The Anabaptists ANOTAMIZED and SILENCED in a PUBLIC Dispute
The Man^er of the Anabaptists Dipping
Their Laying on of Hands
Their Washing of Feet
The Disputation


A PUBLIC DISPUTE Betwixt JOHN TOMBS, B. D. Respondent. JOHN CRAGGE, and HENRY
VAUGHAN, M. A. Opponents,
Touching INFANT BAPTISM, The fifth of September, 1653. in the Church of St.
Mary's in Abergavenie in Monmothshire. Occasioned by a Sermon Preached the day
before, by Mr. Tombs, upon St. Mark. 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be damned. Also a Sermon
preached by Mr. Cragge, the next Lords day following, upon the same Text:
Wherein the necessity of Dipping is refuted, and Infant Baptism asserted.

LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, N. Brook, J. Place, and are to be sold in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, the Angel in Cornhill, and at Furnivals-Inn-Gate in
Holborn. 1654.

To his Reverend Friend, I. T. P. Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, full of Zeal, and Christian Piety, the Contents
whereof may be reduced to these six heads, wherein you desire resolution;
first, what my sense is of the Anabaptists; secondly, when was the spring and
rise of them; thirdly, what is the cause of this present growth, and increase
of them; fourthly, why they are permitted; fifthly, what I think of Disputes
and Conferences had with them; sixthly, a true Relation of that had with us of
late, (which you say is variously reported) of all which briefly I Will endeavor
to give satisfaction. For the first, I referr you to the Sermon, and Conference
here following, to the Harmonies and Confessions of the Reformed Churches, of
all Churches since the Apostles, especially the Western, where you shall find
Universalitie, Antiquity, and Succession (besides many pregnant places of
Scripture) pleading for Infant Baptism; And that (as Austin says) which the
whole Church holds, was never begun by any Council, but always observed,
cannot otherwise be believed, but that it came from the Apostles. For the
second, the spring and rise of Anabaptism, as all Errors, so it had its
beginning after Truth, the Husbandman first sowed good Corn, then the Enemy
Tares; No Age was free: In the first hundred years arose the Ebionites,
Chiliasts, and Gnostics; In the second, the Marcionites, Valentinians, and
Montanists; In the third, the Novatians, Sabellians, and Manichees; In the
fourth, the Arrians, Donatists, and Eunomians; In the fifth, Nestorians,
Eutychians, and Patripassians; In the sixth, Jacobites, Armenians, and
Monothelites; in which time the Mystery of Iniquity began more fully to work,
which was first nascent, then crescent, then regnant, then triumphant.

And no sooner appeared a Reformation in Luther's time, but there were Herod's
that sought the life of this Babe, Dragons watching while the Woman was
traveling, to devour the Child; Amongst whom the Anabaptists of Germany were
most venomous; The first Author whereof was one Nicholas Stock, then Phipher,
Knipperdoling, Munster, with their Tayler-King John Beccold of Leyden, who gave
out that he had a Commission from Heaven to destroy all Nations that would not
submit to his Gospel, and be rebaptized; raging with sword and persecution,
till he was taken, and being examined by exquisite tortures, confessed he
received his Doctrine from an impure spirit; there you have the spring and rise
of it.

Now for the third, the present growth, and increase of it, the reasons may be
many; 1. Times of division, wherein the hedge of Discipline is broken down;
Liberty in Religion is like free conversing without restraint, or watch in time
of pestilence, one house easily infects a whole City. 2. Satan's malice, like a
River, the further it goes, the deeper, and fiercer. 3. The corruption of man's
nature, more inclinable to error than truth. 4. The fitness of the engine for
devastation, and ruinating all former Churches, under color of first-baptisms
nullity, gathering of new ones (after their own mould) out of the old ruins, by
re-baptizing. 5. The pretense that Children are incapable of Church Membership,
or Communion of Saints, And that by washing, as the Proselytes and Jews
Children were initiated.
as if there were not the same capacity under the Gospel, which was under the
Law. 6. False allegation that Infant Baptism is occasion of loose living, as if
the native Jews that were sealed when Infants, were more dissolute than the
Proselytes. 7. To limit it to ripe years, increases Piety, as if Jews, and
Turks, and their own rebaptized converts, were not more frequently guilty of
Apostasy and Hyprocrisie. 8. Not understanding that Infants Church Membership
in the Old Testament, is not repealed, but confirmed in the New. 9. A carnal
estimation that the Covenant made with Abraham was partly carnal, of which
Circumcision is a part, as if Godliness in both Testaments had not the promise
of this life, and of the life to come 10. That Circumcision was the seal of
righteousness of Faith to Abraham, and not his Posterity. 11. That the Covenant
was made with Abraham, and his Spiritual Seed only, and not with visible
Professors. 12. That there is no such thing as National Churches, though Christ
says, Make Disciples of all Nations, and Isaiah says, All Nations shall flow
in, etc. yet (they say) all Churches must be gathered by actual profession, as
well in Christian Nations, as amongst Turks and Pagans. 13. Because we have no
particular instance in terminis, that any Infants were baptized, and because
they are not expressly named in the precept, as if generals did not include
particulars, as well for Infants as Old Men. 14. Denying equivalencies, and
necessary consequences from Scripture. 15. A vilifying of the judgment and
persons of all godly and learned men of this present, and former ages, building
up their rotten foundations upon their ruins. 16. Temporal interests of the
lowest of the people, which while they dream its countenanced by men in power,
cry Hosanna to day, and perhaps Crucify to morrow. 17. A pretending to the
Spirit of God; Numa Pompilius feigned that he conversed with the Goddess
Egeria, Minos with Jupiter in the Cave, Solon with the Delphian Apollo, Mahomet
with the Angel Gabriel; Montanus, and the Shakers, with the Holy Ghost; the
white Witches, with the Spirit in the shape of a Dove, and all but to palliate
their unfound opinions and practices. Let not his Soul prosper that does not
acknowledge and thirst after the true Spirit of God, yet let us try the
Spirits, and not believe every lying Spirit. 18. The learning, subtilty, and
industry, of some Anabaptists, to gain Proselytes; Arrius, Pelagius, Marcion,
were not wiser in their generation than they, to inveagle the poor simple
people, especially Women and inferior Tradesemen, which in seven years can
scarce learn the Mystery of the lowest profession, think half seven years
enough (gained from their worldly employments) to understand the Mystery of
Divinity, and thereupon meddle with Controversies, which they have no more
capacity to pry into, than a Batt to look up into the third Heaven. These, and
many more, are the causes of the increase of Anabaptism. Now, for the Fourth,
you enquire why they are permitted, and their Books printed, and published,
seeing those of Arrius of old, Dr. Pocklington's, and Mr. Archer's of late
(more innocent) were burned? To satisfy you in this, something is to be
imputed to the Providence of God, something to the Wisdom of the State. The
Providence of God, who suffers Errors, 1. That Truth by opposition may more
diligently be searched out. 2. That the sincerity and constancy of the
Faithful may be tried. 3. That the impenitent, and proud in spirit, may be
blinded and hardened. The wisdom of State, who like wise Chirurgions, will not
lance a turgid Ulcer, till it be ripe; a skillful Physician, that will not
purge some floating humors, till they be settled. Therefore the late Parliament
declared, that they would not have them cudgelled, but persuaded out of their
Errors. The two Lights of our Goshen (though they differ in judgment from
them) endeavor not to force them, Mr. Cradock, and Mr. Walter. Monmothshire.
but by sweet insinuations and arguments to win them; Besides, some of them
have been esteemed Godly, amongst which Mr. Tombs may be ranked; who knows but
that may be verified of him, that was of Cyprian, Non videt haec, ut videat
meliora, he sees not these things, that he may see better things? God, it may
be, suffers him to fall, with Peter, that his rise may be more glorious, Tu
conversus, confirma Fratres, that being converted, he may strengthen his
Brethren; will burn his Stubble, Hay, Wood, with the Spiritual Fire of the
Word, or affliction, that his Gold may be the purer. Fifthly, you enquire
whether it may be fit to dispute, and conferr with them, seeing their Doctrine
eats as a Canker, for which cause the Empress would not suffer her Son
Theodosius to discourse with the Heretic Eunomius. To which I answer; the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, is the only Weapon to wound the
hairy scalp of False Teachers; with this, Christ confounded the Sadduces; St.
Peter, Simon Magus; Athanasius, the Arrians; Austin the Pelagians, and
Manichees. There are none that speak against seasonable Disputes, but either
those that understand them not, or with spiritual pride storm against those
that are gifted with that faculty above them, or they that cannot endure that
their Errors be unmasked, and their Soars galled; Camels, conscious of their
deformity, trouble the water, Foul Faces love not the Looking-glass. True it
is, we ought to receive the weak in faith, not to doubtful disputations; but
when False Teachers have infused Poison, may we not apply an Antidote? when
they have sowed Darnel, and Cockle, may not we weed them out? This is to set
Towns and Cities on fire, and to deny Buckets to quench them; to suffer
Invasions, and to permit none to rally together an Army to resist them. The
Disputes at Bewdly, Hereford, and Ross, have been successful to astonishment;
and in this last at Abergavenie (though tumultuary, and on a sudden) has
appeared the Finger of God; he that with Spittle, and Clay, opened the Eyes of
the Blind, overthrew the Walls of Jericho with the sound of Ramms-horns, with
these weak means has wrought strong effects, that no Creature may glory in the
Arm of Flesh.

To the relation whereof (in the last place) and the occasion of it, I come
now; which was thus; Mr. Tombs for several months together being importuned by
Letters and Messengers, came at length to water that, which Mr, Miles, Prosser,
and others had planted, or (as some think) to confirm a Child lately baptized
in London; when he entered the Pulpit, great expectation was, what Mountains
would bring forth; his Text was Mark. 16.16. whence he concluded, that
Infant Baptism was a nullity, a mockery; no Baptism but by Dipping, or
Plunging, was lawful; all that would be saved must be rebaptized, or baptized
after profession; that there was no such thing as Infant Baptism in the
Primitive times, but that it came in with other corruptions, upon unsound
grounds; and challenged the whole Congregation to speak, if they had any thing
to say to the contrary. There were many well learned that heard him, especially
two, Mr. Bonner a neighboring Minister, and Mr. Vaughan Schoolmaster of the
Town, formerly a Fellow of Jesus College in Oxford, who both for the present
kept silence, only Mr. Bonner closed with him in the way to his Lodging, and
told him, that he had delivered some things contrary to that he had read in the
Ancients, and other things that grieved his spirit to hear, and desired
therefore to conferr with him thereabout the next morning: He slighted the
grave old Gentleman, with as much contempt, as Austin the Monk did the British
Commissioners at Bangor, yet told him, that he would tarry in the Town till
such an hour; In the mean time, the greatest part of the People were offended,
staggered, or scrupled, some not knowing what to think of their own, their
Children, and their Ancestors salvation. The Anabaptists that night, and
especially the next morning, triumphed, saying, where are your Champions now?
some of them are struck dumb, others dare not show their faces, whilst Master
Tombs is in the Town, naming Mr. Cragge, another neighboring Minister; the
report whereof being brought unto him, he repaired instantly to the Town, and
meeting with Mr. Bonner; and Mr. Vaughan, they went all together to Mr. Tombs,
where he was at a private house; little was said there, by reason of the throng
of people pressing in; but it was agreed upon, that they should meet in the
Church, or Public Meeting place, at one a Clock, which was done accordingly;
Mr: Tombs took the Pulpit, the Opponents a Seat over against it: Mr. Bonner was
preparing to give the On^et, but a Gentleman dissuaded him, by reason of his
age, and bodily infirmities, lest it should impair his health; Mr. Vaughan
began, Mr. Cragge succeeded, continuing the opposition betwixt them for almost
five hours. When the Dispute was ended, Mr. Cragge was desired by many Godly
Persons to preach upon the same Text Mr. Tombs had done, the Lords Day
following, which he did accordingly; I send you here enclosed the sum of all; a
Copy of Mr. Vaughan's Conference, which a Friend procured me from his own hand,
Mr. Cragge's Sermon and Dispute, I took from his own mouth by Short-writing;
you have the Disputations first, then the Sermon; the Lord bless them to you,
and you to his glory, which shall be the prayer of him, who is

Yours to serve you in the Lord Jesus, J. W.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
TO please my self, and perhaps thee, I shall displease many; First, my Friend,
for making his private token a public frolic. Secondly, Mr. Tombs, for
bringing him in this last Catastrophe wounded in the heel by Troilus and Paris,
who vaunts that in former Scenes, (like Achilles, so far as he was dipped in
the River by his Mother Thetis) he has been unpierced by the Weapons of the
stoutest Hectors. Thirdly, Mr. Cragge, and Mr. Vaughan, for exposing their
Disputes, conceived in an hour and an half, and the Sermon contrived in a day
and a half, to long censure. Fourthly, the Anabaptists (as they will deem) for
too uncourteously galling their soars. Fifthly, their Adversaries the
Paedobaptists, for too courteously, or (as they will fancy) partially
concealing Mr. Tombs harsh language, and his Favorites Incivilities. Sixthly,
the Learned in general, for bringing these Nilus-like hatched Births in a
moment into the open Amphitheater with those Elephants that have been ten years
in conception. My Apology for the whole is as follows; The bulk of this
Manual is small, some may reach to the price of it, that cannot of those larger
Volumes; may have time to read it, that cannot them. The method of this is
facile, the language plain, some will understand this, that cannot them.
Besides, we naturally love the transactions of those, whose persons we know;
Some heard them transiently as they were delivered, and would be glad
deliberately to read them; Some heard them not, but at the second hand, as they
were variously reported (according to the judgment and affection of the
Relator) who would be willing to know the business truly stated. If any of the
Parties cencerned find themselves aggrieved, and intend to bend their style
against me, I Will answer them at the Day of Judgment, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed: In the mean time, if Truth may be advanced, Error
discouraged, Godliness countenanced, Hypocrisy unmasked, thou edified, God
glorified, I have mine ends. Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, I. T. P.

A relation of a conference had between Mr. John Tombs B. D. and Henry Vaghan
M. A. in St. Mary's Church in Abergevennie, Sept. 5. 1653. touching Infants
Baptism, briefly, and punctually set down to the sense of both.
V. INfants may lawfully be Baptized; for they may be admitted into the
covenant of grace now by Baptism, as they were before, and under the Law,
admitted into the same covenant by Circumcision.


T. I deny your consequence.


V. You must deny it, either because the covenant of grace made with Abraham,
and his seed, is not the same in substance with that which is now actually in
force with believers, and their Children, or Secondly, because Baptism
succeeds not in the room of Circumcision.


T. I could deny your division: yet I say, to gratify you, for both those
reasons.


V. For the Former. That the covenant made with Abraham, and his seed, is the
same which is now actually in force with believers, appears by comparing Genes.
17.2. with Galat. 3.14. where it is clearly set forth, that the promise made to
Abraham, came unto the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.


T. Here he distinguishes of a towfold seed of Abraham, the natural, and
spiritual, and says, that the covenant was made with Abraham's spiritual
seed, and not the natural.


V. Even all the children of Abraham were Circumcised, and consequently
admitted into the covenant, not one excepted; for every Man-child was to be
Circumcised, Genesis 17.10. It appears by what happened to Moses for not
circumcising his Child, Exodus 4.24. Even Ishmael was circumcised, Genes. 17.23:
who belonged not to the promise, but was of the natural seed.


T. Ishmael, and the natural Children of Abraham were admitted to the
external part, namely outward privileges, and temporal blessings, and not to
the internal, or spiritual part thereof.

By the Internal part he must needs mean that part of it expressed Genesis 17.7.
in these words, To be a God unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee, and in the
end of v. 8. I will be their God.

To justify this his distinction, he referred us to Romans 9. and I think v. 8.
where the Children of the promise are contradistinguished from the Children of
the flesh, or the natural Children of Abraham; So that the covenant was made
not to the natural Children of Abraham, but to such of them as were elect, and
faithful.


V. This covenant was made alike in the same extent, and latitude,
promiscuously with all the seed of Abraham; and those that lost the promise,
and the benefit of this covenant (which men you call the natural seed) lost it
not because they were not at first comprehended in the covenant, but because of
their own unbeleef, Romans 11.20. I confess that the Children of Isaac are,
Romans 9. called the Children of the promise, not in regard of any peremtory
election, or designation to faith, and Salvation, or on the contrary* of any
absolute reprobation of the seed of Ishmael.

For if it had been Paul's design to declare the Children of Ishmael, yea the
greatest part of the Jews, to have been rejected by a certain absolute decree,
why should he v. 1.2. so much lament their incredulity? wish himself accursed
for their sakes, v. 3. and Romans 10. v. 1. desire, and pray for their
conversion? since upon such an absolute decree of reprobating them, all that
happened to them was inevitable.

But the Children of Isaac are called the Children of promise, First, because
they only were to inherit the land of Canaan; and Secondly, because Christ
according to the flesh was to descend from the progeny of Isaac, not of
Ishmael.

I might have added, that if none but the elect, and faithful, can be admitted
into the covenant, there is no subject left for the ordinance of Baptism, it
being impossible for man to know who are elect, spiritual, and true believers.
Neither can you Baptize with right, or safety, all such grown persons as you
Baptize, since you cannot be assured that they are elect, Spiritual, or true
believers, ( Revel. 2.17.) nor have any light to guide you, save that of
charitable opinion, and conjecture.

Again, it being admitted that none but the Spiritually, elect, and believing,
can be Baptized, the same charity that swayes your judgment for grown persons,
must much rather move you to hope the best of innocent infants, guilty of no
actual sin, since it hopes all things, and thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13.2. They
may have faith ( in semine and habitu) in the seed (as they have the habit of
principles, and reason) tho they cannot exercise it till ripe years. 3. Though
they have not actual faith, yet the faith of their parents may, and does, put
them into a capacity of being admitted into the covenant, nor is it news that
the parents faith advantageth the Children. Joh. 4.50.


T. I could wish you could prove that Infants of believers might be admitted to
Baptism by virtue of their parents faith.


V. They were admitted into the same covenant by Circumcision, into which we
are admitted now by Baptism, but Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.11, 12. Whence it will follow, that either they had the
righteousness of faith inherently in themselves, or that of their parents
imputed to them (choose you whether) or else it will follow that Circumcision
was a false seal.


T. It is not said there that Circumcision was the seal of righteousness of the
Childrens faith, but only of Abraham's own faith in particular.


V. But the covenant, or promise, was the same and alike to Abraham, and his
seed, Romans 4.13. Genesis 17.7. and alike to us believers, and to our Children,
Act. 2. 39.

2. This truth appears yet further from. 1. Cor. 7- 14. Where we find that the
faith of either of the parents makes the Children holy, at least in that degree
of holiness (which is the meanest imaginable) to be in capacity of being
admitted into the same covenant with their parents.


T. The scope of the Apostle here, is to satisfy a scruple of the Corinth.
viz. whether the believing yoak-fellow might live in the enjoying and use of
the unbelieving yoak-fellow? he resolves them in the affirmative, saying, The
unbelieving husband is sanctified in ( as it is in the Greek) or to ( not for,
or by) the wife, etc. That is, he may lawfully use, and enjoy her, and she
enjoy him -- and their Children holy, that is, legitimate.


V. But here is certainly some special privilege set forth to the Children of
believers accruing to them from the believing parents. Besides, it had been no
news to tell them they might have the lawful use of one another, and that
their Children were legitimate, and no bastards. For where both husband, and
wife were unbelievers, no man ever doubted but their enjoyment of one another
was lawful, and their issue legitimate.


T. The case is meant where both parties at their entrance into marriage were
unbelievers, but afterward one of them happens to be converted, whether then
they might cohabit, and enjoy the use of one another.


V. Though this were granted (which I shall not contend about) yet the Apostles
sense can not be of the lawful use, and enjoyment of each other, for the word
(...) sanctified, never denotes to be lawful. Or if ever you show me that
(...) which is rendered holy, signifies lawful, I shall urge no further.


T. There Is that acception of the word 1. Tim. 4.4, 5. Every creature of God is
good, and not to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified ((...)) by the word of God, and prayer here sanctified is for
lawfully used, as standing in opposition to that which is refused.


V. The sense is, that such use of the creature is pleasing to God, as
acknowledging him the author, and sender; for suppose a sinful man eat his
meat without invoking God for a blessing, has he not a lawful use of the
creature?


T. His next instance was 1. These. 4.3, 4, 7. Where sanctification is used for
chastity, and might hear that sense in this place, 1 Cor. 7.17. in agitation.


V. I deny it, for sanctification is there used in its full latitude, as
appears by the context.

But I will descend to prove the second ground of my consequence, at the
beginning, which you denied, viz.

That Baptism succeeded in the Room of Circumcision.

Mr. Tombs had told us that it was impossible, for then women should not be
Baptized, because they were not Circumcised, [which is Bellarmines Argument] To
which I answered, that indeed the males only were mentioned in the covenant of
Circumcision, for in the eyes of all laws whatsoever, the women are but as
ignoble creatures, and therefore the usual style of laws, and covenants is, Si
Quis and Qui in the masculine [except such as particularly respect their sex]

2. That they are included in the word Seed, and because descended from man,
did partake of the privilege, and promise annexed to the covenant. [I thought
also to have told him, that I well knew that before Christ's time, Baptism and
Circumcision were both practiced on the Proselites called Proselitae Justitiae
(as I could have showed out of several authors) yet that hindered not, but
that Baptism now under the Gospel should be the sole means to admit us into
the same covenant, into which the Jews were admitted by Circumcision. Even as
the bread and wine were taken by the Jews at the eating of the Passover, and
now that the Jewish Passover is abrogated, the bread and wine were only by
Christ retained to commemorate his passion, the true Passover. 1. Cor. 5.7.

And in like manner when Circumcision was abolished, yet was Baptism retained
to admit the Infants of Christians, as Circumcision admitted them of the Jews;
But the time, and his close manner of disputing not permiting this Enlarging by
recourse to the original, and institution of Baptism, which served more to
illustrate than convince, I kept to the tedder allowed, and came at length to
prove that proposition] from Col. 2.11.12. Where 1 the circumcision of Christ
is set in opposition to the Jewish circumcisition made with hands. 2. An
explanation of what is meant by the circumcision of Christ in these words,
being buried with him in Baptism.


T. Paul here disswades them from the use of Jewish ceremonies (which some
would have introduced amongst them) and particularly of Circumcision, because
all those were but shadows, but the body and realitie was of Christ.


V. It Is confessed the Apostle speaks here against imposers of Jewish (and also
Pythagorean) doctrines, and practices:

But see ye not here a double Circumcision, and the Circumcision of Christ
described by being buried with him in Baptism. The word buried implies but the
resemblance betwixt Christ's death, and resurrection, with what is done in
Baptism, where there is an Immersion or plunging in the water, to shadow his
burial, and Emersion or rising up out of the water, to represent his
resurrection, which resemblance is more fully set forth Romans c. 6.


T. Here Mr. Tombs interrupted me, and desired the people to take notice of my
ingenuous confession, that Baptism was then practiced by plunging. He read also
a passage out of Casaubons annot. on the New Test. where he says that (...) to
Baptize, denotes a plunging of the whole body etc. Had he read out the
passage, he might have found how that great scholar affirms this to be a
slender Argument against such as only sprinkle at Baptism, for says he, the
virtue and efficacy of Baptism consistes not in that, meaning the manner of
washing.


V. I shall satisfy the Auditors herein anon, in the mean time I desire
Answer to my Argument, the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism being so
evident in this place; But receiving none, I addressed my self to the people,
according to promise, saying, That indeed it seemed to me that for some
Centuries of years, that Baptism was practiced by plunging: For sprinkling was
brought first in use by occasion of the Clinicks (as Cyprian Epist: a Magnum
relates) being men which deferred their Baptism till some extremity of
sickness, who then in such case were only sprinkled with water, lest the
plunging of their bodies might over-offend them in that feeble desperate
condition.


T. Here take notice that sprinkling took its rise from a corrupt custom.


V. Though plunging be confessed the more ancient way, yet is this no ground
for that over-uncharitable speech of yours, in your sermon yesterday: That our
Baptism, meaning of Infants, and by sprinkling, was but a nullitie, and
Mockery, which concludes our selves, and all our Ancestors, even all in the
western Church for 1500. years, under damnation.

For the Church has power upon the sight of any inconvenience, and for order
and decencies sake, to alter the circumstantials and externalls of any
Ordinance.


T. What have they to do to alter any thing from the form of Christ's
institution?


V. That they have such a power is confessed by all divines, and he is none
that denies it, yea I believe it is acknowledged by your own practice.


T. Wherein?


V. In the administration of the Lords supper, which was done by Christ in the
Evening, and also then by his Apostles after their Love-feastes: The whole
Church of God, (and your self I suppose) take it in the morning, which custom
has taken place, and obtained every where for very many ages, even from their
days who immediately succeeded the Apostles.

Thus advising him to be wise to Sobriety, and cease to imbroyl the Church of
God (so infinitely torn already) and to submit to the judgment, and
scarce-interrupted practice of the Western Churches, even for 1500. years, To
which Gods providence could not be so far wanting, as to suffer them to fall
into such an Error of admitting and retaining a Baptism (which in his account
was none) we broke off,


A relation of the dispute had between Mr. John Tombs B. D. respondent, and
John Cragge Mr. A. opponent, in St. Mary's Church in Abergevennie, September. 5.
1653. touching Infant Baptism.
Mr. Cragge having briefly expressed that he was forced to undertake this task,
on a sudden, and unprovided, against so experienced a champion; desired, first,
if he should fail, the cause might not suffer prejudice in men's opinions for
his sake.

2. That liberty might be granted of a premeditate, and treatable dispute
hereafter, not doubting that if he should but study the Question so many hours
as Mr. Tombs has done days, so many days as he has done weeks, so many
weeks as he months, or so many months as he years, the truth was so evident on
his side, he would not fear (Maugre all opposition) to make it clear. In the
mean time trusting to Gods assistance, (whose cause it was) he would attempt
it, beginning with this Enthymema.

C. Some Infants may not be Baptized, therefore some Infants may be Baptized.


T. Having repeated, he denied the consequence.


C. Which he proved thus, Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter may
be both true. But these, viz: (some infants may not be Baptized, some infants
may be Baptized) are Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter. Therefore
they may be both true.


T. Having repeated the Syllogism, he said there were four terms in it.


C. He enquired where?


T. He answered in these words (may be both true) in the Premises, and (are
both true) in the Conclusion.


C. He returned, that was Mr. Tombs Syllogism, none of his, reciting that
distick of Martial.

Quem recitas meus est o Fidentine logismus, Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse
tuus.


T. Repeating it over again after him, said that,


^ C. Which he took thus away; That which proves the thing denied, is
sufficient; But that Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter may be
both true, proves the thing denied, that some infants may not be Baptized, some
infants may be Baptized; Therefore it is sufficient.


T. He denied the Minor, tho it be an Axiom, Subcontrary propositions in a
Contingent matter may be both true, yet it was not consequent that these
subcontrary contingent propositions (some Infants may not be baptized, some
Infants may be baptized) may be both true.


C. Which was proved thus. That which is affirmed and predicated of the
Species, may, and is affirmed of every Individuum, and particular under that
Species: But it is affirmed of the Species, that Subcontrary Propositions in a
Contingent matter may be both true, therefore it may be affirmed of these
particular Propositions (some Infants may not be baptized, some Infants may be
baptized) that they may be both true,


T. He said it was a fallacy, he went about to entrappe him, in confessing that
subcontrary Propositions may be both true, where the subject is capable, but
here the subject, (to wit infants) are not capable of Baptism.


C. Then replies he, they are not Contingent (which is here required) but
Necessary Propositions, in materia necessaria, if the subject be not capable,
but we speak of Contingent Propositions, the Predicate whereof may be affirmed
or denied of the subject without contradiction; which while he was framing into
a Syllogism,


T. Mr. T. interrupted him, saying, what would the man say if he could speak?


C. You love not to hear truth speak, but would strangle it in the birth, like
the Egyptian Midwives; but to give you further Satisfaction, I will prove that
they are actually both true, especially that some infants may be baptized, for
of the other there is no controversy. Which he did thus, To whom belongs the
Essence of Baptism, they may be Baptized; But to some infants belongs the
Essence of Baptism; therefore some infants may be Baptized.


T. He denied the Minor, that the Essence of Baptism did belong to some Infants.


C. Which was proved thus; To whom belongs the definition of Baptism, to them
belongs the Essence; But to some infants belongs the definition of Baptism;
Therefore to some infants belongs the Essence of Baptism.


T. He answered first to the Major, (to whom belongs the definition of Baptism,
to them belongs the Essence,) it was idem per idem, proving of the same thing
by the same.


C. To which was replied, why then says Aristotle, that (...), the definition
is a manifestation of the Essence, and Logicians describe a definition, to be
explicatio rei Essentiae, the expression of the Essence of a thing, now that
which expresses a thing; and which is expressed, are two distinct things. Then
he denied the Minor, which was proved thus.


C, The definition of Baptism, as of all other Relations, is made up of the
fundament, correlative, and termini. But all these three fundamentum,
correlatum, and terminus, belong to Infants; Therefore the definition of
Baptism belongs to Infants.


T. He denied the Major, that Baptism was a Relation, or was made up of those
ingredients.


C. He replied, that seemed strange to him, seeing all the Divines, and
Logicians that he had read, affirmed Baptism to be a Relation, and it was
evident, it could be put in no other Predicament, (as might be proved by
Induction, but that the people understood it not) seeing the whole nature of
Baptism is (...) in Relation to another.


T. He said he cared not for authorities, but bid him prove it.


C. Which he did thus; Every Sacrament is a Relation; But Baptism is a
Sacrament; Therefore Baptism is a Relation.


T. He said he might deny both Propositions, first The Major, for any thing he
knew, every Sacrament was not a Relation; And the Minor too, that Baptism was a
Sacrament, for the word Sacrament was an invention of man, not grounded upon
scripture.


C. Which both Propositions together were proved thus; That which is an
outward, and visible sign, of an inward, and invisible grace, is both a
Relation, and a Sacrament; But Baptism is an outward and visible sign, of an
inward, and invisible grace; Therefore it is both a Relation, and a Sacrament.


T. He denied the Minor, that Baptism was an outward, and visible sign, of an
inward, and invisible grace.


C. He told him, it was St. Austens definition, avouched by learned men in
succeeding ages, confirmed, and approved by the Church of England in the old
Catechism.


T. Mr. Tombs said he looked for Artificial or divine Arguments, not humane
Testimonies, at which answer while Mr. C. seemed to be astomished, he took
occasion to triumph, contumeliously saying he never heard such an Argument.


C. To which he replied, Nor Alexander ever saw such a knot, as the Gordian,
which made him cut it, when he could not untie it; you teach me by experience
to know that there is no disputing against them that deny all Principles; as
where you think the people do not understand, you make no scruple to deny
clear truths in Logic, and Divinity; Therefore I see I must go to plain
scriptures, that all the people may understand the absurdities. Now that the
Definition of Baptism (which was the thing denied) belongs to Infants, I prove
thus.

If God institute Baptism for infants, Christ merited it for them, and they
stand need of it, then to infants belongs the Definition of Baptism; But God
instituted, Christ meritted, and Infants stand need of Baptism; Therefore to
infants belongs the Definition of Baptism.


T. He denied the Minor, that God did not institute Baptism for infants, Christ
did not merit it for them, nor Infants stand in need of it.


C. Which he promised to prove in order, First that God did institute Baptism
for infants. He that appointed infants Church Members under the Gospel, did
institute Baptism for them; But God appointed Infants Church Members under the
Gospel; Therefore God did institute Baptism for infants.


T. He said first the Major might be questioned, because, to be Church Members
(whereas he should have said Church Members under the Gospel) and to be
Baptized, were not termini convertibiles.


C. He confessed it, for infants under the Law were Church Members, and yet not
Baptized, but Circumcised, and before the Law Church Members, and yet neither
Circumcised, nor Baptized; but under the Gospel they were so convertible, that
all that were Baptized, were Church Members, and all that were Church Members
were to be Baptized, which is that which he affirmed now, and is a truth, a
truth so clear, that Mr. Tombs confesses it all along in his Books, and upon
that confessed ground, Mr. Baxter goes in many of his Arguments.


T. He would have denied it, till a Gentleman told him, that he heard him
affirm the same in his Sermon the day before, Then he denied the minor, that
God did institute infants Church Members under the Gospel.


C. That I Will confirm (says he) with a threefold cord, which will not easily be
broken, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel, which he framed into
an Argument thus Those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell under the
Law, actually receive into covenant under the Gospel, those God did appoint
Church Members under the Gospel; But God did promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, and actually receive Infants into Covenant under the Gospel;
Therefore God did appoint Infants Church Members under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Minor, That God did not promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, and actually receive infants into covenant under the Gospel.


C. Which was proved in order, first that God did promise before the Law that
infants should be in covenant under the Gospel, thus.

That which God did promise to Abraham, was before the Law; But God did promise
to Abraham, that infants should be in covenant under the Gospel; Therefore God
did promise before the Law, that infants should be in covenant under the
Gospel. The Minor being denied, he proved out of Genesis 17.7. I will establish
my covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after, thee, in their
generations, for an everlasting covenant. to be a God unto thee, and unto thy
seed after thee. Thus framing his Argument; He that makes an everlasting
covenant to Abraham, and his seed after him in their generations, promised that
infants should be in covenant under the Gospel; but God makes an everlasting
Covenant with Abraham, and his seed after him in their generations; Therefore
God promised that infants should be in covenant under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Major, saying, that everlasting signified only a long time,
not that it should be so under the Gospel to the worlds end; and was to be
interpreted by the verse following, I will give unto thee the Land of Canaan
for an everlasting possession, and yet the Jews are now dispossessed of Canaan.


C. They are now dispossessed, but shall be possessed of it again at their
conversion, and so have an everlasting possession, in the type to the end of
the world, in the Antitype for ever, but that the covenant that God made with
Abraham is to continue to the end of the World appears in that it is a Gospel
covenant; That which is a Gospel covenant is to continue to the end of the
world; But the covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed to all
generations, is a Gospel covenant, Gal. 3.8. and the scripture foreseeing that
God would Justify the heathen, through faith, preached the Gospel before to
Abraham, saying, In thee shall nations be blessed; Therefore it is to continue
to the end of the world.


T. Without repeating, he confusedly answered thus, that it was an everlasting
covenant, and to continue to the end of the world, but not to infants.


C. He told him first that it was a denying of the Conclusion, then took away
his answer thus; If God command infants to stand before him, in covenant, then
it is to continue to infants; But God commands infants to stand in covenant
before him; Therefore it is to continue to infants. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Ye stand
this day all of you before the Lord, your God, your Captains of your tribes,
your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones.


T. He said that he should have proved that it should continue to infants to
the worlds end, for he did not deny but that infants in some sense were in
covenant under the Law, but not under the Gospel.


C. Yes under the Gospel; If Christ has obtained a more excellent Ministry,
and is a Mediator of a better covenant, which is established upon better
promises, then if infants were in covenant under the Law, they are in covenant
under the Gospel; But Heb. 8.6. Christ has obtained a more excellent
Ministry, was a Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon
better promises; Therefore if infants were in covenant under the Law, they are
in covenant under the Gospel.


T. He denied the consequence of the Major, that tho the covenant of the
Gospel was a better covenant than that of the Law, yet infants were not in
covenant as well under the Gospel, as under the Law.


C. Which was thus taken away; That which unchurches the one half of
Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation, can not be a
better covenant; But to deny infants to be in covenant, unchurches the one half
of Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation; Therefore it
cannot be a better covenant.


T. Without repeating the Syllogism, or denying either of the Premises, or
formally applying any distinction, he said, the covenant under the Gospel was
made only with the spiritual seed of Abraham.


C. Which was thus disproved; If the covenant was made in the same manner, and
extent, to the Gentiles, as to the Jews, then under the Gospel it was not
only made to the Spiritual seed; But it was made in the same manner, and
extent, to the Gentiles, as it was to the Jews; Therefore under the Gospel it
was not only made to the Spiritual seed.


T. He denied the Minor.


C. Which was proved by this Enthymema: The partition wall is pulled down, and
Jewe and Gentile are all one in Christ-Jesus; Therefore the covenant is made in
the same manner, and extent, to the Jew, and Gentile.


T. He denied the consequent, that, tho the partition wall was taken down, and
both Jew and Gentile are all one in Christ-Jesus, seeing the Gospel was
offered to all nations; yet under the Gospel the covenant was only with the
Elect, and believers.


C. Which was confuted thus; That which is made with the whole visible Church,
is not only made with the Elect, and true believers; But the covenant is made
with the whole visible Church; Therefore not only with the Elect, and true
believers.


T. He denied the Major.


C. Which was proved thus; That which is made to the kingdom of God upon earth,
is not only made to the Elect; But that which is made to the whole Church
visible is made to the kingdom of God upon Earth; Therefore it was not only
made to the Elect.


T. He denied the Major, that, that which was made to the kingdom of God upon
earth, is not only made to the Elect.


C. Which was proved thus; In the kingdom of God, that is in the Church
Militant, there are not only Elect, but reprobates, Saints, but hypocrites,
for all that are outwardly called, are of the kingdom of God in this sense, and
many are called, but few chosen, The kingdom of God is compared to a field,
where there are tares, as well as wheat; a fould; where there are goats as well
as sheep; to a noble man's house, where there are vessels of dishonor, as well
as honor; And if the Church in regard of outward administration of ordinances
(which is the Question) were only the Elect, then it would follow that there
were no visible Church upon earth, the Jews had no more visible Church than
the heathens, the distinction of the Church visible, and invisible, were
frivolous, for no man, nor angel, knows who are Elect, nor any but God.

To which issue the first branch of the Argument being brought, Mr. C. referred
the judgment of it to the people, And proceeded to the second, that God
foretold under the Law, that infants should be Church Members under the Gospel.


T. Mr. T. perceiving that the people apprehended that he was brought to an
apparent absurdity, would have waded into a large discourse to wind himself out.


C. But Mr. C. told him, that it was his office (being Respondent) to deny or
distinguish, but not authoritatively to determine the question, as if he were
the Dr. of the chair; And with much ado (the Anabaptists crying let him have
liberty to speak on) brought him to dispute again, and to turn to Esaias. 49.22.
Whence he framed this Argument. He that foretold that he would lift up his hand
to the Gentiles, and set up a standard to the people, and that they should
bring their sons in their Arms, and their daughters shall be carried upon
their Shoulders, foretold that infants should be Church Members under the
Gospel; But thus says the Lord God, Behold I will lift up my hand to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons
in their Arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders;
Therefore God foretold that infants should be Church Members under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Major; And said the meaning was, that the Jews should bring
the Gentiles children.


C. To which he replied, God says I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and
they, that is the Gentiles, shall bring thy sons, and Mr. Tombs says the Jews
shall bring thy sons; Then a Gentleman read the words, and said it is the
Gentiles shall bring, etc.


T. Then Mr. T. recollecting himself said, the meaning was, the Gentiles should
bring the Jews children from captivity; And that it did not point at the time
of the Gospel.


C. To which was replied, the contents of the Chapter says that it points at
the time of the Gospel; Mr. Tombs says it points at the time of the Jews
captivity, whether shall we believe? and repeated the contents: Christ being
sent to the Jews, complains of them to the 5. verse, he is sent to the
Gentiles to the 13. verse, Gods love to his Church to the end; then the people
laughed, etc.

The pith of which was framed into an argument thus; That which is the judgment
of the Church of England ought to be entertained before the groundles assertion
of one private man; But that it points at the time of the Gospel is the
judgment of the Church of England; Therefore it ought to be entertained before
the groundles assertion of one private man.


T. He denied that it was the judgment of the Church of England.


C. Which was thus proved, If the Church of England causes it to be printed,
and commands it to be read before the Chapter, then it is the judgment of the
Church of England; But the Church of England causes it to be printed, and
commands it to be read before the Chapter; Therefore it is the judgment of the
Church of England.


T. Mr. T. said it was not commanded to be printed, and read so before the
Chapter, for he knew not what kind of Bible his was.


C. He told him, it was the same with the great Church Bible, which was not
only authorized with a Proclamation, but an Act almost fifty years ago, and
will Mr. Tombs without giving of a reason condemn a whole nation to have slept
in such an error all that while? Then Mr. Abbets preacher resident there, one
who has been dipped, being in pulpit with Mr. Tombs, stood up and said, the
words were, They shall bring thy sons in their Arms; To which Mr. C. replied,
what then? may they not be Gods sons by adoption, and their own by natural
generation?

Mr. Tombs fell upon expounding the Chapter from verse to verse. Mr. C. told
him, that they came not to hear him expound, but dispute, and repeating the
last Argument, wished him to answer; at which Abbets stood up again, and said
the words of the text were, that they, that is, the Gentiles, shall bring thy
Children, that is the Jews. To which Mr. C. replied, that was an addition to
the text, for there is no mention of the Jews; But grant it were, must it be
therefore meant of the Captivity? the 20. and 21. verses of this Chapter
confutes it, intimating that the Jews after Christ's coming shall lose their
own natural, and the Gentiles Children shall be adopted, and engrafted into
their place; They, that is the Gentiles converted, shall bring thy sons, thine
by a kind of adoption, and spiritual succession, for the Gentiles Children
were ingrafted into the stock of the Jews Children broke off; And this is so
clear from the Context (compared with Romans 11.) That with reason it could not
be denied; But he was to speak to Mr. Tombs who understood the nature of a
dispute, and not to him, and if he would take upon him to Moderat, it was fit
that he should have another.


T. Mr. Tombs asked Mr. C. what he understood by standart, what by kings, what
by nursing Fathers, etc.


C. He told him, that it was not his place to dispute Socratically by asking of
questions, but to answer ad Appositum. But to give him Satisfaction (which he
needed not) by Standart he understood some visible Gospel ordinance, as
Baptism; by Kings supreme Magistrates, by nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers,
patrons, and protectours of the Gospel.


T. He said that it was a Metaphorical speech, and that nothing could be
gathered from it.


C. He replied, that he would grant him that it was more than a Metaphorical
speech, (for a Metaphor consisted but in one single trope) but it was a
continuation of several tropes, and therefore Allegorical; yet it does not
follow, that nothing could be gathered from it, for then nothing could be
gathered from any Parable in the Gospel; Nay nor any part of the New
testament; for there is scarce a sentence without some Tropes in it.


T. Mr. T. said it was fulfilled in Hesters time, which was a nursing Mother to
the Jews:


C. To which was answered; Hester was a Jew, and a friend to the Jews, what is
this to the Gentiles bringing Children upon Shoulders? And tho that should be
waved, and Hester granted to be a nursing Mother in the type, yet in the
Antitype it aims principally at the times of the Gospel, else gross
absurdities would follow; for what Kings, or Queens in Hesters-time did bow
down to the Jews with their face toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of
their feet? verse 23. Isles are summoned in the first verse, which must be meant
of the time of the Gospel: Christ is promised to be given for a light for the
Gentiles, that he may be their Salvation to the end of the earth. 6. Kings
shall see, and arise, Princes also shall worships. 7. And the holy Ghost,
quotes verbatim, and applies to the time of the Gospel the 8. verse, and that
expressly 2. Cor. 6.2. There is an employed cutting off to the Jews, 20. An
ingrafting in of the Gentiles, the Children of the wild olive into the stock of
the natural olive, 21. And a Bringing of Children to visible ordinances, 22.
All which he offered to frame into Arguments.


T. But Mr. T. prevented it, saying, that though it should be understood of the
times of the Gospel, yet by sons in Arms, and daughters upon Shoulders, was
meant grown men, for any thing he knew, and men women and of a hundred years of
age might be carried upon arms, and upon shoulders.

Which indeed is the same answer Mr. T. gives in his scepticall exercitation;
(like foxes, and badgers being beat out of one hole, has another to fly unto:)
Where (as Mr. Hussy quotes him) he uses the same words, that Mr. Abbets, and
he found fault with in Mr. C. Major proposition, for these are his words, It is
foretold that Gentiles should bring their Children in their arms, therefore
the Prophet foresaw the Baptism of Infants; he might have seen the beam in his
own eye, turpe est doctori, etc. But to return to Mr. T. answer.


C. Which Mr. C. took thus away; Them that they should bring in their bosoms
were Infants; But it was foretold that they should bring them in their bosoms;
Therefore they were Infants.


T. He enquired where it did appear that they should bring them in their
bosoms.


C. Out of the text, for the word in the original (which is translated arms)
is bosom, and so the Septuagints read it (...), intimating that they should
bring sucking Children hanging upon their breasts.


T. Then Mr. Tombs said it was an analogy, and performed when the Gentiles
persuaded their Children to embrace Christ.


C. Well then, it is their Children, not thy children, oportet esse memorem;
But not that neither; for that Scripture which in the letter suites with many
other Scriptures, but in the pretended analogy with no other, can not be the
meaning; But to interpret it literally of bringing Children to Christ in the
bosom, suites with many scriptures, and to persuade them to come to Christ,
with no scriptures; Therefore it can not be the meaning.


T. Mr. T. could not name one text of scripture, where to bring in arms, or
bosom, was to persuade to come to Christ.


C. So Mr. C. referred the judgment of it to the people, and named another
text, Es. 65.20. There shall be no more thence an Infant of days, etc. But the
child shall die an hundred year old.


T. Mr. Tombs bid him read the rest of the words, and the verse following.


C. He said he had read as much as he intended to raise his Argument from.


T. Take notice (says he) he will not read that which makes against him.


C. Not so; for nothing of it makes against me, but that an Argument must be
terminus simplex, and homogeneal, and that you know well enough, but that in
place of solid Satisfaction you must say something to deceive the people. The
Arguments I raise hence are two, the first is this, There shall be no more an
Infant of days, that is, Infants shall not be incapable of the seal, while
their age is measured by days, as the Jews Infants that might not be
Circumcised till a week had passed over them; Therefore Infants new born are
capable of the seal; The secund Argument is this, The child shall dye an
hundred year old, that is, as an hundred year old, or as well a Churchmember
as if he were a hundred year old; Therefore Children may be Baptized under the
Gospel:


T. Mr: T. found fault with that interpretation, shall dye an hundred years
old, that is as if an hundred years old.


C. He answered, to take it literally would imply a contradiction, for it was
impossible to be a child, and a hundred years old, and was better than his, and
the Anabaptists exposition of 1 Cor. 10.2. they were Baptized under the cloud,
that is (say you) as if they were Baptized under the cloud, when nothing
hindered, but they were really Baptized under the cloud. And Romans 11.19. the
branches were broken off* that is (say you) as if they were broken off, when it
was both possible, and apparent, that they were broken off.


T. Then Mr. T. said it was not meant of the times of the Gospel.


C. To which was replied; Mr. T. will still be wiser than the Church of
England; and read the Contents of the Chapter; The calling of the Gentiles v.
1. the Jews rejected 17. the blessed state of the new Jerusalem to the end.


T. Mr: T. said it was verifyed Zacha: 8.4. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, there
shall yet old men, and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every
man with his staff in his hand for very age, and the streets of the city shall
be full of boys, and girls playing in the streets thereof.


C. To which was replied; what is this to an Infant of days, or a child dying
a hundred years old? when it is apparent both from the Contents, and Text, that
this of Zachary is meant of the Jews return from Captivity, and more apparent
that that of Es. is meant of the state of Christ's kingdom under the Gospel
which I prove thus; That Interpretation that brings with it* Absurdity,
untruth, blasphemy, is not to be admitted; But to interpret it of the Jews
return from Captivity brings with it absurdity, untruth, blasphemy;
Therefore it is not to be admitted.


T. Mr. Tombs denied the Minor.


C. Which was proved in order; first that it brought with it absurdity, To
apply the 25. verse to the return from Captivity was absurd, that the wolf and
the lamb should feed together, and the Lion should eat straw with the bullock,
and dust should be the serpents meat; Therefore it brought with it absurdity.
Secondly that it brought with it untruth; But to apply the 19. v. to the return
from Captivity brought with it an untruth, that the voice of weeping should be
no more heard in Jerusalem; for it was twice destroyed after, once by
Antiochus, then by Vespatian, and Titus; Therefore it brought with it an
untruth.

Thirdly that it brought with it blasphemy; for to interpret the 17. verse,
(Behold I create new heavens, and new earth, and the former shall no more be
remembered, and come into mind) of the second temple, is blasphemous; Therefore
it brought with it blasphemy, for it crosses St. Peter's interpretation 2.
Pet. 3.13. We according to his promise look for new heavens, and a new Earth;
For can any rational man think, that the new temple built at Jerusalem in
Cyrus his time, was this new heaven, and new earth, that the former should be
no more remembered? When the ancient men are said to weep, because the glory of
the latter temple was short of the glory of the first, Ezra. 3.12. [It was
inferior to Solomon's temple, first in respect of the building, that was lower,
and meaner; secondly, in respect of the vessels, before of Gold, now of brass;
thirdly, of five things that were lost, first the Ark of God, secondly, the
Urim and Thummim, thirdty, fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices,
fourthly, the glory of God between the Cherubims, fifthly, the gift of
prophecy, for after the second temple there was no prophet.]


T. Mr. T. fell to his wonted course of impertinent exposition, wherein Mr. C.
told him he violated the rules of dispute, and did lasciviously wanton it out
into a wilderness of words, that the truth might be obscured or lost, and like
a lapwing carry the hearers far from the matter. Then C. P. an Apothecary began
to interpose, as he had done once before, till a gentleman of authority, told
him, that it was not fit for a man of his place, and calling, to speak; Yet Mr.
Tombs would not be Satisfied, but went on saying that Dr. Prideaux in Oxford,
when a place of Scripture was cited, was wont to give a large exposition.


C. Mr. C. Replied; that Dr. Prideaux was Doctor of the Chair, and Judge of the
Controversy, and might do that which a Respondent may not do, whose office is
only to repeat, deny, distinguish, and when a Text is quoted, to give a brief
exposition, that the Opponent may have something to fasten upon; And what Dr.
Prideaux did, he knew not; but what Dr. Collins, and Dr. Ward did, he could
tell him; but that it was not to the present purpose. And that his judgment in
this, was but the same with his own University of Oxford, as he knew of late by
a sad experiment.


T. Mr. Tombs Asked what that was?


C. He told him an explosion, not for disability (for his dispute was plausible
enough) but that he would neither be satisfied with D. Salvage his answer, nor
the Doctor of the Chaires determination; but fell to repetitions, and
extravagances, as now.


Mr. Tombs launched into a tedious discourse to vindicate himself, till he had
tired the Auditors, who cried out this is but to waste time; And a learned
Gentleman spoke aloud, this is but to spend the time in parling, that he may
avoid the gunshot, for he is afraid the great thunderbolt is behind: and so
with much ado, he was brought to dispute again, where Mr. C. falling upon the
third branch of his Argument, That God did actually receive Infants to be
Church Members under the Gospel, began thus.


C. Those whom Christ commanded his disciples to Baptize, they may be Baptized;
But Christ commanded his Disciples to Baptize Infants; Therefore they may be
Baptized. The Minor being denied, was proved thus; He that commanded his
Disciples to baptize all Nations, commanded them to Baptize Infants; But Christ
commanded his Disciples; Matthew. 28.19. to Baptize all Nations; Therefore Christ
commanded them to Baptize Infants.


T. Mr. T. denied the Major.


C. Which was proved by this Enthymema; The whole includes every part; Infants
are a part of Nations; Therefore he that commanded to Baptize all Nations,
commanded to Baptize Infants.


T. He denied the consequent, though the whole included every part, and Nations
were the whole, and Infants were a part of Nations, yet it did not follow that
Infants were to be Baptized.


C. He returned, that, that saying of Aquinas (posito toto generali, pars ejus
negari non potest, a general whole being granted, no part of it can be denied)
was an axiom both in Logic, Philosophy, and Divinity, as Psalm 117.1. Praise
the Lord all ye Nations, is interpreted by another Psalm, Old men, and babes,
young men, and maidens, praise ye the Lord.


T. Mr. T. Said it was an Axiom that the whole includes every part, where
there is no exception, but here is an exception.


C. He replied, Saint Ambrose upon the place says there is no exception, Qui
dixit omnes, nullos exclusit, neque parvulos, etc. He that said Baptize all
Nations, excepted none, no not Infants.


T. Mr. T. Pished at it, sleighting Ambrose his Authority.


C. Then said Mr. C. whether we shall obey Ambrose Bishop of Millain with
Scripture, or Mr. Tombs Vicar of Lemster against Scripture, judge you. But
that there is no exception thus I prove, If Infants be excepted from Baptism,
it is either because they are not named in the text, or because we find no
instance that any were Baptized, or because they are not capable; But for none
of these three; Therefore Infants are not excepted.


T. Mr. T. Denied the Major, and said that a fourth reason might be given,
because they were not Disciples,


C. He told him that in this answer he showed himself to be no good Logician;
for it is an Axiom, that in no division, one member can be affirmed of
another, because they are opposite, now to be Disciples, and capable of Baptism
were not opposite but subordinate; And to be Disciples, if it made them not
capable, it was no exception at all, if it made them capable, it was the same
with the third, to which Dilemma when he could receive no answer, he demanded
where it was required that those that are to be Baptized, must be Disciples?


T. He said out of the Text, for that which is translated Teach all Nations, is
(...) make Disciples of all Nations.


C. He replied; at Ross you found fault with me for that translation, asking
me, was I wiser than the translators? and now when it seems to make for you,
you urge it. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? I confess it is (...), in
the Aorist, ye shall make Disciples, for it must be interpreted by the future,
(...), Baptizing, or by Baptizing in the present tense; as if Discipling were
the end, and Baptizing the means, and required no qualification before (as
learned men with great probability press) but I will not insist upon that now,
But that which you denied, I prove, that Infants may be Disciples, from [that
place Romans 15.10. compared with the 5. verse, for so Mr. C. said, mistaking it
for] Acts 15.10.


T. At which Mr. Tombs insulted, saying he was a good text-man.


C. He replied, he was in have, and did not think of this before, but that his
answer did drive him to it, and he in his elaborate books did oftentimes quote
one place for another, then how much more might he, that was extemporall, it
had been enough to have said, as our Savior to the Tempter, its written: but
to leave these catches, and come to the proof. They upon whom the Pharasies
would have laid the yoke, were Disciples, verse 10. Why tempt ye God, to put a
yoke upon the neck of the Disciples; But many of them were Infants; Therefore
Infants are Disciples.


T. He denied the Minor, that many of them were not Infants.


C. Which was proved thus; The yoke was Circumcision verse 5. the Pharasies
saying, that it was needful to Circumcise them; But they upon whom the yoke
was to be imposed by Circumcision, were only Infants amongst the Jews, and
Infants together with Parents amongst the Gentiles; Therefore many of them were
Infants.


T. He denied the Major, and said the yoke was not Circumcision.


C. He replied it was apparent, by comparing the 5. and 10. with the foregoing
verses. 1. verse Certain men came down from Judea, and taught the brethren,
except ye be Circumcised, after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved; where
observe that Circumcision is the subject of the Question. In the 2. verse they
determined that Paul, and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go up to
Jerusalem unto the Apostles, and Elders, about this Question, to wit
Circumcision. In the 5. certain of the Sect of the Pharasies said, that it was
needful to circumcise them. In the 6. the Apostles came together to consider
of the matter, that is Circumcision, and when there had been much disputing,
Peter rose up in the 7. and determined the Question in the tenth verse, why
tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples?


T. Mr. T. Said, that Circumcision could not be the yoke, that neither they nor
their fathers could bear.


C. He returned, that it was a bloody, and a heavy yoke, therefore the
Israelites had a dispensation for 40. years in the wilderness; Moses neglected
the Circumcision of his child probably for this cause; and his wife (when the
Child was Circumcised) called him a bloody husband. The Sichemites were slain,
as unable to defend themselves, while they were sore of the wound of
Circumcision.


T. Mr. T. Said, that the Doctrine of Moses was the yoke of which Infants were
not capable.


C. He replied; that Circumcision was principally meant, and the doctrine of
Moses only as an Appendix of it, and children were as capable of the doctrine
then, as they were in Abraham, and Moses his time, when all in the moment of
Circumcision were tied to the observation of the doctrine, tho they of ripe
years (to use Vossius his distinction) were taught the doctrine antecedenter,
before Circumcision, infants of eight days consequenter, after Circumcision,
when age made them capable; I know (says God) Abraham will teach his Children;
So it is apparent all those upon whom Circumcision with the doctrine of Moses
was to be imposed, were called Disciples; But some of these were Infants, for
only Infants were Circumcised among the Jews, and Infants with the Parents
among the Gentiles; therefore some Infants are Disciples.


Mr. T. Without any distinct answer would have broke through the pales to rove
abroad again.


C. But he pressed him to keep within the lists, urging this Argument. They to
whom is the promise, they may be Baptized, its the Apostles own inference, Acts
2.28. Be Baptized, for the promise is to you; But to Infants of believing
parents is the promise, the promise is to you, and your Children; therefore
Infants may be Baptized.


T. He denied the Minor, that to Infants of believing parents is the promise.


C. He told him, it was the words of the text, The promise is to you, and your
Children.


T. Then Mr. T. Said they were not believers yet.


C. Mr. C. Replied, they were believers in fieri, tho perhaps not in facto.


T. That Is Latin (says Mr. T.) what do you understand by it?


C. He said, I mean this, they were believers by outward assent, and
disposition, sufficient to make them members visible; but perhaps not believers
by inward assent, and habit, to justify them. For I know you will not say that
none are to be Baptized but they that have a saving faith, which none but God
is able to discern. Ministers must act according to rule, which in adultis, is
outward profession, or a willingness to receive the Ordinance, and that they
were thus qualified (which is sufficient) it is apparent.


T. Mr. T. Denied that they were sufficiently qualified.


C. Which was proved thus; They whom the Apostle commanded to be Baptized, were
sufficiently qualified; But the Apostle commanded them to be Baptized;
Therefore they were sufficiently qualified.


T. Then Mr. T. Without repeating the Syllogism, or applying any distinction,
inquired where the Apostle commanded them to be Baptized.


C. He told him verse 38. (...), be Baptized every one of your.


T. Yes (says Mr. T.) Upon condition of Repentance, repent and be Baptized.


C. That is a condition of your own making, and an adding to the Word of God,
for where dos the Scripture, either expressly, or implyedly say, that Repentance
is a condition of Baptism? if it be meant of complete repentance, true it is,
it was their duty both to repent, and to be Baptized, to repent in relation to
crucifying of Christ, to be Baptized in relation to Judaism, which they were to
put off, and Christianity which they were to put on; But that they must have
complete repentance before Baptism, it is not so much as hinted at. And if you
mean incomplete repentance (which is Indeed all that is required) they had that
already, for they were pricked in conscience, saying, Men, and brethren what
shall we do?


T. Mr. T. Said that was not all that was required, nor was it a sufficient
qualification for Baptism.


C. Against which answer was concluded thus; That upon which the Apostles
Baptized three thousand the same day, was a sufficient qualification; But the
Apostles upon that Baptized 3000. the same day; Therefore it was a sufficient
qualification.


T. He denied the Minor, and gave his reason from the 40. and 41. verses, And
with many other words did he testify, and exhort, saying, Save your selves from
this untoward generation, then they that gladly received the word were Baptized,


C. It was replied, that this was but a recapitulation, or reciting of the
heads of Peter's Sermon that he preached to them, before they were pricked in
conscience, or were exhorted to be baptized, and no new act; which was a thing
usual in Scripture, as Genesis 1. God having expressed the creation of Man, and
Gods blessing of him, and all creatures to him, by a (...) recites the manner
of his creation in the second Chapter. But howsoever it made nothing against
him, for whether it be taken thetically without any condition, or
hypothetically upon condition of repentance, the Children were to be baptized
together with the Parents, the promise is to you and your Children, and that
was all that he contended for; from whence arises this Argument, To whom the
promise of Grace belongs, to them Baptism belongs also; But the promise of
Grace belongs to Believers and their Children; Therefore Baptism belongs to
both.


T. Mr. T. said, the Promise of Grace belonged to Believers, and their
Children, when their Children actually believed, and not before.


C. He replied, there were two Arguments in the text to overthrow that: The
first might be drawn from the Indicative predication in the present tense, the
Promise is to you, and your Children, is, for the present, as well to your
Children, as to you. The second, from the opposition betwixt you and your
Children, and them that are afar off. They, and their Children, which are,
(...), near (as the Greek Scholiast, and the Syrian Interpreter says) are
opposed to them that are (...), afar off. The Jews were near, and in Covenant,
for to them is the promise in the present tense, but the Gentiles were afar
off, Romans 2.15. Ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of
Christ, therefore it is expressed in the future tense, as many as God shall
call; So that to the Jews being called, their Children were in Covenant with
them; when the Gentiles shall be called, their Children shall be in Covenant
with them.


T. Mr. T. said, he granted that Children were in Covenant, and might be
baptized


C. Well then observe, good People, the Dispute is at an end, he grants that
Children are in Covenant, and may be baptized.


T. Yes, but by those Children are not meant Infants, but Grown Men.


C. He replied, there are many circumstances in the text overthrows that;
first, the word is (...), which comes from (...), to bring forth, given
sometimes to Children in the womb, for the most part to them that are newly
born, or young.


T. Mr. T. said, it was also given to Men of ripe age.


C. Yes sometimes, by a figurative speech, (as that of Julius Caesar to Brutus
in Plutarch) (...), and thou my Child. And well might he call him his Child,
for he had adopted him the night before; but properly it signifies a young
Child, and so it ought to be taken here, unless some convincing reason can be
given to the contrary, according to that rule, Omne analogum per se positum,
stat pro famosiore significato. Mr. T. gave no answer, but with a jeering Echo
repeated the last words, pro famosiore significato.

The second circumstance in the text, is the substantive verb (...), is, the
promise is to you, and your Children, not is to you, and shall be to your
Children; now what Children had they at this present, but young Children?
unless Mr. T. will imagine that they were all Old Men and Women that were
present, and their Younger Men and Women were absent.

The third circumstance in the text is the finis cui, the end to whom the
promise is, to you, and your Children; the Jews Children under the Law were in
Covenant with their Parents, the Charter is confirmed under the Gospel to them
and their Children. The Jews when they crucified Christ, called for a Curse
upon themselves, and upon their Children, here the Apostle gives them a Remedy
as large as the Disease, the promise (that is, of Freedom from the curse) is
to you and your Children.


T. Mr. T. still kept his Conclusion in despite of the Premises, that it was
to their Children when they actually believed, and not before.


C. Yes, and before they actually believe, which I prove thus: The blessing is
as large as the curse; But the curse extended even to children, before they
could actually believe ( his blood be upon us and upon our children) Therefore
the blessing.


T. Mr. T. answered to the Major thus: If by blessing was meant the inward and
spiritual part of the Covenant, it might be true; but that was nothing to the
present purpose, seeing it was not known to us: But if the outward, and visible
part, he denied that Infants were capable of the blessing, as well as liable to
the curse.


C. Which distinction was took away thus: They that are holy with a
Covenant-holiness are capable of the outward and visible part; But Infants of
Believers are holy with a Covenant-holiness; Therefore they are capable of the
outward and visible part.


T. Mr. T. denied the Minor, and said that Covenant-holiness was gibberidge,
which they that spoke did not understand themselves.


C. Mr. C. replied, it was the language of learned men of all ages, amongst
whom were Vossius, Bullinger, and Hugo Grotius; and that Children of Believing
Parents were holy before Baptism, and that Baptism did not make, but declare
them to be Christians.

Then cried out a Cobbler, [I. E.] ( that has been dipped) this is Blasphemy.
C. Well, you discover of what spirit you are, and your ignorance; Are not
these the words of the learned assembly of Divines in the Directory confirmed
by Ordinance of Parliament? That Infants are Christians, and federally holy
before Baptism, and therefore are they Baptized [ Page 12.] And that Infants of
Believing Parents are thus holy, with a federall, or Covenant-holiness, I thus
prove from, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy.


T. That says Mr. T. Is meant of Matrimonial holiness, or a lawful use of the
Marriage Bed, that they are no Bastards.


C. That Answer I thus infringe. That which in Scripture is taken almost six
hundred times in a distinct sense, and not so much as once for Matrimonial
holiness, cannot be so meant here; But it is taken in Scripture almost six
hundred times in a distinct sense, and not once for Matrimonial holiness;
Therefore it cannot be so meant here.


T. That Argument (says Mr T.) I will retort upon you, That which in Scripture
is taken six hundred times in a distinct sense, and never Once for
Covenant-holiness cannot be meant here; But it is taken six hundred times in a
distinct sense, and never once for Covenant holiness; Therefore it cannot be
meant here.


C. To which was replied, this is to invert the order of the dispute, you are
to answer, and not to oppose.


T. I may oppose by retorting of an Argument, and I will answer anon.


C. Well, to satisfy you, I deny your Minor, for its taken often in Scripture
for Covenant-holiness.


T. Where?


C. The proof lies upon you, that it is not, yet I Will give give you one
instance, or two, Romans 11.16. if the first fruits be holy, the Lump is also
holy, and if the root be holy, so are the branches.


T. That is not meant of a Covenant-holyness.


C. Yes, its as clear as the light, and so you your self interpreted it at
Ross, as there are hundreds that will witness, which was upon this occasion. I
pressed that if the immediate parents were holy, the children were holy with a
Covenant-holiness; you denied the inference, and said the meaning of it was,
that Abraham the father of the faithful was the first fruits, and root that
was holy, and therefore his posterity was holy, and in covenant [And in this
exposition, as he agreed with truth, so with Beza, who says that children are
holy, that is comprehended in covenant from the womb, and with Bowls who
says, that they are holy with outward holiness, by which they are judged to be
in covenant]

But to return from whence, by your retortion, we have digressed. I am to prove
that holiness is never taken in Scripture for Matrimonial cleanness in
opposition to Illegitimation. Not in that place Ezra 9.2. the holy seed have
mingled themselves with the seed of those lands; which is either your only, or
principal hold, (as far as I can gather out of your books) therefore in no
place.


T. He denied the Antecedent.


C. Which was proved thus. If it be meant of Matrimonial cleanness, then this
must be the meaning of the words; The holy seed, that is the lawfully begotten
Jews, have mingled themselves with the seed of those lands, that is the
bastards of those lands; But that cannot be the meaning, for happily there were
some Bastards among the Jews, and in that sense not holy, and no Bastards
among the Nations, but all, or the most Legitimate, and therefore in that sense
not unholy; Therefore it is not meant of Matrimonial holiness.


T. He denied the Major, affirming that both Jews, and Nations, were holy
before their mixture, but then, both they, and their Children became unclean,
because God had forbidden them to marry with the Nations.


C. To which was answered, they that are Saints are not unholy; But some Saints
have been begot by this mixture, or unlawful bed, as Jepthah, who Hebr. 11. Is
said to be justified by faith; Therefore they are not unholy.


T. He denied the Major, saying, they may be unholy by their Natural
Generation, and first birth, and yet holy by Regeneration, and new birth.


C. This strikes not home; Moses had children by his Ethiopian woman, but they
were not illegitimate; therefore those that were begot by mixture with the
Nations were not Illegitimate.


T. Mr. T. Said, that was before the Law was given.


C. Well, that Answer will do you little service; after the Law was given,
Solomon had children by Rahab, who was a Cananitish, and Boaz by Ruth, who was
a Moabitish woman; and yet they were not Illegitimate, or unholy, as you would
have it.


T. They became Proselites, and received the Religion of the Jews.


C. Well then, while they were not of the Jews Religion, tho no Bastards, they
were unholy, when they embraced the Jews Religion, (by your own confession)
they became holy; what is this but a Covenant-holyness which you have opposed
all this while, and now grant it?


T. Mr. T. Used many words to clear himself, but with little satisfaction to
the greatest part of the hearers, and still denied that children were holy, and
in covenant.


C. Which was further proved thus, They that Christ took up in his arms,
blessed, said, the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon
those that despised, and would not receive, are holy with a Covenant-holyness;
But Christ took up little children into his arms, blessed them, said, the
Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon those that despised,
and would not receive them; Therefore little Children are holy with a
Covenant-holiness.


T. Mr. Tombs began to be netled, as if something in this Argument galled him,
saying it was a fallacy, and that he went about to entrap him by sophistry.


C. What fallacy?


T. A heaping of many things together that belong to several matters.


C. I confess they were spoken upon several occasions, but they all concenter
in my Conclusion, that children are holy, and in covenant; I am in have, and
named them all together, but if you will have patience, I Will prosecute them
severally.


T. I am willing to continue till midnight, but I like not this kind of arguing.


C. You like it not, because it does jugulum petere, cut the throat of your
tenet.


T. No not so much as touch the skin of it, says he.


C. Well I beseech you in the spirit of meekness to answer.


T. It is a fallacy of heaping many particulars together.


C. I confess there is a fallacy they call (...).


T. Take notice, he confesses it is a fallacy.


C. No such thing, for (...) is an asking of many Questions, which is your
usual fallacy, Socratically to ask, when you should solidly answer, but in my
Syllogism there is not so much as one Question.


T. It is a Copulative proposition says Mr. Tombs, and if one member of it be
false, the whole is false.


C. It is not an explicit Copulative proposition (says Mr. C.) neither is any
member of it false, (for every branch of it is Scripture,) Instance in any of
the particulars that you think m^kes the least for me, and I Will begin with that;
then he mentioned Matthew. 18.2. Which words being read, from thence he raised
this Argument. They to whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, are holy, and in
Covenant; But to little children belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; Therefore
little children are holy, and in Covenant.


T. Those little Children were not Infants.


C. They are called (...) of (...), because they could scarce speak.


T. What are these called (...)?


C. If not here, elsewhere, and of other Evangelists, and here they are called
(...), by the diminutive, which the great Master of the Greek Hippocrates
interprets, to signify a Child under seven years of age, and therefore not
capable of actual faith, when the Apostles themselves were yet ignorant about
fundamentalls.


T. They were converted verse 3. Except ye be converted, and become as little
Children, etc.


C. The meaning is not that the little Children are converted, but it has
relation to the Disciples in the first verse, who must be converted from their
actual sins, and become as little children which have no actual sin.


T. O how unhappy are the people that are seduced with these toys, are you not
ashamed?


C. I see you have learned of that man in Lucian to cry out (...), and to
vilify that Argument you cannot answer, and besides that, I see nothing that
is shame-worthy.

He has answered nothing at all (says one under the Pulpit) but shifts and
denies all.


T. Thou art an impudent, brazen-faced fellow, whosoever thou art, I have
answered all, confuted all my adversaries Books, and amongst them one of my
greatest Antagonists, I have turned Mr. Richard Baxter the most of his
Arguments against himself.


C. Sir, let that worthy man alone who is absent, you are now to answer me.


T. Here is nothing to answer, is it not in the sixth verse, Who so shall offend
one of these little ones which believe in me? were they not believers?


C. Yes, the Disciples were believers, which are here meant, and not the
children; which the Grammatical construction will tell you, for it is in the
masculin gender, (...), one of these little ones, meaning (...) disciple, not
in the Neuter Gender to answer to (...), little child; so that my Argument
remains unanswered.


T. I am weary of this Pedantrie, and looking upon his watch, said, I promised
but one hour, and its above four hours; with that he clapped his Book
together. [T. J.] Good Mr. Tombs (says an Anabaptist) continue a little longer
for satisfaction of the people; he gave no answer, but put on his hat.


C. Well, Sir, I will not press you any further now, I should have urged John
3.5. Romans 11. and other places, to prove Infants Church Membership, and have
come to the second and third branches of mine Argument, that Christ merited it
for them, and Infants stand in need of Baptism; but those I must leave to
another opportunity; Therefore I desire that we may have a set day about a
Month hence, seeing I was hurryed to this extemporall discourse through
importunity.


T. No, I will have no more dealing with you, unless it be by writing, that
what both of us shall set down, may be read in the public Congregation.


MARK. 16.15, 16. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature.

16. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes
not, shall be damned.


THese two verses hold out the rich Charter of the Gospel, which our Savior
delivered to the Apostles after his Resurrection; The parts are two, First a
Precept, in the former verse, Go ye into all the world, and Preach the Gospel
to every Creature; Secondly a Promise, with a Commination in the latter, He
that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned.

In the Precept, we have two particulars, First a Mission, he sends them, Go ye
into all the world; Secondly a Commission, he authorizes them, and Preach the
Gospel to every Creature.

In the latter verse, or promise, we have First the thing promised, laid down
affirmatively, shall be saved; Secondly the qualification, and that either
absolute, he that beleveth, or conditional, and is Baptized; he that believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved; Or a Commination shall be damned, with a
qualification negative, and absolutely without any limitation, he that
believes not, he that believes not shall be damned.

Weel only hint at the former verse for introduction to the latter. And he
said, (that is Christ,) Observe, that it is only God, Christ God and Man, that
can give Mission, or Commission to Preach, and ordain Sacraments. Math. 28.18.
All power is given me in Heaven and Earth, Go ye therefore, and teach all
Nations. Go ye into all the world, there is the largeness of their Commission,
to all the world, as he, to all Nations as Matthew. Hence observe, the
Apostles, and by them the Evangelists, had an extraordinary Commission which
extended through the world, but our Commission ordinarily is limited to certain
places; True it is, there may be itinerants upon special occasions, (and they
also confined within their verges,) But as Doctor Buckeridge observes well when
Christ speaks to Apostles, he says, Go ye into all the world, but when to
ordinary Pastors, and Teachers (...) he fixed some to be Pastors, and some
Teachers.

And Preach the Gospel to every Creature, there is the Commission, wherein we
have First the Act Preach, that is proclaim, Secondly the object of the Gospel,
which in the Original, and other languages signifies good news, or a good
speech; from the connection between the Mission and Commission coming from the
same Author Christ, and extended to the same persons, the Apostles, and their
successors, observe, that none may Preach as Church Officers, but they that
are sent in a Gospel way; our adversary in the common cause spoke so home to
this, that we need not press it further. The last thing is the extent of the
Commission, and that a very large one, unto every Creature, as here, to all
Nations, as Matthew.

Now the Quaere will be, what is meant by every Creature? Some limit it to
every rational creature, Angels, men, Devils, as Origin, and his misericordes
Doctores who held the Devils and reprobates should be saved; but that cannot
be; for 2. Pet. 2.4. They are cast down to hell, and reserved to judgment.
Some more strictly restrain it only to man, and that when he is come to age,
and understanding, excluding Children; this is too strict, True it is, Infants
are not capable to be taught of men, but they may be taught of God; they cannot
actually understand the Gospel, but they may actually receive the benefit of
the Gospel; a noble man's Child has interest in his Fathers Patent, and pardon;
a sucking Infant (though he knows it not) may be joined in a lease with the
Parents. Some extend it, and it is conceived more fitly according to the
Letter, without any Synecdoche, or figure, to every creature, as if he should
say, Go and proclaim the benefit that comes by Christ to every Creature; for as
by the first Adam all creatures were accursed, so by Christ the second Adam,
all creatures shall be blessed, Romans 8.22. (...) every creature groans,
desiring to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
answerable to this, Preach the Gospel (...) to every creature, telling them,
that they are now by Christ to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God.

Object. But the creature cannot hear, nor understand.

Answ. Its true not properly, no more could John Baptist in his Mothers Womb,
and yet (...) the Babe sprang for joy; Nay the Holy Ghost ascribes a hearing to
the creature, Hosea 2.21. And it shall come to pass in that day says the Lord,
I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. Hence
observe, that every creature in a sense is sensible of the benefit they have by
Christ; but every one in their kind, men come to years, and discretion, are
capable of actual understanding, actual profession, actual faith; Infants only
in actu primo, are capable of the first seeds of understanding, of profession
of Faith, which will show it self in the fruits when they come to years; The
rest of our fellow creatures as by a natural instinct they groan for the curse,
so by an other instinct, they lift up their heads in expectation of the
blessing, and that (...), with an earnest expectation, or a stretched out neck
as the word in the original signifies, Romans 819.

Thus we have paraphrased upon the first verse for introduction to the second,
wherein is First, a Consolatory promise, he that believes, and is Baptized,
shall be saved; Secondly a Comminatorie Curse, he that believes not, shall be
damned. In the former, we have first the qualification, and that either
absolute, he that believes, or conditional, and is Baptized.

Q. Now the Quaere will be, what belief is here meant?

Sol. First the event tells us, that belief that saves us, he that believes
shall be saved. Secondly the opposition, its contrary to that unbelief that
damns; Observe that a saving Faith is necessary to salvation, without Faith it
is impossible to please God, all they, and only they that have a saving Faith
shall be saved; so that you see that Faith is a necessary, and absolute
condition.

And is Baptized, that is upon supposition, if Baptism conveniently may be had;
hence observe, that Baptism is not absolutely necessary by necessity of means
(as they call it) as if none could be saved without it, but by necessity of
Precept, if conveniently it may be had. The Israelites for forty years in the
Wilderness were not Circumcised. Bernard, that saw not all things could see
this, that, non absentia sed contemplus Sacramenti damnat, not the want, but
the contempt of the Sacrament damns: Valentinian the Emperor dyed, as he was
going to be Baptized in Jordan, and Ambrose being asked what he thought of him,
answered, that he was Baptizatus volo, and voluntate, etiamsi non revera aquae
lavacro, Baptized inwardly with wish, and will, though not outwardly with the
laver of water, Austin is conceived here to be mistaken, who denied salvation
to Infants Un-Baptized, hence he is called durus Pater Infantum, a hard Father
of Infants; and many of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, who hold that
Infants that dye Un-Baptized, are kept in limbo Infantum in a Purgatory of
Infants, where they shall never behold the beatifical vision.

Object. But here is first placed believing, and then Baptized, so that from
the order of placing the words, some would gather that we are first to believe
before we be Baptized.

Answ. That will not follow; for Mark 1.4. There is placed first Baptizing, and
then Preaching, and repentance after, whence they might as well gather that we
must be Baptized, before we can hear the word Preached, or repent; Repentance
in Scripture is often placed before Faith, and yet is a fruit, and effect of
Faith; some of the Evangelists place Judas his receiving of the sop before the
Sacrament, some after it; it is a rule in interpreting of holy Writ, that
Scriptura nescit prius, and posterius, the Scripture does not always observe
the precise order in which things were done.

Q. But I beseech you consider what Faith it is that is here meant?

Sol. A saving Faith; Must then a saving Faith be the rule of our Baptism? and
must we Baptize none, but of those we know have a saving Faith; then we must
Baptize none at all; never any Minister upon that ground had ever Commission to
Baptize any, no not the Apostles, for they did not infallibly know that those
they Baptized had a saving Faith; nay they actually Baptized many that were
hypocrites, as Simon Magus, Alexander, Hymeneus, Philetus, and others; hence
observe, That no rule for Baptizing in general can be gathered out of this
Text, And to say that none are to be Baptized, but they that have a saving
Faith, which is the Faith that is only here meant, or none but they which make
an outward profession of Faith (which is not here meant) is an untruth not
gatherable from this Scripture, and an adding to the word of God, against which
he has proclaimed a solemn curse.

The Commination, or curse follows in the last words, He that believes not,
shall be damned; he does not say, he that is not Baptized shall be damned.

For though the contempt of it is dangerous, yet a man may be saved without
Baptism; he does not say that he that is not dipped over head is damned, that
is a thing indifferent, any washing in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is Baptism; he does not say, that he that is not Rebaptized, or
Baptized again, is damned, for that is the invention of Man, never heard of (in
that sense) before John of Leydens time, who confessed at his execution, that
he had that, and the rest of his poisoned Doctrine from Satan. Hence observe,
That all unbelievers, though Baptized, shall be damned; men believing though
(through invincible necessity) Un-Baptized, shall be saved; thus we have given
you the lively meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Text.

Having laid this foundation, we will make further inquiry into two things which
are in controversy, First what is meant by Baptism, or Baptizing, Secondly
whether Infants ought to be Baptized, or no.

First, Baptism in the Original, signifies nothing but a washing, as Pareus
upon the Hebrews says, Baptismus Graecis est quaevis ablutio, Baptism is in
Greek any washing, whether by dipping, or sprinkling, to Baptize is to dip, or
sprinkle says, Ravenel; so says the Churches old Catechism dipped, or sprinkled
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; so the Directory, Baptize the
Child, by pouring, or sprinkling of the water on the face of the Child, without
adding any further Ceremony. And as many kinds there are of washing, so many
there are of Baptizing, whereof the Pillars of the Greek Tongue, Hesichius,
Budeus, Stephanus, Scapula, Arius Montanus, Pasor, mention four; First tingere,
to die, or tincture, Secondly mergere, to drown, or plunge, Thirdly madefacere,
to wet, or moysten, and lastly abluere, to wash, or cleanse.

I confess there are some that distinguish betwixt (...) to rantise (as they
call it) or sprinkle, (...) which is to plunge to the bottom, (...) which is to
swim upon the top, and (...), which is, as they criticize upon it, to swim
betwixt the top, and bottom; these three last are mentioned by Casaubon in his
notes upon the third Chapter of St. Matthew, as was quoted by our adversary, but
with what fidelity, or advantage to his cause, I leave it to the Godly, and
learned to Judge, for he left out the last words, wherein the whole state of
the question is determined by Casaubon against him, for thus he concludes,
horum sententia jampridem merito est explosa, etc. the judgment of those men
is deservedly long since exploded, and trampled down, that would have Baptizing
to be by dipping, and he gives a reason, quum non in eo posita sit mysterii
hujus vis, and (...), seeing the force, and efficacy of Baptism, this mystery,
consists not in that, that is the manner of washing. Which is confirmed by
Aquinas, Immersio non est de necessitate Baptismi, dipping is not of the
necessity of Baptism, And Dominico sotus, Ablutio est de essentia Baptismi,
washing is of the essence of Baptism, but the manner of washing, whether by
dipping, pouring, or sprinkling, is accidental.

Many places of Scripture confirm this, 1 Cor. 10.2. there the Israelites were
Baptized in the red Sea, when their feet did but touch the water, not as if
they were Baptized, when they were not (as the Ana baptists gloss upon this
place) and that the Egyptians were really Baptized, for the Egyptians were not
Baptized in their sense, but sunk to the bottom like stones. Exodus 15.5.

Baptized under the Cloud, not that the Egyptians were Baptized, and the
Israelites as if they were (as they descant) under the Cloud, for the Egyptians
were never under the Cloud, for the Israetites went before the Egyptians, and
the Cloud, part of it was over the Israelites, part of it went before them.

There is mention made in the Gospel of Baptizing, or washing of themselves
when they came from Market, of Cups, of Vessels, of Tables, which cannot be
meant of plunging, in water, so often, where that Element was so scarce, but
rincing.

John's Baptizing in Jordan, Philips going down to the River with the Eunuch
proves nothing at all; for what strange consequence would this be, especially
from the Anabaptists (that must have express Scripture for all things) John
Baptized in Jordan, (...) or to the water.
Philip went down into the water with the Eunuch, therefore, they were dipped,
seeing it might as well be by pouring, or sprinkling of water upon them, for
any thing that appears out of the Text.

Object. John Baptized in Enon, because there was much water.

Answ. This will seem to be no wonder in those hot Countries, where there are
many miles without a Spring of water, especially seeing Geographers, and
Travelers tells us, that Enon is a little Brook that one may stride over,
scarce Knee deep, and therefore not capable of dipping.

Object. But Baptism, say they, must resemble the death of Christ, Romans 6.4. We
are buried with him by Baptism, which is not by sprinkling, but dipping.

Answ. I answer, the scope of the place is to show, that one end of our Baptism
is to Seal our Communion with Christ in his death, but to press a necessity of
resemblance by descending into the water, and coming out again, we see no
ground in Text, and if our abiding under the water must answer Christ's Burial
in exact representation, then as Christ lay three days, and three nights in the
Grave, so they must lie three days, and three nights under the water, which if
it were put in execution, the dispute would quickly be at an end.

But should we grant this resemblance, I appeal to any man, whether our pouring
on of water in Baptism, does not more resemble our Christian Burial, which is
by pouring on of Earth, or Dust, than by plunging over head.

Thus you see it proved, that Baptizing is any kind of washing, In the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we do not deny with Master Perkins, that if we
were to Baptize converted Turks, or Pagans of ripe age, in hot Countries, we
might Baptize them by dipping, Provided that their Garments were not first
Baptized, or washed, for that is conceived to be no less superstition, than
Baptizing of Bells; Baptism (says Vossius) non est immersio vestium, sed humani
Corporis, is not a washing of the Garments, but of the Body; we account the
Church of Rome Idolaters, for presenting that worship, First to the Image,
which is terminated in Christ; the Garments are first washed, or dipped, and
the Body but at the most wet, or moystned through them.

But to affirm that no Baptism but that which is by dipping is lawful, is a
will worship, much more, that Baptism otherwise is a nullitie, and those that
are Baptized so, ought to be Baptized again, or Rebaptized, which the Senate
of Syrick understood well, when they made an Act, that all that did presume to
Re-Baptize such as were Baptized before, should be drowned.

So we have resolved the former doubt, that Baptizing is not dipping, and come
to the latter, that Infants may, nay ought to be Baptized. And (Brethren) I
beseech you to give me leave a little to speak for Infants, those poor Souls,
that cannot speak for themselves.

And before we come to the Question, take with you these two Considerations;
First, that those truths that were not in controversy in the Primitive times,
the Apostles were not so punctual in pressing of them, seeing there was no
need; Solon being asked why he made no Law against murderers of Parents,
answered, because he conceived none would commit that unnatural Act; If the
Apostles had been asked, why they did not put down Infant Baptism in plainer
terms, I suppose they would have answered, that they thought none would have
denied it.

Secondly observe, that those things that are pressed often in the old
Testament, are mentioned more sparingly in the New, as the Sabbath, and
Magistracy in the old Testament, line upon line, and precept upon precept, but
scarce a Syllable for a Christian Sabbath, or a Christian Magistracy in the
new. Nothing is more clear then Infants Church Membership in the old Testament,
therefore not so clear in the New, and yet clear enough to those that have eyes
to see it, as will appear by these reasons following.

1. Arg. First, those that are in Covenant with God, ought to have the Seal of
the Covenant, which is Baptism.

But Infants of believing Parents are in Covenant with God.

Therefore Infants ought to have the Seal of the Covenant, which is Baptism.

The former Proposition is firm by Confession of all Divines, even our
adversaries, Haec est fundamentalis ratio paedobaptismi (says Daneus) this is
the fundamental reason of Baptizing of Infants, that they are in Covenant,
Esse foederatum sufficit ad accipiendum signum foederis, says Davenant, to be
in Covenant is sufficient to receive the sign, and seal of the Covenant, Omnes
foederati sunt Baptizandi, says Wendel, all that are in Covenant are to be
Baptized, Si in foedere sunt, impie agunt, qui eis signum foederis negant,
says Ferus, if they be in Covenant, they do wickedly that deny them the sign
of the Covenant; in a Civil contract (says Mr Perkins) the Father, and the
heir make but one person, and the Covenant's for himself and his posterity.

The Minor proposition that Infants of believing Parents are in Covenant, is
grounded on many Scriptures, Genes. 17.7. Where God establishes a Covenant, not
only with Abraham, but with his seed after him in their generations, for an
everlating Covenant, everlasting, and therefore to last to the end of the
World; as Cornelius a Lapide says, absolute aeternum est in semine spirituali
fidelibus, It is absolutely everlasting in the spiritual seed to the
faithful. Galat. 3.8 The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham; therefore if
Isaac was in Covenant with his Father when he was but eight days old, and had
the seal by virtue of the Lamb to be slain, much more the Children of believing
Parents, by virtue of the Lamb that is already slain. Deutero. 29.11. When all
the people stood in Covenant before the Lord, their little ones are mentioned
amongst the rest, which is further confirmed, Acts 2.38, 39. Be Baptized every
one of you, for the promise is to you, and your children; to say that they were
not yet believers, is but a shift, the Text makes it clear, as soon as they
were believers, their Children were in Covenant with them, and to be Baptized.

Arg. 2. Such as were Circumcised under the Law, may be Baptized under the
Gospel.

But Infants of believers were Circumcised under the Law. Therefore they may
baptized under the Gospel.

Huic Argumento non omnes Anabaptistae resistent (says learned Whitaker) all
the Anabaptists shall not be able to resist this Argument; the Minor, that
Infants under the Law were Circumcised, is confessed.

The former proposition is only questioned, that Baptism under the Gospel to
Infants, does not necessarily follow from Circumcision under the Law; Augustine
is clear for it, saying, Mutatis signis manet eadem gratia sine aetatis
discrimine, the outward visible signs being changed, the same grace remains
without any difference of age, and he gives a reason, because the grace of God
is not straiter in the new Testament than in the old; Therefore Christ, Hebr.
8.6. Is said to be Mediator of a better Covenant, but how were it a better
Covenant, if all poor Infants that were in Covenant under the Law, were out of
Covenant under the Gospel? Titus. 2 12. The grace of God has appeared unto
all, and therefore surely to Infants; as Ireneus says, Christus pro parvulis
parvulus factus est, Christ becam a little one, for little ones sake, that he
might redeem the little ones. Little ones were the first Martyrs that suffered
for Christ, in Rama, was a voice heard; and that Baptism came in place of
Circumcision, the Apostle cleares it, Coloss. 2.11, 12. Ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands; How is that? Buried with him in Baptism. Hence
arises another Argument.

Arg. 3. Those that were once in Covenant, had the Seal of the Covenant, and
were never disfranchized, and put out of Covenant, have title to the Covenant,
and Seal of it still.

But Infants were once in Covenant, had the Seal of the Covenant, and were
never disfranchized, and put out of Covenant, Therefore Infants have title to
the covenant, and seal of it still.

Let any man show one syllable, one tittle in Scripture, that ever Infants were
put out, and weel yield the gantlet; nay, the Gospel is so far from expressing
of them that they are put out, that it gives them large commendations beyond
them of riper years, making them the rule of our perfection, as new born babes,
receive the sincere milk of the Word. Unless you be as little Children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; which is a case so clear, that even
Bellarmine him self encludes, Nullum est impedimentum, etc. there is nothing
that hinders, but that Infants may as well be Baptized under the Gospel, as
they were Circumcised under the Law; for neither has God forbidden Ministers
to give them this Sacrament, neither are they incapable to receive it.

Arg. 4. That which God has commanded may lafully be practiced by the
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But God has, commanded Infant Baptism.

Therefore it may lawfully be practiced by the Ministers of Jesus Christ. That
God has ommanded it, appears, Matthew. 28.19. Go Baptize all Nations; its a
general command, and (as Aquinas says) posito generali mandato pars ejus
negari non potest, a general command being given, no part of it can be denied;
Infants are a part of Nations, and included in them.

Object. But here is no mention made of Infants.

Answ. No, nor of them of age; we might retort it upon our adversaries, there
is no mention made of Dippers, no, nor of them that are to be dipped, therefore
they ought not to dip, nor be dipped. Generals include particulars in all
Laws; Psalm. 117. Praise the Lord all ye Nations, Nations includes old men,
and babes, young men, and maids, all without exception, as another Psalm
interprets it.

Now if Infants be excepted, contrary to that saying of Saint Ambrose, Qui
dixit omnes, nullum excepit, neque parvulos, etc. He that commanded all to be
Baptized, excepnone, no, not little ones. If (I say) they be excepted, its
either because they are not named, or because we never read in Scripture that
any Infants were Baptized, or, because they are not capable; (that fourth
cavil, being the same with the third, I Will take away anon) but for none of
these three; therefore Infants are not excepted from Baptism.

Not for the first, because they are not named, for so neither old men, nor
nobles, nor Ministers are named. Not because we read not of their Baptism, so
we neither read of the Baptism of the Apostles, nor of the Virgin Mary, yet we
piously believe that they were Baptized; De negatione facti ad jus non valet
consequentia, such a thing is not mentioned, that it was done; therefore it was
not done, or was not done, therefore it ought not to have been done, is no
consequence; Christ did, and said many things that are not written; so did his
Apostles.

Not for the third, because they are incapable, which is denied; for if Infants
be incapable, it is either because they have not repentance, and faith in act,
which cannot hinder them; Christ was Baptized, had not repentance, for he had
no sin to repent of, had not faith, for faith presupposes one lost in himself,
that depends upon another for salvation, Christ is that Rock of Salvation, upon
whom all mankind being lost depends; Neither because they cannot hear the Word
preached; then they that are born deaf should be excluded from Baptism; Or
because they are not otherwise qualified; but that cannot hinder them, for God
requires no more of them that are in Covenant, and born of believing Parents,
but a pure capacity, and receptability, which Divines call Potentiam
objectivam; as God in the beginning created the World of nothing, so in the
beginning of the new creature he does regenerat, and recreate us of nothing;
upon this account it is, that we read of many whole families Baptized, not
excluding, but rather including Infants, Cornelius was Baptized with his
household, Acts 10.47, 48. Lydea, and her household, Acts 16.15. Crispus, and all
his house, Acts 18.8. and the household of Stephanus, 1 Corinthians. 1.16. the
Jayler (...), all that were his, Acts 16.31, 32. His Servants, his Children;
for can we imagine so many families without a child?

Arg. 5. They that are capable of the Kingdom, and the blessing, which is the
greater, are capable of Baptism, which is the lesser.

But Infants are capable of the Kingdom, and the blessing, which is the greater.

Therefore they are capable of Baptism which is the lesser; forbid not (says
our Savior) little Children to come unto me, for unto such belongs the Kingdom
of God; for surely, if the Kingdom of Heaven receive them, the Church may not
exclude them; for the Church must receive such as glory receives, Acts 2.47.
There were daily added to the Church such as should be saved. Now for proof of
this Argument, take these places, Mark. 10.13. to 17. Mark. 9.14.36, 37. Matthew.
18.2, 3, 4. Matthew. 19.13, 14, 15. Luke 9.14, 15. Luke 18.15, 16. Which tho they
be spoken upon several occasions, all prove Infants to be Church Members, and
capable both of grace, and glory; weel instance in two, Jesus called a little
child unto him, the word is (...), which (as Hippocrates in his distinction of
ages says, and Beza seconds him,) signifies a child under seven years, and set
him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted, and become as little children, that is, endeavor to be free from
actual sin, as they are, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

The other is that of S. Luke 18.15. wherein observe, First a Precept, Suffer
little children to come unto me.

Secondly, we have a prohibition, and forbid them not.

Thirdly, his displeasure against his Disciples, for hindering them from coming
to him, he looked on this act with indignation, and was much displeased at it.

Fourthly, he adds a reason why little ones should be brought to him, because
to such belongs the Kingdom of God, that is, the Kingdom of grace here, and
glory hereafter; they are visible members of his Church, and Kingdom, and
therefore none may hinder their access to him.

Fifthly, he confirms this reason, a majori, from the greater to the less, Gods
Kingdom does not only belong to them, but I tell you more, whosoever will come
into this Kingdom, must resemble Infants in Innocence, humility, simplicity.

Sixthly, he adds his benediction of them, he took them up in his arms, put his
hands upon them, and blessed them; and tells us that their Angels always see
the face of his Father, which is in Heaven; and the danger of them that offend
one of these little ones; and all this recorded by three Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, Luke, as if it were of purpose to check the sacrilegious insolency of
these latter times that denies them the seal. Christ is not more punctual by
his Spirit, in declaring his own Birth, Passion, Resurrection, than he is in
this precious Truth so much trampled under foot.

And if any object, these were not young Children, the text easily confutes
them, they were (...). Children under seven years of age, (...), Children that
could scarce speak, they did not lead them, but (...), they carried them unto
him; Christ is said twice in S. Mark, (...), to take them up in his arms, and
embrace them; Christ was already instructing the people that were able to
understand, the Apostles were offended for bringing of Children which could not
understand.

Well then, does Christ take Children in his arms, and would he have them all
put out of his visible Church? would he have us receive them in his Name, and
yet not to receive them into his visible Church, nor as his Disciples? How can
Infants be received in Christ's Name, if they belong not visibly to him, and his
Church? Nay, does Christ account it a receiving of himself, and shall we then
refuse to receive them, or acknowledge them the subjects of his visible
Kingdom? will it not follow then that whosoever refuses them, refuses Christ,
and him that sent him? For my part (to use the words of a godly, and learned
divine) Seeing the will of Christ is that I must walk by, and his word that I
must be judged by, and he has given me so full a discovery of his will in this
point, I will boldly adventure to follow his rule, and had rather answer him
upon his own encouragement for admitting an hundred Infants into his Church,
than answer for keeping out of one.

Argument 6. All Disciples may be Baptized.

But Infants of believing parents are Disciples.

Therefore some Infants may be Baptized.

The Major, or former proposition, is granted by our adversaries, who translate
that place, Matthew. 28.19. (...), go make Disciples of all Nations, which is in
our last translation, Go teach all Nations, confessing, as soon as they are
Disciples they may be Baptized.

Now for the Minor, that Infants are Disciples, is evident from Acts 15.10.
Why, tempt ye God, and put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples? this yoke
was Circumcision, and the attendants of it, as will appear by comparing it with
the fifth verse, and the context from the beginning of the Chapter. Now among
the Jews, children were only to be Circumcised, and amongst the Gentiles,
children together with parents when they were converted, and became Proselites.
To say that not only Circumcision, but the Doctrine, and Observation of the
whole Law, by the yoke is meant, is but a shift; Circumcision was the Seal, or
Ordinance by which the Jews were bound to observe the Doctrine, and the Law,
and all those upon whom the yoke was laid by Circumcision, are called
Disciples; whereof Infants were a great part.

And if it be objected, that children are not capable of instruction, as it is
nothing to the purpose, so it contradicts Scripture, Esaias 54.13. And all thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
Children. And if any one carnally interpret this of the Jews return from
captivity, as they do other places of Esa. our Savior checks them, John 6.45.
And It is written in the Prophets, And they shall all be taught of God.

Arg. 7. All that have faith may be Baptized.

But some Infants have faith. Therefore some Infants may be Baptized.

The proposition none will deny, the Minor may be proved by several reasons.

First, Christ expressly calls them Believers, Matthew. 18. He attributes humility
to them, and faith; and commands Elders to imitate them; and that you may see
they were Infants, Mark 9.36. tells us they were such as Christ took up in His
arms.

Secondly, they are said to receive the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. that is, the
grace of God, Remission of sins, and life eternal; now the Kingdom is not
received, but by faith in Christ.

Thirdly, they please God, therefore Christ blesses them; but without faith it
is impossible to please God.

Fourthly, either faith must be allowed them, or salvation denied them; but the
latter is cruel, and impious; therefore the former must be godly, and pious;
faith only purifies the heart, but no unclean thing shall enter into Heaven.

Fifthly, tho Infants cannot make actual profession of faith, yet they may have
inward roots of Sanctification, and faith.

John Baptist and Jeremie were sanctified in their mothers wombs; let
carnalists say what they will, that is the principal meaning of that place,
Esaias 65.20. There shall be no more an Infant of days; The Jews thought they
were not sanctified, unless a Sabbath went over them; the child shall die an
hundred year old, that is, as well in Covenant with God, or a visible
Churchmember, as if he were a hundred years old. Therefore Pareus says,
Infantes Ecclesiae etiam ante Baptismum censentur sideles; Infants of the
Church, even before Baptism, are judged faithful. Hommius says, infants have
faith, in semine, in the seed, tho not in mess, in the harvest; Beza says,
they have faith (...), in power, tho not (...), in operation. Faith (says
Treleatius) is twofold;

1. Active which the Elder have by hearing the Word.

2. Passive, and by imputation, which Infants have by virtue of the Covenant,
and Divine promise. Pelagius asks Austin where he places infants Baptized? he
answers, in numero credentium, in the number of believers, and adds, nec
judicare ullo modo aliter audebis, si non vis esse aperte haereticus, neither
may thou presume to judge otherwise, if thou will not be a plain Heretic. Weel
conclude this with that of Vossius, As in naturals, so in supernaturals we must
distinguish these three things, power, habit, and act; there is the power of
reasoning in Infants, the habit in men sleeping, but the act, and exercise, in
them that are waking; the power answers the seed, the habit the tree, the act,
and exercise, the fruit; the seed of Faith may be in Infants, the habit in men
of age, but the act, and exercise, in them that work according to the habit.

8. Arg. Those that are Holy, with a Covenant-holiness, may be Baptized. But
Infants of believing Parents are Holy with a Covenant-Holiness. Therefore
Infants of believing Parents may be Baptized. For the former Proposition,
foederatis competit signum foederis, (says Vossius) the sign of the Covenant
belongs to them that are in Covenant; Holiness is twofold (says Bullinger)
either of Faith, or of the Covenant. Ezra. 9.2. Ye have mingled the holy seed,
that is them in Covenant, with the Nations, that is them that are out of
Covenant. Thus you see, that Covenant-holiness is no gibberidge, but grounded
upon Scripture, and avouched by learned men: as shall more fully appear.

The Minor, that Children of believing Parents are holy with a
Covenant-holiness, is clear from 1 Cor. 7.14. Else your Children were unclean,
that is, not in Covenant, but now they are holy, that is, in Covenant, thus
(besides the ancients) Sharpius, and Peter Martyr interpret it, and Hugo
Grotius himself, Non loquitur Apostolus de Sanctitate naturali, etc. The
Apostle (says he) speaks not of natural holiness, and inhering to the nature of
Children, but of an holiness adhering to them, that is, the holiness of the
Covenant, for the Children of believers are comprehended in the Covenant of
grace, and therefore accounted holy of God. To interpret it (as the gross
Anabaptists do) that they are holy, that is, no Bastards, is a new holiness not
heard of in Scripture, and as (Doctor Featly says) a Bastard exposition; and
Pareus gives the reason, if the Children of believers be therefore holy,
because they are no Bastards, the Children of Pagans are as well holy, for they
are also no Bastards. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is holy, and if the
root be holy, so are also the branches. Romans 11.16. The first fruits and the
root, that is the Parents; the lump, the branches, that is the Children, and
posterity.

And, Romans 11.17. if the Jews were broken off, and the Gentiles graffed into
their place, it will follow, that if the Jews were broken off, Parents with
Children, then the Gentiles shall be graffed in, Parent with Children.

But the Jews were broken off Parents with Children. Therefore the Gentiles
shall be graffed in, Parents with Children.

9. Arg. If Infants should be out of Covenant under the Gospel, many dangerous
absurdities would follow.

First, Infants would be losers by the coming of Christ, and be put in a worse
condition than the Jewish Infants were; they with the Parents were admitted to
the Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision, and not Children with Parents
to Baptism.

Secondly, if Infants should be in Covenant then, and not now, Grace would be
larger under the Law, than under the Gospel.

Thirdly, there would be no difference betwixt the Child of a Christian, and of
a Pagan, but all the Infants of Christians would be as vile as the Children of
Turks, Tartars, or Cannibals.

Fourthly, they would be without God, without Christ, without hope in the
world; not the Children of God, but of the Devil; would all be damned, for out
of Covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily) there is no salvation.

10. Arg. Lastly, that which has continued since the Apostles times with
blessed success, must needs be lawful.

But Infant Baptism has continued with blessed success since the Apostles
times.

Therefore Infant Baptism is lawful.

Weel begin with the first Centurie, or hundred years after Christ. Dionysius
the Areopagite whom the Apostles converted at Athens, says, Holy men have
received a tradition from the Fathers, that is the Apostles, to Baptize
Infants. Clemens (who is recorded by some of the ancients to succeed Peter in
his Ministry at Rome) says (...), Baptize your Infants.

Ireneus (who lived in the second Century) says, Christus pro parvulis parvulus
factus est, Christ became a little one for little ones sake, that little ones
might be received into Covenant.

Origin that lived in the beginning of the third Century says, The Church
received a tradition from the Apostles to Baptize Infants, and gives a reason,
because they are born in impurity of sin; nay Pelagius, a great Scholar, who
lived in the latter end of this Century, though he denied Original sin, yet
confessed Infant Baptism, for when they pressed him with this Argument, if
Infants had not Original sin what need they Baptism, he answered, that Christ
appointed, and the Church practiced Infant Baptism, not to purge sin by past,
but to prevent it for the time to come.

Cyprian in the fourth Century confirms it in his Epistle to Fidus, and gives
an account of a Council of sixty six Bishops that decreed that Infants should
be Baptized. Ambrose says, because every age is liable to sin, therefore every
age is fit for the Sacrament of Baptism. Nazianzene says it is better to Seal
Infants with Baptism, (though they know it not) then to leave them unsealed.
Austen is conceived to go too far, who denied possibility of salvation to them
that dyed un-baptized, pressing that place John 3.5. Except a Man be Born of
water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

The Millevitan Counsel in the fifth Century decreed, That whosoever should
deny that Infants, even taken from their Mothers wombs, might not be Baptized,
should be accursed. All Churches, all ages since, agree in this; the Harmonies
of confessions of all Reformed Churches, the Church of England in the Apology,
the old Catechism, The twenty seventh Article, the Directory, the greater and
lesser Catechism composed by the Assembly of Divines, the late Parliament by a
further Declaration, all confirm it; The Canons of our Church did not only in
former times declare, but the Laws of our Land did punish Anabaptists as
heretics. Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments approves of the Albigenses,
Waldenses, Wickliffists, Lollards, Poor men of Lions, Brownists, Barrowists, as
members of the Reformed Churches, but wholly excludes the Anabaptists, as
erring fundamentally.

I Will say no more for confirmation of this polemicall discourse, but wind up
all with a word of exhortation; I beseech you brethren consider what a
dangerous error this is, that robbs the Scripture of its truth, Infants of
their right, parents of their comforts, the Church of its members, Christ of
his merits, God of his glory; That is the mother of many other errors; hence
sprung the Ranters, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Shakers, Levellers, they that
are above Ordinances, Antiscripturians; An error that God has expressed many
signal judgments against, as Sleiden and Gastius in Germany, and some of our
worthies in England have declared. As reverend Mr. Cotton tells one of his
Aposta^ed flock, that had his house burned, and his children in it, No wonder
that fire seized upon his house, and God denied water to quench it, who denied
that water should be brought to Baptize his Infants.

Secondly, consider that much benefit redounds both to parents, and children,
by Infant Baptism.

First, much comfort comes hereby to the parents, when they consider Gods free
grace to them, and theirs, that he is not ashamed to be called their God, and
the God of their seed after them. Hebr. 11.16.

Secondly, much benefit comes to Infants by Baptism, (which the Devil knows
well, when he causes witches to renounce their Baptism, when they enter into
Covenant with him) for they are thereby admitted into the bosom of the Church,
devoted, and consecrated unto God, his Name is put upon them, they wear his
Royal badge, and by it they are distinguished from Heathens. And this so clear
from Scriptures, truly, and spiritually understood, That the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

Now the God of Peace and Truth, by his Spirit, lead us into all truth, keep us
pure, and unspotted in this hour of Englands temptation, and trial, keep us
faithful to the death, that so we may receive a crown of life.

(...).

FINIS.

