PRAECURSOR: OR A FORERUNNER To a large Review of the Dispute concerning
INFANT BAPTISM; Wherein many things both Doctrinall and personal are cleared:
about which Mr. RICHARD BAXTER In a Book MOCK-TITLED [PLAIN SCRIPTURE PROOF OF
INFANTS CHURCH MEMBERSHIP AND BAPTISM] has darkened the Truth.

By JOHN TOMBS B. D.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to be sold by H. Crips and Lod. Lloid in
Pope's Head Ally, T. Brewster and G. Moule at the three Bibles at the West end
of Paul's, 1652.

To the right Honorable Bulstrode Whitlock, Richard Keble, Sergeants at Law,
John Lisle Esquire Lords Commissioners for the Great Seal of England, Major General
Thomas Harrison, Edmund Prideaux Esquire, Attorney General for the State of
England, Denis Bond Esquire.
THrough the influence of the favor of many of you as instruments of the Lord
for my liberty to preach the Gospel and peace at the Temple in London, I
enjoyed sundry years in the late tempestuous times an unexpected calm, until a
new storm arising by reason of the violence of men bent to bear down dissenters
from the determinations of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, by reason of
the publishing my Examen of Mr. Marshals Sermon for Infant Baptism, I was
necessitated to leave the harbor I had at the Temple, and to remove a great
distance from London, to the place of my nativity, in which I hoped for a
setlement, which I found not. For partly by the States selling my lands out of
which my maintenance there arose, and partly by reason of the alienating of
men's spirits from me through the distance between me and the Antagonist I here
answer, I was in a great measure frustrated of my hopes. But it pleased the
Lord nevertheless to order things so, that by the means of some of you as
Patrons, and others as helpers, I enjoy a comfortable supply for my
maintenance, together with that which is dearer to me, the liberty of holding
forth the truth of the Gospel, where I labored many years heretofore. In
testimony of my thankful acknowledgement of that ample favor which it pleased
some of you to vouchsafe me by your appearing for me, and bounty to me at the
Temple, and testimonial of me at my departure thence, the readiness of you all
either to invest, or to setle me in the maintenance I now enjoy, and that there
may be something in your hands to vindicate me from injurious aspersions, under
which my self with the truth I avouch do suffer much, I humbly presume to
present this writing to your hands, and praying that you may honor God in your
places who has raised you up to do him service, I subscribe my self

Your Honors humble and real servant, JOHN TOMBS.
Lemster, December 26. 1651.
To the dearly beloved, my Auditors formerly the Inhabitants of Bewdly in
Worcestershire.
THe fame of the dispute between Mr. Baxter and my self at your Chapel, Jan.
1. 1649. was at first spread over the land by Mr. Bs abusive passage in his
Epistle before his book of The Saints everlasting rest: to which I opposed an
answer in my Farewell-speech to you, and that it might be communicated to the
Nation printed it with some additions in my Antidote, which I intended in the
first place for your use. After this Mr. B. printed a large book for
Infants Baptism, framed in manner of a Sermon as intended, and accordingly
tendered in an Epistle to you. In which how injuriously he has dealt with me,
and how weakly he has opposed the truth I taught you, will appear in part by
reading this Forerunner to the rest of the answer that is to come after. I did
presently upon my first reading of Mr. Bs. book in a set speech briefly show
you Mr. Bs. grounds, and the reason why they were unsatisfying. Yet neither my
Antidote nor that speech do I find much regarded by many of you: nor perhaps
will this writing take much with you. However I have conceived it necessary to
tender this writing to you, that it might thereby appear, how vain the
excessive boastings of Mr. Bs book have been; how justifiable their receiving
the truth, who have yielded to it is; and how inexcusable they are that persist
in Mr. Bs. way. What ever you think or speak of me, yet I do, and shall study
your good, and committing my labors for you and among you, to the blessing of
the Lord, I rest,

Your loving Countreyman and servant in Christ, JOHN TOMBS.
Lemster Oct. 1. 1651.
The Contents.
Sect. I. OF the necessity and occasion of this present writing. Sect. II. That
the Title of Mr. Baxters book, is a mock-title. Sect. III. Mr. Baxters
citations from Fathers, advantage him not. Sect. IV. Mr. Baxters citations from
my writings, advantage him not. Sect. V. Mr. Baxter unduly suggests many things
in his Epistles. Sect. VI. The chief points of Mr. Baxters book are very
briefly touched. Sect. VII. Many personal occurrences are cleared: by relating
of which Mr. Baxter has (in his History) sought to create prejudice against
me. Sect. VIII. More personal matters, which the History of Mr. Baxter has
made crooked, are set straight. Sect. IX. In my alleging Peter de Bruis and
others as Antipaedobaptists 500. years ago, is no untrath. Sect. X. That Mr.
Baxters charge of accusing and of disputing my children out of the Church and
Covenant of Christ, is vain; and some inquiry is made, how they are in
Covenant. Sect. XI. About Mr. Baxters 4. Texts, urged impertinently to prove
Infants visible Church Membership. Sect. XII. That Mr. Baxter unjustly charge
me to be a Sect-Master. Sect. XIII. That it is not a right way to judge of the
truth of doctrine, by strange accidents, though wondrous. Sect. XIV. That Mr.
Baxter does not rightly expound Christ's rule, Mat. 7. 15, 16. nor is unholiness
of men a note to know falls doctrine by. Sect. XV. Mr. Baxters insinuations of
the wickedness of Anabaptists, is Calumniatory, and vainly alleged to condemn
their doctrine of Antipaedobaptism: Anabaptists, and with them my self, are
vindicated from charges of Schism, neglect of the Lords day, etc. Sect. XVI.
The ground of my opposing Infant Baptism, is confirmed by Mr. Baxter himself.
Sect. XVII. The gross absurdities, to which Mr. Baxter vaunted I was driven in
the dispute. Sect. XVIII. The gross untruths Mr. Baxter charge me with, are
not such. Sect. XIX. The 6. imagined errors charged on me by Mr. Baxter are
cleared from his censure. Sect. XX. Many learned men (with the Oxford
Convocation) of former and later times, take Infant Baptism only for an
unwritten Tradition. Sect. XXI. Many things are cleared about my Conformity,
Anabaptists necessity to be baptized, the manner of dipping used by them; their
standing to their confession of faith, etc. Sect. XXII. The speech [that no one
Country is gathered into Christ's visible Church] contains no malignancy
to-Christ, but is a manifest truth.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 13. debare read debate, p. 4. l. 14. specially r. speciously, p.
5. l. 3. after r. before, p. 7. l. 7. contrary r. century, p. 13. l. 9. way r.
man, p. 14. l. 18. conceive r. convince, p. 15. l. 15. wickedness r. weakness,
p. 16. l. 15. weari. r. wari. p. 19. l. 27. 1649. r. 1646. p. 20. l. 36.
alteration r. altercation, p. 21. l. 18. r. is con. p. 22. l. 29. and r. I, p.
26. l. 23. r. I been, l. 35. d. likely is, p. 30. l. 9. 3, 4. r. 314. p. 31. l.
24. singularly r. singularity, p. 32. l. 11. hot r. not, p. 33. l. 18.
overlasting r. overlashing, p. 37. l. 37. mysteriis r. mysticis, p. 38. l. 25.
l. it. is as, l. 28. scoffically r. scoptically, p. 42. l. 19. 1. r. 10. p. 44.
l. 2. eternally r. eventually, l. 20. r. act Act. p. 45. l. 2. r. this is, p.
49. l. 3. r. (...) l 4. (...). l. 28. absolutely r. resolutely, p. 51. l 33.
they r. them, l. 35. accident r. antecedent, p. 53. l. 1. 9. r. 8. p. 57. l.
15. r. knew them, p. 58. l. 18. me the d me. But what r. that, p. 60. l. 38.
notions r. motions, p, 62. l. 35. r. Ampsing. p. 63. l. 17. alteration r.
altercation, p. 65. l. 1. in r. I, p. 71. l. 7. r. come to me, p. 72. l. 11. r,
if he, l. 14. el r. all, l. 25. tras. r. trans. l. 31. any r. my.

Mr. Richard BAXTER in the 2. Edition of THE SAINTS EVERLASTING REST, part. 1.
chap. 8. sect. 5. page 1795. in the margin, has these words.
ANd in the primitive times none were baptized without an express Covenanting,
wherein they renounced the World, Flesh and Devil; and engaged themselves to
Christ, and promised to obey him; as you may see in Tertul. Origer, Cyprian,
and others at large. I will cite but one for all, who was before the rest, and
that is Justin Martyr; speaking of the way of baptizing the aged, says, How we
are dedicated to God, we will now open to you. As many as being penswaded do
believe these things to be true which we teach, and do promise to live
according to them, they first learn by prayer and fasting to beg pardon of God
for their former sins; our selves joining also our prayer and fasting. Then
they are brought to the water, and are born again (or baptized) in the same way
as we our selves were born again. For they are washed with water in the name of
the Father, the Lord and God of all; and of our Savior Jesus Christ; and of
the Holy Ghost -- Then we bring the person thus washed and instructed, to the
Brethren, as they are called, where the Assemblies are; that we may pray both
for our selves and the new illuminated person, that we may be found by true
doctrine and by good works, worthy observers and keepers of the Commandments,
and that we may attain eternal salvation. Then there is brought to the chief
Brother, (so they called the chief Minister) Bread, and a Cup of Wine (washed;)
which taking, he offers praise and thanksgiving to the Father by the name of
the Son and Holy Ghost. And so a while he celebrateth thanksgiving. After
prayers and thanksgiving, the whole Assembly says Amen. Thanksgiving being
ended by the President (or chief guide) and the consent of the whole people,
the Deacons as we call them, do give to every one present, part of the Bread
and Wine, over which thanks was given; and they also suffer them to bring it to
the absent. This food we call the Eucharist, to which no man is to be admitted
but only he that believes the truth of our doctrine, being washed in the
Laver of Regeneration for Remission of sin; and so lives as Christ has
taught: Apol. 2. This then is no new overstrict way you see.

PRAECURSOR, OR A FORERUNNER to a large Review of the dispute concerning
INFANT BAPTISM heretofore managed by the Author.
SECT. I. Of the necessity and occasion of this writing.
IT is the observation of Solomon Prove. 18. 19. (as we now read it) that a
brother offended is harder to be won then a strong city, and their contentions
like the bars of a castle, which being strong will neither bow, nor yield, say
our late Annotations on the Place. Which thing as it is true of natural
brethren, when they contend about civil affairs, so it is too often found true
among Christian brethren, yea even in the ministry of the Gospel, when they
contend about the things of Christ whether out of faction, or conscience. We
need not go far for instances to prove it: this last age has verified it too
plainly in the contentions between the Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany,
Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants in Belgia, Prelatist; and non-Conformists,
Independents and Presbyterians in England. Among others the providence of the
Lord has made me a man of contention, as the prophet complains of himself,
Jerem. 15. 10, and that which is most grievous to me with my brethren in the
ministry and faith of Christ, with whom. I hoped for a brotherly conjunction
in the work of Christ, the yoke of Prelates being removed, and about that
ordinance of baptism, which should be a bond of union between us, Ephesians. 4. 5.
I with others asserting infant baptism to be a corruption of the ordinance of
baptism, others avouching it as of God, and the countrary a pernicious error.
The season in which I appeared in this matter, the spirits of men in Old, and
New England being very thirsty after reformation in worship according to the
word, humane inventions every where cried down, this being taken for a maxim
against Papists, and Prelates, that in Gods worship we must keep close to the
institution, and an Assembly called to that end, and the Parliament with them
engaged in solemn Covenant,. I taking the way approved by Protestant writers
before I vented any thing in public to debare the matter with learned
Ministers, and after to present my exceptions against Paedobaptisme to a
Committee of the Assembly, gave me hopes of a facile and speedy way for
clearing the point. But whether it were that men's resolutions were pitched on
the patterns of other Churches, or swayed with prejudice, or fear or something
else, I quickly found my hopes deceived, my very dissenting from them though in
this candid manner begetting enmity toward me, and notwithstanding my reasons
presented to them, Paedobaptisme established in the Directory, and the not
practicing of it, and gainsaying of it made penal; which things necessitated me
to print my two Treatises, and this drew down on me a storm of writers, by whom
men's spirits were exasperated against me, whereby I was enforced to print my
Apology, before I could review the dispute as I intended. But my Apology not
preventing my removal from that place where I had better opportunity to write,
and print then sithence, yet as soon as I could settle my self and family in
any sort I applied my self to review the dispute according to the order of the
Examen of Mr. Marshals sermon, which I had gone through unto the third
conclusion, and had some purpose of printing a part of it by it self, because
of the difficulty in printing and sale of large things: Yet before I did it by
reason of the neighborhood of Mr. B. I imparted some sheets about 1 Cor. 7.
14. to him, out of which he took notes as he pleased, and quickly returned them
to me without animad versions on them, which I hoped he would have done of his
own accord, as the manner of Scholars of acquaintance is in such cases. After
some of my Auditors beginning to enquire after the duty of being baptized, it
was propounded by one to have recourse to Mr. B. and by me, if they did so, to
get his arguments in writing for infant baptism: but our endeavors not
succeeding; I yielded to a dispute though much against my mind, presaging from
the knowledge I had of Mr. Baxters quickness and my own slownesse in answering
an argument not under my eye, the favor of the most to Mr. Bs. tenet, and a
verseness from mine, and other accidents; Mr. B. likely to gain the fame of a
victory, and to put back the work of reformation of that corruption, yet hoping
Mr. B. would after have imparted to me his arguments in writing, that I might
as Dr. Raynolds permitted Heart, mend my answers before printing. But Mr. B.
denying it, and venting the passage in his Saints everlasting rest, wherein he
speaks of gross absurdities I was driven to, I was forced to print my
Antidote, since which he has printed a large book in which he has raised much
dust to darken the truth, and to asperse my person: which I am necessitated to
answer, and to stay or order the review of the dispute between my self, Mr. M.
and others as there shall be cause.

SECT. II. That the title of Mr. Baxters book is a mock-title.
MR. Bs. Book is entitled Plain Scripture Proof of Infants churchmembership
and baptism: which is true only (...): to the contrary, and might have been
moretruly entitled, no plain Scriptureproof for infants baptism. Let any man
but view his texts which are these: Mat. 28. 19. Acts 15. 10. Levit. 25. 41,
42. Luke 9. 47, 48. with Mat. 18. 5. Mark. 9. 41. Romans 11. 17, 19, 20, 24, 25,
26. Mat. 23. 37, 38, 39. Revel. 11. 15. Heb. 8. 6. and 7. 22. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11,
12. Romans 4. 11. Exodus 20. 6. Josh. 7. 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 13. 12, 13, 14. Exodus 20.
5. Number. 31. 17. Dan. 6. 24. Deuteronomy. 20. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 28 4, 18, 32, 41. Mal. 2.
15. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Mark 9. 36, 37. and 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. being not
prepossessed with his Chemical extractions, but using his own wit or ancient
Commentators, yea or modern except about three or four of these texts, and I
should as soon expect he should conclude a new world in the moon as
Infant Baptism from them. The very first and only text which speaks a word of
baptism is so plain against infant baptism, that Paedobaptists in their
Commentaries and disputes think it enough if they can avoid the force, of it
against them. Yea is not Mr. Bs. own confession contradictory to the title of
his book? page 3. posit. 1. He tells us of some things plainly determined in
Scripture, others have no such determination. And says, Such is the case of
infant baptism. And page 301. If the very baptism of infants it self be so
dark in the Scripture, that the controversy is thereby become so hard as we
find it, etc. And if it be so dark in Scripture, and found so hard by him, me
thinks that he might not be thought to delude people; he should have altered
the title, and forborne to talk as he does in his book of bringing plain
Scripture Proof to them that call for them. If I might be allowed to pass my
censure on him as he does on me, I would not stick to say, that laying aside
his Rhetoric, his exclamations, interrogations, admirations, expostulations,
misapprehensions of my actions and answers, invectives against Anabaptists, and
two or three quirkes of wit, there is as little matter to his purpose that has
the likeness of solidity in his book as I have met within a book so specially
set forth, and so much cried up, and that he does only magno caenatu nugas
agere, endeavor much to trifle much; and that he had done better with the
Oxford Convocatior, Mr. Bedford (as he cites him page 301.) with many others to
have rested on tradition unwritten, then to bring such impertinent texts as he
has done for infant baptism. But I must remember I am an Antagonist. He says
he was constrained thereunto unavoidably by my importunity. Answer, It Is true I
was importunate to have his arguments in writing: but never that he should
print them, much less print my answers taken only from my mouth either
relying on another pen or his own memory. Doctor Rainolds dealt not so with
Heart the Jesuit: nor will I think an ingenuous scholar conceive his dealing
candid, who knows the difference of answering in verbal conference, and
writing where the argument is before the respondent. If I were so importunate
he might have conceived it was for my satisfaction, which he denies to have
been manifested to him page 281. or if it were only for my neighbors there
had been some love in it if we had had them without printing them, specially
with such asperity and foul descirptions of me as he makes. But now he has
printed let us look upon them.

SECT. III. Mr. Baxters citations from Fathers advantage him not.
AFter he comes to the arguments which were desired, 20. leaves in quarto are
spent in sentences, Epistles, and History, and 5. more in a very small letter
in 10. positions and 3. propositions to usher in his arguments with state, or
rather to prepossesse his Reader. First he sets down 2. texts, which are
alleged in his 26. argument to prove his 2d. main argument, and there I shall
meet with them. Then sundry of the Ancients speeches. The first of Origens is
examined in my Examen part. 1. sect 5. and my answer vindicated in my Apology
sect. 16. page 81. The speech of Augustine de bapt. cont. Donat. l 4. c. 23. (it
should be 24.) shows he found no Divine authority for infant baptism, but the
conceit he had that what the universal Church holds came from Apostolical
authority, and circumsion of infants. The former is no good rule, as appears
by the tenets of the ancients about Episcopacy, Easter, Millenary opinion,
infant-Communion. I will recite some speeches of men very eminent, Salmas.
appar. ad libr. de prim. Papae page 86. Eutychio idem usu venit, quod omnibus
ferme scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis Craecis, Latinisque, ut dum morem sui
temporis spectant a principio sic semper fuisse existimarint: Molin. vates lib.
2. c. 13. page 133. D^nique Satan jampridem orsus primula initia mysterii
iniquitatis tam densas tenebras offudit Historiae Ecclesiasticae primi seculi
sub Apostolic, and post Apostolos super is additos, ut Baronius fateatur vix
quicquam certi posse statui. Chamier. panstr. Cath. tom. 3. lib. 24. c. 16.
sect. 50. (quasi vero, inquam, non Cyprianus quum rebaptizari vellet tincto:
apud Haereticos non plenis buccis occlamaret it a semper observe itum fuisse in
Ecclesia. The latter is the common mistake about cicumcision, which has been
often answered in my Exercit. Exam. Apology page 85. As for the place of
August. tom. 7. de peccat. mer. and remis. l. 3. c. 5. that all Antiquity held,
that believers infants do receive remission of original sin by Christian
baptism, Mr. B. does not rightly translate the words. For the words are not as
Mr. B. translates [believers little ones, fidelium parvulos;] but [fideles
parvulos, believing little ones.] And what he means by little ones believing,
he shows lib. 1. de peccat. mer. and remiss. cap. 27. quis autem nesciat
credere esse infantibus haptizari, non credere autem non baptizari? who knows
not that to infants to believe is to be baptized, not to believe is not to be
baptized? So that with Austin all baptized infants are believers, unbaptized
unbelievers: and yet lib. 4. de bapt. contra Donat. cap. 23. he says, that
Certe nondum possunt parvuli infantes cord credere ad justitiam, and ore
confiteri ad salutem, Certainly they cannot yet believe with the heart unto
righteousness, as the pious thief on the cross, but do withstand by crying
their baptism. But how vain Austins judgment was about infant baptism is
showed in my Examen part. 1. Sect. 8. and may be seen by considering how he
maintained a like antiquity and necessity of giving infants the Lords Supper
both in the passage cited by me in my Apology out of the first book de pecc.
merit. and remiss. cap. 24. page 82. and lib. 3. de pecc. mer. and remiss. c.
4. next to that which Mr. B. cites which Mr. B. does not rightly cut off page
162. of his book; whence I gather that Mr. B. is not to be too easily trusted
in his citations of Authors. The words he cites out of Justin Martyr his
Epistle ad Zenam prove nothing that is denied. The testimony of Cyprian Epist.
59. is answered in my Examen pa. 1. Se. 7. To Mr. B. his question whether a
whole Council, and all the Church be ignorant whether infants were wont to be
baptized 100. years before, when some of themselves or their Fathers were those
infants? I answer, they might be ignorant, it being either not at all or very
rarely in that time; nor is it known of what age the 66. Bishops of that
Council were when that Epist. was written, nor whose children they were,
whether believers or infidels; nor in the whole Epistle is any thing historical
set down about the ancient use of infant baptism: but their determination of
the lawfulness of it before the eighth day, which Epistle because Hierom,
Augustine and others do so much allege as their prime testimony for baptizing
infants for remission of original sin, and I am taxed for calling it in my Ex.
p. 1. s. 7. an absurd Epist. and Mr. F. Rous in his late Abridgem. of the 1.
Fathers has left out that which was chiefly to have been inserted as the
reason of the Councels determination, which Austin lib. 3. d'peccat. merit. and
remiss. c. 5. and elsewhere recites; I have therefore translated the whole
Epistle into English, and printed it in the end of this writing, not to show
the nakedness of that Father, as I am accused but to clear the truth about the
antiquity of Infant Baptism. But there is one testimony higher then Cyprian
which Mr. B. urges with much earnestness as if he did triumph in it: and it
is that of Pope Hyginus, who lived about the year 150. or 140. and ordained
something about Gossips at infant baptism, which must needs show the Apostles
baptized infants. To which I answer, 1. The decree in the Epistle as Osiander
Epit. Hist. Eccl. cent. 2. lib. 2. c. 5. cites it out of Gratian to a word
mentions not infant baptism, though it speak of Gossips which were at other
times then infant baptism. 2. Mr. B. might have taken notice, that Scultetus
med. Patru. part 1. lib. 11. cap. 10. says, Of all the Epistles of the first
Popes, No man that reads them attentively, but acknowledges them to be forged.
The Contrary writers cent. 2. c. 7. judge the same, Osiander Epitome Eccl.
Hist. Cent. 2. lib. 2. cap. 5. calls the Author personatum Hyginum, and (as I
remember) Rivet, Cook, James pass the like censure. Perkins preparative to the
demonstration of the problems. These Epistles decretal, which pass under the
names of Clement, Evarist, Telesphorus, Hyginus, and e. are all forged, and
that for six reasons: yea Doctor Prideaux (whom Mr. B. alleges for him) in
his nineth Oration de Pseudoepigraphis Sect. 3. censures the decretal epistles
of the Ancient Popes as counterfeit. Lastly, Doctor Rainolds in his Conference
with Heart chap. 8. divis. 3. has so fully proved in a large discourse the
bastardise of them, that I could hardly have imagined any learned Protestant
would ever have thus alleged so notoriously forged a writing. So that I need
not answer Mr. Bs. allegation of this testimony as by current consent of
Historians assuring us, and his questions thereor, but by telling him he has
reason to be ashamed of abusing men with this forgery after so much eviction of
it by learned men, being more like to a brazen faced allegation, then that he
so censures me for without cause: He next adds a speech of Tertullian de
pudic. cap. 9. and translates it into English. Transgression in interpretation
is not less then in conversation: which I know not why he adds but to show the
evil of my sin in interpretation, as I imagine, of Scripture: which had he
demonstrated he had done more then yet has been done by him, Mr. M. or any
other. That interpretation I give of 1 Cor 7. 14. had sundry godly and learned
Protestants, Melanchthor, Musculus, Camerarius, etc. for it (whose words are
printed in my Exercit.) before me, nor do Mr. B. his arguments or others take
me off from it, but are answered in their place. Of my interpretation of Mat.
28. 19. Mr. B. page 14. says he will stand to most that I said of it. What I
said of Romans 11. 17. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. I intend to vindicate in its place.
My way and course of interpreting Scripture has been known where I have
preached, at Oxford, Worcester, Lemster, Bristol, the Temple in London,
Bewdley. If I make conscience of any thing, it is how I interpret Scripture.
Mr. B. his interpretations of texts in this book are too gross, as of Mat. 28.
19. Acts 15. 10. Revel. 11. 15. Mat. 23. 37. etc. So far as I am able to
discern by his writings, Sermons and conference, his skill is better in
reasoning and amplifying then interpreting Scripture, which I think he had need
study better then I can yet perceive he has done. He takes notice page 191. of
an interpretation (as he is told) of mine of Mat. 11. 28. which he censures for
a foul interpretation. He says, Sure it is the guilt of sin, and accusation
and condemnation of the law with which persons are said to be weary and heavy
laden. But I look for better assurance then Mr. Bs. word. I confess I find
nothing in the text for that sense: but the coherence with ver. 25, 26, 27.
shows ver. 28. to be an invitation to come to Christ as a Teacher, and ver.
29. is an expression of the end of coming to him, to take his yoke on them,
that is, his doctrine and commands, which is expounded by learning of him:
which is confirmed by the motive ver. 30. which is, that his yoke is easy and
burden light: which can be understood of no other then his doctrine and
commands, parallel to 1 John 5. 3. as our translators, Beza, new Annot. Pareus,
Piscator, Grotius, etc. conceive. And he uses sundry arguments to draw them.
1. From the burdens on them, which I conceive to be rather meant (the whole
context leading thereto) of such Burdens as are mentioned, Mat. 23. 3. then of
sins which are not named. 2 From his mecknesse and low linesse, such as should
be in a Teacher, 2 Timothy 2. 24. opposed to harshnesse, superciliousnesse,
disdain, etc. which is propounded rather as an encouragement to them to learn
his doctrine, then (as Mr. B. and others) learn to be meek by my example. 3.
From the rest they should find: to their souls, contrary to distraction and
disquietnesse by Pharisaical doctrine. 4. From the ease of his commands,
contrary to the rigorous impositions of those Doctors. And this interpretation
seems to me to be no foul interpretation, but so fair as that I can discern
no other in the words.

SECT. IV. Mr. Bs. citations from my writings advantage him not.
AFter the speech of Tertullian he filles a whole page and more with passages
out of sundry of my writings, and in the beginning gives this terrible title to
them [Mr. Tombs self condemnation] and [ad hominem] as if he had an argument
from my self against me. The first passage is out of my treatise of scandals
page 323. where I reckon Anabaptists among Heretics and grievous wolves. To
which I answer, 1. Mr. B. knows I deny my self to be an Anabaptist, though not
my own baptism after believing or baptizing of believers, which Christ
enjoined me, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. with preaching the Gospel: Nor does Mr.
B. or ever will prove that for this I am to be termed an Anabaptist, or that
the pretended baptism of Infants is a discharge of that duty Christ requires of
being baptized into his name common to all Christians, Ephesians. 4. 5. 2. Mr. B.
himself page 10. yields me an absolution in these words [on the one side some
think it no less then heresy to deny infant baptism, and to require
rebaptizing; not that the generality of Sober Divines (among which I hope Mr.
B. reckons me) do so, but for the rest of the errors, which almost ever do
accompany it] which Mr. B. might have imagined to have been my mind in the
passage he cites, having been my answer in a Sermon at Bewdley to this very
objection of the Parson there in the pulpit, of which I can hardly think Mr. B.
to have been ignorant. Other considerations of the time of printing that book
might have occasioned M. B. to have put that construction on my words, were he
or any of my Antagonists willing to give my words or actions their due
interpretation. The other passages condemn me not till I be proved an agent
for separation, seedesman of tares: which Mr. B. cannot prove, though he tells
me page 188. he has as good evidence that I am a Sect-Master as that I am a
Christian, because I preach, dispute, talk, and endeavor as zealously to
promote my opinion as I do for the Christian Faith. To which I answer, my
opinion is no other then the command of Christ, and if we speak according to
scripture, to preach for baptism of believers is to preach for Christian
faith. 2. Yet I deny that I preach with a like zeal for that particular point
as for greater points of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God in
Christ incarnate, dead, risen, ascended, to come again, etc. my Bewdley
auditors besides others will I doubt not witness against this calumny. 3. But
were it true that I did preach so zealously for my opinion, yet since my actions
tend not to make a party to follow me, but only endeavor to reform a
corruption like those our Savior opposes Mat. 23. Mark 7. there is no show of
making a sect in my actions, though I were mistaken in them. The passage from
the same treatise pa. 103. concerning an Hypocrites falling foully, does not
justify his exposition of Mat. 7. 16. It proves we often know an hypocrite by his
actions, it is nothing at all to prove a false prophet by his evil manners. The
other two passages yield him no advantage for his proving infants disciples
from Acts 15. 10. but are against him. For his prooflies on this, That the
yokew as put on Infants, and nothing was put on them but circumcision: but
those passages speak of the ordinances of the Jews, and with circumcision all
the legal ceremonies. If Mr. B. mean more by the yoke, Acts 15. 10. as the
doctrines and commands, sure the Teachers did not put that on them till they
taught them, which was not in infancy. And therefore my words will not help him
as will appear in the examining his first argument. All hitherto produced by
him, though by his placing it in the forefront he seems to have made account of
it, is but paper-shot, brutum fulmen, a crack without force. I go on to the
Epistles.

SECT. V. Mr. B. unduely suggests many things in his Epistles.
AS for the Epistle to the people of Kederminster, I rejoice with him in their
unity, excepting wherein they agree against the truth; I think if they will use
their understandings, as they should, they will find more reason to be
unsettled in the point of infant baptism, by Mr. Bs. book then to be settled by
it, and that they had little cause of a solemn thanksgiving for Mr. Bs.
mannaging the dispute. My exceptions against his Aphorisms of Justification
are communicated to him. I wish his life may continue to Gods glory, and the
good of his people, and particularly that he may undeceive whom he has
deceived by his dispute and this book. In his Epistle to the people of Bewdley
he mentions a flame of error and discord at Bewdley blown by my breath, and
that he came to quench it by the importunity of their Magistrate, Minister, and
many of their people. And his words are often enforced with such aggravating
expressions, as make people specially afar off imagine, that at Bewdley there
is a great schism and discord made by my preaching; whereas there was no such
discord as I know of: yea I think before the dispute the godly did walk together
in public hearing, public and private prayer, and conference while I was
with them and since, as lovingly as in any other places. And though all do not
join in breaking of bread, some going to the Parson, others declining him as a
stranger to the private meetings of the godly, and an adversary to such godly
preachers as from time to time they had gotten for the Chapel, and a
temporizer with the kings party while the Town was under their power went to
Mr. B. to Kederminster, others being baptized have joined with me: yet all of
them meet together for repetition and conference, and when I am with them I
think in greater number then in my absence, and do embrace my doctrine with
less breaking out into Antinomian, Familistical, Ranting errors or practices
then at Kederminster. The discord of most note has been between two men and
their wives, who were by consent or connivence of their husbands baptized, and
brake bread with us, till Mr. Bs. book came forth: which charging us with
schism for reforming our selves, and affrighting people with the danger of our
way as leading to error they are kept from our society; which is a manifest
separation to avoid an imaginary, of which Mr. B. is the chief author; and I
may truly say if there be any such flame of discord at Bewdley, as Mr. B.
means, it is blown by Mr. Bs. breath, not mine, who am conscious to my self of
being as studious of unity (as I can, with preservation of truth. As for my
kindling error) I fear I have done less then I should have done, not meddling
with the point of Antipaedobaptisme, but as it fell in my way in my cursory
exposition on Genesis 17. wherein I only vindicated my self from Mr. Robert Bailey
his false Criminations of me about the Covenant there, and overthrew the
suppositions of Paedobaptists from thence about the Covenant and initial seal,
and once or twice more on the by, till by occasion of the motioned dispute
between me and Mr. B. I saw it was fit I should in some sermons open the
controversy, which was not till December. 1649. presently after which my return
to Lemster was concluded. The Magistrate a stranger to the meetings of the
Godly in their houses, the Minister (such as he is) for his credit, and others
of somewhat a like stamp it is likely did invite Mr. B. to oppose me as they
had done their School master to make use of their abilities to uphold their
Dagon of Infant-sprinking: but Mr. Bs. abuse of Scriptures so palpably
impertinent, his mannaging the dispute with reasonings of wit, and other camal
ways do assure me he had no call from God. His alleging Gal. 2. 11, 14. to
justify his sharpness in dealing with me is invalid to that end there being
no such dissimulation used by me, nor error maintained by me; Mr. Bs. opinion
comes nearer Peter's Judaizing then mine.

SECT. VI. The chief points of Mr. Bs. Book are very briefly touched.
THe chief points in Mr. Bs. book he would have observed, in their places shall
be (God willing) fully examined: For the present only thus much. My Confession
that all should be admitted Church Members by baptism, was meant of such as by
their profession are visible, not of such as are visible in Mr. Bs. way without
profession. The repeal of the Law or ordinance for infants visible
Church Membership will be easily proved when the law or ordinance is showed. As
yet I can find no such law or ordinance save what is enjoined concerning
circumcision; which if it stand in force, we must keep the whole law, Gal. 5. 3
His first challenge is answered by another challenge to show what one church
had infants visible Church Members besides the Jews. His second is answered by
showing till Abraham's time there is nothing said about any church-frame; from
Abraham's time till Christ's the Jewish church-frame stood: In Christ's time and
the Apostles no other are reckoned to belong to the visible Church, then
professors of faith. And so it continued till infants were admitted to baptism
to save them, which out of the case of danger of present dying was dissuaded by
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen. Afterward their baptism was more frequent
through Austins urging it so much against the Pelegians, as Strabo rightly
observed long since, and together with it infant-communion was common, yet not
without the continuance of the old form of putting the question to infants,
after which at first profession was declared, and catechizing mostly before they
were baptized at certain seasons of the year till ignorance and confusion
overspread the Churches. But when God began to stir up any to reform other
corruptions, there were that sought to reform this 500. years ago, according to
truth, notwithstanding Mr. Bs. Mr. Ms. or Doctor Ushers allegations: of whom I
persuade my self many may be met with in heaven notwithstanding M. Bs.
confident expressions to the contrary. Yet were all Mr. B. says true, if I put
Mr. B. to the like, as to show me since the Apostles, one that questioned
keeping of an Easter, Lent fast, Infant-communion, Monkish profession, etc.
till the last age he will be hard put to it. His considerations depend upon the
points in dispute: in examining of which it may appear how frivolous his
questions are. Infants Church Membership I find no where but in the peculiar
national policy of the Jews, no universal law or ordinance, for it; the Jewish
policy is taken away both de facto by the providence of God, and de jure of
right by the declaration of Christ and his Apostles in the N. T. and by
altering the way of Church-gathering and constitution. The Jews were hainously
offended at the taking away of circumcision, not because he took away
Churchmembership of infants, but because of the taking away of the law of
Moses, the Temple, Priesthood, etc in which they gloried, Acts 21. 20, 21. Acts
6. 13, 14. If it be true, that it was a known truth, that infants were visihle
Church Members, and to be admitted Disciples, and the Apostles did not admit
them, Mat. 19. 13 (which Mr. B. supposes) then the challenge is answered, Name
me away from the creation till 200. years age, who did once question infants
Church Membership? For after Mr. Bs. dictates the Apostles did so. Let men
turn over their Bibles, they will find enough in them against infants visible
Churchmembership in the N. T. He asks, Why the speech, Mark 16. 16. which
excludes infants from baptism, should not also exclude them from salvation for
want of believing? To which I answer, It is not doubted but that infants belong
to the invisible Kingdom of the Elect Romans 9. 11. Mat. 19. 14. but how they
attain salvation is not so certain: If by a seed of faith or holiness without
actual exercise, the thing is more easy to conceive: if by actual exercise
extraordinarily and immediately wrought by the Holy Spirit, then the speeches,
He that believes not, shall be damned, and the like, do exclude infants from
salvation if not believing actually; if by virtue of election without any work
on them, if by virtue of the Covenant their parents believing (which some
assert, but I profess to know no such Covenant) then the speeches, He that
believes not, shall be damnned, with the like, must be understood with this
limitation, He of those to whom the Gospel is preached that believes not shall
be damned. For my part, I do much in cline to that opinion, which conceives
Mark 16. 16. John 3. 18. and such like, to be understood of belief and
unbelief of those of years, who have the Gospel preached to them because the
course of the context leads thereto. Which being premised, I answer to the
question, That infants are excluded from baptism from Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16.
15, 16. compared together, because these texts show that according to Christ's
institution, they that are to be baptized are to be Disciples or known
professed believers, and baptism belongs only to whom Christ appoints it. Yet
these texts do not exclude infants from salvation, because either it excludes
professed unbelievers, not non-believers negatively from incapacity, or it
excludes unbelievers that are in no sort believers, neither in the seed nor
fruit, neither byordinary, nor by extraordinary operation; in one of which
ways infants are or may be believers, and so not excluded by that text, if
belief and unbelief comprehend all these ways in that place. To his question,
What great comfort would follow this conclusion [that all your infants are out
of Christ's visible Church] that men should bend their wits so to prove it? I
answer, The question might be retorted, What great comfort would follow this
conclusion [that all our infants are by nature children of wrath] that men
should bend their wits so to prove it? 2. The answer I suppose Mr. B. would
give to the one will fit us, that whether it be matter of comfort or
discomfort, we must maintain truth. To another passage of his supposing, That
to be visibly in the Church is all one as (to our judgment) to belong to
Christ's Kingdom, I answer by denying it, and doubt not to show how this
mistake has much misled Mr. B. when I examine the 27. chap. of the first part
of his book. We can prove that Christ will save his elect though no Christians
in appearance, nor disciples by profession, nor visibly subjects of his
Kingdom. Mr. B. talks vainly of the judgments of Gods Ministers and Churches
in all ages of the world, when as their judgment is proved by my writings to
have been, and to be at this day so various about infant baptism; I have
little hope to conceive Mr. B. by my writings, which he sleights so much as to
say, That the best part of my books is Ink and Paper. Men not inferior to Mr.
B. and one I am sure far beyond Mr. B. in disputes, judged otherwise. Were
not Mr. B. mounted to an height of disdainful pride, me thinks he might have
spied the clearing of some Scriptures, and other things more worth then the Ink
and Paper. It is his uncharitable conceit of me, if he imagine I write to have
the last word: it is to show his gross a buse of Scripture, and his fallacies
of reasoning. If he outlive this answer I now am making, any time he may have
the last word if he will for me, who am weary with meddling with such a
distempered writer. I blame not Mr. B. for printing: but for printing my
answers before I had fitted them to his arguments in writing, as Doctor Rainolds
dealt with Heart, which (says he in his preface to his conference with Heart)
learned men have thought to be most fit for trial of truth, not by extemporal
speaking, but writing with advise the question argued of, the arguments, the
answers, the replies set down, and sifted of both sides till each had fully
said; in fine, the whole published, that the Churches and the faithful all may
judge of it. Such a rule was followed also in the conference at the Hague, and
in all other profitable Colloquies about points in controversy; to all which
Mr. Bs. dealing with me has bin altogether unlike. Nor is he excused by
telling me he had a copy of my sermon, and had conference with me. For besides
other exceptions this excuse takes not away, it is very apparent that neither
in the dispute nor in that conference his judgment about infants Discipleship
and Church-visibility, and other points in his book could be discerned so as to
know determinately what to oppose. Which makes me glad of the publishing of his
book however, though for the present I suffer much by it, nothing doubting but
I shall be able to show the wickedness of his writing, so as that all that are
willing may see, that whosoever leanes on his arguments to justify their
infant baptism, rests on a broken reed that will run into his hands.

SECT. VII. Many personal occurrences are cleared by relating of which Mr. B.
has in his History sought to create prejudice against me.
NExt to the two Epistles follows the History, in which his design seems to
be to vindicate himself from my accusations, and to recriminate me. I shall
here very briefly answer him about personal matters in the History and
elsewhere, that the Readers may only have to do with arguments, and answers
when they come to them. He spends some leaves to prove he did not
incosiderately and rashly take up his opinion, as I accuse him. Whereas I do
not remember, that any where I accuse him of rashness, but Antidote sect. 7.
of inconsiderateness and haste in that passage wherein he names Anabaptists in
the plural, meaning me only. Which whether he did or no it is not material: nor
worth while to make reply to the descant of his Corrective on that passage in
my Antidote. The next thing in his History to which I am to answer is, that he
charge me with both there, and in his answer to my Valedictory Oration page
209, 210. with falsehood, in telling them in the pulpit, that I could never
know his arguments till the dispute, that he hid his weapons till he meant to
strike, that I was set upon at a sudden, that I had the arguments concealed
from me aforehand: the contrary whereof was manifest in that he had urged the
same argument at Col. Tailors house in London, that I bad seen some notes of
his in which the first was that which he urged at the dispute, and therefore
that I spoke not truth, and it is an evidence his arguments are good in that I
gave such feeble answers to them. To which I say, I do not think I said I could
never know his arguments till the dispute: I confess the conference at Col.
Tailors house 1646. and the reading of his arguments (as was said) 1647. but
the conference being not written, nor the notes then in my hand, there were
left only some imperfect and obscure apprehensions of them in me, which in
respect of giving a distinct answer were all one as if I knew them not at all:
by reason of which I was very desirous to get his arguments in writing, that I
might be the better able to answer them, and satisfy others; which Mr. B. not
yielding to, I could not give answer, but on the sudden without premeditation
the arguments being gone from me, like Nehuchad-nezzars dream, and I did
imagine, and accordingly used these words in a letter, It was said, you would
hide your weapon till you were to use it; In which opinion his taking hold of
so many indirect ways for advantages to possess men's minds with his opinion,
and to hinder a free examination of what is said on both sides do confirm me.
And that things may be apprehended nakedly as they were, I do acknowledge, that
it is my disposition, be it dullness or weariness, to pause on a new argument
whether in reading or conference, so that I cannot oft-times give a clear
answer to an argument I have not bin used to on a sudden, no nor many times to
an argument I have been versed in, when it is not under my eye, when other
matters possess my memory, when fear of speaking ineptly does benumme me and
hinder my elocution, when I have some obscure notion of a fallacy which at
present I cannot readily discover. Which knowledge of my self made me unwilling
to come to a public dispute or extemporal conference with Mr. B. whom I had
found in conferences I had with him to be quick in apprehension and expression,
various and copious in multiplying arguments and expressions, captious of
advantages, ready to expose even to contempt, with show of disdain, those that
speak not according to his mind, which made me conceive I should neither well
remember, nor weigh his arguments before I must answer, nor clear truth, nor
satisfy my self or others, but occasion glorying in Mr. B. and settling people
in his error. Nevertheless presaging by his declining to argue by writing and
his words in his letter Sept. 6. [if I should refuse a conference (called
before an open verbal dispute) on such advantages I should think it were almost
to yield my cause naught] that it would be taken as if I did confess I could
not answer him, after much endeavor in vain to get his arguments in writing
that I might consider of them before the dispute, I yielded to be ready to
justify my doctrine openly or privately by word or writing, as should be
judged convenient. Whereupon Mr. B. having drawn me to agree upon Jan. 1. 1649
without any agreement about stating the question, order or rules of the
dispute, notaries on both sides to set down what was said people being gathered
together from other places by his party, and a place in state prepared for him
with his abettors, scholars and others on both sides him, I my self alone
without any notary or assistant was forced to answer him prepared in this
unexpected manner, lest I should have endammaged the cause by seeming
tergiversation; yet presuming that I should have found such dealing after by
communicating to me in writing his arguments before printing, or at lest
forbearing to print my answers till I had viewed and rectified them, that might
have repaired what seeming disadvantage the truth had by my present answers: in
which I found my self extremely deceived, my motion of having his arguments in
writing after the dispute being answered by quarrelling with me about things on
the by, and in a subdolous and indirect way filling the land with conceits as
if his tenet and arguments were unanswerable, and I a person pertinarious
without reason. By this true relation the truth of my intimation of the
suddenness of the assault, my ignorance of his arguments, my speeches
concerning his concealing his arguments, provoking me to dispute are verified,
the reasons of my desiring his arguments in writing, the cause of varying my
answers at the dispute, and why to so weak arguments no fuller answers were
then given, and why I said at Bewdley (which I still think) I preached nothing
but truth to them, are assigned: about all which Mr. B. has endeavored to
misrepresent me and my proceedings in his History of the conception of his
Treatise. As for Mr. Bs. inclination now to think me a very proud man however
he thought heretofore, and that I have higher thoughts of my self then was
meet, because of my dissent from so many Churches and God'y Divines, and
because of my answer in private to him about the reason I gave why the error of
infant baptism being easy to be discerned was not discerned through
wilfulness or negligence, I say 1. My dissent is not singular, nor my reasons
and writings such but that such a one as my self might be allowed to hold my
tenet without imputations of selfe-conceitednesse, arrogance, etc. Mr. B.
varies from Churches and learned men about justification and faith in his
Aphorisms: what he can say for himself why he should not be censured as he
censures me may perhaps be my plea. I cannot alter my own judgment or others
but by arguments, nor dare I say I do see what I do not. 2. As for my speech in
private (which me thinks it was somewhat against the laws of friendship for
him thus to publish) I know not what better answer yet to give, but to ascribe
it to prejudice, or faction or some such like cause that men are so wilful or
negligent as not to examine and discern the error of infant baptism so
manifestly discernable by applying to it their own rules and positions in
reformation of Popish and Prelatical corruptions. And I do conceive the same or
like answer would be given about the Lutherans holding consubstantiation,
images to be retained in Temples, ubiquity of Christ's body, conditional
predestination, and sundry the like tenets: which may be a just censure without
pride. That which Mr. B. says, [And lest my touching that controversy though
at a distance might irritate him to fall upon it, I never spoke one word (to my
best remembrance) in my congregation of it to this day, for fear of giving any
occasion of difference page 209. I never preached one sentence before the
dispute, nor since to his hearers or mine that I can remember on the question.
Page 281. I never spoke one word against his opinion in my pulpit to this day]
shows his memory retains not all he printed in his Saints everlisting rest,
preached on the Lecture-dayes at Kederminster. As page 534. We should see the
promises made good to our seed, and the unthankful Anabaptists, that will not
confess, That the children of the Saints are any nearer to God or more
beholding to him then Pagans, so much as for the favor to be visible
Churchmembers, should by sweet experience be convinced of their error, and be
taught better how to understand that all our children are holy. Page 518. He
calls the disputes about baptism perverse and fierce, which did so directly
touch the controversy as might irritate me to fall on it at Bewdley, and make
those that told me think he did gird at me, which he denies page 166. He
mentions a speech of mine to Mr. D. whom he terms a godly man [that truth is
not to be suspended for peace] and says, When the times changed (which his
words page 220. interpret to be meant, When the ordinance against heresies and
errors ceased to be in force) I spoke against Infant-sprinkling, pressed them to
be baptized again, mentioned in Sermons Mr. M. Mr. Blake, and himself, when my
doctrine prevailed not (though since I have gotten above 20. rebaptized
disciples, whom I often visit and confirm) that I charged them with hypocrisy,
with their blood on their heads, that M. Ms. plea from circumcision for
infant baptism is heresy, that by my definition of heresy Independants must be
judged Heretics, that I sought his arguments in writing to put them in my
Review of the dispute with Mr. M. and to ing age him in the Controversy; whence
he gathered I was unpeaceable, set to carry on my opinion, and to make my self
a party. To all this I reply. It Is true some conceiving Mr. B. in his speeches
had a fling at me, and it seeming likely to me, I did speak to the purpose Mr.
B. says I did, not imagining that a speech upon a conference in a shop without
its limitations and cautions should have been (as it is by Mr. B.) published
and refuted as my error: but indeed willing only that Mr. B. should know, that
in my case I was not to suspend my asserting of truth for fear of losing of
peace, as I allege in my Apology sect. 3. And I profess I wonder that such
as Mr. M. Mr. B. and others that were so earnest against Bishops and ceremonies
though wars did follow, and had a great hand in putting them on, should now,
the wars being so well abated, be so impatient that Infant-sprinkling is
questioned. It is untruely surmifed that the change of times was the cause of
my opening my self fully in the congregation at Bewdley. My first meddling with
it was when Mr. Bailey had so unjustly charged me in his Anabaptisme chap. 4.
page 92. with spoiling infants of all interest in the Covenant of grace, making
circumcision a seal to the Jews only of earthly privileges, denying to the
Jewish infants all right to the Covenant till in their riper years they become
actual believers. Which with other falls accusations about twenty in that one
page I entreated by letter my dear Father-in-Law Mr. Henry Scudder to advertise
him of: after that I might stand right in the thoughts of that worthy man Mr.
William Hopkins of Bewdley (now with God) I showed him how he wronged me, and
then cleared my self in my cursory exposition on Ger. 17. brought his book with
me into the pulpit, and read a passage of Mr. Ms. Defense part. 3. page 98. for
my vindication, which was presently sent up to London. But Mr. Bailey doing
nothing to right me, I wrote to Mr. Bailey, and because Mr. Rutherford had my
letter to send to him, I wrote since to him to know what became of my letter,
but have had no answer. After this I was moved to preach what I did (which was
but little till December 1649.) when I found my tenet on the day of fast to be
humbled for blasphemies and heresies (which was as I remember March 10. 1649.)
reckoned as by others so by Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick in his Sermon before the
Lords among heresies, (with which I found afterward the censure of 52.
Ministers about London to concur stigmatizing me by name as holding four
pernicious errors in my Examen) and when the ordinance against blasphemy and
heresy was published; which Mr. Boraston though not required, yet published at
Ribsford (to which Bewdley Chapel relates) that he might proclaim me an
Heretic. Which necessitated me to speak what I did, not the change of times
(it is known I spoke as much in the hardest times to my opinion as since) nor
unpeaceablenesse in me, as Mr. B. surmised. What I preached was in no
clamourous manner (as Mr. B. would intimate, calling it exclaiming) but in a
way of proof and answer as sober Divines do in the like case. My na ming any
was when I recited their words: for which though I was reviled once in London
when refuting Doctor Crisp I named him, and Mr. B. in a letter to me, and since
in print reckons as no small fault, yet I ever did, and do still think it to be
necessary, when the books are in men's hands, and the Auditors are not likely
otherwise to know we recite their opinion truly, nor whose error we refute. I
do not believe I used those words Mr. B. sets down as mine [Let them budge at
it, etc.] though it is likely I might say, it is one of the chiefest signs of
sincerity to embrace every truth, and hypocrisy not to receive it for carnal
respects; not out of anger that men were not of my mind, but to justify my self
after I had fully handled the point about baptism (which I think was either
after or immediately before the dispute) I used the Apostles words, Act. 20.
26, 27. nor do I deny that since our Lord Christ does, Mark 16. 16. make
baptism some condition of Salvation, I think those that are taught that
Infant-sprinkling is not the duty Christ requires of being baptized, and that
water baptism of men at years upon profession of faith is a necessary duty
(which I had sufficiently proved at Bewdley) and yet neglect it, do hazard
their salvation living in disobedience to a manifest duty, yea the prime duty
whereby they ought solemnly to engage themselves to be Christ's Disciples. I
have gotten no Disciples to me, and though more then 20 in Bewdley have bin
baptized after profession of faith since my removal from them (whom with the
whole Town I think my self bound by many ties as often as I may to visit and
confirm) yet not rebaptized. It is true to show how unreasonable the accusation
of my tenet as heresy is, I have sundry times said that Mr. Ms. position in his
Sermon page 35. [That all Gods commands and institutions about the Sacraments
of the Jews bind us as much as they did them, in all things which belong to
the substance of the Covenant, and were not accidental unto them] is one of
the most manifest heresies being condemned, Acts 15. For it expressly asserts
that the Gentile Christians are still bound to some rule of circumcision,
contrary to the Apostles determination. Nor did I frame a definition of heresy
to make good what I said of Mr. Ms. tene, though I deny not the definition I
gave with some explication of my meaning: of which what Mr. B. has in his
Corrective page 259, 260. is not much short. Mr. Bs. inference thereupon that
by my definition Independents are Heretic, follows not. For though they err,
yet that they make a party for their error is unknown to me: although weary of
alteration with Mr. B. as acquainted with his temper I replied not. If I
desired Mr. Bs. animadversions on my writings, that I might see all worth
answering and put it in my Review, it was no more unreasonable in me to desire
then in Mr. B. to desire the like before his reprinting his Aphorisms, nor any
more folly in him to have gratifyed me then, then in othersto gratify him with
the like; but had been a very friendly and neighbourly part in him to one, who
was very glad to gratify him or his neighbors in any thing meet for me, as I
deny not (excepting this) he and his neighbors were to gratify me. After his
denial of his animadversions I think I came to his Lecture sundry times though
not so often as formerly, because of my much absence from Bewdley. To conclude,
Mr. B. found me not adverse to the Churches peace, but only his uncharitable
surmises imagined me so. And I desire the Reader to take notice that in all
this he charge me with, there is no one act of separation from whence he
should conclude so hardly of me as he does.

SECT. VIII. More personal matters which the History of Mr. B. has made
crooked are set straight
THe next part of the History is about the occasion and mannaging of the
dispute, to most of which an answer may be gathered out of my letter to him
Sept. 10. of which so much as is needful is printed at the end of this writing.
To call being baptized in the name of Christ Apostasy, contrary to the
Ancients language, and in effect to call white black. Divisions that happen, if
the saddle be put on the right horse, are to be charged on them that oppose the
reformation of the corruption of infant-sprinkling. I think I answered Mr. Bs.
letter sufficiently in mine of Sept. 10. 1649. If I had a design to answer his
arguments in my Review it had been an honest design, and hansomer then Mr. Bs.
printing my answers to his arguments before he had them from me in writing. Since
Mr. B. is unwilling to be put in the crowd among the rest he shall have an
answer (so far as it is fit) by himself, that he may not complain of being
slighted by being yoked with the vulgar. My dealings with Mr. M. were such as
none can justly expcept against. Personal things were fully answered in my
Apology: the dispute it self at large I reserved for the Review: only sect.
15. I gave arguments to prove Romans 11. 17. etc. to be meant of ingrasfing by
giving faith into the invisible Church, and sect. 16, 17. pointed at some of
the chief things wherein Mr. Ms. d^fence was defective. I professed not a full
answer to Mr. Blake, but gave short advertisements in my Postscript with
reasons why I did so, which I yet count sufficient for answer to that piece,
however Mr. B. imagine of it. I slubber'd over nothing (as Mr. B. and one Mr.
George Milward in a letter to one Capt. Freema charge me). If I do not write so
quick as M. B. Mr. M. etc. it is from my unsettled condition, ministerial
employments, the multitude of them that write against me, though I earnestly
entreated that I might see the strength of all together, (which motion had been
fit for them that were desirous to have truth take place, and not make use of
advantages to hinder the clearing of it) the difficulty and charge of printing,
which Mr. B. can easily perhaps have done, people being averse from the truth I
hold, and willing to sell or buy or read any thing against me, but not what is
for me. That in my Sermons at Bewdley I culled out the weakest arguments, is
most false: to the best of my skill I produced the best arguments I met with in
their strength, and as much as I could in the Authors words. Mr. Cobbets book
being a loose discourse for the most part, having many passages, and
expressions proper to the way of N. E. filled with dictates unproved, much of
it against f. S. H. D. etc. whose speeches and arguments I am not engaged to
maintain, I do not bind my self to answer. If I might be allowed to pass my
judgment freely, notwithstanding Mr. Cottons, Mr. Thomas Goodwins, and Mr. Bs.
conceits of it, I should say, that I do not perceive in the matter of it any
such strength as needs much answering, and that the method and expressions are
such as that it cannot well be answered without lopping off many superfluous
branches, enquiring into his meaning in many of his expressions which are
cloudy (which would be extremely tedious to the answerer and reader, and liable
to much exception) and reducing it into a more scholastical form; were it by
himself shaped into a succinct treatise like Mr. Nortons to Apollonius, and
should be willng to answer it, if I found any thing in it, which I had not
answered before: But I would not have the Reader expect me to answer that
again, which in some of my writings is formerly answered, and in which he might
by reading heedfully satisfy himself: Yet I did answer the chief of his
arguments in those Sermons, and I intend to answer what else I meet with in
them, that is opposed to my Examen, and what ever else I shall conceive is
necessary to be answered. I little expected to satisfy Mr. B. who I found had
prejudice in him, which was not denied by him. Mr. Bs. name was used with
respect only in citing his words in his Aphorisms, which I never dreamt would
be taken for an injury. His censuring men's writings and confuting them in
pulpit without naming them or citing their words as it is less offensive, so
it is less edifying. Mr. Bs. prosperity and my conceived failings at the
dispute (which will appear to be Mr. Bs. mistakes in the answer of his
arguments in print) were ordered by the Almighties providence for humbling me,
and discovery of Mr. Bs. spirit then (which must be refereed to the judgment
of the hearers) and since (which Readers may perceive) yet I hope according to
the strange-windings of his providence, as in Joseph's case, for the advancement
of the truth he opposes. The Ministers about Mr. B. at the dispute were all of
Mr. Bs. party sent for up and down all the Country, such as they were, if they
may be reputed Ministers, or men that mind the things of Christ: of whom no
marvel Mr. B. was cried up, I taunted with dullness, it serving for their ends
to keep up their esteem: one or two of better account sat further off, yet of
Mr. Bs. judgment. That I did not bearken to Mr. Borastons motion for Mr. Bs.
preaching, it was because I knew it would be likely to stir up passion, and
settle prejudice in the people (in which I find by that he has printed chap.
1. 2. especially in the very beginning I was not mistaken) and I hoped to bring
the dispute to writing, which is the best way to clear truth, and I suspected
(as I had cause) Mr. Borastons and the then Magistrates, and those reputed
godly persons devices and motions, which were then by many conceived to be
contrived for the Parsons ends, the continuing his power and profits by
keeping up that rite which ingratiates the profane and formal persons to him.
Whereunto that Mr. B. has been subservient is the grief of many, and might
well befit Mr. B. to repent of. When I saw I could not get Mr. Bs. arguments in
writing, I got what notes I could of the dispute from others writing or my own
memory; and knowing that vauntes were given out of Mr. Bs. victory, I did as
well as I could sum up his arguments, and answer them Jan. 20. and after went
to him upon his motion Jan. 25. to confer with him, which was friendly on both
sides; yet that which I hoped and I conceived he promised, that though he would
not send me his arguments in writing (which I again moved) yet he would
transcribe them for such as should come to him to be resolved in that point,
after sundry puttings off was not obtained: But instead thereof in March the
week before I removed from Bewdley I met with the passage in his Epistle
Dedicatory to the people of Kederminster, to which I after opposed my
Valedictory Oration in Bewdley chapel March. 17. 1649. and printed the same in
effect in my Antidote in May following. Now Mr. B. alleges he had reason for
his not sending his arguments to me to keep me from erring they being not
desired, for my self, but my people, I remained very confident of my self, that
when I sent to him I heaped so many untruths about matters of fact I knew, that
he durst not answer me lest the very naming my untruths might cause me to say,
he reproached or railed, that his conference was with me in private, because he
thought my pride of spirit would not permit me to confess truth openly, that
he wrote the passage in his Epistle to Kederminster out of zeal for God,
compassion to men's souls, my opinion and preaching being like to do more hurt
against the Church of God, then drunkards and whoremongers, and therefore he
had cause to be bitter in his writing. To all which speeches I reply, He had
reason to conceive I desired satisfaction for my self by my desiring his
Animadversions, and by my letter to him Sept. 10. If not, yet to have given
them in writing, which he had as he says before, at Coventrey preached and
were ready by him, had been a neighbourly part to men that were his frequent
hearers. But his prejudice against my opinion and uncharitable conceit of my
pride (as heretofore Mr. M. and Mr. Ley interpreted my most equal motion in
humility of spirit in the end of my Examen to be the challenge of a braving
Goliath, so now any opposing what is determined by Synods and leading writers
must be condemned as coming from pride) are a sufficient reason not to gratify
me, but to do what he can against me, and this must be counted zeal for God,
and his insolent bitterness justifiable, as being in pretense against a
pernicious sin not yet proved, but indeed against a truth discovering an error,
whereby the prime ordinance of Christianity is miserably corrupted. He speaks
of a fearful passion a fever of passion I was in when I first read the passage
in his Epistle against Anabaptists, such as he would not be infor all my
revenues, if I had not a free vent for my spleen in pulpit and press he doubts
it might have spoiled me. It Is true when I first read it unexpectedly in Mr.
Ds. house, I was stirred in my spirit out of the sense of the wrong done to me
and the truth by it, and not meeting with the book before, I wrote out the
passage: but that by word or carriage I showed such passion as he speaks of I
am certain is his tale-tellers addition, whose conscience may perhaps one day
tell him of his ill Offices in opposing truth, and nourishing differences
between me and Mr. B. Mr. B. has a jerke at my Revenues, by which he would
have the world believe it is very great, and such as were desirable for
himself: whereas his outward estate considering his being an unplundered, or
not much plundered single young man heir of a good estate in Land, besides his
sequestration is more likely to suffice his uses then my estate my uses, though
I bless God it is better with me through the favor of some eminent persons
sensible of my hard usuage, then it would have been if the party opposite to me
had prevailed, and I could reasonably hope; when for no other cause but the
publishing of my Examen my remove from the Temple in Londen with my wife and
children above a hundred miles in the midst of winter was necessitated. Not
content with this jerke about my revenewes page 202. He tells me in print of
being Parson of Rosse, Vicar of Lemster, Preacher of Bewdley, Master of the
Hospital of Ledbury, besides means of my own, and yet complaining of want I
and my family might be put to in my books, and he adds, You made so light of
having no less then four market-townes to lie on your shoulders as if it were
nothing, and then sath Pious sober men think it his duty to say what he did. To
which I reply. Mr. M. is taken for a pious sober man, yet in his Defense of his
sermon page 3. he accused me most deeply of a Socianian plot of questioning all
conclusions inferred by consequence from scripture; the injury of which I
showed in my Apology sect. 11. yea his own words in his Defense page 205. You
neither there nor here deny this argument from a consequence to be sufficient
for practice of some things in the worship of God, which are not expressly
laid down in the N. T. refute this calumny, yet to this day I never found that
he did any thing to right me. The like may I say of Mr. Robert Baillee of
Glasgow in Scotland notwithstanding his false criminations before mentioned,
and my writing to him about them. How Mr. Geree used me is showed in my Apology
sect. 6. yet his Vindiciae vindiciarum was presently after published without
any show of remorse of conscience for what he did. And now Mr. B. tells me,
pious and sober men advise him to say that which as he puts it down is false
and exceeding injurious to me, to wit, that I had four market-townes on my
shoulders, which every one will interpret to be 4. beneficial places under my
charge together, besides means of my own, and yet complain in my books of
want I and my family may be put to. Whereas the truth is, there are no words
that have a show of complaint (which yet indeed are not querulous but only
narrative) but those in the close of my Examen and Apology, and neither of
them, when I enjoyed any thing at Lemster, Bewdley, Rosse or Ledbury; but the
former was anno 1644. when all my estate was in the enemies power, and my small
stipend at Eanchurch withdrawn by reason of my not practicing Infantbaptisme;
the other when I was to leave the Temple for publishing my Examen anno 1646.
when the Counties to which I had relation, were but newly reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament. And then I assayed to return to Lemster, where I
had been almost totally plundered anno 1642. and yet so great was the Antipathy
of some men against me, that I could neither get reparation for my losses, nor
allowance for building the Ministers house, nor any augmentation, but only
kept the bare title till the end of the year 1649. It Is true some pitying my
condition gave me the rent of the rectory of Rosse anno 1646. which having a
Vicar endowed, and the Rectory leased out with the Rectors house, they gave it
me with expectation of preaching only some sermons there as I could; but being
invited to Bewdley I accepted of the invitation, and though the maintenance
were but final, and the years dear, and my charges great in refurnishing my
house and study, yet I rested contented therewith till the Deane and Chapter of
Worcesters lands being to be sold, out of which the best part of my
maintenance did arise, the providence of God cast on me the Mastership of the
Hospital of Ledbury, which does not tie me to the charge of souls, much less
puts the market-towne on my shoulders. and then presently I yielded up my
interest in Rosse though some of the godly there were very unwilling I should.
And when my pay ended at Bewdley the Lord opened a way for my return to
Lemster, and provision was made for me there. By which it may appear, that it
is most injuriously suggested as if I had 4. beneficial places together, yea 4.
market-townes on my shoulders, and those that know not the truth imagine me
very covetous, and my revenues very great, not knowing my condition what it is
and what my losses have been. Me thinks when the people of Bewdley, Rosse,
Lemster, were all satisfied (so far as I could discern) with the equity of
my actions, Mr. B. and those other he means might have been so likewise, and
possibly had been an Assembly-man it would have been no disparagement to me to
have been a Master of a House in the University, to have had a Lecture at
London, a sequestration or presentation in the Country, besides pay for
sitting in the Assembly at the same time: but might have in Mr. Bs. books bin
styled nevertheless a learned, holy, experimental, judicious, humble,
heart-piercing Preacher. I cannot but be sensible of the great wrong I receive
in my name, and perhaps in my estate by Mr. Bs. calumnies; and therefore am
necessitated to write this which I conceive had been fitter for private
audience. I do not take on me to know Mr. Bs. heart: but I wish Mr. B. would
consider of what spirit he was, when he vented his jerk at my revenues, and
whether the phrases of offering a sacrifice to Mars, and keeping holy days for
killing the Saints in his Epistle to the people of Kederminster likely is a
most profane, and bitter passage. His quip. page 67. members of this Kingdom,
or (to please you) Commonwealth page 136. of baptizing naked maids in Bewdley
page 245. your feet will take cold or your heart heat, etc. savor not more of
an heathen Satyrists vain wit, then a Christian Preachers zealours spirit. He
says that he perceives by one passage in my Antidote page 21. I am offended at
him for diminishing my esteem: for I complain, etc. But the words there are no
complaint, and if I imagined amiss I am sorry that I did so surmise.

SECT. IX. In my alleading Peter de Bruis and others as Antipaedobaptists 500.
years ago, is no untruth.
BUt there is a foul sin Mr. B. charge me with when he says in his History
my reports are untruths, and page 176. he charge me with very many palpable
gross untruths which I either knew or might to be so. Two he has selected as
most remarkable: The first is, That the lying Papists do accuse the Albigenses
and Waldenses (our first reformers) to be witches, Buggerers, Sorcerers, and to
deny infant baptism, etc. now what does Mr. T. but persuade the world, that
the Papists accusations of these were true in this, etc. Is it railing to say,
that this dealing is stark brazen-faced and unconscionable: and after he
styles it horrible foulness of dealing with other words, He that dare do thus
what dare he not? etc. And page 201. A most unconscionable Jesuitical trick to
seduce poor ignorant souls. To which I answer, My words Examen part. 2. sect.
2. tend to prove, that there were some that opposed Infantbaptisme 500. years
ago, who were both godly men, and had godly societies joined with them: nor do
I see cause to recede from the same opinion notwithstanding what either Doctor
Usher, Mr. M. or Mr. B. have said to the contrary. I do no where charge the
Waldenses, but only cite in my Examen part. 2. sect. 2. Cassanders, and
Osianders words in my Exercit. of the Albigenses. But let us consider what is
brought to the contrary, 1. for Berengarius, Deodrinus, Leodiensiis took it up
as a common fame. 2. It is not found charged in Synods against him. 3. That it
appears to Doctor Usher, they who were charged in those days to hold that
baptism did not profit to salvation held nothing but this, That baptism does
not confer grace by the work wrought. Yet Durandus Leodicensis in the 3d.
tome of the Bibliothica patrum the last book in his Epistle to Henry King of
France makes it such a fame as filled all their ears, praises the King of
France for calling a Council against him and Bruno by reason of it. Nor are
Doctor Ushers words as Mr. M. recites them, that it appeared to him, but nec
aliud videntur negavisse, etc. Which is less then to say it appeared to him.
And for his conjecture it may be answered by another conjecture, that it seems
rather Berengarius did at first discern the vanity of infants baptism as
arising from Austins error about the necessity of it, and not much used till
after his days: yet finding the opposition of the corporal presence in the
Eucharist too hard a business being forced to recant by Pope Nicholas, it is
likely he concealed his opinion of infant baptism; to which conjecture
Cassanders conceit in his preface to the Duke of Gulick and Cleve before his
Testimonies for infant baptism is somewhat like, That though he overthrew
baptism of little ones, yet he brought it not into public, because as
Guitmund says, He knew, That the ears of the worst men would not brook that
blasphemy. I also related a speech of the same Cassander concerning the
Albigenses, besides which in my Exercitation I alleged the words of Lucas
Osiander accusing the Albigenses as agreeing with Anabaptists. And to show that
there was some reason for what I averred, to wit that there were others that
made head against infant baptism before Baltasar Pacimontanus, I alleged
Bernard Sermon. 66. in Cantica. Epis. 240. to Hildefonsus Earl of St. Giles,
Petrus Cluniacensis his Epistle to three Bishops of France, and in my Antidote
sect. 9. Eckbertus Schovangiensis his seventh Sermon adversus Catharos in
Auctario Biblioth. Patrum tom. 2. Against these allegations Mr. M. excepts and
Mr. B. lets fly at me as before: neither deny that I rightly cite the Authors.
But 1. That the Authors were lying Papists. 2. That no impartial Authors so
charge them. 3. That they did belly them in other things 4 That upon report
these with other things were charged on them. 5. That the Councels charge them
not with this. 6. That other Historians charge not the Waldenses. 7. That their
confessions acquit them. 8. That I do but join with malicious Papists to take
up any the falsest slander to defend my cause by it. For answer hereto I will
not return railing for railing, but this I say and leave it to indifferent men
(if there be any) to judge between us whether of us be in the right. Cassander
was never accounted, that I ever read, one of those railing lying Papists Mr.
B. mentions; but as impartial a man as any Papist living in his time.
Maximilian the second Emperor who favored Protestants more then any Emperor
prized him. His study was reconciliation and a middle way, which Mr. B.
professes to be his. Mr. B. page 261. says, He spoke the best of all parties
that he might displease none. Bernard is by Mr. B. himself page 265. styled a
pious man. Petrus Cluniacensis was though a zealous Papist, yet thought fit by
Illyricus to be reckoned among Witnesses of Truth in his Catalogue. They are as
impartial Authors (specially Bernard) as that age yielded; if these be not
taken for witnesses of things in their times, I know not how Protestants will
make up their Catalogue of witnesses for them in all ages. Protestant writers
do frequently allege these very Authors for other things. Mornay in his
Mystery of Iniquity progress. 46. cites these very writings against Papists. I
conceive Mr. M. Mr. B. think they said true, when Bernard charged them that
they derided prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, Purgatory: and
Cluniacensis that they excepted against Altars, adoring of Crosses, the Mass,
chanting inquires, praying for the dead. If they be to be believed in so many,
why not in this, which they put first? Lucas Osiander Epit. Hist. Eccl. Cent.
12. lib. 3. cap. 3. anno Christi 1158. cites Cluniacensis for the same thing.
Eckbertus says when he was Canou at Bon he with his Companion Bertoly did
often speak with them whom he refutes, says in his Sermon that they alleged
against Infant Baptism Mat. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15, 16. Though I make no
question but that they belly them at least some of them in other things, some
upon report, as Cluniacansis, that they denied some of the Scripture, it may be
says Osiaander, because they denied the Apocryphal writings, or perhaps
because they denied arguments valid from the rites of the old Testament; some
upon false inferences, which is a frequent thing in writers to make the
consequences they gather from their writings the tenets of the Authors they
impugn; some it may be out of that abuse of charging those tenets and
practices upon all of the same profession, which is too true of some, as that
all Christians did lewd practices, because the Gnostics did so, that all
Anabaptists are wicked because those of Munster, Copp, and some others proved
so, in which way Mr. B. walks page 138. etc. (for which the Lord forgive him)
yet it seems utterly unlikely to me, that in this Petrus de Bruis and Henricus
and their followers should be belied, when so many of chief account in their
time from several places charge them with denying infant baptism, and
rebaptizing, Petrus Cluniacensis writes to 3. Bishops of France, and Bernard to
the Earl of St. Gyles of purpose against them for this reason, Bernard and
Cluniacensiis put it for their prime error, Petrus Cluniacensis and Eckbertus
produce, and take on them to answer their allegations against infant baptism,
but not so (as I remember) any allegations against the Scriptures or Marriage,
which they charge them to deny, and therefore it is likely they wrong them in
these, not in that. As for the Albigenses and Waldenses, it might be true that
some might be against Infant Baptism, yet others not, some following Peter de
Bruis, others Waldus; as it was in the reformation, when some followed Luther,
others Zwinglius in the points of the Eucharist, Images, etc. or it may be that
they all at the beginning held so, but after left it, which seems to be the
conceit of Cassander ubi supra. And yet in the old book wherein their doctrince
is cited by Illyricus in his Catalog. test. verit. printed Argentinae 1562.
page 3, 4. there are some speeches, which Illyricus is feign by glosses to free
from the opinion of Antipaedobaptisme: But whether the Waldenses were
Antipaedopatists or no what I did allege was rightly done, not with a brazen
face or seared conscience, or out of a desire to take up any slander or join
with any party to defend my cause, as Mr. B. does most unbrotherly insinuate,
yea in my Examen part. 2. sect. 2. before I cite Bernard and Cluniacensis, I
have these words: Now although he charge them with denying marriage and
abstaning from meats, yet you may smell out of his own words that this was but
a calumny: but because by the reasons given I am induced to conceive
notwithstanding Mr. Ms. and Mr. Bs. allegations that Peter de Bruis and
Henricus, and other godly persons and societies were 500. years ago
Antipaedobaptists; yea I conceive as good a catalogue of Antipaedobaptists may
be made almost in all ages as may be made for Protestants against many Popish
corruptions, and better then Antiprelatists can make against Episcopacy. And
this I dare still to do, and marvel Mr. B. dare bring such railing accusation,
to which I only return, The Lord rebuke him. The other untruth if not malice
Mr. B. charge me with, is concerning my dealing with himself, when I had in
my Valedictory Sermon and Antidote showed how impertinently the 2. monsters in
New England were brought as evidences of Gods judgments against Anabaptists I
added in my Sermon, one of the errors condemned in New England is the 21. [To
be justified by faith is to be justified by works] which I moved to be
considered whether it were not near Mr. Bs. doctrine Aphorism 73. of Justific.
and in my Antidote sect. 8. page 24. said it is near to it. Hereupon Mr. B.
adjudgeth this dealing so gross, as he never found in any Jesuit, a shamlesse
charge, and page 190. the vile ebullition of rancor and malice in a most
evident falsehood, that has left no room for blushing. And then cleares
himself from the sense in which the Antinomists held it, and then adds. Now
what does Mr. T. but bring this as the same tenet with mine? when it is even
directly contrary. To which I answer, Mr. B. page 189. in these words [Your
language about the absoluteness of the Covenant is too like many of the tenets
of the Antinomists in N. E.] uses the same dealing with me, which he charge
me with toward himself. For he does or might know when I say with many Divines
the Covenant is absolute, I mean it as they do in respect of the first
promise, Heb. 8. 10. I will write my laws in their hearts, which Doctor Twisse
and many other prove must be absolute or else the grace of God must be given
according to man's desert as the Pelagians held, which thing I express plainly
in my Examen page 164. whereas the Antinomians make it absolute in respect of
justification, in which I am assured that Mr. B. knew by conferences with me
that I was against them, and yet he charge me with symbolizing with them. But
recrimination is no purgation. 2. It is not true that I bring it as the same
tenet with Mr. Bs. but near it: which is so true, that however their in tent
and his were contrary, yet their words are the same. For Mr. B. Aph. 76. and in
the first edition of the Saints everlasting rest page 11. says, Doubtless the
Gospel takes faith for obedience to all Gospel-precepts, of which the works,
James 2. 16. of giving food or clothing to a brother are a part: which if true,
he that is justified by faith is justified by works, and so Mr. Bs. proposition
is the same with the Antinominians, however he used it to a contrary end: it is
the same medium though Mr. B. prove one conclusion by it, and the Antinomians
another, and I think is condemned by the censure of them of N. E. in Mr. Bs.
sense as well as the Antinomians. But Mr. B. goes about to clear himself from
error in it and singularly, and then says, How can Mr. T. have ground to think
that no Minister in England is of my judgment? and then challenges me to
confute the doctrine of his book, or leaves to judge whether I be not a mere
empty calumniator. And adds, that these words of mine [I am sure in his letter
to me, he says he was hissed at from all parts of the Kingdome] are a relation
like the rest from a bitter root so most falsely, when I had his letters,
which might have directed me to speak truth, that the words [from all parts of
the Kingdome] are my addition, which is become ordinary with me. Then mentions
the occasion of the passage in his letters, my offer of help to him for
dividing ends, but he thought he had no need of my help, and was resolved not
to engage with a renter of the Church. To which I answer, 1. My exceptions
against his doctrine in his Aphorisms have been sent to him before his death,
though not to answer his challenge, yet at the motion of his Postscript. I
conceive he erres, 1. in making justification by faith to be only in law
title. 2. In making a first and after continued justification. 3. In making it,
a continued, not instantaneous act. 4. In making obedience to all
Gospel-precepts an essential part of justifying faith, and not a fruit only.
2. I did no where say that I thought no Minister in England is of his
judgment, though I said I thought he had not made one Minister of his
judgment. 3. to the crimination of my speaking falsely I will set down his
own-words in his letter to me, [That pamphlet of justification I well knew was
likely to blast my reputation with most Divines, and the issue has answered my
expectation: I am now so hissed at by them, that I feel temptation enough to
schism in my discontents]. I had hot his letter by me when I spoke those words
not out of a bitter root but to answer the prejudice against me as conceived
singular. But there was no falsehood in my speech [by most Divines] and [from
all parts of the Kingdome] being equipollent. And if this be to add falsely,
our Lord Christ will be found to add falsely Mat. 15. 8, 9. etc. my offer of
help to him in what we agreed was not for dividing ends, but because of his
complaint of weakness of body and want of time for study. It seems he
accounted me a renter of the Church before my preaching at Bewdley the many
Sermons on Mat. 28. 19. against Infant Baptism, for discovering of the error
of it in my books without other practices. It appears thereby that even then
when he seemed to be most friendly he had hard thoughts of me, and however he
protest of his love, yet his misinterpreting so many of the things I have done
or said to him, and at last casting up his accusations in his book in charging
me with frequent untruths, schism, pride, worse then the Devil in accusing my
own children, with bitter scoffs, and insulting tauntes, with other
aggravations and expressions beyond brotherly and neighbourly respects, yea I
may I think say, a sober mind are undeniable evidences of want of love to me,
and candor toward me, if we may judge what is in a man by his deeds rather
then by his words. As for his pretense of zeal for God, the peace of the
Church, and the duty of brotherly reproof, were he never so much in the right,
and I never so much in the wrong for my judgment, yet these could not justify
his carriage to me. And if other Ministers deal with me as Mr. B. Mr. M. Mr.
Baillee, Mr. Geree have done without doing me right after their false
criminations of me, I shall have temptation to think that they have learned a
principle like the Jesuits, to think it no sin to say as bad as may be against
a supposed Anabaptist for the Paedobaptists cause.

SECT. X. That Mr. Bs. charge of accusing and disputing my children out of the
Covenant of Christ is vain; and some inquiry is made how they are in the
Covenant.
I Have now gone through Mr. Bs. Epistles and History, vindicated my self and
the truth from many objections. There are many other things which are scattered
in his answer to my Valedictory Oration and Corrective of my Antidote which are
somewhat besides the dispute it self, which I shall rather point at then insist
on because many are scarce worth the taking notice of, but for the esteem Mr.
B. and his book have gotten with men. Page 165. what he speaks of my exceeding
high and passionate disposition was but his misdeeming likely upon
misinformation, neither my words nor carriage showed it. Page 166. what the
supposed girds were is set down before out of his now printed book, whereby it
seems my few disciples (as he miscalls them) are at least excused, and no
notorious falsehood chargeable on them: That which he says, I forced him to the
disputation I conceive is not right; how it came to pass is showed above; that
there were thousands of people there I think is overlasting: the tale of the
dispute is made to prepossesse men with prejudice. I told him before that such
a dispute was not fit to satisfy, and I gave him my reasons, and I propounded
the way used at the Conference at the Hague, judged best by Dr. Raynolds: but
the way Mr. B. took he liked best, and his carriage of it looks like an
artifice cunningly contrived to please the common sort of Scholars and others
of which few can discern between slight and solid proofs. But I doubt not my
answer will prove Mr. Bs. arguments to be mere trifles. The untruths charged on
me page 167. are upon his mistake of the words written before him. I said not
[to be used by Mr. B.] but by others mentioned next before. That his passage
was like to be the beginning of a schism among those of Bewdley was no jest,
but a conjecture which the event has proved true: how he misrepresents my
words of charging their blood on them, and hypocrisy to them is before showed:
it is not true I had been long time working a fearful schism, unless by
accident, it being true which Mr. Allen and Mr. Shepherd say Advertisement to
the Reader, page 27. scarce truth or error can now adays be received but in a
way of schism. His lines were likely to be the beginning of a schism, in that
it was taken as if Anabaptists and with them my self were adjudged heretics by
him: which if it were an untruth, yet it is so like a truth, that I think he
that shall read in one period what Mr. B. says of Heretics, that they end in
wicked lives, and in the next find the instance in Anabaptists, and after me
named as one of them will conceive he called them and me heretics. And however
he protest he does not, yet his asserting me a Sect-Master page 188. and his
inclining to Vossius, etc. their definition of an Heretic page 171. and his
words page 259. make me think he comes not much short of counting me an
heretic. To his allegations of my speeches concerning Mr. M. and Independents
I have answered before. I may say the doctrine was one of the first heresies,
yet not censure the men that hold it as heretical; it is one thing to be
formally an heretic, and another thing materially, to hold that which
denominated a party heretical. In my Examen I tell Mr. M. and now Mr. B. that I
think none of those glorious lights mentioned held Mr. Ms. position. I do not
judge all heretics that be against my opinion, but that they may be more
justly styled heretics then my self. Mr. Bs. quickness in replying before he
weighed my speeches or perhaps my scantnesse in expressions out of wariness
what I said to him (whom I found very captious) has I perceive created me
these hard censures. That which Mr. B. says page 172. he dare say of me I dare
say is false. The inference which he calls strange is none of mine: the passage
and time of writing it do still prevail with me to conceive that he wanted a
spirit of love through ill surmises of me. Page 174. Infant-sprinking or
pouring water on them will not be proved baptism. I shall not ease sinners
that own their infant-sprinkling as baptism by my assertion: that I tell them
they never sinned against their baptism and engagement is a fiction of Mr. B.
in which he has a pretty art. I said not Mr. B. gave us a title to make us
odious, but [that might make us odious] which imports the term might make us
odious, not that Mr. B. had that purpose in using it. Page 175. He has a
discourse from the end of the accuser and the opposition of justification to
accusation and condemnation to prove, That it is proper language to say he
accuses another, who denies a supposed privilege to be due to him. By the
same reason the accusers accusation may be said to be condemnation, and
execution too, for that is the end of the accuser. I had thought [accusation]
noted the accusers act, not his end; that justification is opposed to
accusation and condemnation shows they are distinguished, the one being the
charging with a fault, the other passing sentence. I must confess I yet
understand not his language of accusing without charging with a fault, nor do I
think any law-dictionary does so define accusation. I do not think the
non-visible churchmembership of infants is poenal, or deprivation of a mercy
now, it being only by the alteration of the Church-frame. Whether the not
acknowledging infants visible churchmembership be a denying a mercy real or
imaginary, whether there be injustice, scorn, or any error in my tenet about
it, is to be examined in answering his book. What I do hold I do it not without
natural affection to my children, out of conscience of maintaining truth. The
very same he charge upon me for denying infant baptism might mutatis
mutandis by the same reason be charged on him for denying infant-communion. I
do judge this Rhetorical or Satirical passage of Mr. B. to be a mere trifling
in a serious matter. That which is said page 176. of my disputing my children
out of the Church by denying them to be visible Church Members is Mr. Bs
mistake in defining visible Church Membership as I shall show in examining the
27. chap. of the first part of his book. It Is not true I deny all infants to be
in Covenant with the Lord their God, or that title to salvation which upon
promise they have in point of law. Mr. Bs. conditional Covenant gives no title
till the condition be put, which he will not say is true of any infants but the
elect, who alone are children of the promise in the Apostles language, Romans 9.
8. page 177. he says, I do all I can to keep infants out of the visible
Church, but I deny that to hinder their baptism is to keep them out of the
visible Church, or that to baptize them is to bring them in. If it be, why have
they not the communion according to that which we read, 1 Cor. 12. 13? Are
Janissaries who were baptized children of Greek Christians therefore visible
members of the Christian Church? Mr. B. though he had the Copy of my Sermon,
yet misrepresents my words. I said not, that it is the Devils part to say that
the infants of believers are members of the visible Church, but my words were
[it being an error, and such pernicious effects following, that people think
therefore they are Christians because baptized, (which opinion of theirs is
confirmed by Mr. Bs. words. For they are visible Christians that are baptized
into the name of Christ, if they have not since by word or works renounced
him) and rest therein, and are thereby held in carnal presumption, we ought
rather to think those that maintain infant baptism play the Devils part] which
expressions of mine being added, the vanity of Mr. Bs. arguings will appear.
That which he has page 178. [that it is no more thanks to me then to Satan,
that I keep not God from making promise to his people] which intimates I would
do it if it were in my power (for if there be no more thanks to me then Satan,
it is because there is no more hindrance in me from doing it then in Satan^, and
so the same will) is a suggestion that exceedes all moderation, as if Mr. B.
were bent not only to rake up all the dirt he can to cast in my face, but also
to put an ill construction on all I say. My answer was a fair answer to a
virulent charge. In 2. senses I conceived it might be said that Infants are
disputed out of the Covenant of Christ: the one as if my dispute made Christ
not Covenant to them, the other as if it made them not Covenant to Christ. I
said, neither was true. What says Mr. B.? 1. Election is not a Covenant. Nor
did I say it was. And then adds [nor are they in Covenant because elected]
which speech is most false, contrary to Romans 9. 8. where [the children of the
promise] is all one with [the Elect] as the Analysis shows, as may be seen in
the Authors cited by me in my Examen part. 3. sect. 4. Besides whom more may be
produced. I will add two now. Mr. Rutherfurd in that piece of his which is the
exactest of his works. Exercit. Apol. 2. c. 2. number. 7. Soli electi dicuntur in
Scripturis foederati, filii and haeredes promissionis, Romans 9. 8. The elect
alone are said in the Sctiptures to be in Covenant, children, and heirs of the
promise, Romans 9. 8. and Mr. Norton in resp. ad Apollon. c. 2. page 30. Objectum
foederis gratiae sunt soli electi. The object of the Covenant of Grace are the
elect alone. Next he says, that I deny that God Covenanteth with our infants
to be their God in Christ, and to take them to be his peculiar people, which is
the Covenant he formerly made with infants, and which he now affirms. What he
affirms distinctly I cannot well tell: he does so confusedly express himself
in his books. He distinguished between an absolute and a conditional Covenant
of Grace. The absolute he says belongs only to the elect, but this he will
not be thought to mean when he speaks of infants of believers being in
Covenant, or baptism's sealing of it: yea he blames me often for so conceiving
of him, and page 223. he disputes against that tenet as my fifth error. The
conditional is a Covenant of justification and salvation upon-condition of
faith: this he says is sealed by baptism, not the other, and this he makes
belonging to all the posterity of Adam, elect and reprobate. And this it seems
most likely he means, when he speaks of infants of believers being in
Covenant, because it is that which baptism seals, and they that are in
Covenant are to be sealed thereby. But according to this conditional Covenaat
either all are in Covenant with God whether elect or reprobate, infants of
believers or unbelievers, or else none till they perform the condition, which
is faith, and so not all infants of believers. [Mr. B. in his additions to the
Saints everlasting rest, part. 3. sect. 3. prop. 2. A conditional promise puts
nothing in being, till the performance of the condition; nor gives any
certainty, but of such performance.] As for any Covenant of God or Christ
besides these containing only the promise of visible Church Membership, or
such like imagined privileges in the New Testament to infants of Gentile
believers I take to be a phantasme, and when I come to examine Mr. Bs. opinion
of infants visible Church Membership (which I could not do till I had his book)
I doubt not to make it appear to be so, that not one text he has brought
proves such a promise, and that he has not proved more to belong to infants by
promise then I acknowledge, and yet neither visible Churchmembership, nor right
to baptism in infancy ordinarily will follow thereon. As for that he says in
general terms, that I deny that God covenanteth with infants of believers to
be their God in Christ, and to take them to be his peculiar people, is said
like a Calumniator, my words being so plain to the contrary in that very
place. In a word, I have said that the Covenant or promise of regeneration,
sanctification, forgiveness of sins, adoption, and eternal life is not made to
all the natural children of the most godly believers, no not of Abraham
himself, or to any barely because they are their children, but because elect,
or believers in their own persons, which Mr. M. and Mr. Geree in their answers
to me confess to be true, as being expressly delivered, Romans 9. 8. and by the
stream of Protestant writers maintained. But I deny not that many infants of
believers are in the Covenant of Grace: nor dare I say that no infants of
unbelievers are in the Covenant of Christ in this sense: I only say I neither
know which of the one or the other are thus in the Covenant of Grace. As for
the arguings that he that denies Infants baptism does deny them to be in the
Covenant of Grace, they are built on these fancies that to be a seal of the
Covenant of Grace is of the essence of baptism, that there is a certain
connection between being in the Covenant of Grace and right to be baptized:
which with other hypotheses of Paedobaptists I shall examine in my Review. Mr.
B. adds, That I flatly deny infants Covenanting with God, whereas my words
were far from such flat denial being only these [for my part I know not how
any person should Covenant with Christ till he promise, etc.] which were not
such a peremptory or flat denial as Mr. B. says they are, and they are true,
it being against all experience, that infants do so Covenant: but on the
contrary when they are baptized cry and show their unwillingnesse, as August.
lib. 1. de remiss. et mer. pecc. c. 23. flendo et vagiendo cum in eis mysterium
celebratur ipsis mysteriis vocibus obstrepunt. Then Mr. B. says, I dissuade
parents from so engaging their children in Covenant, and promising in their
names, which yet they ever did in the Church before Christ, and it was their
duty to do, as Deuteronomy. 29. and other places show. But in which words I persuade
parents not to do (as he says I do) he does not show, my words are there all
assertory of what I conceive infants cannot do in their own persons, not a word
of persuasion or disswasion to the parents or any other. And for that which is
added [then it seems you know not how a Father should engage his child by
covenanting in his name] and after [you would have no parents to engage their
children solemnly to God in Christ by Covenanting in their names] there is not
a word of it in that place. It Is true in my Sermon entitled Fermentum
Pharisaeorum, I gave a little touch against the use of sureties at baptism
according to the Doctrine of the catechism in the common prayer book, that
they did promise that they should believe, etc. which I conceived only belongs
to Christ as surety of the better Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. But I never denied,
that the Elders of a Nation may engage solemnly the posterity even the unborne
to take the Lord for their God (but this I rather take to be an adjuration
under a curse if they do not, then a promise for them that they shall) nor that
a parent may engage his child by a promise of his own endeavor that he shall;
and that the child is engaged thereby: but not by virtue of the Fathers
promise, but by virtue of the obligation of the thing promised, the Fathers
promise is an incitement to do it the rather, but makes not the child bound to
do it of it self, but only because the thing is a duty, which he were bound to
did the Father promise for him or not. But I deny, that this makes a visible
Churchmember, or that in nature or law as his child's act according to the
Gospel for his being admitted a visible Churchmember. Now Mr. B. hastily
answering me jumbles things together, and as one impatient of considering what
I say, charge me with what I avow not, and then concludes scoffically, And I
pray you how well do you free your self from this charge? Should I imitate him
I should cry shameless foul dealing, etc. But I am resolved to examine his
writing, not to follow his fashion Page 179. He says, I did not distinguish of
disciples, or yield infants disciples in any sense, and If I acknowledge them
disciples in any sense, I should speak out. To which I say, I put in those
words in my Sermon in that sense, Christ appointed disciples to be baptized, to
intimate that I did not deny, but infants might be disciples by the immediate
secret work of Gods spirit, though not in the ordinary and mediate way of
preaching the Gospel, about which the rule Mat. 28. 19. is set. As for Mr. Bs.
sense of a disciple of Christ without learning Christ's doctrine, of a servant
of God without service actively or passively, a disciple remotely by the
Fathers being a disciple it is nothing like the use of the word [disciple] in
the New Testament or the term [servant of God] as equipollent to [a disciple]
and no marvel I should mistake Mr. B. who used terms in a sense I never met
with in the New Testament, and I still conceive to be a piece of new gibberish.
And when he says, he took servant, and disciple according to their relative
formal nature, and not either with the accidental consideration of active or
passive, it is no marvel I should be at a stand what to answer him using terms
in such an uncouth nonsense acception as I never met with before. (For if the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to battle?) And it
seems to me a grosser absurdity which Mr. B. has in those words, then any of
those he charge me with, to take disciple and servant in their relative
formal nature without learning or service active or passive; whereas Mr. B.
himself page 92. where he says, the relation of a servant, disciple,
soldier, husbandman, tradesman remains when the act cease for a time, yet
expressly says, the relation and so the denomination is from the act of
service, learning, etc. and yet he would have infants to be denominated
disciples and servants of God without their act of learning or service, or
capacity of actual learning or service in an ordinary way: and he is not
ashamed to call learning or service actively or passively accidental to the
title or denomination of a disciple or servant. Which is a monstrous absurdity
to make a denomination without the form denominating, yea to count it
accidental to conceive a relation without the foundation, which is all one as
to call one a Father without begetting, a Lord without dominion, a sign
without signification, not unlike the riddle vir non vir, percussit non
percussit, avem non avem, lapide non lapide, super arbore non arbore, or rather
absurdorum absurdissimu^ oppositum in apposito. And yet this notion of a
disciple never proved is the ground work of Mr. Bs. first. argument, and
therefore if I may use Mr. Bs. words, they are very tractable souls that are
led by his notions. page 180. He thinks strange that a man of my parts should
know of no separation to God but by election or calling, he questions whether
election be proper separation, he says that the Jews firstborne were
separated by a law, and men now by dedication separate goods to God, that he
means separation neither by election nor extraordinary or ordinary call, but
by the law or Covenant of God. To which I reply, Mr. B. still abuses me by
leaving out my words [as the case now stands] which were put in as remarkable,
to exclude that way of separation to God, whereby the first born, Priests,
goods, etc. were holy as separated to God. Election is, always with
separation, that is, differencing one from another, and as election is said to
be according to purpose, Romans 9. 11. so likewise separation, Paul was separated
from his mothers womb, Gal. 1. 15. according to Gods pleasure and purpose,
that is by his election: And with this separation infants may be said to be
sanctified, as Jeremiah chapter 1. 5. And so the term [holy] is applied, Romans 11.
16. to the Jews then unborne, who were after to be called ver. 24, 25, 26, 27.
And called Saints is used 1 Cor. 1. 2. As for infants of believers whether
elect or reprobate outward federal holiness I know no such, there is no law or
Covenant separates every child of a believer to God. According to Mr. B. the
Covenant sealed by baptism is conditional, and that belongs to all the sons of
Adam till persons are severed by believing, and unbelief: this Covenant
therefore of it self without putting the condition does not separate any to
God, and so not infants till they be believers: the absolute is only to the
elect, and according to it, and so only the elect are separated, which are not
all, perhaps but a few of the children of believers, but an Isaac of all
Abraham's children, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. A law or Covenant of God separating all
infants of believers barely for their parents faith to be visible members of
the Christian Church is Mr. Bs. dream, as I shall show with Gods assistance in
examing his second argument.

SECT. XI. About Mr. Bs. 4. texts urged impertinently to prove infants visible
Church Membership.
PAge 183. he says it is a palpable untruth which I say, he four texts in his
Epistle Levit. 25. 41, 42. Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. Act. 15. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 14. with
Romans 11. 19. were all he concluded any thing from, meaning in the dispute at
Bewdley, and says the hearers know it and is to be seen before. But to my best
remembrance with search into the notes I took after, and the notes which were
communicated to me it is no untruth. Mat. 28. 19. I think he alluded to, but I
remember not it was urged or any other text besides the forenamed as a medium
from which to conclude any proposition to be proved. Then he says, I have been
fully answered before, but yet adds concerning Levit. 25. 41, 42. 1. The Jews
infants, were infants, and the dispute between us was of the species. Answ. 1.
Though Mr. B. and before him Mr. Cobbet usually call the sort or rank of men
that are infants the species; yet other Logicians usually call [man] the lowest
species or kind, and say, age and sex make not another kind. 2. But allowing
Mr. B. and Mr. Cobbet their language, I say, the dispute is not about the
species or kind, to wit, infants as infants, but infants of believers, who are
particular persons, and the question as it was rightly stated between me and
Mr. M. was, Whether the infants of believers were to be baptized with Christ's
baptism by a lawful Minister according to ordinary rule without extraordinary
revelation or direction? And if Paedobaptists will maintain their practice,
they should make good this proposition, That all the infant-children of
professed or inchurched believers are to be baptized with Christ's baptism by
the law full Minister according to ordinary rule. Though Mr. Baillee and Mr. B.
for some advantage set down this as their proposition to be proved, That some
infants are to be baptized. M. B. says he had proved our privileges greater
then the Jews, and that I deny it not, and that this (to wit, to be Gods
servants) was not peculiar to them. Whereas I had proved the contrary from ver.
55. and the whole chapter is about laws peculiar to the Jews, and ver. 38, 39,
40. going before, show plainly that this law was peculiar to the Jews, that
they and their children should return from servitude under which they were for
poverty, at the year of Jubilee, and ver. 45, 46. plainly restraines it to the
children of Israel, allowing them to take the children of strangers so journing
among them, and therefore proselytes, as an inheritance. And therefore in
whatever sense it is meant that they are Gods servants, it is meant only of
Hebrews, as Exodus 21. 2. is expressed. I do not conceive, nor any interpreters
that I meet with do expound this of a proselyte, but only of an Hebrew borne.
If Cornelius had children they had not been Gods servants in the sense there
meant: which is clearly this, that they were his servants in this respect only
in that place, in that they were to be disposed of not as men would, but as he
only would, who had right to them by his purchase in bringing them out of
Egypt, and therefore none can get sovereign Dominion over them (no not by
their voluntary selling themselves) to prejudice his, as Deodat. annot. in
Levit. 25. 42. Whence I infer, that it is a most gross abuse of this Scripture
in Mr. B. to urge it to prove that the infants of Gentile believers now are
servants to God, related to him as a peculiar people, separated to himself from
the world: which is spoken merely in respect of the Hebrew children, and their
corporal servitude, which was to be at Gods disposing by reason of his
redemption of them out of Egypt. When he tells me of my accustomednesse to
mistakes, it is more true of himself (as I have often showed) yea though the
words were written before him. And in this very thing he calls my mistake that
he argued thus, Whosoever is called Gods servant may be baptized, whereas he
might have seen if he had taken any care to set down my words rightly, that my
words were as his own notary took them, and he has printed them [If this be a
good argument Infants are called servants of God, therefore they are disciples,
and must be baptized] which was his argument either in words or substance. As
for the conclusion and argument as he sets it down page 182. I think it was not
urged in the dispute, and I have proved that Levit. 25. 42. is meant only of
Hebrew children, not of Gentiles, nor in the sense Mr. B. would prove that they
are relatively separate to God from the world in the sense as [Gods servants].
is equipollent to a disciple of Christ. Page 184 he calls my answers to his
allegation of Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12 vain, senseless reavils, and then breaks out
into words of pity to people that take their opinions on my word. To which is
I say, that my answers are not vain, senseless cavil, will appear in my reply
to Mr. B. about that text. And as he pitties them that take their opinion on my
word, so I pity them that take their opinion on his word; or any mere man's
word contrary to Christ's privilege, Mat. 23. 1. Page 184. in my words
[adoption] is printed for [doctrine] Page 185. he repeates his frivolous charge
of our accusing our children as no disciples of Christ, and therefore no
Christians, and therefore no ground to believe or hope they are saved: thus
calumniating me, when I have often said they may be both Disciples and
Christians invisibly, and so have salvation; and we have great reason to hope
they are in Gods election by reason of the general indefinite promises of the
Scripture and Gods usual dealing with his people, though there is no certainty
either from Mr. Bs. grounds or mine, since Mr. B. will not say that every
visible Churchmember is saved. All the difference between us is about their
visible Church Membership, whether the denying that takes away ground of hope
of their salvatien: Mr. B. says it does, because there is no hope of that
persons salvation that does not seem to be of the invisible Church; but he
that is not of the visible Church does not seem to be of the invisible. Ergo;
But the Minor is not true, as he takes the word [seem] and by Gods assistance I
doubt not to show, when I examine chapter 27. of part. 1. his mistake concerning
the term [visible] as if it were as much as to appear such in the judgment of
probability though not descernad by sense, by which defininition the opposite
terms [visible and invisible] may be confounded, and the term [visible] is
used contrary to the common use of writers, whereby he misleades himself and
others. Then he adds, But Mr. T. will say, I believe that it is better that
infants are no Christians, then that they were. But believe him that list for
me. To which I say, I will not do as he often deals with me, charging me as
playing the Devils part, and worse, but this I say, I know not what to conceive
of these words, but that either by Gods judicial act of leaving him to himself,
out of addictednesse to calumniate, or extreme ill opinion of me, or which I
much fear notwithstanding all his protestations out of disdainfulnesse of his
Antagonist and delight in Satirical quips he vented this passage. He cannot
show where ever I used such an impious speech: all I have said is only this,
It is a mercy that our children are not visible Church Members as the Jews
were, because it brought a heavy bondage, and the Christian Church-constitution
of volunteers is better, nor do our children lose any thing by defect of such
visible Church Membership. Yet if I had said so, that I would say so for the
time to come who can say but God? Might I not have repented and altered my
speech? Then he goes on to answer my arguing against his allegation of Act. 15.
10. to prove infants disciples, and calls it silly grounds, insipid arguing,
according to his usual Rhetoric, whereas the silliness (if any) is in his own
inconsiderateness of the strength of it. That text serves not Mr. Bs. turn
unless it could be proved, that the very act or action which these false
teachers did were the cutting with a knife the little skin of the privy member,
for no more was done to infants in actual circumcision, nor were they passive
subjects of any other action. Now Mr. Bs. argument is from what was done to
infants by false teachers that infants are meant by [disciples, Act. 15. 10.]
But it is manifest that the false teachers did not cut off that little skin,
but the parents of the infants as Mr. Bs. text shows, Act. 21. 21. and the
same text ascribing the contrary to Paul to that which the false teachers did,
shows it was teaching that was their putting on the yoke: which is more
apparent from Act. 15. 1. where what is said v. 10. they put the yoke on the
necks of the disciples, is ver. 1. they taught the brethren: the disciples then
are the brethren, and the putting on the yoke is the teaching them. My argument
is this, that the false teachers did no other thing but teach, now the act
there is ascribed to the false teachers only, not to the parents of infants,
none are blamed but they, they are spoken of and to, not the parents; therefore
the putting on of the yoke was not actual circumcision, which was the parents
act, not the false teachers: they neither did it, nor by any instrument attempt
to do it themselves, though the one might follow on the other. And I dare still
appeal to any that are of common understanding, whether that which the false
teachers, did Act. 15. 10. were to infants or parents. And for Mr. Bs.
exceptions, To the first, Mr. B. mistakes my confession, I confessed they did
not put the yoke eternally, but only endeavored it, because though they
taught them the necessity of circumcision, yet their doctrine was not received,
but I never said to my remembrance, that the phrase of putting on the yoke
noted barely their intent or attempt, but the act they did though sine effectu
on the disciples: my words are plain as they are printed, in which it is
manifest the putting on of the yoke was by the teaching of the false teachers.
As for Mr. Bs. instances they serve better for me then himself. He that
teaches people to be subject to the Turk, though thereby he inslave their
infants by consequent, yet the subject recipient of his act are only the
people taught, nor does any man in that speech understand the infants; and so
it must be said of Moses subjecting the children of Israel to his law, though
by consequent infants were circumcised, yet in this speech Moses subjected (by
teaching or commanding) the children of Israel to his law. The term [children
of Israel] notes only, or as Logicians speak supponitly parents only. The
act of Gods calling Christ out of Egypt is a complex act, noting the sending
the Angel; the command to Joseph, his carrying Christ, whereof Christ was the
object or terminus, not only of the command. But the false Teachers Act. 15.
10. was formally the single act of teaching not circumcision, they neither
acted it nor attempted it in their own persons, and therefore could have no
other subject recipient, but those that were taught, not infants. Page 187. He
calls my speech [that I think Mr. B. cannot show in any one place where the
word [holy] is taken in his sense for a state or person (I do conceive I said
for the state of a person) separated to God in that way he would have a person
separated to God neither by election nor outward calling, nor any other way
that I know of in which holiness is used for a state separated to God] a new
crotchet of the nature of the rest, and answers it with a quaver, and a jest.
His quaver is, Is it not enough that I prove it always taken for a separation
to God, but I must show that the word signifies a separation by this or that
way or means effected? His jest follows, A man was out of love with his wife,
etc. and is not this the same kind of reasoning with yours? To which I reply,
It is not enough. For 1. Mr. B. says, that holiness is always taken for a
separation to God. 2. I am sure that it is taken for chastity, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3,
4. and Mr. B. denies it not page 255. only says it is a part of sanctity,
though ver. 3. Beza translates it, id est, ut abstineatis a fornicatione, which
shows the holiness there is no other then chastity, or at least chastity in
the first place, which is plain from ver. 4. where it is, to possess the
vessel, that is, the body in holiness, that is, chastity, which the opposition
to the lust of concupisence, ver. 5. and uncleanness, ver 7. do show. And this
acknowledged by Illyricus in his clavis Script. on the word Sanctus, Piscator
in his scholie on 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. and others which I shall produce in my Review.
3. Then it must needs follow according to Mr. Bs. position, that to be chaste
is to be holy in a state of separation to God. But I suppose Mr. B. will not
say every chaste person is in a state saparated to God which may entitle him to
baptism, therefore it is not enough for Mr. Bs. purpose to prove a person any
way holy or in a state separated to God, that thereby he be entitled to
baptism: but he must show the way how he is holy, and that this intitles to
baptism. The Jews hereafter to be called are holy, Romans 11. 16. by election.
Mr. Cobbet Just vindic. chap. 3 sect. 1. page 37. The Jews yet to come were in
Paul's time holy federally, Romans 11. 15, 16. not actually, but intentionally,
yet not then baptizable: the Mede^, sai. 13. 3. are called Gods sanctified
ones, yet not to be admitted visible Churchmembers. I further add, that in his
general sense [Legitimate] might also signify a state separate to God, as
being that only posterity he allows of according to his institution of
marriage, Mal. 2. 15. which is very frequently called holy by Divines. And
therefore letting pass his jocular tale, my exception or answer to his
reasoning from 1 Cor. 7. 14. deserves a better refutation then he has yet
given. Then he makes me say, that no Scripture speaks of holiness in his
sense, whereas my words (as above) were more wary, Mr. B. I think cannot show,
etc. And then tells me, that the Jews infants are called the Holy seed, and
that by covenant or law, which is his sense, and then charge me with laying
by conscience and common modesty, having little tenderness of conscience in
accusing his will in charging him with a gross falsehood, that he was willing
to carry things in generals, and not to tell distinctly how infants are holy
and in a state separated to God, whereas he told me he meant holy by law or
Covenant. Notwithstanding which I may yet conceive him willing to carry things
in generals, since this very explication is in generals, the law or Covenant, as
he calls it, being not distinctly named and showed where it is, and upon what
conditions that state of separation to God which infants have is ascertained,
whether upon their own act or parents, and if upon parents whether immediate or
mediate, whether to the truth and reality or profession, nor wherein that state
of separation to God consists, or what is the benefit of it: all or of some
which perhaps I apprehend Mr. B. rightly in now, yet not till I had read over
his book again and again, and picked out his meaning by comparing many passages
together: which because he did not then, nor since in his printed writings put
together as others do in their theses they maintain. I guessed he was willing
to carry things* in the general, and if I did say so (which Mr. B. and I must
take on his Scribes word) in my Sermon without any caution, Mr. B. might have
imagined that I meant it with this caution (which is ordinarily allowed in
constructions of such speeches, where thematter leads us to conceive them
intended) that I conceived him unwilling: which might be the more allowed to me
in that speech which I had not a word written when I spoke it; which of all
other Mr. B. is least fit to except against me for, having in print offended in
this way in worse manner, page 185. But to the matter now we conceive his
meaning, I still say the same, that I think he cannot show one place, where
[holy] is taken for separated to God in his sense. He alleges that the Jews
infants are called the holy seed: though he name not the text, (which had been
fit) yet I guess by his words page 83. he means Ezra 9. 2. in which place
only and Isaiah 6. 13. I find this term in Scripture. But Ezra 9. 2. does not
speak of infants, but such a holy seed as mingled themselves with the people of
the land, which was in marriage, which will not be said of infants; nor is
[holy seed] there meant of a state separated to God in Mr. Bs. sense by
Covenant promising it to believers, that their infants should be visible
Church Members: For this holiness was a state of difference or separation
only by legal descent from Israel, not by the faith of next parents, and it
did entitle them to a peculiar privilege of being reckoned in the genealogy of
Israel, or in full communion with the Commonwealth of Israel in respect of
inheritance, marriage, etc. though they fell to Idolatry, as Jeroboam, Ahaz,
Manasseh, etc. did. But proselytes though believers were not the holy seed
there meant, they were not forbidden to marry the daughters of the people of
the land. Yea the children of the holy seed begotten upon prohibited women, as
the daughters of the Nations there mentioned, were with their mothers to be put
away as unholy according to the law, Ezra 10. 3. contrary to the resolution af
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 12, 13, 14. which evidently shows that the Jews are
called the holy seed by their descent according to the law of Moses, and that
the term [holy seed, Ezra 10. 2.] is all one with [Legitimate] and if the
Apostle did allude to that place in Ezra it serves more for my sense then Mr.
Bs. and the sense may be conceived this, If the unbelieving husband were not as
sanctified to his wife so as that they might lawfully live together, then the
children should be unclean, that is illegitimate, as those in Ezra: but now,
that is it being determined that the law of Moses concerning prohibiting
marriage with some people is voided, and unequal marriage is not dissolved,
your children are holy that is legitimate. His evasion page 188. about a
judgment of charity will be found insufficient to avoid my exception against
his exposition, which is mistaken by him; nor will it at all smite me, my
exception being not as he imagines, that upon a judgment of charity concerning
the sincerity of a persons profession he is not to be taken for a real
believer: But that Mr. B. determining that the unbeliever is sanctified only
to the believer, who is not only such according to the judgment of charity,
but also really such before God; and the Apostles consequence including this
Proposition according to his exposition, that the children of such only are
holy, that is, after Mr. B. visible Church Members and baptizable, of necessity
all other by his exposition are prohibited to be baptized; and therefore of
necessity he that will follow the rule according to Mr. Bs, exposition must
know the reality of the parents faith, which being impossible to be known
without special revelation, he may baptize none without it. Now Mr. B. answers
not at all to the main thing, how by his exposition a man can go upon certainty
that he does his duty: but how without respect to his exposition a man may take
a person for a sincere believer, and so baptize him. But this serves not his
turn in this case. For it is the duty of the baptizer to baptize only visible
Churchmembers: this Mr. B. will not deny: now of infants who can make no
profession, their visible Church Membership is known only by their parents
believing; but according to Mr. Bs. exposition of the Apostle, those infants
only are visible Church Members whose parents are real believers before God:
no hypocrite if Mr. B. rightly expound the Apostle can make his infant a
visible Churchmember, and baptizable, for his children are unclean. But it is
not possible for a baptizer to know the parent to be a real believer before God
without special revelation, and therefore without it he cannot be certain he
does his duty according to Mr. Bs. suppositions; yea he may be certain he does
not his duty: For he may be certain he cannot observe the rule of baptizing
only the infants of those that are real believers before God, it being certain
some in the visible Church are hypocrites, and he is not to baptize the infants
of such, if Mr. B. rightly expound the Apostle, they being unclean, that is, no
visible Church Members, nor baptizable, and therefore he may be certain in
baptizing promiscuously infants of visible professors that he does not his
duty, if Mr. Bs. exposition be good, but sins against the Apostles
determination, in baptizing those that are not baptizable by the Apostles
determination as Mr. B. expounds him, and if he be intelligent against his own
light: but cannot be certain he does his duty, because he cannot know which are
baptizable, those infants being only baptizable according to the Apostles
resolution as expounded by Mr. B. who are the children of believers not only
so accounted in the judgment of charity, but also really such before God,
which he cannot know without special revelation.

SECT. XII. That Mr. B. unjustly charge me to be a Sect-Master.
TO his virulent and most unrighteous speech of me page 188. that he has as
good evidence that I am a Sect-Master, as that I am a Christian; I have replied
before sect. 4. And now I say further, that my conscience acquits me from the
guilt of making any Sect; and my proceedings at first with my brethren in the
Ministry manifested in my Examen and Apology, in my applying my self to the
Assemby and Mr. M. do fully clear my aim, to have been Reformation with peace
and concurrence in the work of Christ with them: (which course Mr. B. approves
page 246.) and if my writings had been fairly examined, it is very probable
they had not bin printed. What I did, I was necessitated to, by their
sleighting the thing, aed determining contrary to my positions, in a
Magisterial manner, notwithstanding my writings; whereby it became poenal to
hold my tenet; which enforced me to print. And yet neither then did I meddle
with the practice till Mr. Baillee awakened me, by telling me, my
infantbaptisme must be null, by my principles. Nor have I baptized (save one
nearely related to me,) but where I was chosen a preacher; where I conceived my
self bound to baptize (by Christ's rule, Mat. 28. 19.) those disciples to whom I
preached: nor did I join any in communion, till I saw that those that did
their duty in being baptized, were rejected and made odious, with Ministers and
people, whereby they are necessitated to join in communion by themselves. And
if any others do not join with them, it is partly because notwithstanding I am
for my own particular much inclined to unite in the communion, those that
differ in judgment about infant baptism, according to my judgment expressed
in my Apology sect. 12. and Mr. Jesseys determinations in his book entitled A
storehouse of provision to further resolution in sundry cases of conscience;
yet because it is manifest from Acts 2. 41, 46. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. and 12. 13.
persons were baptized before they brake bread together, and Justin. Martyr.
Apolog. 2. ad Antoninum has these words, (...), that is, This food is with us
called the Eucharist or thanksgiving: of which it is not allowed for any other
to partake, but him that believes those things to be true which are taught by
us, and is washed with that washing which is for the forgiveness of sins and
unto new birth, and that lives so as Christ has delivered, which passage is
alleged by Mr. B. page 156. though maimedly. And Augustine. tom. 7. de pecc.
mer. et remiss. lib. 1. cap. 20. Adsacramentum mensae Domini nemo rite nisi
baptizatus accedit. And Lumb. sent. l. 4. did. 8. Hoc coeleste manna non nisi
renatis praestari debet. And the generality of Popish and Protestant Divines
hold so. Mr. B. page 342. We have no warrant by word or example in all the New
Testament, to admit any member into the Church, without baptism; and therefore
the taking any without baptism to the Lords Supper, will but strengthen men in
their opinion, that their infant-sprinkling is sufficient; and partly, because
by Mr. Bs. book and other means men are so possessed with the restoring of
baptism, as if it were an error, schism, a practice accursed by God, that
conscientious timorous men do of themselves shun us, and others furiously
oppose us; therefore I see a necessity of desisting from that enterprise, yet
resolved to join with other Christians of different judgment in what agreement
and communion I can with a good conscience in prayer, preaching, discipline,
etc. And I speak unfeignedly notwithstanding all the injuries done me by Mr. M.
Mr. Geree, Mr. Baillee, and now beyond all the rest by Mr. B. yet my heart is
toward them to promote with them the work of Christ according to the solemn
Covenant, and I think Mr. B. and others are not ignorant that I have as
absolutely and diligently opposed, if not so happily, the Popish, Arminian,
Antinomian, Familistical; Socinian errors now broached as other men. What I
said in my Apology sect. 20. I say still, I seek unity with truth, and I am
certain that Mr. B. has most injuriously accused me as unpeaceable, whether it
has come from others suggestions or his own misconceits of me. To that which
is from page 189. to 169. is answered before.

SECT. XIII. That it is not a right way to judge of the truth of a doctrine by
strange accidents, though wondrous.
PAge 197. He drives on more furioso, having recited my words concerning
unsafenesse to judge of doctrine by such accidental strange things as Mrs.
Dyers and Hutchinsons monstrous birthes in New England, and all adged an
example of determining that God was against the marriage of Priests by the
falling of a house, and added, we are to judge God may order accidents for
stumbling blocks, he flies out thus, Will not this man rather fight against
heaven, and dispute against miracles then let go his error? and then in his
pathetick Rhetoric insinuates, as if this speech of mine were weakening the
credit of Gods testimony in wondrous providence, not far from the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, that I am fallen so far as freely to sacrifice Gods
glory to my fancies, and then brings in exceptions against me in four things,
1. That I call them only strange accidents. 2. Compare it to the falling of a
house. 3. That I dissuade from judging of doctrine by such accidents. 4. Yea
rather would have men think that they are stumbling blocks that men should not
receive the truth. And then discourses that the monsters in New England were
the extraordinary directing finger of God, and adds: Would Mr. T. have us so
carelessely regard Gods judgment etc. yea and rather judge the contrary? It
seems if he had seen the wonders of Egypt, he would not only have been
hardened as Pharaoh, but judged God laid them as stumbling blocks. Who would not
tremble to hear the holy God to be accused by man, as if he led his people into
evil by his wonders? and then sets down two propositions, 1. That true miracles
are never to be distrusted, but believed what ever they teach, that they are
Gods testimony, John 15. 24. 2. That some wonders that are not proper miracles
in their nature, may yet have a plain discovery of the finger of God in the
ordering of them, and so when they are not against Scripture but according to
it, should exceedingly confirm us, and such he conceives those monstrous births
were, and that the forgetting them among us is no small aggravation of our sin.

To which passage I am nccessitated to answer, being so deeply charged upon
such mistaken grounds, 1. That I hope the Lord has ordered this Shimei-like
looseness of his pen to discover two things for his own good and the good of
them that doat on him and his book, 1. His extreme bitterness or
uncharitableness toward me and those he terms Sectaries. 2. His hasty,
inconsiderate, rash and immoderate censures, misconstructions and
determinations. For wherein do I fight against heaven, and dispute
againstmiracles rather then let go my error? In which words did I either weaken
the credit of the testimony of God? or sacrifice freely Gods glory to my
fancies? or regard so carelessely Gods judgment? or rather judge the contrary
to Gods judgment? Whence may it seem I would have been hardened as Pharaoh,
and judged God laid his wonders as stumbling blocks? Or accused God as if he
led his people into evil by his wonders? Let Mr. B. prove any of these without
his childish exclamations and vain Rhetoric, and I will confess my self
worthy to be held an Anathema: if not let him be dealt with lege Remnia, or
rather lege Divina, Deuteronomy. 19. 18, 19. Were I minded to retort I might take up
some of Mr. Bs. Rhetoric, and apply it to the Author of the passage in the
Epistle to the Church at Kederminster, in which in all likelihood the
thanksgiving days for victories against the Scots are termed offering a
sacrifice to Mars, and keeping holy days for killing the Saints. In this
manner, will not this man fight against heaven? weaken the testimony of God?
sacrifice freely Gods glory to his own fancies? regard carelessely Gods
judgment? judge the contrary to Gods judgment? etc. Who dare ascribe those
glorious works of providence in giving victories to a weak, and far smaller
Army brought into a great straight, over an Army double the number, when
solemn appeals to God were made on both sides to show whose cause he owned,
to chance of war and call the thansgiving for that victory offering a
sacrifice to Mars, using though a Preacher of the Gospel such a Heathenish
profane censure and language concerning the actions of praise to God enjoined
by a Christian State, and performed by holy Christians, who had by prayer
obtained such a signal mercy? But I forbear any more of this, and proceed to
examine what Mr. B. says, 1. That I call them only strange things. Answ. If
they be referred to [miracles wrought by God] which is in the next period, and
in Grammar construction should be the accident, then it is false, that I call
them only strange accidents, and not miracles: if to the monstrous births in
New England, I do call them only strange accidents in that place, being
willing to use a general term abstracting from miracles and wonders, which are
differenced by Mr. B. himself in his Saints everlasting rest pa. 2. c. 4. s. 1.
yet using a term that signified they were from remarkable providence. Even Mr.
B. himself I do not find to term those accidents in New England miracles, but
the extraordinary directing finger of God, the evident hand of God, wonders of
providence, which I also freely acknowledge. 2. He says I compare it to the
falling of the house, which might easily come from a natural cause. Answ. 1.
He changes [them] into [it] and so leaves it doubful what he means that I
compare with the falling of the house: But I imagine he means the monstrous
births, because he adds that the falling of the house might easily come from a
natural cause. But the truth is, I did not make any comparison between the one
and the other accident as if the one were no more observable then the other,
but only gave an instance to prove, that it is not safe to determine of a
doctrine whether pleasing God by an accident: since that accident in appearance
to them was as evident a providence of God as could be, that while they were
debating the matter it should then fall on one side where married Priests were,
and not on the other side, where were Monks. And in respect of the time it was
in show a more likely evidence of Gods disproving marriage of Ministers, then
the monsters in New England of disproving Mr. Wheelwrights doctrine, they not
happening at the time of his preaching, or the Assemblies sitting at Cambridge
in New England, August 30. 1637. or the Courts proceeding against them, Oct. 2.
1637. but at another time and place though near them, and not in so open a
manner to public view as that was, though after evidenced sufficiently at the
taking up of Mrs. Dyers child. And though the fall of a room might come from a
natural cause, yet it falling at such a time on one part, and not on another, I
believe if Mr. B. had been then present he would have been apt to take it as an
extraordinary providence of God against married Priests, as Doctor Gouge in his
priented Sermon, and many others did the fall of the house at Blackfriers on
Drury, Redyate Popish Priests, etc. Oct. 26. 1623. against the Papists. 3. That
I dissuade from judging of doctrine by such accidents. To which I answer, My
words are plain, I conceive no safety of judging what doctrine is true or falls,
but by going to the law and testimony, and trying thereby, and therefore bid
men take heed how they follow Mr. B. in his direction, and of so adhering to
the voice of God in monsters or other providence as barely upon them to judge
a doctrine to be false. And this I still think good advice, 1. Because the
Scripture is the sufficient and only rule which now we have to judge doctrines
by whether they be true or false 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. 2. It is the command of God,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. notwithstanding the doing of a sign or wonder, yet to
look to the doctrine of a prophet. The like is Isai. 9. 20. Luke 16. 29, 31.
yea John 5. 39. Christ referres them to the Scriptures notwithstanding his
miracles. 3. Because though true miracles are never to be distrusted, yet
Christ has foretold us, Mat. 24. 24. There shall arise false Christ's and falls
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were
possible) they shall deceive the very elect, and the like is foretold, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 9, 10. Revel. 13. 13, 14. 4. Because true miracles themselves do not
testify immediately concerning the doctrine, but the person that he is sent of
God, and consequently of his doctrine, John 3. 2. and then they are wrought by
the person himself. As for other providence or real wonders if not wrought by
the person, but on him, though they should be dreaded and observed as Gods
works, and when we have examined the doctrine by Scripture they have great
influence on us either to confirm or unsettle in an opinion, yet they are
rather discoveries of Gods judgments of men and their practices, then their
opinions; and yet therein we may mistake thinking Gods judgment may be against
one when it is against another, and thinking them worse then others contrary to
our Saviors doctrine, Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And in the relation of such
accidents there is not always that certainty that may settle a person as
appears by the mistakes of many, and many such are invented and related with
much art and confidence so as to deceive credulous people frequently. In a
word, I conceive Mr. B. himself says in effect as much as I say, I know
wonders that are not miracles are not to be interpreted or trusted to contrary
to the word, for Satan by Gods permission may perform them, and Antichrist may
do lying wonders. 4. He excepts against me that I say, God would rather have us
judge that they are stumbling blocks, that people should not receive the truth,
and most of his invectives are against this Answ. Nothing is so well said but
may be depraved when a man's words are misinterpreted. My words are, We may
think we ought to determine, that God may order accidents so, as to become
stumbling blocks, that people should not receive the truth rather then by any
accidents to determine a truth to be an untruth. Which are different from that
which Mr. B. sets down as my words, 1. He recites my words thus [they are] as
if they spoke of the accidents next mentioned, whereas my words are [God may
order accidents so] which note only accidents possible. 2. Whereas my words
were comparatively spoken to this purpose, that accidents are so far from being
a rule to determine of truth, that God sometimes orders them to become
stumbling blocks, which is the same with that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. The Lord
your God proves by signs and wonders of the false Prophet, to know whether
you will keep his coommandments. Mr. B. recites them thus [We are to judge they
are (meaning such accidents) stumbling blocks that people should not receive
the truth] as if I had spoken positively of those particular accidents
forementioned, that God did order them to that end, whereas I only to give
reason of my advise of wariness set down my observation comparatively, and
spoke of accidents that might be not of what were. Which being thus stated, Mr.
Bs. exceptions are answered, and show either his inconsiderateness in what he
says, or proneness to misconstrue what I speak. That which he puts in by the
way of his opinion concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost, as if it did lie
much in an infidelity against the convincing testimony of miracles, and of the
not believing true miracles, and of Gods ordering some wonders, and the
accidents in New England, may be allowed him, yet makes nothing to prove that
remarkable providence of God are a safe rule by which to judge what doctrine
is true, and which is false. As for his words of me [that it seems if I had
seen the wonders of Egypt, I would not only have been hardened as Pharaoh, but
judged God laid them as stumbling blocks] I leave others to judge what spirit
they proceed from, and do resolve that though he paint me as an incarnate Devil
or worse. I shall take him for a Saint though a very distempered one. Page 198.
the Scribe has written in my words [or none of them] in stead of [or to them
only.]

SECT. XIV. That Mr. B. does not rightly expound Christ's rule, Mat. 7. 15, 16.
nor is the unholinesse of men a note to know false doctrine by.
PAge 199. He would vindicate his interpretation of Mat. 7. 15. from my
exception, and says Christ tells them how to discern whole parties of false
Prophets, and not how to descerne every particular man that is such. But this
is only his saying, and the contrary is proved by these reasons, 1. Those
false Prophets Christ says we shall know by their fruits, whom he bids us
beware of: but they are not only whole parties of them, but also every man
that is such, Ergo. The Major is plain by the term [them] which referres to
the false Prophets ver. 15. the Minor I think Mr. B. will not deny. 2. They are
known by their fruits, which did come to them in sheep clothing, but inwardly
were ravening wolves; for [them] ver. 16. relates to such. But these are
particular men as such, and not only whole parties; otherwise Christ should
not bid beware of one false Prophet, nor censure such a one as a wolf, but
only whole parties of them: which had been very imprudently done so to expose
his disciples to be a prey to single wolves, and only warn them to take heed
of a company of them together. Then he asks me, But what real Horeticks can
Mr. T. name that had holy lives? It is hard to answer his question, because of
the difficulty to determine who is a real Heretic, some only making him an
heretic that holds an error against the foundation, others any error against
the doctrine of Christ, some make it necessary that it be held with pertinacy,
some with a party, some against self-conviction. Mr. Bs. speeches show he is
not fully resolved. Nor is it easy to determine who erres, nor what degree of
holiness is necessary to a holy life, or how it may be known. But I told Mr.
B. in my Antidote Pelagins, A^minius and some others have been reputed
Heretics, and to have been of holy, and so have many zealous Papists and
others. But however (says Mr. B.) the best have made nothing to sacrifice the
unity and peace of the Church to their fancy, and rent it in pieces to
strengthen their party: whence Mr. B. seems to infer they had not holy lives,
but were wicked. I answer, if any man of purpose do so, I cannot think him to
live holily; I know the wisdom from above is peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. Yet holy
men thinking their fancy to be Gods truth, may out of zeal to their opinion
rend the Church, and yet be holy men. Mr. B. says in his Epist. Dedic. to the
Saints everlasting rest direct. 5. That independency which gives the people to
govern by vote, is the same thing with separation, which comes from pride and
ignorance, and directly leads to the dissolution of all Churches. Then they
that hold it hold their fancy, and rend the Church by it, and so by Mr. Bs.
rule none of them were of holy lives. If Mr. B. censure so Mr. Atnsworth, Mr.
Robinson styled by Rivet. Explic. Dec. Exodus 20. praec. 4. vir pius, a godly
man, etc. he will vent a more arrogant speech, then any he charge me with.
Mr. Bs. opinions about faith and justification are by some counted fancies; if
he should by them make a breach in the Church; yet I durst not deny his life to
be holy. He calls it my reproach, that I think it may be safely said, that
there are proportionably as many unholy Paedobaptists as of the opposites: to
refute which he referres us to that said before, where I shall in its place
examine it, and show that he has done much wrong to Antipoedo baptists in two
things, 1. In charging them with the evils of sundry who were never of their
society. 2. In charging the evils of some few Apostates upon all the Churches,
though they expressly rejected the persons, and declared even publicly in
print against their wicked principles and practices, yea have been the first
and almost the only men who have so declared, though many more then ever were
of their Churches have fallen into the wicked Ranting ways besides Copp, and
some others termed Anabaptists. He tells me, Lay aside the common people, and
compare each party that are carried to it in judgment and in conscience, and
experience will confute me, and then bids me show who came to the height of
Cop, or those in Germany. To which I say, Who are carried to one side or other
in judgment and conscience, it is impossible to determine, and therefore such
an estimation as Mr. B. propoundes is not feasible: it is known many have been
wicked on both sides: Copps and his followers madness is disclaimed by the
Churches in London under baptism in their Heart-bleedings for professors
abominations, and therefore by Austins rule should not be charged on the
Churches. Whether Hacket or any other were as wicked, who knows but God? The
evil carriages of the men have risen from their opinion of high enjoyments of
God in the spirit, when they left ordinances, as was observed in the Levellers,
not while they kept to baptism and Church Communion. Mr. Weld observed in his
Story of the Antinomians page 40. that conceit of special revelations was the
original of Mrs. Hutchinsons miscarriage, and the like is conceived of the
Anabaptists in Germany, and the like tragedy was near acting in New England as
there. Mr. B. I still judge does ill to aggravate so far the actions of those
in Germany and some in England, as if no miscarriages of others were
comparable. I am sure it is no rule to judge a doctrine false by this, that the
professors miscarry, but only to make men wary and fearful. If it be, he must
judge the same doctrine false by reason of some men's miscarriages, and true
because of others godly living. Page 200. he excepts against my Logic, for
saying it is not idem per idem to know a false Prophet by his false doctrine.
For what is a false Prophet but one that preaches false doctrine? I answer, A
false Prophet is one that is not sent by God, as a false Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.
13. is one that is not an Apostle of Christ, and it is no trifling repetition
of the same, but the sure note that Christ gives, to say a false Prophet is
known by his false doctrine. Ball Trial of grounds for separation chap. 13.
page 312. If we look into the Scriptures of the old and New Testament, we shall
never find the Prophets called true or false in respect of their outward
calling, but in respect of their doctrine. When Mr. B. interprets [likely] by
[ordinarily, or for the most part, or usually] as our ordinary sense of that
phrase, I think he mistakes in the meaning and use of the word, and that
[probably] does better answer to it then [usually.] However, since he dare not
say that constantly all false doctrines end in wicked lives, Christ's direction
as he makes it [to know false Prophets by their wicked lives, which ordinarily
though not constantly they end in however they begin otherwise] is a very blind
one for his people of Kederminster to make use of, since they cannot by it
discern an Antinomian or Anabaptist to be a false Prophet to beware of them,
till they have observed the end of a whole party proving wicked, which perhaps
will not be till they are dead that are tempted by them.

SECT. XII. Mr. Bs. insinuations of the wickedness of Anabaptists is
Calumniatory, and vainly alleged to condemn their doctrine of
Antipaedobaptisme: Anabaptists and with them myself are vindicated from charges
of schism, neglect of the Lords day, etc.
PAge 201. To deter his hearers from Anabaptistry Mr. B. had said, Where has
there been known a society of Anabaptists since the world first knew that
proved not wicked? A direct answer to this question thus propounded can hardly
be made, nor is it necessary. It can hardly be made, it being a question that
depends partly upon much reading of histories in former times both about the
doctrine and manners of men comparatively obscure and contemned. Whereas
Historians speak little but of eminent societies, and occurrences that make a
remarkable change in the affairs of their time: and of things done in those
ages in which Historians are but few, and not of the best note, when greatest
darkness was on the Church, and hardest censures of the best: partly upon an
exact intelligence of the affairs of the present Churches of so called
Anabaptists in many Countries, who have been so depressed by the opposite party
as that it is somewhat hard to learn where they be. All the intelligence I can
get of them is by books for the most part of them that are their adversaries.
Besides, it is very difficult to pass a censure upon a society, which is not a
consistent but a flowing body, some members coming in, some cast out, some
dying, same sound, some rotten, some removing dwellings, subject to change of
Ministers, opinions, etc. whether in the end they have proved wicked or not, it
being usual that some in such societies do prove wicked, and others prove well.
And what man is there that wants not either age to see the beginninig and end
of such a society, or opportunity to know the state of all or most of such a
society, or judiciousnesse to conclude when her they proved wicked or not, it
being certain that men may fall foully and yet die in Christ, and there being
no fixed rule for us to judge who dies wicked, who not. The wisest Divines do
advise caution in judging the final estate even of selfe-murtherers that have
died with horrible speeches in their mouths not long before their death. I
think God only fit to judge of men's final estate, and therefore think him fit
only to resolve Mr. Bs. question. If I should ask Mr. B. where has there
been known a society of Antiprelatists, that have not in the end proved wicked,
I think it would be as hard a thing for Mr. B. to give answer to it, as for me
to give answer to his question. When men speak of men they speak as they are
affected, some magnifying whom others debase, some counting that wicked which
others count pious, he is canonized as a Saint, a Martyr by some who is judged a
Traitor, Malefactor by others. They that pass such a censure must trust much
to informations, which whether they be partial or impartial, true or false who
can tell? Nor is it necessary to answer Mr. Bs. question. For to what end? Is
it thereby to conclude against me the doctrine they held? But what may be known
by the certain rule of Scripture without this uncertain sign. And therefore I
conceive of this question not unlike the artifice of the Jesuits to deter
people from the plain doctrine the Protestants hold by calling for Catalogues
of Protestants in all ages, demanding where was your Church before Luther? As
if we must not own a manifest truth we find in Scripture, unless we can
produce teachers of it in former days, and societies of professors of it that
were not wicked. Yet I gave for answer some instances of some societies now in
Londor, 500. years ago in France, and some later in Germany. As for those now
in London, Mr. B. says, 1. They are not yet come to the proof; when they have
reached to the end of what they are tending to, then it will be seen what they
will prove, if they do not return and repent. Answ. What he means by the end
of what the societies in London under baptism (I mean) are tending to I know
not. If he mean Levelling, or Ranting, or universal grace, they have as much
for their number and quality opposed them as any other in London; if he know
any other dangerous end they aim at, it were fit it should be named, that
their design may be prevented: if not, who can interpret this speech of Mr. B.
but as from a man out of a settled hatred to the opinion unwilling to hope well
of the persons, against the rule of charity, 1 Cor. 13. 7. which hops all
things in them for the future whom he knows not for present to be desperately
bad, which he will not say of the Churches of Anabaptists in Germany, Holland,
England, of whom Mr. B. in his book against Mr. Bedford page 310. says thus:
Yea what will you say to all the Churches of the Anabaptists in Germany,
Holland, England, etc. Have none of them grace till baptized? Are you sure so
many thousands are all unpardoned, or that God is not wont to pardon them and
give them grace? I dare not think so uncharitably of them. And after Who dare
think that it is (of the Anabaptists) such an error as excludes them from
grace? There have been societies of them for a great while, though somewhat
latent before these times, and of them many of the leaders are fallen asleep in
the Lord, many remain unblameable in respect of their faith and life. And
therefore why Mr. B. should so forebode as he does the wicked end of the
societies remaining I know no reason but his ill opinion of them. But should
God in his just judgment let it fall out so that they should prove wicked, as
some Churches, yea the most famous, as the seven in Asia have done, which have
begun well and ended ill, it is no certain evidence against their doctrine,
since their miscarriages may come from other causes, whereof here and Examen
part. 2. sect. 5. some are assigned by me, and are such as have befallen others
as well as they. 2. Says Mr. B. It is hard with your cause when you cannot
name one society of them that ever lived in the world that proved not wicked,
except those now alive whose ends we yet see not. Answ. 1. It were not hard
with our cause though we name no society or person before our selves that were
Antipaedo baptists as long as we have the Scripture for it. 2. If I could not
name one society, yet there may be many, we have but obscure intelligence of
many Churches in the East and other places. The Georgians children or the
Christians children of Cholcis say Heylin in his Geography in the description
of Armenia, out of Brerewood, Alex. Rosse in his censure of religio medici,
etc. are not baptized till they be eight years old: How they live, what they be
we have no clear intelligence probably honest though poor Christians. The
certain state of them in London is not known to many, much less the state of
those far off. 3. We have seen the ends of many of the societies to have been
blessed: and how otherwise we now alive should see the end of a successive
society, I do not well conceive, until is be quite dissolved. Mr. B. adds. 3.
If I were never so able to answer this, yet as the world goes it is not safe to
speak all or half the wickedness of the Anabaptists now living, which the
history of this age will speak to posterity. Answ. 1. Why it should not be safe
for Mr. B. to speak half the wickedness of the Anabaptists now living, I
cannot divine, except it be, because if he or others speak of them while they
live they may be convinced of lying, as Beza did the tale of his dying a
Papist. They are not so many, nor so formidable in power, or so spiteful in
spirit that it should be unsafe for Mr. B. to tell the worst he knows of them.
However me thinks of any man Mr. B. being according to his declaration of
himself in such expectations of death as near, and so resolute to speak truth,
should not be moved by the unsafenesse of speaking truth. Yea if Mr. B. should
speak all he could, I think he should not more exasperate them then he has
done part. 2. chap. 14. Those that sit at the stern I cannot yet learn have
such hard thoughts of them as Mr. B. And he that reads Mr. Edwards Gangraena,
Mr. Baillee his Anabaptism, and other writings, may imagine that if there were
worse matters to charge them with, they would not be spared in this age,
especially by those that are out of their reach. After-Historians may relate as
partially as the present, and therefore I shall not think it lawful to condemn
them upon such dark intimations as this, but think the better of them till
their wickedness be laid open. 4. Says Mr. B. Yet if you had named that
society that are not guilty of schism and demolishing the Church by division
and contempt and reproach of the godly. Ministry and disobedience to those in
government, further then they please them, and covenant breaking, and neglect
of the Lords day, etc. you would credit the particular society if you make it
good. In the mean time I see them rolling down the hill so fast that I think
many have but one step lower to go. Answ. Schism was imputed to Protestants by
Papists, for their not joining in their corruptions with them, by Prelatists to
non-conformists, for not yielding to ceremonies of Bishops. Covel in his
preface to his answer to Burges, accused the most moderate of them as making a
rent in the Church, and breaking from the Bishops (even in that where in they
were very passive) choosing rather to for sake their function and calling then
to yield conformity to the ceremonies of the Church. Allen and Shepherd answer
to Mr. Ball page 27. Advert. to the Read. say truly: Scarce truth or error can
now adays be received but it is maintained in a way of schism. I confess it
is too true, that it is hard to name any society of Anabaptists or
Infant-baptists that are not in a schism, and commonly both parties guilty of
making the breach. I am conscious to my self of using what means I could for
reformation without schism, if possible: but I find (it as men's spirits are)
impossible: yet Mr. B. is not ashamed to tell the world in print, that he has
as good evidence that I am a Sect-Master, as that I am a Christian. I made to
Mr. M. in the Epilogue of my Examen as fair notions as I could devise, yea
such as a holy sweet-spirited man and understanding did much rejoice to read,
and blessed God for it before I sent it to Mr. M. Yet Mr. M. and Mr. Ley
interpreted them as the challenge of a braving Goliath. I was desirous to see
Mr. Bs. arguments in writing. He would not, but prints in a way that proclaims
to the world, that he loo es on me and all the societies of Antipaedobaptists
as persons intolerable. Infant Baptism we see to be a manifest corruption, we
know it has no precept or example express or virtual in Scripture, that it
with infant-communion began some ages from Christ's birth upon the conceit of
necessity to save an infant from perishing: we know it is a duty to be
baptized, yea by Christ made a concurring requisite to salvation with
believing, Mark 16. 16. and so a fundamental by Mr. Bs. rule in his addition
to the preface of the second part of his Saints everlasting rest, where he
defines Fundamentals Those things which God has made the conditions of
salvation. Infant-baptizers will not baptize believers, yea they inveigh,
abhor both the opinion and practice we conceive a necessary important duty.
We can scarce come to their meetings, but we must hear the truth bitterly
declaimed against, persons that hold it reviled, error published,
infant baptism practiced; if we be silent we are judged to consent, if we
speak it makes an uproare: we are painted out so deformed as that men are
almost afraid to have speech with us, or to hear us, or to join in communion
with us. Magistrates are by writings and Sermons incited against us. I know not
what we can do less then be baptized as Christ appoints, and receive the Lords
Supper. Mr. B. page 341. counts the error of the old and new Socinians denying
the continuance of baptism as a standing ordinance in the Church, nothing so
bad as my opinion, upon a frivolous pretense as if I made void the end of
baptism in that where in the true end of baptism is preserved, which is that
the baptized engages himself to be Christ's disciple. So that even as the rigid
Lutherans for their Consubstantiation had rather join with Papists then
Calvinists, Mr. B. is more willing to comply with that Antichristian, and I had
almost said Atheistical way of living above ordinances, then favor
Anabaptists. In this case if there be schism in our practice, let all the
world judge whether we be not passive rather then active, and whether the true
cause of it be in us, or Mr. Bs. and others invectives and actings against us.
We make not schism, but suffer it: Mr. B. by this last book has done more to
promote it then any Anabaptist I know, and how far the ways of other
Antagonists have been from peace, the intelligent will perceive though I be
silent. Contempt and reproach of Godly Ministers by men of opposite parties, is
very frequent and mutual. I have often endeavored, but cannot express it: yet
that societies of Anabaptists as they are a body do so I do not find. As for
obedience to Governors further then they please them, the modern so called
Anabaptists in England and Holland may vye with their adversaries. The
accidents of this year in England which I am unwilling to mention, may serve to
wipe away the reproach of Anabaptists in this respect. Covenant Breaking till
instance be given wherein is so general a charge that an answer cannot be
given. I know men are taken to break Covenant who conceive they keep it.
Neglect of the Lords day I think cannot be charged on the societies of
Anabaptists, however it may be on some members. Some of the leaders of them
appear sound in this point. Mr. Blackwood Apostol. bapt. The Jewish Sabbath
being put to an end, Col. 2. 16. we observe the Lords day from the Apostles
example, and the morality of the fourth Com. which requires one day in seven.
Mr. Edward Harrison Paedobapt. oppugned page 4. makes the rule for one day in
seven moral and natural, and the altering the day simply Evangelical from
Apostolical example, which having not merely temporary reason is enough to
prove an institution from Christ, which sort of proof we have, Acts 20. 7. 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2. Mr. B. knows the Protestant Churches beyond sea more guilty of
looseness in opinion and practice about the Lords day then English
Anabaptists* When Mr. B. speaks of their rolling down the hill so fast in
placing their religion in full mouthed oaths and blasphemies, etc. it is very
hard for Mr. B. to charge that upon them, which is the act of some particular
persons whom they condemn, and warn others of, and whereof not a few have
been of other societies then theirs. My second instance 500. years ago I have
vindicated before. My third instance is of societies at this day in the Low
Countries, and Mr. B. answers about them, of whom Bullinger and others wrote
who were dead before they were borne, which is not to the business. Yet Mr. B.
might consider that it is confessed that even then Menno Simonis detested
Muncer, and Becold, as Becman. Exercit. Theol. 21. page 359, 362.
acknowledges, that even then there were aliqui innocentia vitae commendabiles,
commendable for their innocence of life, as Heresbachius relates Histor.
Anabapt. monast. c. 8. and those at this day it is likely are not guilty of much
scandal in practice, when Cloppenburg. Gangr. Anabapt. disput. 148. Ampliug.
dial. thesi. 2. Mr. Paget defense of Church-govern. part. 1. chapter 4. who lived
near them, make it their fault that they are strict in excommunicating for
small matters, and Cloppenburg. in the Epistle Dedicatory to his Gangrene
says, The troops of Anabaptists that dwelt in Friesland after the commotions
at Munster, although they trouble not the Commonwealth having cast off
corporal weapons, yet they suffer not the more pure reformed Churches to be
edified without daily conflicts. From whence I gather that their conversation
there is as other men's, saving for their rigid discipline and different
opinions: in the most whereof whether truly or falsely charged on them by
Cloppenburgius, they are not owned by those in England whose Confession is
extant. To Mr. Bs. charging of me of untruths, and covetousness, and malice,
and contempt of my brethren page 202, 203. there is an answer made before and
after where speeches and practices to prove these are objected. He charge me
with pride in my usual way of putting off the authority of their arguments and
judgments with a contemptuous smile, or wonder at the silliness of them. But
therein there is no despising of their persons, but only of their arguments:
which if I know to be weak I dare not make show as if I counted them strong:
that were to put darkness for light, and if I do show dislike with a smile or
wonder (though others rather say I do reject them with anger mistaking my
earnestness in speaking for that passion) this is usually less offensive then
alteration of words. And if I use wondering at their silliness, I am sure Mr.
B. is not behind me in this book, whose frequent exclamations of silliness,
etc. are to be seen where he had little or no cause but the defect of his own
apprehension, as shall appear in the examining his book, and therefore if for
this I be judged proud Mr. B. should do well to search himself who differs from
the most learned and godly in the world in more things then I do, and I imagine
with more peremptorinesse and less evidence then I bring from my adversaries
own confessions. Perfidiousnesse he charge me not with: it is a great
question in this age whether it be a sin. Answ. I think it is no question
whether breaking of Covenants and oaths be a sin: but whether the not settling
uniformity according to the advice of the Assembly at Westminster, the not
conjoining with the Scots, the engagement to the present government, etc. be
perfidiousnesse or no Wherein if Mr. B. hold the affirmative, it is very
probable there will be found some to encounter with him, when his arguments are
seen in writing. What he tells me, that my not reproving the profaning the
Lords day, and excusing my self from resolving the question concerning its
morality has no good savor, is a charge which I imagine comes from some tale
brought Mr. B. whereby he is abused. I have spoken against profaning the Lords
day as I have judged meet in the places I have preached: my judgment about its
morality is succinctly set down Examen part 2. sect. 8. At Bewdley I did often
in my prefaces before I began morning-exercises at the chapel on the Lords day
press them to the observation of it, and in my Cursory Exposition of the three
first chapters of the Revelation on public fastdayes, and of Genesis on the
Lords day, delivered my self more fully in opening Genesis 2. 3. Revel. 1. 10. And
when the question was propounded in the weekly meeting we had to edify one
another, Whether the observation of every first day of the week as a Sabbath,
be of Divine institution? I resolved it at the next meeting affirmatively. And
after I had in one or two Lectures (for so I may call my dictates at Bewdley in
resolving their hard questions) cleared the terms, 1. Concerning the measure
of the first day of the week, examining whether precisely 24. hours, and when
to begin, and when to end, are necessary for the account of the time, resolving
it to be measured for observation as we do other days for working, allowing
time for necessities. 2. Concerning the observation of a Sabbath, what is
requisite thereto; wherein I resolved that it is to be observed by rest and
holiness, about both which I resolved many cases. At the next time I drew the
substance of my proof into this one syllogism. If solemn worship of God in
full congregations be required of God, and fixed days be necessary thereto,
and observed by all or most Nations even Heathens, nor belongs it to any but
God to appoint it to his service, and God appointed a seventh day Sabbath from
the beginning, and commanded it in the fourth Commandment a mong the morals,
and the Apostles distinguished from other days the Lords day by title, precept
and example, as appropriate to God, and Christians with common consent so took
it, and used it after their days the Jewish Sabbaths being abrogated, then the
observation of every first day of the week as a Sabbath is of Divine
institution. But solemn worship of God, etc. Ergo. The sequel of the Major I
stood not long in proving, supposing some morality of a Sabbath being infolded
in the first institution and the fourth Commandment and the Apostles fixing
that on the Lords day, is a sufficient declaration of Gods mind to have it
observed. But the Minor I proved by parts. And after I had proved the two first
Propositions, by reason first of the failing of the meeting through some sad
accidents, and then the removing of my dwelling and books, and my seldom being
with them, I did not prosecute it till one moved that I would resolve them
about that question, whether it were to tempt me or otherwise they know who had
a hand in it. I told them what I had done already, and that of what I had begun
I had not any breviate about me, but I conceived that in my study I had, and
therefore I desired their respite till my next coming to them, that I might by
reviewing what I had done and adding some further reading fit my self to
resolve them: in which they seemed to rest, but it is likely some or othertold
Mr. B. of this, who I perceive wanted not tale-bearers, and he in imagine
sticks not to interpret this my respite (which he calls an excuse from
resolving the question concerning the morality of the Lords day, though I had
long before resolved it, but had not fully confirmed my argument) as having
some ill savor of licentiousness, though about a month after I repaired to
them, and so fully confirmed the other seven Propositions, that the company
(who were as many of the best-affected and intelligent there as the room could
hold) declared themselves satisfied thereabout. Mr. B. also page 258. says of
my exceptions against one story in the book of Gods judgments on
Sabbath Breakers, he is jealous lest it be from no good will to the doctrine of
the morality of the Christian Sabbath, as being against the scope of the book,
though the occasion show it was only to prove the uncertainty of relations,
that men may not rest on them as proofs of a truth. But I perceive as Mr. B.
is very prone to have hard thoughts of me, so both he and Mr. M. seek advantage
to create prejudice against me about this point of the Lords day, which makes
me more full in my clearing my self in this thing, and in other things, not so
much regarding my own personal esteem, as desirous to prevent that indirect
way of wounding the truth through my sides. I would have no man adhere to my
tenet because it is mine, nor would I have any to reject it because it is mine.
I know too much evil by my self, yet not in the things in which I am accused,
at least not in that degree in which Mr. B. accuses me. Mr. Bs. telling me in
print this manner of crimes not proved, but imagined is no whit justified by
the rules and examples he brings: his ranking me with seducers I defy, and know
that I shall better be able to prove it against him, then he against me.

SECT. XVI. The ground of my opposing infant baptism is confirmed by Mr. B.
himself.
PAge 205. He tells me all the Ministers and scholars that he can meet with,
that heard my disputes, did think I had silly grounds to build my confidence
in: and though I boast much of my answers by writing, he thinks my writings
have little to be boasted of. Answ. I have some experience of Ministers and
Scholars, and I sind few fit to judge of controversies, and of those few not
many willing to search impartially into a point that is against the stream, and
likely to expose them to hard measure: some that talk much study little, nor is
it a new thing to find some that wrangle in dispute for such a sense of a
Scripture as when they are out of the heat of dispute they themselves expound
otherwise. The Ministers and Scholars at the dispute, such as they were, weigh
but little with them that know them best. My writings are not boasted of by me,
yet men equal to Mr. B. or any auditors of the dispute have said more of them
then I am willing to speak of. My employment in this argument seems to me to
be part of my work God has allotted me, though I am known not to be idle in
other work. What Mr. B. calls fallacies passing from me, will be proved
verities. My arguments from Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. are to be found in
my Exercit. sect. 15. Examen part. 4. sect. 1. to which Mr. Ms. replies are
insufficient as I shall show in my Review. In the worship of God it was wont to
be accounted a certain rule, that Gods worship should be observed according to
his appointment and no otherwise. And so Protestant Divines argue from 1 Cor.
11. 28. selfe-examiners are appointed to eat, Ergo no infants or younglings,
though young ones ate the Passover. Yea Mr. B, himself page 221. If Christ
never sent any but Ministers to baptize then no others may do it. If there be
no example of any but Ministers that have baptized (though parenrs did
circumcise) then no others may do it: (For the Apostles established the Church
according to Gods mind; and the Scripture is a sufficient rule) page 222. if
there be no command or example in Scripture of any but Ministers administering
the Lords Supper then no others may do it. Page 342. If we have no warrant by
word or example in all the New Testament (since the solemn institution of
baptism, Mat. 28.) to admit any member into the Church without baptism, but
both percept and example of admitting them by it: then we must not admit any
without it (ordinarily) I take his own medium mutatis mutandis, and thence
infer, If we have no warrant by word or example in all the New Testament
(since the solemn institution of baptism Mat. 28.) to admit any member into
the Church by baptism but believers by profession, but both precept and
constant example of admitting them by it, then we must not admit any without it
(ordinarily) I use his own words and texts. But the Antecedent is evident, John
4. 1. Acts 2. 38, 41. and 8. 12, 13, 16, 36, 38. and 9. 18. and 10. 47, 48. and
16. 15, 33. and 18. 8. and 19. 3, 4, 5. Romans 6. 3. etc. the Consequent is
undoubted to those that take the word for their rule. If Mr. B. will stand to
his own argument he must make good my arguing from. Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15,
16. unless he have some such strange shift as Mr. Cotton puts in the mouth of
Silvanus (who personates himself) in his book entitled, The grounds and ends of
baptism in the Preface page 3. where he intimates that the urging against
childrens baptism this main principle of purity and reformation, to wit [that
no duty of Gods worship nor any ordinance of religion is to be administered in
the Church but such as has just warrant from the word of God] is from Satan,
but from God when it is urged against the Prelatists and Papists: so Mr. B.
thinks his medium good against Socinians, but not (though it be the same) for
the Anabaptists. He adds, All your confident words show me not the least
ground for your conclusion no more then thus: Scripture requires faith to
justification, therefore none but believers are justified: which is false, yet
like yours, if I know what you would thence deduce. Answ. He now I hope knows
what and how I deduce, or rather how Mr. B. deduceth my conclusion from Mat.
28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. not only in my words, but also his own (though I had
often long before deduced my argument in the places before quoted, and
elsewhere in my writings) of the validity of which deduction I am the more
confident, because it is in Mr, Bs. own words justly brought by me against
himself. If the Scripture requires says of all to justification, then it is
not false that none but believers are justified. Yet infants may be justified
by habitual faith or actual by operation in an extraordinary way: But the
Scripture requires profession of faith before any be baptized ordinarily. As for
what may be done extraordinarily elsewhere I have expressed my self, and have
vindicated my self from the wrong inferences made thence Postscript sect. 15.
and elsewhere. Page 206. The People of Kederminster did not hear from my mouth
in the dispute Jam. 1. How little Anabaptists could say in the hardest point of
baptism: for I used no such words, nor any thing I said or omitted to say can
infer it: and when they have read my answer me thinks they should believe I
could say more then I did say then, and see the reason why no more was said
then. It is a mere Calumny that he says, I chose out the weakest arguments or
urged some that were strong in a way of my own, and then triumphed and answered
as weakly in my Sermons. To my best understanding I chose out the best
arguments I found in Mr. M. Mr. G. Dr. H. M. Drew, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cobbet, and
some others, and that for the most partin their own words, which that I might
not mistake I read in the pulpit, and therefore what ever my answers were, I am
sure it is an untruth that I chose out the weakest arguments, and urged some
that were strong in a way of my own. When I threatened Mr. B. with the danger he
went in or opposing me, unless it were from God for opposing truth I know not,
and therefore take this supposed threatening of mine to be either his, or his
tale-tellers fiction.

SECT. XVII. The gross absurdities to which Mr. B. vaunted I was driven in the
dispute, were not so as he imagined.
PAge 207. He makes a catalogue of my absurdities at the dispute, to which
(being the chief thing he charged me with in the Epistle to the people of
Kederminster) I answer. The first and second will be showed to be no
absurdities in examining the first part of his book chap. 6. The third is no
absurdity, understanding it of visible membership by profession of their own,
in which notion I said in the dispute I understood visible Church Membership,
as commonly Protestant Divines do. Upon what occasion the fourth and many other
of them were spoken by me (if they were spoken by me) I cannot remember, nor
what limitations or explications I then used, but this I conceive was my
meaning, that infants of the Jews were not visible Church Members in the
wilderness in that manner they were when they had circumcision, that is, by
their visible particular note or mark, and yet then they were visible in the
lump, the whole congregation being then Gods visible Church: in which sense
they were then visible, and so the women too who were not circumcised. And when
I said no infant can be said to be a visible Churchmember without some act of
his own: I meant it of visibility according to the note of visibility in the
Christian Church. Which things being rightly understood, there was neither
absurdity, nor contradiction in my speeches, nor any thing against conscience,
nor deserving such derision as was in Mr. B. and his colleagues, though perhaps
through distraction of thoughts chiefly occasioned by Mr. Bs. concealing the
notion in which he used the term [visible] which I often in vain assayed to
understand from him, or forgetfulness, or scantnesse of words I did not
express my self clearly. This is answer sufficient about the fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, nineth, sixteenth pretended absurdities. The tenth a
candid man would have conceived rather to have been lapsum linguae, a flip of
speech, then errorem mentis, a fault of mind, and that however a mistake might
slip from me (a thing very incident to the most learned in the heat of dispute,
yea sometimes in preaching, conference and writing) yet I meant [visibility] to
be the adjunct, and the persons visible to be the subject. The eleventh,
twelfth, thirteenth I conceive no absurdities, the Church-visibility of infants
then being from that imperfect Church-frame, which was to continue only till
Christ came, and was clogged with many burdens, which by Christ's coming all
were mercifully freed from, as, to go up to Jerusalem thrice a year, etc.
without any loss of mercy to infants, though it were for a time a mercy to
them: which will be morefully cleared (God assisting) in answering Mr. Bs.
argument p. 1. chap. 6. The fourteenth is no absurdity, as I then to my best
remembrance expressed it, though Mr. Bs. juvenility thought fit to make sport
with it, that the elect people of the Jews were natural (not as Mr. B. sets it
down naturally) that is according to nature, in that they were descended from
Abraham (the root of the Church of believers) by natural generation, and so
natural branches, yet not by nature, that is, natural abilities or works of
their own, but by grace as the efficient cause, Rom, 11. ver. 5, 6. To conceive
it, the olive there notes a race of men who were the Church of believers, which
because after Abraham the root it was first in the Jewish Nation, is called
their own olive: ver. 24. Of which Abraham is ver. 16, 18. made the root
bearing two sorts of branches, some ingraffed who were the Gentile believers,
some natural the Jews, and he is a root under a double habitude, one as a
natural Father, and another as Father of believers. Both sorts of branches are
by the Apostle made to stand in Abraham the root as branches of the Church of
believers or the invisible, the one natural in that they were not proselyted or
ingraffed, but came of Abraham by natural generation, the other proselyted or
ingraffed by believing (...), besides the natural way of descent from Abraham,
yet both united in Abraham the common root of believers, and in the olive tree
the Church of believers, as particular branches thereof: yet neither by nature,
that is, by virtue of natural generation, as the Apostle determines, Romans 9. 8.
but by election of grace, Romans 11. 5, 6. And whereas Mr. B. tells me, Romans 11.
24. says both, he is mistaken. For 1. it is not said that any was a branch of
the root Abraham by nature, but that the ingraffed branches were antecedently
to their ingraffing in the olive wild by nature: nor is it said of the branches
from the root that are called natural, that they were branches in the true
olive by nature, as Mr. B. would have it to prove them of the visible Church by
nature: but that they were branches of that olive or race of men who were not
wild by nature, that is Gentiles bringing no fruit to God, but of that olive
which was descended from Abraham by natural generation, which was the Church of
God till broken off. 2. Whereas the translation turns (...) ver. 21, 24. by
[natural] and once ver. 24. [by nature] yet it is the same term (...) in all.
3. It is not true that the Jews in the translation of ver. 24. are said to be
branches by nature. And for the fifteenth absurdity it is no absurdity: they
are called natural only in respect of their descent as men from Abraham, but
not as branches in the olive tree. And this is clear. For the ingraffed
branches can be said to be no otherwise (...) besides nature, but in that they
were not descended from Abraham by natural generation, and therefore on the
contrary the Jews are natural branches, not as believers, but as men descended
from Abraham by natural generaration. The seventeenth absurdity is a relation
of a speech of mine that Mr. B. cannot find one Author expounding 1 Cor. 7.
14. of infants Covenant-holinesse in his sense before Luther, and Zuinglius;
and then asks, is this irue? I answer, I think it is, and if he can produce
any one, me thinks he should have done it in his book. If he do, he will do
more then Mr. Ms. friend better versed as I conceive in Antiquity then Mr. B.
has done, though attempting it page 21. of Mr. Ms. Defense of his Sermon. Two
places; he cites; one in Tertullian, which I have answered in my Apology page
85. The other in Athanasius qu. 114. ad Antiochum, as teaching infant baptism
by virtue of federal holiness from 1 Cor. 7. 14. But, 1. The Author is
confessedly spurious, by Rivet. Critic. sac. l. 3. c. 6. Scultetus part. 2.
Medul. Patr. l. 1. c. 42. Perkins Preparat. to the Demonstr. of the problem.
The works falsely imposed on Athanasius are these. The book of diverse questions
of the Holy Scripture unto King Antiochus; for therein great Athanasius is
cited. Yet Mr. M. or his friend has these words ubi supra. These words then
which are safe and sound, grounded upon tho same Scripture which I have much
insisted on are read in the works of Athanasius: where the question is about
infants dying requiring a resolution, that might clearly set whether they go
to be punished or to the Kingdom. The answer is, seeing the Lord said, Suffer
little children to come unto-me, for of such is the Kingdom of heaven. And the
Apostle says; Now your children are holy (observe the Gospel-ground the same
that I build upon) it is manifest that the infants of believers which are
baptized do as unspotted and faithful enter into the Kingdom. This assertion
is owned by all the reformed Churches] But had Mr. M. or his friend recited the
words fully then it would have appeared how impertinently the words are
alleged to prove the baptizing of infants by virtue of federal holiness from 1
Cor. 7. 14. and that none of the Reformed Churches would own the doctrine of
that Author, being built on no Gospel-ground, but Popish opinion of Limbus
infantum. For the entire words are these Qu. 114. ad Antiochum, Whither go
dying infants to punishment or the Kingdom? and where are the infants of
believers dying unbaptized disposed, with the believers or unbelievers? Answ.
The Lord saying, Suffer little children to come: for of such is the Kindome of
heaven, and again the Apostle saying, But now are your children holy, it is
manifest that the infants of believers baptized go into the Kingdom as
unspotted and believing: but the unbaptized and Heathenish neither go into the
Kingdom nor into punishment: for they have done no sin. Which answer plainly
determines that infants of believers if baptized enter into the Kingdom: but
neither the unbaptized infants of believers or Heathens enter into the Kingdom
or punishment: for they have done no sin. Not a word of federal holiness, but
the plain Popish doctrine that infants dying unbaptized go to limbus infantum,
but the baptized into the Kingdom of heaven: which is the same with the
doctrine fathered on fustin Martyr. qu. 56. ad orthod. Now this is contrary to
what the reformed Churches assert even from 1 Cor. 7. 14. that the children of
believers are federally holy before baptism, and go into the Kingdom though
they die unbaptized. Nor does the alleging 1 Cor. 7. 14. prove that the
Author observed the Gospel-ground (more truly Antievangelical or Jewish) which
Mr. M. builds on. For the holiness in that Author is meant either of
holiness in possibility in being likely to be baptized, because believing
parents would likely breed them up in Christianity and they be baptized, in
which sense Tertull. de anima c. 39. expoundes the Apostle as calling them holy
not in act barely by descent from a believer, but because designati
sanctitatis, or as Hierome Epist. 153. ad Paulinum alleging, Tertullian de
monogamia, quod candidati sint fideiet nullis idololatriae sordibus polluantur,
which Erasmus in his gloss on Hierom, renders thus, quodvelut ambiunt et
exspectant baptismum; or else of actual holiness in being baptized, believers
being wont to baptize their infants when near danger of death not by reason of
Covenant-holinesse, but the giving of grace by baptism, and the necessity of
it to save an infant from perishing. I am still confident that neither Father
nor Interpreter preceding the sixteenth century did interpret 1 Cor. 7. 14. of
holiness of separation to God as visible Church Members by Gods Covenant to
them: Nor does Chamier panstras. Cathol. tom. 4. l. 5. cap. 10. bring any
though he purposedly sets down the various opinions about the holiness there
meant, and says omnes complecti conabor and examinare sententias. Sure I am
Augustine. tom. 7. l. 2. de pecc. mer. and remis. c. 26. says, Ac per hoc and
illa sanctificatio cujuscunque modi sit quam in filiis fedelium esse dixit
Apostolus, ad istam de baptismo and de peccati origin vel remissione omnino
non pertinet: nam and conjuges infideles in conjugibus fidelibus sanctificari
dicit eo ipso lo^o, etc. Unto which I think good to add, that whereas Mr. M.
in his Defense page 10. 58. brings in the Pelagians acknowledging that infants
were baptized secundum sententiam Evangelii, which he imagines to be the
Gospel-ground (as he calls it) of federal holiness from the Covenant to the
believer and his seed in Aug. tom. 7. l. 2. contra Pelag. and Coelest. c. 5.
That he hadadded the next words [quia Dominus statuit regnum Coelorum non nisi
baptizatis posse conferri] it would have appeared, that the Gospel he meant was
John 3. 5. which with Romans 5. 12. was elleadged in those days as a reason of
the Churches tradition of infant baptism, and no other reason can I find for
infant baptism, nor in any the exposition of 1 Cor. 7. 14. in Mr. Ms. or Mr.
Bs. sense till Zwinglius his days. The eighteenth absurdity is, that I said
the word (...) is taken many hundred times for authority, and asks is that
true? To which I answer, This was spoken in the dispute, when I had not time or
means to collect the number of times wherein (...) is used for authority in
Scripture, and therefore spoke at adventure, and if I did Hyperbolize it might
be neitheir absurdity nor untruth so to speak, as is frequent in speakers and
writers without imputation of falsehood. Nevertheless I find it used above an
hundred times in the New Testament, in Matthew 10. and 6. of them it is
traslated authority, and in most places where it is translated power, it might
be translated authority, and if it be used for liberty in any of these places,
yet it is no where used for a veil but one, 1. Cor. 11. 10. and I doubt not
but it is used for authority, or power, or liberty many hundreds of times in
the Lxx Greek of the old Testament, though I have not a Greek Concordance of
the old Testament, to number them by, and therefore there is neither absurdity,
nor untruth in any speech any more then in that John 21. 15. though I conceive
there is scarce need of an hyperbole to verify it, but am sure Mr. B. trifles
in putting this into the score of my absurdities to which I was driven. To the
nineteenth I do not remember I said, the Corinthians doubted whether their
living together were fornication. My resolution and exposition of the Apostles
words will be made good against this exception, in answering Mr. Bs. fifth
argument c. 29. of the first part, which I intend to fit for the press with as
much speed as I can. To the twentieth I have in my Examen of Mr. Ms. Sermon,
Exercit. Antidote and Review showed a ground of necessity to take the Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 7. 14. in my sense, not in Mr. Bs. the reply to which made by Mr.
B. will appear to be insufficient upon the examination of chap. 29. of the
first part of his book. The one and twentieth absurdity which Mr. B. would
fasten on my arguing as most absurd, and like a right Anabaptist (in his
scoffing language) is merely from his mistake of my expression, as if by
present prayer I meant prayer coexistent and continued during the use of the
thing sanctified: whereas my meaning was to exclude an habit of prayer without
the act, and actual prayer interrupted in its course, through lapse into such
sin as David's adultery, in which time things are not sanctified to real
believers till repentance restore their sanctifying exercise. And so the two
and twentieth and four and twentieth absurdities which Mr. B. makes so horrid,
are also answered, nor was the three and twentieth an absurdity. Mr. B. himself
page 98. limits the speech [all things are pure to the pure] that is, all
things good and lawful; and is not this all one as to say [some things are
pure;] nor is it unusual to limit such universal terms, as the matter
requires, as 1 Cor. 13. 7. and 10. 23. etc. The twentiefith and twentiesixth
were no absurdities, but fit answers to so trifling arguments. For the term
[disciple] importing one that has learned, it is but trifling to argue
[infants of believers are disciples] without proving they have learned; and the
reason why they have not learned is because they are untaught; and if Mr. B.
had further asked why they are not taugh, I would have answered, because
ordinarily incapable, and God both not extraordinarily shown them this mercy:
But because I perceived he was about to leave the plain way of proving them
disciples, by showing that the notation and use of the word disciple (which
himself page 92. confesses to come from the act of learning) did agree to
them, never imagining that ridiculous sense in which he takes the word
[disciple] page 14. as a relation without a foundation without actual learning
for the present, or so much as an assay, intention or capacity to learn, and
making actual learning the end of an Infants being a disciple, who has no
thoughts of it, and that he sought to wind about an intangling discourse about
Gods mercy to Infants, which though it were but frivolous in respect of the
thing to be proved, to wit, the appliablenesse of the word [disciple] to
Infants, yet being popular and pausible, would be taking with the Auditors
(which I quickly perceived he affected). I conceived on the sudden the answers
I gave fittest, and so still do think. The last in number is no absurdity, but
if Mr. B. put in [actual] used by him in the dispute, and understand it of
circumcision as acted barely, not as taught, and put in the term [yoke] it is
Mr. Bs. absurdity to maintain the contrary as is proved above. And for the
latter part it is no absurdity, nor seemed to Grot. annot. in Mat. 11. 29.
Jugum mandata singnificat. It a vox ista sumitur, Act. 15. 10. and Johannes
hunc locum explicans pro jugo (...) dixit, 1. Epist. 5. 3. To like purpose
Pareus in Mat. 11. 30. where he uses the term jugum doctrinae, the yoke of
doctrine, applied to the Gospel in opposition to the yoke of the law, Acts 15.
10. So the N. Annot. on Mat. 11. 29. Acts 15. 10. 1 John 5. 3. Pisc. sch. on
Act. 15. 10. the yoke] to wit, the law of Moses by comparing it with verse 5.
Deod. on Mat. 11. 30. calls it the rigorous yoke of the law unsufferable
without Christ, and therefore unsufferable not so much for the labor in
observing it, as the imperfection to quiet the conscience, and the condemnation
it bound to for not keeping it, on Acts 15. 10. My arguing to prove the repeal
of infants Church Membership was only lamentable, in that it met with such a
contemptuous respondent, who judges that idem, per idem, which was rationally
thus. The repeal of Church Membership was proved from the altering the
Church State from Jewish national to Christian personal, this proved from the
different call, this proved from the different way God took to gather his
Church in the New Testament from the Old, by preaching not authority of
superiors as when he brought the family of Abraham, and the Jewish Nation into
Covenant. What the Ministers (so called) which sat next Mr. B. judged I pass
not. They were much deceived in their judgment about my arguing, and my being
mated and puzzled then. What ever puzzling I had was in the beginning, when I
was almost at a stand what to answer, and therefore varied my answers by reason
of my not understanding where that ordinance of infants visible
Church Membership unrepealed Mr. B. speaks of is, and in what sense Mr. B.
called them visible Church Members and disciples under the Goipel, which then I
understood not, nor did he explain so as that I could clearly understand him,
nor so fully since by his book, but that by much diligence I am fain to pick it
out by comparing one passage and expression with another. It is untrue that not
knowing what to say I was resolved to say something, lest if I were silent the
people should think I were worsted, or that I requested him to name my
absurdities: or that by private confessions or by my own confession I was
conscious of absurdities I was driven to.

SECT. XVIII. The gross untruths Mr. B. charge me with, are not such.
PAge 209. Mr. B. charge me with six gross untruths, though my words were
not assertions, but intimations: nevertheless I conceive not any untruth in
them. For, 1. However the motion was not sudden, nor the yielding to it sudden,
yet the assault was sudden, without any rules for orderly mannaging the
dispute, or notaries on both sides to take it, etc. which I imprudently
ommitted, not expecting such a solemn meeting as I found, and because of the
opinion I had of Mr. B. as more candid in taking my answers, and explaining
himself, and yielding to other things which might sift the truth, then I found
him. 2. It is not true, I forced Mr. B. to the dispute. The words of my letter
dated December 27. 1649. four days before the dispute were these. Sir, my
message was this, since I intend on the next Lords day to prosecute what I have
begun in examining the Hypotheses, upon which the argument from circumcision
for infant baptism (which is the Paedobaptists Achilles) is built, I was
willing to invite you to be a hearer, and if you judged it meet to oppose what
you should think good in a Logic way without Rhetoric: Yet if you choose to
come over either Monday or Tuesday, I shall be ready to justify my doctrine
openly, or privately by word or writing as it shall be judged convenient. Mr.
B. choosing Tuesday Jan. 1. a seat was provided for him with some kind of
State, Ministers and Scholars (such as they were) sent for over the Country,
placed on each side Mr. B. which with Mr. Bs. carriage in the beginning to
propound that question (which I had not then meddled with in my Sermons or
printed books) about the manner of baptizing, and in that manner as served for
no other purpose but to create prejudice, besides his fallacious disputing in
the beginning, did cause apprehensions in me of the design of bearing down me
and the truth by indirect ways, which before I dreamed not of: which if Mr. B.
were not privy to yet was he instrumental to promote, which I confess did not
a little perplex me and straightened my thoughts and expressions. 3. That Mr. B.
did conceal his arguments me thinks he should not deny, who denies not that he
would not give me animadversions on my written notes, nor let me have his
arguments in writing. To the rest of his questions answer enough is already
given. 4. It is no untruth that I had scarce time afforded me to repeal his
arguments: yea at first it was expressly denied me till Mr. Good informed Mr.
B. that it was the rule of Schools the Respondent should repeat the arguments.
And it was once confessed ingenuously that Mr. Bs. syllogismes were so long as
that they could not be easily repeated: which was very true of some of them,
contrary to the use of Schools being hypothetical syllogismes to prove an
hypothetical proposition. It is true that Mr. B. would open his terms, viz.
the chief term [visible Church-member] when I asked him by what note he meant
Infants were discernable as visible Church Members, he did not tell me his note
to my best remembrance, and when I did distinguish of visible by profession, or
some other way, because I did not express the other member of the distinction
(though I could not do it till he explained what other way he conceived as
being a visible Churchmember besides profession) he derided me. 6. It is true
also that he checked me with Satirical quips, as that he could not help my
memory, when I did not repeat rightly his long syllogism, hat he came not to
be catechized, when I asked him of his meaning about the term [visible]. His
speech of my defying the armies of Israel, and calling, give me a man to
dispute, etc. for my uncircumcised opinion is conservant with Mr. M. and Mr.
Ley their unjust and false charges of me to which I answered in my Apology
sect. 7. and Mr. Bs insulting speech thereupon is not without show of vain
glory. Page 211. He blames me for desiring his arguments in writing, though not
denying the validity of any one of his reasons against writing, many men's
writings being yet unaswered by me, my answer to Mr. Ms. Defense being weak,
that I have done him great injury in forcing him to write. Answ. The desire I
and others had to see his arguments in writing, was because we could not
otherwise well judge of them, which he might easily have done being those as he
says he preached at Coventrey, and had written in his book at the dispute, and
therefore might have been easily communicated to us. His reasons against
writing I took to be excuses of his unwillingnesse to gratify us in our
request, and that they were mere excuses his printing proves, to which he was
never ferced by me, as he falsely pretends in his title page, and if he be
injured it is by himself, whose own mind, or some others design using him as
their instrument, carried him to it; and though I am glad to see his arguments
in writing, yet I take it for the greatest injury that ever I received from
man, that he has so unworthily abused me and the truth, (which I pray God
forgive him) expecting also if he live both righting me and the truth. Of
answering Mr. Cobbet I have said enough already, Mr. Church, and Mr.
Rutherfords are in effect the same with Mr. Ms. and others: by overthrowing in
my Sermons the Hypotheses of the Covenant, seal, Baptismes succession to
Circumcision they were answered. Mr. Drew's main argument page 23. though his
book by the Author of the lawfulness of obeying the present govenrment be
judged to be written with sharp reasons and mild language, yet either there are
four terms in it, or else it concludes we are to circumcise. The dispute of
Mr. Baily had been showed to be very fallacious, if my letter to the press had
found one willing to print it. I desired to have Mr. Bs. arguments in writing
besides these, because he was better known to those of Bewdley. I compare not
my self with men excellent in writing, nor do I think I used the term [silly
people] though Mr. Bs. notary so wrote it, page 212. How unseemly Mr. Bs.
language was I have said before. I conceived it necessary Mr. B. should explain
his terms to satisfy the people, who could not judge of his proof without
knowing his meaning, which might have been done, and yet strict disputing
observed: which Mr. B. denied, though this were or should have been the end of
the dispute, and the occasion of it led him to it. If [for peace] and [for fear
of scandal] be equipollent (as I take them to be in these speeches) then [Truth
must not be lost for fear of scandal] and [no truth is to be concealed so as to
be lost for peace] differ not as much as truth from a most destructive
falsehood, as Mr. B. says page 215. Austin I think has the words I cited in
that Sermon, my book of scandals page 273. and in my Apology page 5. though
perhaps I am mistaken, and the speech be Gregory's, whose words in his seventh
homily on Ezech. are thus cited by Aqu. 2. 2. q. 43. art. 7. Si de veritate
scandalum sumitur ut tilius nasci permittur scandalnm quam veritas relinquatur.
My traducing Mr. B. in my pulpit, mentioned page 217. was nothing but citing
his words, which was not frequent, nor is it, if rightly done, any injury when
the book is published. What is of me and not of God I pray with him may perish:
of schism or zeal for it I am not conscious: that truth I avouch will stand
when Mr. Bs. rotten pillars fall to the ground. To many questions and charges
in sundry pages 213. etc. an answer may be gathered from what is said before.

SECT. XIX. The six imagined errors charged on me by Mr. B. are cleared from
his censure.
MR. B. adds a confutation of six of my pretended errors. The first was only
a speech of mine in conference on occasion of Mr. Bs. words in a Sermon which
were taken to be a fling at me, and my meaning was this, that the truth I
maintained and such like being about a thing of frequent practice, so that by
reason of ignorance sin will be committed, were not to be concealed when if it
be it is like to be lost for the peace of the Church, that is to prevent
differences in opinion and the breaches in communion that by reason thereof do
by accident from the corruption of men fall out. Mr. B. opposes it, as if I
meant a man must not suspend any truth of the Scripture, no not though a total
breach bringing bloodshed, ruin, etc. follow; yea by his last argument he
would insinuate, as if it would follow on my tenet, that every one that does
but think it is a truth that Christ is not God, that there is no God, etc. that
he will think himself bound to reveal it to the world, though it turn all to
confusion, and after his satirical vein says, He that had rather see the
Church in this case then his doctrine of Anabaptistry should be concealed, is
good for nothing but to make an Anabaptist of that I know. To which I answer,
my meaning in that speech of mine was this, that no truth of God that a person
is certain is such, and can demonstrate so to be, which concerns the faith or
practice of Christians, through concealing of which they shall err and sin, is
to be concealed when a person may perceive by circumstances, that if he
conceal it at such a time the contrary will be established, and so truth be
lost in the eye of reason, though much trouble follow thereon. And this I
resolved heretofore in my book of scandals chap. 4. sect. 20. not that I know
of excepted against by any ground on Paul's words, Gal. 2. 5. avouched by many
Divines, and without which the Waldenses, Hussites, Protestants will be
condemned for opposing the Monkish profession, half communion, etc. though
wars followed thereon. And our present and former non-conformists will be
deeply guilty of sin in opposing the Prelacy, ceremonies, canons, etc, which
has been one cause of the great troubles of the land, which have proved
greater then any raised by the Anabaptists. And so far as many prudent men can
discern, many of the Presbyterian Ministers of the land, do as little regard
the peace of this land at this time, through discontent that they want the
establishment of discipline after their mind, as any Anabaptist heretofore did.
And I presume they that sit at the stern do find the so called Anabaptists as
faithful to the public cause as their opposites.

As for the two next errors about others then Ministers baptizing and
administering the Lords Supper, Mr. B. delivers as much himself as the errors
pretended affirm in these words page 221. In a case of necessity (as if people
were in the Indies) where no Ministers can be had, if any fay that it is better
a private man baptize and adminster the Lords Supper then wholly omit them, I
will not deny it; and he gives two reasons. But faith he, Mr. T. speaks it in
reference to our ordinary case in England. Concerning which I answer, that for
baptizing it is true I speak in reference to the case in England; all or most
of the Ministers ordained Tertullian. l. de baptismo Laicis jus est baptizandi.
being against baptizing of persons of years sprinkled in infancy, and there
lying upon them that see infant baptism a corruption a necessity to be
baptized upon profession of faith, there is a necessity that they be baptized
by persons not ordained by laying on of hands of the Presbytery, though I do
conceive laying on of hands an ordinance in force from 1 Timothy 5. 23. and 4. 14.
Act. 13. 3. Heb. 6. 2. Nor do I like the argument from Numb. 8. 10. to prove
that non-preaching elders may lay on hands conceiving no Mosaical ordinance
concerning any positive ceremonial rite belonging to the Jewish service is a
rule to us now, and therefore do wish there were either by authority or consent
of Churches some way of restoring it; till which I see a necessity that persons
not ordained yet preachers of the Gospel do baptize. But for administering the
Lords Supper though I acknowledge it most fit in many respects it should be
received some Minister ordering it, not so much for the consecrating of the
Elements (as they call it) by virtue of office, as for the comely and edifying
dispensing of it by prayer and exhortation, the ordinance being holy, and to be
performed with much reverence, to which none are so fit as a Minister that is
set apart for the word and prayer: yet whereas it is claimed as a part of the
Ministers office to be Minister of the Sacraments, or (as they call them)
seals, and it is aggravated as if it were the sin of Uzzah or Uzziah for any
else to do it, and too much I think is ascribed not only by Papists, but also
by others to the power of order, and many require it as a Ministers duty to
give them the Sacrament, and if Mr. Bs. doctrine be good in his treatise of the
Saints rest page 651. Their being baptized persons or members of the universal
Church, is sufficient evidence of their interest to the Supper, till they by
heresy or scandal blot that evidence, Ministers cannot deny it them without
instustice, and hereupon many perplexities are in Ministers about giving the
Lords Supper, and perplexities in receivers from whom they receive it, it being
taught that they do justify their Ministry, and own them as their Ministers,
who receive the Lords Supper from them; and it is taught that Ministers have a
power to deny some the seals, and this is made a chief part of their
government, I have I confess said and I think it still true, that a company of
believers though they have no Minister ordained in case of want of an ordained
Minister may some one or more in holy and seemly manner by giving thanks,
praying, and declaring the end and use of that rite, and guiding the action,
remember the Lords death in breaking bread, and this may be truly a Sacrament
as it is called, and acceptable to God if performed with a holy heart. And my
chief ground is, because whereas it is made one of the chief disorders in
eating the Lords Supper at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. that in eating every one
took his own Supper before other, this could not have happened if they had been
wont to receive it from a Minister that distributed to all; and when the
Apostle to rectify the abuse sets down what he received of the Lord, ver. 23.
he speaks not a word of a Ministers duty to regulate them, or of Christ's
appointing it as a part of his office to distribute it, nor gives any direction
to that end: but only ver. 33. that they tarry one for another, and not eat
till they came together, whereas if it did then belong to the Minister to
distribute, the direction should have been given to him not to distribute till
they came together. If it be said (as Saravia against Beza) that there were
then Presbyters at Corinth, though I conceive it not likely, but the contrary
rather manifest from 1 Cor. 1. 7. and 6. 4. and 12. 28. and 14. 29. Yet it
serves the more to confirm my opinion, that then it was not counted the
Ministers office to deliver the Lords Supper, and that it might be without a
Minister ordained, since they did receive it then, 1 Cor. 10. 16. yet I
acknowledge that it is very ancient that the Minister called the President did
order the Lords Supper, as I gather from Justin Martyrs Apolog. 2. ad Antoninum
where he sets down the order of the Christian service in his time. And I am
against the altering it because of the antiquity of the use, and the confusion
likely to follow on the alteration. But being urged by Mr. B. and others in the
manner abovesaid, it is necessary that the point be examined. Mr. B. argues
thus, 1. He that administreth the Lords Supper (in breaking the bread,
delivering it to all, bidding them take, eat, etc.) must represent the Lord
Jesus, who did all this at the institution. But only Ministers and no private
men are persons who should represent the Lord Jesus in Church-administrations.
Therefore only Ministers and no private men may administer the Lords Supper.
To which I answer, 1. [in Church-administrations] in the Minor is added which
was not in the Major, and so there are four terms, and the argument faulty. 2.
But waving that exception, because it may be quickly rectified, I deny the
Minor understanding as Mr. B. does by a Minister a Presbytery ordained by
laying on of hands. For to speak of the Ruling elders Churchadministrations, or
the preaching of persons not in office (of which anon) It is certain that
Deacons have Church-administration, who are not Presbyters; yea it is manifest
out of antiquity, that the Deacons did deliver the Elements in the Lords
Supper, and Rogers on Article 23. of the Church of England, prop. 3. says, at
Geneva the elder (a layman) ministers the cup ordinarily at the Communion,
and therefore Ministers did and might represent Christ at least in that part of
Church-administration. But Mr. B. goes about to prove the Minor thus. Ministers
only are called his Ambassadors, Stewards of his mysteries, and beseech in his
stead, etc. Answer, 1. I think that those mentioned Act. 8. 4, 5. of whom
Philip was then only a Deacon, as many of the Ancients hold, not only Apollos
but also Aquila and Priscilla Acts 18. 26. Frumentius that converted the
Indians, and the captive maid that brought the Iberians to the faith, were
Ambassadors of Christ, and Stewards of his mysteries, and might beseech in his
stead. 2. But were it granted that Ministers only are called Christ's
Ambassadors, etc. how is it proved that they only should represent Christ's
person in breaking the bread, delivering it to all, bidding them take, eat,
etc. Does the Embassage of Christ, dispensing of his mysteries, beseeching in
his stead, etc. consist in breaking bread, delivering it, bidding take, eat,
etc? If it do, then a non-preaching Minister who does these things may yet be
an Ambassador of Christ, and Steward of his mysteries, then the breaking
bread, etc. is a converting ordinance, as Mr. Pryn held, which Mr. Gillespy and
Mr. Rutherford deny. For my part I think to be an Ambassador of Christ, and to
beseech in his stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. to be a Steward of the mysteries of God, 1
Cor. 4. 1. are all one as to preach the Gospel, and that the Assembly did
misallege the text 1 Cor. 4. 1. as they have done the other, to prove that
neither Sacrament may be dispensed by any but a Minister of the word lawfully
ordained, Confession of faith chap. 27. sect. 4. For mysteries of God never
signify Sacraments in Scripture, but the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Romans 16. 25.
Chamier panstrat. Cath. tom. 4. l. 1. c. 4. sect. 9. in Scripturis (...)
usurpari pro ipso rei sacrae signo profecto imposturaest. But Mr. B. tells me.
It is a silly answer of Mr. T. that Sacraments are not called mysteries of God.
For the word preached neither is not the mystery it self, but a revealing and
exhibiting that mystery, and so are the Sacraments. The one reveals them to
the ear, and the other to the eye. Answ. Sure if the answer be silly, the
refutation is no better. For if the word preached be not the mystery it self,
then neither is the Sacrament, much less the breaking the bread and delivering
it, and so to be Steward of the mysteries of God is not to be breaker and
deliverer of the bread and wine in the Lords Supper. But however Mr. B. grants
that though the word preached be not the mystery it self, yet it is the
revealing and exhibiting of the mystery, and that the sense undoubted of 1 Cor.
4. 1. Stewards of the mysteries of God, is revealers of the mystery of God by
preaching the word. But then says Mr. B. the Sacrament reveals the mystery
of God to the eye. I reply, Mr. B. says so, but not one text of Scripture
says so: nor is it true. The mystery contains not only the thing done by
Christ, but the end, use, reason of it: but this is perceivable only by the
understanding, and the Sacrament abstractively from the word declares it not,
no not so much as a picture: and therefore the Sacramental actions of
themselves are not revelations of the mystery of Christ, nor ever so called in
Scripture: and therefore I conclude, that the text 1 Cor. 4. 1. does not prove
that it is the peculiar office of an ordained Presbyter to Minister the Lords
Supper by breaking bread, delivering it to all, bidding take, eat, etc. And
though the title of Minister of the Gospel be used in the New Testament, yet
the title of Minister of the Sacraments is a made title. 2. Says Mr. B. If
there be no command or example in Scripture of any but Ministers administering
the Lords Supper, then no other may do it; But there is no command or example
in Scripture of any other doing it; they that say there is, let them show it.
Answ. I find this command, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread and drink of that cup, and this example 1 Cor. 10. 16,
17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood
of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? For we being many are one body and one bread: for we are all partakers
of that one bread. But for command or example that an ordained Presbyter only
should administer the Lords Supper by breaking bread, etc. let them that say
there is, show it. Mr. B. goes on. But by this time you may see whither Mr. T.
would reduce the Ministerial office, 1. Others may baptize. 2. And administer
the Lords Supper. 3. And then preaching is all or almost all that is left (for
he gives them far less in government than I do.) And how well he defended the
Ministerial privilege of public preaching in his disputes with Captain Bray
is too well known. And what need the people allow so much of their means then
to maintain Ministers? is not this next to the utter extirpation of them
acoording to the doctrine of their learned Martin-Marpriest. Answ. Pastors and
Teachers or Presbyters to teach and govern the Church of God I am assured are a
Divine institution, and a very merciful gift of Christ, Ephe. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1
Cor. 12. 28. Acts 14. 23. 1 Timothy 3. 1. Tit. 2. 5. to whom people should yield
obedience, Heb. 13. 17. and yield maintenance liberally, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6.
6. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. If any go about to extirpate them let him be accursed as
an enemy to Christ and his Church. The railing books of Martin-Marpriest, and
such like on the one side; and the slanderous books of Mr. Edwards, Mr.
Baillee, etc. on the other side I abhor. Yet I fear more danger to the
Ministry by the pragmaticalnesse of the Ministers, especially their meddling
with State matters, then either by Martin-Marpriests libels, or my assertions.
Would Ministers keep to their studies and the work of Christ in preaching in
season and out of season, it would better establish their maintenance and
Ministry, then the asserting such a juridical government and power of
dispensing the seals (as they are called) as they do. I ascribe as much to the
Ministry as the Scripture gives them. Though the office of preaching whether
public or private be proper to the Minister so as to be his constant
employment, and he ought not to be hindered in it, since he is to be accountable
to God for it: yet public or private preaching I do not annex to ordained
Presbyters as a peculiar privilege to them, so as none else may be said to be
sent or called of God to preach in Scripture sense but they. Notwithstanding
what Mr. Thomas Hall in his Pulpit guarded, or my quodam scholar and worthy
friend Mr. Giles Workman, in his better tempered book entitled Private men no
pulpit men, have said, I still conceive that not only for trial of expectants,
but also upon other occasions persons not ordained may be permitted, yea
desired to preach in the pulpits. I find these words in Bilsons Difference
between Christian subjection and Antichristian rebellion, part. 4. Strangers
also if they were in place were suffered both to teach and bless in the
Church, as well as others that were tied to their cures, by reason that many
were sent by the Apostles and by the Holy Ghost to visit the Churches and
comfort the Christians as they travailed, and such were according to their
knowledge and gift not only permitted, but also desired to exhort the people,
and to give thanks to God in other men's charges, Grot. annot. in Mat. 4. 23.
Mansit is mos aliquandiu in Ecclesia Christiana ut concessu Episcoporum
Scriptur as interpretarentur non presbyteri tantum aut diaconi, sed and (...).
Vide Eusebium qui Origenis aliorumque exemplo probat (...) spectant quae
leguntur 1 Cor. 24. 19. Nevertheless I am against the courses of many
Soldiers and others, who against the denial of able teachers to whom the
teaching of the people is committed, love to get into the pulpits of the ablest
men to vent their peculiar conceits, and oft-times their pernicious errors, not
reguarding to preach to the ignorant the clear truths of faith and a holy life
in places where they have no Preacher, but to new converts to pervert them, and
withdraw them from their able Teachers, and to disquiet them and their
congregations by frivolous exceptions. And for this reason I was unwilling
Captain Bray should preach at Bewdley when I was there, and when he would
preach and bent himself to assert a liberty to all that had Gods sanctifying
spirit, and could express their minds, to take upon them to teach publicly
what is the meaning of the Scripture, and what doctrines are true and what
false, without any skill in arts, yea though he taught error, I did oppose him.
Which if it were not so skilfully and happily done as Mr. B. better acquainted
with such men's way might have done, yet me thinks my good will might have been
accepted. But I see very little I do is well taken, and therefore see it
necessary to wait patiently on God till my words and actions though intended
for the furthering of reformation and good of the Ministry, in my Examen part.
2. sect. 7 in my Apology and elsewhere, be better resented and considered.

The fourth and fifth error Mr. B. charge me with as dangerous, and the root
of my error about baptism, will more fitly come into the body of the dispute,
in which I doubt not but I shall show that both himself and Mr. Blake (however
he esteem his writings) do recede from the Scripture and other approved authors
in their making the New Covenant common to elect and reprobates, in making
reprobates interest in the Covenant a fruit of Christ's death, denying the
absolute promise to be most fitly called the Covenant of Grace, hold that a
person may not be baptized that is not known to belong to the Covenant of
Grace, that God actually seals the Covenant of Grace to reprobates, with sundry
other mistakes about Sacraments in general, as if their essence were in being
seals of the Covenant of Grace, and deriving thence a right to baptism for
believers Infants, though the Covenant be conditional and common to all.

The fith error of mine he confutes is about the Magistrates not being an
officer of Christ as Mediator. And he excepts against me for saying in pulpit
at Bewdley it was of dangerous consequence which he held, though he named not
me at any time, and he wrote to me, and I would not dispute it with him. To
which I answer, It is true, preaching on Mat. 28. 18. the argument leading me
to it, I did oppose that doctrine, that the Magistrate is an officer of Christ
the Mediator, and because Mr. Bs. book was in some of my Auditors hands, did
read the passage in his Aphorisms page 273. and said it was of dangerous
consequence. And indeed I think it so still. For I think it will follow, that
except a Magistrate can show his commission from Christ, that he is an usurper,
and then none is bound to him but to suppress him, then no infidel is a
lawful Magistrate who denies Christ, and it will be questionable whether this
will not extend to a non-churchmember or an excommunicate person, then a
Magistrates doing of right to an infidel against a believer, or to one believer
against another, as putting him to death, is an act for Christ as Mediator, and
if because all power is given to him in heaven and in earth therefore
magistracy, so as that all power must be derived from Christ as Mediator, then
a Fathers power over his child, but sure that is in a Father by nature, nor do
I think it any part of the curse; then ruling Presbyters should do the acts of
civil Magistrates as having plain title to rule under Christ. Nor do I think
Mr. B. has answered these arguments or the rest, but that however he proves
Magistracy to be from Christ's appointment, and to be subordinate to his laws,
and accountable to him, and ought to act for him, yet not that the commission
of every lawful Magistrate is from him as Mediator. I think it will follow if
Mr. Bs. position be true, that supposing Christ had not been Mediator, there
had been no lawful Magistrate, and that Dominium fundatur in gratia, which was
heretofore denied. And since Christ is heir of all things, and believers only
are Christ's, and all theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. it would be considered whether
by parity of reason the Saints might not entitle themselves to all power, and
all men's estates, which was charged on Anabaptists at Munster. But I find I
digress, and therefore stop till more liberty draw me to a fuller handling of
it.

SECT. XX. Many learned men (with the Oxford Convocation) of former and later
times take Infant Baptism only for an unwritten tradition.
MR. B. proceeds to answer my Antidote, terms it a Corrective for a
circumforaneous Antidote: but the Antidote will appear to be good if taken,
notwithstanding his disgraceful term of Corrective without virtue. Page 299. He
prints two passages of Dr. Whitakers for the late Oxford Convocation to read,
and referres to the like in Davenant. But whatever Doctor Whitaker thought, yet
that the Ancients did take Baptism of Infants to have been an Apostolical
tradition unwritten seems to me, from that which is said in my Examen part. I.
sect. 5. not avoided by Mr. Ms Defense. In the Council of Basil in the oration
of the Cardinal of Ragusi it is asserted, Item nusquam legitur in canone
Scripturae S. quod parvulus recenter baptizatus, qui nec cord credit ad
justitiam, nec ore confitetur ad falutem, inter fideles and crudentes
computetur. Et nihilominus Ecclesia it a determinavit et statuit, etc. And, in
principip hujus Sacramenti baptizabantur solum illi qui per se sciebant fidem
interroganti respondere. To which purpose Walafridus Strabo many hundred years
before, and Vives about that time, whose words are alleged in my Exercitation,
the title page and sect 17. Erasmus resp. Archiep. Hispal. ad artic. object.
61. Sunt et alia innumera quae prisci non ausi sunt definire, sed suspensae
pronunciatione venerabantur, quod genus est an parvuliessent baptizandi. And
commonly the learned Papists do instance in Infant Baptism as an unwritten
tradition in force; and whereas it is objected that Bellarm. and others do
bring Scripture for it, Becan. manual. lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 24. answers, aliqua
possunt probariex Scriptura quando constat de vero and legitimo Scripture
sensu. So he says it is concerning Infan-baptism, which is proved from John 3.
5. but that the sense whereby to prove it is only manifest by tradition. Which
is confirmed in the Canon law and Schoolmen, an Infants Baptism was not
reckoned perfect, till the Bishop laid on hands, which act was called
Confirmation, to wit, of the imperfect Baptism in infancy. Molinaeus in his
Vates l. 2. c. 7. cites the canon did. 5. de. consecratione, as determining
that without the Sacrament of Confirmation no man is a full Christian. Can.
omnes, et Can. ut jejuni. Thomas 3. part summae, q. 72. art. 9. dicit hoc
sacramentum esse perfection^m Baptismi: innuens Baptismum esse imperfectum nisi
accesserit Confirmatio. Lumb. l. 4. sent. did. 7. A. omnes fideles per manus
impositionem Episcoporum post Baptismum accipere debent in Confirmatione
Spiritum sanctum ut pleni Christiani inveniantur. Bellarm. tom. 3. de sacr.
confirm. c. 12. confirmatio est complementum and perfectio baptismi. Lib. 2. de
effec. Sacram. c. 8. est Confirmatio quaedam perfectio and consummatio
Baptismi. Jewel Defense of the Apolog. page 218. allegeth it as Caistans tenet,
that an Infant, for that he wants instruction in faith, therefore has not
perfect Baptism. Consonant hereto is the conceit of the common people, that
they have not their full Christen dome all they be Bishopped. But that it may
appear even learned Protestants speak near the same, I will cite some of their
speeches; Among which I will forbear to recite the speeches of the Lord Brook
and Mr. Daniel Rogers alleged by me in my Exercit. sect. 18. and cleared in my
Apology from Mr. Rogers. his latter gloss, nor the opinion of Mr. Bedford, who
judged with the Romanists, that the Scripture gives us proof only of the
reasonableness of Infant Baptism, as I gather by Mr. Bs. I answer to him page
305. Dr. Field of the Church, fourth book chap. 20. The fourth kind of
inadition is the continued practice of such things as are neither contained in
the Scripture expressly, nor the examples of such practice expressly there
delivered, though the grounds, reasons, and causes of the necessity of such
practice be there contained, and the benefit or good that follows it. Of this
sort is the Baptism of Infants, which is therefore named a tradition, because
it is not expressly delivered in Scripture that the Apostles did baptize
Infants, nor any express precept there found that they should so do. Yet is
not this so received by bare and naked tradition, but that we find the
Scripture to deliver unto us the grounds of it. Doctor, Prideaux fasci.
Controv. Theol. loc. 4. sect. 3. q. 2. Paedobaptism rests on no other Divine
right then Episcopacy. Doctor Jeremy Tailor in his Liberty of prophesying sect.
18. number. 34. after he had ventilated the point on both sides says, there is
much more truth then evidence on our sides, meaning Paedobaptists. To all which
I will add the words of Theophilus Philakyriaco Loucardiensis, that is Mr.
Young, as I am informed, an eminent man in the late Assembly, and Mr. Marshals
friend that holp him in the first part of his Defense, in his Dies Dominica
lib. 1. c. 10. page 54. where he confesses ingenuously thus. Anabaptistas
Paedobaptismo oblainantes apertis testimoniis ferire non possumus, vesaniam his
teles comprimimus, 1. ex parallelo praecepto de Circumci sione. 2. ex praxi
Apostalica: quae quum aliquanda fit obscurior, consuetudinem totius Ecclesiae a
primaevis and historicis temporibus adjicimus: juae; licet praefractos
Anaboptistas non movebunt; apud prudentes, morigeros, and aejuos renum
aestimatores valebunt. So that according to him, the main weight lies on the
custom of the Church, which is falsely imagined to have been from the
Apostles, as in some measure is proved in my Examen part of the first, not yet
shaken by Mr. Ms. friend with all his insight Antiquity. From which I infer,
that the Ancients and learned before Zuinglius did account Infant Baptism to
have been an unwritten tradition, having reason from Scripture, not evident of
it self, but to be received for the determination of the Church, and that
because it was not fully perfect, therefore Confirmation was added, which was
retained in the English Liturgy as necessarily previous to the Lords Supper;
nor do many of the best learned Protestants speak much otherwise out of the
heat of dispute against Anabaptists. They are far from Mr. Bs. audaciousnesse
to assert it as having plain Scripture proof for it. The very hesitant
resolution of the most learned and considerate is enough to repress his vain
attempt, and to awaken those that depend on his proofs, and rest on their
Infant-sprinkling, and neglect the practice of being baptized after profession
of faith, being so expressly enjoined in Scripture as a prime important duty
for their salvation.

SECT. XXI. Many things are cleared about my conformity, Anabaptists necessity
to be baptized, the manner of dipping used by them, their standing to their
confession of faith, etc.
Page 241. he says, I begin with a complaint of my sufferings, whereas my
words were a gratulation for the change of my condition, and for my sad
complaints Mr B. makes them more then they were, and misrepresents me in the
time and reason of them. I let pass his jerkes about my health, and my
grievance of removing from Bewdley, his way to heaven and mine. Mr. B. page 242
would vindicate his passages I cite in the Epistle to the people of Bewdley:
but he passes over that which goes before in my Epistle, and makes no answer
to any of these three things, 1. That he assigns no sufficient note whereby to
discern the visible Church Membership of Infanrs of which he speaks. 2. That
there is no connection between his visible Church Membership of Infants and the
initial seal, without institution of the rite to be so used. 3. that in the
positive rites of the New Testament, there is no reason to be a rule to us, but
the appointers will in some precept or practice. And to show the precept to be
against him his own words are alleged and that rightly, however he interpret or
interlace them. His interpretation agrees not with his own passage Appendix
page 56. which says, neither are the seals useful till the accepting and
entering of the Covenant, where he places accepting before entering the
Covenant, and in both his passages speaks of accepting and entering with
consent, which Infants cannot do, page 243. he says, I seem to speak as if I
had some of my old Episcopal ceremonious spirit, though he hoped and believed
verily that I did not turn merely to the times, though with the times. To which
I answer. Mr. B. was a stranger to me till a little before these times, and
therefore is not fit to charge me with an Episcopal ceremonious spirit. Were it
worth while to trouble the world with it, I could show how I examined, as well
as at those years, I could the points in difference about which I was to
subscribe and conform, and however I was carried away with the stream, yet my
subscription was according to Doctor Burges his explication, and my conformity
upon Mr. Spruits grounds, I was no promoter of either, and in the worst time I
think none can say but I stuck fast to the main, the propagating the Gospel and
Conjunction with the Godly. And my opposing the Bishops began with the soonest
before this Parliament began, as soon as ever I deprehended the Bishops to be
wholly for their own rule, and adversaries to the preaching of the Gospel. And
for my nonconformity, reasons were given with some of the first in a Sermon at
a visitation at Lemster, November 24. 1641 since printed. And what I said the
ceremonies were more excusable then Paedobaptism is true, 1. They were not at
first urged otherwise then as indifferent things, Paedobaptism is urged as of
Divine appointment, and yet the chief principle of non-conformists does more
strongly plead against it then the ceremonies. 2. Paedobaptism not withstanding
the palliating salves of Mr. M. Mr. B. I find far more pernicious then the
ceremonies; it being, 1. The great occasion of the souldestroying presumption
whereby a great part of men perish, and the genuine hinderance of the
reformation of the Lords Supper and Church Communion. 2. it quite perverts the
end and use of baptism, which the ceremonies did only in some sort disorder. I
justify not the ceremonies, and therefore I need not answer the men he names,
but their writings yield strong arguments for me against Paedobaptism, and
better for me then for themselves. Mr. Bs. questions page. 243. are upon a
mistake, as if I counted all Pedobaptists mere formal teachers: whereas what I
speak was in tenderness to Bewdley, lest they out of averseness to my doctrine
should rest in a mere formal teacher, which I had reason to fear was the aim
of some, whom perhaps Mr. B. may find (though I wish he may not) he has
mistaken for godly men. Who perhaps might tell him what was not true, that the
power of godliness is much diminished since my coming to them, and their
profitable converse turned into heart-burnings, jealousies and fruitless
contendings. His argument page 244. is vain: for were it supposed that Infants
of believers were Church Members (which his whole book proves not) and it were
true that baptizers cannot otherwise have knowledge when those that are piously
educated begin to be Churchmembers, yet the practice of baptizing the children
of Christians ordinarily at years of discretion overturnes not the true end of
Baptism. For whether the true (to which he adds principal in a parenthesis, as
if true and principal were all one) end of Baptism be to be Christ's sign for
solemn admission of Church Members or Disciples, or to be an engaging seal as
elsewhere; yet both these ends are preserved if they be baptized many years
after their being Disciples. It is untrue, that it is my usual artifice to work
on the affections, of people when I mistrust my strength to work on men's
understandings; it may be more truly said of himself, who usually fills up the
vacuity of proofs with childish exclamations, admirations, etc. What I said and
preached from Acts 3. 23. is right, people do endanger their being cut off from
Gods people, who disobey Christ, in not being baptized when their duty is told
them, as the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected or made void the Counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized of John Luke 7. 30. I preach against
popish necessity of Baptism, and yet hold a necessity of precept for believers
to be baptized, yea and an ordinary necessity of means according to Christ's
doctrine, Mark 16. 16. I threaten no man for not yielding to my opinion, but
not yielding to a plain command of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. and his Apostle, Act.
2. 38. etc. acknowledged by all my Antagonists (except Socinianized) from which
Mr. Bs. observations concerning the backsliding of some cannot acquit him. Were
my words of any weight with him, I should advise him, more seriously to
consider whether this his writing be not a perverting the right ways of the
Lord. Page 245. that Mr. B. did not at least mainly direct the passage of his
Epistle against me, he will hardly believe that takes notice of the passage,
the time when, the texts produced, the accusation it self, the naming me, yea
or his own words so often in his book, as page 167. that he used the speeches
to preserve his friends from the danger of my error, that being a dying man he
might have no opportunity after to warn his people, that a fire being at
Bewdley he had reason to provide for Kederminster. And what though it were
intended against all that take my course, yet it might be directed mainly
against me, whom he singled out for commendation, but yet in such a manner, as
I may say with King James in his answer to Cardinal Perons oration, I defy the
praises that ascribe ability and moderation to me, and charge me not only with
gross absurdities, but also with little tender conscientius fear of erring,
playing the Devils part, besides other imputations, which if not directed
against me solely, yet he might have conceived would be taken as chargeable
upon me with others. By officiating Priest I meant not any other then mere
reading Ministers, by whom most were baptized, and it was not scornfully used
by me, nor like the language of Martix-Marpriest (which I abhor) but to in
imate that in that respect, as well as the manner of sprinkling and defect of
profession of faith, the Anabaptists so called had reason not to content
themselves with Infant Baptism. It is true, our English prelatical Divines do
account Baptism sufficiently administered that is so done, yea though it were by
a popish Priest or a Midwife, and I think Presbyterians and Independents do
agree with them: for they do not question their Baptism, nor seek any other,
though it is likely many have been so baptized. Yet I find Spondanus in his
Auctar. Chronol. ad annum 1604. reporting that in France, at Vapincum in the
Daulphinate, a Synod wherein famous Chamier was President, determined according
to a former Synod at Poictiers, that Baptism administered by expectants of
ordination was of no value, and to be iterated by Ministers themselves. Whether
this relation be true or not, yet my end in my expression being to give reason
why Anabaptists content not themselves with their pretended Infant Baptism, Mr.
B. does ill to interpret my words as scornful. I do now profess as I did not
long since at Coventrey to Mr. William Swayn (who I perceived since upon his
misconstruction has also alleged this passage in the end of Mr. Stephens book
entitled a precept for Baptism of Infants out of the New Testament,) that I do
reverence many Paedobaptists as godly Ministers of the Gospel far beyond my
self. Yet still I say, that they most injuriously inveigh against Anabaptists
for being baptized at years of discretion, and thereby necessitate them to
associate themselves, when the Baptism of Infants is confessed by the most
considerate not to have clear proof without help of Tradition unwritten; which
yet learned men contradict, the sprinkling they have received is not Baptism,
nor appointed by Christ, nor the person adminstring it to many Infants a
Preacher of the Gospel, and many learned men have made Baptism of Infants
imperfect without Confirmation, and Churches have thought it necessary to
retain it, yea Mr. B. would have something like it (which but for the dipping
in cold water is to the same purpose as rebaptizing) page 119. 120. which to me
discovers the imperfection and insufficiency of Infant Baptism to its end; and
though Mr. B. in answer to Mr. Bedford holding baptizing but once only a
tradition unwritten, undertakes to prove it fully from Scripture page 305.
(whose performances I find very short of his undertakings) yet Theophilus
Philokyriaces in the book forenamed page 54. says, sacrum baptismum non
repetendum semper statuit Ecclesia: de quo tamen interdicto in sacris tabulis
nihil occurrit, and therefore unless I will speak against my conscience, I must
needs say that it is ignorance or wilfulness holds Ministers and people in
their stiff asserting and practice of Infant Baptism, and the violent
opposition they make to their practice who are baptized or baptize believers
upon so great reason. He tells me it is an untruth that he said [dipping in
cold water is murder and adultery] about which I not contend, whether he used
those very terms only, but so far as my memory retains, and the notes I
could get relate, those words were used by him without addition of [the
ordinary practise] or [naked.] But my meaning in my denial of his speech, was
to justify dipping as used by those termed Anabaptists, whose baptizing so
far as I have known it, has been seemly with coverings fit to be quickly put
off when they come out of the water, and with meet provision for the health of
persons, not tying persons to cold water in the open air or any other
inconvenient thing to health and modesty, but only requiring the person to be
under water resemhling Christ's burial and resurrection according to Romans 6. 3,
4. Col. 2. 12. as the stream of the expositors do conceive the allusion. And
therefore I cannot be of opinion that the ordinary practice of baptizing by
dipping the whole body in cold or warm water openly or privately is either a
breacb of the sixth or seventh Commandment, unless he condemn Christ and his
Apostles as appointing and practicing a rite contrary to Gods commands, and be
of an opinion, which is refuted by frequent experience of aged weak persons men
and women baptized in cold stormy times in the open air in cold running water
without detriment to their health to mine one knowledge. Nevertheless were it
that any person did conceive, that he ought to be baptized naked, as vossius
These. Theol. and Hist. disp. 1. de baptismo thesi 6. 7. 8. shows in the first
ages men women and Infants were, yet he may find there how provision was made
against immodesty and murder, and I wonder that either Mr. B. or any other
considerate man that knows how persons go into bathes frequently, should
imagine so evil of a persons going into the water but once in course habit in a
penitent form not without grave company, not staying a minute in the water,
that it could not be performed without such danger as Mr. B. would possess
people with, in the second part of his book chap. 12. 13. His satirical I had
almost said scurrilous quips I let pass. I did not charge Mr. B. with
endeavors to drive me or others out of the land, or destroy us, but I think
the instigators to the ordinance against Heresies, have had such minds. And
whereas he says page 247. I tell him of his danger and elsewhere that I
threaten him, is a suggestion that I cannot yet guess whence it should arise.
The citation out of his book sect. 3. of my Antidote was to show M. B.
paraphrased Mat. 28. 19, to like purpose as I do. That the untruths he charge
me with page 248. 252. were not such is showed before. The matter of the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh sections being argumentative, is to be referred
to the first part of his book. Page 257. Mr. B. applies that to one term of
calling some Sects which I said of the rest of his discourse, especially the
accusation of societies proving wicked, that it has a manifest tincture of
reviling. He charge my conscience as having a flaw for insinuating that he
called all Independents a Sect, and that for denying the power of a Synod to
excommunicate, whereas he plainly limited his speech to that Independency which
gives the people to govern by vote, which is the same with separatism. To which
I reply, I took it, and do still, that in the books of Independents it is their
received tenet, that excommunicating however it be not without officers, yet is
in the people, from Mat. 18. 17. but that whence they are named Independents by
Mr. Her'le and others, is from denying superiority of Synods in governing, and
appeals to them, and if a Sect then from thence as their distinguishing tenet.
However for the tenet of the peoples governing by vote, I know no reason why
they should be called a Sect rather then their opposites. The excommunication
which the Scripture speaks, of so far as I discern, is no where made a part
of government, or of the Elders office any more then the Peoples. In antiquity
it is apparent out of Cyprian, etc. that the people had a great hand in
Elections, Excommunications, Absolutions. Nor is a person a Separatist for that
tenet, but for dividing practices: other things in that section are answered
before; To that page 259. of my logic, I say he is mistaken in it. I know this
water to be cold because I feel its coldness, this person to be a false
teacher because I hear from him false doctrine. The subject is not the
suppositum as a substance but as a substance with its adjunct. I prove not a
wall to be a wall by its whiteness seen, but a white wall, and this is not
idem per idem. The Apostle shows the evil lives of Heretics for better
prevention of their practices, not to prove them Heretics [A ravening wolfe]
signifies neither error of doctrine, nor visiousnesse of life, but the effect
or end of the persons described, to wit, destroying souls, often also lives and
estates. That the false Prophets have sheep clothing, that is, fair shows,
though inwardly are ravening wolves, overthrows Mr. Bs. interpretation he
pleades so much for, except he think they can have sheeps clothing, that is
fair shows of a good life, who are openly wicked, so as by the fruits of their
wickedness they may be known, which me thinks comes near a contradiction. Mr.
B. often says, he takes me not to be an Heretic nor a mere Anabaptist except
they divide the Church. But he taking me for a divider of the Church, for my
error must of necessity take me for an Heretic if he stand to the descriptions
he there says he likes, so that I cannot nor any Anabaptist or Independent
long look to be out of his black roll of Heretics. Page 260. Mr. B. says, I
make his question an affirmation, and so does he himself that tells us it
speaks what a rarity it is according to his reading that any society of
Anabaptists has not proved wicked. But I make it a peremptory determination,
where as it is neither omnino dubitantis, nor yet determinantis, but provo
cantis. Nor did I say it was a most peremptory determination, but, no man will
I think take his interrogation for any other then a most peremptory
determination, which I think is true, the words carrying a plain show of a
peremptory determination, and being written to the people of Kederminster were
not likely to be a provocation of Anabaptists to look over their own
intelligence, but a resolute assurance, that there has not been known a
society of Anabaptists since the world first knew them, that proved not wicked.
And therefore I put no false sense on his words, as he falsely charge me, nor
do I as he says, call him dog, I only say, like a right-English mastive he
flies in the face, etc. not comparing him to a dog, but his bold act to the
manner of English mastives boldness, whereby he is no more called dog, then
Christ is thief, when he says, I come as a thief, Revel. 3. 3. To that which
he says page 261. of my cheat, I have answered. To his question, Did no body
contradict Infant Baptism for so many hundred years? and yet is it an
innovation. I answer yes: and I think Mr. B. will say of keeping an Easter,
Lent-fast, Infant-communion, Monkish profession, Episcopacy, at least some of
these are innovations not contradicted for so many hundred years. For his
testimonies page 262, 263, 264. for the antiquity of Infant Baptism, to the
chiefest of them answer has been made, that the eldest of them is not till the
third age, that they only urge it and practice it in case of evident danger of
present death to save from perishing; that the conceit of peculiar privilege to
Infants of believers is a late innovation: some of them are merely impertinent
without Mr. Bs. vain infernece, some Heathenish rites of expiating Infants are
unseeming Mr. B. to allege, they being from Satan. My testimonies page 264. of
Bernard, Petrus Cluniacensis, Eckbertus, are vindicated before, Strabo does not
say that before Austins time, Infant Baptism was not, but only, in the first
times, nor is it likely that he did mistake Austins age 10 years. That the
Copies put 25. for 35. Nor do I think he was mistaken in the reason of Austins
deferring his Baptism, but that the reason he gives was one though not the sole
reason of it, and the testimony of Walafridus Strabo though later then
Augustine, yet he giving himself to search out and to write of ancient rites,
is of more credit concerning the Antiquity of Infant Baptism then Augustines,
who as I show Apology. sect. 6. and elsewhere, did often inconsiderately call
that an Apostolical tradition, which was commonly observed in his days within
the compass of his acquaintance. Cyprians speech if it be rightly brought by
Mr. B. will prove all still-born Infants to be lost, being not of the visible
Church Catholic. That which Mr. B. page 266. says, fully satisfies him, part
of it is false, the rest so frivolous, that I can impute his satisfaction to no
other cause then his inconsiderateness. The very same or like plea will serve
for communion of young children in which yet Mr. B. is not satisfied. But to me
it is very good satisfaction that baptizing of Infants is but an innovation,
neither agreeing with the institution of Christ, nor the Apostles practice, nor
known till it began to be conceived necessary to give grace and to save from
perishing, yet then dissuaded and not practiced but in case of iminent danger
of death, nor maintained on any other ground till Zuinglius his days. What the
Churches of Anabaptists so called have done in London that Mr. B. should so
much lament, till I know what it is I take to be a Calumny. That Anabaptists
have been in danger by the instigations of Preachers and writers it is a marvel
to me, that Mr. B. should not understand, who can hardly be ignorant whence the
ordinance against blasphemies and heresies came. That any of my Antagonists are
turned out of house and home is unknown to me, surely not for nonconformity to
rebaptizing, most certain, that if any such thing has been done it was never
by my procurement, nor I think any of the Churches of Anabaptists. That which
Mr. B. page 267. says, that the same men that subscribe the Anabapiists
confession have many of them written other kind of doctrine elsewhere. I doubt
whether it be true, I find him only naming Paul Hobson page 147. and citing
some passages of his, of which that which is most liable to exception Mr. B.
himself gives us this excuse in his Saints evelasting rest part. 2. chap. 1.
sect. 2. page 169. not understanding that they affirm and deny the same thing
in several expressions: so that however his expressions be dangerous, yet it is
probable he held not the Socinian opinion, which he contradicted in the
subscription to the confession, but only discovered his weakness. And yet Mr.
B. I think is not ignorant, that so holy and learned a man as M. Pemble near
the beginning of his Vindicae gratiae has a like conceit of Gods never hating
the elect, but being reconciled from eternity, taking reconciliation for an
immanent act in God: which as I imagine Mr. B. would excuse in Mr. Pemble, so
might he with a like charity excuse the other in Paul Hobson. What he cites out
of Cyprian I wish Mr. B. had Englished it, and that both Anabaptists and their
opposites would learn it. Page 268. he says if my book of scandals were read,
men may perhaps receive a preservative from my own hand from the danger of my
opinion, to which I say, I wish my book of Scandals were more read, nor do I
fear that my doctrine will be the less embraced for reading it, if my
interpretation of my own words justified even by Mr. B. be received, as I show
before. Page 269. he tells us the Levellers were Anabaptists, but I cannot yet
learn of any of them he names except Den that was so: though I deny not but
there might be sundry of them such, likely of the Free-willers disclaimed by
the seven Churches in London, and that they were but few in comparrison of the
rest: by the Newes-books I gather the Levelling business was carried on by
such as were in no gathered Church, but lived above ordinances. As for Mr. Bs.
dark criminations I can give no answer to them, unless I could plow with his
heifer and find out his riddle: But my hope is those great instruments of God
to break the enemies of those that are termed Sectaries, though Mr. Bs. words
seem to forebode and misdeem evil of them, will and do prove better then he
discribes them, though I imagine they be not Anabaptists. Nor do I like Mr. Bs.
obscure satirical criminations, they having some show of a malevolent mind.
Whatever Mr. B. may conceive of the danger of the Anabaptists way in other
things, I am sure if they would keep themselves only to this to be baptized
upon profession of faith, they should be in a safe way, even in the way of
Christ.

SECT. XXII. The speech [that no one Country is gathered into Christ's visible
Church] contains no malignancy to Christ, but is a manifest truth.
MOst of that which is in Mr. Bs. answer to the last section of my Antidote
has either been replied to before or in some other part of my writings, or
will fall into the main of the dispute, wherein I doubt not but I shall fully
vindicate my argument against the visible Church Membership of Infants, from
the different cause of the Jewish and Christian Church, though the thing be so
manifest, to wit, that the Christian Church was otherwise gathered then the
Jewish, that I see nothing but mere wrangling in the questions Mr. B.
propounds. And to his words page 279, 280. Sir, if you were my Father, I would
tell you that when you say, Christ makes no one City, Country, Tribe, his
Disciples, you speak most malignantly, and wickedly against the Kingdom and
dignity of my Lord Jesus. I answer, I meet so often with Mr. Bs. high charges,
upon palpable mistakes and weak proofs, that I fear his misguided zeal or
natural distemper has brought him to an habit of ill-speaking. My words were
not as Mr. B. sets them down, but thus [no one Country, or City, or Tribe
together, were gathered by the Apostles or other Preachers into the Christian
visible Church, but so many of all as the Lord vouchsafed to call by his word
and spirit] which has neither wickedness nor malignancy against the Kingdom
and dignity of the Lord Jesus; but a manifest truth expressly taught in the
Holy Scripture as congruous to the glory of God and the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.
26, 27. 28, 29. Not many wise men, etc. Ergo not the whole Nation, Revel. 5. 9.
out of every Nation, Ergo not the whole Nation, as he did the Jews in the
Wilderness. The relations in the Gospel and Acts of the Apostles plainly prove
it true, that by John Baptist, Christ, the 12. and 70. Disciples was no entire
Nation, City, Country or Tribe gathered into the visible Church-christian, but
parts of them, and those fewer then the adversaries, who in every place were so
numerous (when the Christians are counted at some few thousands) as that even
at Jerusalem and elsewhere they prevailed to disperse Christians by
persecution. Nor do Mr. Bs. questions prove, that into the Christian visible
Church any one whole Country, City or Tribe, young or old, men and women, are
gathered by the Apostles and other Preachers, as Moses did gather together the
Jewish Nation, Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 29. But says Mr. B. 1. Has he noi commanded to
Disciple Nations? I answer, yes: to make Disciples of all Nations by Preaching
the Gospel to every Creature, as it is, Mark 16. 15. but no where by civil
authority to gather a whole City, Country or Tribe, and to draw them into a
National or City Covenant together, old and young, but to offer Christ and to
baptize so many as are willing to embrace him. 2. Says Mr. B. Has not the
Father promised to give the Heathen or Nations for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2. and that Nations
shall serve him? Answ. He has, and it is fulfilled, but not in Mr. Bs. sense,
as if one whole Nation, City, Country or Tribe were gathered together in the
manner Moses brought into Covenant all the Jewish Nation, but as the Apostle
speaks by ministering the Gospel, Romans 15. 16. the Gentiles, that is believers
among them, are an offering to God, glorify God, ver. 9. praise him, trust in
him, ver. 11, 12. so as it was foretold in Abraham all Nations should be
blessed, which is expounded Gal. 3. 7, 8, 9. Romans 4. 17, 18. believers of all
other Nations as well as Jews. 3. And that the Kingdoms of the world shall
become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ? Ans. I read those words Rev.
11. 15. but I find the time of fulfilling to be when the seventh Angel has
founded, which some say is not till the world to come. So Mr. Seager of the
world to come, part. 1. sect. 8. And this is not improbable from ver. 18. and
Revel. 10. 6, 7. The New Annot, faith thus, Antichrist is weakened, and Christ
has begun to take the Kingdom out of his hand, and shall have a visible
Church like an Empire in all the known world, and that to the end, but that it
is not yet* 4. And do you not see it fulfilled before your eyes? Are not
Bewdley, Kederminster, etc. and England (till of late) as fully Christ's
Disciple, and so Church Members, as the Jews were in Covenant with God, and so
Church Members? Answ. If by [it] be meant the prophecies Psalm. 2. 8. and 72.
11. I see them fulfilled, though not in Mr. Bs. sense: but the prophecy Revel.
11. 15. I see not yet fulfilled. I see at Bewdley, Kederminster, in England,
people who generally are called Christians, but I do not see that all, old and
young, are Disciples or Church Members, or ought to be so accounted, or that
they were ever brought into such a Covenant as the Jews, or-ought to be
accounted. Church Members by virtue of such a Covenant. There is not a word in
my writings to that effect. Mr. B. charge me [that I would not have Princes
and Masters do what Abraham and Moses did, in bringing the people of Israel
into 'Covenant with God] but I say, that should they do so, yet the Infants are
not thereby to be accounted visible Church Members in a Christian Church. The
commission to gather the Christian Church was not given to the Emperor, but
Apostles. The Apostles, it is true, were sent to proselyte them that were no
Chuch-members, and yet. they were sent to proselyte, or in the phrase of
Scripture to Disciple, the visible Church Members of the Jewish Church as well
as the Gentiles. What I said, I still say, that the different Church-call of
the Jewish and Christian Churches is enough to show a different Church State,
and consequently the argument is not good from the Jewish Infants visible
Church Membership to ours. If Mr. Bs. judgment be not so commandable, as to
assent to what I say, it is so much the less commendable. The speech of Mr.
Herle, and the jest out of Matthiolus are misapplied. When he says, why may we
not write plainly against one another judgment by a loving consent? He may
know that it was my desire it should have been so, that it was not so, was from
himself. He that believes he has showed love in this his writing, is very
credulous. For the rest, if Mr. B. will have the patience and indifferency of
judgment which is meet, he may see an answer to his allegations about Gods
mercy to Infants, and the repeal of their visible Church-memship. If he remain
in his opinion (which I much fear, knowing him sowell as I do) and I in mine,
we must leave our writings to others to judge, and especially to that day which
shall declare every man's work being revealed in fire. In the mean time
(sleighting his vain curse, which is page 217.) my prayer for him as my self
is, that we may do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

FINIS.
Cyprian, and the other Colleagues which in the Council were present, to the
number of 66. to brother Fidus greeting.
MOst dear brother, we have read thy letters, in which thou have signified
concerning one Victor a Presbyter, that Therapius our Colleague in a time not
ripe, and with overmuch haste, has granted him peace, before he had done full
penance, and satisfied the Lord God, against whom he had offended. Which thing
has enough moved us, that he has departed from the authority of our Decree,
that before the allowed and full time of fatisfaction, and without the asking
and privity of the common sort, no infirmity urging, nor necessity compelling,
peace should be granted to him. But upon counsel weighed long with us, it was
enough to chide Therapius our Colleague in that he rashly did this; and to have
instructed him; that for hereafter he do no such thing. Yet we have not
thought, that the peace however once granted by a Priest of God should be taken
away; and for this cause we have permitted Victor to use the Communication
granted to him. But for what belongs to the cause of Infants, whom thou have
said should not be baptized within the second or third day in which they were
born; and that the law of ancient Circumcision is to be considered, so as that
thou should not think him that is born should be baptized and hallowed
within the 8. day; it seemed far otherwise to all in our Council. For unto
this which thou thoughtest should be done, none of us have agreed, but all have
rather judged that the mercy and grace of God is to be denied to none that are
born of mankind. For when the Lord in his Gospel says, The son of man came not
to destroy men's souls, but to save them, as much as in us lies if it may be, no
soul is to be lost. For what is wanting to him, who is once formed in the womb
by the hand of God? For to us and in our eyes they which are born do seem to
receive growth according to the course of secular days: but what ever things
are made by God are perfected by the Majesty and work of God the Maker. Lastly,
the faith of Divine Scripture declares to us, that there is one evenness of the
Divine gift to all, whether Infanrs or elder in age. When Helisaeus upon the
Infant son of the Shunamite widow which lay dead so laid himself when he prayed
to God, that head was applied to head, and face to face, and the members of
Helisaeus spread over were joined to each of the members of the little one, and
the feet to its feet; Which thing if it be thought on according to the quality
of our birth and body, an Infant cannot be equalled to a person grown and come
to full stature, neither could he close and fit little members to greater: But
their Divine and Spiritual evenness is expressed, that all men are even and
equal when they are made By God, and our age may have difference in increase of
bodies according to the world, not according to God: unless if the grace also
which is given to the baptized be given less or more according to the age of
receivers: where as the holy Spirit is equally given to all, not by measure,
but out of tenderness and fatherly indulgence. For God as he accepts not a
person, so neither does he accept of age, since he affordes himself alike to all
with a balanced equality for the obtaining of heavenly Grace. And for what
thou have said the footstep of an Infant made in the first days of his birth
is not clean, because every one of us as yet is afraid to kiss him, neither do
we think this to be a hindrance to the giving of heavenly Grace: for it is
written, all things are clean to the clean; neither ought any one to be afraid
to do that which God has vouchsafed. For although the Infant is yet new from
the birth, yet it is not so that one in giving grace and granting peace ought
to be afraid to kiss him, since in the kiss of an Infant every one of us
according to his religion ought to think of the very hands of God as yet fresh,
which we in some: sort kiss in man now formed and newly born, when we embrance
that which God has made. For as for what was observed in Jewish carnal
Circumcision the 8. day, is a Sacrament foregoing in a shadow and in an image,
but is now complete in the truth, Christ being come. For because the day in
which the Lord should rise and quicken and give us Spiritual Circumcision was
the 8. day, that is, the first after the Sabbath, this 8. day, that is, the
first after* the Sabbath and the Lords day went before in an image, which image
ceased, the truth after ^^^ing upon it, and the Spiritual Circumcision being
given us. For which reason we think none ought to be hindered from obtaining the
grace of Christ, nor that the Spiritual Circumcision ought to be hindered by the
carnal, but that every man altogether is to be admitted to the grace of Christ,
since Peter also speaks and says in the Acts of the Apostles, The Lord has
said to me, none is to be said to be common and unclean. But if any thing might
hinder men from the obtaining grace, more grievous sins might hinder grown men
and commen to full stature and elder in birth. But moreover, if to most
grievous offenders, and those that sin much before God, when after they believe
remission of sins is given, and no man is withheld from Baptism and from grace,
how much more ought not an Infant to be withheld, who being new born has sins
no whit, but that being born according to Adam carnally he drew on him in his
first nativity the contagion of death of old: who in this respect does more
easily come to receive remission of sins, because not his own sias but another
are forgiven him? And therefore most dear brother, this was our sentence in the
Council, that none by us ought to be prohibited from Baptism, and the grace of
God, who is mercifult and kind and tender to all. Which as it is to be observed
and held concerning Infants themselves and newly born, who in this respect do
deserve more of our help and 'Divine mercy, because in the first beginning
their birth presently crying and weeping they do nothing else but pra We wish
to thee most dear brother always health.

For Mr. Richard Baxter at Kederminster.
Sir, some of my neighbors conceived it would be their best way to resolve
their doubts about Baptism to know what arguments you could bring for
Infant Baptism, and against their being baptized, notwithstanding the pretended
Baptism they had in Infancy. Whereupon with my privity one came to you, upon
whose relating to me your answer, I wrote to you, and upon receipt of your
letter to me think good to let you understand, that I said not, I utterly
refused open dispute, but that I affected it not, it being fit for Schools, and
not common auditors, entered into usually with animosities and eagerness to
obtain a supposed victory, managed with heat and multitude of words, with
answers and replies not so delibrate as were requisite to settle any ones
judgment, they being misapprehended by Auditors who commonly take him to have
the better who speaks the most, ending usually in wrangling or something like
it, followed with misreports, accompanied w^^^ disorders and inconveniences
insomuch that except in case of betraying truth by declining a dispute, I can
hardly bring my self to yield to it. And howsoever you conceive of my
advantages, you may if you will, and perhaps do know, that you have such
advantages in your ready wit and speech, and the favor and general acclamation
to any thing that is said for the superstition of Infant Baptism as to bring
things so to pass, that the event shall be crying down truth and disgrace of
my person. Nor have your disparaging speeches of my writings without
animadversions on them communicated to me, or your carriage at or not long
after the receipt of my letter, encouraged me to hope for all candor from you
in this matter. For preaching, since it belongs to you to maintain the Divine
institution of Infant Baptism, I shall be willing to examine what you say, when
you have said what you think good for it if I may obtain a copy of your Sermon
which you will own; and if it satisfy me, I shall confess it, if not in a
Sermon in the same place or elsewhere I shall give a distinct and plain answer
to it. For writing (which I like best) I desire not to put you to any tedious
or volu^^nous way, but in the most compendious way of syllogisms, yea if it may
^^, that you put in one medium the strength of all you can. Of the sho^^
^ispatch you desire, you may assure your self who are to be the opponent in
^^^oint, my answer will be as short as your argument will permit, and ^^^^^e
you conttact it keeping to the point, the more satisfactory it will (...) I am

Yours in our Lord JOHN TOMBS
Bewdley, Sept. 10. 16

