CHRIST'S Commination against SCANDALIZERS: OR, A Treatise wherein the
Necessity, Nature, Sorts, and Evils of Scandalizing are clearly and fully
handled. With resolution of many questions, especially touching the abuse of
Christian liberty: Showing that vengeance is awarded against such as use it to
the grievance of their weak Brethren. By John Tombs. Minister of Gods Word.

1 Cor. 8. 12. When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
conscience, ye sin against Christ. Printed at London for E. Forest, and are
to be sold by Richard Royston at the sign of the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1641.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN LORD VISCOUNT SCUDAMORE.
Right Honorable,
IT is necessary that Christians should be warned of sin against God, lest
they incur his wrath. And withal it is as necessary that the sins of which
men are warned should be plainly, and distinctly declared. Without the one
men's consciences will sin without fear: without the other they will fear
where no fear is: the defect of the former will make conscien^es secure: the
want of the la^ter perpetually unquiet, o^ settled in error. And errors in
conscience produce many great evils not only ad intra in men's own souls,
but also ad extra in humane affairs. The endeavoring then t^ direct men's
consciences in practique cases cannot but be a needful and charitable work.

And surely as it is useful in other arguments, so very needful in this of
scandals. Few there be that heed the terrible commination of our Savior
against scandalizers, and therefore are affected as if by transmigration they
had Cains spirit, when he said nunquid ego fratris mei custos? Whence it is
that offenses are multiplied daily, many souls perish, alienations of mind,
schisms, jarres and wars too arise. We wish, we pray, I would we might
say we hope for a true union and consolidation of men's minds. Certainly it is
not to be hoped without removeall of scandals. On the other side the grievous
threatening of our Lord Christ does so affright many consciences, that they are
almost irresolute in every thing they do before men, as fearing least there be
anguis in herba, some scandal in it. In my small reading and experience I find
few doubts of conscience, concerning men's patent actions, in the resolving of
which the difficulty has not most of all rested on this point of scandals.

Which considerations moved me to apply some part of my studies to clear this
argument, and to remove this evil. And having in this form fashioned a
treatise, I cannot say polished, it is now produced into the light for public
good by discovery of truth. Such as it is I humbly present to your Lordship, as
to a person made honorable not only by your high dignities, but also by your
noble virtues, manifested abroad in your employments of State, and in this
your native country (wherein as in your proper Orb you shined many years
tanquam stella primae magnitudinis) by your eminent prudence and integrity in
government, and by your rare, pious, and large munificence in restoring tithes,
and bestowing lands and building on the Church, and indeared to my self by
reason of that noble favor by which your Honor has been pleased to cheer
me in this very great, and very poor Cure, in and under which I now labor.
Which I beseech your Honor to accept of as from him that rejoices in the
prosperity of your Honor and your noble House, and studies to acquit himself

Your Honors in most humble observance JOHN TOMBS.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
FOR preventing of mistakes I entreat thee to take notice. 1. That whereas I
find the word [Scandall] in common speech and some writings used as if it did
signify a slander or evil report, I conceive that such use of the word
[Scandall] in that sense is different from the proper notation and use thereof:
and therefore is omitted by me in this treatise. For though a slander may be a
scandal, yet ratio nominis, or the notion and conceit of them is different;
the one signifying a false report of another in respect of the speaker whether
the party slandered know of it or not, be offended or not: the other generally
signifies all such acts whereby men's minds are harmed in reference to the
person harmed, as I have declared chap: 1. and 2. of this treatise. 2. That
whereas I use the term [regard] sundry times, especially chap. 4. in such a
sense as it carries Romans 14. 6. where our last translatours by it render
[(...)] used there by the Apostle, and I say such a scandal is not to be
regarded or not regardeable, my meaning is not as if it were not simply to be
regarded, but in every respect to be neglected, so as that we should not at
all be bound to be greived for another harm caused by his own wilfulness
or ill disposition, nor to pray or use other Christian means to redress it,
but only this, that we are not so to regard it as to conceive our selves bound
in conscience to omit our action, or to charge our selves with sin if we do
that thing upon which scandal follows in the cases there mentioned. 3. That
there are in the print sundry faults escaped in the few Hebrew and Greek and
Latin words, in the running title, in the numbers of sections in the margint,
in the interpunctions, and letters, which because I conceive the learned will
easily amend, and they are not likely either to hinder or pervert the
understanding of the rest, I have thought best not to burden the table of
Errata with them, but have collected these few that follow as the most
material.

Errata.
PAge 8. line 21. for bastes read beasts. p. 19. l. 6. for Sandalls r.
Scandalls. p. 76. l. 5. for and r. are. p. 77. l. 3. dele then. p. 80. l. 11.
for due it r. due to it. p. 104. l. 18. for occasion r. occasion of. p. 118. l.
8. for it that r. in that. p. 285. l. 15. for wise r. wife. p. 392. l. 12. for
they r. there. p. 410. l. 18. for changes r. charge. p. 433. l. 18. for
intrence r. entrench.

The Contents.
CAP. 1. Of the meaning of the Text, and the necessity of Scandalls.
Parag: 1. THe speaker and occasion of the words. Parag. 2. The partition of
the Text. Parag. 3. The explication of the word Scandal in the proper
acception. Parag. 4. Scandal in the Scripture use. Parag. 5. Of the sorts of
effective scandal. Parag. 6. The necessity of scandalls. Parag. 7. In respect
of scandalizers. Parag. 8. Of persons scandalized. Parag. 9. Of Satan. Parag.
10. Of God. Parag. 11. For what ends ordered by him. Parag. 12. The
application. 1. To justify religion notwithstanding the scandals of the
professors of it. Parag. 13. To magnify the providence of God. Parag. 14. To
teach men to walk circumspectly. Parag. 15. To wait for Christ's coming.
CAP. 2. Of the woe belonging to scandalizers in general.
Parag. 1. THe explication of the words of the second proposition of the Text.
Parag. 2. That a woe belongs to scandalizers. Parag. 4. Who are scandalizers,
and to what scandalizing woe belongs. Parag. 5. What woe belongs to them.
Parag. 6. 7. Why a woe belongs to them. Parag. 8. Application 1. to manifest
the danger of scandalizers. Parag. 9. To admonish them of their sin. Parag.
10. Directions to avoid it.
CAP. 3. Of scandalizing in special by sinful example.
Parag. 1. SCandalizing distributed into four ways. Parag. 2. A woe belongs
to them that scandalize by sinful example. Parag. 3. What actions of sinful
example do scandalize. Parag. 4. How they do scandalize. Parag. 5. Why a woe
belongs to such. Parag. 6. Application 1. to move them to mourn that
scandalize by sinful example. Parag. 7. 2. To move men to take heed of
scandalizing by sinful example. Parag. 8. 3. And others that they be not
scandalized by sinful example. Parag. 9. Directions to prevent it.
CAP. 4. Of scandalizing in special by abuse of liberty in things lawful.
Parag. 1. A Woe belongs to scandalizers by abuse of liberty in things lawful.
Parag. 2. Reasons thereof out of S. Paul's Epistles. Parag. 3. The difficulty
of this point, and quaeres propounded to clear it. Parag. 4. Answer of the
first quaere, what are things lawful and indifferent, and what is our liberty
in their use. Parag. 5. What ways our liberty in things indifferent may be
restrained. Parag. 6. The summary of the Apostles resolutions about scandal in
the use of things indifferent delivered Romans 14. Parag. 7. And 1. Cor. 8. 9.
10. Chapters. Parag. 8. Quest. 1. Who are to avoyde scandalizing by abuse of
liberty in things indifferent. Parag. 9. Quest. 2. Scandalizing of whom by such
abuse is to be avoided. Parag. 10. Quest. 3. Whether strong ones are obnoxious
to such scandal. Parag. 11. Quest. 4. Who are to be accounted weak ones not
to be thus scandalized. Parag. 12. Quest. 5. What evil consequent on our
actio^ makes scandalizing of this sort. Parag. 13. Quest. 6. How long we are to
forbear our liberty for fear of scandal. Parag. 14. Quest. 7. What foresight
of scandal consequent is necessary to make a man capable of scandalizing this
way. Parag. 15. Quest. 8. Whether the restraint of our liberty for fear of
scandal be universal. Parag. 16. Quest. 9. Whether scandal may be by
omission of the use of our liberty. Parag. 17. Quest. 10. Whether a community
or a Magistrate may be scandalized. Parag. 18. Quest. 11. What we are to do
when there is danger of scandal one way, and of disobedience to the Magistrate
another way. Parag. 19. Quest. 12. What we are to do in case of scandal
either by using or not using our liberty. Parag. 20. Quest. 13. What we are to
do when the forbearing of our liberty indangers the loss of it. Parag. 21.
Quest. 14. What we are to do when there is danger of life by not using our
liberty, of scandal by using it. Parag. 22. Quest. 15. What we are to do when
there is fear of scandal to some, and hope of good to others by use of our
liberty. Parag. 23. Quest. 16. How far we are to regard the scandal that
arises from mere fancy without any probable reason. Parag. 24. Application 1.
To manifest the uncharitableness of scandalizers by abuse of their liberty.
Parag. 25. 2. To dissuade them from this sin, with directions against it.
Parag. 26. 3. To admonish men that they be not scandalized by another use of
his liberty, and directions to that end.
CAP. 5. Of scandalizing in special by enticing practices.
Parag. 1. A Woe belongs to scandalizers by enticing practices. Parag. 2. How
men scandalize by enticing practices. Parag. 3. Difference of scandalizers by
enticing practices in respect of the part they act therein. Parag. 4.
Difference of scandalizers by enticing practices in respect of the motives
which incite them. Parag. 5. Difference of scandalizers by enticing practices
in respect of the matter wherein they scandalize. Parag. 6. The reasons of the
woe due to this scandalizing. Parag. 7. Application 1. To manifest the great
guilt of scandalizers in this kind. Parag. 8. 2. To admonish men to take heed
of scandalizing this way. Parag. 9. 3. And those that are apt to be
scandalized.
CAP. 6. Of scandalizing in special by persecution.
Parag. 1. A Woe belongs to scandalizers by persecution. Parag. 2. How
beleivers are persecuted. Parag. 3. How persecutions do scandalize. Parag. 4.
What woe belongs to scandalizers by persecution. Parag. 5. Application 1. To
discover the danger of such scandalizers. Parag. 6. 2. To deter them from it.
Parag. 7. 3. To advise them that are in danger of being scandalized by
persecutions.
CAP. 7. Of the aggravation of the woe belonging to scandalizers.
Parag. 1. THe explication of the third proposition in the text. parag. 2.
Those that believe in Christ are little ones. Parag. 3. Some less then others
in spiritual gifts and graces. Parag. 4. In power and dignity. Parag. 5.
Beleivers commonly less then others in the world. Parag. 6. Little in their
own eyes. Parag. 7. Application 1. To advertise us of the estate of beleivers
in this world. Parag. 8. 2. To teach beleivers contentedness in a low
condition. Parag. 9. 3. To quicken their hope after Heaven. Parag. 10. 4. To
aggravate the sin of scandalizing beleivers. Parag. 11. That the woe due to
scandalizers of beleivers is greater then any temporal death. Parag. 12. Who
are to be accounted beleivers in Christ. Parag. 13. Why so great vengeance is
awarded to scandalizers of beleivers in Christ. Parag. 14. Application 1. To
manifest Christ's tender care over his people. Parag. 15. 2. To teach us to
commit our cause to him when we suffer for him. Parag. 16. 3. To advertise
scandalizers of the greatness of their sin and punishment. Parag. 17. 4. To
deter them from their sin.
VAE SCANDALIZANTIUM.
Luke. 17. 1. 2. 1 Then said he to the Disciples, it is impossible but that
offenses will come, but woe unto him through whom they come.

2 It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
cast into the sea than that he should offend one of these little ones.


CAP. 1.
Of the meaning of the Text, and the necessity of Scandalls.
THe words of the wise (says Solomon) are as goades, 1. Eccl. 12. 11 The
speaker and occasion of the words.
and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies: which are given from one
Shepherd: Such words are these: the words of the wise, even of him who is
Wisdom it self, given from one Shepherd, even him who is (...), the chief
and only Shepherd, and Bishop of souls to the masters of assemblies, the holy
Apostles, to be, as goades to provoke unto love, and as nails to fasten men in
unity. All the words of this preacher were acceptable words, and although all
are not written, yet all that are written are upright, even words of truth.
This present speech was conceived so useful, that two of the Evangelists have
preserved the first part: S. Luke here, and Saint Matthew Chapter 18. 7. and three
the latter part* S. Luke here, S. Matthew with some inversion of the order used
by S. Luke, and Saint Mark, chapter 9. 42. The occasion of this speech is
distinctly related by S. Matthew, to wit, the disciples disceptation about
preeminence; to decide which controversy our Savior sets before them a little
child, as an emblem of humility, and upon this text reads a lecture to them,
of which these words are part, S. Mark chapter 9. 39. inserts another accident, to
wit, S. John's forbidding some that were not in Christ's retinue, to cast out
Devils in his name, together with our Saviors reply. Saint Luke chapter 9. v. 46.
etc. relates the same accidents, but not this part of his course in this place.
In which it is in vain to seek for connection. That which Maldonate has
observed is right, that the occasion is plainly set down, and the order right
in S. Matthew; here in S. Luke the words are put loco alieno in another place.

These two verses in S. Luke do contain three Categorical propositions: The
partition of the text.
in S. Matthew there is a fourth put before two other, which is, woe to the
world because of offenses: which because my text omitteth I shall let it pass.
Of the three propositions in S. Luke, the first is Modall, and declares the
necessity of Scandalls: It is impossible but that offenses will come: the
second foretells the woeful condition of Scandalizers: woe unto them through
whom they come: the third v. 2. aggravates that woe to them that Scandalize one
sort of persons called little ones, by an uneven comparison of their woe with a
less, but a very grievous one: 3. The explication of the word Scandal in the
proper acception.
It were better etc.

To begin with the first proposition (...) is as much as (...), in Saint
Matthew (...), is as much as (...) often used by Aristotle as equivalent to
(...): and it does here void an unavoidable necessity. And (...) is as much as
(...), to be or happen. That which most requires explication is the word (...)
translated offenses: which word is originally a greek word, but by use taken
into our English language, as it is into the Latin and other tongues: it is
very frequent in the new Testament: Greek Grammarians tell us that originally
(...) signified some part of a trap made to kill or catch wild beasts:
Hesychius in his Lexicon, (...), Scandal, a part of mouse-traps. The Greek
Scholiast on Aristophanes his Acharn: Lexic. in voce (...).
and Suidas after him tell us that (...), were certain crooked pieces of wood,
unto which wild beasts coming (because the bait was thereunto fastened, say
some) did cast down on themselves, or cast themselves upon some frame of wood,
by which they were hurt, killed, maimed, or made halte and so caught: and
therefore they derive these words (...), from halting which happened to the basts
that dashed on them. Such accidents the Prophet Isaiah intimates to follow on
the putting of (...) Isay. 8. v. 15. where foretelling that Christ should be
(...) translated by S. Peter 1. Pet. 2. 7. (...) he tells us that many shall
stumble and fall, and be broken and be snared, and be taken: But what ever the
original of the word be, certain it is, that in the new Testament it is
Synonymous to (...), that at which a man dasheth his foot, as Romans 14. 13. S.
Paul puts these two words as of the same sense, Romans 11. 9. (...) is used as
equivalent to (...), which signify a snare or toil, by which in hunting wild
beasts are taken. By which words the Hebrew words (...) from (...) to fall (to
which (...) most aptly answers) and (...) and (...) used Psalm. 69. 22. Isai. 8.
14. 15. which signify a gin, or snare, are rendered by the Apostle. Out of that
which has bin said, we may easily perceive that a Scandal in the notatio^ of
the word signifies such a block, piece of wood, stone or the like, at which a
beast or man dashing or hiting themselves fall or otherwise catch harm, as by
bruising maining, halting or the like.

Scandal then properly is applied to that whereby the body is hurt the laying
of which is forbidden Levit. Scandal in the Scripture use.
19. 14. and therefore a woe belongs to him that lays it. But here doubtless
our Savior means not such a stumbling block as hurts the body, but (as it is
commonly translated to signify) such a one as whereby the mind or soul is
harmed. Now the harming of the mind is by causing grief, and so Romans 14. 15.
(...) is grieved, is as much as (...) is scandalized, or stirring up anger,
displeasure, enmity, as when our Savior says Math. 17. 27. (...) that we may
not scandalize them, that is, we may not provoke them to anger or enmity
against us. But chiefly the mind or soul is harmed by committing sin, as the
action of him that sat at meat in the Idols temple became a Scandal in
emboldning others to communicate with Idolaters in Idol-service 1. Cor. 8. 9.
10. and Balaam is said to teach Balac to lay a stumbling block before the
children of Israel to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication, Revel. 2. 14. which hurt of the soul is by laying it open to Gods
wrath, and by defiling and wounding the conscience: And here is to be noted,
that whereas in common use to offend is as much as to displease, in the
Scripture use he is said to be offended who is induced to sin, though he be
pleased thereby: so that to offend, is not only to displease, but also to
harm the soul even by pleasing. Now this laesio animi, hurting of the mind
is sometimes by a mere object without, at which the person offended dasheth
himself, and hurts his soul, the thing which is the scandal acting nothing
to move the person to harm himself, which therefore may not unfitly be
called an objective scandal. Thus images, Ps. 69. 23.
silver and gold are termed, Romans 11. 9
Ezekiel. 7. 19. The stumbling block of men's iniquity. So was the Babylonish
garment to Achan, Bathsheba's nakedness to David, the Altar of Damascus to
(...); etc. Such are to many others a glass of wine, a wanton picture, a book
of Magic, and the like. Now in this sort of scandal it is the person hurt
that scandalizeth himself, as being active therein: and therefore most truly
the scandal is in himself. In which respect S. John 1. Epist. Chapter 2. v. 10.
tells us that he that loves his brother abides in the light, (...), and a
scandal is not in him, that is, he does not make his neighbors prosperity
his brothers preferment, etc. to be a stumbling block to him to make him
covetous, envious, etc. For the antithesis, v. 11. and the coherence of the
text show it to be meant not of sca^dall, whereby through defect of love a man
causes another to stumble, but of scandal whereby a man may cause himself to
fall for want of light in himself. And to the same purpose it is said in that
parallel place, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy law, (...)
and there is no stumbling block to them, that is, by reason of their adhering
to Gods law, outward objects become not scandal to them.

2 Sometimes the hurting of the soul is by the action of another,. Of the
sorts of effective scandal.
which I therefore call effective scandal, as Ieroboams setting up the golden
Calves was a sca^dall to Israel: David's sin a scandal in causing the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme. Now such actions may be scandal three ways. 1. In
potentia, in possibility only, when the action is in it is nature scandalous,
or in the intention of the agent, but not so in the event, because of the
steadfastness and uprightnes of the person tempted. So was the action of
Joseph's Mistress to Joseph. Peter's persuasion to our Lord Christ, Mat. 16. 23.
and this is termed Scandalum datum, sed non acceptum, given but not taken. 2.
In actu, actually. In the event, but not from the nature of the action, or
intent of the agent, but by accident by reason of the erroneous judgment, or
evil disposition of the person scandalized, as Christ's preaching of eating
his Flesh, and drinking his Blood was a scandal, John 6. 60. 61. and the
preaching of Christ crucified is to carnal men. 1. Cor. 1. 23. and is termed
Scandalum acceptu^ sed non datum, a scandal taken though not given. 3. In actu
and per se, actually in the event, and of it self, that is from the nature of
the action, as in David's sin, 1. Sam. 12. 14. Or intent of the agent, as in
Balaams fact, Rev. 2. 14. In Ieroboam's fact, 1. Kings 12. 29. 30. and this is
termed, Scandalum datum and acceptu^: a scandal both taken and given.

Now although I conceive our Savior intended specially this last sort of
Sandalls in this place,. 6. The necessity of sca^dals.
they being the scandals by which a woe comes to the world, and a woe belongs
to the authors of the^, yet I know no absurdity in it to extend this
proposition in the handling of it to all those sorts of scandalls, by which the
souls or minds of men are hurt. According to which the sense is this. It is
impossible or it cannot be otherwise, but that men's minds or souls will be
hurt with displicency, grief, anger, enmities, sins occasioned by outward
objects and actions of men, which either by accident, or of themselves become
scandalls to them. So that our Saviors assertion is in brief this: That while
men live on earth there will certainly be offenses and scandalls to the harm of
men's souls. When our Savior tells us, Mat. 13. 41. That in the Consummation or
end of the world, the son of man shall send his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom (...) all scandalls, he does plainly intimate that
till then there will be scandals even in his Church; that the Church in it is
present condition on earth is but as a field in which wheat and tares grow
together, scandals and good example: that it is a mixed company of good and bad;
wise, and foolish* weak, and strong; and therefore scandalls will arise.. 7.
In respect of scandalizers.


This necessity of scandalls is. 1. In respect of the second causes. 2. In
respect of the first and supreme cause of al things. The second causes are, 1.
The persons scandalizing. 2. Scandalized. 3. Satan, who has ever a finger in
all mischievous things. 1. A necessity of Scandalls is from Scandalizers;
first, in general from vitiousnesse of life which every where abounding makes
scandals to abound. All sin against God is venomous: it being the very poison
of the old Serpent. And all open sins are like the Basilisk infecting those
that come within the sight of them, unless well fenced with Antidotes. It is
so connatural to men, that they are ready not only to take, but even to suck
in the infection. Faciles imitandis turpibus ac pravis omnes sumus. In open
sins scarce any man sins alone: specially if their persons be eminent either
in authority, dignity, or any other reputed excellency: One Jeroboam is
sufficient to make a whole kingdom to sin: the profaneness of one Hophni is
enough to cause a whole Church to abhor the offerings of the Lord. And if
persons be not scandalized with infectiou of open sins; yet doubtless they
will be with grief of mind; so that one way or another all open sins sins
will beget scandalls, and therefore such sins being so many and so certain, it
cannot be but that there should be an innumerous brood of scandalls. 2. But
besides vitiousnesse of life in general, there are some special evils by
which scandalls are multiplied. As 1. by malice. There are that do data opera
of set purpose lay snares for their brethren. It is the delight of some to be
Satan's agents to harm the souls of their brethren, they sleep not except they
have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to
fall* Prove. 4. 16. Balak hires Balaam, Balaam devises and teaches Balak to
lay a stu^bling block before the children of Israel, Rev. 2. 14. Ionadab the
son of Shimeah directs Ammon how to commit Incest with his sister, 2. Sam. 13
5. And these promoters of scandalls are likely none of the dullest, but the
most active and subtle: Satan has wit enough to choose the ablest instruments
for his purpose. They use craft, eloquence, diligence usque ad extremum virium,
to the utmost of their power to further evil. So devoted they are to the
devils service that he can have them ready to serve his turn at small wages,
magna merces quieta movere. It Is wages enough for the^ to do hurt. Their own
disposition makes them active of their own accord. And this cause must needs be
a fruitful mother of scandalls. Secondly, proud contempt of their brethren
causes many scandalls: while men slight the harm of their brethren, that
they may have their own wills: As those, Romans 14. 3. that despised the^ that
did not eat as themselves and those whose knowledge puffed up, as the Apostle
speaks, Cor. 8. 1. Thirdly, Imprudence in many causes scandalls: for so it
may be that men may by their speech and actions scandalize through ignorance,
as S. Peter did Mat. 16. 23.

2 Nor are scandalls more avoidable, 8. Of persons Scandalized.
if we consider the qualities of persons scandalized. For as some are prone to
lay stumbling blocks, so others are as apt to stumble at them. First, Generally
unmortified, or prevalent corruptions dispose men to fall by scandals. Silly
women laden with sin, led away with diverse lusts, are easily deceived by
those that have a form of godliness but deny the power of it. 2. Tim. 3. 6.
And those that receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, but
have pleasure in unrighteousness, are not only by Gods just judgment, but
also by their own propensitie ensnared by signs, lying wonders,
deceaveablenesse of unrighteousness and strong delusions to believe lies. 2.
Thessal. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. Corrupt qualities make men like straw or tinder, the
least spark of evil example or counsel will set them on fire. Yea bare
objects if seen or heard of will overthrow them. A voluptuous man shall not
need to be invited to sports, merriments etc. Sponte sua properat, he runs of
his own accord, he will smell them out himself as a vultur does a Carcass.
Even as sores of the body will draw corrupt humors to them, so will vicious
hearts make scandals to themselves.

Secondly. In special some particular sins make some accidents to become a
stumbling block to them. Enmity against our Lord Christ his person, impatience
to be rebuked, false opinions from example of others, common conceit, weakness
from ignorance, dullness to conceive, mistakes of his speeches, caused the
Pharisees and others to stumble at Christ and his words. Math. 13. 57. Mat. 15.
12. Ioh. 6. 61. Ioh. 7. 3. 48. spiritual pride made the Jews Romans 9. 32. to
stumble at Christ: ignorance of their brethrens liberty made those weak ones
mentioned Romans 14. to stumble at their brethrens lawful practice, and
fearfulness of heart caused Peter and the Disciples to be offended upon
Christ's apprehension. Mat. 26. 31. Even as a mist before the eyes, mistake of
the unevenesse of the way, hasty going, a sudden weakness, and many more such
accidents may cause the body to stumble, that otherwise has not any settled
debilitating sickness: so in the mind many scandals may arise from
alienations of mind, mis-reportes, mistakes etc. both of them that are
habitually depraved by a corrupt lust, and also of them that are otherwise
right hearted.

3 Nor may we forget the agency or working of Satan,. 9. Of Satan.
in assigning the causes of Scandalls. For he is the primus motor, the first
mover, the incendiary in all these mischievous things. It is his employment to
walk about seeking whom he may overthrow and devour. He has a trap for a
Judas, a snare for a Simon Magus, a gin for Ananias and Sapphira. And he wants
not a stumbling block for a David, a Peter, or any of the best of Gods Saints.
And these he lays thick, with much art and cunning, baiting each with his
peculiar bait, that were it not for the wonderful care of the Almighty, by
his preventing and sustaining grace, no man could escape overthrow by them: so
that if we consider the second causes we see reason enough of the multitude of
Scandalls. 10. Of God.


Let us raise our thoughts higher, from earth to heaven, from second to the
first, from the subordinate to the supreme Cause, and from thence we shall see
a reason of the necessity of Scandalls. The prediction of them by God proves
the necessity of them, for Gods prescience cannot be deceived. But these
following texts of Scripture do import more then a necessity by prescience, to
wit, a necessity by appointment or ordinance of Gods will: And voluntas Dei est
rerum necessitas, it is an axiom in the Schools, Gods will is the necessity of
things: Christ is a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even to them
which stumble at the word being disobedient, whereunto also they are appointed,
says S. Peter. 1. Ep. chapter 2. 8. Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone and
rock of offense. Romans 9. 33. God has given them the spirit of slumber, etc.
Romans 11. 8. 9. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie. 2. These. 2. 11. So that what ever be the way, Ezekiel.
3. 20.
it is from God that Scandalls fall out: and therefore there is a necessity of
them.

But we may here ask with the Apostle, 11. For what ends ordered by him.
Romans 11. 11. Have they stumbled that they should fall? Are scandals ordered by
God only for the ruin of men? Doubtless no: There are other ends aimed at by
God in the event of scandals, both in respect of him self, and of men. In
respect of himself he orders the happening of scandals to become subservient
to the fulfilling of his own counsel. Pharoahs stumbling was made an occasion
to show Gods power, Exodus 9. 16. and the disobedience of Hophni and Phinchas
for the inflicting of Gods just vengeance, 1. Sam. 2. 25. and the unbelief of
the Jews, the showing mercy to the Gentiles, Romans 11. 31. 32. In all of them
there is a depth of wisdom, riches of knowledge in God, who by unsearchable
judgments and undiscernable paths, brings his own counsels to pass, v. 33.
Though we know not how, nor why God does permit such pernicious evils as
scandals in themselves be, yet the Almighty whose thoughts are above our
thoughts, whose ways are higher then our ways does know. This we are to hold
as certain. God lets nothing, no not scandals to fall out without excellent,
though unsearchable wisdom, for righteous and good, though undiscernable ends?
And yet God does not so conceal this matter, but that we so far know his
mind, that he intends scandals, as for the intrapping of false hearted
disobedient persons, so for the probation of the^ that are sincere: The wonders
and signs of false Prophets, and Dreamers of dreams were permitted sometimes
to come to pass, to try whether we love the Lord our God with all our heart,
and with all our soul. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. And oportet esse haereses, there must be
also heresies that they which are approved may be made manifest, 1. Cor. 11.
19. And in the business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who
sent unto Hezekiah to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left
him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, 2. Chron. 32. 31.
So that one while God discovers a secret Hypocrite; another while manifests the
hidden corruption or weakness that is eve^ in a godly person. Here he lets a
stumbling block be the destruction of an obdurate sinner, there it becomes to
be the witness of the faith, obedience, patience and constancy of an upright
believer. Enchir. ad Laur c. 96.
S. Augustines saying is received in schools, Nisi esset hoc bonum ut essent
and mala, nullo modo esse sinerentur ab omnipotente bono: unless this were
good that there should be evils, they would by no means be suffered to be by
the omnipotent good. Nor is the laying of scandals less evil in man, because
God permits them to be for righteous and good ends. For however they be
ordered by good intendme^ts in God, yet they proceed from evil principles in
men: and therefore are no whit the less vicious in men, because by accident to
their intentions good is willed by God. As when it is said of Joseph's brethren,
Genesis 50. 20. they thought evil against him, though God meant it unto good,
their sin was not the less because Gods goodness was the greater.

For application of this truth.. 12. The application* 1. To justify religion
notwithstanding the scandals of the professors of it.
1. From hence we may frame some answer to those that accuse religion by reason
of the Scandalls that are given by them that profess it. If Scandals fall out
among Protestants, presently the Papists infer, that we are not the true
Church, the Separatist that we are but an Antichristian Synagogue, the
Libertine, and Carnal worldling, that those that profess more piety, then
themselves affect, are but a sort of hypocrites. As if where there fall out any
dissentions between the Teachers, any evil practices in the Scholars, there
could be no true doctrine, nor good men, nor holy society. But these inferences
are indeed nothing else but the unjust accusations of malicious minds. For if
malice did not blind them, they might by the same medium conclude against
themselves, there being no sort of men among whom evil practices do not
happen. Even among the disciples of Christ there was a thief, in the first
Church of Christians there were a pair of Sacrilegious hypocrites, in the best
Churches there were dissentions, variances, and Corruptions. The worst that can
be hence inferred is that no Church on earth is pure without mixture of dross,
that wheat and tares grow together until the harvest. They that imagine a
Church on earth without Scandalls in life, without corruption in discipline do
but fancy an Vtopia, an Idea of a Church in their brains, which neither is nor
ever will be in rerum natura. We have wherewith abundantly to justify our
Religion and Church notwithstanding the accidents of Scandalls, in that they
are condemned in our doctrine, punished in our government, disclaimed by most,
practiced by few. But that they are necessary by reason of men's corruptions,
and Satan's working even where there is true religion, true Church, true
Godliness, it is enough to answer them, that from the event of Scandals would
argue, that our Religion is not true, or our Church false, or our piety
hypocrisy.

2 A better use of this point is to take occasion to acknowledge and magnify
the wise and gracious providence of God in ordering of Scandalls.. 13. To
magnify the providence of God.
That there should be multitudes and multiplicities of Scandals in the world,
that every where Satan should, I say not lay, but sow, and that thick too,
snares and gins to catch the Saints by the heels, that over and besides the
world, both good and bad should cast stumbling blocks in our way, either
wittingly or by imprudence, and withal natural corruption be so apt to be
busy with them, and yet the Saints escape hell, get to heaven, sometimes
without any dangerous falls, sometimes without any wounds, this is the
admirable and gracious providence of God alone. It Is a thousand times more then
to pass by the mouth of a hundred pieces of ordinance discharged against a
man, and yet be unhurte, to break through the host of Philistines with safety,
to walk on high pinacles and not to fall down headlong, to sail in the most
rough and dangerous seas, to shoot the most perilous gulfs, and yet arrive in
safety at the haven. The Psalmist Psalm. 107. extolles the immense goodness of
God in his preservation of men from many dangers: but none of them all is
equal to this of the delivery of his people from Scandalls, and therefore none
deserves greater thanks: on the other side, that the Almighty so orders it,
that the obdurate sinner is ensnared by Scandalls to his perdition, yet no
injustice, no fault in God, this is the wonder of Gods providence, to be
entertained by us with the Apostles exclamation. O altitudo! O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Romans 11. 33.

3 But then though it be the ever-vigilant providence of God, 14. 3 To teach
men to walk circumspectly.
that preserves the saints from ruin by Scandalls, and his just judgeme^t that
leaves the wicked to his own perdition to be caught by them; yet this excludes
not, but requires care in the Godly to take heed of them, and condemns the
impiety of the wicked in yielding themselves to stumble at the^. For it is the
vitiousnesse of the one, that makes scandalls to be actually such to him, and
the holy wisdom of the other, whereby God keeps him from being overthrown by
them: wherefore it behooves them to learn to walk circumspectly, not as fools
but as wise. Ephe. 5. 15. And to this end, 1. to get as much spiritual
prudence as they can to discern them, to be acquainted with their own hearts
by frequent examination, by through-knowledge of their natural corruption, to
be well seen in the wills and methods, and artifices of Satan, whereby he seeks
to deceive and devour, to know the dispositions of wicked men, and weakness
of good men whom Satan may work by. 2. To be ever sober, and watchful, not
laid a sleep by any lust of our hearts, any pride and selfe-confidence, or the
like, as David, Hezekiah, Peter, etc. were, when they were scandalized. 3. That
we study constantly in Gods law, and cleave to it with upright hearts, which is
a sure antidote against this poison of scandalls; For great peace have they
which love thy law, and nothing shall offend them. Psalm. 119. 165. 4 That as we
have one eye still to our way that we stu^ble not, so the other still on God in
fervent prayer to him, who alone can, and will keep us when we seek him.

4 Lastly,. 15. 4. To wait for Christ's coming.
since notwithstanding all the vigilance and wariness of a Christian, scandals
will be till the son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.
Mat. 13. 41. The righteous must learn with patience and longing desire, to
expect the coming of the son of man. Even as the husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the earth, so must they be patient unto the coming of the
Lord. James 5. 7. Till then there will be cause for them to be exercised, in
humbling themselves, and mourning for the dishonor of God by scandalls; as Lot
vexed his righteous soul with hearing and seeing the deeds of the Sodomites,
and to possess their souls in hope and assurance that Christ will come, and
bind up Satan, and remove all scandalls, and perfect his Church, that they may
follow the Lamb whither soever he goes.

CAP. 2.
Of the woe belonging to Scandalizers in general.
HAving handled the first proposition concerning the necessity of Scandalls,.
1. The explication of the words of the second proposition of the Text.
the second follows concerning the woeful condition of Scandalizers, which is
delivered elleiptically by S. Luke, (...), by Saint Matthew fully, (...), Woe
be to that man by whom the scandal comes, or is; for (...), is as much as
(...): which proposition the particle (...) nevertheless, shows to be added in
manner of a prolepsis: For whereas it might be urged, if there be a necessity
of offenses, then they are no faults, nor punishable; our Savior seems to deny
this consequence by telling us, that though they be necessary, yet they be
voluntary in the scandalizers, who are therefore culpable, and punishable, Woe
unto him through whom they come.

Saint Hierome in his Commentary on Math. 18. 2. That a woe belongs to
Scandalizers.
conceives that in this speech our Savior specially pointed at Judas. It Is true
that Christ does pronounce a woe to Judas Mat. 26. 24. But that these words in
my Text should either aim at Judas his particular fact, or be restrained to
his scandalous action, agrees not with the words, which speak of woe or evil
redundant (...) to the world by offenses: not one offense, and of scandalizing
indefinitely any of those little ones that believe in him. Wherefore the meaning
is, Woe, that is misery or evil shall befall him by whom the offense comes,
who ever he be. And the conclusion that it affords is this, That misery belongs
to him that is the cause of scandalls, or as in S. Matthew in that parallel place
Mat. 18. 7. Woe shall be to that man by whom the offense comes.

To declare which truth we are distinctly to express. 3.
1. What scandalizers this woe belongs to. 2. What the woe is which is
pronounced against the^. 3. Why it is that they incur this woe.

In answer to the first,. 4. Who are Scandalizers, and to what Scandalizing woe
belongs
we are to consider, that that by which scandal comes is not a bare object,
but a person, (woe be to that man, as it is in S. Matthew) and that as an agent
in causing scandal. 2. That sometimes a man may be a scandalizer in
overthrowing himself. As is manifest by that speech of our Savior, Mat. 18.
8. If thy hand or thy foot scandalize, or offend thee, cut them off. That is as
Interpreters conceive, if thy lust, or will cause thee to sin, deny them. For
men's own carnal reason, the lusts of their own hearts do ofttimes cause them
to fall, or to go away. An instance is the example of the Psalmist, Ps. 73. 2.
Whose feet were almost gone, his footsteps had wellnigh slipped. For he was
envious at the foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked: His own
understanding had in a sort tripped up his heels, or scandalized him. And this
sort of scandalizing may not unfitly be called internal* or immanent, and is
so far from being excluded here, that our Savior by subjoyning to the words,
Mat. 18. 7. Woe to that man by whom the offense comes, presently in the 8.
ver. If thy hand scandalize thee cut it off, (which is meant of this inward
scandal) seems to have plainly intended it: And therefore S. Chrysostom in
his Homily on Math. 18. 7 calls the scandals here (...), all hindrances of the
right way, whether from within or without. And indeed a Woe does undoubtedly
belong to all such, as by their own vain imagination, their own evil
affections do overthrow themselves; when as S. James speaks, a man is drawn
away of his own lust and entised: for as it follows, James 1. 14
then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished brings forth death. Accordingly occasion might be taken hence to
consider the ways of selfe-scandalizing, which are in a manner infinite, and
to show the woe consequent to them, and to give directions to prevent this
danger. But this is besides my purpose in handling this text, and an immense
task: it must be to show the deceites of every sin, its manner of working
etc. and therefore letting this thing pass only with this admonition, that it
behooves every Christian to be jealous of his own heart, and to watch it
narrowly, lest it prove a Judas to him, and how dear so ever his lust, or
imagination be to him, yet it must be cut off, that it scandalize him not,
remembering the Counsel of our Savior, that it is better without them to enter
into heaven, then with them to be cast into hell fire. 3. That sometimes and
that most commonly, scandalizing is a transeunt action, and he is said to cause
offense, that harms another by his action, and this may be called external or
transeunt scandal. And this is undoubtedly here meant, for he speaks here of
scandalizing one of these little ones that believe in him, and of such scandal
as whereby a woe comes to the world, that is to the societies and ranks of
men. And this sort of Scandalizing is it which I intend to treat of. 4. That of
this sort of scandalizing diverse definitions are given. There is this
definition or description in Tertullian his book de velandis virginibus, where
he defines scandal, Exemplum rei non bonae aedificans ad delictum, an example
of a thing not good building to sin: which description though it do not
unfitly express what is the scandal which is by evil example, yet does it
not sufficiently comprize all sorts of scandalizing another, v. g. not the
scandalizing by abuse of our liberty in things indifferent, nor that which is
by persecution. That definition which the schoolmen as Aqu. 2a. 2 ae. q. 43.
art. 1. do commonly follow taken from S. Hierome comment. in Math. 15. is more
fit to comprize all sorts of scandal to another. Scandalum est dictum vel
factum minus rectum, praebens alteri occasionem ruinae; that is, Scandal is a
saying or deed, less or not right, occasioning ruin to another. This
definition is good enough, saving that the term of ruin being a metaphor (and
according to Aristotle's rule in his Topics (...), All metaphors are obscure)
is unfit for a definition till explained: wherefore it is needful we should
show more plainly what is meant by ruin in this definition. By ruin, or
falling, is doubtless meant here not corporal ruin or falling of the body,
but spiritual ruin or the falling of the mind. Now this spiritual ruin is
primarily understood of falling into sin, whether it be greater, as Apostasy
from the faith, heresy, infidelity, Idolatry or the like; or lesser as by
causing a slower progress in Religion, unchearfulnesse therein, impediment to
any other duty a Christian or an unbeliever should do. If any be asked whether
any grief or displicency of mind, Qu.
or anger, which are the effects of Scandal, as is before showed may be called
ruin of another, according to this definition? whereto I answer: Ans.
The grief displicency or anger that ariseeth from another man's saying or
deed, is sometimes just and necessary, when the words or deeds be manifestly
evil; such was the grief of the Corinthians for the scandal of the
incestuous person; our Saviors indignation at the hardness of the Pharisees
hearts: such was the grief or vexation of righteous Lot, in hearing and seeing
the ungodly deeds of the Sodomites, David's grief because men kept not Gods
Law. And this grief is a necessary duty in them that mourn, but a sin and
scandal in them that cause it. A ruin therefore it cannot be said to be in
the primary sense, as ruin imports falling into sin, but ruin it may be said
to be in a secondary sense, as ruin imports any affliction of the soul; and
with this explication the term [ruine] may fitly enough express the effect of
this scandal. Sometimes the sorrow, displicencie, and anger that arises in
the person offended, from the sayings and deeds of another are unjust, both in
him that is offended, and in him that offends: this is when a man is grieved at
the use of another ma^s lawful liberty in things indifferent by reason of his
own weakness of faith, thinking that to be unlawful which is not; as those
that were offended at their brethrens neglect of days, and difference of
meats, Romans 14 which thing is unjust in him that is thus offended, and it is
also unjust in him that offends, when without Charity to his brother he heeds
not, as he ought, the avoiding of grieving his brother contrary minded. And
this grief may be called, ruin of the person offended, not only in the
secondary sense, but also in the primary sense, occasioning not only grief,
but also uncharitable judging, disunion, or diminution of affections, and
sometimes further sins. Sometimes the grief is unjust in the person offended,
but not in the person offending. As many were offended at our Saviors, and the
Apostles preaching, which yet were their necessary duties; such persons were
not only angered, but sometimes forsook them and their fellowship, by reason of
such preaching, and so the preaching was a scandal to them, and a ruin, both
in the primary and secondary sense, but through their own default; and
therefore unjustly on their part. With this explication I conceive the
definition given to be sufficient, and right enough. 5. That sins of thought
are not scandalls, unless they break out into acts, whether of words or
deeds. If smothered or stayed within they are sins, but not scandals. 6 That
then an offense is said to come by a man, either when his intention is to harm
his brother by his fact, as Balaam did Revel. 2. 14. or the nature and quality
of the fact is apt to harm others, as in S. Peter's advice, Math. 16. 23. In
either of these two Cases it is scandalum datum, or active scandal, and the
man that is the agent in such facts or words, is one by whom the offense
comes. But if a man do his duty and men are scandalized, if the offense were
neither intended by the agent of the fact, nor come from the nature of the
action, but from the ill disposition of him that is offended, it is to be
conceived to be only ex accidente, accidentally, to him whose action did
offend, and therefore it is in relation to him only scandalum passivum, a
passive scandal, non datum sed acceptum, not given by him, but taken by the
offended party, who is thereby the scandalizer of himself, or he by whom the
offense comes. Our Saviors discourse concerning the eating of his flesh,
offended the Capernaites John 6. 60. 61. But this was not by reason of Christ's
sermon, which was of a necessary truth: but from their own perverse ignorance.
In like manner the Pharisees were offended at Christ's doctrine concerning the
cause of defilement. Math. 15. 12. but of this scandal not our Saviors
doctrine, but their own malice was the proper cause. The fact of the
Reubenites offended the other tribes Josh. 22. 10. 11. 12. but this was through
their own mistake. Now the woe here denounced belongs not to those through
whose actions scandal comes by accident: but those that give, or cause
scandal, either in their intention, or according to the nature, quality, or
manner of their action. So that, that to which this woe belongs, is not an
object, but an agent, not only as scandalizing himself, but another, not by an
action of the imagination, but of word or deed, bringing ruin to another,
either in a primary or secondary sense, not by accident, but either by direct
intention, or by reason of the nature, quality, or manner of the action.

In answer to the second quaere. The particle (...) or woe is used in our
Saviors sayings to signify some grievous judgment or calamity, both
temporal, as Mat. 23. 29. the woe denounced to the Pharisees is expressed v.
33. to be the damnation of hell. And that this woe is here denounced to
scandalizers appears by the aggravation in the 2. verse, where to have a
millstone hanged about his neck, and to be cast into the sea, is made less
than the woe here denounced to the scandalizer, and Mat. 18. 7. when our
Savior had said, Woe' to the man by whom the offense comes, he adds
immediately v. 8. that the hand offending should be cut off, that the
scandalizer by retaining his two hands, be not cast into hell fire. Hell fire
or the damnation of hell is the chief and greatest woe due to the scandalizer.
But besides it there is a woe also of temporal death awarded sometimes to
scandalizers. For this reason was Balaam the son of Peor slain with the
sword Number. 31. 8. that God might be avenged of him for his practice in teaching
Balaak to lay a stumbling block before the children of Israel. Elies sons
sinned greatly in their scandalous facts: for men abhorred the offering of the
Lord, 1. Sam. 2. 17. The issue was, they were both slain by the Philistines in
one day. Likewise other temporal woes on their souls, bodies, names, estates,
posterity, etc. are inflicted by God on scandalizers. Thus was David filled
with trouble of soul for his sin in the matter of Vriah, by which he caused
the enemies of the Lord to blaspheame, so that he was feign to beg hard for
restitution of joy and comfort, Psalm. 51. 8. 12. And the incestuous Corinthian
was so plunged over head and ears in sorrow that he was almost drowned with
it. 2. Cor. 2. 7. he was cast out of the Church, delivered over to Satan.
David for the forenamed sin was haunted with griefs in his children almost to
his dying day, and it still lies as a blot upon his name. The Priests that make
others stumble at the Law, and threatened with contemptiblenesse, Malac. 2. 8.
9. No active scandal scapes scot-free, there is none venial, every one has
it is measure of woe; yet not all alike. For some of these scandalls are more
heinous then others, and therefore incur a greater woe. As for instance, some
scandalls consist in facts in their kind evil, and these are worse than other
scandalls which arise only from the abuse of our liberty, in things lawful.
The scandal of Elies sons in respect of the foul nature of their facts was
worse then than the scandal of the strong in faith by the eating of meats with
offense, mentioned. Romans 14. 2. Some scandalls are worse than other, ratione
causae, in respect of the cause from whence they arise. As scandalls from
malice, and subdolous intents are worse than those that arise from ignorance
and imprudence; Balaams scandal by devising and counselling Balak how to
entrap the Israelites was worse than Peter's advising of Christ to desist from
his purpose of going to Jerusalem to suffer 3. Some scandalls are worse then
others in regard of the eminency of the person offending; because they bring a
greater stain to the profession, and become a greater danger to men, apt to
stumble: Thus David's sin in the matter of Vriah the Hittite was greater then
the sin of the adulteress mentioned Io. 8. The scandalous fact of a
Clergyman worse then of the people, of a Magistrate than a subject, of a noble
person than one of the Commons. Vbi sublimior praerogativa ibi major culpa.
Lib. 4. de gubernat* Dei.
Says Salvian, where the dignity is higher, the fault is the greater. 4. In
respect of the issue and event of the scandal, some scandals are worse than
others, as when the event with a little heed might have bin foreseen, when the
issue is not only the alienation or grieving of another, but also Apostasy of
some, hardening of others, occasioning others to blaspheame the name of God, to
inveigh against the truth, Gospel, Religion, etc. Thus the incestuous
Corinthians fact was worse than the fact of those that eat with offense to
their brethren things offered to the Idols. 5. In respect of the number and
quality of persons scandalized, the scandals of some are worse then of others.
For it is worse to scandalize many than few, weak Christians than stronger
etc. So that these and such like Considerations vary much the degree of the
sin of scandalizing, and consequently of the woe due it. Yet so that none,
but has it is woe allotted to it. 6 Why a woe belongs to them.


In answer to the third question. The reasons of this woe awarded to
scandalizers are taken 1. from the nature of the sin. For all scandalizing
though but by abuse of our liberty in things indifferent is against charity, as
the Apostle teaches. Romans 14. 15. For true charity should move us to serve,
and help, and sustain one another, Gal. 5. 13. not to harm deject and grieve
one another. Now the law of charity is a fundamental law, the law of Christ,
Gal. 6. 2. and therefore in this respect scandalizing is a sin against our
brother, and against Christ, 1. Cor. 8. 12. Wherefore according to the rules of
equity he that regards not to show love to others, deserves to be deprived of
favor and love himself; there being no rule more equal than that of our
Savior, Mat. 7. 2. With what measure ye meet it shall be measured to you
again. But when the scandalizing is not by ignorance, but wittingly and
willingly, then it is much more against charity, and therefore justly deserves
a greater woe. As when men scandalize of set purpose either as the Pharisees
that under pretense of long prayers and fasting devour widdow^s houses, by
their show of devotion gained Proselytes, and made them twofold more the
children of hell than themselves. Mat. 23. 14. 15. or as our Savior says of
false Prophets that put on sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
Mat. 7. 15. or Foxes in the deserts. Ezekiel. 13. 4. They shall receive the
greater damnation, in that not only virtually, but formally, not only
privatively, but also positively they sin against charity. Add hereunto that
if the scandalous fact be such an act as is in it is nature an enormous sin,
which though it were done never so secretly, yet it would highly provoke God:
then it is to speak with the Apostle (...) excessively sinful, Romans 7. 13.
in that it is both a grievous transgression, and a grievous scandal, and
consequently compound iniquity. In which respect the sin of Hophni and Phinehas
in their violent profanations, and their outrageous abusing of women even
before the Tabernacle of the congregation, was very great before the Lord, for
men abhorred the offering of the Lord. 1. Sam. 2. 17. And David's deed in
defileing Bathsheba, and murdering her husband was exceeding grievous, in that
he gave occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheame. 2. Sam. 12. 14. 2.
From the effects of it.. 7.
The immediate and principal effect of scandalls is the harm of our brothers
soul, by wounding their conscience, as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 8. 12. and
quantum ad scandalizantem, as much as pertaines to the scandalizer the
destruction of him, for whom Christ dyed, as the same Apostle speaks. 1. Cor.
8. 11. Romans 14. 15. I say not that every soul that is scandalized does
eventually perish, nor do I meddle with the dispute concerning Christ's
intention in dying for them that perish: But this I say that he that
scandalizeth a soul, for which, for ought he knows Christ dyed, and for which
he is to conceive Christ died, and thereby moves him to turn into the way of
perdition, does for so much as concerns his action, cause his brother to
perish for whom Christ died, although he neither in the event perish not, nor
Christ in his intention offered up himself as a sacrifice to his father to
appease his wrath for him. For it is merely ex accidenti by accident to the
scandalizers action, that either his brother perished not, or Christ died not
for him. Even as he that maliciously intending to wound Jason, Phaeraeus did by
accident cure him of an Apostem, his fortune was admirable, but his malice
nothing less in his wound by that accident. Surely every man ought to be
tender of his brothers soul that it perish not by his action. And if
notwithstanding his scandalous fact yet he perish not, this co^mends Gods
goodness, but lessens not his naughtiness. Every man ought to be tender of
the soul of his brother, as if he were certain Christ died for him, when in
appearance to him Christ died for him, and he that is not so, is injurious to
Christ, whether Christ intended to dye for the person scandalized or no: Even
as he that does a thing lawful, which his own conscience judges unlawful,
sins damnably, as if the thing were in it self unlawful Romans 14. 23. Now
does not he that cares not to destroy another soul deserve to have his own
soul lost? should his soul be regarded by God, that makes no account of his
brothers? If a Cain or Judas betray or destroy another life, who is aggrieved
that they loose theirs? If a monstrous Caligula be so minded that he he care
not though all men's heads were off so that his might stay on, who can except
against God for letting vengeance loose upon him? Add hereunto that besides
the principal and immediate effect of scandals many other evils by breach of
charity, contentions, schisms etc. follow upon them, which as they bring woe
to the world, so does the woe brought on others justly rebound on the head of
him that casts it. 8. Application 1. to manifest the danger ^f scandalizers.


For application of this truth. 1. That which has been said manifests unto us
both the sinfulness and the danger of those that heed not their ways to
avoyde scandalizing of others, that watch not over their words or actions least
they cause others to stumble. It is not to be denied but that there are some
who through overfearfullnesse of giving scandal, do omit things fit for them
to do, which arises through want of knowing in what cases scandal is to be
feared, in what not, out of imprudence in not discernning the difference of
persons. This error is the more pardonable in that it likely comes not out of
an evil disposition, but out of a tender conscience, joined with a weak
understanding. Nor likely does it procure other hurt than the lessening of the
esteem of the person scrupulous, and the exposing him to contempt and derision,
in some, to pity in others; excepting when such scrupulosity causes
disobedience to the necessary commands of governors, or breeds superstition,
or the like evils. Yet this is an evil in that it is an errror, and somewhat
intrencheth on Gods prerogative, in making that to be sin, which he has not
made sin: and therefore is to be shunned, not to be cherished. But such likely
are but few. The most of people mind and prosecute their pleasure, profit,
credit, preferment, content, etc. but little or nothing regard what scandal
follows thereon, many are of that impetuous resolution that they will have
their sports not unlawful in themselves, though they will certainly occasion
drunkenness, quarrelling, bloodshed, idleness, undoing of families, and such
like evils. So that in a sort they resolve like unto that Pope, who said that
he would have his dish of meat in spite of God, so these are bent to have
their sports in spite of their brethren; yea and of God too, that commands
them not to offend their brethren. And as men are affected to their pleasure,
so they are to their profits, preferments, credit, ends, yea their vain
customs. So violent is the stream of their wills, that they will have their
course, although they not only overthrow many lives, and states, but also
drown many souls in perdition. Too too many are of Cains mind, who when he
was demanded of God, where his brother was answered angerly Genesis 4. 9. Am I my
brothers keeper? They care not whether they sink or swim, their consciences
be whole or wounded, they stumble or go upright, they perish or be saved,
would it could be truly said that there were no ministers of the Gospel, no
Magistrates, no Parents, no masters, that by their courses show that they make
light account of the stumbling of men's souls, so they may have their will?
surely there should be (if there were any spark of true charity in men) a
zeal to the good of their brethrens souls, and accordingly of some to have
compassion, putting a difference, and others to save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire: hating even the garment spotted by the slesh, that it may not
infect others. Jude 22. 23. Knowing that he which converts a sinner from the
error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of
sins. James 5. 20. But alas: so great is the vicious self-love of men that
for their own pleasures, profit, preferment, vain glory, and such like ends,
they draw innumerable souls into hell with them, sometimes by perverting their
faith, sometimes by corrupting their devotions, sometimes by vitiating their
manners, and yet as if they were all Popes no man must say unto them what do
thou? To omit other instances of less account. To maintain the great Idol of
latter ages the Papal Monarchy. What gross superstitions have been
maintained, what practices have been devised, and used to the seducing of whole
nations of people, holding them in blindness and superstition to their
perdition, yea to the reproach of the religion of Christ even by Jews, Turks,
and Infidels; it were infinite to relate. How careless many others are to
scandalize milions of souls that they may attain to, or maintain secular
greatness, I forbear to speak it being too manifest to the world. All which
dispositions and practices, how damnable they be, oh that men would consider,
that they may prevent the woe here denounced by our Savior, and take heed how
they slight their brothers spirit, lest they draw down eternal vengeance on
themselves from the Father of spirits, and by valuing at so low a rate their
brothers soul, make the market cheap for their own.

Wherefore in the second place we are to be admonished,. 9. 2 To admonish them
of their sin.
that as we are to look to our feet that we stumble not our selves, so to take
heed to our actions that they overthrow not others. The Almighty has forbidden
in his law to curse the deaf, and to put a stumbling block before the blind.
Levit. 19. 14. it being an unworthy, and injurious thing to take advantage from
weakness, to hurt those whom humanity, and reason should cause us to help.
But it is a thousand times more injurious and cruel, to lay a stumbling block
before men's souls, in as much as the danger of a souls falling is
incomparably greater then the ruin of the body. Surely he that has any
estimation of the preciousnes of a soul, any love to it, any compassion, any
sense of the evil of a souls perdition, ought to be most tender of doing it
any hurt, ready to do it any good. Wherefore it concerns us to be watchful
over our words and actions appearing to men, that they become not Scandalls. We
are to look heedily to our thoughts, that we be not found hypocrites before
God, and to every action we do that we may keep our peace with God: But for a
farther reason we are to look to those that are in the view of the world, as it
were on the stage. We are to be careful of our privy thoughts, as knowing that
God sees us; and hates all uncleanness, in the inward parts. But of our open
actions we are to be careful for a double reason, because God sees them, and
men too; so that we may not only grieve Gods spirit, but also hurt men's souls,
if they be not right. For as there be likely some who as Jeremiah speaks of
himself, Ierem. 20. 20. will wait for our halting if in any thing we stumble,
that they may reproach us: so there are others, whom we shall probably make to
halt to their ruin, if we cast any stumbling block before them. Besides we may
safely conceive, that they are careless of their own souls, that are not
careful to prevent the scandal of other men's souls: and that in foveam
incident, quam foderint, they shall by divine justice fall into the pit
themselves, who have dug it for others.

Wherefore that we may not scandalize others, 10. Directions to avoid it.
let us learn, 1. To fear God as we are commanded Levit. 19. 14. Thou shall
not put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear thy God: I am the
Lord. For he that fears God will not put a stumbling block before his brother,
since he is sure thereby to incur woe, and displeasure of God. Scandalizing
consists not with Gods fear. 2. To love our brethren, with which Scandalizing
consists not. For how can he be said to love his brother, who spreads a net for
his feet: especially when he insnares his soul? And this is sure, that he
which loves not his brother loves not God but walks in darkness. 1. John. 2.
10. 11.

3. To get uprightness of heart, that thou may walk uprightly, and this will
prevent both stumbling in thy self, and scandalizing of others. For he that is
not right-hearted, though he may in some things for a time do well, as Iehu
did, yet sooner or later he will stumble or fall. Even as a lame horse while he
is heated will go well enough, but when he cooles will halt downeright: Even
so an hypocrite though for a time he may go on fairly in his way; yet in the
Conclusion likely, when he has attained his ends, he falls foulely. As Iehu
that seemed to be zealous for the Lord, until he had gotten the kingdom of
Israel, but in the end showed his hypocrisy by serving Ieroboams golden Calves.
Now such a one will surely become a stumbling block and that a permanent one.
Wherefore as it is necessary for our appearing before God with boldness, that
we get upright hearts, so likewise for our living unblameably, and
inoffensively to our neighbors.

4 Lastly to get wisdom and prudence to consider the dispositions of men, who
are apt to be scandalized, and the due circumstances and consequences of our
actions, that they may be none occasion offense. In all our dealings that are
obvious to men we must show our selves innocent as Doves, wise as Serpents, in
malice children, in understanding men.

CAP. 3.
Of Scandalizing in special by sinful Example.
HOW grievous an evil active scandalizing is in the general has bin
declared. 1. Scandalizing distributed into four ways
But because things that are more confuse in the Genus, appear more distinct
in the species, my purpose is to consider the several branches of active
scandalizing, that we may the better discern the sin and danger of
scandalizing. Active scandalizing is two ways; one, when a man in his actions,
intending only to have his own will or lust, regards not the ruin of another
by his action, and this may be called Exemplary scandalizing, or Scandal by
example, and of this kind of Scandal there are two sorts. The first is when
the example is in a thing in its nature evil, and this may not unfitly be
called scandal by sinful example. The second is when the Scandal is in a
thing lawful otherwise, as being in its nature indifferent, but by want of
Charity abused so, as that harm comes to another, and this may be called
scandalizing, in the abuse of things indifferent. The other way of scandalizing
is when an action is done for this particular intent, that other men's souls
may be harmed, chiefly in drawing them to sin. And this may be called
Scandalizing by devised practice: which likewise is of two sorts: one when by
inticeing means, as by cou^sells, persuasions, placing objects before men, and
the like, men are overthrown; and this may be called, scandal by enticing
practices. The other when by terrifying ways men are scandalized, and this may
be called, scandal by persecution. According to this distribution in this
method I shall speak. 1. Of scandalizing by evil example. 2. Of scandalizing
by abuse of our liberty in things indifferent. 3. Of scandalizing by enticing
practices, 4. of scandalizing by persecution.

That sinful example begets scandal needs not proof; 2. A woe belongs to
them that scandalize by sinful example.
Experience of all times proves it too abundantly. And that position of Solomon
is plain, Prove. 29. 6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare,
or scandal. For these two words are equivalent, as was declared before. A
snare whereby to ensnare himself and to harm others. Whereupon it is that
Solomon advises Prove. 22. 25. that we should make no friendship with an angry
man nor go with a furious man, lest we learn his ways, and get a snare to
our soul. So that the evil example of angry and furious men becomes a snare
or scandal to men's souls, who go with them. Wherefore we may safely apply
the woe of my text to this scandalizing, and conclude. That misery belongs to
those that scandalize others by sinful example. The wages of sin
indefinitely is death Romans 6. 23. even that death which is opposite to eternal
life to wit eternal death of body and soul in hell fire. Which is much more
due when it is not only a sin but also a sinful example, and a scandal by
sinful example. But besides this eternal woe, that temporal woe belongs to it
also, the story of the misery of Hophni and Phinehas, of David and others for
their scandalls by sinful example does plentifully show.

To explain this point more fully we are to consider, 3. What actions of
sinful example do sca^dalize.
1. what actions of sinful example do scandalize. 2. How they do scandalize.
3. why a woe belongs to such. To give answer to the first quaere, I say. That
in this sort of scandalizing, the action scandalizing is that which is of it
self sinful, that is such as is prohibited by God to be done. For this is the
difference between this and the next sort of scandalizing, that this sort of
scandalizing would be sinful in Gods sight, though no man were offended by
it, and therefore when it becomes a scandal it is a double sin, 1. As it is
such a kind of act as is forbidden by God. 2. As it occasions the ruin of
another, as David's murder had been a sin if never known, but scandalizng
others, it became a double iniquity. The next sort of sca^dalizing is in an
action not evil of it self, but by reason of scandal, so that were it no
scandal it would be no sin, as the sin of the strong in faith mentioned Romans
14. in eating indifferently any sort of meat had been no sin, the thing being
in it self indifferent, had not the weak in faith been thereby offended. 2.
It is requisite that the action scandalizing be known. For privy actions do
not scandalize. Actions do scandalize tanquam objectum a quo, as an outward
motive, that provokes the mind; now such provocation cannot be but by the
knowledge of it; I mean knowledge of the act, though perhaps the person
scandalized know not the sinfulness of it, but rather the ignorance of the
sinfulness of it, may be the cause that it does ensnare him. Qu.
Perhaps it may be asked whether the living may be scandalized by the actions
of them that are dead? I answer, Ans.
yes doubtless, though they were dead many ages before. Solomon's sin in
harkening to his wives, and furthering their Idolatry, became a scandal to the
succeeding Kings of Judah; and Ieroboams setting up the golden calves, was the
scandal of the Kings of Israel that followed him in many generations. As the
remembrance of the virtues of ancestors, may provoke posterity to do
worthily, and thereby their memory be blessed as it is, Prove. 10. 7. so the
remembrance of the cruelty, tyranny, and such like vices of Ancestors does often
times revive their sins in their children, and cause their names to rot, and
to stink above ground, when their bodies are low enough in the ground. As the
valor of Miltiades at Marathon stories report, provoked Themistocles to do
great exploits, and the relation of Achilles his prowess inflamed the mind of
Alexander the Great, so the memorial of Sylla taught Caesar to oppress his
country. For which reason it concerns all that desire to do good to those
that come after them, to leave a good name behind the^, least the evil savor
of their bad example infect the world in many generations. Qu.
Possibly it may be yet farther asked, whether sinful omissions of things we
should do, may become scandalls? Ans.
I answer, yes; Experience shows that the remissenes of great Scholars in
duties of Godliness, is often the cause of Coldness and Lukewarmenesse in
religion in others that lean much on their example: the negligence of
governors in frequenting Gods service, causes many times the subjects to
think there is no necessity of Constancy and diligence therein. So that he that
would not scandalize his brother, must not only be free from open sins of
Commission, but also from sins of omission.

For answer to the second quaere I say,. 4. How they do scandalize.
that scandalizing by evil example does harm the minds of others unto their
ruin many ways. 1. Because it provokes men to the imitation of that
particular sin in which the scandal is, whereby their souls are harmed.
Thus S. Peter by not communicating with the Gentiles, drew Barnabas in like
manner to Iudaize with him. Gal. 2. 13. The example of an eminent person is
never single, if such a one do evil he carries with him others, as the stream
does that which floats upon it. Iter efficax per exempla, says Seneca, the
most prevalent way of drawing men is by examples, by which men are guided more
than by Laws or reasons. In evil things examples are most forcible, since they
agree with our natural lusts: men need not to be urged to them, they learn
them of themselves at the first sight, ut vident, pereunt. 2. The sinful
example of men becomes a scandal to others, it that it hardens them in the
sins they have committed. For the deceitfulness of sin, so infatuats men's
hearts as that they are ready to imagine the sin of another man to be a good
excuse or plea for their own. As it is said by the Prophet Ezekiel. 16. 51. That
Judah had by her abominations justified Samaria in all her sins. Not as if
the sin of one man could be in truth a sufficient plea to acquit another that
commits the same sin. But it is so (...), in the opinion of men, who do
allege nothing more commonly for defense of their facts, and consequently for
hardening them in their evils, then this that others have their faults, all are
sinners: good men have bin overtaken with the same sins, eminent men in
profession of religion have done as themselves, and therefore they hope they
have done no great hurt, there is no such cause of others reproving them, or
that their own consciences should be much troubled. 3. There is another way of
scandalizing which comes by evil practices, in that it makes men to stumble and
fall one upon another, by jarres, variance fightings. What was it which set the
Benjamites, and the other tribes in such a combustion, but the horrible sin
committed on the Levites Concubine. Judge. 21. 12. The treacherous murder of the
Sechemites by Simeon and Levi made Jacob to stink among the inhabitants of the
land, and to combine against him. Genesis 34. 30. so true is that of S. James that
wars and fightings come from men's lusts that war in their members, and set
men one against another James 4. 1. 4. Besides sinful examples create grief
to the good, and thereby scandalize them. To this purpose speaks David Psalm.
119. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not
thy word. And S. Paul feared that when he came to the Corinthians God would
humble him, and that he should bewail the uncleanness wherein they had
sinned. 2. Cor. 12. 21. Righteous Lot, dwelling among the Sodomites, in seeing
and hearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful
deeds. 2. Pet. 2. 8. As by stumbling sometimes there is fraction of a member,
always anguish, so by scandals sometimes there is perverting of men from the
right way, always dolor and pain even in the best and soundest. 5. Add here
unto that sinful examples do most grievously scandalize, in that they cause
men ill affected to blaspheme God, to reproach his ways, religion, service.
Through the sins of the Jews the name of God was blasphemed among the
Gentiles. Romans 2. 24. David by his foul crime in the matter of Bathsheba, had
given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. 2. Sam. 12. 14. It is a
frequent thing for evil men to set their tongues against heaven, against God,
his word, true religion, as if they were none of them good, when any that
seemed to follow the^ fall into gross transgressions. Wherein however they
foolishly impute that to God, which he condemns and punishes, and charge
religion and godliness with that which is the fruit of men's corrupt lusts,
contrary to Godliness: yet it serves Satan as an engine to stir up men's
enmity against God and his ways, and an occasion for evil men to vent their
venomous hatred of Gods word, his people and religion. Lib. 4. de guber. Dei.
Salvian at large relates how frequent in his days, such speeches as these
were in the mouths of Pagans, when they beheld the evil lives of Christians;
Christians would surely do holy things if Christ had taught them holiness,
look into the lives of Christians and you may know what is Christ's doctrine. In
like manner by reason of the lewdness of Gnostics, Nicolaitanes and such like
damnable teachers. Christian religion was much reproached by the heathen, and
as S. Peter foretold 2. Pet. 2. 2. The way of truth blaspheamed. And so it is
still the vitiousnesse of a Protestant in his life ope^s the mouth of a Papist,
to diffame the reformed Religion, and the falling of any that seemed to be
zealous of Gods word, causes the impure mouths of licentious persons, to
speak evil of the truth which is according to godliness. 6. Lastly the
sinful examples of men that have the name of Gods people do scandalize, in
making men to loath and to be averse from Gods service, and the way of his
fear. The sin of Hophni and Phinehas caused men to abhor the offerings of
the Lord. 1. Sam. 2. 17. 24. The Cruelty and coveteousnesse of the Spaniards in
the west Indies, caused the miserable Americanes to abhor Christian religion.
As a holy life in the professors is a great attractive, and inducement to draw
men's hearts to the love of it; so an ungodly and unrighteous conversation is a
certain impediment and disswasive from it. Partly because as Seneca says plus
oculis quam auribus credunt, men are guided by their eyes more then their
ears, partly because good religion and virtue of men that do evil things is
taken to be, either nonens or nullius pretii, either nothing or of no worth,
even as a pearl or gold covered with dirt is passed by as if it were not, or
of no value.

For the third quaere.. 3. Why a woe belongs to such.
The reason why such woe as has been said belongs to this scandalizing by
sinful example is.

1 Because in every scandal by sinful example there is a double iniquity, one
in that it is against the precept of cleaveing only to that which is good.
Romans 12. 9. an other in that it is against the precept of good example, in
which we are enjoined that our light should so shine before men, that they may
see our good works and glorify our Father which is in heaven Mat. 5. verse. 16.
2. Because it produces two great evils, one in that thereby the name of God
is dishonored, and so is against the love that is due to God, the other in
that it becomes the ruin of his brother, and so is against the love that is
due to him. Yet for as much as all sinful example is not alike grievous, but
some sinful examples cross the precept of love to God more, some less, some
dishonor God more, some less, nor alike scandal, some being more against the
love we owe to men, some less, some harming them more, some less; therefore
the same degree of misery is not awarded to all scandalizers by sinful
example. There are some that by a continued evil practice do scandalize
others, who are accustomed to do evil, as if it were their occupation, others
that scandalize by a foul sin, but into which they were brought by
infirmity, as Noah when he was overtaken with dru^kennesse. Whose woe is
doubtless less then the formers. Some there be that scandalize by total and
final Apostasy; others by a grievous fall, but so as they recover by
repentance, as S. Peter, and their woe is less. Some break out into sinful
example after warning given them to take heed of it: others because they wanted
a Monitour to warn them, and their woe is less. Some there be, whose
scandalls by reason of their eminency of place, gifts, or profession are more
notorious, and more heinous* others whose evil example reaches not far, and
their woe is less. Some that overthrow many by their evil example, some but
few, and their woe is less. Some that overthrow by their evil example their
own children, their own natural brethren, their own flocks of whom they ought
to be most tender; others overthrow strangers only, and their woe is less.
Thus by variety of circumstances the scandalls of some may be worse then
others, and their woe greater; however there be a woe allotted to every one
that sca^dalizeth by sinful example.

For application of this truth.. 6. Application 1. to move them to mourn that
scandalize by sinful example.
1. Hence men are to be advertised, what reason there is, they should bewail,
and mourn for such scandalls as they have caused by sinful example. The
greatness of the sin, and the greatness of the danger, should both cause
this humiliation. If S. Paul saw cause to mourn, and to be humbled for the
uncleanness, fornication, and lasciviousness of the Corinthians; how much
more cause had the Corinthians to mourn for themselves! Every one that tenders
Gods honor, and his own peace, is to show his hatred of sin by mourning for
the abominations he sees acted by others: such are marked and observed by God,
Ezekiel. 9. 4. Greater cause there is that the Actors themselves should mourn who
have harmed others, and destroyed themselves suo gladio, by their own sword.
It Is true there are no small number of men, that make a sport of sin, that
rejoice to do evil, and that they cause some to fall. It were fitter for them
to learn S. James his lesson Chapter 5. 1. to weep and howl for their miseries
that shall come upon them: For as all sins are mischievous, so doubtless
scandalls by evil example, will be very mischievous to the layers of them. You
then that by your evil example, have made others dissolute, debaucht,
quarrelsome, brawlers, fighters, murderers, lascivious, prodigal gamesters,
drunkards, liars, common prophaners of Gods holy name and time, deriders of
Gods word, holy services, and servants, idle, undutifull to superiors, froward,
factious, co^tentious, deceitful, injurious, superstitious etc. oh go and
bewail these sins as a double evil dishonouring God, and destroying men,
overthrowing them, and bringing woe on your selves, and therefore requiring
double and treble mourning for such mischiefs.. 7. 2. To move men to take heed
of scandalizeing by sinful example.


2 It concerns likewise all persons for the same reasons, to take heed of
giving evil example, to the scandal of others, specially of those that should
be near and dear to them. It much imports every Christian for the comfort of
his own soul, the glory of God, the good of others, to have his conversation
honest among men, that they which speak against him as an evil doer, may by
his good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of their
visitation. 1. Pet. 2. 12. It is exacted even of women the weaker sex, that
their conversation should be such in their subjectio^ to their husbands, that
their lives should have the effect of a Sermon to win others to godliness 1.
Pet. 3. 1. 2. The reaping of such fruit by well doing should be a great
motive to make Christians abundant in good works, much more should the
certainty of eternal life, assured to those that patiently continue in well
doing. Romans 2. 7. provoke them to love, and to good works. However humane
commiseration should move us to take heed of destroying our brethren by our
evil life. Should it not be a grief to thee to destroy him who^ thou art
bound to help? Can a man take delight to damn his Child, his friend to enjoy
his lust? Should it not be a joy to a man to lead others toward heaven, to
keep them from hell? Oh what a blessed condition would it be to every man, that
of him it may be said as the Apostle of the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9. 2. that his
zeal had provoked very many, his life had been a light to guide others into
the way of peace!

3 And as it concerns all men to take heed of scandalizing others by evil
example,. 8. 3. And others that they be not scandalized by sinful example.
so likewise to take heed of being scandalized by such example. It is their sin
that scandalize; it may be also their ruin that are provoked by them. They
shall receive more punishment that lead into evil: they also shall have misery
that follow, mark our Saviors words Mat. 15. 14. If the blind lead the blind,
both fall into the ditch. When we see evil examples, it were wisdom to
conceive, that these are but for trial, as it is said of false prophets, Deuteronomy.
13. 3. the Lord proves us to know whether we love the Lord our God with all
our heart, and with all our soul.

Though singularity be counted a reproach, yet undoubtedly it is a greater
honor, and a surer happiness rather to be singular with Noah, then to be
corrupt with a world of ungodly persons, to swim against the stream toward
the shore, then to be carried down the current into perdition, to contend with
the wicked for heaven, then to go down quietly to hell.

For this purpose learn we,. 9. Directions to prevent it.
1. not to glory in any man's holiness or learning, as if they were absolute,
for if such fall thou will stumble too. It is an heavenly counsel of the
Apostle. 1. Cor. 3. 21. that no man glory in men. Remember so to follow other
men's example as they follow Christ to stick to their judgment, as they stick
to his word. Blind obedience to men is a certain cause of stumbling. Conceive
we the best may fall, and then the falling of some will not move us to reproach
all, their lapse will not be our ruin.

2 Endeavor to be rooted in knowledge, to be of a sound judgment, that thou
may not need to lean on others judgment, or to make their example thy rule:
weakness makes men easily to stumble, strong walls stand though the butteresse
fall: A strong man can go though his staff break, a weak one falls
presently, so a man weak in knowledge that leanes on another judgment or
example if he err, erres with him, if he falls, falls with him.

3. Avoyde the company of evil men as much as thou may. Make no friendship
with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn
his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. Prove. 22. 24. 25. Evil company will
either infect or weary a man, one way or another scandalize him

4. Favor, not any particular sin, such a one as favors a sin is like tinder,
the least spark sets it on fire: he that loves sin will make any example, any
shadow of reason a scandal to himself. An upright heart when he sees others
fall, becomes more jealous of himself. A corrupt heart is secretly glad at
other men's sins, as if they did patronize his own.

CAP. 4.
Of scandalizing in special by abuse of Liberty in things lawful.
THe next way of scandalizing is by abuse of our liberty in things lawful
concerning which we affirm,. 1. A woe belongs to scandalizers by abuse of
liberty in things lawful.
That a woe belongs to them that scandalize others by abuse of their liberty in
things lawful against charity. It is frequently forbidden by the Apostle, and
therefore undoubtedly a woe appertains to the doing of it. Romans 14. 13. The
Apostles precept is, Let us not judge one another any more: but judge this
rather that no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers
way: which precept though it be delivered in terms appliable to scandal in
general, yet the series of the Apostles discourse shows it was specially
intended to admonish them, that they lay not a stumbling block in their
brothers way in their use of meats and days, things indifferent, which is more
plainly expressed. 1. Cor. 8. 9. Take heed least by any means this liberty
[about meates] of yours, become a stumbling block to them that are weak. And
Gal. 5. 13. Brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not your
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. But by love serve one another.

And there are many reasons of this precept,. 2. Reasons thereof out of S.
Paul's Epistles.
expressed in those scriptures. As, 1. it is a corruption of our good, when it
becomes another harm. Our good will be as no good to us, when it is thus
perverted. Plus aloes quam mellis habet. As wine mixed with gall and wormwood;
so is the use of a Christians liberty in things lawful tending to the ruin of
his brother. Wherefore the Apostle warnes us that our good be not thereby evil
spoken of. Romans 14. 16. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil to him that
eats with offense. v. 20. 2. It is a depraving of our knowledge of our
liberty. Our knowledge of our liberty should serve us to direct our selves in
our way: but not be made an ignis fatuus to lead others out of the way. But
rather as a Mercury, or hand to direct them in it, as a candle to enlighten us
how to remove stones and stumbling blocks out of the way of Gods people, that
the weak be not cast down by them. We know says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8. 1.
that we all have knowledge, yet we are to take heed that through our knowledge
our weak brother perish not for whom Christ died. v. 11. 3. it is an
unreasonable, and unequal thing, and so against justice, that the privilege
of one should be the undoing of another, that the benefit of one should become
the detriment of another, that one Christians liberty should be enjoyed so as
to harm others. Our liberty is not res tanti, a thing of that value, that it
should at all times be used even to the ruin of our brother. The pleasing of
our own wills should not be so accounted of, as to have them, what ever
mischief ensue to our brother. It Is true if the use of our liberty did make us
accepted with God, then it were equal we should please him, though we
displease all men. But the kingdom of God is not meat and drink: but
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. Meat
commends us not to God: for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if
we eat not are we the worse. 1. Cor. 8. 8. And the like may be said of other
indifferent things, wherefore the good of enjoying our liberty is not such as
may countervaile the evil of scandalizing our brother. Justice in the Emblem
waighes with even skales: So should we in the use of our liberty, not account
our liberty so weighty, as that our brothers good be accounted light. 4. To
abuse our liberty to the scandalizing of another, is against the charity we
owe to him. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat: now walk thou not
charitably, says the Apostle Romans 14. 15. The property of true charity is
(...). 1. Cor. 13. 4. To be kind and beneficial to others, not to be
hurtful, and unkind: It seeks not her own. v. 5. When it may wrong another.
He then that shall be so settled on this resolution, as that he will not abate
an inch of his convenience for the preventing of a mischief, or at least a
vexation to his brother shows that he loves himself much, his brother little
or nothing at all. 5. And as this offensive use of our liberty discovers want
of charity, so it does also want of mercy. For it is a kind of spiritual
slaying or wounding of our brother. The Apostle 1. Cor. 8. 11. 12. says that
by such offenses the scandalizers do (...), beat and wound the weak
conscience of their brother, as a man that does kill another with a destructive
weapon, and that consequently the offended person (...), perishes, that is
quantum per ipsum stat, as much as pertaines to him. And to the like purpose
dissuading from using our liberty in meats with offense he forbids it in this
phrase, (...). Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat, and again, v. 20.
(...). For meat destroy not, or dissolve not the work of God, that is the soul
of thy brother. As if scandalizing were a destroying or murder, such as a
soul is capable of. For what is the murder of the soul but grieving it,
perverting it, causing it to sin, to feel Gods anger? This is that which the
scripture calls Death, as being indeed the only death of an immortal
spirit, so that to cause this by using of our liberty is against the mercy we
are to show to our brothers soul, which is also aggravated in that it is a
destroying of Gods work, that is, the soul, which is divinae particula aurae,
that particle as it were of Gods breath. Genesis 2. 7. That image of the invisible
God, far surpassing in worth the whole mass of corporeal beings, and
therefore the destruction of it much exceeding the destruction of the body. 6.
Add hereunto, that this scandalizing must needs hinder the peace, the sweet
peace that should be between Christians that are members of the same body.
For whereas they should follow after the things that make for peace. Romans 14.
19. This course is opposite thereto. Peace is to be followed by yielding
somewhat to other men's desires, by being indulgent to their weakness, by
relaxation of that rigor we may stand upon. But in this way of scandalizing
another by the use of our liberty there is no yielding to the desires of others,
no indulgence to their weakness, no remission of rigor, yea besides it
causes a jealousy in the offended person of his enmity toward him, who would
do that which he is so much offended with. Which apprehension will assuredly
cause him to look obliquo oculo, awry on him, that offends, and instead of
embracing him, fly off farther from him. 7. And indeed whether there be
enmity or evil will or no in the scandalizer, surely there is some pride, and
contempt of his brother in this sin. For the Apostle when he speaks of the
fountain of this evil, derives it from the swelling of knowledge, that his
knowledge puffs him up. 1. Cor. 8. 1. And again when he forbids the cause of
scandalizing in the use of things indifferent he charge thus, (...). Let him
not despise or set at naught his brother. Intimating that if he were not puffed
up, with his knowledge, nor set at naught his brother, but esteemed him as he
should, he would prize him above his own conveniences, and remit his use of
them for his sake. Now pride whereby a man despises another as it is a great
evil in it self, so is it the greater in that by it comes contention. Prove.
13. 10. 8. Furthermore the obligation of christians binds them to the utmost
of their power to further the kingdom of God in men; his glory, and their
salvation. The mercy we have our selves received should move us to endeavor to
make others partakers of the same, we being called should call others, as
Philip having found the Messiah invites Nathaniel to come to him John 1. 45.
Peter being converted was bound to strengthen his brethren. Luke. 22. 32.
Wherefore for such a one not only not to strengthen, but even for unnecessary
things, in which the kingdom of God consists not, to weaken them is very
contrary to to the heavenly calling wherewith we are called, to the unspeakable
grace we have received: doubtless the Apostles rule is most equal for such,
That whether they eat or drink, or whatsoever they do, they do all to the
glory of God, giving none offense neither to the Jews, nor the Gentiles, nor
to the Church of God; But as he himself did, who pleased all men in all
things, not seeking his own profit, but the profit of many that they may be
saved. 1. Cor. 10. 3. 32. 33. 9. Unto which the example of our Lord Christ
should yet more forcibly urge us, as the same Apostle presses it. Romans 15. 1.
2. 3. We that are strong ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good
to edification. For even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written, The
reproaches of them, that reproached thee, fell on me. How much do they
degenerate from Christ's example, whom they ought to follow, who are unwilling
to suspend the use of their liberty for their pleasure, whereas the Lord Christ
laid aside his glory, emptied himself, and became of no reputation for their
sake. 10. Finally what is scandalizing our brethren for our liberties sake, but
a forgetting what love Christ vouchsafed them and us in that he dyed for them
and us? Christ dyed for them that he might save them, we let them perish for
our pleasure. Such practice is doubtless not only a sin against the brethren,
but against Christ much more. 1. Cor. 8. 12. All these reasons put together
declare how great a sin this kind of scandal is, and therefore, how justly a
woe belongs to it. And so much the greater a woe is awarded to such
scandalizers as it is committed with, and so much the greater pride, wilfulnes,
or wantones: when it is done data opera, of set purpose, or with evident
foresight of the grievance and harm ensuing thereby to their brother. For
these things make it the more voluntary, and therefore the more sinful.

But then it is a very hard and knotty point in many cases to know when a
christian does thus abuse his liberty in things indifferent,. 3. The
difficulty of this point, and quaeres propounded to clear it.
when not: it being a hard thing to understand, when men are weak, when
wilful: a hard thing to determine what to do when the harm of another by our
use of our liberty is only suspected or feared it may be, but on the other side
probably may not be: what is to be done when it is likely that there may be
scandal either way in using or not using our liberty; what regard is to be had
to our brethren in case the Magistrate interposeth his authority. From these
and sundry more such difficulties arise many doubts to the disquiet of tender
consciences, and sinful presumptions in some, superstitious fears in others,
which beget no small evil, which points nevertheless I find handled ex
professo by few: only incidentally to other arguments here and there writers
clear some of the doubts belonging to this argument: wherefore I have
conceived it may be of good use to endeavor the clearing of such difficulties
incident to this argument as I have either by reading, meditation or conference
met with, not discouraged by the conscience of mine own insufficience, but
trusting in gods assistance, and with all assureing my self that among readers
there will be some, that conceive esse aliquid prodire tenus. And that the
order I use may appear, 1. I shall briefly say somewhat of things lawful and
indifferent, and our liberty in their use. 2. Of the ways whereby a christians
conscience may be restrained from using this liberty. 3. because the fourteenth
chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, and the eighth, ninth, and
tenth, of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, are the seat of this argument,
I shall deliver as rightly as I can a sum or the Apostles resolutions
concerning this point in those chapters. 4. Out of these things premised, and
such other passages of holy scripture and reasons as I find pertinent thereto,
I shall endeavor to resolve sundry questions or cases of this matter needful
to be cleared: yet not magisterially obtruding these resolutions on others,
but submitting them to examination, as remembering that the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14. 32.

In answering the first of these points,. 4. Answer of the first quaere what
are things lawful and indifferent, and what is our liberty in their use.
we are to take notice that there are some things lawful, which are in
themselves duties, and commanded by God to be done, which yet are to be
omitted at sometimes, for the avoiding of scandal. As for instance, reproving
of our neighbor is a duty enjoined by God, yet to be omitted at some times,
when the person to be reproved would be likely rather hardened, then amended
by reproof. In like manner may it be said also of excommunication, when there
is danger of schism; of punishing malefactors, when the issue would be the
overthrow of the common wealth. Pro vitando scandalo cessat rigor dissiplinae,
is an old rule and a good one, To avoyde scandal the rigor of discipline
cease. This truth is grounded 1. On that rule, which is among Divines
received, that praecepta negativa obligant semper, and ad semper, they always
bind and to always, that is, what is forbidden by God may at no time be
done: no man may sin to avoyde scandal; Their damnation is just, says the
Apostle, Romans 3. 8. that say, Let us do evil that good may come. But on the
other side affirmative precepts obligant semper, sed non ad semper, They
always bind, but not to always, that is though they stand in force always,
yet not so as to tie us to do the things required at all times. As for
instance though Gods command always binds a christian to pray, to give alms
etc. yet not to do these always: but when the glory of God, and the good of
our brethren require it. The knowledge of which time is partly to be taken
from rules and examples in holy scripture, partly from godly prudence and
reason, which every man should have as a light to guide him in discerning the
circumstances, which make such actions necessary. 2. On this consideration,
that those actions of reproof, punishing vice, and the like to them are
commanded principally to this end, that they may do good to men for the curing
of their evils, the furthering of virtue in them. Wherefore when prudence
shows that such actions would be either fruitles in respect of their end, or
contrariwise harmfull, they are to be forborne: in this case there is Libertas
non faciendi, a liberty not to do them, or rather he ought not to do them.
Concerning this sort of things lawful, wherein our liberty is to be
restrained to avoyde scandal, there needs not much more to be said, but that
when according to true prudence they appear to be necessary for Gods glory,
our own salvation, or our brethrens good, then they are to be done without
regard of scandal consequent; if to the contrary to be omitted. Few scruples
there are in men about these things, and such as be, may find some
satisfaction from the resolutions of the Cases concerning things indifferent.
The second sort of things in which we may abuse our liberty to the scandal of
our brethren are things indifferent. Now by things indifferent I understand not
according to the vulgar acception of actions indifferent, such actions as are
neither much praise worthy, nor much to be reproved; because there is no
special matter of goodness or hurt in them; as for a man to eat when he is
hungry, to drink when he is thirsty, to keep due hours for meals, or on the
contrary to omit these: which though they may be in common acception called
indifferent, yet according to exact speaking they are not indifferent, but
either right or sinful as they are clothed with circumstances. But by things
indifferent I mean such actions as in their nature, in se, of themselves, are
neither right nor sinful, neither commanded nor forbidden, as to eat or not to
eat such meats, to eat sweet meats or sour, to go or not to go on foot, to
go on foot or to ride, to wear such clothes or not to wear them, to wear
linen or woollen, to express our mind by word of mouth or writing, to write
on paper or parchment, to speak in Latin or English. In which, and a thousand
such like, a christian has both the liberty which is called Libertas
contradictionis, liberty in contradictories, to do or not to do, as to eat
eggs, or not to eat them, to wear a cloak, or not to wear one; and also the
liberty which is called libert as contrarietatis, liberty in contraries, as in
eating sweet or bitter food,; in wearing white or black In which there is a
greater liberty than there is about duties. For though we are not bound to do
all duties at all times, yet we may not at any time do the contrary: as,
though we are not at all times bound to reprove, yet at no time to flatter.
But in things indifferent there is Libertas ad utrumlibet, liberty in either of
which we like, to do this or not to do it, to do this, or the contrary to
it. That there are actions of men that are in se, of themselves abstracted from
particularizing circumstances in their nature indifferent as has bin said, I
take it as a certain truth, grounded on the speech of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 8.
8. Neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse; like unto which are those Romans 14. 5. 6. 14. 20. and on plain reason.
For the contrary assertion must needs suppose that Gods laws do command or
forbid every action in special, which is not so, as may appear by induction,
in the particulars before mentioned, and thousands of the like; I have read of
some that have gone about to maintain, that there is nothing indifferent: but
this opinion either has been retracted by the author, or conceived so absurd
that it has had either none or very few followers. In the manner that I have
declared I take it as certain, That there are indifferent things. It is granted
that all humane actions in individuo, in the particular or singular, that flow
from deliberate reason are either morally good, or evil, as agreeing to, or
disgreeing from Gods law. I said signanter to be marked, that flow from
deliberate reason, to exclude such particular actions of men as being natural
actions from natural instinct, or force of imagination, are not of moral
consideration; such as are the handling of the beard, rubbing the nose, shaking
the leg when a man thinks not of them, talking or walking in sleep. These as
not coming from reason, nor having any end are accounted not as rational
actions, but as animal only, though they be done by men, and therefore neither
good nor bad. But for all singular actions which are not of moral
consideration, that come under a law, being clothed with circumstances
specificating and singularizing them, as they come from reason, as Aquin. 2a.
2ae. q. 18. art. 9. or as Paraeus in Romans 14. dub. 10. ratione principij, hoc
est ratione electionis and intentionis qua fiunt, in regard of their principle,
that is the election and intention by which they are done, are either good or
bad, agreeing or disagreeing from Gods law. Thus every act of eating, or
wearing apparel, or going a journey with this or that intent, in this or that
manner, is either good or bad, right or sinful. But then it is as certain
that many actions of men in the general, or in specie, in the kind of them
considered without restraint of particularizing circumstances before they are in
actu exercito, that is, actually done are indifferent, as I have declared. And
it is further to be observed, that in these indifferent or middle things, as
they are called, the christian Church has greater liberty then the Jewish
Synagogue. For many things were not indifferent to them, which are indifferent
to us: It was not indifferent to them to eat swines flesh or not, to wear a
garment of linsey-woolsey or not, with many more. But it is to us indifferent
to eat swines flesh or not, to wear a garment of linseywoolsey or not. The
ordinances whereby the Jews were restrained in their liberty, were a yoke
which they were not able to bear. Acts. 15. 10. But it is removed from our
necks by Christ's death, who has abolished the law of Commandments contained
in ordinances Ephesians. 2. 15. And in this liberty we are commanded to stand fast
that we be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Gal. 5. 1. A liberty
then we have in things indifferent, and to renege and deny, it is to put on our
necks that yoke that Christ has freed us from.

Nevertheless though God has not made these indifferent things
intrinsecally,. 5. What ways our liberty in things indifferent may be
restrained.
or in their own nature good or evil, yet extrinsecally they may be made good
or evil: and that sundry ways. 1. By the command or prohibiting of the
Magistrate. For though the Magistrates authority cannot make, (for examples
sake) the eating of flesh, or the wearing of a weapon unlawful to me, as a
thing prohibited by God, and thereby intrinsecally evil: yet if he forbid
them, who is the lawful governor, and has power to make laws, or
ordinances, it is sin against God to do these things: because he contemnes the
law of the Magistrate, against the common good, which is the ground of it, and
the authority, concerning which God has commanded. Romans 13. 1. Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers: For there is no power but of God: the powers
that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power resists
the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. The same is to be conceived of the commands of Ecclesiastical
governors according to their authority, of natural parents, of tutors,
teachers and Masters according to the flesh, to the which God has commanded us
to be subject. Ephesians. 6. And elsewhere. Whence it was that the Rechabites would
drink no wine because of Ionadab the son of Rechab his command not to drink
wine. Ierem. 35. 6. For though by such mandates they cannot take away our
original liberty, yet they can restrain the use: the liberty we have in
things indifferent being the proper matter for the Magistrate or Governor to
show his authority of making laws in. 2. By a vow whereby a man binds
himself to do or not to do, to use or not to use his liberty in such or such
an indifferent thing. For by vows and promissory oaths, a man may make that
necessary or sinful to himself, which neither is intrinsecally good nor evil,
necessary nor sinful nor would be to him such, but for the vow he made: because
God has enjoined Deuter. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy
God: thou shall not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it
of thee, and it would be sin in thee. But if thou shall forbear to vow, it
shall be no sin in thee. And Psalm. 15. 4. it is made a requisite condition of
him that shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, that though he swear to his own
hurt, he change not. 3. Likewise a man may by his own opinion make that
extrinsecally evil which is not so intrinsecally. For though a man's opinion
cannot make that to be duty which is not so: yet it may make that to be sin
which otherwise would not be so, according to the Apostles resolution. Romans
14. 14. To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
ver. 23. And he that doubts is damned if he eat: because he eats not of
faith: For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. 4. The good or evil of our
neighbor binds us to use or not to use our liberty, as it may further their
good, or be a scandal to them. For though we are called to liberty, yet we
may not use our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another. Gal. 5. 13. Now it is to be observed that which is intrinsecally good
by virtue of Gods command, is intrinsecally good to all, to whom that command
is given (who are the whole world) and that which is intrinsecally evil, is
evil to all to whom Gods Commandment forbids it, (who are the whole world) and
therefore it is sin to any to do that which he forbids, as to lie, blaspheam
etc. But that which is extrinsecally good, is not good to all, but only to
those to whom the obligation reaches, and for the time it lasts; nor that
which is extrinsecally evil as being contrary to the governors commandment
or to the restrained parties vow, or the verdict of his own conscience, or
being scandalous and hurtful to his neighbor, is extrinsecally evil to all,
but only those who are under that government, that vow, that opinion, to whom
it happens that their use of their liberty may become the harm of their
neighbor. That which is evil for a subject of the King of England to do, may
not be evil to the subject of the King of Spain, who has made no such law
as the King of England: And that vow that binds him that made it, binds not
another which has made no such vow; and that opinion which one man has, and
that harm of our brother which restraines one man from the use of his liberty,
restraines not another, whose action would cause no such harm: in whose mind
is no such opinion.

Having premised these things I am next to enquire into the Apostles
resolutions delivered, 6. The summary of the Apostles resolutions about
scandal in the use of things indifferent delivered. Romans 14.
Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8. 9. 10. chapters concerning the forbearing of the use of
our liberty in case of scandal, which was then in agitation, and determined by
the Apostle in those chapters. Which that we may the better understand, we are
to take notice, that, as appears by S. Lukes history of the Acts of the
Apostles, and likewise by other histories of Josephus, Suetonius, Tacitus, and
others, the nation of the Jews was, in those days wherein S. Paul wrote his
Epistle to the Romans, dispersed over many countries of the world, in Asia,
Egypt, Greece, Italy: and particularly that many of that nation dwelt in Rome.
In which city at that time, the great city, which had dominion over a great
part of the earth, the Jews retained the religion and rites of their nation
prescribed by Moses, and were for their Sabbaths, Circumcision, abstaining from
swines flesh, and such like rites derided by the Satyrists of those times
famous at Rome, Horace, Iuvenall, Persius and the rest. Now of these Jews at
Rome it pleased God to convert some to the Christian faith, as well as some of
the Gentiles. We are likewise to remember that while the Ceremonial law of
Moses was in force, the Jews conceived themselves as strictly bound to the
observances of meats and days, and other ordinances of Moses, as of the
decalogue, unless in such cases as wherein the observing of them was against a
moral duty. For then that of the Prophet took place, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, as our Savior determines Mat. 12. 7. Whereupon the godly Jews made
conscience of obedience to the ceremonial laws, as to other moral precepts.
When in a vision all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things and fowls of the air were presented to Peter to
kill and eat, he replied, not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that
is common or unclean Acts. 10. 14. Hence they thought themselves bound rather
to suffer any torment, than to eat so much as a bit of swines flesh, as appears
in the example of Eleazar, and the mother and her seven sons, in the history
of the Maccabees. 2. Maccab. chapter 6. and 7. wherefore when the Gospel began to
be preached, and the ceremonies of Moses his law to be disclaimed, and
neglected, much contention arose between the Christians that were of the
Circumcision, and those of the Gentiles, concerning the necessity of observing
Moses law: in so much that it was thought necessary to call a counsel of the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem to decide this difference. Acts. 15. So that
although by Christ's death the necessity of observing them was taken away: and
the Gospel being promulgated, their observation became dangerous, as we read
Gal. 5. yet such esteem had the ceremonies of the law gotten, partly by their
original institution, and partly tractu temporis, by a long tract of time in
which they had stood in force, that many Christians not sufficiently instructed
in their liberty feared to neglect or break them after their initiation into
Christianity: as on the other side those that were well instructed in their
liberty did neglect them securely, they made no scruple of eating meats, of
neglecting new moons, and the like Festivalls. And thus was it among the
Romans when S. Paul wrote this Epistle to them. There were some that would not
eat meats prohibited by Moses law, but rather eat herbs; nor would they omit
the observation of days, as not knowing their liberty therein, so that if it
happened they did eat such meats, or neglect such days it was with doubting
and regrete of conscience. These the Apostle calls weak brethren, weak in
the faith. Others there were among the Romans, who made no question of eating
any sort of meats, nor regarded days as knowing they had lawful liberty
therein. And these are called strong in the faith by the Apostle: Now if this
diversity had been only in practice, or opinion, it had been somewhat
tolerable. But the difference in opinion, and deformity in practice bred among
them (as usually it does) discord and division. For whereas Christian charity
and holy wisdom should have prevented all quarrel between them, all harming
each other, contrariwise it so fell out that the strong despised the weak as
more scrupulous then needed, and the weak with an aggrieved mind judged the
strong as licentious, and unholy; and whereas sometimes the weak by the
example of the strong might be induced to do that Which, though lawful, they
doubted whether it were so or not, their consciences were thereby wounded. To
ease the Christians of this grievance the Apostle as an equal arbitrator thus
decides the controversy. In this case, the strong should take to them the weak
in faith, showing kindness and love to them, but not imprudently entangle them
with disputes which bred more doubts in them, while they sought to cure their
error about meats and days: that they should not despise or slight them for
their weakness, but show them all respect as believers: that they should enjoy
their knowledge to themselves, but not use their liberty to the grievance of
their brethren: that they should not so look to their own much content in the
use of their privilege as to damnifie their brethren, and to wound their
conscience. On the other side the Apostle admonishes the weak, that they
neither censure nor judge their brethren, in the use of their liberty, nor yet
venture upon the use of their lawful liberty, with doubting consciences, but
be sure that they be well resoved in their judgments before they enter on the
practice.

Concerning the other Scripture in which the Apostle sets down his resolutions
in point of scandals the case was thus, 7. And 1. Cor. 8. 9. 10. chapters.
Corinth was an eminent beautiful city called by Tully lumen Graeciae, the
eye of Greece, but a Pagan city. In which the people were wont to worship
Idols of Jupiter, Mars, Minerva etc. to these they built Temples, and offered
sacrifices of oxen and other beasts, as we read they would have done at
Lystra. Acts. 14. 13. Of these oxen and other sacrifices some part of the flesh
the Priests of the Idols had for their share: some part was eaten by the people
that offered, at the Feasts called Lectisterma in the Idols Temple, some part
was perhaps sold in the shambles, and bought by any that would, and eaten in
private houses. Concerning Idolothytes or things sacrificed to Idols: it was
the sin of the Israelites in Shittim, Numb. 25. 2. Psalm. 106. 28. That they did
eat the sacrifices of the dead. And Revel. 2. 14. in the Epistle to the Church
of Pergamus the angel of that Church is accused that there were some that held
the doctrine of Balaam to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and in the Apostles
decree it was given in charge to christians. Acts. 15. 29. (...). To abstain
from things sacrificed to Idols, called v: 20. (...), the pollutions of Idols.
Now it pleased God to gather to himself in Corinth much people by the
ministry of S. Paul, Acts. 18. 10. although in that, as in other cities where
christians were a part remained infidels. The converted christians were for the
most part of the meaner sort of people, as the Apostle tells them, 1. Cor. 1.
26. ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called. In this calling it happened that
sometime the wife was converted to the christian faith, the husband remaining
in unbelief; sometime the husband converted, the wife unconverted, sometime
the servant converted, and not the Master, the child and not the Father, this
man a christian, his next neighbor a Pagan, as appears by the Apostles
suppositions. 1. Cor. 7. 13. etc. Insomuch that christians were mingled with
Pagans, as in some countries, Turks and Christians, Jews and Christians, or as
in England Protestants and Papists, excepting that the Pagans were the greater
number, and more potent party. This vicinity, and these relations caused a
necessity of civil converse between them: For otherwise the christians must
needs go out of the world. 1. Cor. 5. 10. These things likewise occasioned
the Pagans sometimes to invite the christians to go with them to their Feasts
at the Idols Temple: sometimes to their own tables. The meat that was dressed
at their Feasts and other meals sometimes happened to be such meat as had
been offered before in sacrifice to the Idol, either bought in the shambles,
or sent by a neighbor as a gift. The christians were of diverse sorts, some
that had knowledge 1. Cor. 8. 10. some that had not the same measure of
knowledge, but were weak, had weak consciences v. 7. 9. The case standing thus,
the doubt was how the christians in the city of Corinth were to carry
themselves upon these occasions. The resolution of the Apostle is this. That
they might by no means eat Idolothytes or things sacrificed to Idols, (...) in
the Idols temple. For that is to partake of the table of Devils. 1. Cor. 10.
21. an Idol service, and likewise a scandal to a weak brother to embolden
him to eat those things which are offered to Idols. 1. Cor. 8. 10. And so this
scandalizing is by evil example, in a thing manifestly evil. But if
christians were invited to a private house by an unbeleever, they might go,
and eat the meat that had been offered to Idols, either wittingly, or
unwittingly, or if the meat offered to the Idol were to be sold in the
shambles they might buy it, dress it, eat it asking no question for conscience
sake. For the earth being the Lords, and the fullness thereof, the flesh by the
offering to the Idol could not be so alienated from him, but that Gods people
might eat it as Gods creature given them for food. Nevertheless if any were
present, that being weak in knowledge should think it unlawful to eat such
meat, and by saying, This is offered in sacrifice to Idols, should intimate to
thee his opinion of unlawfullnesse to eat it, and his grief to see thee
partake of it, in this case the christian were to forbear eating to avoyde
offense, which might be taken by his brother, being grieved, or else by his
example in eating that meat which he knew to be offered to an Idol, emboldened
to think that in some sort he might communicate with an Idolater in
Idol-service, that there is no unreconcileable difference between Paganism
and Christianity. Which might easily happen to a weak christian not fully
instructed in the truth of his christian liberty,. 8. Que. 1. Who are to avoyde
scandalizing by abuse of liberty in things indifferent.
how far it extends, and where it ends.

In this brief manner I have as rightly and clearly as I could, gathered the
matters of those chapters: from whence we may draw sundry things useful for
the resolving of questions incident to this point, to which I now hasten; where
first it may be asked, who are bound to avoyde scandalizing of others by their
use of their liberty in things lawful? Answ. Whereto the answer is: All
christians as christians: for this is a fruit of christian charity which all
are bound to have. They that are called to liberty are not to use their liberty
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love to serve one another. Gal. 5. 13. The
same God that has by his letters patents given his people so ample a
privilege, as leave to use all indifferent things, has thought good
nevertheless to limit it by the law of charity.

A second question may be,. 9. Que. 2. Scandalizing of whom by such abuse is to
be avoided.
whether a christian be bound to avoyde scandalizing of evil, or unbelieving
persons by the use of this liberty? Answ. whereto I answer: That although the
Apostle in the places Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. which I called the seat of this
argument, speak only of not scandalizing our weak brother by the use of our
liberty, that being sufficient for the present occasion: yet in the conclusion
of his dispute. 1. Cor. 10. 32. He charge christians to give none offense
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, but as he
himself did, who pleased all men in all things, not seeking his own profit,
but the profit of many that they might be saved. Which rule of S. Paul is
conformable to the practice of our Lord Christ who paid tribute money to the
Collectors who were neither themselves, nor their masters any of Christ's
Disciples, but evil persons, and that for this end least he should offend
them. Mat. 17. 27. And if the scripture require (as it does 1. Pet. 3. 1. and
that of women) good conversation that those who obey not the word may without
the word be won by good conversation, undoubtedly for the same reason it
requires we should not scandalize them by abuse of our liberty, least they be
farther off, from being wonn, There is a kind of charity or love due to them,
and consequently some care of not offending them. There Is not due the same
tenderness of offending an unbeliever or evil person as of a christian
brother; but as there is due to a christian brother a more affectionate love,
so likewise a more tender regard of not scandalizing him. Servants are to be
careful of not hurting their Masters cattle, but most careful of their
children: so ought christians to be careful of not offending evil men, who
are Gods creatures, but most careful not to offend the godly, who are his
children. Yet that the resolution of this question may be more full, I
conceive, that unbelievers or evil persons are differently considerable in
this matter of not scandalizing them, according to the diversity of their
estrangednesse from the true faith, or obedience. For, 1. there are some who
though they yet profess not the truth, nor show themselves to be regenerate,
have yet some beginnings of affection to the truth we profess, and the
obedience we practice: that are less vicious, more inclinable to hearken to
the truth then some others that begin to perceive some part of the truth. As
our Savior said of the Scribe that answered him discreetly, telling him, that
to love the Lord with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with
all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love our neighbor as our
selves is more then all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices (whereby he
showed that he had not the dreggs of Pharisaisme in him, which was to conceive
themselves righteous by observing the outward ceremonies, and duties of the
law) that he was not far from the kingdom of God: Mark. 12. 34. Now of such
we are to be tender that we scandalize not them by intempestive use of our
liberty. If a Nicodemus among the Pharisees be but a listner to his doctrine,
our Savior thinks good not to reject him, but to draw him on further: if a
Papist yet remaining in the Roman Church begin to mislike the Idolatry of that
church, their magnifying their own merits etc. and yet out of a reverend
esteem though erroneous of the Church of Romes orders mislikes the eating of
flesh on a friday, Charity should make me rather forbear in such a ones
presence to eat flesh at such a time then to give occasion to such a one to
count our religion licentious, and thereby estrange him the further from the
truth. For since a principal end of not offending our brother by the abuse of
our liberty, is that we may seek his profit, that he may be saved, if in
true judgment, or our opinion, the not scandalizing him would tend to that
end, we ought to forbear out liberty, that we may not offend him. It being a
sure rule, Finis dat mediis ordinem, mensuram, and amabilitatem. The end gives
order, measure, and desireablenesse to the means thereto tending. 2. Some
unbelieving, evil, or unregenerate persons are further off from the kingdom
of God being plain, and professed adversaries to the way of truth, and
righteousness, but yet not out of wilful malice, but blind zeal. As the
Jews of whom the Apostle speaks, that they had a zeal of God, though not
according to knowledge. Romans 10. 2. Now the scandalizing of such men is not so
much to be regarded as of the former: because there is less likelihood that
our forbearing our liberty should alter their judgments, or practice, yet for
as much as according to the nature of vehement persons out of ignorance though
they be impetuously carried in that they do, yet if they discover their
error they are as soon turned: therefore it is probable that some yielding to
them may win upon their affections, and make way for such insinuation as may
give opportunity to discover to them the truth, we ought so far to abstain from
our liberty as not to confirm them in hard conceits of the truth, and so far
to please them in the use of our lawful liberty, as may serve to make way for
the recovering of them out of error. As for example sake: If we should meet
with a zealous Papist that never understood the truth of our profession: but is
an adversary to it upon misinformation of his Priest, his parents,
acquaintance, as that our religion is mere novellisme, carnal, licentious
etc. We ought so far to abstain from our lawful liberty, or to please him
in a thing lawful which he affects, as in our apprehension we conceive may
make way to our reducing him into the right way. And this I find agreeable to
the Apostles resolution. 1. Cor. 9. 19. 20. 21. 22. Though I be free from all
men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more.
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that
are under the the law as under the law, that I might gain them that are under
the law. To them that are without law, as without law (being not without law to
God, but under the law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without law:
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some. Lively exemplifications of
which professions were his practice of taking a vow on him related Act. 21. of
his forbearing his power, 1. Cor. 9. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 9. wherein he did not
show hypocritical policy, like those that Proteus-like can transform
themselves into any shape for evil purposes: but serpentine wisdom joined
with dove-like innocence, commended by our Savior Mat. 10. 16. the end being
not his own advantage but the salvation of others. 3. Some are adversaries to
the truth out of malice, being settled therein, by love of unrighteousness, and
hatred of righteousness. The converting of these being in a sort desperate,
the scandalizing of them by the use of our liberty is not to be regarded. Our
Saviors example Mat. 15. 14. is a sufficient rule to direct us in this case.
When the Pharisees were offended because of his doctrine, that that which goes
into the mouth defiles not a man, our Savior bids let them alone; since they
are wilful, and incurable, Let them fall into the ditch. It Is true we are
bound by Gods law not willingly to provoke any to anger, much less to provoke
any greater sin in him: but rather to avoyde such things as may cause these
evils. But when we meet with such enemies as being wholly possessed by Satan,
are settled in their enmity against us, and the truth we profess: we then are
to be careless of offending them by enjoying our convenience, as knowing that
our restraint may be uncomfortable to us and unprofitable to them.. 10. Que. 3.
Whether strong ones are obnoxious to such scandal.


A third question may be: whether strong ones may be scandalized by the use of
Christian liberty? Aquin. 2a, 2ae, q. 43. art. 5. propoundes this question,
whether passive scandal may befall the perfect, and he denies it, alleging a
sayng of S. Hierome, majores scandala non patiuntur: Those that are stronger
suffer not sca^dals. But I conceive there is need of a fuller answer. That the
strongest may be tempted by scandal is no question. Our Savior was tempted
by a scandalous advice of Peter to forsake the work which he had received from
his Father, and for which he came into the world. That men of great strength
for knowledge, and godliness, may be overcome by scandal, the falls of David,
Solomon, and others show. The best strength of a Christian is but weakness
without a continued supply of strength from above. But concerning a scandal
from the use of Christian liberty it may either arise from an evil will,
jealousy, prejudice, whereby the mind prepossessed is offended with that which
another does: or else it may arise from ignorance of the lawfulnes of such
liberty. Scandal proceeding from the former motives may be in them that are
strong in knowledge, or in the faith. Evil will or evil prejudice may cause
such a one to misinterpret another man's action, and to take offense thereat.
But this offense comes a malo ingenio, from an ill mind in him, wanting charity
and wisdom, and therefore he is in true estimation the scandalizer of
himself. As for scandal of the latter sort from ignorance the strong are not
liable to it. For if a man bestrong he is sufficiently instructed in the truth
of our liberty, and therefore mistakes it not, nor excepts against it.

A fourth question may be: 11. Que. 4. Who are to be accounted weak ones nec
to be thus scandalized?
who are to be accounted weak brethren whom we may not scandalize by the use of
our Christian liberty? I answer: In the Apostles reasonings in the chapters
before abridged, those are reputed weak brethren who either because of their
late conversion had not time to learn the doctrine of christian liberty, or
otherwise for want of right information knew it not. It is the speech of Dr
Ames l. 5. de consci. c. 11.. 14. pusilli habendi sunt illi qui non sunt
sufficienter instituti circa libertatem nostram: They are to be accounted
little or weakones, who are not sufficiently instructed about our liberty. And
for this he cites 1. Cor. 8. 7. And indeed in that place the Apostle opposes
the strong to them that have not knowledge. Whence it follows that those that
have been taught the doctrine of Christian liberty, and yet are offended are
not the weak ones of whom the Apostle speaks. For if after instruction they
still stumble it has more of wilfulnes in it the^ of weakness, if they may be
said to be weak, yet not merely weak, because their ignorance is either from
negligence, or averseness of mind, and so is ignorance affected, or weakness ex
prava dispositione, out of an ill disposition. Dr Ames, ubi supra,. 15. tells us
they may be accounted weak to whom the reason of our liberty has bin rendered.
For they may be not capeable of conceiving. Which speech of his has need of
further consideration. For the incapacity he speaks of may be conceived to be
either from weakness of natural parts of understanding: And indeed such
incapacity may make men weak notwithstanding instruction: but then it is not
to be imagined, but that they which have natural parts sufficient to conceive
the mysteries of faith, have natural parts sufficient to conceive the doctrine
of the lawfulness of christian liberty: if they can understand the one, they
may understand the other: if they understand neither, they may be termed more
rightly infidels, then weak in faith; blind, then dimmesighted: or else such
incapacity as he speaks of may arise out of preconceived opinions, alienation
of mind, prejudice against the teacher, e studio partium, from an addictednes
to some peculiar party, or from such other cause. For such motes or beams
rather in men's eyes will mar their sight of that which they should perceive,
and so make them uncapeable for the time of discerning that which is right. But
then it is to be considered, that this incapacity is vicious and voluntary, at
least ratione causae: in respect of the cause of it, and therefore such persons
are not to be reputed such weak ones as the Apostle speaks of, who were simple
hearted, not wilful, whereas these are rather wilful then weak, and have
more in them of evil will, than of little wit. And this may be known by
sundry signs of their perverseness. As namely by unwillingnes to be taught in
the truth of christian liberty contrary to their opinions: despising all that
is said or written to clear that truth, which is against their minds:
declining the hearing or reading of that which is said for it, or hearing and
reading unequally, not weighing or considering the one, but with rashness
continuing in the former, perverting, misconstruing, misreporting, that which
is written or spoken, keeping in the same time after such declaration as might
convince, wrangling, and censuring, and quarrelling with those that vary from
them, zeal for their own opinion, resolution even to suffering for their way.
By which and such like signs men's wilful weakness may be discerned from
simple ignorance. 12. Qu. 5. what evil consequent on our action makes
scandalizing of this sort.


A fifth question may be, what effect upon the use of our liberty, either
consequent or likely to be consequent, is necessary to make the use of our
liberty a Scandalizing of our brother? In answer whereto it is needful that
that be remembered which I declared before Chapter 2. 4. in the explication of the
definition of Scandal, to wit, that ruin or falling which is made the
adequate effect of scandal, must be understood both in a primary, and a
secondary sense, and that the action causing either sort of ruin may be
called scandal; so that if by the use of our liberty, we either draw our
brother to special sin, as by eating meats offered to Idols, to be
partakers of Idoll-service, or hinder them in their progress of grace, or
cause them to fall away, or cause discords, schisms, alienation of affections,
it is scandal. For any of these effects are sufficient to make our brother
stumble, offend or be weak, which are forbidden by the Apostle as the effects
of Scandalizing Romans 14. 21. Whereto we are to add, that it is plain by the
15. verse, that the grieving of our brother by our eating is a scandalizing,
though as I said before, in a secondary acception. In that speech of Abigail to
David, 1. Sam. 25. 31. that which our Translators read [griefe of heart] is if
the Heb. (...), scandal or stu^bling of heart. But if there be any other effect
unpleasing, as simple dislike by dissent in opinion without grief I find not
that such effect is sufficient for the denomination of a scandal. For the
Apostle does not speak of that effect in the places where he treats of
scandalizing: nor does it produce any hurt to our brother, unless it proceed
to some further evil. So that if a Christian should do that, as suppose wear
such fashion of clothes, which his brother has an opinion that it is not
convenient or lawful, and therefore dislikes it, yet because the thing is
doubtful, wisely keeps himself from mourning for it, censuring him, with
drawing affection and communion from him, I think such a Christian should not
by wearing of that fashion be said to scandalize his brother. But if through
weakness he be grieved at it, then it is scandalizing of him that is so
grieved.

A sixth question may be:. 13. Que. 6. How long we are to forbear our liberty
for fear of scandal.
how long we are to forbear the use of our liberty for fear of scandal?
Answ. Aqu. 2a 2ae qu. 43. art. 7. resolves that the Scandal of weak ones is to
be avoided quousque reddita ratione scandalum cesset. si autem post redditam
rationem hujusmodi scandalum duret jam videtur ex malitia esse, that is, until
a reason being rendered the scandal may cease. But if after a reason given such
a scandal continue, it then seems to be of malice. Peter Martyr loc. com.
class. 2. c. 24. Imo neque semper in ipsis mediis rebus etc. yet we may not
always yield unto the weak in things indifferent, but only until they be more
perfectly taught: but when they have understood, and yet still stand in doubt,
their infirmity is not to be borne. Bucan. loc. com. 33. quaest. 14. Rerum
mediarum usum ad proximi adhuc ex ignorantia infirmi, and in Christi Schola
pusilli, captum moderemur, idque tantisper dum rudes isti possunt erudiri: we
ought to moderate our use of things indifferent to the capacity of our
neighbor as yet weak by ignorance, and a little one in the School of Christ,
and that so long until such ignorant persons may be instructed. The reason of
which resolution is, because after instruction in true interpretation of
reason, as I said before in answer to the fourth question, they that are
scandalized are accounted rather wilful then weak, and therefore not to be
regarded. Whereto I add that unless we pitch here, there can be no certain
rule given when men are weak, when froward: when we must forbear our liberty,
when we may use it. Yet by instruction, or giving a reason, I mean not a mere
Magisteriall avowing of our liberty, much less a jesting at the weakness of
him that doubts of it,. 14. Que. 7. What foresight of scandal consequent is
necessary to make a man culpabie of scandalizing this way.
but an humble, loving, and solid manifestation of it, to the understanding of
the weak.

A seventh question may be: whether that a man may be guilty of sinful
scandal in the use of his liberty, it be not requisite that he should have
some foresight, or preconceite of it, or at least such particular advertisement
of the scandal consequent, as if he had heeded it he might have prevented the
scandal? Ans. Whereto I answer, that if a man use his liberty, and such
scandal follow as he did neither foresee, nor imagine would follow, nor had
any advertisement of it fit to foremind him of it, sin is not to be laid to his
charge in respect of such unexpected and unthought of scandal. In this case it
may be infortunium non peccatum, his mishap that his action should occasion
another hurt, but not his sin, to whom the scandal was by no default of
his, no defect of charity, but by mere nescience in a sort unavoidable. This
answer may be gathered from the Apostles resolution, 1. Cor. 10. 27. 28. In
which the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that if any of the^ that believe not
should bid them to a feast, and they were disposed to go, they might eat
whatsoever was set before them, asking no question for conscience sake. But if
any man should say to them. This is offered in sacrifice to Idols, they were
not to eat, for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake, yet not his
own conscience, for he might use his liberty in respect of his own conscience,
who knew the meat offered to the Idol, to be still nevertheless Gods
creature, whose the earth is and the fullness thereof; but the others
conscience, who was ready to conceive some honor given to the Idol by eating
the Idolothyte. Now from hence it is plain, that if there had bin none to give
notice of the exception of the weak, there would have been no sin in him that
had eaten though offense had followed, which argues that then a man only is
guilty of sin in the scandal consequent on the use of his liberty, when he
has had fore-notice thereof. Add hereto that the scandalizing of weak
brethren reprehe^ded To. 14. is called a despising, or setting at naught of a
brother, ver. 3. 10. which implies manifest knowledge, that the weak were apt
to be grieved by the strong ones eating of meats: yea in reason, and agreeably
to the cases resolved. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8. and 10. chapter it is not a man's sin
unless he know the futurition of the scandal with some moral certainty, so
that if it fall out though we conceive it not likely it would, our Consciences
need not to be troubled for that accident: because however factes done by
ignorance of those precepts which God has enjoined are sins: yet contingent
events not foreseen by us, cannot make those facts of ours which are otherwise
lawful, to become sinful though the event be harmefull. God who has tied us
to know his will which he has enjoined us, has not tied us to know these
accidents, which caliginosa nocte premit, he reserves in his own breast. As it
is in slaying by mere chance mentioned Deuteronomy. 19. 5. the killing of a man is a
grievous misfortune, and in that respect to be lamented, but not a sin, nor
in that respect be repented: so in like manner such casual scandal (as I may
so call it) is to be bewailed as a mishap, but not to be mourned for as a sin.

An eight question may be:. 15. Que. 8. Whether the restraint of our liberty
for fear of scandal be universal.
whether the restraint of using our liberty by reason of scandal be
universal? Ans. No: scandal upon the use of our liberty, restraines us only
hic and nunc: in this place at this time: it does not take away, but suspend
the use of our liberty. So that though a man may not use his liberty where and
when there are persons apt to be scandalized: yet he may where and when there
are none, or he knows of none that are apt to be scandalized. In such cases
the reason of the restraint ceasing, the restraint cease. And this is
agreeable to the Apostles determination 1. Cor. 10. 27. 28. resolving that a
man that might not eat meat offered to an Idol, when it was showed him by
another that it was an Idolothyte, had yet his liberty of his own conscience
entire: which were not true if he might eat at no time such meat, because he
might not eat it at that time. To conceive otherwise inferres this absurdity,
that the likelihood, or accident of one scandal utterly extinguisheth his
gracious Charter of Christian liberty in that thing by which he was or might be
once a scandalizer.. 16. Que. 9. Whether scandal may be by omission of the use
of our liberty.


A ninth question may be: whether there may be scandal by omission of the use
of our liberty in a thing indifferent? Ans. Omission I oppose here to positive
action: As for instance, eating meats allowed by God is a positive action, and
the use of our liberty: not eating that which we might is a privation and
omission of the use of our liberty. Now that a man may be guilty of sinful
scandal by the omission of a duty I determined before, c. 3.. 3. To which I
add that since the lawful Magistrate has power about indifferent things to
restrain, or require our use of our liberty for the public good, and we are
bound to make conscience of obeying such commands, not for the things sake so
commanded, for that is in it self indifferent, but by reason of the authority
to which God has made us subject, and the end for which such orders are
established, which all members of a commonwealth ought to seek: therefore the
omission of doing such things commanded is an omission of a duty (rebus sic
positis) and the scandal consequent upon it, a scandal of the first sort, to
wit of sinful example. Moreover for a punctual answer to the present
question, I conceive that there may be scandal by the forbearing the use of
our liberty, when that forbearing though otherwise lawful, occasions men to
conceive some alienation of affection, some evil intentions, some
superstition, or the like evil in them who do forbear it, our Savior Math.
17. 27. would have tribute money paid for himself, and Peter, though he were
free, and that because the not-paying would offend them. S. Peter's not-eating
with the Gentiles was a scandal to Barnabas Gal. 2. 13. Frequent experience
confirms it that the forbearing of some actions which are in their kind
indifferent, at some times does grieve weak brethren, and offend others, when
they are apt to conceive such forbearance to arise out of a malevolent mind,
superstitious opinion, humor of singularity, contempt of others, or the like
cause.

A tenth question may be:. 17. Que. 10. Whether a community or a magistrate may
be scandalized.
whether a community, a nation, the public Magistrate may be scandalized?
Ans. The use of excommunication presupposes that scandal may be of the whole
Church by sinful actions of one member. Yea further it is determined art. 34.
of the Church of England. Whosoever through his private judgment willingly and
purposely does openly break the traditions, and ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be approved, and ordained by
common authority ought to be rebuked openly (that other may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and wounds
the conscienees of the weak brethren. Moreover experience shows that whole
nations or societies are sometimes offended with those who observe not their
customs, or orders, which are in their use indifferent, 18. Que. 11. What we
are to do where there is danger of scandal one way and of disobedience to the
Magistrate another way.
and not confirmed by any public ordinance, but by use only received: and
that such varying from them occasions anger, enmity, and such like evils.

An eleventh question may be: Whether since the Magistrates authority is one way
of restraining or requiring the use of our liberty, and the danger of scandal
another, upon supposition, that the lawful Magistrate commands the doing or
omitting of that which is indifferent, and on the other side there is danger of
scandalizing, the question is which of these respects I am to be ruled by? Ans.
There is no doubt, but that a good and wise Magistrate will remit in many cases
the rigor of discipline to avoid scandal, as I said before. 4. As the
lovefeasts, kiss of peace, vigils at the tombs of Martyrs, and other orders
of the Church were in process of time evacuated, when they occasioned
scandal. But if the Magistrate do not suspend his commands, then it is a hard
case. For either on the one side there is danger of nullifying the power of the
Magistrate, or on the other side of wounding or destroying our brother:
Possibly it may so fall out that a man's conscience may without much difficulty
wind it self out of this straight, by finding some circumstances
prepo^derating either one way or other. As for ininstance, if the Magistrates
command be about a matter of great consequence, for the safety of the
Commonwealth, to avoid a present evil: or if it be in a smaller matter if
urged peremptorily, and vehemently, on the other side the effect of the
scandal be not likely to be plain Apostasy, or the like great sin, but some
grievance of mind, or discontent of the party scandalized, it is without doubt
that then the Magistrates command is to be performed. On the contrary, if the
Magistrates command be in a smaller matter, not bringing any great evil, nor
likely to infringe the power of authority though the command be not followed,
if it be not peremptorily, and strictly, but remissely urged: on the other
side, the effect of scandal of the greatest sort of evils, very probable, and
in a manner present, giving no time to find a way to redress it, then in this
case the danger of scandal may prevail for that time. But if we make the
scales even: and propound the case thns: what if the danger of scandal be
great, and manifest, on the one side, and the Magistrate peremptory in his
command, and the thing commanded of great moment on the other side, the doubt
is, whether of these two is to be regarded? I determine that the Magistrates
command should in this case sway our consciences: and that for these reasons
following. 1. Because by the Magistrates command the thing required is made a
necessary duty though in it self indifferent. For the command that ties every
soul to be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. requires obedience to
them, which is the chiefest part of subjection. And this obligation of
obedience is antecedent to the consideration of the scandal. For the sanction
of the law precedes the accident of scandal. Now in things that are our duties
we must not omit them, or neglect them for fear of scandals. Therefore the
Magistrates command in the case propounded is not to be neglected for fear of
scandal. Against this argument Dr Ames. lib. 5. de consci. c. 11.. 16. seems
to except in these words: Nulla authorit as humana etc. No authority of man can
either take away the nature of scandal from that which otherwise should be
scandal, or the nature of sin from scandal given. For no man can command
our charity and consciences. Vel periculum scandali dati praestare, which I
render thus, or counter veil, or be preferred before the danger of scandal
given. Whereto I reply that it is not true that the lawful authority of the
Magistrate may not in things indifferent make the doing of that action not to
be a scandal given, which otherwise might be. For if it may make the thing
commanded a duty by virtue of the command, the scandal consequent will be
passive, or taken; not active, or given. As we determine of preaching, and many
other duties that they are to be done though scandal follow: so we are to say
of obedience to the Magistrate in that wherein God has made us subject to him
we are to obey him, though scandal follow. If it be said that preaching is a
duty immediately enjoined by God, the doing of that which the Magistrate
commands only mediately: I answer. Though it be true that for this reason the
thing which the Magistrate commands is not so strictly our duty, as that which
God commands: the Magistrates commands belonging only to his own subjects,
Gods commands to all: the Magistrates constitutions binding us only in
reference to a superior authority, and a superior end, the public good, and
therefore when they are contrary to the law of God, or nature, when there is
some pressing necessity that cannot be avoided by reason of which we cannot
do the thing commanded, if the necessity be true, and not fained, and the
not-doing of the Magistrates command be without contempt of authority, or ill
example to others, or if the thing commanded should be in truth plainly
contrary to the public good, as it may happen sometimes some commands may, if
strictly urged, (...) according to the letter, But Gods commands bind
absolutely, without limitation. I say though for these reasons the thing which
the Magistrate commands be not our duty so strictly as that which God
immediately commands: yet when it is a duty (as it is when it opposes not Gods
law, the law of nature, or the public safety) there is a necessity of obeying
the command of the Magistrate, as of obeying Gods immediate precepts: nor may
the one be omitted to avoyde scandal any more then the other. As for that
which is said that the Magistrate cannot restrain our charity. It Is true: for
charity is an inward affection of the soul, which none but God can command, as
none but he can search, and punish, yet the Magistrate may restrain the
showing of our charity somewayes, as in forbidding to relieve malefactors,
rebels, vagrants etc. so that he should sin that should prefer such a work
of charity, before a work of obedience to the governor, which is a work of
piety to a public person, and the Father of the country: whereas the other
is to a private person of common respect. But the Magistrate cannot command our
consciences. Answ. That the commands of men do in no sort bind the conscience,
cannot be said without contradicting of S. Paul. Romans 13. 5. Ye must needs
be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: They that say
least for governors, say they may by their laws bind the conscience
mediately, and by virtue of Gods precept, although not immediately and of
themselves. Now this is enough to prove that it is the duty of Christians to
do the lawful commands of the Magistrate. As for that which is said that the
danger of scandal is before the disobedience to the commands of men. I suppose
not: for the evil by disobeying of the Magistrate is as certain, if not more
certain then the evil of scandal, the evil of scandal more remediable then
the evil that follows on the disobeying the Magistrates command: for the one
is likely only some transeunt harm in the mind or conscience of the
scandalized person, the other a constant permanent harm in the common wealth,
such as many times overthrowes government, and in fine dissolveth a
commonwealth: the one usually extends to few, the other to the whole community.
And it is taken for a plain truth. Praestat ut pereat unus, quam unitas. Or as
Caiaphas once said, It is expedient that one should dye for the people, and
that the whole nation perish not. 10. 11. 52. Add hereto that there is a
scandalizing of the public Magistrate and others by disobedience, as. 17. was
determined, which is as regardable as well as the scandalizing of private
persons, unless too much partial respect sway men, that they will not judge
righteous judgment. 2. I argue thus, If it be not determined that the obeying
of the Magistrates command were to be preferred before the declining of
scandal, that may happen by such obedience, then it will follow that both the
Magistrate is bound to revoke or suspend his laws, when there is likelihood
of scandal to follow. For he is not to urge men to do that which is evil;
Now this would make all governors that make conscience of their commands
almost perpetually uncertain, whether they may command any thing or no: or
make their constitutions invalid, since they can seldom make any orders, but
that scandals will arise, as experience in all ages has proved. And subjects
also shall have power to neglect such constitutions, and so to make them as no
laws in the same case. The consequent of which being granted, I suppose can
be no less then Anarchy, and confusion. The mischief of which is greater
then I can express, and such as the avoiding of scandalizing of some souls
cannot countervaile: wherefore as it is said in the case of exacting an oath of
a person, that (it is likely) will forswear himself. Fiat justitia and ruat
coelum. Let justice proceed, though the heaven fall: so say I, let government
stand though subjects be scandalized. 3. Lastly, If a man in doing any lawful
thing make it known that he must do it by reason of the command of
authority, or it be otherwise manifest that that is indeed the reason of his
doing, surely he that is offended is rather unrighteous, and evil minded, then
weak, that will think that laws must be broken to please him: and therefore
the scandalizing of such not regardable.

A twelfth question may be:. 19. Que. 12. What we are to do in case of
scandal, either by using or not using our liberty?
If it fall out that in the doing or omitting of a thing indifferent some will
be scandalized if it be done, others if omitted, some offended if it be done
this way, some offended if not done this way, so that there is apparent danger
of scandal either way, what is to be done in such a case? Ans. D. Ames. l. 5.
de conscientia. c. 11.. 18. denies the case and says, nulla datur talis
perplexitas, ut necessarium sit pio homini sive hoc vel illud faciat, sive non
faciat scandalum alicui dare: There can be no such perplexity, that it should
be necessary for a godly man, whether he do this or that or not do it to
scandalize some one. Which assertion of his is both against experience, and
reason. Against experience: For the contrary fell out in S. Peter's case, Gal.
2. 12. in which it is plain in the carriage of that matter, that if he did eat
with the Gentiles he was in danger of scandalizing the Jews, if he did not
eat with them to scandalize the Gentiles. And it falls out too frequently in
our own days, that in the use of some rites in themselves indifferent, some
are offended with the use of them as Popish, some with the not using them as
arguing the affectation of Novellisme and singularity: Against reason. For since
scandal arises from the opinion that is had of a thing indifferent, when the
action of him that offends dasheth against it, and it is undoubted that even
godly men, may have opposite opinions of things indifferent, one thinking them
fit, another unfit: one thinking them needful, another evil, it is plain in
reason that it may so fall out that the doing or not doing of something
indifferent may cross the one or the other of the opposite opinions, and so
scandalize either the one or the other. The resolution of Calvin, Epist. 379.
is right and good, that a scandal of a few must not sway us in a thing not
repugnant to Gods word. Vbi major numerus pervincit, where the greater part is
on the contrary, no not though it draw an evil consequence after it.

And in like manner may it be said, ubi potior numerus pervincit, where the
better part is on the contrary, as the governor, the most wise, learned, and
faithful Christians. Likewise consideration should be had to offend those
rather whose offense is easier remedied, or the consequence of their scandal
less pernicious, then those whose offense is more hardly redressed, or the
consequence of their scandal more pernicious. For in such cases prudence must
rule our consciences to respect primarily the more considerable par, and to
avoid the more dangerous consequence.

A thirteenth question may be:. 20. Que. 13. What we are to do, when the
forbearing of our liberty endangers the loss of it.
It may so fall out that either by the frequent, or incommodious forbearing of
the use of our liberty at some time, our lawful liberty may be so endangered,
that an opinion may thereby be settled as if it were unlawful simply, which we
forbear only by reason of the fear of scandal, or as if it were necessary
which we only do to avoyde scandal, what is a christian to do in this
case? Answ. The example of S. Paul is commonly by Divines produced as a
resolution of this question. We read Acts. 16. 3. that Paul took and
circumcised Timothy to avoid the offense of the Jews though the law of
circumcision, and other legal ceremonies were then abolished: and he had
liberty to omit it. But he tells us Gal. 2. 3. 4. that Titus was not compelled
to be circumcised, and that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who
came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that
they might bring us into bondage. To whom says he: v. 5. We gave place by
subjection no not for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue
with them. While the liberty of uncircumcision was unchallenged he did with
security circumcise Timothy to avoyde offense: but when the truth of christian
liberty was challenged and endangered he would not yield to do the same to
Titus. From which practice avouched by S. Paul, and therefore propounded by the
holy Ghost as imitable by us, this rule may be safely inferred: that when by
use or disuse of our liberty, the truth of our liberty is in danger to be
impeached, we are then rather to put our selves on the hazard of scandal,
then to loose our liberty it self. For it is a more precious thing not to have
our consciences in bondage or the truth impaired, then can be countervailed by
the pleasing of some men. Truth is an unvalluble Jewel, which we are not to
forfeit to win men's affections. Praestat ut scandalum admittatur, quam veritas
amittatur: is the approved rule of S. Augustine. Better admit scandal then
loose truth.

A fourteenth question may be:. 21. Que. 14. What are we to do when there is
danger of life by not using our liberty, of scandal by using it.
whether if on the one side our life should be endangered by forbearing the use
of our liberty, and on the other side there be likelihood of scandal if we
use it, is our liberty to be used to save our lives, or to be forborne to avoid
scandal? Answ. It is a rule received, which Aqu. 2a, 2ae, qu. 43. art. 7.
cites as out of S. Hierome, that that which may be omitted, Salva triplici
veritatescil. vitae, justitiae, and doctrinae, a threefold truth of life,
righteousness and doctrine being preserved, ought to be omitted to avoyde
scandal. According to which exception it follows that we are not to omit our
liberty when our life is endangered. And there is plain reason for it, from the
precedence of our selves among the objects of charity before others: we are to
love others as ourselves, not before our selves. 2. In respect of the greatness
of the danger of loosing our life above the danger of scandal. For, 1. the
danger of loosing life may be more certain in forbearing our liberty, when
natural necessity requires us to use it, then the event of scandal can be,
depending on the changeable mind and will of man. 2. The evil of loosing life
is plainly remediless: life lost cannot be recovered by man: but the evil of
scandal is not simpliciter irremediabile, simply remediless, but that
instruction, advise, example, prayers may by Gods blessing restore the person
scandalized. If it were so that it were revealed by God that by using my
liberty to save my natural life, I should inevitably cast my brother into
everlasting fire, surely charity binds me to loose my life rather then to
damn my brother. But this no man does by using his liberty, at least God
reveals no such thing. But what means the Apostle then 1. Cor. 8. 13. when he
says; If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, least I make my brother to offend? I answer: The Apostles resolution
is not to abandon all meat and dye to avoid offense: but to eat no flesh,
without which he might live. And accordingly we are to forbear our
conveniences, and privileges which serve us ad been esse to our well-being:
but not our lives or livelihood that is necessary ad esse, simpliciter, that
we may have a being.

A fifteenth question may be:. 22. Que. 15. What we are to do when there is
fear of scandal to some and hope and hope of good to others by use of our
liberty.
whether if there appear danger of scandal to some in using our liberty, and
likelihood of opposite good to others by using it, we are to forbear it? Ans.
No: For in this case the use of our liberty to that end is a duty, as being a
greater exercise of charity, the scandal being not remediless, unless by
reason of a perverse mind: which kind of scandal is not to be regarded.

A sixteenth question may be: 23. Que. 16. How far we are to regard the
Scandal that arises from fancy without any probable reason?
whether we are bound to forbear the use of our liberty to avoyde the
scandal of our weak brother offended with our action as conceiving it evil
without any probable ground? Answ. I think not. For there was probable ground
of the evil of eating the Idolothytes 1. Cor. 8. and of the eating of the
meats and neglect of days mentioned Romans 14. And in reason, if a man's conceit
without show of reason on mere fancy shall hinder me in the use of my liberty,
my liberty is no liberty in effect. Besides if he conceive ill of my action
without some probable reasons moving him thereto, his conceit is rather to be
interpreted an effect of self-will, or ill will then of weakness, and so not
to be regarded: If it be objected, as frequently it is, that the Apostle 1.
These. 5. 22. charge christians thus (...). Abstain from all appearance of
evil, and therefore we are not to do that which seems to be evil to
another, whether upon probable reason or fancy though it be not in it self
evil. I answer, 1. that (...) signifies the sort or kind of things, answering
to genus and species, as Cicero renders it, and that Tremellius out of the
Syriak translates it ab omni voluntate mala fugite, fly from all evil will,
that is, as he interprets it in the Marginall note, negotio malo, sive re mala,
evil business, or evil thing, so that it might be translated, abstain from
every evil thing, or every sort of evil. 2. That though Beza with others read
ab omni specie mali, from every appearance of evil: and expound it not only of
that which is evil in it self, but also of that which though not evil in it
self, yet seems so to others: yet more plainly according to the original it
is translated by the vulgar and Tigurine translators, ab omni specie mala, from
every show which is evil. According to either of which readings this text will
prove only that we are to avoid that which is an evil thing or appearance it
self evil, and makes nothing to prove that we ought to abstain from a thing
or appearance not evil but indifferent. 3. That Chrysostom, the Greek
Scholiast, and others apply it only to false doctrines, or lies of false
prophets. As if the Apostle had said, Though you are not to quench the spirit,
yet you are to try all doctrines, and to abstain from that which appears
evil: which would be nothing to the abstaining from the use of things
indifferent, when they seem evil to another. 4. But let it be granted, that it
is meant of evil appearance in respect of practice, yet it may be doubted
whether the Apostle means it of that which appears evil to another or to a
man's self? surely the series of the text does best suite with this
interpretation. Abstain from that which appears to your selves to be evil:
for having said, Try all things, whether doctrines or practices, to direct the^
what to do he adds, Hold that which is good, that is what you find upon
trial to be good, and abstain from all evil appearance, or appearance of
evil, which so appears to you upon your trial. Which exposition besides that
the words of Calvin in his Commentary imply he so conceived it, has other
learned men that approve it, and so far as I see into the text seems to be
most genuine. Now if this exposition stand, it makes nothing for the abstaining
from the use of our lawful liberty which appears evil to another, but from
that doctrine or practice which appears to be evil to our selves, that we may
not sin against the light of our own conscience. Lastly, if it were granted
that the Apostle forbiddes us to abstain from all that which appears to be
evil to another, yet no interpreter that I meet with understands it of such
appearance of evil, as is conceited to be such upon some erroneous principles
in him that conceives it to be such, or by reason of the mere fancy, or rigid
austerity, or evil will, or such like cause of him that thinks it evil: but
they usually apply it to such causes or signs of manifest evil as are means of
drawing to some notorious sin, as going to hear a Mass, which is a cause
and sign of Idolatry, or wanton dalliance which is a cause or sign of
whoredom. And they apply hereto that saying of Julius Caesar, that Caesar's
wife should be free not only from evil, but also from the suspicion of it. So
that even in their intent, this Scripture is not appliable to this purpose, as
if the Apostle did prohibit a Christian to use any thing that another thought
evil, whether he thought so upon probable reason, or no reason, upon some
ground or none. And to speak truth, the application of this text in that manner
as it is by some, as if the Apostle did forbid us the use of any thing though
indifferent in it self, when it appears as evil to another, without farther
restraint, is very absurd and so unreasonable as that it will bring a yoke
upon men's Consciences impossible to be borne, since there is scarce any thing a
man can do, but some or other, Infidel or Christian, weak or strong in the
faith, orthodoxe or superstitious will think it to be evil, that saying by
experience being found true, quot homines, tot sententiae, so many men, so many
minds: nor shall a man's own conscience only make a thing evil to him, but the
conscience of any other man in the world. These are the most material questions
which have occurred to me. Which having finished, I pass on to application
and so to the concluding of this point.. 24. Application 1. To manifest the
uncharitablenes of scandalizers by abuse of their liberty.


First then we may hence perceive how evil and uncharitable their
dispositions are, who use their liberty in things lawful without heeding of
scandal, surely there are every where a great number of men of this temper,
that will eat and drink and play, and cloth themselves, and do innumerable
other acts without the least thought, or regard whether others be pleased or
displeased, sca^dalized, perverted by their actions. Alas! said I they will do
these things without respect of avoiding scandal? I might have added, there be
not a few that make but a jest of scruples concerning scandal, yea that of
set-purpose with delight do such things as they know will offend, that they
may provoke and offend their brethren. All such persons do undoubtedly walk
after their own lusts, who neither for God nor for man's sake deny themselves
any thing. It is manifest that it is their Lust that rules them, not obedience
to God, not charity to men, not advised reason: and it shows a heart in them
ready to do unlawful things for their lust, who will do lawful things so
unlawfully. My brethren we are most apt to offend in things indifferent: it is
easy to slip from the mean to some extreme or other; and so much the rather
because in such things men usually walk not with much wariness; In things
plainly evil, men's consciences will easily check and correct themselves,
because the evil is so apparent: but in things indifferent, men fall into
evil before they are aware. Wherefore those that are wise-hearted, and
right-hearted christians, will so much the more watch themselves in the use of
such things: they are careful neither to offend God, nor men, neither to abuse
their privileges against Gods glory, nor their brethrens good; only men whose
lust is their law, will have their sports, feasts, fashions, and the like
things in themselves lawful, after their own wills, though God be provoked,
or their brethren damnified.

Wherefore it concerns us all to take heed of scandal in the use of our
liberty in things indifferent:. 25. 2. To dissuade them from this sin, with
directions against it.
I mean of scandal both active and passive: And therefore this admonition is
to be conceived as pertaining both to them that use their liberty, and them
that may be offended with it. 1. Those that are to use their liberty are to
take heed that they mar not their good by evill-handling, to wit by using it
to destruction, and not to edification of their brethren. Our liberty is a
great blessing of God: it is no small benefit that we may have his creatures to
use, that he has made us under himself Lords over the works of his hands: And
though he require obedience of us, yet he has given us a large scope in things
after our own wills, enough to satisfy us if we have any reason: we may eat
this or that, wear this or that, dwell here or there, and a thousand more such
things are left to our own choice: But what then? Shall we grow petulant and
wanton? Shall we be like an ungracious son, who when his father has put an
estate in his hand, follows his own pleasure, regarding neither parents nor
brethren? God forbid we should thus requite the Lord! Nay rather it becomes us,
as we have all our privileges from God, so to do as a good child to a kind
father, a generous Favorite to a munificent Prince, even to lay all our gifts
at the donours feet, to devote them all to his honor that gave them freely: to
spend that for his service which he has so frankly endowed us with. It Is to
be remembered that we are not Proprietaries, but Vsufructuaries of Gods
creatures: they are his goods still, though put into our hands, to occupy: the
earth is still the Lords and the fulness thereof: we may not say of it, we may
do with our own as we list. That we ought to do which the Apostle inferres
hereupon, Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, do all to the glory
of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Not forgetting our brethren, but as it is added v. 32.
giving none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God: or as we are admonished. Gal. 5. 13. Though we are called to
liberty, yet not to use our liberty for an occasion to the flesh: but by love
to serve one another. It will be but a miserable advantage to us to use our
liberty, so as to spurn at Gods honor, and to trample our brethrens good under
our feet: to obscure the luster of Gods glory, or to make gashes in our
brothers conscience. Shall a man because he is strong, kick the weak under
his feet? Shall a man use his own happiness no better, but to make others
miserable? No, no, (Brethren): Mercy, Justice, Charity, our Calling, Christ's
example, all these and more then these should teach us better, to seek not our
own, but one another wealth, to use our own good, so as not to spoil
another peace. We are to remember, that as our Savior said, we should have
the poor always with us, so it is true also, that we shall have the weak in
faith always with us, and therefore it will be a perpetual duty, (...) Acts
20. 35. to support, not to supplant the weak. -- To this end, 1. get a tender,
and compassionate love of thy brother in thy heart: thou art bound to love all
men: but thy christian brother chiefly. Let the love of Christ to thee, and him
be thy pattern: he would not break a bruised Reed, nor quench smoking Flax:
Isai. 42. 3. He fed his flock like a shepherd: he gathered the Lambs with
his arm and carried them in his bosom, and gently led those that were with
young. Isai. 40. 11. Oh get such a tender love, that ye may be as the Apostle
requires, (...) Romans 12. 10. Inclined to tender affectionate kindness one to
another in brotherly love, that thou may communicate to them the warmth of
thy bosom, that they may have heat by thee, and the kissing of thy mouth,
that they may have delight by thee, and the strength of thy arms, that they
may have safety by thee, not be exposed by thee to dangers, much less bitten
and devoured by thee: you are not borne for your selves: you have not your
goods only to serve your own turns. They are thy bone, and thy flesh, yea thy
spirit too, if a christian. If there be any excellency in thee: yet both are of
the same kind: If thou differest from him, yet who made thee to differ from
him? Or what have thou that thou have not received? Love him therefore and
despise him not: be tender over him, and not contemn him: 2. Get much
prudence also to know the condition, inclination, mind of thy brother. Much
charity may make us willing, but there must be much prudence also to make us
able to avoyde scandalizing. There Is such variety of dispositions, opinions,
and conditions of men that it is no small difficulty to avoyde scandalizing of
some one or other. Nevertheless if we do what lies in us, the Almighty will
accept of the integrity of our hearts, and not impute to us our defects of
imprudence.

And here I could heartily wish that all christians, especially those that are
set apart for the ministry of the word, would take heed of one evil to which
in these times men are very prone. I mean the teaching of many things to be
evil, whose abuse only is evil, not the things themselves, For what ever be
the cause whether it be facility of sliding into extremes, or unskilfullnesse
to distinguish between the use and abuse of things indifferent, or the
debility that is in many to reason, and to gather right consequences, or the
preoccupating of men's minds with erroneous principles, or that (...), as St
Basil calls it, the immoderate drawing things to a contrary way, as to think
that to be most right which seems most contrary to Popery, profaneness, or the
vitiousnesse of the times, or the addictednesse that is in men to hold that
which their affected teachers do vent, or studium partium, a desire to promote
some party, or to have, and to entertain opinions peculiar to such a party as
a Cognizance for them to be discerned by from others, or an affectation of
singular opinions, I say what ever be the cause the great Charter of christian
liberty is too much enlarged by the licentious, who make that indifferent which
is evil, or necessary, to the confirming of themselves in sin: and on the
other side is too much straightened by others, in making things evil which are
not so, expunging that out of this gracious Charter, which God has indulgently
granted us therein. Both which are contrary to Gods precepts, which require us
neither to call good evil, nor evil good. Isai. 5. 20. to turn neither to the
right hand nor to the left. Deuteronomy. 5. 32. And therefore as the one is a
transgression against God, plainly violating his precepts: so the other is an
intolerable presumption against the sovereign authority of the great Lawmaker
to impose laws on men's consciences which God has not made: and in the effects
of it, it is dangerous. For it is in truth a seminary of superstitions, which
do always attend errors of conscience, and the great nursery of scandalls,
in intangling men's consciences with unnecessary scruples, disquieting and
discomforting men thereby, occasioning the neglect of necessary duties whilst
zeal is bent on things unnecessary, raising many jealousies, alienation of
affections from others, rash judging, separation from communion, and a world of
other evils, which according to the fruitfullnesse of error arise from this
one root. Wherefore I beseech all christians, specially ministers of the word
in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to be very well advised either how they allow
of that as lawful which is indeed sinful, or condemn that as sinful which
is indeed lawful, and in their invectives against sin, so to attemperate
their speeches, that the abuse and use of things be distinguished, that corn
be not pulled up for the weeds sake.

2. As for those that are apt to be scandalized,. 26. 3. To admonish men of
being scandalized by another use of his liberty, and directions to that end.
it concerns them to consider that their taking offense at their brothers
liberty is their own weakness, and danger. It Is sure thy weakness of
judgment, or affection that thou art so apt to stumble at thy brothers
actions. And is not weakness burden enough to thy self, but that it must also
become thy brothers burden? Will thou make thy ignorance his punishment? Learn
better that most necessary lesson, descendere in teipsum, to look into thy
self, and to know thy self: to take a right measure of thy knowledge, and to
submit thy self to the reasons and judgments of the stronger. It concerns
the Father to be indulgent to his child's weakness: but the child should
learn to submit to the Fathers judgment. The stronger should favor the
weaker, but the weaker should prefer the stronger before themselves. 2. It Is
thy danger also: How do thou by such stumbling incommodate thy self! Thou
might learn good by thy stronger brother, thou take harm: he might be
a staff to stay thee, thou make him a stumbling block to overthrow thee: he
might ease thy conscience, so as to walk more comfortably: thou make use of
him only to fetter thy conscience that it may walk more heavily: he might
heal thy sores: he does but would: there is disagreement from that which should
promote charity, a breach where there should be strongest affection. Do not
thy self so much harm, thy brother so much wrong. To this end receive from me
these directions. 1. Acquaint thy self with the difference that is to be made
between superstructures and fundamentalls of Christian doctrine, whether of
faith or practice: Know this, that though he is no true believer, that
believes not all Gods truth which he knows to be Gods truth, nor truly
obedient that obeyes not all Gods precepts, which he knows to be such, yet he
may be a true believer, and truly obedient, who believing and practicing
fundamentals, things necessary to be known and practiced by all, yet believes
not, or practices not sundry superstructures, not out of unbeleife of God or
enmity to his will, but simple ignorance. Be not then hardly conceited of him
that knows not, or practices not through ignorance things not fundamental,
especially if they be remote from the foundation. Let not thy zeal be equal
for the smaller and the greater matters of the Law, as our Savior
distinguishes them, Mat. 23. 23. 2. Be not rash or too stiff in thy opinion,
when it is circa disput abilia, about disputable points, such as honest and
learned men do vary in, so that it can be hardly discerned, who is in the
right. Let thy conceits of thy self be modest: and be willing to learn from
aany one that which is truth. 3. Be not apt to suspect another unsoundnes:
Judge not that thou be not judged. Mat. 7. 1. Who art thou that judge
another servant? Romans 14. 4. Why do thou judge thy brother? We shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ. verse. 10. 4. Lastly wherein thou
agreest with thy brother, what thou have learned as he has done, profess
that; practice that with concord, and wait till God shall join you together
in one mind, and one way for the rest. Remember that golden rule of the
Apostle. Philip. 3. 15, 16. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus
minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

CAP. 5.
Of scandalizing in special by enticing practices.
THE next way of scandalizing is by devised practices intended to beguile men's
souls,. 1. A woe belongs to scandalizers by enticing practices.
and to harm their consciences: to which also the general assertion is to be
applied, and a woe is to be pronounced as belonging to them that by cunning
and subtle devices, by counsels, persuasions, laying before men alluring
objects, do scandalize others. Such a one was Balaam, Revel. 2. 14. Who taught
Balaak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication. But Gods vengeance followed
him, he was slain with the sword by the Israelites, Number. 31. 8. And St Jude
verse. 11. tells us, a woe is to them that run greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward. Of the same stamp was Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
caused Israel to sin, by setting up two Calves of gold, one in Bethel, and the
other in Dan, instituting high places, and Priests of those Calves, offering
sacrifices, and keeping a feast to them. 1. Kings 12. 30. etc. The issue of
which was the cutting off his house, and destroying it from off the face of the
earth. 1. Kings. 13. 34. And he his still styled by the holy Ghost Jeroboam the
son of Nebat which caused Israel to sin. The like woe in some one way or
another belongs to all those that tread in the same steps.

To conceive more fully of this sort of scandalizing,. 2. How men Scandalize by
enticing practices.
we are to consider that this kind of scandalizing has diverse acts. The
first and principal is in the brain, that contrives some pernicious device to
ensnare men's souls by, for the most part intended to that end: but if it stay
there, and show not it^selfe in outward act, it is only a scandal inchoate or
begun. The outward acts by which it shows it self, are either of words, or of
deeds. We may see it in the scandal of Balaam and Balak: Balaam devises a way
to scandalize the Israelites by sending the whoorish daughters of Moab among
them, thereby enticing them to commit whoredom, and to join with them in
their Idol-feasts: Balaam devises this, he imparts it to Balak, and He puts it
in practice: in this Balaam was the principal, Balak the ac^essary: Balaam
began the scandal, Balak perfected it. Ionadab the son of Shimeah devises a
way for Amnon to practice his incestuous lust with his sister Tamar, and
advises him to execute it, by which he committed a foul sin. 2. Sam. 13. 5.
This counsel of Ionadab was a scandal to Amnon by a subtle way. Julian the
Apostata abstaines from the shedding the blood of Christians which Diocletian,
and other Emperors before had shed: he saw that it did but increase
Christianity, men being ambitious of death that they might have the honor and
Crown of martyrdom. But he uses sly and cunning devices to ensnare men in
Paganism, he promotes the most zealous Pagans, makes the schools free only
for them, countenances them, ieeres at the doctrine of Christ, scoffs at the
rites of Christians, foments their contentions, and thereby draws many to
Apostasy; many to a love of Paganism, and thereby scandalizeth them.
Innumerable of the like subtle devices are used in every age to ensnare men's
souls by enticing them to do evil. And this sort of scandalizing differs from
that scandal which is by sinful example, in that the action of such scandal
is intended only for to satisfy the doers lust, though it becomes scandalous
by it is venomous nature: the scandal by an enticing practice is sinful, and
intended also to further sin, though sometimes the scandalizer know not the
thing he persuades to, to be sin. It differs also from scandal by persecution
in that that scandal is by force, the other by fraud.

Now all such kind of scandalizing by enticeing practices in sinful and
deserves woe,. 3. Difference of scandalizers by enticing practices in respect
of the part they act therein.
but all is not alike sinful: nor has the same degree of woe awarded to it:
For difference is to be made between scandalizers according to the part they
act in this tragoedy, or mischief of scandals. For there are some that are the
contrivers, and Counselors of such divellish machinations: others only moti
movent, being set on work they execute. The inventer and perswader in this
thing is deeper in the guilt of the scandal then the mere actor. For it is
more voluntary in him that contrives, more of his own motion, than it is in him
that acts what another suggests. He that leads and rules the other is the
principal, he that consents and follows is but a second. Wherefore the
scandalizing of the children of Israel by the daughters of Moab is rather in
scripture imputed to Balaam, who taught that wicked device, then to Balak who
put it into execution: and Jeroboam that devised the golden Calves is rather
said to cause Israel to sin, then the workman that made and set them up.

Secondly,. 4. Difference of scandalizers by enticing practices in respect of
the motives which incite them.
difference is to be made between sca^dalizers of this kind in respect of the
several motives which lead them to offend others. For first, some do
scandalize others out of craft for their ungodly and unrighteous ends. Thus
Balaam the son of Peor devised a way to scandalize the Israelites that he
might gain the wages of unrighteousness. 2. Pet. 2. 15. Jeroboam the son of
Nebat sets up two golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, which became a snare to the
people of Israel, and this was done to maintain his rebellion against his
Prince, and confirm the kingdom to himself, 1. Kings. 12. 26. 27. Jonadab
the son of Shimeah persuades Amnon to ravish his sister, and this was done that
he might the more ingratiate himself to Amnon his friend. 2. Sam. 13. 3. The
Pharisees devised ways of superstition and hypocrisy that they might devour
widows houses. Mat. 23. 14. 15. Elymas the Sorcerer with subtilty seeks to
turn away the Deputy from the faith, that he might retain his power with him.
Acts. 13. 8. 10. The false Apostles sought to corrupt the faith of the
Galathians concerning Justification by the law that S. Paul being excluded,
themselves might be affected. Gal. 4. 17. Those of whom the Apostle says, 2.
Tim. 3. 6. that crept into houses, and lead away silly women laden with sins
led away with diverse lusts, did it no doubt to make a prey of them. And with
the same spirit at this day do many seducing Jesuits and Seminary Priests
bred of the smoke of the bottomless pit scandalize many ignorant or corrupt
souls by drawing them to their impious Idolatry, and superstition, their
Antichristian errors and deceits, that they may maintain the unrighteous
tyranny of the Roman Bishops, maintain themselves, their Colleges, and
fraternities in a rich and plentiful manner by Drurifying (as the secular
Priests call it) that is by cheating their proselytes. And no better are the
ends of many other Heretics, as Socinians, Anabaptists, Familists,
Separatists and the rest of the litter of grievous Wolves, as S. Paul calls
them, Acts 20. 30. that enter among Christians and spare not the flock.
Cosin-germanes to which are all that for wicked ends corrupt men's consciences:
as the harlot that enticeth lovers to her for gain: that corrupt young heirs
in their manners by humouring them, pleasing them in their vain lusts of
swaggering and gallantry (as they call it) that they may in fine cheat them of
their lands or money by gameing with them, or some such practice: that make
their neighbors drink, put the bottle to them, and make them drunken, that
they may see their nakedness; an use in Habakkuks times. Hab: 2. 15. That they
may discover their secrets, rob their pockets, draw them to suretiship for
them, and such other evil purposes. Now all these do scandalize plena
voluntate, with full will, wittingly and deliberately, and thereby show
themselves to be full of Satan, thoroughly diabolized professors of his art,
which is to make it his business, to go about seeking whom he may devour:
they are as S. Paul called Elymas, Acts 13. 10. children of the Devil, enemies
to righteousness, that cease not to pervert the right ways of the Lord. 2.
Some do scandalize others by enticing practices not out of any oblique or
indirect ends contrary to their pretenses: but out of love and zeal to their
errors, or other things wherein they scandalize them. Of this sort are many
Heretics and Scismatiques, and Idolaters that solicit men to embrace the
errors they hold, or the superstitions they practice out of mere zeal to
their errors and superstitions. Iezabel was zealous for the worship of Baal,
and therefore she entertaines and promotes the Priests of Baal at her own
table, that she might further her superstition, out of the mad affection she
had to the Idol. Saint Paul says of the Jews that went about to establish
their own righteousness that they did it out of a zeal of God, though not
according to knowledge, To: 10. 2. There are not a few that corrupt others by
enticing them to drunkenness, idleness etc. For no other end but because they
love their sin, and would have as many companions with them in their sin as
they can infect, to build up the Devils kingdom. The adulteress with much
fair speech draws the simple young man to commit lewdnes with her, only to
satisfy her immoderate Lust, Pr. 7. 21. These are very grievous scandalizers
harming and destroying their brethrens souls to further their sin, and to make
others children of hell like themselves. And it shows in them a wicked
disposition that loves and delights in evil. Yet because it is out of some
ignorance (though it be such as is pravae dispositionis, of an evil
disposition) it is therefore less voluntary then the former, and thereby less
evil, and less obnoxious to woe. 3. some do scandalize others by fair words
out of misguided love to the persons they scandalize: so that the motive hereof
is an affection of love compounded with ignorance, and imprudence. Thus Peter
advised Christ to decline his sufferings, out of love as he thought: but
ignorantly, and therefore our Savior rejected counsel as savouring of a mere
carnal and humane affection. Mat. 16. 23. telling him that he was a scandal
to him. In this manner many carnal parents have dissuaded their children from
Martyrdom, from zeal, and forwardness in Religion, least they should be
lost, as they think, become melancholy, unfashionable, miss their preferment,
be mocked by men of the world etc. wherein they think they show much love to
the^, but do indeed scandalize, or harm their souls, as Peter did Christ. But
the woe due to this is less then the former, because it is less voluntary, as
being not out of a love to the evil, but to the persons they persuade through
simple ignorance of the evil to which they persuade.

Thirdly difference is to be made of scandalizeing in this kind according to
the matter or thing wherein they scandalize them.. 5. Difference of
scandalizers by enticing practices according to the matter wherein they
scandalize.
For sometimes men do lay a stumbling block by seducing men from the truth, in
credendis, in matters of faith. As those of whom S. Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 2.
1. that brought in damnable heresies, or heresies of perdition: and those of
whom S. Paul speaks, that sought to deprive Christians of their liberty in
Christ, that they might bring them into bondage, Gal. 2. 4. those that
corrupted men's minds from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 3. Some
do scandalize others in agendis, in matters of practice, whether pertaining to
Religion, or to civil conversation. As Balaam that corrupted the Israelites in
both: and all others that draw men to superstition, intemperance and the like
sins. Now the former are (caeteris paribus, other things being alike) the
worse sort of scandalizers: for as much as a pernicious error in matters of
faith is more dangerous, as more easily spreading and infecting the minds, then
a corrupt practice that has less color for it, and likely more resistance.

The reasons why a woe belongs to such Scandalizers are 1. Because they are
plain and manifest agents and factors for Satan and his Kingdom.. 6. The
reasons of the woe due to this scandalizing.
Our Lord Christ called Peter Satan, when he was a Scandal to him, though but
out of imprudence. Mat. 16. 23. much more justly may the title be fastened on
him that scandalizeth out of craft, who is ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked.
For this reason S. Paul styled Elymas the Sorcerer a Child of the Devil,
because he did not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord, Act. 13. 8.
For what do such but (...) with open face declare themselves for Satan, and
associate themselves to him in promoting his work, which is the devouring of
souls: and therefore may expect his pay, to whose service they have addicted
themselves. 2. because they are direct enemies to God. S. Paul styled Elymas,
an enemy to all righteousness. Acts 13. 8. And what is an enemy to
righteousness, but an enemy to God, Who loves righteousness and hates
iniquity? what do such Scandalizers but apply themselves to seduce men from
their subjection to Gods kingdom: and as much as in them lies, overthrow his
dominion? Now such as show enmity against God may justly expect hostility from
him against them, wrath in requital of their unrighteousness, and that in
proportionable measure, answerable to the measure of their iniquity.

For application of this truth.. 7. Application 1* To manifest the great guilt
of Scandalizers in this kind.
1. We may hereby discover the great guilt that lies on them, that by this way
scandalize others, and the great misery that belongs to them. Surely there are
every where many, who at least through imprudence do scandalize men to their
ruin by insinuating practices: many carnal parents that relish not the word
of life themselves, out of prejudice against Godliness, and holy zeal
dissuade their Children from diligence in duties of godliness, prayer,
reading, hearing, meditating on Gods word, as conceiving that these things will
make them silly, unfashionable, unsociable, dejected, melancholic,
opinionative, that it will hinder their credit and preferment. And therefore
divert the current of their minds to the reading of Poems, play-bookes, amorous
writings, acquaint them with merry company, pregnant wits, that they may learn
gallantry of behavior, whet their wits, erect their spirits. But instead of
learning these things, they learn for the most part the damnable Arts of
swearing, whoring, sighting, drinking, riot, scoffing at religion, and the rest
of those hellish courses, which are in these days veiled under the name of
bravery of spirit, and gallantry of carriage. And this falls out by Gods just
judgment, that while parents are enemies to that noble service which their
children by their godliness, and holy zeal might do for God the sovereign
Lord; to that Heroical fortitude of mind, in contemning the world, and
bearing the extremest evils for Christ's sake, which faith produces; that
incomparable joy, that true liberty which a holy life begets, that
surpassing wisdom, and useful worth that attend the knowledge of God, and an
upright heart toward him: their children should fall into the basest services
of their own lusts, and of Satan's will: enslave themselves to whores, and
drink, and such like effaeminating things, be filled with mere vanity, empty
of real worth, and prove a grief to their parents, a burden to their
country, the ruin of their houses, and which is yet worst, Children of hell.
And as this is the course of too many ill-advised parents, so it is the manner
of too many unfaithful friends, and misguided masters, who being led by the
same spirit endeavor to quench the beginnings of new birth in their friends,
and servants, by their counsels: if they perceive in them any sense of sin,
any degree of humiliation, any application of their minds to religion, any
alienation of their minds from the prophanenes and vanity of the world, they
set their wits on work how to prevent them, conceiving they shall do them a
pleasure, when as their Counsels tend to their perdition. And thus they do as
they say apes do to their young ones, amplexando strangulant, by hugging them,
they kill them. Unhappy men! that thinking to do good, destroy those who^ they
love, and procure a woe to their own souls in recompense of their counsels,
that under the covert of friendship act Satan's part: and precipitate themselves
and their followers into perdition: But besides these there are not a few, who
are zealous for corrupt opinions, for superstitious traditions, for drunken
usages, for profane libertinisme etc. And others who out of crafty reaches,
and subdolous intentions, for worldly advantages apply themselves to seduce
others. Of which sort are no doubt many emissaries out of Popish seminaries,
agents for separation, and other seedesmen of tares. Shall I take up the
Apostles wish, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were cut off that trouble us? So indeed
we wish, but my text puts me out of hope of attaining it in this life, and
therefore I can do no more but only read their doom, that a heavy direful
woe hangs over their heads, which will as surely fall on them, as God is true.
For how can it be otherwise, but that Gods wrath should break forth against
those that continue practices against him as his enemies? Can any Prince brook
the sowers of sedition, the seducers of his subjects from their allegiance, the
underminers of his authority? If Claudius Caesar were so blockish, we shall
seldom meet with such another. Certain it is, God will not so put it up, he
has proclaimed himself to be a God that will by no means clear the guilty.
Exodus 34. 7. that he will repay them that hate him to their face: Let no man
deceive himself, God is not mocked. There is a treasure of wrath reserved for
all such factors for hell. The same cup that Balaam and Jeroboam, and Iannes
and Iambres and Elymas drank of shall all seducing Jesuits and inveigling
Sectaries and promoters of licentiousness drink of. The same judgment abides
them: the same hell must hold them.

Wherefore in the next place admonition is needful.. 8. 2. To admonish men to
take heed of scandalizing this way.
1. To those that out of imprudence do scandalize, that they consider what
they do. Thou that disswadest from that which is good, out of ill-advised
love, consider better what thou do. Will thou dissuade that which God
commands? Will thou go about to cross his work? Gamaliels saying should
lesson us better: That which is of God we cannot overthrow, least happily we be
found even to fight against God. Acts 5. 39. Will thou destroy thy brothers
soul whom thou think to benefit? Will thou do the Devil service under
show of a good office to thy friend? S. Peter's case should be a memento to
thee, that thou may deserve the title of Satan by such officiousness. 2. To
those that out of zeal to their opinions and affection to their ways do
scandalize, that they look well what it is they are zealous for, It is good
always to be zealous in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. But in evil the more zeal
the worse. Nothing worse then Iezabels zeal for Baal; nothing better then
Elijahs zeal for God. In a wrong way, the faster a man runs, the worse; in a
right way, the better. It is mischievous enough to scandalize others
ignorantly; it is more mischievous when it is done with zeal: for that is done
with more activity, and after a more pernicious manner. It is pity good
metal should be ill placed. It might do much good were it rightly used, use
thy zeal for God, it will be thy happiness; if thou use it for evil, it will
be thy madness. 3. To those that scandalize others out of crafty and evil
intendments, that they do but weave a net to catch themselves. Thou that art
willingly the Devils agent, take this with thee, that the devil will overreach
in the end. What wages have witches, the devils covenant servants, but
confusion? And what reward can thou that art the Devils hired servant expect
but destruction? Thou have sold thy self to work wickedness: and iniquity
shall be thy ruin: while thou do destroy thy brothers soul, thou do by
the same labor damn thine own. Oh take this wholesome counsel: repent of
this thy wickedness: and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may
be forgiven thee: Acts 8. 22. use thy wit and zeal for God who will do thee
good: debase not thy self to do the Devil service, who loves thee only as a
Salvage does, that he may devour thee.

. 9. Lastly for those that are in danger of being scandalized by such
practices,. 9. And those that are apt to be scandalized.
it concerns them 1. to walk by the light of Gods word. For it is light that
must keep us from stumbling: If a man walk in the day he stumbleth not,
because he sees the light of this world. But if a man walk in the night he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him. John 11. 9. 10. So it is
concerning the soul, if there be ignorance and error in it, it is easily
scandalized, but light and understanding preserve a man safe. 2. To look well
to thy goings, without which thou may stumble though thou have light before
thee. Remember then that of Solomon, Prove. 14. 15. The simple beleiveth every
word: but the prudent man looks well to his goings. Be not easily credulous
then of men's counsels: trust not lightly to their judgments: Try their
spirits, examine their counsels, and opinions before thou embrace them. Forget
not S. Paul's rule, Romans 16. 17. To mark them which cause divisions, and
offenses contrary to the doctrine which is delivered to us, and avoid them. For
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and
by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple

CAP. 6.
Of scandalizing in special by persecution.
THe fourth way of scandalizing in the distribution before made is scandalizing
by injuring or persecuting. This way Maldonate conceives our Savior specially
intended verse. 2. and he gathers it from the Antithesis as it is set down by S.
Mat. ch: 18. 5. 6. for having said v. 5. who so shall receive one such little
one in my name, receives me. Adds immediately v. 6. But who so shall offend
one of these little ones which believe in me etc. Where scandalizing verse. 6.
is opposed to receiving, that is entertaining with kindness, and therefore
imports injuring or persecuting. And indeed scandalizing is an effect of
persecution, even such scandalizing as causes Apopostasie. Our Savior says
of the stony ground which resembles such hearers as have no root in
themselves, when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and
by they are offended, Mat. 13. 21. and that when many shall be delivered up to
be afflicted, many shall be offended. Mat. 24. 10. Wherefore we conclude, That
misery or woe belongs to those that scandalize others, A woe belongs to
scandalizers by persecution.
by afflicting, injuring, or persecuting them. Which woe belongs to all that
shall cause enmities, griefs, and other harmings of men's minds, by terrifiing
them with threats, by wronging them in spoiling their goods, by giving them
blows, or other ways, whoever the persons thus harmed be. For such works
being the works of unrighteousness shall have their due vengeance. Unto them
that are contentious, that obey unrighteousness shall be indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish upon the soul of every man that does evil. To.
2. 8. 9. But yet in a higher degree the woe belongs to them that offend
beleivers in Christ, who are the chief object of persecution, which are
chiefly meant in this place. Of whom the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. It is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble such.
To clear this truth I shall distinctly* answer these 3 questions. 1. wherein
persecution is exercised, and how believers are persecuted, 2. how scandalized
by persecution. 3. What woe belongs to such as thus scandalize them.

For an answer to the first of these questions;. 2. How beleivers are
persecuted.
persecution in Greek (...) does most properly signify an eager swist motion,
as in running a race, or in the chasing of an enemy flying, with an hostile
mind: by translation it signifies any eager pursuit, or seeking after a thing
which we would obtain, as when we are commanded Heb. 12. 14. (...), follow
after peace, and the Apostle Phil. 3. 12. (...), I pursue if I may comprehend
or attain to, he means the knowlgdge and grace of Christ. But in the
Ecclesiastical use of this word it is appropriated to those afflictions which
unbeleiving and ungodly men do set themselves to inflict on the godly and
believers. In this sense it is used Mark. 10. 30. where our Savior says that
the loss of things left for him shall be recompensed with an hundred fold in
this time, yet (...) not without persecutions, that is afflictions and hard
usages from evil men. And S. Paul 2. Tim. 3. 12. They that live godly in
Christ Jesus (...) shall be persecuted, that is, be ill handled by the ungodly
which thing they do many ways. Sometimes by seeking after their lives; so
that nothing will satisfy them but the shedding of their blood, as if nothing
else could quench their thirst, but a draught of a godly Christians blood. Yet
not all in the like cruel manner: To some it is enough that they can destroy
them: to others it is not sufficient unless they can cause them sensim mori, to
dye a lingering death by torture, so as to be long a dying, or that if it be
shorter for the time, it may be with the extremest pain, or with the
extremest ignominy. Nor are the impulsive causes the same in all: it is in all
hatred of the godly, but not for the same reason: and therefore the bitterness
of this hatred is in some greater and more lasting: in others less, and sooner
removed: S. Paul persecuted the Church of God: but he did it out of ignorance
and unbelief, and therefore was the more capeable of repentance and mercy, 1.
Tim. 1. 13. Iezabel persecuted the Prophet Elijah out of zeal for her
Idolatry, 1. Kings 19. 2. Herodias, because John Baptist had preached against
her companying with Herod, Mark. 6. Herod persecuted James and Peter that he
might please the people. Acts 12. In all there is malice, but upon different
reasons. And for the kind of death which they inflict on them, it is different
according to the diverse degrees of their malice, wit and power, some they
stone, others they saw in two, others they slay with the sword. Heb. 11. 37.
some they hang on a cross, some they cast to wild beasts, some they drown in
the sea, some they boil in oil to death, some they broyle on a greediron,
some they burn at a stake, some they make away in secret, as the Histories of
the Church do abundantly testify. Sometimes persecution reaches not to the
taking away the life, but to bonds and imprisonment, as it befell Paul and
Silas Acts 16. to banishment, loss of goods, as it befell the Saints, Heb. 11.
37. to excommunications, and casting out of the Synagogue, as our Savior
foretold, Ioh. 16. 2. to threatenings and hard speeches, Jude 15. to slanders,
and false accusations, Mat. 5. 11. to scoffs, insulting Sarcasmes, which are
called cruel mockings, Heb. 11. 36. and with which it is said Ismael
persecuted Isaak. Gal. 4. 29. In a word all those ways of inflicting evil,
whereby the malignant spirits of wicked men do harm the godly in their
bodies, outward estates, and name, are acts of persecution. Such kind of evils
sometimes happen to the godly by voluntary undertakings, as death, and danger,
and wants by reason of travail to promote the Gospel, or the like cause: but
then they are acts of persecution when they are by others inflicted on them to
do them mischief. It falls out sometimes that believers and godly persons do
molest and practice one against another, by reason of private discord, and
grudges from corruption prevayling although they agree in the worship of the
same Lord. Sometimes such kind of practices are between unbeleivers
themselves, who seeks one another lives, vex, spoil, expel one another, by
reason of private enmities: sometimes they do the like to believers upon
private quarrels arising from ambition, covetousness or the like cause. By
all which there may harming and scandalizing come; But it is then in the usual
Ecclesiastical acception of the word, persecution, when ungodly men inflict
those evils on godly and beleiving persons, qua tales, as they are such, for
their piety or faiths sake, for righteousness sake. Mat. 6. 10. 1. Pet. 3. 14.
For Christ's sake and the Gospells, Mark. 10. 29. More distinctly when men
inflict evil on others for their profession of Christ, and his Gospel, for
not serving Idols, as when the Emperor did put to death Christians for
refusing to offer incense to their heathen Gods. And Nebuchadnezzar cast into a
fiery furnace, three Jews for not bowing down to his golden Image, or when
they bring evil on them for doing their duty, the reproving of sin, delivering
Gods message, as when Ahab and Iesabel made Elijah to fly, Micajah to lie in
prison, Herod cast John Baptist in prison for declaring their sins to them, and
foretelling there judgment, when the Princes of Darius procured Daniel to be
cast into a den of Lions for praying to God three times aday, when the Jews
drove the Apostles from one city to another for preaching the Gospel, then it
is persecution; And thus even at this day those that have power do persecute
christians in some places by cruel torments, in some by expulsion from their
dwellings, spoiling their goods, in some by tauntes, mockes, threats,
disgracings, slanders etc. For their embracing the word of life, rejection of
Idolatry, publishing of the truth, nonconformity to the vices of the world.
For it is the lot of Gods people which our Savior requires us to remember,
John 16. 20. The servant is no greater then the Lord, if they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you.

Now these persecutions do scandalize, 3. How persecutions do scandalize.
as our Savior tells us Mat. 13. 21. And the reason of their scandalizing may
be gathered from our Saviors words, who tells us that the good hearers
persevere, because they bring forth fruit with patience. Wherefore on the
contrary the scandal of the temporary beleivers is for want of patience:
Defect of patience to bear the assaults of persecution is that which causes
the persecuted beleiver or hearer of Gods word to be scandalized. For the heart
of man is swayed by pains and delights. Arist. lib: 2. Ethic: ad Nicom: makes
voluptatem and dolorem, pleasure and grief, the general objects, or matter
about which virtues, and vices are conversant. The reason of which is because
in all moral things pleasure and grief do move and sway men to or from a
thing. Hereupon it is that when men have not root of faith, and strength of
patience, their resolutions are altered, their courses changed, their minds
broken by suffering hard things: so that rather then undergo them, they will
yield to that sin which is their ruin. The spirits of strong men are apt to be
broken with calamities, even as a strong Oak by a mighty wind, yea the fear
of things grievous does often prevail ^o scandalize men. S. Peter who was a man
of great resolutions, was dashed by the charge of a weak maid, when it tended
to bring him into danger, and all the Disciples were offended because of
Christ, as soon as he was apprehended, Mat. 26. 31.

As for the woe that belongs to such scandalizing, 4. What woe belongs to
scandalizers by persecution.
it is the same which is awarded unto other sorts of scandalizing; if not
greater: Forasmuch as this kind of scandalizing has more of malice in it then
the rest. For all persecutors are moved by bitter malice toward the godly to
injure and molest them. It Is true, sometimes their malice is pure malice,
sometimes mixed: but always malice. The Pharisees who persecuted our Lord
Christ out of pure malice, they said, he had an unclean spirit: Mark. 3. 30.
they called him a Samaritane, a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners.
They sought to entangle him, to destroy him though his miracles convinced them,
that he was a teacher sent from God, and that God was with him, John 3. 2. But
others persecuted out of malice compounded with ignorance. Luke 23. 34. says
our Savior, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; compounded
with blind zeal; The time comes says our Savior John 16. 2. That whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service. S. Paul says that out of
zeal he persecuted the Church, Philip. 3. 6. This malice is less then pure
malice, and the woe due to this scandalizing by persecution, less then to the
former; 1. Persecution out of blind malice is the more pardonable, and the
less punishable, then that which is done out of pure malice, which may perhaps
be utterly unpardonable, when it is the sin against the Holy Ghost. Whereas
S. Paul alleges for himself, that though he were a persecutor, and a
blaspheamer, yet he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly in
unbeleife, 1. Tim. 1. 13. Nevertheless all persecution of the godly, all
scandalizing by evil handling of men, without repentance, has eternal death
for its wages. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, says S. Paul. 2. These. 1. 6. and what is the
tribulation? He tells them v. 9. They shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. And
though God suffer such enemies of his Church to prevail for a time, yet few of
them in the end escape his hand, but by some exemplary death, or other grievous
judgment they bear the punishment of their iniquity. Neither Pharaoh, nor
Saul, nor Herod, nor Nero, nor Domitian, nor any of the Chaldaean, Syrian,
Roman persecutors have escaped without deserved vengeance. As it is just with
God to recomdence tribulation to them that trouble his people. So he does
undoubtedly inflict it serius aut citius, sooner or latter, unles his reve^ging
hand be held up by the repentance of the persecutor.

For application of this truth, 5. Application. 1. To discover the danger of
such scandalizers.
first we may hereby discern the danger of those that this way scandalize
others. The impetuous malice of persecutors carries them violently with rage
against beleivers, so that they neither perceive their sin, nor the woe due to
it. Even like a horse that runs furiously and violently, observes not into what
precipices, pits, down-falls it casts it self; so a persecutor that is driven
by malice and blind zeal to breath out threatenings and slaughter against the
Disciples of Christ, and to spoil the Church runs (as we use to so say)
without fear or wit, neither considering whom he persecutes, nor how hard a
thing it is for him to kick against the pricks: they see not what a tempest
hangs over their heads, what a pit they are falling into. For even then when
they study cruelty, devise mischief on their beds, while they act it with
their tongue cutting like a sharp rasour, weigh the violence of their hands in
the earth, use their strength, authority, power, as men that know not the way
of peace, but destruction and unhappines are in their ways, while they hire
soldiers, arm executioners, invent torments for the Saints, even the^ and all
that while God is whetting his sword and bending his bow and making it ready,
he is preparing for him the instruments of Death; he ordains his arrows
against the persecutors, that their mischief may return upon their own head,
and their violent dealing may come down upon their pate. Ps. 7. 12. 13, 16.
God is diging up a pit for the wicked, Psalm. 94. 13. And as sure as Pharaoh,
Saul, Iezabel, Herod, Nero, Domitian, and the rest of persecutors have suffered
divine vengeance: so surely shall all cruel Inquisitors, barbarous Turks,
unjust oppressors, ungodly scoffers, divellish belyers of Gods people perish.
It is determined in heaven: upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.
For the Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked and him that loves violence
his soul hates, Psalm. 11. 5, 6.

2. This may justly deter men from this way of scandalizing by persecution.
6. 2. To deter them from it.
A way of scandalizing it is that Satan, who uses all practices to stumble
men, vi and dolo, by force and Craft, has set on foot in all times, in all
Churches. where princes are infidels or heretics he seeks to raise them up to
waste the Church to vex the godly. where they have professed, and Countenanced
the Gospel, and godlynes, there he sets on work some or other as secret
underminers of their peace, such as may reach at them with their tongues, if
they cannot with their hands. And it is so still: as in some places there are
persecuting soldiers, and persecuting Judges, so there are in other places
persecuting scoffers, persecuting accusers, whose business is to discourage
believers, to affright the godly. not only infidel princes, and heretical
Prelates, but also the whole rabble of vicious men, riotous livers, sons of
Belial will be out of their malignity practicing against the Saints that are
opposite to their ways. And the devil knows this to be a prevailing way by
reason of the love men have to their lives, goods, ease, and quietness. But
for such as thus do scandalize, it behooves them take notice of the woe
following, to remember what our savior said to Saul, Act. 9. 4, 5. It is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks. If they be able to fight with God, let
them go on: if not, let them remember Iulians end betimes, that they may not
be forced to confess as he did, vicisti Galilaee; Christ has overcome them,
though to their perdition.

3. Lastly for those that are apt to be scandalized by persecutions it
concerns them to get root in themselves, 7. 3. To advise them that are in
danger of being scandalized by persecutions.
strength of faith, stability of patience to stand in the time of trial, that
they be not overthrown in their goings by violent scandalls.

The fiery trial must not be, as if some strange thing had happened to us; but
as men prepared for such a combat, we are wisely to foresee the assaults of
such temptations, that we be not surprised by them, and to fortify our selves
with faith and courage, that we be not forced by them. We must watch, stand
fast, quit our selves like men, be strong. 1. Cor. 16. 13. remembering that the
favor of God, the peace of our consciences, and salvation of our souls,
depends upon our victory: that the fearful shall be without: to him that
overcomes shall be given to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst
of of the paradise of God. We must break through terrors; look beyond death;
and by faith overcomming the world, and the Prince of it, as Christ and the
Saints have done, enter into glory.

CHAP. 7.
Of the aggravation of the woe belonging to Scandalizers.
HAving finished the two first propositions contained in the first verse, 1.
The explication of the third proposition in the text.
there remains only the third and last proposition containing an aggravation
of the woe due to scandalizers by comparing it with a lesser though very
grievous affliction, It were better for him etc. For the reading and meaning of
which, much needs not be said, (...) (in English it is profitable, to which
answers in S. Mat. (...) it is behovefull) is translated by our translators
according to the phrase in Saint Mark (...) it is better for him. Now in the
aggravation it self we are to consider the persons whose offense is spoken
of, and the grievous punishment with which the woe due to such offenders is
compared. The persons of whose offense our Savior speaks are these little
ones. Now by little ones are not meant little ones in age: For although our
Lord Christ took occasion from the presence of little Infants to use this
phrase; yet chiefly by the addition of Saint Matthew which adds (...), That
believe in me, by the condition of these little ones, that they are converted
and become humble as little children; and because not little children in age,
but little ones in disposition are apt to be scandalized in that manner our
Savior here speaks of, it is plain that our Savior means by (these little
ones) believers in him, who are called little ones, not from their age, or
quantity of body, but from their disposition or condition, because they are
little in their own eyes, or in the esteem of the world, or because some of
them that believe on him are less then others: The grievous punishment with
which the woe due to such offenders is compared, is (...) t, o be drowned in
the deep of the sea, as it is in S. Matthew; in S. Mark (...), thrown into
the sea, in S. Luke (...), cast into the sea, and that (...), that an
asse-milstone be hanged about his neck, in S. Mark. (...), a millstone be put
about his neck, in S. Luke (...), that an asse-milstone be about his neck.
Critics busy themselves about this asse-milstone, what it was, and why so
called; some conceive it to be the lower millstone, because that is the greater,
and our Savior would express the weight of the fall by the greatness of the
stone: Therefore they say the lower millstone was called (...) or the ass,
either because in manner of an ass it bare the burden, or from (...) to move,
or bring about, because the upper millstone is turned about it, as Iansenius
conceives. But Suidas in his Greek Lexicon in voce (...) says the upper
millstone was called (...) or the ass, and this is more likely, and that the
reason why it was called (...) or (...) was because it was turned about with an
ass, and thereby distinguished from mola trusatilis, that millstone that was
wont to be turned about with the strength of men's arms: Which is the opinion
generally of interpreters, Ambrose, Hilary, Erasmus, Iansenius, Maldonate etc.
However we conceive of this millstone, the intent of our Savior was to show by
this addition the certainty of his perishing, the weight of his fall, and the
irrecoverablenesse of it; For a man that is cast into the sea, and has a
millstone hanged about his neck, is sure to perish, there being no possibility
for him to use his arms or body to stay himself from sinking, and he has a
most heavy downfall, the weight of the millstone carrying him most violently
into the bottom of the deep, and his fall is irrecoverable, no man being able
to prevent his fall, or to recover him thence. For this reason in the
Revelation of Saint John chapter 18. 21. Where the irrecoverable destruction of
Babylon is signified, the resemblance is the same with that in my text, And a
mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea,
saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down: and
shall be found no more at all. Hierome in his Comment: on Math: 18. 6. says
this manner of casting men into the sea was secundum ritum provinciae quo
majorum criminum ista apud veteres Iudaeos paena fuerit, ut in profundum ligato
saxo demergerentur: according to the manner of that province, in which that was
among the ancient Jews the punishment of greater crimes, that they should be
drowned in the deep with a stone bound about their necks. But this punishment
we find no mention of in the old Testament, though of stoning often. what
other writers relate I cannot speak, nor upon what evidence S. Hierome found
this to be the manner of the ancient Jews to punish great crimes by drowning
the malefactors in the deep of the sea, with a millstone hanged about their
neck. Casaubon in his notes on Matthew 18. 6. proves by a passage or two which
he cites out of Diodorus Siculus, and Athenaeus, that the Greeks used (...)
drowning in the Sea, as a punishment among them, but he finds not that it was
by tying a stone to their neck, but rather by putting the malefactor into
lead. And it may seem by a passage which he cites out of Polybius, that it
was rather reckoned among the easier, then more grievous sorts of punishment.
Maldonate conceives it might be that our Savior in using this resemblance did
allude unto the pride which he here censures, as he did Math: 11. 23. when he
said; And thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven, shall be brought down to
hell. What ever the allusion be, Saint Hierome rightly notes, that our Savior
meant hereby to let us understand that it were better for scandalizers to
receive a short punishment here, then eternal torments. Or that though to be
cast into the sea with a millstone about the neck, be a certain, grievous,
irrecoverable destruction, yet the woe of scandalizers is more certain, more
grievous, more irrecoverable. And it is considerable that the Emphasis of our
Saviors words in averring this, seems to intimate that He spoke this with
some vehemence, as if he had said to this purpose: though it be that those
that believe in me are little ones in their own and others eyes; yet I tell you
it will be more tolerable for a man to be thus dolefully cast into the sea,
then for him to incur the punishment of offending these little ones, as little
as they be, yea though he offend but one of these little ones.

Now from this speech of our Savior, we may observe that those that believe
in Christ, 2. Those that believe in Christ are little ones.
are little ones; which is true, whether we compare them among themselves, or
with others; for Magnum and parvum are relatives, as Aristotle observes in his
Categories in the chapter (...). Now compared among themselves, they are some
less then others. Our Savior Math: 25, 40. by saying, In as much as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me:
Intimates that some of his brethren are less then others: 3. Some less then
others in spiritual gifts and graces.
And indeed so it is.

1 In respect of spiritual gifts and graces some are less then others. Our
Savior in his charge to Peter concerning his pastoral office distinguishes
between (...) his little Lambs, and (...) his sheep, Ioh. 21. 15, 16. and
requires Peter to do as it was foretold of himself, Isay 40. 11. that he
should feed his flock like a shepherd, that he should gather the Lambs with
his arms, and carry them in his bosom and should gently lead those that are
with young. The Apostle distinguishes between the strong in faith and the weak
in faith, Romans 14. 1. and 15. 1. Thus it has been, and it is still. Some are
Christians, come to maturity, others are in the blossom and bud: some are
novices, Catechumeni, yongling in Christ; some are confirmed Christians and
strong men in Christ. Which thing happens, First because of the sutablenesse of
it to the condition of a body: For as it is in the natural body, all members
are not of equal growth, so it is in the mystical body of Christ, it is fitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth according to
the effectual working in the measure of each part. Ephesians. 4. 16. There is a
different measure of each part, that there may be a meet Symmetry in the
whole. Secondly Besides all members have not the same office: And therefore
Gods spirit gives not to all a like measure of knowledge and other gifts, Romans
12. 4, 6. Thirdly, Again all parts have not a like means for growth, not a
like instruction and nurture, not a like time for growth: There is a different
working in the several parts, and accordingly a different growth, Ephesians. 4.
16. Fourthly, If all Christians were of equal strength, Faith, wisdom, and
other graces, there would be a subtraction of the matter of sundry principal
duties; there would be no need one Christian should edify one another, bear
with one another, avoid the offense of another, give help to another, restore
one another, etc. Whereas God has so tempered the parts of the mystical body
as well as the natural, that the members should have the same care one of
another, 1. Cor. 12. 25.

2. In power, 4. In power and dignity
dignity, authority, wealth etc. Both in the Church, and in the world, some
believers in Christ exceed others. Among many mean Christians, some are noble
in birth and dignity: among many Christian subjects there are some sovereign
Kings and Princes that are Christians: among many illiterate believers there
are some learned believers. In which thing God has admirably ordered that as
there should be some nobles, some Princes, some learned among his people, that
they may help and defend his Church: so there are not many nobles, not many
mighty, not many wise after the flesh, that the support and raising of his
Church may appear not to be by an arm of flesh, not by might, but by his
spirit, that no flesh should glory in his presence. 1. Cor. 1. 26, 29.

If we compare them with others they are but little,. 5. Beleivers commonly
less then others in the world.
I mean in dignity, secular honor, power, strength among men. Except a David
or a Constantine, and some other christian Kings, how few of Gods people have
enjoyed any eminent degree of worldy glory? the triumphant Co^querors, the
mighty Monarchs of the world have been most of them Infidels. The Almighty
(that intends a better inheritance for his Saints even a kingdom that cannot
be shaken, Heb. 12. 28.) bestows not on them the great Monarchies, Dominions,
and dignities of this world, which are meaner gifts. And accordingly the world
makes small account of beleivers, as if they were but contemptible persons: For
the men of this world have eyes of flesh, and fleshly minds: they magnify and
admire the world and the pomp thereof, sumptuous palaces, gorgeous attire,
great command, great observance and attendance: But the worth of spiritual
excellencies, the glorious privileges and endowments of Gods sons they know
not: even as Christ was unknown in the world, so are his members, 1. John 3.
1, 2.

Lastly those that believe in Christ are little in their own eyes, 6. Little
in their own eyes.
that is humble, which (it is likely) was chiefly here meant by our Savior. For
to this Christ specially applies the Emblem of a little child, Math. 18. 4.
And in this sense Saul is said to have been little in his own eyes, 1. Sam. 15.
17. Thus certainly are all the Saints: David was as great in the eye of others
as any man in the world in his age: yet he was not so great in the eyes of
others, but he was as small in his own. Who am I (says he to God) 2. Sam. 7.
18. and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And Psalm. 131. 1.
etc. Lord my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise
my self in great matters, or in things too high for me. Surely I have behaved
and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even
as a weaned child. The reasons hereof are 1. Because by faith they behold Gods
infinite greatness, and then comparing themselves with him, they cannot but
think themselves as nothing. Abraham was a great man in his time: he had great
wealth, and was so potent that by the forces of his own household he overthrew
four conquering Kings: yet when he comes to speak with God, he does in most
humble manner acknowledge his own mean condition: Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. When
a man surveyes the earth by it self, it is a great and vast body* but when it
is compared with the heavens, it is instar puncti, but as a small point that
has no quantity. So for those men that look on themselves, or compare
themselves with other men, or inferior creatures, they are apt to imagine
themselves to be some great ones, as Simon Magus vaunted himself, Acts, 8. 9.
But those that acquaint themselves with God, walk and converse with him, they
find such an infinite disproportion between God and themselves, that they
conceive themselves as nothing, even lighter then vanity it self. 2. As by
faith they behold Gods infinite greatness, and thereby find themselves as
nothing: So by faith they behold Gods infinite power, riches and sovereignty,
and thereby see that they have nothing, that the things they have are not their
own but Gods: that they have them from him, not by any merit of their own,
But ex dono, of free gift: Nebuchadnezzar he swells when he looks on his
greatness as his own, Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the
house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty? Dan. 4. 30. But holy David is in another tune, Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty: for
all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom (O
Lord) and thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of
thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in
thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. But who am I,
and what is my people etc. 1. Chron: 29. 11, 12, 14. And godly Jacob, Gen: 32.
10. (...) I am little (the phrase of my text) in respect of all the mercies,
and all the truth which thou have done to thy servant. All was mercy and all
the truth of God which he had, and therefore he was but little: the
apprehension of this that all was to be ascribed to Gods truth and mercy,
caused him to see nothing he had that might puff him up, though he had much
to be thankful for: He does not say, this is my house, my land, my dignity, my
wit, etc. But these are the lands, the children etc. which God has given, that
he has lent me. He does not take himself to be a proprietary, but a
borrower, not a gayner of them, but a receiver. And therefore as a borrower
thinks not himself rich because he has much substance in his hands of other
men's, so neither do beleivers think themselves to be great, because that
which they have, they know it is but borrowed.

For application of this truth,. 7. Application 1. to advertise us of the
estate of beleievrs in this world.
1. We may hereby be advertised what is the estate of beleivers in this life:
some are less then others, and all little in this world: so accounted by
others, and by themselves. The present condition in which they are is not the
estate of men come to ripe years, but of children in their minority: of whom
the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 1. that though they be heirs, yet as long as they
are children they differ nothing from a servant, though they be Lords of all:
It is so with the Saints in this life, all things are theirs, they are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, 1. Cor. 3. 22, 23. yet they have command of nothing: nor
perhaps the use of so much as wicked men. As it is with the heir of all his
fathers goods, while he is young, he is set to school, there corrected, fares
harder and has less money in his purse, less to manage then many of his
Fathers servants: and yet all is his, and for him; so it is with Gods children,
they are held hard to it, they have little in hand, they are low in the eyes of
men, and in their own, and yet this is no impediment to their future glory:
it is a preparative to their receiving their inheritance. The men of this world
do grossly mistake the case of Gods people: they imagine God neglects the^,
because they are not in high places, and great power on earth: but this is
their folly, while they measure Gods love, and care of his people by their own
affections, not by Gods judgment, they imagine those unhappy who are most
blessed, and themselves happy who are most accursed.. 8. 2. To teach beleivers
contentedness in a low condition.


2. Christ's little ones should be wiser, they should know that their present
condition is to be little, and accordingly to be contented with small things,
not mind great things in this world, as if they could not be happy without
them; It was the end wherefore our Savior used the Emblem of a little child,
Mat. 18. 2. (to which the phrase of little ones in my text alludeth) that he
might admonish his Disciples not to strive for dignities, and precedencies, in
this world. And S. Paul Romans 12. 16. changes christians not to mind high
things, but to condescend to men of low estate. Excellent was the advice of
Jeremiah to Baruch, Jerem. 4. 55. Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek
them not. We must remember for the present our condition is to have our
allowance, and to be stinted by God: and therefore ought to be contented with
it, though it seem little, since we know God is our Father, and though now we
be little, yet hereafter he will make us great, though now we be humbled, yet
hereafter we shall be exalted: though we be now poor in this world, yet
we are rich in God:. 9. 3. To quicken their hope after heaven.
and heirs of all things.

3. Answerably hereto it concerns them to quicken their hope, and to excite
their endeavors after those great things which God has prepared for them: The
less beleivers in Christ are now, the more should they long for, and pant
after their greatness in heaven. By this they must comfort and support their
souls in their present condition: If they look for great things on earth,
they shall be sure to miss them, if they look for great things hereafter they
shall be sure to have them. Heaven is their country, there is their
preferment. On it they must fix their hopes, by it they must sustain their
souls.

Lastly this consideration that scandalizing of them that believe in Christ is
the offending of little ones aggravateth much the sin of scandalizers.. 10.
4. To aggravate the sin of scandalizing beleivers.
To trample little ones under foot, to injure, and harm little children,
argues much pride and much unmercifullnesse. Smallness should be the object of
mercy, not of insolency. And therefore in this respect the sin of persecutors
is great who scandalize Christ's little ones, and accordingly their woe is
great, which is the principal point of this verse, and is now to be handled.

The second observation and that which is the maine point in these words,. 11.
That the woe due to scandalizers of beleivers is greater then any temporal
death.
is this: That the punishment due to them that scandalize believers in Christ
is greater then any temporal death though never so grievous. This assertion
needs no other confirmation then the words of the text rightly understood
according to the explication before made. To which nevertheless may be added
this argument: The punishment due to scandalizers of believers in Christ is
eternal punishment in hell. For that such is due to this sin, has been
proved before in declaring the woe due to scandalizing in general, and to each
particular branch thereof. But it is certain that no temporal death is or can
be so grievous as eternal punishment in hell; none so sharp, and tormenting;
none so constant and lasting: the bitterest pains of the most lingering
temporal death, being sufferable, and finite, the other being intolerable,
eternal, and so in a sort infinite; now finiti ad infinitu^ nulla proportio,
there is no proportion between a thing finite, and a thing infinite. Therefore
no temporal death can be equal to the punishment of scandalizers of beleivers
in Christ. But that I may distinctly handle the conclusion, it will be needful
to consider, 1. Who are to be accounted beleivers in Christ. 2. Why to the
scandalizing of them there is so great vengeance allotted.

To believe in Christ is to acknowledge in heart that he is the Messiah that
was to come into the world,. 12. Who are to be accounted beleivers in Christ.
to assent to the doctrine of the Gospel which he published, and to trust in
him for remission of sins and salvation: From hence men are denominated
beleivers in Christ. So that they are indeed beleivers in Christ, who do
acknowledge in heart that he is the Christ, the son, the living God, that
assent to his doctrine, and trust in him for righteousness and salvation. My
purpose is not to take occasion to consider exactly the nature and sorts of
faith in Christ, nor the signs whereby that which is true and genuine is
distinguished from counterfeit, imperfect, or defective. For at this time we
are only to consider whom another man is to take for a beleiver in Christ,
whom he ought to take heed of scandalizing. Only thus much may be fit to be
considered, that beleivers in Christ may be so called either according to Gods
estimation, as they are in his sight; And in this acception they only are
beleivers in Christ, who have the most excellent grace of faith planted in
their hearts, by Gods spirit, by which they are united to Christ, dwell in him,
live by and to him: which all that acknowledge the truth of the Gospel in
their profession of it, or that yield to it in mind a light and uneffectuall
credulity to it, do not. But these are only known by God, Who alone searches
the heart and reins. Or else beleivers in Christ are called such according to
that estimation man may make: And thus we are to account all those as
beleivers in Christ, who knowing what they profess do without compulsion
profess themselves beleivers in Christ, and do not openly renounce either by
speech or practice the truth of Christian faith, though they have much
weakness of knowledge, many errors in opinion, and many sins in their
practice. In general the number of those who profess freely their assent to
the Articles of the creed, that join in the worship of Christ, and profess
subjection to his precepts are to be accounted by men as beleivers in Christ,
the scandalizing of whom is so woeful.

The reasons why so great a degree of punishment belongs to such as scandalize
beleivers in Christ,. 13. Why so great vengeance is awarded to scandalizers of
beleivers in Christ.
are 1. Because Christ does love them dearly, and they are of near relation
to him. The love of Christ to them is abundantly manifest in that superlative
expression of it, his dying for them: he loved us, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
2. and has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor. And in like sort are they most tenderly beloved of his
Father, Who so loved them, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
beleiveth on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. And
for their relation there is no relation of dearness by which their
indearednesse to God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ is not expressed.
They are his little flock, Luke 12. 32. And a good shepherd is tender over
his flock: they are his servants, John 12. 26. And of these, good masters are
careful: they are his friends, John 16. 15. and true friends are very
mindful of their friends: they are his peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14. 1. Pet.
2. 9. and a good Prince is very tender of his peoples safety: they are his
brethren, Heb. 2. 11. and truehearted brethren are very regardfull of their
brethrens good: they are his children, v. 13. the sons of God, 1. John 3. 1.
heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and strong is the
affection of a Father to his Child, his son, his heir: they are the spouse
of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 23. 25. and what is a man more zealously affected to, then
to his beloved spouse? they are his members, v. 30. and what is it that a man
will not give or do to save his members? whence it is that he that shows
kindness to them does it to Christ, Math. 25. 40. the neglecting of showing
mercy to them is a denial of it to Christ, v. 45. And an offense to them a
sinnne againg Christ, 1. Cor. 8. 12. Their sufferings Christ's sufferings,
Coloss. 1. 24. This was the reason why Christ when he spoke to Saul from
heaven, going about the persecuting of beleivers at Damascus, said thus to him,
Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me, Acts 9. 4, 5. Saul thought that he had
bent himself only against a company of peevish refractary people, whom he
thought worthy of all punishment for their obstinate adhering to their
profession, by him conceived impious superstition, and heresy: but it was
indeed Christ himself who was persecuted, and struck at in their
persecutions. And so it is in all the persecutions of beleivers for their faith
and obedience. Now then Christ must needs be provoked greatly by the
scandalizing of them whom he loves so dearly, accounts so near to him:
Doubtless what was said of the Jews, Zech. 2. 8. He that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye, is truly verified of all true beleivers, he
that touches them touches the apple (if I may so speak) of Gods eye, which
he will not let pass unrevenged. 2. The sin of scandalizing beleivers in
Christ as it is against those whom Christ loves, and are near and dear to
him, so it tends directly to the overthrow of Christ's kingdom. For to what end
are they persecuted for the faith and service of Christ, to what end are they
tempted to sin, harmed in their consciences, but that they may be alienated
from Christ, withdrawn from subjection to him, hindered in his service? Saul's
persecuting of David is construed as if he had bid him go serve other Gods,
they have driven me, says David, out this day from abiding in the inheritance
of the Lord, saying go serve other Gods. 1. Sam. 26. 19. Nor can it be
otherwise interpreted but that they which scandalize little ones that believe
in Christ for their faith and obedience sake, do as good as say, believe not,
obey not Christ. Now all such cannot but fall heavily under the wrath of God,
and of Christ Jesus the universal Judge. What he said, Luke 19. 27. will be
verified of them: As for those mine enemies that would not that I should reign
over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. For lo thine enemies O
Lord, Lo thine enemies shall perish, and all the workers of iniquity shall be
scattered. Psalm. 92. 9. 3. As it tends to the overthrow of Christ's kingdom, so
especially in the last sorts of scandalizing it arises out of hatred of
Christ, his people, kingdom, and Gospel; which shows a most wicked heart,
and causes intolerable provocation to anger. 4. In the practice of this
sin, especially by persecution, what are scandalizers but as Satan's hands to
execute what he instigates them to? Our Savior in his Epistle to the Church
of Smyrna, Revel. 2. 10. tells that Church that the Devil should cast some of
them into prison that they might be tried, and they should have tribulation
ten days. Are we to think that the Devil did in his own person lay hands
on any of the beleivers of that Church, and by might hale them to prison, as
Saul intended to do at Damascus? Nay, we find no record for any such thing,
nor is it agreeable to the course of Gods providence whereby he rules the
world. But rather we are to think that the Devil is said to cast them into
prison, because he excited the Infidel rulers of those times to do it, who
therein took on them the person of the Devil as Judas did, when he betrayed
Christ, and Peter (though in another manner) when he dissuaded Christ from his
willingness to suffer. Now that which is promoted by Satan, who is the Father
of all evil, and the grand enemy of Christ cannot but be most odious to him,
and procure his wrath, specially when men suffer themselves to be made Satan's
professed Agents and servants to do his will.

For application of this truth.. 14. Application 1. To manifest Christ's tender
care over his people.
1. we may hereby perceive the tender care which Christ has over his people.
He takes their scandals as if he himself were scandalized, their injuries as
his own injuries, the persecuting of them as the persecuting of himself,
which he will not suffer to escape unpunished. Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of the Saints, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 116. 15. Their lives
are precious, and their death is precious. I may add, even their reproaches,
their injuries, their false accusations, their scandalls are precious, not sold
for naught, nor valued as no loss. Albeit sometimes it may seem so, yet it is
not in truth so as the Psalmist complains, Psalm. 44. 12. Thou sellest thy
people for naught, and do not increase by their price. Nay rather their
hairs are numbered, Luke 12. 7. He that valewes sparrowes, does not account
his children as naught worth: doubtless the meanest of his Saints has his
tears bottled; and his flittings numbered, and all his injuries booked. Psalm.
56. 8. And that to some end, even that they may be recompensed in them,
revenged on their adversaries. A great Cordial this should be to Christ's
little ones, to persist in the faith notwithstanding their scandalls, since this
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for them a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4. 17. And as it has been
some content to some spirits dying, that they knew their death should not be
unrevenged; so it may be a comfort to beleivers, that their persecutions shall
be required, he will do right to them, justice on their enemies.

2. It should further direct us when we are scandalized to commit our cause to
God, 15. 2. To teach us to commit our cause to him when we suffer for him.
to our Lord Christ. Thus did Zechariah when they stoned him with stones, he
said, The Lord look upon it, and require it. 2. Chr: 24. 22. And thus did our
Lord Christ 1. Pet. 2. 23. when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. So should we: else we intrence on
Gods prerogative, who has said, vengeance is mine and I will repay. Rom* 12.
19. we disadvantage our selves by hindering the recompense of our patience,
we mar our cause by making it evil, which otherwise would be good, we
harm our selves by moving God to anger for our miscarriage. Its our wisdom to
forbear avenging our selves, else we shall show that we remember not Christ's
love to us, nor trust his care over us.

3. From hence scandalizers may take the right measure of their sin: 16. 3.
To advertise scandalizers of the greatness of their sin, and punishment.
and the greatness of their punishment. They think commonly when they
persecute beleivers, godly preachers, faithful christians, they do but speak
against, and vex, and oppose a company of peevish, precise, silly weak folk.
Thus did Paul imagine when he persecuted the Church of God. But Christ told him
otherwise, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. Acts. 9. 5. And so do all that
are moved by the same spirit, and walk the same way. For wherefore are
beleivers hated? Is it not for their constancy in the faith, their profession
of the truth, their zeal to Christ's kingdom, their obedience to his precepts?
The scandalizing of them then can be no other but an offense of Christ. There
may be some that may think they love Christ, and yet scandalize his little
ones. But this cannot be: the love of Christ and of the brethren go together,
as S. John strongly proves, in his first Epistle. Know then, that scandalizing
of Christ's members is no less then the offending of Christ, and will be
punished, as if his person were directly struck at. Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousands of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their
hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Jude 14. 15.

Lastly this may startle those that practice this course of scandalizing: 17.
4. To deter them from their sin.
those that believe in Christ are in appearance little ones, of small power,
contemptible, and therefore they are ready to think they may harm them with
impunity. But it were good for them to remember Solomon's caveat Prove. 22. 22,
23. Rob not the poor because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in
the gate. For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of them
that spoiled them. Consider what a doom is here threatened to scandalizers of
beleivers. Be assured that Gods righteousness, his love to his people, his
own cause requires this severity at his hands. Know that there is no escaping
unless they could fight against God, and were stronger then he. Provoke not
then a courageous Lion, stir not up the wrath of the Omnipotent God. Touch
not his anointed, do his Prophets no harm. Show them all kindnesses on
earth, that what they cannot, their Savior may recompense in heaven: that when
ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

FINIS.

