A SERIOUS CONSIDERATION OF THE OATH OF THE Kings Supremacy:

Wherein these six Propositions are asserted.

1. That some Swearing is Lawful.

2. That some promissory Oaths are Lawful.

3. That a promissory Oath of Allegiance and due obedience to a King is Lawful.

4. That the King is His Realm, is the only Supreme Governor over all persons.

5. That the King is the Governor of the Realm, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as temporal.

6. That the Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences, and Authorities in that
Oath, may be assisted and defended.

By John Tombs B. D.

Prove. 23. 21. My son fear thou the LORD, and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, living in
Aldersgate Street next door to the sign of the Peacock.

To the Christian Readers.
BEing by special Providence brought hither upon some occasions of mine own,
and finding many persons of different persuasions scrupling the taking of the
oath of Supremacy now beginning to be urged, by reason of their unacquaintance
with it through the long disuse of it; by various conferences I convinced
sundry of them, that the end and matter of the oath was not such as they
imagined: Whereupon some persons tender of the public peace, and the
liberties of those doubting persons, who still remained unsatisfied, earnestly
pressed me to draw up something in writing, tending to the elucidation of this
doubt: which I was unwilling to do, being absent from mine own Books and
Collections, and hoping to have staid here less time then I am now necessitated
to do: yet the instant pressure has drawn from me this writing, though short
and indigested, it being conceived useful in this juncture of time, wherein if
I be offered on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with
you all, as being studious not how to have dominion over your faith, but to be
a helper of your joy. For which and I crave your prayers, who am,

London Oct. 13. 1660. Your brother and servant in Christ, John Tombs,

The OATH of SUPREMACY as it is in the Statute 1. Eliz. Cap. 1.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or Causes, as Temporal; and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm; and
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions. Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear
Faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminencies and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Proviso in the Statute of 5. Eliz. Cap. 1.
PRovided also, That the Oath expressed in the said Act, made in the said first
year, shall be taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in an
Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, published in the first
year of her Majesty's Reign; That is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other Authority than that was
challenged, and lately used by the noble King Henry the eighth, and King Edward
the sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear.

The Admonition annexed to the Queens Injunctions.
THe Queens Majesty being informed, that in certain places of this Realm,
sundry of her native Subjects, being called to Ecclesiastical ministry in the
Church, be by sinister persuasion, and perverse construction induced to find
some scruple in the form of an oath which by an Act of the last Parliament, is
prescribed to be required of diverse persons, for the recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly neither was ever meant, ne by any
equity of words or good sense, can be thereof gathered: Would that all her
loving Subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant or
intended by the same oath, to have any other duty, allegiance, or bond
required by the same oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble
kings of famous memory, king Henry the viii. Her Majesty's father, or king
Edward the sixth, Her Majesty's brother.

And further Her Majesty forbyddeth all manner Her subjects to give ear or
credit to such perverse and maliciouse persons, which most sinifferly and
maliciously labor to notify to her loving subjects, how by the words of the
said oath, it may be collected the kings or Queens of this Realm, possessours
of the Crown, may challenge aucthority and power of ministry of divine
offices in the Church, wherein Her said subjectes be much abused by such evyl
disposed persons. For certainly her Majesty neither does: ne ever will
challenge any other aucthority, than that was challenged and lately used by the
said noble kings of famous memory, king Henry the eight, and king Edward
the sixth, which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. That is under God, to have the soverainty and rule over all manner
persons born within these Her Realms, Dominions, and Countries, of what estate,
either ecclesiastical or temporal soever they be, so as no other foreign power
shall or ought to have any superiority over them. And if any person that has
conceived any other sense of the fourm of the said oath, shall accept the
same oath with this interpretation, sense, or meaning, Her Majesty is well
pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient subjects,
and shall acquit them of all manner penalties contained in the said Act against
such as shall peremptorily, or obstinately refuse to take the same oath.

The 37. Article professed in the Church of England.
The Kings Majesty has the chief power in his Realm of England, and other his
Dominions, unto whom the chief government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they he Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appetain, and is not, nor
ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction: where we attribute to the
Kings Majesty the chief government, by which titles we understand the minds of
some standerous folks to be offended, we give not to our Prince the ministering
either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments: the which thing, the Injunctions
also, sometime set forth by Elizabeth our (late) Queen, do most plainly
testify, but that only Prerogative, which we see to have been given to all
godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is that they should rule
all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn, and
evil doers.

The OATH of SUPREMACY briefly considered, and the lawfulness of taking it
asserted.
IT is questioned, whether the Oath of the Kings being acknowledged Supreme
Governor in all causes, according to the Statute 1. Eliz. may be lawfully
taken? To which I answer affirmatively, and thus argue,

If it may not be lawfully taken, it is either because no Oath may be taken, or
no promissory Oath, or no promissory Oath to a King, or the matter of this Oath
is not to be acknowledged or promised.

But none of these make it unlawful. Ergo.

The consequence is proved, because there is a sufficient enumeration made of
things that seem to prohibit the taking of it: if not, let what else may make
it unlawful be named. The minor is proved by parts, in confirming these six
propositions.

I. That some swearing is lawful.

II. That promissory Oaths may be lawful.

III. That to swear to a King or Governor may be lawful.

IV. That the King is Supreme Governor over all persons in his Dominions.

V. That he is Governor in Ecclesiastical causes.

VI. That the Jurisdictions, Preeminences, and Privileges meant in that Oath
may be lawfully acknowledge and defended.

The first is proved thus.

I. That which is not de toto genere, in it is whole kind evil, may be lawful:
But swearing is not de toto genere, or in its whole kind evil.

Therefore some swearing may be lawful.

The major is manifest of it self. The minor is thus proved.

That is not wholly evil about the use of which some directions are given by
God. God does not give directions about the use of Blasphemy, witchcraft,
idolatry, etc. which are in their whole kind evil. But God gives directions
about the use of swearing, as in the third commandment (which is undoubtedly
moral) Jer. 4. 2. where he says, And thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. Ergo.

2. That which is approved by God, is lawful. But some swearing is approved by
God. Psalm. 63. 11. Every one that swears by God shall glory. Ergo.

The major is of it self manifest, the minor the text evidenceth, since the
swearing by God is made part of glorying in God, or of the swearers glory.

3. If it were unlawful to use any Oath, then it were unlawful to put any Oath
on any. But this is not to be said. Ergo.

The consequence is manifest, since we cannot lawfully urge any to that which is
of it self sinful: Now that it is lawful to put an Oath on some persons at some
times is manifest by Gods own appointment, Levit. 5. 1. 4. his ratifying
Solomon's petition concerning this thing, 1 King. 8. 31. 2 Chr. 6. 22. and the
practice of Abraham in the old Testament, Genesis 24. 2, 3. putting an Oath on his
servant, and Paul's in the New, putting an Oath on the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.
27. for so the Greek word translated, I charge you by the Lord, or adjre you,
as it is in the margin, by the Lord, is, I put the Lords Oath on you, or swear
you that this Epistle be read to all the holy brethren. Alike charges are, 1 Timothy 6. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1.

4. That which has been the practice of the godly before, under the law, and
in the times of the Gospel without reproof is lawful, for in all these times,
and by such men moved as they were by Gods spirit, even in their holy speeches
and writings, it would not have been done had it been sinful.

But some swearing has been the practice of the godly, before, under the law
and in the times of the Gospel, as is proved by instances, as of Abraham that
lift up his hand to the most high God, Genesis 14. 22. of Isaac, Genesis 26. 31. of
Jacob, Genesis 31. 53. under the law, of the people of Israel, Josh. 9. 19, 20. of
David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 3. 42. David to Saul, 1 Samuel 24 22. of Urijah, 2 Samuel 11. 11. of Ittai, 2. Sam. 15. 21. of David, 1 Kings 1. 29, 30 and 2. 8. of
Solomon, Verse. 23. of Elijah, 1 Kings 17. 1. of Michajah, 1 Kings 22. 14. of
Elisha, 2 King. 2. 4, 6. and 3. 14. and 5. 16. and the woman of Shunem, 2 King.
4. 30. in the times of the Gospel, of Paul, 2. Cor. 1. 18. using this Oath, As
God is true, verse. 23. I call God to record upon my soul, and 11. 31. and 12.
19. 1 Cor. 15. 31. this is a form of swearing, By your rejoicing which I have
in Christ Jesus, it being in the Greek (...) which is a particle of swearing,
not (...) or (...), which are prepositions noting the means or instrument of
the effect; of the Angel, Revel. 10. 6. who swear by him that lives for ever.
The like are Romans 1. 9. and 9. 1. Gal. 1. 20. Philip. 1. 8. Ergo.

5 That which has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society, is not
unlawful.

But some swearing has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society. Ergo.

The major is plain, it agreeing with the law of nature and nations, which is
of necessary use for the benefit of humane society, which laws God the author
of nature has imprinted in all, and indeed has made all his laws for men one
toward another subservient thereto.

The minor is plain from the words of the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. 16.
An Oath to men is an end of strife, which is a necessary use for humane benefit.

6. That which has been counted by all nations as a Sacred thing, a principal
part of the acknowledgement and worship of God, is not unlawful of it self.

But so has some swearing been counted. Ergo.

The minor is proved by Gods own words, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou shall fear the LORD
thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave and swear by his
name.

The second [ That promissory Oaths may be lawful] is thus proved.

1. That is not altogether of it self evil or unlawful, which God makes a bond
of the soul to be kept and performed to the Lord.

But some promissory Oaths God makes a bond of the soul to be kept and
performed to the Lord.

Ergo. Some promissory Oaths may be lawful.

The major is proved, because that which is altogether unlawful cannot bind the
soul to God, nor is to be kept and performed to the Lord.

The minor is proved from Numb. 30. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or
swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break or profane his
word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Matthew. 5.
33. Again ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, where a
promissory Oath is made a bond to bind the soul with, to be kept and performed
to the Lord.

2. If holy men before the Law, under the Law, in Gospel times have put
promissory Oaths on others, then they are not altogether unlawful. This is
proved by the same reason by which the like consequence is proved before, in
proving the fourth argument of the former proposition.

But holy men before the Law, as Abraham, Genesis 24. 2. 3. under the Law, as
Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. 14. Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 17. Asa and the people of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13, 14, 15. Ezra, Ezra 10. 5. in Gospel times, Paul, 1 These. 5.
27. adjuring the Thessalonians by the Lord, that that Epistle be read to all
the holy brethren, have put promissory Oaths on others. Ergo.

3. That which godly men have practiced and still counted as well done that is
lawful.

But some promissory Oaths godly men have practiced and still counted as well
done. Ergo.

The major is probable, and in this case, considering the persons, and the holy
Ghosts recording as he has done, certain.

The minor is proved by instances, of David, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. 1 Samuel 20. 42. And
Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in
the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and thee, and between my
seed and thy seed for ever. Nehem. 10. 29. They clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an Oath to walk in Gods Law. 1 King.
1. 29, 30. And the king swear and said, As the Lord lives, that has redeemed
my soul out of all distress, even as I swear unto thee, that by the Lord God of
Israel assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall

(...) reproof is lawful, for in all these times, and by such men moved as they
were by Gods spirit, even in their holy speeches and writings, it would not
have been done, had it been sinful.

But some swearing has been the practice of the godly, before, under the law
and in the times of the Gospel, as is proved by instances, as of Abraham that
lift up his hand to the most high God, Genesis 14. 22. of Isaac, Genesis 26. 31. of
Jacob, Genesis 31. 53. under the law, of the people of Israel, Josh. 9. 19. 20. of
David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 3. 42. David to Saul 1 Samuel 24. 22. of Urijah 2 Samuel 11. 11. of Ittai, 2 Samuel 15. 21. of David, 1 Kings 1. 29, 30. and 2. 8. of
Solomon, Verse. 23. of Elijah, 1 Kings 17. 1. of Michajah, 1 King. 22. 14. of
Elisha, 2 King. 2. 4. 6. and 3. 14. and 5. 16. and the woman of Shunem, 2 King.
4. 30. in the times of the Gospel, of Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 18. using this Oath, As
God is true, verse. 23. I call God to record upon my soul, and 11. 31. and 12.
19. 1 Cor. 15. 31. this is a form of swearing, By your rejoicing which I have
in Christ Jesus, it being in Greek (...) which is a particle of swearing, not
(...) or (...), which are prepositions noting the means or instrument of the
effect; of the Angel, Revel. 10. 6. who swear by him that lives for ever. The
like are Romans 1. 9. and 9. 1. Gal. 1. 20. Philip. 1. 8. Ergo.

5. That which has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society is not
unlawful.

But some swearing has a necessary use for the benefit of humane society. Ergo.

The major is plain, it agreeing with the law of nature and nations, which is
of necessary use for the benefit of humane society, which laws God the author
of nature has imprinted in all, and indeed has made all his laws for men one
toward another subservient thereto.

The minor is plain from the words of the Author to the Hebrews Chap. 6. 16. An
Oath to men is an end of all strife, which is a necessary use for humane
benefit.

6. That which has been counted by all nations as a Sacred thing, a principal
part of the acknowledgment and worship of God, is not unlawful of it self.

But so has some swearing been counted. Ergo.

The minor is proved by Gods own words, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou shall fear the LORD
thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and swear by his
name,

The second [ That promissory Oaths may be lawful] is thus proved.

1. That is not altogether of it self evil or unlawful, which God makes a bond
of the soul to be kept and performed to the Lord.

But some promissory Oaths God makes a bond of the soul to be kept and
performed to the Lord.

Ergo. Some promissory Oaths may be lawful.

The major is proved, because that which is altogether unlawful cannot bind
the soul to God, nor is to be kept and performed to the Lord.

The minor is proved from Numb. 30. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or
swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break or profane his
word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, Matthew. 5.
33. Again ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, where a
promissory Oath is made a bond to bind the soul with, to be kept and performed
to the Lord.

2. If holy men before the Law, under the Law, in Gospel times have put
promissory Oaths on others, then they are not altogether unlawful. This is
proved by the same reason by which the like consequence is proved before, in
proving the fourth argument of the former proposition.

But holy men before the Law, as Abraham, Genesis 24. 2. 3. under the Law, as
Moses, Deuteronomy. 29. 14. Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 17. Asa and the people of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13, 14, 15. Ezra, Ezra 10. 5. in Gospel times, Paul, 1 These. 5.
27. adjuring the Thessalonians by the Lord, that that Epistle be read to all
the holy brethren, have put promissory Oaths on others. Ergo.

3 That which godly men have practiced and still counted as well done that is
lawful.

But some promissory Oaths godly men have practiced and still counted as well
done. Ergo.

The major is probable, and in this case, considering the persons, and the holy
Ghosts recording as he has done, certain.

The minor is proved by instances of David, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, 1 Samuel 20. 42. And
Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasomuch as we have sworn both of us in
the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and thee, and between my
seed and thy seed for ever. Nehem. 10. 29. They clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an Oath to walk in Gods Law. 1 King.
1. 29, 30. And the king swear and said, As the Lord lives, that has redeemed
my soul out of all distress, even as I swear unto thee that by the Lord God of
Israel assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my
throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.

4. That which is made a qualification of one that shall dwell in Gods holy
hill, is not unlawful: but to swear to his hurt and not to change, that is, to
take a promissory Oath, and not to change, though it be to his damage is made
a qualification of one that shall dwell in Gods holy hill, Psalm. 15. 4.

Ergo. Some promissory Oaths are lawful.

The third Proposition [ That to swear to a King or Governor is lawful] is
proved,

1. From approved examples, which prove either a duty, or at least lawfulness
of the thing.

That which has been practiced by holy men without reproof is lawful.

But swearing to Kings and Governors Allegiance and Obedience has been
practiced by holy men. Ergo.

The minor is proved by instances of the people to David, 2 Samuel 5. 3. So all
the elders came to the king to Hebron, and king David made a league with them
in Hebron before the Lord: and they anointed David king over Israel, 1 Chronicles.
11. 3. Then came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron, and David made
a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed David king
over Israel according to the word of the Lord by Samuel. A Covenant before the
Lord was an Oath, but the people of Israel, a holy people made a covenant
before the Lord with David their king, therefore they entered into an Oath of
Allegiance and due Obedience. The other is more plain, 2 King. 11. 4. And in
the seventh year Jehojada sent and fet the rulers over hundreds with the
captains and the guard, and brought them to him in the house of the Lord, and
made a covenant with them, and took an Oath of them in the house of the Lord,
and showed them the kings son, verse. 17. And Jehojada made a covenant between
the Lord and the king, and the people, that they should be the Lords people:
between the king also and the people, 2 Chronicles. 23. 3. And all the congregation
made a covenant with the king in the hosue of God: and he said unto them,
Behold the kings son shall reign, as the Lord has said of the sons of David,
verse. 6. Then Jehojada made a covenant between him and all the people, and
between the king, that they should be the Lords people. These are express
examples of swearing Allegiance to Kings, which is consonant to what our Lord
Christ teaches, that we should render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
as to God the things that are Gods, Matthew. 22. 21. Besides we find David
swearing to Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 22. the people conceiving themselves bound by
Saul's adjuration, 1 Samuel, 14. 24, 28. Shimei was bound by the Oath which Solomon
imposed on him, where Solomon speaks thus to him, Why have thou not kept the
Oath of the Lord, and the commandment that I have charged thee with? Abraham's
servant swear obedience to Abraham, and counted himself bound to keep it, Genesis
24. 2, 3. Then arose Ezra, and made the chief Priests, the Levites, and all
Israel to swear, that they should do according to this word, and they swear,
Ezra 10. 5. Nehemiah made them swear by God, saying, ye shall not give your
daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for your
selves, Nehem. 13. 25.

2. From Gods dealing with Zedekiah, that kept not the Oath made to the King of
Babylon, Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19. where God does not except against the Oath, but the
breaking of it calling it his Oath, which he had despised, and his covenant
that he had broken; whence I argue,

That which God calls his Oath, the despising of which he avengeth, may be
lawfully taken.

But an Oath of subjection even to the King of Babylon, God calls his Oath, the
despising of which he avengeth, therefore some Oath of subjection to a King,
may be lawful.

3. From the words of Solomon, Eccles. 8. 2. I counsel thee to keep the kings
commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. The Oath of God seems to
be an Oath by God to the king, being made the reason of keeping the kings
commandment, as the Oath of Shemei, 1 King. 2. 43. is termed the Oath of the
Lord, Zedechiah's Oath to the King of Babylon, Gods Oath and Covenant, Ezekiel.
17. 19. Prove. 2. 17. the wives covenant with her husband, is called the
covenant of her God; whence I argue,

That which is Gods Oath, and is urged as the reason of keeping the Kings
command is lawful.

But an Oath of subjection to a King is Gods Oath, and urged as the reason of
keeping his commandment, as the Text shows, therefore it is lawful. If by the
Oath of God be meant, not a particular Oath to a King, but the general Oath or
Covenant to obey God (which seems not so likely, because it is the special
reason of keeping the Kings Commandment) yet thus also the argument holds: If
it be lawful to make a general Oath to God of keeping his Laws, and this be one
of Gods Laws to keep the Kings commandment, and that the particular Oath of
subjection to the King is comprehended in the general Oath of keeping Gods
commands, a particular Oath of obedience to the King is not unlawful.

4. That is lawful which is of necessary use for the Public good.

But some swearing to a King or other Governors is of necessary use for the
public good, therefore it is lawful.

The major is confirmed in proving the major of the fifth argument of the first
proposition, The minor is proved by experience, even Jehojada and David
conceived so, and the reason is, because the common peace and good government
cannot be kept but by good correspondence between Prince and people: therefore
if mutual Oaths tend thereto, as often they do, they are of necessary use for
the public good.

The grand objection is from the words of our Savior, Math. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37.
But I say unto you, Swear not all, neither by heaven for it is Gods throne: nor
by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city
of the great king. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not
make one hair white or black. But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay,
for whatsover is more then these comes of evil: and of the Apostles, Jam. 5.
12. But above all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by
the earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay,
nay; lest ye fall into condemnation: which words do seem expressly and fully to
forbid any swearing at all, excluding some sorts of Oaths by name, and the rest
by General terms, with prescription that our communication be yea, yea, nay,
nay, and determination, that what is more then these comes of evil, or the
evil one, which made some of the Ancients and later godly persons conclude all
Oaths of any sort prohibited now to Christians, though they were not to the
Jews. But the reasons foregiven are so cogent to the contrary, that we must of
necessity find out a limitation of the speeches, as we do, and rightly, for
the next words of our Savior following, verse. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. which are as
full in show for not resisting of evil, but offering our selves to receive
further injury, and permitting more damage and profuse vain casting away our
estates, contrary to the law of nature, in our necessary defense, to that
necessary moderate providence, which belongs to every man, that due respect
which each is to have to the rules of mercy, bounty, and our own employment and
family, so that without good caution we shall make Christ's precept in stead of
being useful to become pernicious.

That we may then consider how to understand our Lords precept about swearing,
we are to take this as certain, that Christ's precept forbids somewhat which the
Pharisaical teachers allowed, though they forbad perjury; now one thing seems
to be forbidden by our Lord Christ, to wit, the making of such distinction of
Oaths as the Pharisees did, and accordingly used them, which seems to have
consisted in two things.

1. In conceiving they might use Oaths by some creatures, as if in such use
there were no relation to God, and so no profaning of his name, or taking it in
vain. The reason of this seems to be Christ's and James his instances only in
such sorts of Oaths as were by creatures, and the refutation of their conceit,
by showing, that all referred to God, as the Oath by the heaven, was by God,
since it was his throne; by the earth, since it is his footstool; by Jerusalem,
since it was his city; by the head since he makes the hair white or black.

2. That some of these Oaths made them debtors to perform what they swear and
not other, which appears from Christ's own charge upon them, Matthew. 23. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22. where he terms them fools and blind guides for such
decision, concluding that all those Oaths had respect to God, and did bind.
And accordingly Christ is not to be understood as forbidding simply all Oaths,
but such differencing of Oaths in their meaning and obligation, as the
Pharisees, and other Jews, either superstitiously or otherwise erroneously
used, yet I do not conceive this is all. For the words, Swear not at all,
neither by heaven nor earth, nor any other Oath, but prescribing yea, yea, nay,
nay, censuring more to be from evil, or the evil one, seems to forbid all Oaths
in some cases or manner, which some conceive as if he forbad a promissory Oath
universally, or a vow with an Oath: But these opinions stand not with the
second Proposition before proved, nor do I find any thing in the text leading
to them. And therefore I conceive, that the prohibition is of that frequent,
vain, light, profane, unnecessary, customary passionate swearing, or in secular
matters of no importance, without any dread of an Oath, or consideration of the
holiness of God, upon a provocation to anger, as David, 1 Samuel 25. 21. or
deceifully as those, Psalm. 24. 4. all who take Gods name in vain, which I
gather from the text.

1. In that he prescribes their yea, yea, nay, nay, to be in their speech or
communication, which seems to be meant of their familiar speech one with
another, in their answers to each other.

2. Because James saying, Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, does exlude
inconstancy and lightness, and prescribes such considerateness as that they
need not unsay what they have said, that to use the Apostles speech, 2 Cor. 1.
18. Our words may not be yea, and nay, off and on, but yea and Amen, that is,
firm and ratified, so as that deeds answer to words, as becomes men, that
consider what they say, and still say that taught the good knowledge of the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, 2, 5, 22. Removed the high places, and brake the images,
and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had
made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it, 2
King. 18. 4. Appointed the courses of the Priests and Levites, with the portion
to be given to the Priests and the Levites, 2. Chron. 31. 2, 4. Josiah purged
the land of Idols, repaired the Lords house, gathered all the people to hear
the Law read, and to make them to stand to the covenant he made before the
Lord, to walk after the Lord. And in the doing of these things the Kings are
said to do that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and to walk before the
Lord with a perfect heart.

2. On the contrary, the not removing the high places, and permitting Idols,
and neglecting the setting up of Gods true worship and service, is charged upon
some of the Kings as their sin, 1 King. 15. 14. and 22. 43. 2 King. 14. 9. and
15. 4.

3. God gives a special charge to the King to have a copy of the Law, and to
read therein, that he may learn to fear the Lord, and to keep all the words of
the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. and therefore when Jehojada crowned King Jehoash he
gave him the testimony, 2 King. 11. 12. that he might be minded, that he was,
as a King, to know and to see to the keeping of the whole Law.

4. The open practice of Idolatry is imputed to the want of a King in Israel,
Judge. 17. 5, 6. and 18. 1. which proves, that the King in Israel ought to
restrain from Idolatry, and not to permit every man to do what was right in his
own eyes.

The ma^or is manifest, because the Office of the Kings of Israel was no
ceremonial function, as the Priests, but moral, and of perpetual use, and
therefore belongs to other Kings as well as the Kings of Israel; nor does the
Gospel deprive them, or any other of their State and Authority, by their
becoming Christians: for then suppose King Agrippa had become a Christian, he
must have ceased to be a King, and have had his Kingly power diminished: but as
the Apostle resolves concerning servants and persons of other conditions, 1
Cor. 7. 24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called therein abide with
God, that is, his Christian calling does not bind him to leave the state and
condition of life in which he was, nor diminish his Authority which he had when
he was called to be a Christian, as not consisting with Christianity; so is it
true concerning Kings and other Magistrates, they have greater obligation to
God, and the Lord Christ, no less Authority and power as Kings by their
Christianity: but they may abide in their Office, and exercise the lawful
Authority they had before.

Perhaps it will be said, The Kings of Israel were types of Christ, and
therefore their Power and Authority did cease in things Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, when Christ was come.

1. But to the contrary, this is said without proof, and so is rejected as
easily as it is alleged.

2. It is true, Christ is often termed David, and it is said, he shall sit on
David's throne, Luke 1. 32, 33. But this power of reforming Religion was not
appropriate to David, or the race of the Kings of Judah, but belonged also to
the Kings of Israel, (who were not types of Christ) who are charged with the
permission or promoting of Idolatry, as their sin, as on Jeroboam, Ahab, etc.
and Jehu is in some measure rewarded for the partial Reformation he made, 2
King. 10. 28, 29, 30. and therefore it belonged not to the Kings of Israel to
reform Religion, only as types of Christ, but even as Kings.

2. This is proved, and the Proposition it self. That is to be ascribed to the
King, which was with approbation ascribed to Kings out of the Church.

But the Government in things and Causes spiritual or belonging to Religion, is
ascribed with approbation to Kings out of the Church. Ergo.

The major is proved, because what of this kind is with approbation ascribed to
Kings out of the Church, is to be taken as belonging to Kings as Kings, and not
as typical Kings or Rulers.

The minor is proved by instances.

The first of Cyrus King of Persia of whom we read that the Lord stirred up his
spirit to make a Proclamation for building of Gods house, 2. Chron. 36. 22, 23.
Ezra. 1. 1, 2. in doing this he is called Gods shepherd, Isa 44. 28. and
anointed by God, Isa. 45. 1. and the same was continued by Decrees of Darius,
Ezra 6. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 13, 21, 23, 26. now these
things belonging to the building of Gods house, furthering his service, were
spiritual things, and therefore Government in spiritual things belonging to
Religion, is ascribed to Kings out of the Church.

To these may be added the Decree of Nebuchadnezzar against them that should
speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. Dan.
3. 29. and of Darius, Dan. 6. 26. That in every Dominion of his Kingdom, men
tremble and, fear before the God of Daniel, which are undoubtedly about
spiritual Causes or Matters of Religion: and the King of Nineveh his
Proclamation by the Decree of the King and his nobles, that all should fast
covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily to God, Jonah 3. 7, 8. which is
approved by God, in that he deferred his judgment thereupon: in all which
Government in matters of Religion was exercised and approved.

3. That which agrees to other Rulers besides Kings, agrees much more to Kings,

But to Govern in Causes spiritual or things of Religion, belongs to Governors
below Kings, therefore much more to Kings.

4. The major is proved from the title given to the King, 1 Pet. 2. 13. where
he is called the Supreme or Excelling, and of those that are in Authority or
Excelling, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. the King is reckoned as chief; therefore if
inferior Governors are to Govern in matters of Religion, much more Kings. Now
that they are to do so, appears by the practice of Nehemiah, who being not
King, nor Priest, but Governor under the King of Persia, reformed the Priests,
excluding aliens from the Priests chambers, giving the Levites their portion,
and chiefly by restraining the profanation of the Sabbath, Nehem. 13. 9, 10,
15, 22. reckoning it among the works for which he would have God remember him.
Jacob reforms his household by requiring them to put away the strange gods that
were among them, and bury them, Genesis 35. 2, 4. Parents are required to bring up
their children in the nurture, in Greek discipline or government and admonition
of the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 4. Servants are to be obedient to their masters as to
Christ, Verse. 5. As the servants of Christ doing the will of God from the
heart, Verse. 6. With good will doing service as to the Lord and not to men:
therefore Parents and Masters have Government in matters of Religion, much more
the Father and Master of the Commonwealth, having a more ample Authority.

4. This is further confirmed in that the Apostle where he speaks of the
Powers, he says without limitation, that Rulers are not a terror to good
works but to evil: will thou not be afraid of the power? do that which is good,
and thou shall have praise of the same, he is the minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13. 3. 4. Kings and Governors
sent by them are for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well, without limitation and distinction of Civil and Spiritual things,
1 Pet. 2. 14. Now where the Law does not distinguish, neither are we, and
therefore are to understand the Governing in the text to be in Religious things
as well as Civil.

5. Which is further confirmed from the Titles given to them: they are termed
gods, Psalm. 82. 1, 6. John 10. 34, 35. Ministers of God, Romans 13. 4. That judge
not for man but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 9. therefore they are to be
ministers in a Political way, and to judge in things of the Lord.

6. Paul did not refuse to apologize for himself about the accusations of the
Jews against him for his profession and preaching of Christian Religion, but
did justify himself before Felix, Festus and king Agrippa, and appealed to
Caesar, Act. 23. 29. and 24. 5, 6, 8, 10. and 25. 8, 11, 19, 21, and 26. 2, 3.
therefore he denied not, but acknowledged the Kings Government, even in the
things and Causes that concern Christian Religion, and consequently we may in
like manner acknowledge it.

7. Paul exhorts us to pray and give thanks for Kings and all that are in
authority or excellency, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. therefore he supposes that Kings have
some Government in matters of godliness, as well as honesty, and therefore are
Governors In Causes Spiritual, or of Religion.

8. From the absurdities which follow if this be not granted.

1. If the King be not Governor in Ecclesiastical things and Causes, then his
Kingly power is of no use in matters of Religion, for if he have no Government
in them he is to be a looker on, and in effect a mere cipher in respect of such
things; But this is not to be said, since matters of Religion do as much concern
him to Govern in, as any causes, all experience showing that no Government can
be well ordered without some regard had to Religion.

2. All the actions which Kings have been commended for by godly persons were
unjustifiable: the pulling down of Idols, restraining the importation and
vending of Popes pardons, and consecrated ware, the causing the holy Bible to
be translated, and publicly to be read, proclaimnig fasts, and days of
thanksgiving, with many of the like acts of Kingly Authority have been
unwarrantable.

3. Kings should have no way of expressing their zeal for Gods worship and true
Religion more then other men, if they were not Governors in spiritual things
and Causes, nor be more accountable to God for neglect thereof, then other men,
nor this sin of theirs of more guilt then the like sin of others, which are all
absurd.

4. All the holy Martyrs who have owned their authority, and submitted to it
when they suffered under it, all those who have petitioned for Reformation of
Religion to Kings, have giventhanks to God for it, have advised that it should
be sought from them, should be censured as foolish, if not sinfully
countenancing an unrighteous usurpation, and the best Christian Kings who have
done most for the settling the affairs of the Church censured (...) busy in
other men's matters, and the like is to be said of Parliaments, and so all
matters of Religion must be left wholly to Bishops, the evil and miserable
effects of which are discernible in the Records of former and later times, to
be intolerable; as it fell out in the troubles by Thomas Becket in the time of
Henry the second, of Stephen Langton in King John's days, the persecution in
Queen Mary's days by Bishops, whose disowning the Kings Supremacy and asserting
the Popes, occasioned the making and the imposing of this Oath.

5. Those Titles which have been given them for their care in ordering the
things of the Church, that they were nursing fathers and nursing mothers to it,
according to Isaiahs prophecy, Isa. 49. 29. should be recalled: all the
exhortations and charges given to them by preachers to take care of the Church
of God, should be retracted, they should be no longer minded, that they are to
be keepers of both tables of the Law; in a word, it should be their virtue to
be as Gallio was, that cared for none of these things, Acts 18. 17. which are
all absurd.

Against this many things are objected.

1. That to acknowledge the King the only Supreme Governor is to make him God.

To this I answer: Not so, since he is acknowledged Governor in his Dominions,
and Supreme therein under God, and the exclusive term [ onely] excludes foraign
jurisdiction of the Pope and other Princes and States, (which by the Oath is
renounced) not Gods Government.

Object. 2 If Kings are Governors in all causes, then they may appoint what
Religion, and worship of God they please, and it is evil to disobey or gainsay
what they impose.

Answer. Though in temporal things they be Governors, yet are they to Govern
according to Laws. So in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things they are to Govern
according to the Laws of Christ, and such rules as agree with them, and not in
either, in a merely arbitrary way after their own will: nor are we necessitated
to obey or own what they require, if inconsistent with the laws of Christ, and
such rules as agree with them.

Object. 3. If Kings be Governors in all Causes over all persons, then may
they dissolve Churches and their Government, and mould and order them as they
will.

Answ. So far as Church constitution, Government, and ordering is by Christ's
appointment, or such example which has the force of an institution of Christ,
it may not be altered by a King; But in such things as are left to humane
prudence, and there is a concernment of the weal public; Kings have authority
to order them so, as that they tend to the real good and advantage of the
Churches of Christ, and the glory of God, which is the highest and ultimate end
of all.

Object. 4. This will make the use of Synods, and Assemblies of Pastors to
determine things of Religion, and to order government unnecessary, since the
determination of all will lie in the Kings breast.

Answ. Though Statute-laws require the Kings assent, and the Government is to
be exercised in his name, by his Commission, yet are not debates in Parliament,
and passing bills by both Houses, nor consultations with judges, nor their
decisions of cases unnecessary: The like is to be said of the use of Synods and
Assemblies of Pastors and learned men, though the calling of them, and validity
of their Canons, that is rules, in respect of the imposing them on others with
civil penalties, require the Kings concurrence.

Object. 5. This has occasioned great evils in so much that persecution has
been raised against godly persons as Heretics and Schismatiques, when Princes
have been misled; so as to burn, banish, imprison, and otherwise to afflict
persons, judged by Prelates and others to be such.

Answ. It Is true this has fallen out, when Princes ignorant of the true
Religion, corrupted in their education, perverted by seducers and ungodly
guides in their judgments have yielded too much to the misinformation of
others, and so have been unhappy in the abuse of their Government to the great
hurt in life, liberty, and estate of innocent persons: And the like has been
in mal-administration of civil affairs, through the like causes: yet the power
and authority in neither is to be denied for some abuse: for that would
introduce a worse evil of Anarchy and mischievous confusions. On the other side
when Princes have been good, and have used such good Counselors, as Jehojada
was to Joash; their Government in Religion has been of great advantage to the
Church of Christ. And, as things have stood in England, it was the means under
God whereby Popery was expelled, and the Protestant Reformation was established.

Object. 6. By allowing so much power in Ecclesiastical things, Religion is
often changed with the King, and thereby peoples minds are at much uncertainty
what Religion to be of, which tends to irreligion and Atheism.

Answ. So it fell out in the Kingdom of Judah, yet the power of the Kings of
Judah in matters of Religion was not for this cause denied. And the like
happens upon change of teachers, as in the Churches of Galatia: and Paul, Acts
20. 29, 30. foretells the like would be in the Church of Ephesus, yet is not
therefore the use and Government of Pastors to be denied, but more diligence to
be in using such holy means as prayer for Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. etc. which by
Gods blessing may prevent these evils.

Object. 7. No man is to Govern in that whereof he is no sit Judge, nor is any
man a fit Judge but he that is skilful in the things he judges: which seldom
happened to Kings in matters of Religion, and therefore Government therein is
ill ascribed to them.

Ans. As a King may be fit to Govern in Temporal Causes (whereto is required
skill in the laws of the Land, of which perhaps he has little or no knowledge,
not so much as a Judge is to have, who passes sentence) if he choose and use
them that are skilful and upright therein: so it may be in Ecclesiastical
Causes, if he choose and use the help of them that are skilful and faithful in
Religion. But in this thing there is need of the greatest circumspection,
vigilance and wariness, on the one side by reason of the cunning and diligence
of seducers, and the violence of spirit in profane persons against the most
holy and harmless Christians, and on the other side by reason of the weakness
in the faith of many upright souls, whose consciences are very tender, and
their wounds hardly cured: of whom our Lord Christ was very tender, Matthew. 12.
20. and gentle toward them, as the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the
blood of the everlasting covenant, Heb. 13. 20. as was foretold, Isai. 40. 11.
and the Apostle Paul requires much indulgence to be given them, Romans 14. 1, 4.

Object. 8. The acknowledgement of this Supremacy of the King has been opposed
by sundry godly Protestants, who have in their writings excepted against it, as
Calvin, and the Century writers of Magdeburg.

Answ. It Is true, they excepted against the Title of head of the Church given to
King Henry the eighth, as Stephen Gardener, and such like persons misreported
it, as if it gave to the King an uncontrollable authentic power, to determine
of faith, and worship of God: but when those learned Protestants better
understood what was meant by it, they withdrew their exceptions, as Doctor
Rainold shows in his Conference with Heart in the Tower, chap. 10.

Object. 9. Many godly persons are offended with the taking, and defending the
Lawfulness of the taking of this Oath, as fearing it many tend to the taking
away those Liberties of their consciences in Religion, which are dearer to them
then their lives: and being jealous of those who take it, least they betray
those Liberties.

Ans. It is to be considered by those conscientious persons, who make this
objection, that the takers, and defenders of the taking of this Oath do
apprehend, that the imposing this Oath was for the excluding the Popes
jurisdiction, and other Foreign power, as the admonition of Queen Elizabeth
here prefixed shows, and therefore there is nothing done by such takers or
defenders in prejudice of their brethrens Liberties, or imposition on the
consciences of others: But they that have taken it, or conceive they may take
it, if imposed, do it, as being satisfied in their consciences by the foregoing
arguments, or such like, that they do but what they may do lawfully without
offense, and hope that it will fall out as it did in the business of the Altar
of Ed, Josh. 22. that a right intelligence of their fact will prevent any
breach between them and others, and unite them more closely.

Object. 10. This acknowledgement of the Kings Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical has been but of late, not before King Henry the eighth and
Edward the sixth.

Answer. The Title of head of the Church of England, ( now altered into Supreme
Governout over all persons) though it were not assumed by the Kings of England
before Henry the eighth, yet the power of Supreme Government in Causes
Ecclesiastical, as says Bishop Bramhal in his answer to Militiere, page 111.
The ancient Kings of England ever exercised, not only before the Reformation,
but before the Norman Conquest, as appeared by the Acts of their great
Councils, by their Statutes, and Articles of the Clergy, by so many Laws of
provision against the Bishop of Romes conferring Ecclesiastical dignities and
benefices upon Foreigners, by so many sharp oppositions against the exactions
and usurpations of the Court of Rome, by so many Laws concerning the Patronage
of Bishoprics, and investitures of Bishops, by so many examples of Churchmen
punished by the Civil Magistrate. This power, though not this name, the
Christian Emperors of old assumed to themselves, to Convocate Synods, to
preside in Synods, to confirm Synods, to establish Ecclesiastical Laws, to
receive appeals, to nominate Bishops, to eject Bishops, to suppress Heresies,
to Compose Ecclesiastical differences, in Councils, out of Councils, by
themselves, by their Delegates. All which is as clear in the History of the
Church, as if it were written with a beam of the Sun.

The sixth Proposition is [The Jurisdictions, Preeminences, Privileges, and
Authorities in that Oath may be assisted and defended] The jurisdictions, etc.
meant I conceive to be expressed a little before the form of the Oath in the
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Of which the Queens admonition says, No other
Authority is challenged, than that was challenged and lately used by King Henry
the eighth, and Edward the sixth, that is, under God, to have the Sovereignty
and Rule over all manner of persons, born within her Realms, Dominions and
Countries, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, so
as no other foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them.
What was used in the days of Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth, appears by
the book of Acts and Monumens and Statutes in their days, to wit, the rejecting
the Popes jurisdiction, appointing visitors, judging and deposing some Bishops,
commands to take down Images, causing Divine service to be in the English
tongue, the Bible in the English tongue to be in Churches, with many other
things of the like kind. the promise to defend them is [ to Our power] whether
by opposing the bringers in of a Foreign power, especially the Popes or by
aiding the King in the right use of this Authority, neither is the power
granted which may not be lawfully used or exercised, nor is the abuse of it
required to be defended. With this explication, the Proposition is thus proved.

That we may lawfully swear to assist and defend, which may lawfully be
exercised, and may be of necessary use.

This Proposition needs not any further proof being of it self manifest.

But all the Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities meant in
the Oath according to the Queens explication in her Admonition, ratified in the
proviso of the Statute 5. Eliz. may be lawfully exercised, and may be of
necessary use, as appears by the recital of them and their use before
specified: therefore we may lawfully swear to assist and defend them.

The Objection that is made against this is, that these Jurisdictions,
Preeminences, Privileges, and Authorities were the same that were taken from
the Pope and given to the King, and thereby Papal power was conferred on him.

To which I answer, The power (says Heart Conference with Rainold, chap. 1.
division 2.) which we mean to the Pope by this title of the Supreme Head is,
that the Government of the whole Church throughout the world does depend of
him: in him does lie the power of judging and determining all causes of faith,
of ruling Councils as President, and ratifying their Decrees; of ordering and
confirming Bishops and Pastors; of deciding Causes brought him by Appeals from
all the Coasts of the earth, of reconciling any that are excommunicate, of
excommunicating, suspending or inflicting other censures and penalties on any
that offend, yea, on Princes and Nations; finally of all things of the like
sort, for Governing of the Church, even whatsoever touches either preaching of
Doctrine or practicing of Discipline in the Church of Christ. Now this immense
power, as too heavy for the shoulders of a mortal man, and as not belonging to
the Kingly Office at all in many parts of it, is disclaimed by the Kings of
England, as is before showed, and not meant to be acknowledged in the Oath.
Therefore, says Dr. John Rainold Confer. with Heart, chap. 10. that which we
take from the Pope we give not to any mortal creature, and having by the
reading of Dr. Nowels reproof of Dormans proof of certain Articles convinced
Heart the Jesuit, that no more is meant by it then what August. says Epist.
50. that Kings do serve Gods as Kings, if in their own Realm they command good
things, and forbid evil, not only concerning the civil state of men, but the
Religion of God also: thus much he did subscribe to. Out of all which I infer,
that it was very presumptuously and unjustly made by Mounsier de la Militiere
the crime of the Kings of England, which God chastised by the late Tragedy,
that the Authority which God gave the King in Temporal matters was used by him
for Governing Spiritual, in his tempting Epistle to his Majesty that now is,
whom the Lord preserve and direct in the mannaging of this power of so great
concernment to so many millions of precious souls as are within his Dominions.
Amen.

FINIS.

