A REMEDY FOR THE WARS: OR, Certain Deplorable Expressions, of the great
Miseries, and woeful Effects, which the Horrid, Bloody, Cruel, Domestic, and
Intestine Wars, have lately produced (amongst us) in this our Kingdom of
England.

Together, with Spiritual Salves for the Cure thereof.

By JOHN TARLTON, Preacher of GODS Word, and Minister of Ileminster, in the
County of Somerset.

(...).

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

TO The Right Honorable, RALPH, Lord HOPTON, Baron of STRATTON: Grace, and
Peace, from the Father, Prince, and Spirit of Peace. Amen.
Right Honorable,
THe infallible mouth of the Arch Doctor of all truth has told us, that every
Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a householder,
which brings forth out of his Treasure things both new and old. Mat. 13.52.

Answerable hereunto, there has been in former ages of the Church and are
also now in these latter times, many able and Orthodox Divines, whose hearty
desire for the good of others, have stirred them up to write for the
advancement of true Religion, and the benefit of the Church of Christ, that
through Gods blessing upon their writings, they might win many souls unto God:
whereby being dead themselves, they might still speak to those that are alive;
that so their holy DOCTRINE might be transmitted, and propagated unto posterity
after them.

Of which number my self being one, (although the meanest of all the rest)
laboring in the same Vineyard, have thought it necessary to gather one
handful of Grapes, and carry them to the Press, thereby to increase the water
of life, wherewith to refresh the Church of Christ when she is either sick, or
sorrowful.

The which as the poor widows Mite will add somewhat to the Churches
treasury; according to that Talent. which the Lord has lent me.

And in this Age, there was never greater cause for Spiritual Physicians, to
provide restoring comfortable Cordialls, for sick, cast down, and dejected
souls, then in these present deplorable and calamitous days.

Natural experiment tacitly tells us, that the sad expression of woeful
calamity, can never be welcome to a truly Christian, and sympathizing heart.

This Ioab the General of King David's host knew right well, and therefore he
would not suffer Ahimaaz whom he loved, to carry tidings to King David of
Absaloms death. 2 Samuel 18.20.

The Sword of the late, domestic, unnatural, and intestine Wars, has eaten
up many thousands of our English Nation, yea, has swiftly snatched them away,
even as the Ox licketh up the grass: so great have Rubens divisions been in
our Land.

My self also having borne a great share thereof, almost as bitter as death it
self: For diverse of us of the Tribe of Levi, were imprisoned in one room in
the Metropolis of this Kingdom, in which Prison they all ended their days:
And about one month after all their deaths, my self only (and that by way of
exchange) escaped alive; like one of Jobs messengers, to declare somewhat VIVA
VOCE, concerning those that are in their graves.

And as an Aggravation to my Affliction, I have been a long time (and still
remain) under Sequestration, being deprived both of Living and Goods, whereby
my self and family are (at this present) destitute of the means of subsistence.

So that, the premises maturely and seriously considered, I thought it
therefore my duty both unto God my heavenly Father, and also to the Church of
England my Spiritual Mother, in this her present and sad condition, to
express to the world her woeful calamity, together with a Remedy for the same.

For which cause I do here humbly present unto your Honors this ensuing
Treatise, the which may not unfitly be termed A REMEDY FOR THE WARS. Which
through Gods blessing upon the holy Endeavors, and Religious Practices, of
those persons unto whom it shall come, there may be a present surceasing of
these bloody, unnatural, and intestine English Wars, and both Church and
Commonwealth, even speedily and happily enjoy their pristine condition.

Many thousands of us English Natives (since these troubles arose amongst us)
have deeply suffered, and still do, by a stupendous kind of dispersion in
Opinion and Practice; and yet how few there are who in lowliness of Spirit,
and humbleness of heart truly repenting them of all their wickedness, smite
their breasts, saying, What have I done? Jer. 8.6.

And yet I hope the deep apprehension of these present Distractions amongst us,
does exercise, and that not unworthily, the heads of many that are of great
Wisdom and Policy, to think how this distracted Church and Commonwealth may
again be reunited.

If ever we would have a wel-grounded, firm, and permanent Peace in this our
Kingdom, then must we sincerely perform these three particular Duties.

1. Aversion from Sin.

2. Conversion to God.

3. Humble, hearty and constant Prayer unto God, to enable us by the power of
his grace and blessed Spirit, for the speedy and constant performance of both.

At the request and importunity of some who are more able (both in gifts of
Nature and Learning) then my self, who having had a sight of this Book
(privately in my Study) before it was fully finished, I was prevailed with to
present it to the public view; and at their instance being resolved so to do,
I called to mind your Noble Lordship, (as in duty I am obliged) who so
willingly, freely and speedily condescended to my Enlargement by the way of
Exchange when I was in Prison; humbly craving the peaceable Passage of this my
Book under the shelter of your Honorable Patronage, and Protection; being
well assured, that your Honorable Name, and Noble Aspect, casting an
approbatious and indulgent eye upon it, have such attractive power in them; as
that by virtue thereof, they will set such a splendid luster upon this my weak
Work, that thereby as by the efficacy of a Lodestone, the eyes and hearts of
many thousands will be drawn unto it: whereby also it may take the deeper
impression in their hearts, for the reformation of their lives, and the
conversion of their souls unto God, through Jesus Christ: the which (through
Gods blessing upon it) may greatly conduce to the glory of the God of Peace,
and the benefit and comfort of many poor disquieted souls.

I humbly entreat your Noble Lordships charitable, and candid censure, for my
Super-audacity in this nature; For through the fervent zeal which I have for
the glory of God, and hearty desire for the salvation of his childrens souls,
wishing also both the present permanent Peace, and the speedy continuing
Comfort, of his distressed Militant Church, in this our disquieted, perplexed,
and distracted Kingdom:

I have (in imitation of Saint Paul to his Romans) somewhat boldly after a
sort, written for the benefit of the English Natives, as one that puts them
in remembrance, through the grace that is given me of God. Romans 15.15.

I do ingenuously and submissively confess my great and over-boldnesse to
Dedicate this weak work unto your Honor: yet I humbly beseech your Honor
both to pardon this my boldness, and to accept the mind of the Offerer;
accept also the Book offered, if not for the Author of the Book, yet for the
Author of the Text, and those necessary things contained therein, being
pertinent to these present times.

And thus fearing to hinder the course of your Honors more serious
cogitations, in all humility I take my leave: heartily desiring Almighty God,
that when the last Period of your mortal life shall present it self; you may
look Death in the face without Dread; the Grave without Fear; the Lord Jesus
with Comfort; and Jehovah blessed for ever, with everlasting joy.

Your Honors in all duty to be commanded, John Tarlton.

To the Christian Reader.
Gentle Reader,
ALthough the writings of all men that are presented unto the public view,
are arraigned at the Bar of each Readers understanding, and sometimes the
Authors thereof too rashly censured, by Polipragmaticall, Overcurious, and
Critical persons; yet this should be no Obstacle to hinder the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, from doing their best endeavors, as well by writing
as by preaching, to build up the Church of Christ.

This Book although it treats of the miseries of Wars, and also of the
Members of Christ's Church, yet it medleth not at all with any Controversies in
the Church, or any thing in the state Ecclesiastical, but only for the good
of Christ's Church, (in a patheticall way) imploreth our constant assistance by
the practice of Prayer on her behalf as the great prevailing Ordinance of God,
for the curing of all her distempers and putting a Period to all her
distractions, wherewith at this present she is greatly disquieted.

As for carping and censorious Critics, I care not to satisfy them: my desire
is to convince the Wicked, to comfort the Godly being afflicted, to edify the
Conscience, and increase the Understanding.

And if herein, thou either find any thing amiss, or thy self not fully
satisfied in particular; then I pray thee remember what is the Lot of the most
Learned men's Works, even to be left (after a sort) naked and imperfect: for
every one that is mortal, knows but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.

I crave thy charitable construction of my poor Endeavors, being willing to
be convinced, and reformed: read them impartially, and those truths therein
contained, practice them, both speedily and profitably, give God the glory
thereof, and much Benefit and comfort may thy soul receive thereby.

The blessed spirit of God cooperate with this Work in the hearts of the
Readers; for the glory of his great name, and the salvation of their poor
souls through Jesus Christ.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, John Tarlton.

A REMEDY FOR THE WARS.
PSALM. 122.6. O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.


THis Psalm (as one of our Church both Learned and judicious well observes)
breaths out nothing but a sweet perfume of inflamed affection: such as the only
bird, the dying Phoenix lying in her bed of spices, all the spices in Arabia
fired with the pure beams of the Sun cannot parallel.

If you please with me, to view it considerately with a spiritual eye, we
shall conspicuously see, it primarily begins with David's tryumphant joy: I was
glad when they said unto me: we will go into the house of the Lord.

Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

The first word of this Psalm (in the Original) is (...) id est, Laetatus
fui: that is, I have been glad: and the Radix from whence it is derived, is
(...) id est, Laetatus, vel Hiralis fuit: that is to say, has been glad, or
merry: metaphorice Luxit, the which word Metaphorically is borrowed from the
Light; for as those that are blind, or sit in Darkness, are deprived of that
benefit which the Light affords unto others that participate thereof: So in
like manner those persons who live in the Darkness of ignorance, wandering in
the devious and bypath of blind Superstition, and dangerous Errors, and
walking in the thick and foggie mists of seducing opinions, and shadow of
death; never coming into the house of God, but altogether neglecting his holy
Ordinances; neither taste the comfortable sweetness, nor behold the joyful
Light which others partake of, that zealously frequent them, and
conscienciously are exercised in them. And hence is that saying of Solomon.
Prove. 13.9
(...) The light of the righteous shall rejoice. Thereby giving us to
understand, that the knowledge of God greatly delights his Children, and they
also rejoice to communicate it to others.

So in like manner, as is here expressed, David's delight consisted in gathering
the children of God together, and his joy was in the assembly of the Saints,
furthering them in the service of God.

But alas beloved, what have we to do (in these cloudy and darkesome days)
with this David's joy?

Every Naturalist will tell us, there is an Antipathie between Joy, and Sorrow;
yea, they are as contrary, Heretogeneall, and opposite in their operations, as
Light, and Darkness, Peace, and War.

So that our former late joyful Comedy, being turned into a present doleful
Tragedy, how then can we rejoice?

The sad and great disaster which lately has befallen us, whispers in our
ears, and tacitly tells us, that we must now (for a Remedy) set our faces
Sion-way, and with our weeping eyes half blinded with brinish tears, immitate
those sorrowful Saints, in this our sad, dejected, and cast-downe condition.

Too truly may I for mine own particular, and that by woeful experience, in
the sadness of Spirit, and pensiveness of Soul, together with many thousands
more of this distracted Kingdom, who are unhappily co-involved into the same
pitiful predicament, (at this day) condolingly complain, of Englands
distractive and calamitous condition; having had hastily taken from us,
(altogether contrary and also inconsistent to the practice both of Humanity and
Christian Charity) our Houses, Goods, Lands, Livings, and all other means of
our livelyhoods present subsistence, both Spiritual and Temporal, properly
and lawfully belonging to us; whereby we are now left in a most despicable,
languishing, and perishing Condition:

And as an aggravation to this our present affliction, our names are
ignominiously traduced, and we are both in the Judgment, and also the Eyes of
our remorselesse Enemies, (...), a Spectacle or Gazing-stock to the World. 1
Cor. 4.9.


And even as it were (...). The filth of the World, 1 Cor. 4.13.
and the offscouring of all things.

Yea, as Abjects unto our Adversaries, and also the very Objects of their
reproach, scorn, contempt, and derision.

So that we have cause rather (Crane or Swallow-like) to chatter; Esaias 38.14.
or (Dove-like) to mourn with afflicted Hezekiah, then with joyful David here
in the beginning of this Psalm to rejoice.

Yea, woe and alas may we justly cry out, the bitter fruits of War in our Land,
proceeding from the provocation of our crying sins, from the swift swords
sharpness, has turned our former late joys sweetness, into present bitter
sorrowful sowrenesse.

When the Lord by his Prophet Ezekiel declared the Swords coming upon the
Jews for their sins, He commanded him to say, A Sword, a Sword, Ezech. 21.9,
10.
both sharp and furbished.

It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, and it is furbished that it may
glitter: How shall we rejoice?

So in like manner, our present woeful and hearts-convincing condition tacitly
tells us, that we have little to do with this David's joy, now in these sad times
of War and Sorrow: Can there be joy in our hearts, whilst there is War in our
gates?

Sackcloth and ashes becomes us better: David's case in the next Psalm before
this save one, suites better with our condition: where he complains, Woe is me
that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the
tents of Kedar. Psalm. 120.4, 5, 6.


My soul has long dwelt among them that be enemies unto Peace.

I labor for Peace, but when I speak unto them thereof, they make ready to
battle.

Lo, This perverse practice of preposterous persons, must needs greatly
afflict a truly, charitable and Christian-sympathizing heart, who heartily
desires, and earnestly endeavors both for himself and others, to have the
blessing of Peace.

The like also our Kingly David in these late times of our woeful War, has
often solicited the sons of Mortals, for a speedy, settled, firm, and
wel-grounded Peace; not only for Himself, but also on the behalf of many
thousands more of our English-Natives, yea, even the whole Kingdom: but alas
the birth of all those His Solicitations (as yet) has proved abortive.

Eminent and public Persons placed in Authority above others, ought (above
all others) to make the Word of God the Rule, and the Glory of God both the
Aim and End of all their Actions.

But woe and alas may we at this day justly cry out, that too many such persons
of our English Nation, have of late years wilfully rejected the holy
Commandments of the righteous Lord, and greedily followed the sinful lusts of
their own graceless and wicked hearts, for their Self, Sinister, and By-ends;
whereby utter ruin has been wrought to the lives of many thousands that are
already dead, and also great detriment brought to this English Church and
Commonwealth wherein still we live: to the great grief and prejudice of our
Gracious and Dread Sovereign His Majesty; and all His well-affected, obedient,
dutiful, and loyal-hearted Party; both in, and also of this our divided and
distracted Kingdom.

How many thousands of poor, distressed, destitute, desolate, disconsolate
Women, and almost hunger-starved Children, have often submissively Petitioned
(and that according to the several Ordinances pretendingly extant on that
behalf) with grieved hearts and watery eyes, for some relief out of their own
Estates wherewith to preserve their languishing lives? But alas their
Petitioning has been to no purpose, insomuch, as that they have not only been
perfunctorily neglected, but also scornefully rejected.

Oh that those poor distressed creatures violent Adversaries might not too
truly be termed, Viri inexorabiles, inflexibiles, implacabiles and
immisericordes, qui nullius precibus flectuntur.

I blush to express to the Vulgar in English the condition of such persons,
and the rather for the preservation of the Gospels purity, because they have
put upon their shoulders the Cloakes of Religion, and yet deal thus cruelly
with their Native, National and Christian Brethren.

The Orders and Ordinances which have been made for the relief of such
distressed persons are repealed at the pleasures of the Authors thereof, and
thus they practice Penelopes telam retexere, viz. Do and undo, as soon as
they apprehend that their so doing will conduce to their own advantage.

O Heavens be pleased in mercy toward us to help us speedily: Or else the
Kings Loyall-hearted party will perish suddenly.
The Scripture tells us, For the Divisions of Ruben there were great thoughts of
heart; and for the Divisions that lately have been among our selves, there have
been great searchings of the heart.

Searchings indeed, when the Sword point has been employed as the Instrument,
like a bloody inquisitive revenging Searcher, to rip up the bosom, and to make
the scrutiny, digging there until the last drop of the heart-blood issued: to
the great grief of heart and disturbance of the peace of Jerusalem, the
Church, our Mother, that her Children should deal thus unnaturally one with
another.

Oh, how justly may the Lord (in these troublesome times) complain of England,
as once he did by his Prophet Jeremiah concerning Jerusalem.

As the fountain casts out her waters, Ier. 6.7.
so she casts out her malice: cruelty and spoil is continually heard in her,
before me, with sorrow and strokes.

So that England for the present (in these particulars) may undeniably be
paralleled unto Jerusalem!

And not only so, but also what great and just cause (at this day) has our
distressed Militant Church of England, to complain of her calamity, with the
church of Jerusalem, expressed in the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah?

She finds no rest: Lam. 1.
all her Persecutors took her in the straits.

The Adversaries saw her, and did mock at her Sabbaths.

Her Princes are become like Hearts that find no pasture: and they are gone
without strength before the Pursuer.

Her Priests sigh: her Virgins are discomfited, and she is in heaviness.

Yea, Mat. 2.18.
She mourns like Rachell for her lost Children, and will not be comforted
because they are not.

In so much, as that not only many thousands of the Vulgar sort of our English
Nation have been lately slain, but also many Noble, Worthy and Valiant
Champions, who were Loyal hearted Subjects, have (in the behalf of their King,
Country, and Religion) willingly exposed themselves, not only to the bloody
pangs of uncertain hazards, receiving dangerous wounds in their Bodies; but
also to the merciless jaws of cruel Death, whereby they have been deprived
of their precious Lives, in this bloody English, and unnatural Quarrel.

If but a little while we recollect our thoguhts, and employ them in these
Tragical passages, we shall coactedly conclude, that we have all just cause
jointly to pray for the peace of this our Jerusalem:

For listen either East, West, North, or South, and you shall hear not only
private whisperings of Multitudes, who hastily fled from their lawful
habitations, to escape the enraged Violence of outrageous Soldiers in their
fierce fury; fearfully affrighting their disconsolate families left behind
them, and violently Plundering their lawful goods unlawfully from them: but
also public complaints of those that have lost their nearest and dearest
friends, whose dearest heart-blood has been spilt like water on every side of
Jerusalem.

Thus Death and Desolation have (of late) rid tryumphantly through many parts
of our Kingdom, and also made both visible and tragical Expressions of their
puissant and successful Valor and magnanimity, (maugre all malignancy) in
their desperate attempts against all their Opposers; swiftly cutting down with
their fatal swords of War, diverse of all sorts from off the face of the Earth,
making our pleasant English fields to become Golgotha's, even Receptacles for
dead men's bones, and laying their slain bodies in the dark Cell of this
sublunary World low in the dust.

So that this woeful War has produced these patheticall Effects, viz. That
many heavy-hearted Fathers and Mothers have sorrowed for their Sons,
woful-hearted Widows have wept for their Husbands, tenderhearted Children
have cried for their Fathers, compassionate-hearted Sisters have complained for
their Brothers, yea, thousands have lamented for the loss of their loving
Friends, Neighbors, Kindred, and Acquaintance; so that many thousands have
already lost their lives in this intestine War, and unchristian Quarrel.

Lo, thus immature Death ( Samson-like) has suddenly seized upon them,
speedily surprised them, and also swiftly cut them down as well young as old,
with the fierce and fatal Sword, of cruel, bloody, and merciless War; to the
destruction of their bodies that are dead, and the ruin of many thousands of
poor Widows and fatherless Children left behind them, that are yet
languishing alive.

Alas then, whose heart cannot sympathize their sorrows, and bleed at the
consideration of their calamity?

Oh therefore Tell it not in Gath, 2. Sam. 1.20.
publish it not in the streets of Askelon: lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

And whereby also our English Natives, should hereafter become a Byword
amongst other Nations; But rather labor to pacify Gods displeasure by praying
for Jerusalems Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

But if David in a time of Peace, when Jerusalem was as a City at Unity in it
self, makes his prayer for Peace, and prays for the preservation and
continuance of the Peace of the Church, and would also have others fluctuating
(with himself) in their prayers for the Churches Peace, like the Sea with
Surges, and kindling their Devotions with fervent zeal, would have them
willingly bring plentiful store of Altar-fuell to this holy fire, desiring
them to pray for the Peace of Jerusale^:

Oh then, how much more does it concern us in these Dismal, Disasterous, and
Dog-dayes of the worlds declining Age, viz. in these calamitous times of
discrepancy and dissension, to do our best endeavors jointly to the uttermost
of our power, to prevail with the God of Heaven, for the speedy removal of
these our present penal Evils from us, that are still remaining amongst us,
and lying heavy upon us: For alas, we live (at this day) amongst a perverse
people, who differ too little in disposition from those generations of Men,
Prove. 30.13, 14.
spoken of by Agur the son of Jakeh, Whose eyes are haughty, and their eyelids
are lifted up. Whose teeth are swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives, to devour
the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men. And like those in
David's time, of whom he complainingly spoke, Who imagine mischief in their
hearts, Psalm. 140.2, 3.
and stir up strife all the day long. And have sharpened their tongues like a
Serpent, having Adders poison under their lips.

And Who have whet their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their arrows,
Psalm. 64.3.
even bitter words.

And also Lying among the children of men that are set on fire: Psalm. 57.5.
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp Sword.

Beloved, too much do the people with whom we now dwell, resemble those persons
that are here recited: having their judgments blindly infatuated with false
Principles; burning inwardly with the fire of indignation, against those
indigent persons, who are harmless toward them, and helpless to themselves
and others; grinding fiercely the faces of the poor, eating up the Lords
people, Psalm. 53.4.
as they eat bread; piercing sharply into their hunger-starving stomachs;
shooting their poisonous Darts deep into their tender Consciences, against the
wills of their forced Patients, and contrary to the light of their knowledge;
and also wounding their candid Reputations, with the sharp Rasors of bitter
Obloquies, and reviling Reproaches, by unjust Aspersions, and caviling
Calumniations.

Thus cruelly dealing with our languishing Lives, almost as deadly as Death it
self. Of all which perverse passages, together with many more, being here (for
brevity) omitted, which might also justly have been expressed, let all Wise,
Judicious, Learned and truly Religious persons censure: and God in mercy
toward us speedily deliver us out of them all.

And for a speedy Remedy whereof, let us all in the fear of God, and confidence
of his mercy toward us, make our present approaches, unto the beautiful gate
of Gods never-failing-Mercy to his faithful Children, imploring in all
submissive and possible humility, his gracious and powerful assistance, in
this our great and woeful extremity: humbly desiring him in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, to look down with his merciful eyes of loving pity, and tender
compassion, upon this our distressed and distracted Kingdom; and to compose
(and that speedily) all unhappy differences between our Gracious Sovereign,
and those that either are, or else ought to be, His Loyal and dutiful
Subjects; and to repair the late-made-Ruines, and build up the now-broken-Wals
of this our low-cast-downe, and disquieted Jerusalem; Psa. 122.7
that so Peace may be within the Walls thereof, and Plenteousnesse within her
Palaces.

Such holy and fervent Prayers, steeped in sorrowful and penitent Tears,
flowing from the truly contrite Spirits, greatly grieved Souls, and
throughly-humbled Hearts of faithful and righteous Persons: and with powerful
Groans, Marshalled forth from between our fasting Lips; will (in the
acceptable time) be prevalent with our Gracious God (through Christ) for the
speedy healing of our Lands manifold Distempers; and also well become this
present time and occasion.

Oh then, let us all in Gods fear, (without any farther protraction of time)
speedily labor, and earnestly endeavor, even from the ground of our hearts,
thus to pray for our Jerusalems Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

TEXT.
THe Text, that I may not affect any curious Logical distribution thereof,
Divide it, and briefly the parts thereof are four.

1. A Patheticall Particle, or Interjection, O!

2. An exhortary Christian Religious Duty, Pray.

3. The Subject of this Duty, Peace.

4. The Object of this Subject, the Church, Jerusalem.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Of these briefly and in their Order, as the blessed Spirit of God shall
assist me, etc.

From the which 4. parts of the Text, there do arise 4. particular Doctrines,
viz.

1. From the patheticall Particle or Interjection O.

Doct. It is the duty of the Children of God, to provoke and stir up one
another to the service of God.

2. From the exhortary Christian Religious Duty, Pray.

Doct. Prayer to God is the only salve to cure calamity, and to continue the
favor of God to his people.

3. From the subject of this Duty, Peace.

Doct. Peace is a precious blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his
faithful Servants.

4. From the Object of this subject, the Church, Jerusalem.

Doct. It is required as a due debt from the children of God, that they should
pray for the Peace of the Church their mother.

O Pray for the Peace, etc.

Now let us return to the Particle, O.

But here before we go into the Temple with Peter and John to pray, this
Particle O does as it were tell us, it will not be amiss to make a little stop
in Solomon's porch: that so all the people may flock about us, Act. 3.11.
as they did about them. And also bear us company into the house of the Lord.

This is that the Psalmest drives at in this Particle, or Interjection O, O
Pray, etc.

This Interjection O, is like the Cryers O Yes, before some weighty
Proclamation; or the ringing of a Bell before some excellent Sermon; or the
sounding of a Trumpet, calling the Soldiers together, for to March speedily
upon some great, weighty, and important service.

Yea, it may not unfitly be paralleled to the Hebrew word Selah; Psalm. 3.2.
which signifies a lifting up of the voice, to cause us to consider the
sentence as a matter of great importance.

Behold, the Prophet here is earnest and patheticall in his persuasion to this
Religious duty: his heart breaks out for the very fervent desire he has that
all good men should join with him in this Sacrifice of Prayer, to offer up the
calves of their lips unto God; And for the kindling of which holy Devotion,
this O is as it were the bellows of the Sanctuary, to blow this Sacred fuel
into a flame.

O Pray, etc.

Not that David here intended to exclude himself, and to ease his own
shoulders, by laying the burden on the necks of others.

As Pharaoh did by Moses and Aaron, when his land was afflicted with horrible
hail, thunder and lightning; Pray ye unto the Lord says he, (for it is
enough) that there be no more mighty thunders and hail, Exodus 9.28.
and I will let you go.

And as Simon Magus dealt by Simon Peter, who when he was exhorted by the
Apostle to pray, If perhaps the thought of his heart might be forgiven him;
revolved back the business upon St. Peter, and would needs engage him to do
the service for him; Pray ye (says he) to the Lord for me, Acts 8.24.
that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me.

No, David meant to be one of the company himself, but would not willingly go
alone; And therefore says elsewhere, O praise the Lord with me, Psalm. 34.3.
and let us magnify his name together.

Now for proof of this Doctrine from the Particle O, viz.

It is the duty of the children of God, to provoke and stir up one another to
the service of God.

Our blessed Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount told his Disciples, Mat.
5.13, 14.
they were the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the World; meaning thereby,
that their Office was to season the hearts of others with their heavenly
Doctrine, and also by their knowledge, to give Light unto those that sit in
darkness.

And when Christ taught his Disciples and others with them, the true Pattern
of a Christian life; He set it forth by this Querie, Mark 4.21
Is the candle lighted to be put under a Bushel, or under the Table, and not
to be put on a Candlestick? Alluding to those that have a greater measure of
Knowledge and Understanding then others, to impart it to them for their
Benefit; whereby others also might be brought to the service of God.

We have here also David's practice, and it is the very same lesson that S. Paul
commends unto us, 1 These. 5.11.
even to exhort one another, and to edify one another, and to provoke one
another to love, and to good works.

Yea, this was the practice of St. Paul himself, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
where he says of himself, For though I be free from all men, yet have I made
my self servant unto all men, that I might win the more.

And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might win the Jews: to them that
are under the Law, as though I were under the Law, that I might win them that
are under the Law.

To them that are without Law, as though I were without Law, (when I am not
without Law as pertaining to God, but am in the Law through Christ) that I
might win them that are without Law.

To the weak I became as weak, that I might win the weak: I am made all
things to all men, that I might by all means save some.

And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you.

And this lesson S. 2 Timothy 1.6
Paul gave in charge to Timothy, that he should (...), stir up the gift of God
in himself.

The which Gift of God is a certain lively flame, kindled in our hearts by the
Spirit of God, which the Devil and our corrupted nature labor to quench, and
therefore we must nourish and stir it up.

And S. Paul exhorts Timothy with this expression. viz.

That the servant of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
but must be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men
patiently.

Instructing them with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at
any time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth.

And that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, who are
taken Captive by him at his will.

Yea, S. Paul exhorts his Galatians, Gal. 6.1.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also
be tempted.

And 1 Timothy 4. ult. S. Paul there lessons Timothy, to take heed to himself.

But this is not all. True it is indeed that Charity is to begin at home, but
it is not also there for to end: But to resemble that precious ointment spoken
of Psalm. 133. which being poured upon Aarons head, did descend and work down
by degrees unto the skirts and hem of his garment.

And therefore in our Charity we are commanded to be like to him who is the God
of Charity; Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful, as your father in heaven is merciful; who says the Apostle
(...) would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4
and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

It was Cursed Kain, that member of the Church Malignant and bloody murderer,
that was the first that thought himself discharged from being his Brothers
keeper; when he answered the Divine Majesty, (...) Am I my Brothers keeper?
when as his guilty Conscience within him, tacitly told him, his Brothers blood
would be required of him.

Whereas the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man (...) to profit
withal. 1 Cor. 12.7.


So that all those gifts and graces that descend from above, are not given
particularly for the good of one, but mutually for the good of one another; viz.

That others should reap the benefit of our Prayers, the benefit of our
Almsdeeds, and the benefit of our good Councels and exhortations to
godliness.

Therefore the Apostle exhorts us, that we should exhort one another daily
while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13.
lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

It was a good resolution of them, had their tongues and their hearts gone
together, when they spoke one to another, every one to his brother, Come, and
let us go and hear the word of the Lord.

When we are to come into the presence of God, to look our Joseph, (I mean
our Jesus) in the face, it is fit we should bring our younger brother with us.

And S. Jude exhorts us in his Epistle, concerning weaklings, that we should
(...) have compassion on some, (...). putting a difference: Jude 22, 23. And
others to save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: meaning mild spirits
by gentle admonitions, and obstinate spirits by sharp reprehensions,
endeavoring by all good means to the uttermost of our power, to provoke them
to obedience and the fear of the Lord; as David here does, to Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Lo, thus have I plainly proved unto you this point of Doctrine by Scripture.

And now follow the Reasons to confirm the same; viz. four.

non nobis nati sumus: we are not borne for our selves: Therefore by
consequence we are to do the best good we can for others.

And what better good can we do for others, then to provoke and stir them up
to the service of God; the reward of which service will be the full fruition of
heavenly happiness.



Not that any thing which is finite can add any thing to that which is
infinite; so that no finite creature, can add any glory to the infinite
Creator; but the greater number that walk in Gods service and obey him, the
more the Lord is glorified by them.

souls unto God, and save them from eternal destruction.

He which converteth the sinner from going astray out of his way, Iam. 5. ult.
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.



They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; Dan. 12.3.
and they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever.

By which the Prophet means not only the Ministers of Gods Word, but also
the faithful, who instruct the ignorant, and bring them to the true knowledge
of God.

And thus pass I from the Reasons of the Observation, to the Application.

The Uses of this point are briefly four.

1. Use of Examination. 2. Use of Exhortation. 3. Use of Reprehension. 4. Use
of Consolation.
Examination.


And whether thou have done thy best endeavor to the uttermost of thy power to
convert souls unto God?

But contrariwise, have thou at any time heard, or beheld thy poor ignorant
Brethren, or any other wilful wicked wretches, perpetrating iniquity with
violence, and following their sins with eagerness, and as it were like Brands
burning in the fire of their own destruction, and not done thy best endeavor
and that with expedition, to pull them out for their preservation?

And if upon examination thou find thou have not, then mourn for thy
negligence therein for the time that is past, and speedily reform thy self
thereof for the time to come.

Exhortation.
viz. to provoke and stir up others to the service of God.

This is that precious Balm, that on our parts should never be wanting to the
heads of others.

Hence then we are all to be admonished, to lay hold upon every opportunity, and
to take all occasions that possibly can be offered, for to edify each other
mutually in the knowledge of God: according to that Prophecy of the Churches
restoration by Christ, as it was foretold of these times, Come ye, Esaias 2.
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: And
Verse the fifth, O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of
the Lord.

The word here Light in the Original is (...) a radice (...) id est, Lucidum
fieri, vel illuminari, vel Lumen recipere. So that, as far as the Omniscient
God is pleased to inlighten us, and impart the knowledge of his truth unto us,
we must to the uttermost of our power communicate it unto others; never
forgetting nor neglecting, but ever remembering and also practicing Christ's
Charge unto Peter,

When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. Luke 22.32


Behold, if any of us traveling abroad, should epsy a blind man wandering
without a Guide, and drawing near to a dangerous River, into the which if he
should fall, he must certainly perish: if uncharitably we should pass from him,
without either leading him from the danger, or calling to him for his
preservation; so that he falls therein and is drowned: would not our hearts
terrify us, and our consciences condemn us, as being guilty of his Death?
doubtless they would, unless they were cauterized: So in like manner, when
those whom God has endued with the light of knowledge and understanding, shall
see others walking in darkness and the shadow of death, and wandering in the
broad way that leads to eternal destruction; and not do their best endeavors
to instruct them that they may come out of their errors, to show them the
light of knowledge, that they may arise out of the darkness of their
ignorance; and to lead them into the narrow path of eternal life, that thereby
they may escape the broad way that leads to everlasting death: Their negligence
(I say) therein will be laid as a foul fault, and heinous sin to their charge.

For if it were a fault in Churlish Nabal, as indeed it was, Not to relieve
(out of his plenty) fainting hearted David in the wilderness; 1 Samuel 25.
And the rich Glutton Luke 16. out of his superfluity, not to cherish the pined
stomach of hunger-starved Lazarus:

Oh then how great a sin will it be unto those that abound in knowledge, not to
stir up others to the service of God?

Let us all therefore in Gods fear to whom God has given a greater Talent of
knowledge then to others, deal with their souls, as holy Job did with infirmed
bodies; who was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame. Job. 29.15.
Labor to make the deaf to hear, the ignorant to understand: That so we may
strengthen the weak arms, and feeble knees in the service of God, and bring
home those weak and blind Wanderers, into the sheepfold of Christ.

Reprehension.


Who pray over daily the black-booke of damnation; that say one to another,
Prove. 1.11.
Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent
without a cause.

Or with those Epicures that say one to another, Wis 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
Come and let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, etc.

But those beastly belly-Epicures rest not themselves satisfied with this their
voluptuous living, frequenting the Schools of Drunkenness, and Temples of
Bacchus, and putting in practice Sardanapalus Epitaphe, Ede, bibe and lude,
post mortem nulla voluptas.

Eat, drink and be merry, for after death there is no pleasure.

But they go one step farther in their impiety, reviling righteous men for not
running into the same excess of riot with themselves, Verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Come (say they) let us defraud the righteous man, for he is not for our
profit, he is contrary to our doings: He checketh us for offending against the
Law, and blames us as transgressors of discipline, etc.

But will you read the doom of those men by their own confession, in their
mental alteration, justifying others whom they have condemned, and condemning
themselves whom they have justified?

Then shall the righteous man stand with great boldness before the face of him
that has tormented him, Wis. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and taken away his labors, etc.

Certainly beloved, if they that do their best to convert souls, and draw
them to the service of God, shall shine like stars in the firmament of heaven;
Dan. 12.3.
then they that make it their work to pervert souls and seduce them, shall
shine too:

But not as stars in the firmament of heaven above; but as firebrands in the
region of darkness and shadow of death in hell beneath.

And therefore woe will it be with all such persons at the last judgment day.

Consolation.


Cheer up thy heart my beloved brother, for there are degrees of glory in
heaven, and the greater number thou do convert and bring to the true
knowledge of God here upon earth, the greater degree of glory shall thou have
hereafter in heaven.

Almighty God is a bountiful Benefactor, his service never goes unrewarded;
He sees in secret, Mat. 6.4.
and will reward his servants openly.

Lo, this S. Paul knew right well, the which caused him rejoycingly to say, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course: I have kept the faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me
only, but to them also that love his appearing.

And therefore up and be doing, 2 Chronicles. 19. 1 Cor. 15 58.
and the Lord will be with thee; and thy labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord.

Thus much for the Particle or Interjection O, which stands here in the Front
of our Text, as a patheticall Preface to some ensuing weighty Declaration, not
only craving our diligent attention, but also our best assistance for our
Mother the Churches Consolation.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And thus having passed through the Portch, let us now enter into the Temple.

The next considerable in our Text, is the exhortary Christian Religious Duty,
set down in this word Pray, O Pray.

From which word you may remember the Doctrine.

Prayer to God is the only salve to cure calamity, and to continue the favor
of God unto his people.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

By Prayer, I do not mean after the manner of Rhetoricians, an Order of speech
thoroughly labored by art, which the Graecians call (...), but I mean
according to Divinity, a holy speech or talk with God, not so much of the
mouth as of the heart, which also in other terms, according to the Original
of the New Testament we call (...) id est invocare and implorare, to call upon
and to request, quod proprie de eo dicitur, qui in periculo constitutus, Dei
subsidium cum clamore petit, which is properly spoken of him, who being in
danger desires the help of God with a crying out.

Hinc (...) pro toto Dei cultu accipitur, hence by a Synecdoche it is taken for
the whole worship and service of God. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. Act. 2.21.


Whereby S. Peter teaches, that Prayer is the remedy to avoid the wrath of
God, and to obtain Salvation.

The several parts or kinds of prayer are four.

1. (...) Deprecatio, whereby we desire the aversion of present punishment, or
imminent evil.

2. (...) Petitio, whereby we desire those things that make for the glory of
God, and the benefit of our selves.

3. (...), Intercessio, whereby we intercede and mediate for others, Acts 12.5.
as the Church did for Peter when he was in prison.

4. (...) est gratiarum actio, wherein we give thanks unto God for benefits
bestowed both upon our selves and others.

All which four parts or kinds of Prayer, are set down in one Verse by S.
Paul to Timothy,

I exhort therefore, 1 Timothy 2.1
that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks
be made for all men.

But (beloved) if thus I should handle this word [Prayer] Commonplace way,
then should I walk in so large a path as would tire your patience; and
therefore for brevity sake I shall herein reduce my self unto these two
particulars, together with the Reasons of the Doctrine and the Application;
viz. 1. Orationis Necessitas. 2. Orationis Dignitas.


1. The Necessity of Prayer.

2. The Dignity of Prayer.

And upon these two considerations, as upon the two wings of Prayer, I desire
your souls may fly aloft unto the hill of the Almighty.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And First, for the Necessity of Prayer; Certainly a great Necessity of Prayer
lies upon every one of the sons of Adam, whose whole composition is nothing
else but wants and necessities, and those no way to be supplied but by Prayer.

This is the seed we must sow, we must sow to the Spirit, if ever we mean to
reap the harvest and increase of Gods blessings.

It is our Saviors own rule, and may serve as a proof of this Doctaine.

(...) Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and
it shall be opened unto you.

Here is but Ask, Seek, and Knock; and ye shall obtain: Lo, thus Christ
does exhort us to make use of a Triple-chaine, consisting of three links, viz.
Asking, Seeking, and Knocking. Ask with the Mouth, Seek with the Heart, and
Knock with the Hand; but the Mouth must be guilelesse, the Heart faithful,
and the Hand righteous. So that we must Ask with a guilelesse Mouth, Seek
with a faithful Heart, and Knock with a righteous Hand. And so shall we
obtain by our guilelesse Mouths Asking, things Temporal for our bodies; By
our faithful Hearts Seeking, things Spiritual for our Souls; and through the
merrites of Christ by our righteous Hands Knocking, things Eternal both for
our bodies and souls.

But alas there are (at this day) many Antithesticall persons in the world, who
are contrary to these in disposition, viz. Such as have guilefull Mouths,
faithless Hearts, and unrighteous Hands: whose guilefull Mouths speak
deceitfully, whose faithless Hearts, conceive unbeleevingly; and whose
unrighteous Hands; perpetrate wickedness violently.

Such as were those wicked Heads of Jakob, and the Tyrannical Princes of the
House of Israel: of whom the Lord complains by his Prophet,

They hate the good, Mic. 3.2, 3.
and love the evil: they pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh from
their bones.

And they eat also the flesh of my people, etc.

In which words, the Lords Prophet condemns those cruel Tyrants, not only
of cursed Covetousness, unjust Robery, and bloody Murder, but also compares
them unto Savage beasts, who are of Wolvish, and Lion-like dispositions.

Will the Lord hear the prayers, and grant the requests of such cruel and
merciless persons? Certainly no: But he will rather cast their prayers as
dung upon their faces. Mal. 2.3.


And will also hide his face from them, Mic. 3.4. Esaias 59.2.
and will not hear them.

But when Godly and sincere hearted Religious persons Pray, the Lord will hear
their Prayers, and grant their requests:

They shall call and the Lord shall answer: Esaias 58.9.
they shall cry and the Lord shall say, Here I am.

Behold, of all helps, Prayer is the readiest at hand, for all persons, upon
all occasions, in all places, and at all times: And by its fervent and
faithful performance as we ought; we shall assuredly obtain full Remission of
all our sins, hearty Repentance for all sins that are past, and
irrisistible power against sins for the time to come: And also be kept from
Afflictions, or made able to bear them. And God will certainly give us,
either all outward good things necessary for us, with a Blessing upon them; or
else his blessing of contentedness without them:

The which contentment, although in this worlds conception it be a despicable
condition: yet, it is the Blessing of Nature, the Salve of Poverty, the Master
of Sorrow, and the End of Misery.

The Psalmist when he would inroll and magnify the goodness of God toward
his people, tells us, Psalm. 84.12.
that he will give grace and worship, and no good thing will he withhold, from
them that live a Godly life.

Indeed the Lords hand is ever open to give, but then he looks also that our
mouths should be open to receive: Open thy mouth wide, says God, wide, Psalm.
81.10.
in prayer and supplication to heaven, and I will fill it.

His grace like a cloud still hangs over our heads, but the drops of that cloud
descend not, unless first dissolved by the breath of our Prayers.

Ye have not because ye ask not. Iam 4.2.


And there are some also that ask and yet go away empty; Ye ask and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, Iam. 4.3.
that ye might consume it upon your lusts.

True it is beloved, that the Children of God have a full and unquestionable
Right to all those Blessings that descend from above.

All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.12, 23.
says the Apostle, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods.

A large Patent, including all good things, whether Temporal, or Spiritual,
or Eternal, whether of this life or that to come, all are theirs.

But how hold they their Charter now? surely the conveyance runs altogether in
a style of mercy, Romans 2.4.
according to the riches of his goodness.

And according to the riches of his grace. Ephesians. 1.7.


Alas there is nothing in us that can entitle us upon merit to the least
expression of Gods goodness: our tenure is ex mera gratia written and sealed
up unto us in the blood of the Lamb.

And although we make no Purchase of our Christian Estate, but receive it by
deed of Gift, yet God has reserved some small Homage, or as it were some
peny-Rent as due unto himself, and that is our prayers and thanksgiving: For
the non-payment whereof our Estate becomes escheat and forfeited, and returns
back into the hands of the Landlord.

So that we connot claim so much as one morsel of Bread without our Prayers;
and if we are not incapable of it, yet I am sure we are unworthy of it, Psalm.
145.16.
if we beg it not at his hand, who opens his hand and fills all things living
with plentiousnesse.

And for this cause we are taught by our blessed Savior to pray, Mat. 6.11.
Give us this day our daily bread. Which Petition we may not think to be put
into the Lords-Prayer only for poor men; but even they also whose barns are
full of corn, and have bread laid up in store for many years, have as much
need to supplicate God with this Petition, as the poorest man that now lives
upon the face of the Earth.

If there be any one in this place so hard driven through extreme poverty,
that he can Vye necessity with that poor Widow of Sarepta, and protest in the
integrity of his heart as she did, I have not so much as a cake, 1 King. 17.12.
but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, which I am
now to dress for me and my son that we may eat it and dye.

Why yet I say, the rich man that swims in the confluence of all outward good
things, and knows no end of his riches, is as deeply engaged to beg his
daily bread as he. Because man lives not only by bread, Mat. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

If men be provided of bread, and have not Gods blessing on their bread, they
are like to fare as ill with bread, as without it;

The lean kine may eat up the fat kine, and be never the fuller, Genesis 41.4.
we may eat much and not be filled, and drink our fill and not have enough,
Hag. 1.6.
and cloth our selves and not be warm, and earne wages and put them into a
broken bag.

So that all outward things will be nothing beneficial unto us without Gods
Blessing upon them, and also upon us in the use of them.

True it is indeed that I find in Scripture mention made of the staff of
bread, by which Metaphor I am taught, that bread in its latitude is the prop,
fulciament, and support of our natural life.

But withal, we ought to know, that as bread is the staff of our life, so
Gods Blessing is the strength, and as it were the staff of that staff.

And unless his blessing rest upon the means of our sustentation, the staff
we rely upon, will prove no other then a reed of Egypt, that instead of
supporting our bodies, will pierce our hands:

Or like Moses (...) his rod cast upon the ground, if we take it by the wrong
end, Exodus 4.3.
without prayer and thanksgiving, it will turn into a Serpent, that will
rather sting us with diseases, then nourish us unto soundness of health.

Lo, thus the outward things of this life, if we receive them not rightly, and
use them holily as God commands us, they being sanctified by the word of God,
and by prayer; 1 Timothy 4.5.
Instead of being unto us helpefull and beneficial, they will prove hurtful
and prejudicial.

Oh then beloved, how great cause have we to pray with David, that the same God
that prepares a Table for us, and make our Cup to overflow, that he that gives
us the staff of Bread, would also give us the staff of his Blessing, Psalm.
23.4.
that his Rod and his Staff may continually comfort us.

Deceive not thy self whosoever thou art, to think by thine own industry to
raise thee a fortune without God:

For it is not he that rises early, Psalm. 127.2.
nor goes late to bed, nor eats the bread of carfulness, that is in an
infallible way to be rich: No, when all is done, Prove. 10.22.
It is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich.

A Fortune collected by mere industry, and without Gods special Blessing,
shall shortly melt away, and not have the Blessing of continuance, unless it
be obtained by suit at his hand, who must prosper unto us the work of our
hands.

It will therefore be good for us to take the advice the blessed Spirit of God
gives us, Rev. 3.18.
I council thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be made
rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed.

To purchase a Patrimony by our Prayers, and to lay the foundation of our
wealth in Religion.

And every stone and spit of earth we bring toward this building, still to
pray for a blessing. Psa. 90. ult.
Prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, O Prosper thou our handy work.

And now what has been spoken of our estate Natural, is no less true of our
estate Spiritual; In both it is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich;
John 15.5. Act. 17.28.
for without Him we can do nothing.

In him we live, move, and have our being, for our estate Natural.

And it is He also that works in us both the will and the deed for our estate
Spiritual. Phil. 2.13.


So that unless he give a Blessing to the labor of our hands, we may with
Peter, toil all night and catch nothing. Luke 5.5.
Paul may plant and Apollos water, I may preach, and you may hear, 1 Cor. 3.7.
but no increase unless God give it.

Oh then beloved, how needful it is for us to pray unto the Father of lights,
Iam. 1.17.
that he from whom every good and perfect gift does descend, would open unto us
the Ministers of his word a door of utterance, that may give a free passage
unto his Gospel.

And that he would also open unto you our Hearers a door of entrance, that
his word and spirit may enter into your hearts and dwell there; And that we may
all of us bring forth the fruits thereof in our conversation, to Gods glory and
our everlasting consolation. O Pray, etc.

And thus I pass from the Necessity of Prayer, unto the Dignity of Prayer.

For the Dignity and excellency of Prayer.

Our life faith Job, is Militia super terram, a Warfare upon the Earth, Ephesians.
6.12.
and we wrestle not only says Paul with fiesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, etc

Indeed by our prayers and importunate suits we wrestle with the greatest Power
of all, even with God himself, Mat. 11.12.
and offer a kind of Sacred Violence to the Kingdom of Heaven.

It was in this Harness that good Jacob was clad, Genesis 32.
when he strugled with the Angel all night for a Blessing and prevailed.

So that Prayer is the great prevailing ordinance of God. Oration est telum quo
vulneratur cor Dei, says S. Ambrose. Prayer is the weapon that wounds the very
heart of God, and makes it bleed in tender compassion toward his Supplicant.

Preces and lachrymae arma sunt Ecclesiae.

Prayers and tears are the Churches weapons.

Preces and lachrymae vincunt invincibilem, ligant Omnipotentem, says S.
Hierome.

Prayers and tears overcome the invincible, and bind the Omnipotent.

Faithful Prayer is a chain to tie up Gods hands from punishing.

And such a Chain it was that Moses cast over the arms of God to preserve the
Jsraelites from destruction; insomuch that God himself does even sue unto
Moses, the Master unto the Servant, that he would suffer his vengeance to
break out upon his people.

Let me alone, Exodus 23.10.
says God, that my wrath may wax hot against them, that I may consume them.

Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus.

What? (...) The strong, most mighty and omnipotent God, to be overcome, by
weak, infirmed, mortal, and impotent man, through the power of faithful and
fervent Prayer?

O the Excellency, and the Efficacy of devout Prayer!

It it Gladius, and Arcus Christiani,

The sword, and bow of a Christian:

Jocob gave Joseph one portion above his brethren, Genesis 48.22.
which he got of the Amorites by his sword and by his bow.

But the Chaldee Paraphrast translates it, By my Prayer, and by my
Supplication. Which Translation proves, that Prayer is the Sword, and
Supplication is the Bow of a Christian, whereby he subdueth all his Enemies.

It is Scala coeli, the Ladder of heaven, on which the Angels ascend and
descend to our relief and succor.

It is Clavis Coeli, the Keye of heaven, and if the wards of this Key be of
Faith, it will unlock unto us the doors of everlasting life.

Against whom can you imagine the gate of Heaven to be surer and faster locked
then against Thieves and Robbers?

S. Paul is peremptory in this particular; Be not deceived, says He, neither
Thieves, 1 Cor. 6.10.
nor Covetous, nor any of that cursed rabble he speaks of there, shall have
any inheritance in the Kingdom of God and of Christ.

But no sooner comes the penitent Thief with this Key of Prayer, Domine,
memento mei cum veneris in regnum tuum, Lord remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom, but presently the door is open unto him; with an Hodie mecum
eris in paradiso, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

A Key did we call Prayer? It seems rather to be a Pick-lock, that did not
only open heaven gate, but also even let in a Thief.

He that formerly had robbed passengers on the way, and walked in the way of
error, and shadow of death; Now bids Stand to the Way it self: And sets
only upon him who is the Way, Ioh. 14.6.
the Truth, and the Life; and by his prayers unto him, as it were by a new
kind of theft steals Heaven.

And as the Thief by his prayers opened the doors of heaven, so Elijah the
Prophet by his prayers made them fast.

He prayed that it might not rain, Iam, 5.17.
and it rained not by the space of three years and six months. 1 King. 18.
When he fled from the presence of Ahab.

He tied up the influences of heaven, and carried away the Clouds in his Mantle.

It seems God who is the Father of the drops of dew says Job, Ioh. 36.28 Mat.
5.45.
and sends rain upon the just and unjust, says our blessed Savior, had
granted unto Elijah a Patent, or Monopoly of the rain, and his prayers were
the only Rent he paid for it.

Eusebius reports, Lib. 5. That in the Primitive Church, Anno Dom. 175. The
Army of Christians was called the Thundering-Legion; because upon their
prayers, God scattered their Enemies with Thunder, and refreshed themselves
with comfortable showers from Heaven.

But not to loose our selves and protract the time in this Panegyric of Prayer.

It is our Christian Sacrifice, the calves of our lips, which after all the
abolished Sacrifices of the Law, does yet answer them all.

It is our morning and evening Sacrifice, our incense offering which we put
into the hand of our high priest Christ Jesus to offer for us.

Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight like the incense (says David) and the
lifting up of my hands be an evening Sacrifice. Psalm. 141.2.


Like incense, it vapors up in a sweet perfume in the nostrils of God.

It is our Juge Sacrificium, our daily Sacrifice, pray continually, says the
Apostle, 1 These. 5.17.
pray without ceasing.

Prayer is our sinne-offering, our clensing-offering.

Oration sonat pestes mentis, says the Father; It cures the plague-sores of the
Soul.

And God accepts of the fruit of the lips proceeding from a penitent heart, for
the faults of the whole body.

Lastly, Prayer is our Elevatum, or Heave Offering, even the lifting up of our
hands in his sight.

And blessed are they that can lift up pure hands in his Sanctuary, they shall
be sure to have the Victory, and to triumph over all their Necessities.

When Moses hands were lifted up, Exodus 17.11.
then Israel prevailed, but when they hung down, then Amaleck prevailed.

Moses is the History, and every man that is a meek and faithful man as Moses
was, is the Moral.

When we lift up our hands and hearts to God in faithful and fervent Prayer,
then our sins and enemies do both retire; but when we let them hang down
neglecting that necessary Duty, then they charge us with double Forces. Which
teaches us, how dangerous a thing it is to faint in Prayer.

And therefore cease not to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And thus do I pass from the Dignite of Prayer, unto the Reasons of the
Observation, viz.

Wherefore Prayer to God is the only salve to cure calamity and to continue
the favor of God unto his people.



Call upon me in the time of trouble: Psalm. 50.15.
so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise me.



Blessed are the Peacemakers: Mat. 5.9.
for they shall be called the Children of God.



For the Church our Mother and we her Children are relata, and mutually
sympathize the distresses of each other.

And as we should condole the Church our Mothers adversity: so in like manner,
we ought to congratulate her prosperity; our Portion being in her Peace.

Prayer produces.

If (says God) I shut the heaven that there be no rain, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14.
or if I command the Grasshopper to devour the Land, or if I send Pestilence
among my people.

If my people among whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves and
Pray: and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I
hear in heaven, and be merciful unto their sin, and will heal their Land.

Unto which also S. James alludeth, where he says, Pray one for another that
ye may be healed: Iam. 5.16.
for the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent.

And therefore Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And thus do I pass from the grounds of the Observation, unto the Application.

The Uses of this point are briefly four, viz.

1. Use of Examination. 2. Use of Exhortation. 3. Use of Reprehension. 4. Use
of Consolation.
Examination.
Prayest for the Peace of the Church or no? if thou do, then it is an
Argument of thy Regeneration:

But if thou do not, then it is an Argument that (as yet) thou art without
the pale of the Church, and art still in thy Natural cursed condition:

And one of the bastard-brood of Satan, and consequently a firebrand of hell;
rather then a faithful Son of God, and Heir of Heaven.

Exhortation.
Jerusalems Peace:

And this ought to be done secretly, privately, and publicly; secretly by our
selves, privately with our families, and publicly in the Assembly.

Beloved, if thou art so aged, or otherwise possessed with infirmities, as that
thou can not fight for the Church when she is in distress: yet if thou cast
Pray, thou art for the Churches turn; and that thou may do: for Prayer is
a Spiritual quality of the Soul, which may be performed by a weak and
infirmed body, and therefore as occasion is offered neglect not the same.

But, admit the Lord has decreed (as I hope he has not) that we should perish
in a general Calamity: yet notwithstanding, let us all endeavor for to die at
the Altar, with Prayers in our mouths.

Have not many Soldiers (who are out of this life departed) fighting, and
dying in their own blood, cried aloud in the ears of God? and shall we be
silent who are left (as yet) alive after them? Shall not we Pray for the
Churches Peace, who living in the bosom of the Church, have had our lives
given us for a Prey, in this time of War?

Can we be so senseless and careless both of our own and others present
calamitou; Condition? That would not only be laid to our charge as a Sin, but
also redound to our great Shame, in succeeding Ages, even from all posterity.

Lo, this is a duty which we owe unto the Church our Mother, and she may
justly claim it at our hands.

The word here Pray in our Text is rendered by some orate, and by others rogate,
but the word in the Original is (...) the which being translated is postulate,
The Hebrew Radix is (...) which signifies Rogavit, Quaesivit, and precibus
impetravit; impetrare, est quod petitur obtinere, in petione effectum habere.

That is to importune God uncessantly, (and never to give him over) by our
Prayers, until he be entreated of us that the Church enjoys her Peace.

Behold, our gracious God willingly accepts uncessant Suitors, and also dearly
loves importunate Petitioners: Yea, the more earnestly he is desired of us,
the more sweetly he is delighted in us.

And therefore men of Israel help, help with your Prayers, Psalm. 121.2
for our help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth.

So that it is He, and only He, that can preserve the Churches Peace from
disturbers.

Oh then let us fly and that speedily to the Lord of Hosts, and importunately
implore his assistance; Let us be earnest suitors to heaven, and desire the
Almighty to command his Angel to pitch his tents about his Church; And for the
preservation of her Peace, Zecha. 2.5.
that his providence may be as a wall of fire round about her, to surround and
incircle her from the insurrection of wicked doers.

And thus whilst others dig out of the bowels of the earth powder and shot
for our destruction, let us fetch our Ammunition from Heaven: let us look up
to the hills above, and to the heavens above them, from whence comes our help.

Yea, let us all resolve with holy David, Psalm. 44.6.7.
O Lord we will not trust in our bow, it is not our sword that can help us,
but it is thou that savest us from our enemies, and put them to confusion
that rise up against us.

Unto thee therefore do we lift up our eyes, Psalm. 123.1.
O thou that dwell in the heavens.

O Pray for the Peace, etc.

And now by the way of a necessary digression, we are to pray not only for the
Church in general, but also for our selves in particular:

Art thou fallen into any sin?

Then pray that thou may recover thy foot out of the snarne of the Devil.

Do thou stand upright in thine integrity?

Then Pray that thou may not be led into Temptation.

And thus upon every occasion we should repair unto the Throne of grace, to
find grace and help in the time of need; that so we may have a speedy supply
of assistance from heaven against all our infirmities.

At which Throne of grace, our faithful and fervent prayers will find
acceptance, and will be so prevalent both for our selves and others, that we
shall grow in the strength thereof, from one degree of grace unto another,
until we become perfect members in Jesus Christ.

And therefore, let us not cease to pray particularly for our Selves, and
generally for the Peace of the Church.

O Pray for the Peace, etc.

Reprehension.


My Charitable censure of this Congregation is, that there are no such persons
present here; But if there be any, then to them I say,

Oh Ungratious Children, what are ye utterly void of all humanity?

Are ye stupefied and become altogether senseless of your Mother the Churches
callamity?

Are ye wholly deprived of all natural affection?

Is your Mother in misery, and can ye not mourn for her?

Is She in adversity, and can ye not pity her?

Is she in distress, and can ye not pray for her?

Unto whom shall I compare you? but unto that Widow of whom S. Paul speaks
to Timothy, who living in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6
is dead whilst she lives.

Or to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, of whom the blessed Spirit of God
says, Rev. 3.1.
Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead.

Lo thus, such persons are frozen in the dregs of their own impieties, and
will not suffer the heat of Gods blessed Spirit to enter into their hearts to
dissolve them;

Whereby their hearts might relent, and their bowels of Compassion yerne within
them, toward the distressed Church which they profess to be their Mother.

Oh, how justly are those unnatural Children to be reprehended!

Let therefore all such persons be ashamed for their neglect herein for the
time that is past; and make it their practice to pray for the Churches Peace
for the time to come.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Consolation.


The God of the true Church, for whose Peace thou have prayed, and whom thou
have greatly pitied when she was like a Lily amongst the Thorns, will one day
embrace thee in the arms of his mercy;

And thou shall see the Church in her perfect beauty, and shall with her (from
God) receive a Crown of immortal glory.

And therefore comfort thy self, for having done the work, thou shall be sure
to have thy wages, not as deserving any thing that is good at the hand of God,
but only proceeding from Him ex mera gratia; having labored faithfully by
fervent prayer, to procure the peace of the Church militant here upon earth;

Thou shall be sure to reign with her when she shall be gloriously Tryumphant
in heaven.

Where all tears shall be wiped from her eyes, and she shall sing Hallelujah,
Praise, Rev. 5.13.
and Honor, and Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb for evermore.

And thus much for the exhortary Christian Religious Duty, set down in this
word Pray.

O Pray for the Peace, etc.

From which word you may remember the Doctrine.

Prayer to God is the only salve to cure calamity, and to continue the favor
of God unto his people.

And now let us come to the next considerable in our Text, viz. the Subject of
this Duty, set down in the word Peace.

From which word you may remember the Doctrine.

Peace is a precious blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his
faithful servants.

As I spoke formerly of the Duty Pray, so now I shall say of the subject Peace;
I purpose not to handle it Commonplace way, for then I must speak of Pacis
externae, Internae and eternae, of Peace External, Internal, and Eternal;
and so should I be copious in the prosecution thereof, and consequently
troublesome to your patience; but through the assistance of Gods blessed
Spirit, I will observe the same method as I began.

This word Peace, although it be but a short word, yet it worthily deserves our
Devotions, and justly may bespeake our Prayers.

For, it is the Mother, yea and the Nurse too, of all earthly Blessings,
without whose fostering and attendance, like wretched Infants left to
themselves, they quickly dye and are turned again to their dust.

And therefore cease not to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Peace, is a word but of one syllable, yet very pregnant in its signification,
and may not unfitly be paralleled to that Cloud which Elijah's servant saw, 1
King. 18 44.
The which although at the first sight it seemed no bigger then a man's hand,
yet it was full of water, and quickly over-spred it self over the face of the
whole heavens.

Lo, such is the name of Peace, a little Cloud to look upon, but very full of
water; for it conteines in it both the former and the latter rain of Gods
mercy.

Peace, may fitly be compared to Pandora's Box, for it is (as it were) the Nest
wherein all other good blessings are hatched; yea, the sum, complement, and
Epitomy of all earthly felicity:

Arts, Sciences, Laws, Trades, Husbandry, and all the good these bring us, are
formed in her womb, and suck the milk of her breast; She first gives them
life, and afterward gives them growth and perfection.

Whereas, when War once invades the gates; it deals with the Children of Peace
as Herod's Butchers did with the Infants of Bethlehem. Mat. 2.16.


It ravishes them from the sweet embracements of their tender Mother, and cuts
the throats of all her hopeful Progeny.

The time was that our English Nation thought themselves very secure, singing
nothing but Requiem's of Peace, Peace unto themselves, Ier. 6.14.
as the Prophet Jeremy speaks of the Jews.

At which time, Reason should have persuaded them not to be so lulled asleep,
and as it were bewitched with the sweet and charming name of Peace, as utterly
to forget the time of War.

It is no ill policy whilst the weather is calm, to provide for a Storm; for
when once the Sky is obnubilate, the Clouds are grown thick and black, the
Tempest is up, and the great drops begin with violence to fall upon us, then it
is necessarily high time for thin-cloathed persons to run for a Shelter: The
former of these we have improvidently neglected in the time of Peace, but alas
the latter is now our present condition, being greatly afflicted in this time
of War.

And therefore Pray for the Peace, etc.

Beloved, If ever there be a time that the Sea does rejoice, and the floods
clap their hands for joy, as David says there is; If there be a time that the
Hills are joyful together, and all the Trees of the wood rejoice before the
Lord:

And if there be a time that the Valleys Psalm 65.13, 14.
stand so thick with corn that they do laugh and sing:

Surely, it is no other then the time of Peace.

For if once Nimrod the mighty Hunter be up with his Kennell of Plunderers at
his heels, they quickly make them alter their Note.

Lo then, Joel. 1.12.
the harvest of the field is perished, the Vine is dried up, and the fig tree
languisheth, the pomegranate tree, the palm tree and the apple tree, even all
the trees of the field are withered, because joy is withered away from the
sons of men.

And thus, all the joy of the field is by the noise of Drums, and the neighings
of horses, and the clashing of Arms, quite dround and destroyed; and so its
mirth is turned into mourning:

And therefore Pray for the Peace, etc.

And does not Religion also owe much unto Peace for her Pupillage and
Protection?

Surely, She spins the cloth for the Curtains of Solomon. Prove. 31.


Take an example hereof, Acts 9.31. Then had the Churches rest, says the Text,
throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, And what then followed? They
were edified, and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by the
comfort of the holy Ghost.

Good days, Fair weather, and Peaceable times, make much for the Churches
enlargement: But tempora si fuerint nubila, In the stormy wind and tempest;
Psalm. 32.6.
In the great water-floods they will not come nigh her.

When the Earth is overwhelmed with a deluge of blood, no marvel if Religion
flutters like Noah's Dove hither and thither, Genesis 8.9.
and finding no rest for the sole of her foot, returns back to the Arc, into
the hand of God that sent her forth.

So that now we may plainly perceive; all Blessings both of Church and
Commonwealth, as well Divine as secular, are wrapped and folded up (as it were)
in the bosom and lap of Peace.

As that Great ARTIFICER Phidias, who made that famous BUCKLER for Minerva the
Goddess of the Athenians; so contrived the same, that he wrought his own name
in the Center of the BUCKLER, which was so framed of several pieces and
minims, that it was impossible to race or pick it out, without destroying the
whole work:

So, Almighty God, the great Opifex rerum, as the Poet styles him, the Creator
of the Universe, has so interwoven his own name and attribute who is the God
of Peace, in the very heart and Center of the World, that it is impossible to
race or pick Peace out, without the whole Series of Gods blessings fall to the
ground.

And therefore Pray for the Peace, etc.

Thus much for the proof of the Doctrine, arising from this word Peace, viz.

Peace is a precious blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his
faithful servants.

And now follow the Reasons to confirm the same.

Peace is one of the fruits of Gods blessed Spirit, and therefore a precious
Blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his faithful servants.

The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, Peace, etc. Gal. 5.22.


He that prays not for it, is altogether unworthy of it, and may justly
conceive he shall go without it:

And he that prays for it, and does obtain it, let him not think there is
any thing in himself that deserves it, but that it proceeds only from the
free grace of the God of Peace, Esaias 9.6.
through him who is the PRINCE of Peace.

Peace is accounted as a Curse upon wicked men that have it not, this is their
portion in judgment allotted unto them, to be tumbled and tossed, vexed and
perplexed.

It was Jezebels expression to Jehu when he came to destroy her, Had Zimri
Peace who slew his Master? 2 King. 9.31.


And to this purpose also speaks the Prophet Isaiah, where he says, Esaias 57.
ult.
There is no Peace, says my God to the wicked.

Peace unto us produces.

Temporal, In the time of Peace men may follow the ordinary works of their
particular callings, without molestation or interruption, whereby worldly
wealth may be attained, which through Gods blessing upon it, may be for the
comfort of our selves whilst we live, and the benefit of our families when we
are dead.

Spiritual, In the time of Peace, the Temples of Gods may be freely
frequented, the holy Communions reverently received, Opportunity had to hearken
to the word preached, Leisure also to read, pray and meditate upon the sacred
Scriptures, all tending to the salvation of the Soul in the world to come.

Whereas, if there be dissension and War, then the offices of husbandry and all
profitable callings are neglected, corn and grass are spoiled, houses fired,
women ravished, all holy duties through fear of the Enemies violence omitted,
whereby profaneness and barbarism comes to prevail; to the ruin of the
body, and the destruction of the Soul.

All which are answerable to that Expression, Concordia res parvae crescunt,
discordia dilabuntur. By Concord small things grow great, but by discord great
things are soon wasted and brought to nothing.

Lo, thus beloved, I have apparently proved unto you, that Peace is a sweet
Blessing; a Blessing of Blessings, yea and as considerable a gift as any of
those that descend from above.

And thus I pass from the Reasons of the Observation to the Application.

The Uses of this point are briefly four, viz.

1. Use of Caution. 2. Use of Instruction. 3. Use of Exhortation. 4. Use of
Thankfulness.
Caution.
Peace is a precious Blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his
faithful servants? Oh then, let us all beware and take heed, that we violate
not that Peace which God is pleased to bestow upon us, by sowing the seeds of
discord, and kindling the coals of dissension in those places where it is;
Ephesians. 4.3.
But do our best endeavor to preserve the same, and to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of Peace:

That so we may be in a capacity to live comfortably in this world, and also
prepare our selves to live joyfully in the world to come.

And therefore Pray for the Peace, etc.

Instruction.
Peace above with God.

Would thou be at peace with all men, and that all men should be at peace
with thee? then be thou careful that thy conversation displease not God, that
he may be at peace with thee, who has all power (when he pleases) to turn
the hearts of all men in the world against thee.

Would thou be at peace with the Creatures, Job 5.23.
and have a league made with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the
field? Then be thou at one with their Creator, whose hosts they are to destroy
thee at his pleasure:

For the creatures are all armed against him, who by sin takes up arms
against their Creator.

Do thou desire to have inward Peace in thy Heart and Conscience, whereby to
strengthen thy Heart, and comfort thy Conscience, in thy inward conflicts, and
Spiritual combats, against the filthy lusts of the Flesh, that they infect
thee not; the enticing allurements of the world that they deceive thee not; and
the subtle suggestions of the Devil, that they destroy thee not; whereby thy
precious soul (maugre all Malignity) may be safely preserved from Infection,
Deception, and Destruction?

Then thou must list thy self under the PRINCE of Peace, become a dutiful and
faithful servant unto his Commands, and a magnanimous and valiant Soldier,
for to fight courageously under his Banner.

Would thou have all opposite power against thee subdued under thee, and
thine enemies to become thy friends? then let thy ways please the Lord.

In a word, Would thou enjoy prosperity? then acquaint thy self with God,
Job 22.21
make peace and thou shall have prosperity.

And labor speedily to become a Child of the Church, Esa. 54.13
for much peace shall be to her Children.

Also delight thy self in the law of God. Psalm. 1.2, 3, 4.




David is hunted like a Partridge upon the mountains; 1 Samuel 26.20.
while Saul and diverse others joyfully pursue him, expecting his ruin.

Hezekiah lives in pensiveness, 2 King. 18.
while Rabshakeh raileth blasphemously (against him) at his pleasure.

Lazarus lies at the rich man's gate in a pitiful condition; Luke 16.
while the rich man himself is at ease, and swimmeth in the confluence of
outward good things.

The Jews are sorrowfully captivated in Babylon; Psalm. 130.7.
while their reproachful Enemies insultingly and triumphantly over them, are
glad and rejoice.

The Israelites are vassalized, Exodus 5.
being oppressed with heavy burdens in Egypt; while Pharaoh and the
Egyptians live in jollity, and plot greater mischief against them.

And are there not also (at this day) here in England amongst our selves, many
living in great want and poverty; Godly, Religious, indigent, and poor
persons, living in great want and poverty; whose hungerstarved Skelleton-like
bodies, are as it were Anatomized dead Corpses, while their Souls are still
remaining in them; lying under the heavy pressures, and intolerable burdens
imposed upon them, the which have been unto many who lately have departed this
present life, no less bitter then Death it self; whose blood (I am persuaded)
like that of Abels, cries up into heaven for vengeance, to descend upon those
their unnatural, cruel, and merciless oppressors: the Lord in mercy toward
our English Nation, speedily put a period to this Evil amongst us.

Whereas there are also amongst us, many godless, graceless, and vicious
persons, Psalm. 73.7.
whose eyes swell with fatness and they do even what they lust; fatting
themselves (without Repentance) against the day of slaughter; posting in the
way that leads to the Land of everlasting darkness: and yet prosper in the
world, enjoying (for the present) abundance of worldly wealth, Peace, and
prosperity.

Lo, the consideration of this seemingly prosperous strange condition,
exceedingly troubled the Prophet Jeremiah, Ier. 12.1, 2
O Lord (says he) if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous, yet let me talk
with thee of thy just judgments: wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
why are all they in wealth that rebelliously transgress?

Thou have planted them, and they have taken root: they grow and bring forth
fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.

And this also greatly grieved the Prophet David, My feet (says he) were
almost gone; Psalm. 73.2, 3.
my treadings had well-nigh slipped.

And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such
prosperity.

Thus, the flourishing, imperious and prosperous condition of wicked men,
spreading themselves like a green Bay Tree, and bringing their enterprises to
pass according to their own hearts desires, while the Children of God lie low
in the dust, Psalm. 102.9
eating ashes as it were bread, and mingling their drink with weeping, are
trampled upon by their Insolences, Oppressions, and profane Censures; caused
David (being a tall and well rooted Cedar) to stagger: yea, this Conflict had
near surprised him; this Tempest had wel-nigh overwhelmed him; and this Blow
had almost wounded his faith unto death; had he not timely stepped into the
Sanctuary of the Lord, and there understood the end of those men; How suddenly
they are destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed.

The words in the Original are (...) the which being translated are Consumpti
sunt a terroribus.

So that the Peace and prosperous estate that ungodly men have, though it seem
to the world never so pleasing and delightful; yet notwithstanding, it is but
of short continuance and full of fears.

Such men like Damocles at Dyonisius Table, may feed their hopes with the
choicest dainties; but the just revenging Sword of the righteous God, being
pendulous over their heads, threatens fearful judgments to fall upon them to
their destruction.

Peace, but it is only outward, not inward, nor grounded on peace with God:
and therefore although to the world it may seem fair and flourishing, yet
notwithstanding it is but deceitful, unsound and vanishing.

Zophar the Naamathite compares it to a Dreamo, Job 20.5, 6, 7.
affirming that the wicked man's joy is but for a moment.

So that although his Excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reaches
unto the clouds. Yet shall he perish for ever like his dung.

The holy Ghost compares it to the crackling of thorns under a pot, Eccles.
7.6.
which for a time make a fair blaze, and a great noise, but all is almost
ended, as soon as kindled.

Yea, the Peace of wicked men is so deceitful, as that it most deceives them
when they depend most upon it.

It is S. Paul's expression, 1 These, 5.3
When they shall say, Peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.

The which made the Prophet Amos say, Amos 8.9.
that the Lord will cause their sun to go down at noone.

As Belshazzar sunk down at his banquet, Dan. 5.5, 6.
when he saw the hand writing upon the wall.

So that their Peace is but a Truce for a time, which once expired, the Lord is
up in Arms, for further revenge against them.

Lo, thus beloved we see, that although wicked men sometimes have peace, yet
it will be unto them no better then a broken reed of Egypt, deceitful,
unsound, and vanishing.

And therefore that our Peace may be the more permanent, let us lay the
foundation of it above with God.

And cease not to pray unto him, for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Exhortation.
Peace.

And here I shall speak Per (...), id est cum per contraria amplificamus, A
prevalent Motive hereunto may be taken from the contrary, viz. the great
calamity, the miserable misery, and the devouring destruction of woeful War.

The worth of a Jewel is best known by its want; witness the long absence of
our Gracious and Dread Sovereign.

For good things are known Carendo, magis quam fruendo, as the Philosopher
speaks; better by their lack then their enjoyment.

And we are likely to judge more exactly of a beautiful picture, by casting
our eyes upon some deformed misshapen draught that stands near unto it.

Answerable hereunto, turn but your eyes now a little from the beautiful face
of Peace, to behold the deformed and ugly, morphewed vizor of War.

And here I shall not need to ship your meditations for a waftage beyond the
Seas; that so I might land you on the desolate shore of Germany, or the no
less woeful and blood drunk Country of Ireland:

Although it might be well worth your labor, sometimes to be embarked for such
a meditation.

I shall not need to travel far abroad to show you the dismal face of War,
Woe and alas, our own Country and Clime has saved me that labor.

For look either East, West, North, or South, this way or that way, and you
may see the blood of your brethren that lately has been spilt like water on
every side of Jerusalem.

And not only seen with your eyes, but also heard with your ears, the daily
dolorous and Tragical tidings, of the sacking of Cities, the burning of Towns,
the Plundering of Houses, the filling of Prisons, the emptying of Purses, yea
and of veins too, for there has been Bloodshed, Ruin, Destruction, and
Heaps upon Heaps, so that many thousands of our Christian Brethren have lately
lost their lives in this unchristian Quarrel.

And yet notwithstanding (alas) what is all this? for unless the blessing of
Peace comes in to succor us, all these are like to be with us but the
beginning of sorrowse. Mat. 24.8.


Our dissension has been a Civil, Domestical, and intestine War, in the very
bowels of the Kingdom, and may fitly be paralleled to that Burden of Egypt
which God laid upon their shoulders by his Prophet. Esa. 19.2.
I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every
one against his Brother, and every one against his neighbor, City against
City, and Kingdom against Kingdom.

Which calls to mind those destructive days that our Savior predicted should
lead on this wicked world to its utmost period.

There shall be five in one house divided, Luke 12.52.
three against two, and two against three.

Beloved, I need not tell you that this day this Scripture is fulfilled in your
ears, you know it right well (unless you be only strangers in Jerusalem, and
know not the things that are come to pass there in these days) That this
unnatural War has engaged the Father against the Son, and the Son against
the Father; and the Brother against the Brother.

Who like the Serpentine Brood of Cadmus, sheath their swords in each others
bowels.

Pereunt per mutua vulnera fratres.

And now in this unnatural Condition, (not much digressing) I shall in a few
words give some Religious directions unto the Soldiers, being the Instruments
of War, concerning their deportment in their Warfare.

The Lords servant Joshua, Josh. 12.24.
being Isreal's most Noble and valiant General, who had the leading of six
hundred thousand men, and Conquered one and thirty several Kings in a short
time; having received his Commission from the Lord of Hosts, Josh. 1.2. Rev.
19.16
who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, had this exhortation from the
Lord, annexed unto it, with a gracious promise unto his proceedings: Josh. 1.8.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success. The which is recorded and still remains in force for
succeeding Ages.

Hence then, All Soldiers should learn, that in all their Military Actions,
they ought to make the word of God to be their guide; for the Omniscient and
Omnipotent God is the great and universal Warrior of the whole world, He it
is who directs every Bullet, Sword, Spear, and Dart to the Person appointed.
And wherefore it comes to pass, that in the Battle some are wounded, some
outright killed, and some escape untouched, is a secret locked up in the bosom
of God, and therefore not to be pried into by the sons of men.

Every Soldier that puts himself into Military service, and does execution
upon others, ought to have in his heart zeal for the glory of God, without any
by-ends, or sinister-respects of his own unto himself, otherwise, he is a
Murderer in the sight of God: For the Lord says by his Prophet Hoseah. Hos.
1.4.


(...) I will visit the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu: That is, I
will be revenged upon Jehu for the blood that he shed in Jezreel: for although
God stirred him up to execute his judgments upon wicked persons, yet he did
that Military service for his own Ambition, thereby to satisfy the lusts of
his own proud heart, and not for the glory of God.

The word there in the Original is (...) which signifies bloods, intimating
thereby to the world, that the blood of every particular person that has been
so shed by a party not so qualified, shall be reputed as Murder in the sight
of God.

Oh then let every Soldier seriously examine his own heart in what condition
he stands, whether he be justly acquitted for what he has done in that
nature, or stands guilty as a Murderer in the sight of God.



Conscience, and constantly will follow thee at the heels, as the Jailer does
his Prisoner, ever stinging, vexing, troubling, and tormenting thee, at the
inevitable remembrance of the righteous judgments, and just vengeance of the
all-powerfull revenging God, unto which (by the sin of Murder) thou have
made thy self liable every hour, until thou do truly, thoroughly, and
heartily repent thee of it.

And therefore whosoever thou art that take upon thee the honorable calling
of a Soldier, examine thy condition by the word of God, viz. The justice of
thy cause; the willingness of thy heart; the lawfulness of thy calling: the
readiness of thy obedience to Gods commands, as to strike when he bids, and
to forbear when he forbids.

Have regard unto this I humbly pray thee; as also not to Rob, nor Plunder, nor
Kill, nor fight, but against a lawful Enemy: ever remembering, and constantly
practicing that Religious exhortation of Moses, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
unto Soldiers when they go to War; When the Hoaste goes forth against the
enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. And so shall thy service
bring glory to God, Credit to thy Person, and comfort to thy Conscience.

And as Soldiers in a skirmish, if they keep not Rank and File, they will be
in danger of their bodies destruction: So in like manner, if Soldiers observe
not these Rules, they will be in danger of perishing their Souls.

But alas, all Soldiers observe not these Rules, for many times in the Wars,
there is Gain instead of Godliness, Courage instead of Equity,
Blood-thirstinesse instead of Valor, Policy instead of Justice; and which is
also greatly to be lamented, in many Soldiers no Religion: for seldom do
they pray till they be in danger of Death: And yet how careful ought they to
be to have grace in their hearts, who carry (as it were) their lives
continually in their hands? But O how defective are many of them, of what they
ought to be; being full of fierce fury, enraged Violence, cruel Hatred, cursed
covetousness, thievish Plundering, swinish Drunkenness, beastly Whoredom,
abominable Oaths, horrid Blasphemies, hellish Curses, impure Discourses,
terrible Threatenings, false Accusations, filthy Communications, etc. The
consideration whereof greatly grieveth the souls of Conscientious men, and
frequently makes their hearts to tremble within them.

Can such irregular Soldiers to the Laws of God, hopefully expect in mercy a
Blessing from God, upon their Military Designs and Actions? Certainly no: but
rather in judgment fear a Curse, where by there shall be to themselves nothing
but Ruin and Confusion.

And therefore I heartily wish that all Soldiers would henceforth carry
themselves (in all their thoughts, words, and Warlike Actions) so Religiously
toward God, as that they may be constantly in favor with him, and
consequently have him for their Protector in their greatest danger: and not
resolutely to follow the wicked ways, and lewd lusts of their own corrupted
hearts, to the great dishonor of God in this world, and the everlasting and
just condemnation of their own souls in the world to come.

But here peradventure some may Object,

Unto which I answer,

and the dazzling golden outside of all Rebellion.

And to the great grief both of our Dread Sovereign, and all His faithful
Subjects, the very Lodestone to draw and attract the Iron hearts of many
thousands of this Kingdom, into unnatural, unchristian and horrid Rebellion,
against all just, Regal and lawful Authority.

Under which delusive Pretense, of fighting for the Protestant Religion, there
has been produced many unhappy, yea cursed effects of late amongst us, of
which I will nominate a few, viz. The Omission of the holy Prayer of Jesus
Christ.

The not publishing of the Law of God.

The not reading of the Apostles Creed.

The not administering of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The mixture of the Fancies, Inventions, and Corruptions of men, with the pure
and holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, The deprivation of all the Lands, Livings,
Goods and Estates, of all the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Laity of this
Kingdom, that either are or were of the Kings Party.

The over-burdening of this whole Kingdom with intolerable Taxes.

The bitter, fatal and deadly imprisonment of many for their Kingly fidelity,
in which Prisons some of them yielded up their souls into the hands of their
heavenly Father, my self then being in the Metropolis of this Kingdom a
Prisoner with them, and at the deaths of diverse of them.

These, together with the loss of many thousands of the Kings faithful
adhering Subjects innocent lives, have been some of those woeful effects,
which the delusive specious Pretense of fighting for the Protestant Religion,
has lately produced amongst us in this Kingdom.

God in mercy look upon us, and speedily deliver us all out of this
destructive and calamitous condition.

War, may not unfitly be compared to a cruel wild Beast, a Savage Tiger, or a
fierce Lion, which at the best looks gasht and grim, even then when he is
first rouzed out of his Den:

But nothing to that he will do afterward, when he has been well baited and
chafed.

Oh, then death sparkles through every look: And in the end he grows savage,
and tears and rents all that lies in his way.

God look down in mercy upon us, and keep us from those distastefull fruits
of War that other Nations have tasted; Sower fruits have they been unto them,
by which their teeth have been set on edge: such as the Dishonouring of
Matrons, the Deflowring of Virgins, the tossing of Children upon the pikes of
remorslesse Soldiers, the rosting of Infants, Murders, Rapes, Massacres and
all Tragical Pomp of bloody cruelty that uses to attend upon the enraged
Sword.

And when the Sword has acted his part awhile, and the Drums sounded alarums
to the Battle, and the Trumpets blown preparatives for the War, and the
Cannons roared loud destruction from the one end of the Kingdom to the other:

Then steps up Famine for a new scene of Misery, and this proves no less
cruel, and altogether as fatal as the former.

Then, those over-gorged stomachs and full bellies, that have been too much
filled with dainty diets variety, must be made a prey to the hungry jaws of
pining Scarcity.

This sets forth the Prophets cry in the streets, My leanenesse, my leanenesse.
Esa. 24.16.


This brings the late fastidious and overcurious palate, to the loathsome diet
of Horse flesh, and Dogs flesh, and vermin, and excrements of Beasts; yea, of
old shoes and leather trunkes.

Such a black Bill of distastefull diet and surfeiting fare Josephus brings in
of Gods own people, when Titus and Vepatian laid siege to the walls of
Jerusalem.

The Children there cried out unto their Mothers, Lam. 2.12.
Where is bread and drink? when they swoonded as the wounded in the streets of
the City, and gave up the ghost in their Mothers bosom.

Yea, the Prophet complains there, of the peoples extremity through Famine;

Behold O Lord (says he) and consider to whom thou have done this: shall the
women eat their fruit, and Children of a span long? Verse 20. The words in the
Original are (...) Little of educations.

What obdurate hearted Parents cannot mourn for their little Infants in so
great extremity?

Also the Famine in Samaria was so great, 2 King. 6.25.
that an Asses head was sold at fourscore pieces of Silver, and the fourth part
of a Cab of Doves dung at five pieces of silver.

Yea, in the extremity of Famine, Mothers have eaten their own Children; which
caused the woman to cry out against her neighbor unto the King, Help, my
Lord, O King.

The King said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, this woman said
unto me, Give thy son that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to
morrow.

So we sod my son, and did eat him, and I said to her the day after, Give thy
son that we may eat him, but she has hid her son.

When the King heard this, 2 King. 6.
he rent his clothes, in token of humiliation.

Oh, whose heart cannot relent within him, at the consideration of this woeful
condition: That the hunger-starved and pined mother, though compassionately
affected and tender hearted to her Infant, shall be driven to dish up her own
Child for a Breakfast.

And thus a miserable Myriam sacrificing her son to famine, shall be
constrained to make the Womb of her increase, the Tomb of her posterity.

And so to turn the fruit of the Womb into meat for the belly.

Beloved, if it be a grief to any to hear this; what then will it be for them
to see it and suffer it?

Lo, thus have we heard of the woeful misery of Famine which War produces.

And therefore let us all in Gods fear do our best endeavors to procure the
Blessing of Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

The word here Peace in our Text in the Original is (...) a radice (...) quod
significat pacem habere, id est, pace vel prosperitate frui, which signifies
to have Peace, that is to say, to enjoy Peace or prosperity.

And would we not willingly enjoy Peace? certainly yea; Then let us now at the
last learn the true and right way to remedy this our evil of War amongst us;
lest by our carelessness and continuance in wickedness, our (...) the house of
God become (unto us) (...) the house of Affliction: and our (...) the Vision of
Peace; be made (unto us) (...) a most homely and unpleasant place: and our
(...) the house of Grace and Favor; be turned (against us) into (...) the
house of Anger and Displeasure: and whereby also the Lords long-suffering turn
(against us) into Wrath, and consequently the Sword of War our lives into Death.

The Means then to attain Gods blessing of Peace in this our disturbed
Kingdom follow, and they are these, viz.

The first is Prayer.

The second is Humiliation.

The third is casting away all our transgressions.

For a Man to be in Misery and not to Pray; is an infallible Sign of his
Infidelity.

For a man to pray, and not to humble himself, is an evident Token of his
Hypocrisy.

For a man to pray, and humble himself, and not cast away all his
Transgressions; is an apparent Testimony of his Obstinacy.

And therefore, to free our selves from the guilt of Infidelity, Hypocrisy,
and Obstinacy, let us speedily put in practice the Means here prescribed, viz.
Prayer, Humiliation, and Casting away all our Transgressions.

Concerning the first of these, viz. Prayer; I shall not need to say much,
because I have spoken so largely thereof already; yet notwithstanding in regard
Prayer is one of those Means here prescribed, for the Aversion of the
judgment of War from us, I shall therefore speak a little more thereof.

Prayer, is the great prevailing Ordinance of God; both for a prevention from
our falling into evils, and also for our speedy deliverance out of them, being
fallen into them.

The Saints of God have ever made Prayer the Alpha and Omega, of all their
Actions.

The good and right use of holy Prayer amongst devout and Religious persons,
has always been esteemed both the first and last Remedy in our greatest
dangers; as being most prevalent with God for our speedy deliverance: For when
all earthly Policy, and worldly Stratagems are fled from us, and all our former
fast friends shrinkingly from us, have forsaken us, and Death stands at our
elbowes ready to seize upon us; yet still Prayer is left with us, as a gracious
Orator, and an effectual Advocate to intercede for us.

And unto this we have Gods own Injunction, Psalm. 50.15
Call upon me in the day of trouble: so I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

And here also we must remember, that our Prayer must be cordial if it be
prevalent.

Non vox sed votum, non musica cordula, sed cor clamat in aure Dei.

Its not the voice, but the vote; not the musical harmony, but the heart that
cries in the ear of God.

Thus Hannah prayed, 1 Samuel 1.13
she spoke in her heart: her lips only did move, but her voice was not heard.

Yea, Prayer has also been the Practice of the Saints of God in the time of
their calamity: as for example.

David Prayed to the Lord when he was in trouble: Psalm. 120.1
and the Lord heard him.

Hezekiah Prayed to the Lord to send him aid against the King of Ashur: 2
King. 19.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 2 King. 6.18.
And he prevailed.

Elisha Prayed to the Lord to smite his enemies with blindness that were sent
to apprehend him: And he obtained.

Jehoahaz, 2 King. 13.4.
Prayed to the Lord being surprised by the King of Aram: And he was delivered.

Asa, 2 Chro. 14
Prayed to the Lord for aid against his enemies: And the Lord smote the
Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.

Jehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 20
Prayed to the Lord for help against the Ammonites, Moabites, and inhabitants
of Mount Seir his enemies that came against him to destroy him; And the Lord
laid ambushments against them, and they fought one against another, and when
the Ammonites, and Moabites had destroyed the men of Mount-Seir, then every one
helped for to kill each other.

The Israelites cried to the Lord when they were in trouble, Exodus 2. Judge. 6.
Psalm. 107.
and he heard them and delivered them.

Lo, thus the Lord has formerly heard the Prayers of his servants being in
afflictions, and also granted their requests, for his glory and their comfort:
and still he is the same God, his hand is not shortened. Esaias 59.1.


And therefore let us not neglect to practice this duty of Prayer, it being the
great prevailing Ordinance of God; either to prevent us of falling into
troubles, or else to free us out of them, being fallen into them.

For the Second, viz. Humiliation.

We have Gods Querie to the Prophet Elijah, concerning the Aversion of Gods
judgments from Ahab; See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? 1 King.
21.29.
Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his
days: but in his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.

And when God (by his Prophet Jonah) threatened the Ninevites, adhuc quadraginta
dies, and Nineve subvertetur. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed.

Yet notwithstanding, upon their Humiliation, that threatening was reversed, and
the Nirevites preserved. And God saw their works, Iona. 3.10
that they turned from their evil ways: and God repented of the evil that he
had said, that he would do unto them, and he did it not.

What? were the sinful Ninevites spared from Destruction, through Gods mercy
toward them upon their Humiliation?

Oh then, how ought we in this our present and deplorable condition, to make
expression of our Humiliation with zealous Nehemiah, Neh. 1.4.
who when he heard of Jerusalems Calamity, He sat down and wept, and mourned
certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven.

Humility, is the first helpefull step, by which we ascend the heavenly Throne
of Gods sacred Majesty for mercy; and also the first raising Round of Godly
Jacobs long reaching Ladder, by which, like swift Angels, our precious Souls
climb up to God in Heaven, and his holy Angels, and heavenly blessings descend
down to us upon earth.

Lo, thus the most great and glorious God, whose habitation is in the highest
Heavens; Esa. 57.15
yet also vouchsafes his gracious presence, to dwell amongst humble minded men
here upon Earth, in the lowest hearts.

Therefore, one of the means to obtain mercy, in this our present misery is,
in, by, and through Humility.

But admit thou can not by thy Humiliation obtain at the hands of God, the
deliverance of a Nation from a General calamity: yet notwithstanding, thou
shall thereby procure for thy self the Mark of the Servant of God. Ezekiel. 9.4.


And although our Humiliation be not the cause of healing our Lands distempers;
yet notwithstanding, it is one of those means which God has ordained for
procuring the Cure thereof: and therefore it must not be neglected by us; for,
God has commanded us to use the means to attain the end.

And using the means as we ought, there will be no cause for us to doubt, of
Gods blessing upon them.

Despair not then of help in thy greatest dejection, for there is yet Balm
in Gilead, and Hope in England: And as Shechaniah once said unto Ezra in
another case,

Yet now there is Hope in Israel concerning this thing. Ezra 10.2
The which I hope may not unfitly be applied to us English Natives in these
many, present, and great distractions amongst us: For God is more merciful,
then we have been sinful, if we can be truly sorrowful.

And for the proof hereof, I will declare unto you two examples in the holy
Scriptures.

The one in the time of the Law;

And the other in the time of the Gospel.

1. That in the time of the Law, shall be that of Manasseh the King of Judah;
He was a notorious Malignant against the Lord, He committed many horrible and
heinous abominations, wherewith the Lord was wrathfully displeased against him.

He shed so much innocent blood, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to
another.

Wherefore the Lord brought upon him and his people, 2 King. 21.16.
the Captains of the Host of the King of Ashur, which took Manasheh, and put
him in fetters, and bound him in Chains, and carried him to Babylon.

And when he was in tribulation he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him: and God
was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and brought him again to Jerusalem
into his Kingdom.

So that, what although thou have formerly fallen into sin, and thereby
greatly provoked the Lord to wrath against thee? yet notwithstanding, now at
the last return unto God, and humble thy self before him:

Cast down thy self before the Lord, Psalm. 15.17
and he will lift thee up: he will not despise the Sacrifice of a sorrowful
spirit.

He will not reject the sighing of a contrite spirit. Esaias 66.22


He will dwell with three, Esa. 57.15
and revive thy humble spirit, and give life to thy contrite heart. And will
heal thy backslidings, Hos. 14.4.
and love thee freely, and turn away his anger from thee.

2. And for a Gospel-patterne hereof, Luke 15.
look upon the Parable of the Prodigal.

Who by his riotous living greatly grieved the tender heart of his loving
Father, whereby also he vexatiously provoked him to displeasure against him:
yet notwithstanding, when in Humility he returned unto his grieved and angry
Father; Lo then, His Father received him joyfully, embraced him lovingly
kissed him sweetly, and forgave him freely.

And therefore prepare thy self in Humility for to meet thy God. Amos 8.12


And also to walk humbly before him. Mic. 6.8.


And so shall we, by the sorrowful tears of penitential water, quench (through
Gods gracious acceptance) the furious fire of his fierce displeasure, and have
him to be unto us again, a reconciled Father in Jesus Christ.

And for the third, viz. Casting away all our Transgressions.

We have Jehues Querie to Jehoram, concerning the destruction of his Mother
Jezabel; 2 Kings 9.22.
What Peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel, and her
witchcrafts are so many?

Yea, beloved, and as for our Sins, we must be so far from having Many; as
that we must not willingly retain Any: But deal with them all, as Moses (in
another case) once answered Pharaoh, concerning the Israelites Cattle, Exo.
10.26
There shall not an hoof be left behind.

Even so beloved, for a speedy, present, and permanent prevention, of farther,
future, and greater mischiefs, that by continuance in any one of our sins
may befall us; Every true Christian must have regard in the sincerity of his
heart, to walk in a constant, cordial, and universal obedience to all Gods
Commandments:

He must not foster, cherish, or keep any one sin whatsoever: For S. Peter
bids us lay aside (not some, but) all malice, 1 Pet. 2.1.
and all guile, and hypocrisies.

And S. Paul exhorts us to abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22


And to cleanse us from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit. 1 Cor. 7.1.


And S. Jude would have us to hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. Jude
23.


And S. James tells us, Iam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, (meaning
wilfully) he is guilty of all.

Oh then, let us all in Gods fear, take heed of our Serpentine Delilahs, Judge.
16.
and beware of our soule-destroying Herodias's. viz. Mar. 6.
Our bosom, dear, and darling sins:

And let none of us say of that sin, Genesis 19.20
as once Lot did (in another case) of Zoar, Is it not a little one, and my
soul shall live?

Unto which I answer, Though that sin in thy judgment seem never so small,
yet the effect which it will produce unto thee, will be that of Joabs Sword
unto Abner, viz. 2 Samuel 2.26
bitterness in the latter end.

Resembling that little book which S. John did eat. Rev. 10.10


Though for the present it be sweet in thy mouth; yet for the future it will be
bitter in thy belly.

For the sweet meat of Sin, must have the sower sauce of Punishment.

And as Jonathan spoke of the death of his body, 1 Samuel 14.43.
for the tasting of a little honey; I did but taste a little honey with the end
of the rod that was in mine hand, and lo, I must die.

So in like manner, the exercising of thy sweet-darling-sinne, though never so
little, and living and dying in it (without repentance) will be the everlasting
destruction of thy soul.

So that, If we desire the aversion of Gods bitter judgments of War from us,
and the comfortable enjoyment of his sweet mercies, and blessing of Peace upon
us; then must we imitate the Widow in the Gospel, seeking that she had lost,
Luke 15.8.
who swept her house, to find her Groat.

So in like manner, we must sweep, purge, and cleanse our hearts of all
filthiness and corruption; if seeking we desire to find Gods blessing of
Peace.

Otherwise, the terrible sword of Gods justice against us for our sins, will
still continue the Wars in our gates.

Alas beloved, shall any of us of this English Nation, who live in the heavenly
Light of the glorious Gospel, and also unto whom both the Law and Gospel have
been for many years together, both clearly, plentifully, and powerfully
preached; be so spiritually blind, and full of unregenerate darkness, as not
to see, that those unexpelled sins which lie lurking still in our souls,
cause the continuation of these unnatural Wars in our Land?

Or can any of us be so blockishly senseless, or stupidly ignorant in our
understanding, as to have the least conception, or thought in our hearts, that
the holy and righteous God, will be so merciful and friendly unto us, as to
remove the raging Wars from us, while we retain our crying sins with us,
which make us become enemies unto him; calling continually and earnestly upon
him, to open the Vials of his fierce wrath and vengeance, and pour down his
fearful and terrible judgments, in his great displeasure and indignation upon
us to our utter destruction?

Observe (with me) I pray you, the Lords former and just proceedings, against
the Violators of his sacred Laws:

Was there ever any Transgressors of the Decalogue, viz. the Ten Commandments
of the Moral Law, who continued in their sins, and had not punishment (from
God) inflicted upon them to their destruction?

Take a view with me of those particular Offenders against those Ten several
Commandments: as for example,

The Idolatrous Israelites violating the First Commandment, by making other
Gods, were so smitten by the hand of God, Ex. 32.27.
as that both brethren, companions and neighbors, (contrary to all natural
affection) sheathed their swords in each others bowels.

Superstitious Nadab and Abihu violating the Second Commandment, by offering
strange fire upon the Altar, Lev. 10.2.
were both of them (both speedily and fearfully) consumed by fire.

The blasphemous Egyptian Israelite violating the Third Commandment, Lev.
24.16
by blaspheming the Sacred name of Almighty God, was stoned to death.

The profane and careless Stickgatherer violating the Fourth Commandment,
Numb. 15.32, 36.
by gathering Sticks upon the Sabbath day, was also stoned to death.

Rebellious Absalom violating the Fifth Commandment, 2 Samuel 18.9, 14.
by raising War against his Father David, whom he ought (both by the Law of God
and Nature) in all filial duty to have obeyed; was hanged upon an Oak in his
own hair, and also thrust through with three Darts by the hand of Joab.

Blood-thirsty Cain violating the Sixth Commandment, Genesis 4.8, 15.
by murdering his brother Abel, was branded with the mark of Gods indignation.

Unclean Zimri and Cozbi violating the Seventh Commandment, Number. 25.8.
by committing the filthy fact of Fornication, were thrust through both their
bodies with a Javeling, by the hand of zealous Phinehas.

Avaritious Achan violating the Eighth Commandment, Josh. 7.21, 24, 25.
by taking a Babylonish garment, two hundred Shekels of silver, and a Wedge of
gold; Lo, himself, his sons, his daughters, his oxen, his asses, his
sheep, and all that he had, was stoned to death, and burned with fire in the
valley of Achor.

Dissembling Ananias and his wife Sapphira violating the Ninth Commandment,
Act. 5.5, 10.
by lying and dissembling, concealing their Sacrilege, were both of them
(through Gods displeasure) about three hours the one after the other, smitten
dead at the feet of S. Peter.

And Covetous Ahab violating the Tenth Commandment, 1 King, 22.38.
desiring and thirsting after Naboths Vineyard, his blood was devoured by
dogs.

Lo, thus beloved, we evidently see, that the Transgressors of Gods Laws,
continuing in their sins, have punishments constantly attending upon them,
and also swiftly following after them, to their ruin, subversion, and
destruction.

And therefore for a speedy prevention of our own Confusion, let us all (in
Gods fear) even speedily cast away all our transgressions.

Otherwise, we may justly fear, that the righteous Lord in his fury will
fiercely come against us, and draw forth his revengefull sword upon us, and
never leave us, till he has destroyed us: for thus has been his former
practice against obstinate sinners continuing in their sins.

And this truth also holy David confesses, God shall wound the head of his
enemies: Psalm. 68.21.
and the hairie scalpe of such a one as goes on still in his wickedness.

A notable and fearful Example hereof we have in the Lords righteous dealing
against Jerusale^, who had many fore-warnings both by the Lords Prophets in the
time of the Law, and also by Christ himself in the time of the Gospel, to
forsake her sins, and by timely and true Repentance to turn unto the Lord:

But alas, She still continued in them without Reclamation, the which at the
last turned to her own destruction.

So that it may now truly be said of Her, with great Grief, Shame, and
Reproach unto Her;

Jerusalem, that formerly was a beautiful, famous, glorious and Sceptred City;
has now bequeathed no other Monument to Posterity, then the hateful
Character, the odious Emblem, and the disgraceful Example of her own Shame
and Infamy.

She, who sometimes splendidly shone as the bright glorious Star of the East,
to the terror of all her neighbor Nations, and also the admiration of the
whole world; serves now but as a prodigious Sign, or blazing Comet in the view
of the world, for to threaten all Nations sinful Security.

That sacred Sanctuary, wherein the holy God had set his rest, and would have
been the peoples delight and glory; was afterward not only irreligiously
profaned, but also abominably prostituted to all Impiety.

Those stately Streets being full fraught with sumptuous Buildings, wherein
Pride was wont to vaunt her self with Ostentation; are now become the stinking
dunghills, and noisome Receptacles of unclean, filthy, and ugly Vermin.

Also the loss of diverse hundred thousands of Lives, by the Roman military
Power, together with the Persons remaining scattered Ruins, who are (as yet)
groaning under the worlds scorn and their own Calamity.

Lo, These were some of those woeful Miseries, and cruel heartbreaking
Calamities, which Jerusalem justly suffered for her continuance in sin.

But of this particular concerning Jerusalem, more largely toward the end of
this Book.

So that the continuation of wicked men's perverseness, is the immediate
forerunner of Gods vengeance.

Continuance in our sins, stops the ears of God to our prayers.

Yea, if our hearts have but an inclination to evil, though our hands
perpetrate it not, yet the Lord will not hearken to our Prayers.

If I incline (says Daaid) unto wickedness with mine heart: Psalm. 66.16
the Lord will not hear me.

And therefore according to the Apostles rule, 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let every one that calls upon the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

As in the time of the Law, the Lord commanded his Prophets to cry aloud in the
peoples ears, Ier. 6.1.
and without sparing to tell them of their sins, and also of punishments,
Esaias 58.1.
that for their sins, (without repentance) would justly be inflicted upon
them; Ezeke 33.
dealing with them as a merciful and clement Combatant, giving them a Caveat
before he sends his Capias, that so men being premoniti, they may be
premuniti, being forewarned, they may be fore-armed, hearing of punishments
before they come, they might thereby timely shun and avoid the same.

So in like manner, The faithful and painful Ministers of the Gospel, have
often foretold to sinful England, that if She continued still in her Sins,
Mal. 2.2.
the Lord would turn her Blessings into Curses.

But woe and alas, She would not be reclaimed, and therefore now the Lord has
justly taken away the sweet blessing of Peace from her; and instead thereof,
sent the bitter Judgment of War upon her.

Beloved, when wicked men will not cast away their Trangressions, but still
wilfully persist in their sins.

Lo then, the just punishing sin-revenging hand of the Righteous God, will
draw forth the Sword of Justice, and fight against them to their destruction.

If (says God) I whet my glittering Sword, Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42.
and mine hand take hold on Judgment; I will execute vengeance on mine
Enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

I will make mine Arrows drunk with blood, and my Sword shall eat flesh, for
the blood of the slain, and of the Captives, when I begin to take vengeance of
the enemy.

And for this cause he is called (...) The Lord of Hosts, as though he came
with a mighty Army to fight against wicked men because of their Sins.

Yea, the Lord has all the Creatures in the world ready at his own Command to
execute his Judgments upon Obstinate sinners at his pleasure: And it also has
been his practice even in all Ages for to act the same. As for example,

When He fought against the vicious men of the Old World; Genesis 7.21.
Then the Deluge took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

When He fought against the beastly Sodomites; Genesis 19.24.
Then the fire and brimstone from Heaven took his part, and so he wrought their
Destruction.

When He fought against the blood-thirsty Egyptians pursuing the Israelites;
Exodus 14.28.
Then the Red Sea took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

When He fought against those Rebellious Persons, Numb. 16.32.
Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and their Accomplices;

Then the Earth took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

When He fought against those cursed Amorites, Josh. 10, 11, 12, 13.
warring against the Gibeonites; Then the Sun, the Mooone, and the
Hailestones from Heaven took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

And the Stars also in their courses fought against Sisera. Judge. 5.20


When He fought against those reviling Mockers of the Prophet Elisha; 2 King.
2.24.
Go up thou bald-head, Go up thou bald-head.

Then the Bears took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

When He fought against those accusing Idolaters of the Prophet Daniell; Dan.
6.24.
Then the Lions took his part, and so he wrought their Destruction.

Lo, Thus the Lord has not only these, but also all other Creatures in the
world, ready at his own command to fight against wicked Persisters in sin.

At the beginning the greatest and strongest Creatures were by Nature and
Creation subject to Man; but alas now, not only they, but also all others,
both great and small, are either become our Enemies, or else our Conquerers:
And what must this then teach us, but only how Odious, hateful and abominable
Sin is in the sight of Almighty God?

Sin,
It was forbidden by God;

It was condemned by Angels;

It is revenged by Beasts;

And punished by Divills.

It drove Adam out of Paradise,

It kept Moses from Canaan,

It destroyed the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,

And it has also excluded infinite thousands from the Kingdom of Heaven.

It was wilfully committed by the disobedience of Man.

It was willingly redeemed by the life of Christ.

It was faithfully reproved by the death of Martyrs.

And yet still it is wickedly maintained by the practice of Multitudes.

Oh, whose heart bleeds not within him, to see such a wicked Monster made more
account of, then all other good things in the world; which was hatched by the
Devil, fed by the life of Souls, and yet still reigns, that it might win
Millions of Souls unto Condemnation?

Shall reasonable Men rescue it, when unreasonable Beasts fight against it?

Every Creature in his kind cries Vengeance against it:

It made the Angels Damnable,

It made the World Abominable,

It makes the Beasts Corruptible,

And it makes Men Miserable.

Miserable (I say) by Birth, for they were borne in it; Miserable by Life, for
they are vexed with it.

And most miserable by Death, for then they shall be accursed by it.

Lo, Thus does the Earth cry, woe unto Sin, for it cursed her;

Thus does the Heavens hate it, for it destroys her Children;

Thus do the Stars fight against it, for it dazleth their Light;

And thus do the wilde-Beasts war against it, because it increases their
Groans.

It was the Jews complaint in their extremity, O Lord, Ier. 14.7.
though our Iniquities testify against us, deal with us according to thy Name:
for our Rebellions are many, we have sinned against thee.

It was the Wickeds expression in their Calamity for sin: We roar all like
bears, Esa. 59.11, 12.
and mourn like doves; we look for equity, but there is none, for health, but
it is far from us.

For our trespasses are many before thee, and our sins testify against us.

So that, unless thou leavest thy Sins, expect no Peace, but look for
mourning instead of mirth, according to that Curse imposed upon the Jews for
their sins, declared by the Prophet.

The Earth lamenteth and fades away; Esaias. 24.4, 5, 6, 7,
the world is feebled and decayed: the proud people of the earth are weakened.

The earth also deceives, because of the inhabitants thereof: for they
transgressed the laws: they changed the Ordinances, and brake the everlasting
Covenant.

Therefore has the Curse devoured the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are
desolate: wherefore the inhabitants of the land are burned up, and few men are
left.

The wine fails, the vine has no might: all that were of merry heart do
mourn.

Thus beloved we see, that Sin is the Cause, and Punishment the Effect; So
that, Sublata Causa tollitur Effectus. The Cause being taken away, the Effect
cease; And until then, expect no Peace.

For, so long as our hearts are full of Corruptions, let us look to have our
lives full of Afflictions.

Afflictions are divine medicines, sent from God to correct our corruptions:
Yea, they are Chastisements for sins that are past, and also Preventions of
sins that are to come; like a Prophylacticke Phlebotomy, or a Preservative
Purgation. And hence is that expression of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.32.
We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

So that we have here Life and Death set before us, perform the Means
prescribed. and we shall live comfortably; neglect them, and we shall perish
miserably.

Lo, this truth, the Author of all truth has expressed, Levit. 26.17.18. I
will set my face against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and they
that hate you, shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none pursues you.

And if ye will not for these things obey me, then will I punish you seven
times more according to your sins.

Hence then we may learn, that if the former punishments of Pestilence,
Famine, and the Sword, which lately have been amongst us, and upon us; will
not reclaim and reform us: then the Lord will send more, and heavier
judgments upon us, until we either are converted, or confounded.

And now for a Prevention of Englands Confusion, let me speak unto her, as
once the Lord did by his Prophet Jeremiah unto Jerusalem, Jer. 6.8. Be thou
instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee: lest I make thee
desolate, as a Land that none Inhabiteth.

So say I, both freely and mournfully, Be thou instructed, O England, learn
righteousness, and speedily be reclaimed from all thy wickedness: lest the
righteous Lord in displeasure against thee, suddenly depart from thee, and so
thou becommest a Desolation.

The which Desolation that we may all escape, let every one throughout this
whole Kingdom, seriously examine his own heart of all those sins wherein
(at this day) he stands guilty before the Lord; and search and try his ways,
and speedily turn unto the Lord our God.

And for a prevalent Motive hereunto, Let all Traitors against the King, call
to mind Gods just Judgments upon Ahithophell: 2 Sa. 17.23 2 Sa. 18.14. 1 Samuel
8.3 1 Sa. 4.18. 2 Sa. 20.22 Ester. 7.10
Rebels, upon Absalom: Corrupt Judges, upon Samuels Sons: Idle Ministers,
upon Eli: Wicked Magistrates, upon Sheba: Proud persons, upon Haman:
Fornicators, Nu. 25.8. Nu. 15.36
upon Zimri and Cozbi: Prophaners of the Lords Sabbath, upon the Stickgatherer:
Ion. 1.15.
Disol edient persons, upon Jonah: Swearers and Blasphemers, Lev. 24.16
upon the Aegyptian-Israelite: False witnesses, upon (those wicked Elders)
Susanna's Accusers: Susan. 62. Josh. 7.25.
Covetous persons, upon Achan: Murderers, upon Joab: 1 K. 2.34.
Despisers of the Gospel, Ministry, Word, Sacraments, and all true Religion,
Act. 8.23.
upon Simon Magus: And all Thievish, Blood sucking, Cursed, Intruding Usurpers
(contrary to all Law and Justice) into the Rights, Estates, and Possessions of
others, both Clergy and Laytie, upon greedy, covetous and avaricions Ahab: 1 K.
21.19
who wrongfully took away Naboths Vineyard: And the Lord in mercy toward us,
grant so much grace unto us, that the consideration of their punishments, may
work so effectually in our hearts, as that it may cause our speedy amendments.

And that thereby, all Magistrates may leave their Connivency, and too much
Winking: Men of eminent Places, their Partiality, and too much Favoring:
Patrons, their Theevery, and too much Church-robbing: Ministers, their Soothing
up, and too much Flattering: Lawyers, their Subtlety, and too much Delaying:
Courtiers, their Policy, and too much Dissembling: Citizens, their Pride, and
too much Deceiving: Gentlemen, their Racking, and too much Oppressing:
Countrymen, their Lawing, and too much Contending:

And also every one of us forsake our dear, darling, and bosom Sins,
whereby we may amend our Conversations, by casting away all our Transgressions;
greatly grieving, and heartily lamenting, that we have lived so long in them:
that so we may ascape Destruction and Desolation, which the Sword of War (at
this day in our Land) being shaken against us, threatens to bring upon us, to
our Confusion.

Oh then, let the serious Consideration hereof, sink so deeply into our hearts,
as feelingly to move us, and also speedily to make us put in practice, these
ensuing Exhortations of the Lords Prophets and Apostles, viz. Esaias 1.16.17.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil,

Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow.

And Ezekiel 18.31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die,
O house of Israel?

And Jam. 1.21. Lay a part all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your
souls.

And 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

And 1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

Upon all which places of holy Scripture, my Inference shall be that of the
Lords Prophet Isaiah, If ye consent and obey, Isa. 1.19, 20.
ye shall eat the good things of the land: But if ye refuse and be rebellious,
ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

So that my Exhortation then (in this Use of Exhortation) to you all, shall be
that of the Lords Prophet Daniel, unto Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babell,

O King, Dan. 4.24.
let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor: Lo let there be
an healing of thine error.

That is, cease to provoke God to displeasure by thy sins, and suffer the
former errors of thy life to be redressed.

We lie under the pressure of an heavy affliction, and that which makes the
Burden the more intolerable is, That it is not an open enemy that has done
us this dishonor, for then we should have borne it:

But it is thou my Companion, Psalm. 55.14, 15.
my guide and mine own familiar friend: we took sweet Council together, and
walked in the house of God as friends.

But woe and alas, this is now our woeful Condition, that those who formerly
have lived friendly, now altogether void of humanity, sheath their swords into
each others bowels, and so mutually work each others Destruction

Beloved, as you desire to Preserve your Selves, your Lives, your Wives, your
Children, your Brethren and Companions, your Cattle and Substance, yea, and
the whole Kingdom from Destruction, speedily perform the means delivered.

But alas, the Means here prescribed, is by many too much neglected, and the
contrary too fluently, and frequently practiced.

Beloved, I do heartily wish on the behalf, and for the welfare of our
English Nation, that there may never be justly objected against them, the Lords
complaint against the Obstinate Jews.

And in that day did the Lord God of Hoasts call unto weeping and mourning,
Esaias. 22.12.13.
and to baldness, and girding with sackcloth.

And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh,
and drinking wine, eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall die.

But I greatly fear, there are too many thousands (at this day) in England,
that are foully faulty herein, and deeply guilty hereof: who little, or nothing
at all lay to heart, the woeful miseries of these present sad and calamitous
times: never calling their sins to mind, and smiting their breasts, saying,
What have I done? Ier. 8.6.
or using any of these Means here declared; whereby to pacify Gods
displeasure, that so he might have mercy upon us, and speedily be entreated of
us; whereby we might also once again sweetly enjoy from him, his former
Comfortable blessing of Peace inour Land.

Such careless, yea, impious Persons, by their Profane, Carnal, and
Pernicious Practices, hasten to draw down Gods Just and heavy Judgments both
upon themselves and many others; to the ruin of their bodies in this world,
and (without Repentance) the everlasting destruction both of bodies and souls
in the world to come.

Now the three Salves that I have prescribed for the Curing of these Sores,
viz. Prayer, Humiliation, and casting away all our Transgressions, are all
summed up, (By the blessed Spirit of God) in the former part of one verse in
the holy Scripture.

If (says God) I shut the heaven that there be no rain, Chron. 7.13, 14.
or if I command the grasshopper to devour the land, or if I send pestilence
amongst my people.

If my people, among whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves, and
pray; and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked ways: Then will I hear
in heaven, and be merciful unto their sin, and will heal their land.

So that, if we perform these three things, then the Lord has promised, that
he will hear us, and help us, and heal us.

Thus beloved, if carefully and faithfully we use the Means here prescribed,
we shall certainly have Gods blessing upon our endeavors therein, as he has
promised: whereby our sorrow will be turned into joy, our mourning into mirth,
and our Wars into Peace.

Oh then let us speedily put in practice the Prophet Hoseas exhortation to the
Jews.

Come, Hos. 6.1.
and let us return unto the Lord, for he has Wounded us and he will heal us,
he has broken us and he will bind us up.

And let us heartily send up our Prayers into Heaven for the Remnant that is
left.

Be uncessant Suitors to the Lord for Peace: Let me entreat you all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to make your approaches to the beautiful Gate of Gods
mercy, and importune the God of Peace, even for his dear sake who is the
Prince of Peace, that he would be pleased to look once again with his eye of
pity and compassion, upon the distressed estate of this Church and Kingdom:

And to take the matter into his own hand, and compose the divisions of Ruben
for whose sake there are great thoughts of heart.

That he that makes men to be of one mind in an house, Psalm. 68.6.
would unite the heart of King and People, that in their happy Union, Peace may
flourish in our Land.

That he who makes wars to cease in all the world, that breaks the bow,
Psalm. 46.9.
and knappeth the spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots in the fire; Esa.
2.4. Mic. 4.3.
would break our swords into plowshares, and our spears into mattocks and
pruning-hookes; that he would once more speak Peace unto his people, that he
would give unto his people the blessing of Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Peace be within her walls, Psalm. 12^.7
and plentiousnesse within her Palaces.

This is the way (yea the only way left that I know) to Preavile with the God
of heaven, that he may be entreated for the Land.

Lo, thus it remains, then on our part, that by the breath of our prayers and
windy sighs and groans, through Gods permission and acceptance, we labor to
blow away the dark and black cloud of Gods vengance that hangs over our heads,
and threatens a deluge of blood to fall upon us; lest wrath break forth to the
uttermost against us, and there be no remedy for us.

And then he rain upon us in his displeasure, snares, fire and brimstone,
storm and tempest, Psalm. 11.7.
and make this our portion to drink.

From the which miserable, forlorn, wretched, woeful and calamitous condition,
as we are the workmanship of thine own hands; For thy mercy sake, Good Lord
deliver us all.

And yet notwithstanding all this that has been spoken, peradventure it may
(by some Weakling) be demanded: What, although I diligently use all the Means
here prescribed, viz. Pray, Humble my self, and cast away all my
Transgressions, for to procure the Churches Peace; Yet I can conceive but
little probability of prevailing; for the true Members of Christ's militant
Church are but a little flock, Luke 12.
and their natural strength is weak, in comparison of the numerous multitude
of the Church-Malignant: and therefore how shall they be able to encounter with
them, when they do oppose them? My answer hereunto, shall be that of Asa's, in
his humble prayer unto God for his assistance against the multitude of his
Enemies: 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
It is nothing with the Lord to help with many, or with no power; the words in
the Original are, (...) against many without power.

The sacred Scriptures perspicuously and fluently declare unto us, that God
has in all Ages performed great, wonderful, and admirable Actions, and that
even by weak Means, contrary to the expectation, and also the conception of
humane sense and reason: as for example,

He overthrew the innumerable Army of the Midianites, Judges.
even by Gideons three hundred men.

He slew a Garrison of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.
even by Jonathan and his Armor-bearer.

He Conquered the Kings of Sodom, Genesis 14.
Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboijim, Bela, and diverse other Kings about them, even by
Abraham and his Family.

He surprised Goliath by David, 1 Samuel 17. Sisera by Jael, Judge. 4. and
Abimelech by a woman, Judge. 9.

And who would ever have thought, Judge. 3.31.
that Shamgar, the son of Anath, with an Oxegoade should have slain six
hundred men?

And Samson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, a thousand Philistines. Judge. 15.16.

It was not possible that so great execution could be done only by them, being
but weak Instruments to encounter with such puissant Adversaries: there was
more then so in those their Warlike Actions.

There was the Eternal Omnipotent Providence, unto which all the Designs and
Actions of all Mortals have been subject from all Eternity. Yea, there was
also the supernatural and effectual Concurrence of the divine and powerful
assistance, against which all the forces in the world could make no resistance.

So that it is neither the number, nor the means that the Almighty regards,
when he resolves to get himself the Victory.

When once the Lord God Omnipotent is pleased to arise in his own strength, all
Nations in comparison of him are but as the drop of a bucket; yea, less then
nothing, and vanity it self. Isay 40.15.17. and all their forces united
together, are not so much for him to destroy, as the Elephant to break the
Spiders web.

Gods heavenly and unlimited Providence far transcends the carnal eye of all
humane discovery.

Who would ever have thought, that Moses from the Bulrush-Cradle, floating on
the tears of the weeping river, should thereby have derived his Princely title
in Pharaoh's Court?

And that Pharaoh's daughter should preserve that vessel as a Cabinet of
pleasure, Exodus 2.
which Moses Mother (with an heavy heart) at his last farewell, bestowed upon
him, her poor innocent Infant, as a mournful Coffin?

Or that Pharaoh's tyrannous decree against the people of God in Egypt, Exodus
14.
projected for his safeguard, and their extirpation; should have turned to
Isreal's deliverance, and Pharaoh's destruction?

Lo, thus the Lord can (when he pleases) drive the Enemies of his Church into
the ruinous Labyrinth of their own Confusion.

And as the Lord (in times that are past) has done great things for his Church
even by weak means: So in like manner, Esa. 59.1.
his hand is not shortened, but that he can do as great, or greater things, by
as weak, or weaker means, for times that are to come.

Oh then in Gods fear, let us all walk as dutiful children before him our
heavenly Father; let us Pray unto him, Humble our selves before him, and cast
away all our Transgressions from our selves; that so we may be in his favor,
and have him to shelter us under the wings of his fatherly Providence in all
Exigents that do befall us, and to be our Protector in our greatest danger.

Then shall we be secure from the violence of all adversary power, though all
the men in the world were mischievous Malignants against us, and purposed with
bloody malice to destroy us.

For, If God be on our side, who can be against us? Romans 8.31.

Thankfulness.
Peace we now enjoy; and although it be not so complete a Peace, as we desire,
yet to rejoice in it, and to be heartily thankful to God for it.

The Motives hereunto are many, but I shall only and briefly declare Six.

Motives.
Effects which Thankfulness produces, viz. it does not only retain Gods
favor for the present, but also moves him to bestow his Blessings upon us for
the time to come.

So that Thankfulness for present Peace may not only continue it to us, as it
is for the present, but also for our greater comfort increase it for the future.

You know (beloved) that Thankfulness even Inter homines, amongst men, is not
only a means still to retain their former Favors, but also to purchase the
fruits of their future Affections.

Now if Policy amongst men produces this grateful Effect, ought not then
Religion toward God to work it in us much more? Certainly yea.

Oh then, let us not be like those nine unthankful healed Lepers in the
Gospel, who returned no thanks unto Jesus for healing their infirmity.

But let us be like the Tenth of that company, that good Samaritane, who
thankfully for his cure turned back, and fell on his face at Jesus feet, and
with a loud voice praised God. Luke 17.15.16.

Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless the
Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee.

And Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me (says God) in the time of trouble: so will I
hear thee, and thou shall praise me.

Then contrariwise, not to be thankful is to disobey God, and consequently to
contemn his Command.

What? Does God Command, and shall not man Obey? Oh what is Impotent Man the
Creature, that he should oppose the Omnipotent God his Creator!

The Larkes, and other little sensitive Birds that fly in the Air, do (after
a sort) in their language sing praises to their Maker: And shall rational Men
whom God has endued with understanding, be more remiss in performing their
Duty then they?

Let all Ungrateful men then blush for shame, that those little sensitive
Creatures should transcend them: And learn to be more thankful for blessings
received, and to make God the Object of their praises for the time to come.



So that their Wives, like those of this Land, are not only Widows, and
their Children Fatherless, but also their Cities, Towns and Villages sacked
and burned, their Women ravished, their Virgins defloured, their Infants
roasted, their Goods plundered, their Cattle destroyed, and Country wasted.

So that by reports, a man may travel many miles before he shall meet with any
person for his travells farther direction, or visibly discern for his hungry
and thirsty bodies repose and present refection, a place of repast and
supplying Habitation.

So that those places that formerly have been habitations for Christians, are
now become Nests for wild Birds, Dens for favage Beasts, and Receptacles for
Toads, Adders, Snakes, Serpents, and such like Vermin.

Oh then, what great cause have we to magnify God, that we are not (as yet) in
their condition!



Alas, (Beloved) what are we but the spurious offspring of our unhappy
Progenitors? from whose loins we are polluted with original cursed
corruption, which has contaminated all the powers and faculties of our souls,
and defiled all the parts and members of our bodies, and we have and still do
daily bring forth the fruits thereof in our conversations: So that we justly
deserve even present destruction.

And there is nothing but the free bountiful goodness, and the admirable
unparalleld longanimity of our gracious God, that restraines his destroying
Angel from seizing upon us to our utter confusion.

And have we not great cause then to praise him for our peaceable Preservation?

Judgment with us, and deal in Justice against us?

Lo then, we could look for nothing but all manner of temporal punishments
in this World, and everlasting burnings in the World to come.

In which never-dying flames, Cursings should be our Himnes, and Howlings our
Tunes, Blasphemies our Ditties, and Lacrymies our Notes, Lamentations our
Songs, and Shreekings our Strains.

These should be our morning and evening, yea, mourning Songs; there Moab
should cry out against Moab, Father against Son, and Son against Father
that ever he begat him.

And those infernal Torments should be unto us, both Endless, Easelesse and
Remediless, not only for a Thousand years, but also unto all Eternity.

Oh, let us all then consider the merciful dealing of our gracious God toward
us in this Condition, who still suffers us to live in this time of Grace, and
also in the bosom of the Church, from whence the light of Truth shines most
splendidly unto us, and does out of his goodness toward us, suspend his
Judgments from us, and gives us time to repent of our Wickedness, and to cry
unto him for the pardon of our Sins, that so we may escape those intolerable
Punishments which by our sins we have deserved.

Whereas, it had been just with God that our Bodies should long ago have
been laid in their Graves, and the Worms gnawing upon them, and our Souls
cast into Hel-fire, and the Devils tormenting of them.

What great cause then have we to magnify God, for giving us so gracious an
Opportunity until this Moment, whereby we may endeavor our selves by
Humiliation to pacify Gods displeasure, and have him become a reconciled
Father to us in Jesus Christ?

Thankfulness to God has ever been the Practice of the Saints of God, for
all the Benefits he has bestowed upon them, whereof our selves can speak
experimentally the blessng of Peace is not the least.

Noah, after his deliverance from the Flood, Genesis 8.20.
built an Altar to the Lord (in thankfulness) and offered burnt offerings upon
the Altar.

Abraham's servant when he found experimentally that the Lord had prospered his
journey, Gen 24.48.
blessed the Lord for guiding him in his way.

Isaac, Genesis 26.25.
built an Altar to the Lord in Beersheba, for his Blessings; and there he
called upon the name of the Lord.

Moses, and the people of Israel sang praises to God for their deliverance from
Pharaohs fury: And the Form of their Thanksgiving was this. Exodus 15.1, 2, 3.
I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and his
rider has he overthrown in the Sea.

The Lord is my strength and praise, and he is become my salvation: He is my
God, and I will prepare him a Tabernacle: He is my Fathers God, and I will
exalt him.

The LORD is a man of War, his name is Jehovah, etc.

Deborah, Judge. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and Barak the son of Abinoam sang a song of Praise for the peoples Victory.

Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.1
praised God for her son Samuel.

It was S. Phil. 4.6.
Paul's Exhortation to his Philippians, that they should be Thankful unto God.

And also to his Colossians, Col. 2.6, 7
that they should abound with Thanksgiving.

Thus Raguell praised God for the preservation of Tobias life; Tob. 8.15.
O God (said he) thou art worthy to be praised with all pure and holy praise:
therefore let thy Saints praise thee with all thy Creatures, and let all thine
Angels and thine Elect praise thee for ever.

It was the desire of wicked Balaam to have the Righteous man's Death. Number.
23.10.


But he would not live the Righteous man's life.

If therefore we desire to be happy with the Saints at our Death; Let us
endeavor to imitate them in our Life: And one way whereof, must be, by being
thankful to God for his Blessings received.

Holy David's thankful heart unto God makes it his Quaerie, Quid retribuam
Domino? What shall I give unto the Lord: Psalm. 116.11, 12.
for all the benefits he has done unto me?

I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Yea, the serious consideration of Gods Blessings, caused David to stir up his
own soul to be thankful unto God, when he said,

Praise the Lord, O my soul: Psalm. 103.2
and forget not all his benefits.

And the same Princely Prophet, four times in one Psalm, heartily wishes
that the people would praise the Lord; and set forth his loving kindness to
the world.

Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness: and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

Our Thankfulness to God ought to be testified (as far as Mortals may) in a
threefold duty: In Cord. In Affectione. In Lingua. In Professione. In Vita. In
Action.


In Affection, Profession, and in Action. Cordially, Verbally, and Visibly.

1. Thankfulness in Affection is, when willingly we accept the Benefit, and
heartily think our selves indebted for it.

2. Thankfulness in Profession is, when we make publication of a benefit
received, to the praise of the Giver.

3. Thankfulness in Action is, when the party receiving a gift, does express
a reality of gratitude, gratifying thereby the Donor, to the uttermost of his
power.

So that our real thankfulness must be, by a constant, cordial, and
universal obedience to Gods commandments.

It should therefore be the care of every one who would be truly Thankful, to
be the same, all these three ways, viz.

In Heart, in Mouth, and in Life.

Let us therefore call to mind, my beloved Brethren, how many Bonds of
Thankfulness the Lord has bound us in: And also consider with our selves, it
was only his free mercy toward us, that we had not been those children that
were ripped out of their Mothers bellies, 2 King. 8.12.

Or those young men that perished in the Battle, Judge. 9.

Or those women that ate their Babes to preserve their lives, 2 King. 6.29.

Or that we were not Infidels, Pagans, Papists, Atheists, or Heretics.

So that we may comfortably say with the Prophet David, He has not dealt so
with every Nation, Psalm. 147. ult.

Let therefore evermore the Praises of God be in our Hearts, the Word of God in
our Mouths, and the Gospel of Christ in our Lives.

And by how much the more we have tasted of the Lords Goodness above others,
so much the more let him taste of our Thankfulness above others.

And let us all in Gods fear pray continually for the Peace of England, and
the flourishing estate of this Church, and Commonwealth wherein we live. Use
the means to keep it, refuse the way to lose it, and long, yea, for ever may
they prosper that love it.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Thus much for the Subject of this Duty (being the Third Considerable in our
Text) set down in this word Peace.

From whence you may remember the Doctrine.

Peace is a precious blessing of God, well deserving the prayers of his
faithful servants.

And now let us come to the last Considerable in our Text, viz. the Object of
this Subject, set down in the last word of our Text; Jerusalem. By which is
meant the Church of God.

From the which word you may remember the Doctrine.

It is required as a due debt from the Children of God, that they should pray
for the peace of the Church their Mother.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And here I am not to speak of the invisible Church triumphant in Heaven, but
of the visible Church Militant here upon Earth; and of that as briefly and
orderly as I may.

The word used for Church in the Original language of the New Testament is
(...). id est, (...), which is to call; for (...), was called of the Graecians
an Assembly of the Citizens, called from home by the voice of a Crier, to hear
the Judgment of the Senate.

But the Jews called their place of public meeting for the reading of the
Law and the Prophets (...), a Synagogue, that is, a gathering together, (...),
to gather together, to bring together, and to assemble together.

But the Christians that by the very name of public meetings, they might
distinguish between their Christian meetings, and the Jewish assemblies; have
used and kept the word Church, for the Congregation of them that profess
Christ.

So that the Church of God is the company of selected Saints, being effectually
called from the world by the Preaching of the Gospel, and chosen before all
Worlds to the Worship of God, being also Justified and Sanctified in Christ
Jesus, through the Operation of the Holy Ghost; who heartily desire to serve,
and earnestly endeavor to please their Creator in all things, whilst they live
here in this world, and shall have the full fruition of Eternal happiness
hereafter in the world to come.

And from being Members of this Church, none that are true Believers are
excepted, whether they be high or low, rich or poor, old or young, noble or
ignoble, learned or unlearned, simple or politic, of what estate, degree, or
condition soever they be: For there is neither Jew nor Grecian; Gal. 3.28.
there is neither bond or free, there is neither male or female; but they are
all one in Christ Jesus.

The Sapient Solomon describes the Church as though it were a Stately Court,
Cant. 6.7.
in which there are none but those that are of the Blood Royal, viz. Kings and
Queens, and those that are Heirs apparent to the Kingdom of Heaven.

So that the true essential Members of the Church being faithful Believers in
Christ Jesus, are the most precious and Noble Persons that live upon the earth,
even such as are descended of the Blood of Christ, in which regard they are the
dearest of men, and nearest unto God.

Yea, they are a people distinct from all others by Gods Grace of Election, and
stand before him in their new Birth and Second Creation; in which the Lord
looks joyfully upon them, and delights to behold them, because they sprang
from Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. Ephesians. 3.15.


And this Church Metaphorically and by way of similitude is called Matter
Fidelium, the Mother of the Faithful, because she brings forth Sons unto
God, unites them to Christ, and nourishes them by the Preaching of the Word,
and by the Examples of good Works: And hence is that expression,

Non posse quemquam habere Deum Patrem, qui non habet Ecclesiam Matrem.

No man can have God for his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother:
alluding to that of S. Paul.

Though ye have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many
Fathers: 1 Cor. 4.15
for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

So that, if we would have God for our Father, we must account the Church for
our Mother, and procure her Peace with our best endeavors, and there is no
more prevalent way for us to help her, then by praying heartily to God for her.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem was the Metropolis of Judea. And she was also a Tipe of the Church
of Christ, and that in diverse respects, viz.

1. Jerusalem was a City compact in it self, by reason of the bond of love,
and Order that was amongst the Citizens themselves; as in this Psalm, verse
the 3. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is at unity in it self.

So in like manner the Members of Christ's Church are linked together by the
bond of one Spirit: Ephesians. 4.3.
And they jointly endeavor to keep the unity of that Spirit in the bond of
Peace.

2. In Jerusalem was the Sanctuary, a place of Gods Presence and Worship.

So in like manner, the Church of Christ is the room of the Sanctuary, in
which we must seek the presence of God and the word of Life: 1 Timothy 3.15.
Therefore the Church is called (...), The Pillar and ground of Truth.

3. The Lord mercifully promised the people of Jerusalem, that if they would
call upon his Name, they should have Deliverance: Joell the 2. and ult. the
which has resemblance to the Church of Christ amongst the Gentiles; alluding
to that of S. Paul,

There is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian: Romans 10.12, 13.
for he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all, that call upon him.

For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

4. In Jerusalem the Citizens yielded obedience to their Kings: So in like
manner, the Members of Christ's Church being true Believers, Ephesians. 2.19.
are fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God.

And they yield obedience unto Christ their King. Esa. 2.5.


5. In Jerusalem was the Throne of David; as in this Psalm, verse the 5. So in
like manner, in the Church of Christ is the Throne or Scepter of Christ, Rev.
3.7.
figured by the Kingdom of David.

6. Zach. 2.8
The Lord chose Jerusalem above all other places in the world, and tendered the
people therein, even as the apple of his own eye.

So in like manner, the true Members of Christ's Church are a Chosen Generation,
1 Pet. 2.9.
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a Peculiar people, that ye should show
forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his
marvelous light.

Lastly, in Jerusalem the names of the Citizens were enrolled in a Book.

So in like manner, all the true Members of the Church of Christ, Rev. 20.12
have their names written in the book of Life.

S. John had a Revelation of the last Judgment; And he says, I saw the dead,
both great and small stand before God: and the books were opened, and another
book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged of those
things which were written in the books according to their works.

Whereupon we may orthodoxally resolve, and infallibly infer, that whosoever
have not their names written in that Book of Life, must have their portion with
the Devil and his Angels for evermore: as plainly appears in the last verse
of the same Chapter,

And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the
lake of fire.

Lo, thus Beloved you have heard, the near Resemblance, and Typical
Representation between the City of Jerusalem, and the Church of Christ.

Now let us come to the Reasons of the Observation.

warfare in this world, and therefore she is called the Church Militant,
because she is daily fighting against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil; yea
she has many enemies that come from Satan's Camp very fiercely against her.

Who like Tyrants by violence and force of strength, like Sophisters by
subtilty and corruption of doctrine, like Hypocrites by dissembling and
superstition, and like Epicures by lewdness of life, and filthiness of
conversation, do daily assault and sight against the Church of Christ.

Lo these, like cunning Fowlers, strive daily and hourly for to entrap her;
the Flesh would infect her, the World would deceive her, and the Devil would
destroy her.

And therefore it behooves us with our best endeavors even heartily to pray
unto God for her.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Church, Psalm. 15.4. And how can we better manifest our love untothem, then by
praying for them when they are in distress?

And this duty of Love to the Members of Gods Church, is both Commanded,
Commended, Approved, and Rewarded in the holy Scriptures.

It is

1. Commanded. 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe in
the name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
Commandment.

2. Commended, 1 Cor. 13. ult. Now abides Faith, Hope and Love, even these
three; but the chiefest of these is Love.

3. Approved. Apoc. 2.19. The Blessed Spirit of God spoke to S. John, to say to
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, I know thy Works and thy Love; meaning
toward the Members of Gods Church.

4. Rewarded. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your
work, and labor of love which ye showed toward his name, in that ye have
ministered unto the Saints, and yet minister.

Yea beloved, and were it so, that the love to the Members of Gods Church were
neither Commanded, Commended, Approved, nor Rewarded.

Yet notwithstanding, if thou have received an Influence of Grace from Heaven,
the sparks of Grace will so kindle in thy soul, that thy praying for the
Church here upon earth will be inevitable.

So that I may say of such a one, as the Prophet Jeremy once spoke of himself
in another case, when Pashur had put him into Prison for denouncing Gods
Judgments against Jerusalem: Jer. 20.9. Then I said, I will not make mention
of him, nor speak any more in his name; But his word was in my heart as a
burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could
not stay.

So in like manner, if thou have grace in thy heart, (the Church of God being
in distress) thou will be weary with forbearing to pray for the Peace of the
Church.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Church is environed with many Enemies, yea, sometimes ( David-like) enclosed
with fat Bulls of Bashan on every side; even Cruel Tyrants, who seek her
Subversion.

Yea, She is like a Lilly amongst the Thorns, Cant. 2.2. She is often beset
with dangerous and troublesome Thrones, viz. hurtful, graceless and pestilent
Spirited persons, who prick and wound the Lillies in their goods, names,
liberties, yea, and lives also.

And thus it has been, even from the beginning, for when there were but two
men borne into the World, the one was a Lilly, and the other a Thorn, but the
Thorn suppressed and perished the Lilly, viz. Genesis 4.8.
Caine destroyed his Brother Abel.

Yea, the most beautiful Lilly that ever saw the light of the sun, Christ
Jesus our blessed Savior, was so fiercely and violently beset with Thorns, as
that all his love and purity, meekness and innocence could not keep them from
him; but they violently thrust at him, pricked him to the heart, and wounded
him to the death.

And lo, thus will it be with the poor Members of his Church until the last
Judgment day; when as both Lillies and Thorns must appear before Christ in
the Clouds to receive according to their deeds. Mat. 25.


And then shall the persecuted Lillies be received into Heaven, and the
pernicious Thorns be cast as Fuel into the fire of Hell.

So that this persecuted condition of the Church pathetically implores us to
pray for her Peace.

O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Church is Seated in Bochim, being a place of Weeping, she now lives in a Vale
of misery and Vallie of tears, and must be Contented so long as she lives
upon the face of the Earth, to sit down like a desolate widow, Psalm. 137.2
and hang her harpes upon the Willowes, and make her Expressions in mournful
Elegies and Doleful Ditties, until her Husband returns unto her.

Alas, woe and alas may we of this English Nation (at this day) deploringly
complain, that the little Bark of Christ is now almost sunk under Water; She
is tossed up and down, to and fro, hither and thither, in the troublesome Seas
of this turbulent Age: Rabshakeh raileth, Haman plotteth, Balack bribeth,
Balaam curses, the Enemy rages, and the Devil roareth; and all against the
innocent Doves in the little Bark of Christ, as they are sailing hopefully
toward their resting Haven of happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven.

So that Peter-like in the eye of humane sense and reason, they are in the way
of perishing, did not the hand of Gods Providence preservingly support them.

She was prefigured in Noah's Arc floating upon the Waters, and does now
resemble a little Ship in the vast Ocean, which sometimes is carried along
quietly with a calm and prosperous Gale, but suddenly the boisterous winds
arising, and the unresistible Surges, Billows and Waves swelling, the Seas
become rough and troublesome, and she is in Danger, and necessarily stands in
need of our Prayers: And therefore let us not cease to Pray for her Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

And thus do I pass from the Reasons of the Observation unto the Application.

The Uses whereof are briefly Five, viz.

1. Use of Terror. 2. Use of Instruction. 3. Use of Reprehension. 4. Use of
Consolation. 5. Use of Exhortation.
Terror.
Church of Christ. Listen a while I pray you to those heavy (though just)
Judgments of God, that have befallen the bloody Persecutors of his Church.

Pharaoh Oppressed the poor People of Israel in the Land of Egypt and when
they had leave to depart the Land, Exodus 14.28.
yet he pursued them with a purpose to destroy them: But in the end, his
intention was frustrate, and both himself, and all his Hoaste perished in the
Sea.

Haman, Hest. 3.9.
upon the promise of Ten thousand talents of Silver, procured a Decree from
King Ahashuerosh, to kill and destroy all the Jews, both old and young, men,
women and children that were in all the Kings Provinces in one day: But his
Design was blasted, Hest. 7.10.
and in the end himself hanged upon the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai.

Senacherib, the King of Ashur, sent Rabshakey to rail upon the living God,
and to discourage his Army; but the Birth of his Project proved abortive,
insomuch that the Angel of the Lord in one night slew in the Camp of Ashur,
Esa. 37.36
an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and in the morning, behold they were
all dead corpses.

Yea, and after that, Senacherib himself was slain by two of his own Sons,
Adramelech and Sharezer as he was worshipping his Idol God Nisroch in the
Temple.

Antiochus the son of Demetrius, after he had chased Tryphon from the
Kingdom of Asia, and broken the league which he had made with the Jews, gave
himself wholly to work mischief against them.

Then violently he set upon Jerusalem, and took it by force, Commanding his
Soldiers to destroy those that were therein, insomuch that within the space of
three whole days there was such a bloody massacre both of old and young, men,
women, and children, that there were destroyed fourscore thousand of the
Jews, 2 Mac. 5.

After this was done, this bloody Tyrant was put to flight by the Inhabitants
of Persepolis a City of Persia, going about to rob their Temple of their
Treasures.

Then furiously he threatened the people of the Jews, saying, I will make
Jerusalem a common burying place of the Jews when I come thither.

But the Lord Almighty the God of Israel, smote him with an incurable and
invisible plague: for as soon as he had spoken these words, a pain of the
bowels, that was remediless came upon him, and sore torments of the inner
parts.

So that the worms came out of his body in abundance: and whiles he was alive,
his flesh fell off for pain and torment, and all his Army was grieved at his
smell.

Lo thus, the Murderer and Blasphemer suffered most grievously, and as he had
entreated other men, so he dyed a most miserable death in a strange Country,
among the Mountains, 2 Mac. 9.

Nero, that bloody Tyrant, being the first Emperor that persecuted the Church
of Christ, exposed the poor Christians to the fury of rude, barbarous, and
merciless men.

Hereupon the poor Innocents were apprehended, and some of them clad with
skins of wild beasts, were torn in pieces by dogs.

And others cast one upon another, until they became great heaps, after the
manner of Bone-fires, and then fire put to them, and their bones burning served
for light in the night, in the stead of Torches.

But at the last this wicked wretch, the causer of all that cruelty exercised
upon the poor Christians, seeing himself in danger to be murdered, by one
appointed for that purpose, (as a just reward for his horrible, unjust, and
inhumane dealing) hastened his own death by killing himself, as Cornelius
Tacitus reports, Lib. 5.

We read in History of one Cyrillus a Deacon of Heliopolis, situate near to
Lybanus, who lived under the Empire of Julian the Apostate, and came to a
miserable end.

For after Constantine was deceased, by whose authority the holy Martyr had
broken down many of their Images and Idols, the abominable Idolaters did not
only murder him, but also devoured his liver with bread, as if it had been
the sweetest morsel of meat in the world.

But the all-seeing eye of Almighty God beholding their villainy, his revengfull
rod bruised them to pieces.

For their teeth wherewith they chewed that unnatural food fell out of all
their heads; and their tongues wherewith they tasted it, rotted and consumed to
nothing; and lastly, their eyes which beheld it, failed them, and they became
all blind.

Lo thus were they all served, bearing justly the marks of Gods indignation,
for so horrible, inhumane and unnatural Cruelty, as Theodoret reports, lib.
3. chap. 7.

Valerian the Emperor, was a deadly Enemy to the professors of Religion, and
very terribly persecuted them in his Dominions.

But shortly after, himself was taken prisoner in the Persian Wars, being
Threescore and ten years of age, and was made a slave to his Conqueror all
the rest of his life.

And whose condition was so miserable, that Sapor, the King of Persia, used his
back as a block or stirrup to mount upon his Horse, and at the last, to make up
the full number of his miseries, he caused his Skin to be taken from his
Flesh, whilst he was alive, and then poudred him with salt, as Josephus
reports, in his Ecclesiastical History. Book 7. Chap. 30.

The cruel, merciless, and hard-hearted Jews, did persecute even unto the
death, the innocent Lamb of God, who is the Lord of life, our Blessed Savior
Christ Jesus.

But did they escape Punishment? Verily no, for the avenging hand of the
Just-punishing, sinne-revenging God, followed after them, overtooke them and
seized upon them to their Destruction.

For they were driven up and down, from place to place in diverse Countries by
the Deputies:

And after that, there were slain of them at Cesaria in one day Twenty
thousand:

At Alexandria another time Fiftythousand.

At Zabulon and Joppa Eight thousand and Four hundred, besides the burning of
both the Towns:

At Damascus Ten thousand had their throats cut:

And as for the Jews that were in Jerusalem, they were pinched with so sore a
famine, as that they did eat the excrements of Oxen; and many women were
constrained to boil and to eat their own Children.

And in that great extremity many thinking to save their lives by flying to the
Enemy; were taken and slit in pieces, in hope to find gold and silver in their
bowels:

And at the last the whole City was taken by force and the holy Temple consumed
by fire.

And this in general was the miserable issue of that lamentable War: during
which time, Fourscore and seventeene thousand Jews were taken Prisoners, and
Eleven hundred thousand slain.

Some of the Prisoners were carried reproachfully into Rome;

Others were murdered at their Conquerours wills;

Some were torn in pieces and devoured of wild Beasts:

Others were constrained to march in Troops against their Fellows, and kill
one another as if they had been Enemies.

And the Remnant of that wretched people which remained alive, after the mighty
tempest of Gods Wrath was past, were dispersed and scattered abroad throughout
all Nations under Heaven:

So that their condition (at this day) is so vile and contemptible, as that no
Nation under Heaven is half so miserable: which is a manifest evidence of Gods
vengeance still abiding upon them. -- As Josephus reports in his books of
the Jewish Wars.

And here I might also be very copious in the expressions of the remarkable
Destructions of Agag. Goliath. Benhadad. The Moabites and Ammonites. Nicanor.
Herod-Agrippa. Domitian. Trajan. Hadrian. Antonius. Severus. Decius. Aurelian.
Dioclesian. Maximinus. Maxcentius. Licinius. Arnolphus. Smaragdus. Mamucha,
etc. Who were destroyed for persecuting the Church of Christ.

Yea beloved, and many more terrible examples of Gods fearful Judgments (that
fell upon diverse other bloody Persecutors of Gods Church) I could here recite,
but for brevity sake I pass them over.

Oh then (at the consideration of this that has been spoken) let all the
bloody Persecutors of Gods Church tremble and desist from so doing, lest the
Lord come suddenly as a swift witness against them, and speedily be avenged of
them, to the ruin of their bodies in this world, and the utter destruction
both of bodies and souls in the world to come.

And let them also labor to the uttermost of their power to make up the Ruins
of the Church of Christ, and do their best endeavors for her, by praying for
her Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Instruction.
Church to arm her self for Troubles, Crosses, and Afflictions, so long as
she remains here upon the face of the Earth.

For as the comfortable sunshine Days, and the uncomfortable darksome Nights,
(in the order of Nature) follow each other: So in like manner, in the
Administration of the Church of Christ, there is a continual Intercourse
amongst the Members of Christ Church, between Peace and Persecution.

To live continually in Jollity, and be always free from Crosses, is one of
the Worlds pleasing Cognizances of Satan's Imps; for being always without
Chastisements, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
whereof all Gods Children are Partakers, we are Bastards and not Sons.

Beloved, There is a strict Dependence, near Relation, and close Connection
betwixt Christianity and the Cross; they are Concommitants, Individuals, and
inseparable Companions.

This is an infallible Aphorism of Divine Observation under the Kingdom of
Christ, and an indubitable Axiom of Christ's Gospel, Providence, the which
proceeds from the good pleasure and providence of God, in the dispensation of
things under the Gospel.

Our blessed Savior told his Disciples, and in them every true Member of his
Church, In the world ye shall have affliction, Ioh. 16.33. And it was also the
general Proclamation of Christ to the whole World, Mat. 16.24
(...), If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
(...), his Cross and follow me.

The which Cross, although to unregenerate men, in their Natural Condition,
it be tedious and burdensome; yet notwithstanding, to the faithful Members of
Christ's Church, they making a right use thereof, it will be helpful and
profitable.

As for example, Holy David was so greatly oppressed with troubles, as that he
complained in the anxiety of his soul, The snares of death compassed me round
about, Psalm. 116.3
and the pains of Hell gate hold upon me.

What Adversaries are more horrible, and Enemies can be more terrible, then
Death, and Hell? And yet notwithstanding, he making a snactified use thereof,
they wrought in him most blessed and happy Effects, the which he found
experimentally in himself; and therefore freely confesses, Before I was
afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy word, Psalm. 119.67. And Verse the
71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted: that I may learn thy
Statutes.

And the Lord says (of the Israelites) by his Prophet Hosea, Hos. 5.15.
In their affliction they will seek me diligently. And the Prophet Isaiah,
speaking of the Faithful in affliction, says, Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee: Esa. 26.16.
they powered out a prayer when thy chastning was upon them. So that
Afflictions, being Gods Rods, are his Childrens Remembrancers: yea, Troubles
make many Returners, and Seekers to God, who formerly have been Revolters and
Straglers from him: as were the Israelites, Manasseh, the Prodigal Son, and
diverse others. Yea beloved, and to be continually without Crosses, Troubles,
and Afflictions, men may justly suspect themselves, to be rather Members of the
Devils Church Malignant; than of Christ's Church Militant.

St. Ambrose, that godly, devout, and religious Bishop, traveling (with some
others) toward Rome, went to a Rich-mans house, resolving to lodge and remain
there till the next morning; And after some short discourse, he demanded of the
man of the house, how it went with him, and in what case he stood concerning
his present condition for the things of this Life? Unto which the Rich-man
replied; Sir, my condition has ever been happy and fortunate, I never tasted
any kind of Adversity, I never had any sickness or loss of goods, all things
have hitherto been with me, even according to my hearts desire. When Saint
Ambrose heard this, he said unto them that were with him, Eamus hinc, nam Deus
non est hic. Let us go from hence, for God is not in this place. And
immediately after they were departed from the Richmans house, the Earth
suddenly opened her mouth, and swallowed up the Man, together with his house,
and all that he had. Intimating thereby to the World, that God is not there (in
mercy) present, where the Cross is continually absent.

Hence then, Let all the Faithful Members of Christ's Church, account it as an
indubitable Aphorism of infallible Truth, believe it as an Orthodoxall Article
of their Christian Faith, and hold it as an undeniable Maxim in Divinity; that
as the Children of Israel went through many Troubles, before they could come to
the Earthly Canaan; which was a Type of the Faithfuls Passage from Earth to
Heaven: So in like manner, the Children of God must pass through many
Afflictions, before they can come to the Heavenly Jerusalem.

St. Paul desired to know nothing (amongst his Corinthians) but Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 2.2
and him Crucified. And he also rejoiced in nothing so much, as in the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ; whereby the World was crucified to himself, and
himself unto the World, Gal. 6.14. He also expresses to the World, that no
man is Crowned, except he fight lawfully, (...), 2 Timothy 2.5. And also
confesses of himself, I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal.
6.17. The lawful and valiant fighting of earthly Soldiers, for their King,
Country, and Religion greatly reflecteth upon them with Credit, and exceedingly
redounded to their Honor: and they also account those Wounds that are given to
their Bodies in Skirmish, as Marks of their Magnanimity, Cognizances of their
Courage, and Characters of their Valor; intimating thereby to the World, for
whom they have fought, how they have suffered, and who they are.

Now for Application of this to our selves: Heaven is appointed for none but
only Spiritual Conquerours, viz. the valiant fighting Members of the Church
of Christ, against their Souls Adversaries surprising, subduing and conquering
all their spiritual Enemies: For they wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against Principalities, Ephesians. 6.12.
against Powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this World, against
spiritual wickedness in high Places. So that, of necessity they must be
Fighters, for without a Fight there can be no Conquest, and without a Conquest
there will be no Crown: And therefore they must not only be Fighting
Soldiers, but also Conquerours upon Earth, before they can be Inheritors of
Heaven.

For a Man to be a Christian, and not a spiritual Soldier, is to falsify his
promise at the Font of Baptism.

For a Man to be a Christian, and a spiritual Soldier, and not to fight under
Christ's Banner, both manfully and faithfully for Christ, is the Cognizance of a
pusilanimous spirited Soldier, and Badge of an Hypocrite.

For a Man to be a Christian, and a spiritual Soldier, and to fight for
Christ, and not to Conquer, is to lose the Reward promised to Conquerours.

But to be a Christian, a spiritual Soldier, a Fighter for Christ, and a
Conqueror of all his own spiritual Enemies, Lo, that Man, and only he,
shall be a Partaker of the rich Reward promised, even the full fruition of the
heavenly Inheritance.

And therefore, whosoever thou art, that desire to be a true Member of
Christ's Militant Church, thou must resolve with thy self, to live the life of
a Christian, to a be a spiritual Soldier, a Fighter for Christ, and also a
Conqueror.

Hence then we may infallibly collect, that none shall be crowned hereafter in
Heaven, but only those that (in some measure) first endure a spiritual Fight
here upon Earth; that so they may become crucified Christians, and thereby made
conformable to Christ their Head: Phil. 3 10.
The which Conformity is the greatest Honor, that this World can afford to the
Sons of Mortals.

And to such spiritual Conquerours, Christ Jesus himself has made a large
promise, even of no less Reward then Eternal Life. He that overcommeth shall
be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book
of life, Apoc. 3.5. And ver. 21. To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
in his Throne. And, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life, Apoc. 2.10. and Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the Lord has promised to them that love him. And what Fight is it that we
should not willingly undergo, for to inherit Eternal Life? And herein let
Christ Jesus himself be our President, Who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right
hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2.

Oh, what a comfortable and joyful day will that be to thy immortal and
precious Soul, when stepping forth of her earthly Prison, and speedily
conducted by the blessed Angels to the Tabernacle of Heaven, she shall
rejoycingly be there received, by the honorable Companies of that heavenly
Consistory, viz. with all those blessed Spirits mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, viz. Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Principalities,
Dominations, Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims: also with the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Martyrs, Innocents, Confessors, and Saints of God; together with the
blessed Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ! all which shall then greatly
triumph and exceedingly rejoice, at her Coronation and Glorification.

Yea, and far more Happiness she shall enjoy than all this, viz. the
Knowledge of the invisible Nature of the most blessed Trinity. The All glorious
and Beatificall VISION, the sight of God which makes us happy: of which St.
Augustine says, Haec sold est summum bonum nostrum. This SIGHT of God is our
only and chiefest Happiness, in which consists the Sovereign Good and Life
of the Soul: which no mortal Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, neither
has it entered into the Heart of Man. The which SIGHT of God, is the full
Beatitude, and total Glorification of Man. Lo, this is the Happiness, which
the Soul of a Christian, Spiritual, Fighting, Conquering, Soldier, shall for
ever enjoy.

Where she shall sing Hallelujah, Praise, Rev. 5.13.
and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for evermore.

freedom from them, or Deliverance out of them?

Jesus Christ, as a Sympathzing Brother of thy sorrows, murmur not thereat,
but acknowledge God to be righteous, and that thou suffer justly for thy
sins; and be not sorrowful because thou suffer, but for the Cause of thy
suffering which are thy sins which thou have committed. According to that
complaining Querie of the Prophet Jeremiah, Wherefore is the living man
sorrowful? man suffers for his sin, Lam. 3.39. And also labor for to live
by Faith, and not by Sense, For the Just shall live by his faith, Hab. 2.4.
Ever being mindful of, and also constantly depending upon the Providentiall
name of God, amongst the Hebrews, (...) which denotes unto us, the special
Prodience of God toward his children in all their distresses: resolving also
constantly in thine own Soul without wavering, that whether longer
continuance of Life, or speedier seizing upon by Death shall befall thee; yet
notwithstanding, according to that comfortable Expression of the Apostle, All
things work together for good, to them that love God, Romans 8.28.

The continual Consideration hereof, should serve as a spiritual Antidote to
preserve thy afflicted languishing Soul (for ever) from Despair. And God
Almighty, who is the only Physician both of Soul and Body, and can (at his
pleasure) apply a Remedy to every Malady, according to each particular Persons
several wants and necessities; give a speedy, comfortable, helpful, healing
Blessing, to the divine Operation thereof within thee.

Of which my self can speak both comfortably and experimentally, who being
fast locked in Prison (for my Kingly Fidelity) with diverse others of the
ministerial Function, and having not any corporal Sustenance allowed us for
above forty days together, wherewith to preserve our languishing natural
Lives, they all ended their days in the same Prison; and shortly after all
their Deaths, my Body was from Prison enlarged, and Life from Death (under God)
thereby preserved.

Lo, thus far the special Providence of God extended unto me, when I was
wel-nigh brought to the Period of my Life, and almost cast into the cruel
jaws of devouring Death: Blessed be the God of my Life and Liberty (for it)
for ever.

Beloved, a Valiant and Courageous hearted Soldier, will not be discouraged at
the roaring of Cannons, the clashing of Arms, the clattering of Weapons, or
the hideous noise of furious Enemies coming siercely upon him, although that
military Service be never so sharp or dangerous unto him; because he expects to
receive some rich Booty to himself when the Battle is ended: so in like
manner, a true crucified Christian, who has the blessed Spirit of God in him,
(which is the only Spirit of all true Valor and Courage) will not be daunted
or dismayed, at the coming on of Troubles, Crosses, or Afflictions, how great
or many soever they be, because he is not left to himself alone, as a Soldier
in the field, when all his pusilanimous spirited Fellow Soldiers have deserted
the Service and forsaken him; but has the All-powerfull Lord of Heaven with
him, compassing him about with his special Providence, as a never-failing
Shield, and defensive Buckler to preserve him from perishing; only bringing
him into the Field, that so he may fight against his Enemies, and thereby have
the great Glory and rich Reward, of a magnanimous spirited and valiant
Conqueror.

In earnall Judgment, and the fleshly Eye of humane sense and reason, the rich
Gluttons case was desirable, Luke 16.
and poor Lazarus condition despicable: but the poor Man was received to Mercy,
and the rich Man rejected to Judgment.

And herein (beloved) we may behold, the great, gross, and palpable Error, of
the carnal men's Judgment of this World, who conceive their chiefest
Happiness consists in creature Comforts, and esteem it their greatest
Delight to swim in the Confluence of all outward good things, and account it
their principal Felicity to be in the present possession of outward Pomp, and
earthly Prosperity. Lo, thus blind, erroneous, and ignorant, are
carnall-minded men, in their natural Condition.

But the Children of God, to whom the heavenly light of Truth has appeared,
who have been often exercised in Troubles, Crosses, and Afflictions, being
crucified Christians, living unto God, and not to themselves, are of a contrary
Judgment; knowing assuredly, that Afflictions are necessary physical Potions
for their Souls, to purge out their sinful Corruptions, to try and exercise
their Faith, and to refine their Souls, whereby they may be the fitter
Receptacles for the Spirit of God.

Although the Heaven of Heavens be exceeding High, yet notwithstanding, the
Gate thereof is very Low, and none but humble hearted and lowly spirited
Persons, (being crucified Christians) shall enter therein.

Beloved, we may not think to go to Heaven in beds of Down, we must (in this
Vale of misery) pass through an earthly Purgatory, I mean the Afflictions of
this Life, before we can come to the heavenly Paradise, viz. the Joys of the
Life to come. Yea, we must go by the Suburbs and Gates of Hell, before we can
come to the City of the new Jerusalem, and joys of Heaven.

Every true Member of Christ's Church is a crucified Christian, and therefore
not only incident to suffering, but also strict in his Conversation; for
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it, Mat. 7.14. None must live the life eternal hereafter in the
joys of Heaven, but only those that first Crucify their carnal Corruptions,
and mortify their sinful Affections here upon Earth. We must live in the
Spirit and not in the flesh, For He that sows to his flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit
reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. And hence is that of S. Paul to his
Colossians, Mortify therefore your Members which are on the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is idolatry. Col. 3.5, 6.
For the which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the Children of
disobedience.

The Members of Christ's Church publicly promised (by their Sureties) at their
Baptism, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, and constantly believe Gods
holy Word, and obediently keep his Commandments: and were incorporated into
Christ's Church, to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, to be faithful
Soldiers for Christ their Savior, and manfully to fight under his Banner,
against Sin, the World, and the Devil: and the Lord expects the constant
spiritual Performance, of this their public Promise, during the troublesome
time of their earthly Pilgrimage.

And how shall the Valor of Soldiers be evidenced to the World, who keep
themselves continually in their Quarters, and never go upon service; who lie
always in the Camp, and never come into the Field?

But, when once Troubles do arise, and the Enemy draws nigh, and Christ's
Soldiers (by the sound of Drums and Trumpets) are called from their Quarters,
and they march forwards and meet their Enemies in the face; Lo then, Abraham's
Faith, David's Piety, Vriahs Constancy, Jobs Patience, Jonathans Love, Jehues
Zeal, Gideons Valor, and Paul's Courage will appear; who like valiant
spirited, and heroical hearted Soldiers will zealously strive, and
unanimously desire, (for the Glory of God, the Honor of their King, the Peace,
Good, and Welfare of their Country) to be placed in the Front of the Battle.

So in like manner, when Troubles seize upon the Souls of the Members of
Christ's Church, then the Graces of Gods blessed Spirit within them (as occasion
is offered) will be operative and working; yea, the more excellent in Graces,
the more eminent in Affflictions: and thereby they are distinguished from the
Soldiers of Satan.

The Earth (of it self) will bring forth little else but briers and weeds if
it be not tilled, and Vines will wax wild if they be not pruned: Even so, the
corrupt and sinful Affections of our graceless and rebellious Hearts, like
pernicious Briers and noisome Weeds, would quickly over-runne, not only all
the Parts and Members of our Bodies, but also all the Powers and Faculties of
our Souls, if our Gracious God by his tender Care over us, loving
Chastisements upon us, and powerful working of his blessed Spirit in us,
should not effectually Purge, Dress, and Manure us.

And the superfluous Branches of our natural Corruptions would spread so far
abroad within us, as everlastingly to destroy us; if the Lord by sharp
sanctified Afflictions should not prune them, and by his loving fatherly
Corrections cut them off.

Therefore, let the Church of Christ be content to suffer Afflictions here upon
Earth, and also be glad to bear the yoke in her youth. Lam. 3.27


The present Condition of Christ's Church Militant in her Warfare, (at this day
in our Land) resembles the case of Judah.

Manasseth, Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseth: and they both shall be against
Judah.

Loc, this is the Sting of the Churches Crosses, and unto her it is inevitable.

For it was the portion of Christ her Head, and shall the Members expect to
escape?

It was the Lot of her Master, and shall the Servants think to fare better?

It was the condition of the Saints in the Old Testament, and also of the
Apostles in the New.

Of the Saints in the Old, Abraham banished both from his Country and kindred;
Jacob lay in the fields; Joseph in the prison; David hunted as a Partridge
upon the mountains; Elijah full of fear through Jezabels bloody Tyranny,
desired the Lord to take away his life from him; Job scraped himself with a
potsherd upon the dunghill; Jeremy put into the dungeon; The three Children
into the fiery Furnace; Daniell cast into the den of Lions; And Susanna,
brought almost to the place of her execution.

Yea, the Church her self complains of her suffering condition.

O Lord, behold mine affliction: Lam. 1.9.
for the enemy is proud.

And verse the 12. Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by this way? behold and
see, if there be any sorrow (...) like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

The Apostle rehearses a Catalogue of the Saints sufferings that were before
Christ's Incarnation.

They were tried by mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover by bonds and
imprisonment.

They were stoned, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
they were hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword,
they wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented.

Whom the world was not worthy of: they wandered in wildernesses, and
mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth.

Lo, these were the sufferings of the Saints in the Old Testament.

And as for the Saints in the New, Poor Lazarus lay in a woeful condition at
the rich Gluttons gate, but there was found no mortal heart to sorrow for him,
nor eye to pity him, nor hand to relieve him.

And none of Christ's Apostles dyed a natural death but only S. John, and he
was banished by the Emperor Domitian to the I Will Patmos, and also put into a
Tun of hot oil at Rome; as both Tertull. and S. Jerome report.

So that, although with the rest he suffered not an immature death; yet
notwithstanding, he also tasted deep of his Masters Cup: of which every one
must be contented to drink, that is a true Member of the Church of Christ.

Beloved, this is the Lords usual dealing toward all the true Members of his
Church, thereby to make them Crucified Christians, that so they might be like
unto Christ their Captain, who is called by the Prophet (...) a Man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief. Esa. 53.3.


And it was Saint Paul's general rule to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.12.
(...). All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

Lo, this truth Paul and Barnabas preached at Lystra, Iconium, and Antiochia,
and S. Luke reports it with an Oportet, signifying the necessity of suffering,
Act. 14.22
We must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God.

Shall we hope to live with Christ in the Church Triumphant, and not be content
to die with him in the Church Militant?

Would we gladly reign with Christ there, and not willingly first suffer with
him here?

Let us not deceive our selves; None shall have tears wiped from their eyes in
Heaven, but those that have first shed them upon the Earth.

So that no perplexity, no felicity; no misery, no glory; no Cross, no Crown.

For our happiness is Conditional, Si sustinemus, conregnabimus.

If we suffer with Christ (meaning) in Affliction, we shall also reign with
him (that is) in glory. 2 Timothy 2.

Therefore let all the true Members of Christ's Church arm themselves for
Troubles, so long as they live upon the face of the Earth, Amos 6.6.
and never forget the afflictions of Joseph, but mutually pray one for another.

O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Reprehension.
Peace. And for brevitie sake I will but only Hint at them: and they are of
two sorts; 1. Those that help her not. 2. Those that hurt her.


So that the Church has both Omissive and Commissive Enemies:

Omissive, neglecting to help her: and Commissive, endeavoring to hurt her.

1. Those that help her not.

Whosoever is not for her, is against her; and whosoever gathers not with
her, Mat. 12.30.
scatters abroad.

And they are of two sorts.

1. Ministers.

2. Lay-persons.

1. Ministers, who have Pastoral Charges in the Church of Christ, and do not
feed those flocks that are committed to their Charge.

And they are of two sorts.

1. Those that are Ignorant, and cannot feed them.

2. Those that are Idle, and will not feed them.

The Ignorant that cannot, are called reproachfully dumb dogs. Isay 56.10. and
the Idle that will not, must be accountable for the blood of that part of their
flock that perish through their defect. Ezech. 33.6.

2. Lay-persons, and they are of three sorts.

1. Those that pray not at all, either for themselves, or for the Church.

Such stupefied persons being both senseless and careless of their own and
others conditions, though they dwell amongst Christians, yet (to their shame be
it spoken) they live like Heathens, Their foolish hearts are full of darkness,
Romans 1.21. They live as strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance
that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.18. and are
as without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12.

2. Those, that if they pray at all, pray but only for themselves, utterly
neglecting the Church, never laying to heart the afflictions of Joseph. Amos
6.6.

3. Those, that if they pray for the Churches Peace, they perform that great
and weighty duty but lightly and perfunctorily: as not being earnest and
zealous in the performance thereof.

Yea, give me leave I humbly pray you, to demand of you all here present
assembled before me, who is there amongst you, that in the sincerity of his
heart can stand forth and say, when once he did humble himself upon the bended
knees of his soul unto God, and sigh, and groan, and pray, and shed tears
flowing from a penitent heart on the Churches behalf?

Oh how few there are that can truly say, when once they did heartily humble
themselves unto God for the good of the Church!

I will not censure so uncharitably of that number (as if there be any) to say
of that party he is a Phoenix: But I fear I may too truly say of them, they are
black Swans, even rare Birds amongst us.

Beloved, if they be true Members of her, it cannot be, but they must
Sympathizingly suffer with her, and consequently pray unto God for her.

And therefore they come justly under the lash of Reprehension that are
defective herein.

2. Those that hurt her.

And they are also of three sorts:

1. Open profane persons who revile her, by casting obloquies and reproaches
against her: as Potiphars wife to Joseph, Shimei to David, and Rabshakeh to
Hezekiah.

Let all such know, that whosoever revileth or reproacheth the true Members of
Christ's Church, Christ takes it as done unto himself.

He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me: Luke
10.16
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

2. Those that live in the bosom of the Church, and make a profession of
Religion, and yet are vicious in their Conversations.

Those are cruel Enemies to the Church of Christ, they make the Enemies of God
to blaspheme, cause the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, scandalize the
Gospel of Christ, and are unto the Church as the Canaanites were to the
Israelites, even thorns in their eyes, and pricks in their sides.

I shall refer all such Hypocrites to that learned Father who reprehensively
says, Oh Hypocrite, if it be a good thing to be good indeed, why will thou not
be that which thou seem to be? And if it be an evil thing to be evil
indeed, why will thou be that which thou would not seem for to be?

My counsel in this case to all such persons shall be, I pray them in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, to consider that God is Omnipresent, and that all
things are naked before him, and they cannot blind the All-seeing Eye of the
Omniscient God, whose eyes are Ten thousand times brighter then the sun,
beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts. Ecclus.
23.19.

The Lord beholds the ends of the world, and sees all that is under heaven.
Job 28.24.

He sees all the imaginations of the thoughts of men's hearts, Genesis 6.5.

He beholds our ways, and tells all our steps, Job 31.4.

And pondereth all our paths, Prove. 5.21.

And there is no thought hid from him. Job 42.2.

The Hebrews say, (...) The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all
the imaginations of thoughts.

And he is called of the Grecians, (...), The Searcher of the heart.

Lo, this truth is acknowledged by holy David, where he says, O Lord, thou
have searched me out, and known me: thou know my downe-sitting, and mine
up-rising: thou understandest my thoughts long before. Psalm. 139.1.

Yea, he knew right well, Jezabels Fast, 1 King. 21.9. Absaloms Vow, 2 Samuel
15.7. and Judas kiss, Mat. 26.49. although their bloody intents, and
mischievous purposes were never so secret: for He beholds, and tries the
very hearts and reins. 1 Samuel 16.7. Psalm. 7.10.

So that he perfectly knows both the true-hearted Nathaniel, John 1.47. and
the falseminded Simon Magus, Act. 8.20.

Yea, the Everlasting Searcher of the hearts, has written the sin of
Hypocrisy (being double iniquity) with a pen of iron, and the point of a
Diamond, Jer. 17.1.

So that the Diabolical sin of Hypocrisy, must (at the last) break forth,
and be detected.

And therefore let them not be deceived, for God cannot be mocked; as they sow,
so shall they reap; their seed-time wherein they sow nothing but the seeds of
wickedness is in this life, and their harvest shall be in the end of this
life, in the land of everlasting darkness: for the Hypocrites portion shall be
in utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 24. ult.

3. Those that are Schismatics, who separate themselves from the Church of
Christ.

Against all such persons of that dangerous Brood, S. Paul gave in one verse, a
Threefold Caveat to his Philippians, (...). Phil. 3.2.

The first, the Apostle terms Dogs.

The Second, Evill-Workers.

And the Third, the Concision.

1. By Dogs, is meant those who bark against the truth of Christ for lucre
sake.

And hence it is, that there is such a Deluge of Errors (at this day) flowing
in the Church, viz. the splendour and glittering show of Balaks gold, which has
not only dimmed, but also blinded the avaricious eyes of the bastard brood of
corrupt-hearted Balaams, and (against the light of their knowledge) turned
their Consciences into covetousness, answerable to that true saying of Virgil
the Heathen Poet; O sacra auri fames, quid non mortalia pectora cogis? O cursed
desire of gold, what mischief is it, but (for the love of thee) thou forcest
man to attempt it? Whereby they are not only fitted to work their own
sinful ends by sinister means, but also eagerly exercised (as every
opportunity is offered) in speaking both privately and publicly, those things
(though never so pernicious to the souls of their Auditors) that shall conduce
to their worldly Advantage, and help to their expected and greedy-wished-for
wages, for the satisfying of their unlimited and avaricious desires: Who serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies; whose glory will turn to their
shame, minding (as they do) nothing but earthly things. Phil. 3.19.


The approach of which Medusa's head (being Demas-like avariciously affected)
in this declining Age of the World, 2 Timothy 4.10
wherein the people are as desirous of Novelty, as subject to Discontent; the
world has suffered a fearful and fatal Metamorphosis, and justly may wonder
to find her self so great and gross a Changeling: but politic Hypocrisy
accounting Gain to be Godliness, is a building which has but a lubricall,
sandy, and slippery foundation: and therefore with terror to her cooperating
Agents, and comfort to her over-oppressed Patients, she cannot promise to her
self, and her viperous Brood, any certainty of long continuance, although her
deceitful and pestilent Agents are never so Active.

The which pernicious practice of those pragmaticall and pestilent Impostors,
may not unfitly allude, to those late, upstart, factious, pedanticall
Novelists, who pretend to the world, they are sufficiently gifted to be
Teachers of others, and that they also are the only, able, Orthodox, and
powerful Preachers of these latter Times; and yet they are not able to read
the Texts of the Old and New Testaments, in those Languages wherein God by his
Prophets and Apostles (Originally) spoke to his Church; wherein is contained
the infallible Demonstration of the holy Scriptures.

Such ignorant Pedants (not knowing what they speak, or whereof they affirm)
must of necessity build their Christian Faith (if they have any) upon the
judgments and opinions of other men; as not being able themselves for to
discern between Truth and Error. 1 Cor. 2.14.

And yet notwithstanding, they often speak swelling words, being vainly puffed
up with their fleshly minds.

Who partly out of their Pride, or Malice, or Covetousness, or Ignorance, or
some other as great or greater sins moving them, teach desperately erroneous
Doctrines, to corrupt the minds of their itching-ear'd-hearers, and divulge the
brainsick devices of male-contented factious persons, which only tickle their
all-hearing Auditors itching ears, but work no saving grace in their hearts;
mixing with the limpid and pure waters of Life, the putrified dregs, and
polluted, schismatic, and foul corruptions, of their own filthy and
deceitful factions: turning the heavenly sweetness of Truths infallible and
plain direction, into the hellish bitterness of heretical expressions, and
erroneous Confusion.

Thereby causing their seduced Proselites to wander from the direct and true
paths of Gods Commandments, leading to Heaven and Salvation; into the devious
and bypath of cursed sin, and infectious wickedness; walking blindly in
the broad way leading to the wide gate, going down to the dark and
uncomfortable lodgings of Death, Isa. 30. ult.
and terrible Tophet of Perdition.

2. By Evill-workers, those that make their whole life a trade of sinning:
whose sole practice is to do nothing but evil; and are also ever plotting
mischief against the Church of Christ.

As was the practice of Cain against Abel, Genesis 4. Esau against Jacob. Genesis 27.
Pharaoh against the Israelites. Exodus 14. Saul against David, 1 Samuel 23.
Benh^dad against Jehoshaphat, 1 King. 22. Senacherib against Hezekiah, 2 King.
19. Haman against the Jews, Esther 3. The Jews against our blessed Savior
Christ Jesus, Mat. 26. Also Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Anthony,
Dioclesian, and diverse other malignant Emperors, against the zealous and
religious Christians, in the tender Ages of the Christian Church.

Lo thus, there has been (even from the beginning) inveterate hatred in the
Church Malignant, against the Church Militant: the which Malignity, even as a
Gangrene or Leprosy, has pernitiously spread it self, so far abroad into the
world, as that we of this English Nation may experimentally (at this day) with
sadness of spirit, and great grief of heart, justly complain of the bitter
fruits thereof; the which has unhappily produced by the violence of the
enraged Sword, the late great destruction that has been in our Land, and the
present afflicting Distractions that still remain amongst us.

Such persons are as opposite to the true Members of Christ's Church, as Light
is to Darkness, Heaven to Hell, and God to Satan.

Yea, that cursed Brood of venomous Vipers, having their hearts set on fire of
Hell, are both maliciously minded, and bloodily affected, whose wisdom is
earthly, sensual, and devilish; Lam. 3.15.
exercising their power to the uttermost against the true Members of the Church
of Christ; nothing regarding to contemn the approved Truth, and Peace of the
Church.

3. By Concision, those that make Rents and Divisions in the Church of Christ;
those Separatists that pluck up the pales, and tear up the hedges thereof,
giving liberty thereby to the subtle Foxes to pluck off her grapes, whereby to
strip and speedily starve her, and the wild Boar of the Forest to root her
up, and utterly destroy her.

Such as were those over-selfe-conceited, arrogant, and contemptuous Jews, of
whom the Prophet makes expression, Isa. 65.5. who said, Stand apart, come not
near to me: for I am holier then thou.

But Agur the son of Jakeh, describes the condition of such insolent
spirits: Pro. 30.12
There is (says he) a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet
are not washed from their filthiness.

The which truth will plainly appear unto us, if we look into their
conversations; For we shall find many of them possessed with boiling Malice,
swelling Pride, cruel Oppression, cursed Covetousness, swinish Drunkenness,
beastly Whoredom, abominable and crying sins, lewd and lascivious lives,
filthy Lusts, and fleshly Pleasures:

Who may not unfitly be compared to the Athenians, whom Pantolidas the
Ambassador hearing dispute of Virtue, and being demanded how their speeches
pleased him? He answered. Your talk indeed is good, but this is greatly to be
lamented, that talking so well, ye live so ill.

And so in like manner, may I say of many such Separatists, their words are
commendable, but their works condemnable; their speeches are glorious, but
their lives vicious. Amply expressing (in their vicious lives) that Heathen
man's complaining Accusation against precise and deceitful Epicures,

Qui Curios simulant and Bacchanalia vivunt.

I could willingly wish they might not too truly be termed Pedants, condemning
and rejecting all opinions which they either understand not, or like not:
Supposing with themselves, they have a special point of the Spirit, and know
more then the common sort of people, being filled with an enraged folly,
resolving to reject all opinions and sayings but their own, which they keep
pertinatiously with themselves as Oracles.

And thus like positive and affirmative Dogmatists, they are so wedded to their
own opinions, as that they would have all the world to be ruled by their
opinionated Laws, and subject themselves to the Scepter of their sayings,
although they be never so unconformable and inorthodoxall.

God in mercy to us of this English Nation, prevent our Christian Kingdom from
being involved (by such turbulent Spirits) into a new Chaos of spiritual
Darkness, Combustion, and Confusion.

For when once such pestilent, over-selfe-conceited, Church-renting Hypocrites,
have palliated themselves with the Cloak of fained purity, by the external
profession of Religion; and masked their impudent faces with the Vizor of
seeming Sanctity; and anointed their fraudulent tongues with the oil of
smoothing Flattery; whereby they can deceitfully express themselves in
Saint-like Discourses: speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2. whereby to
delude ignorant persons.

Lo then, they can cunningly, like the Scribes and Pharisees, under the color
of long prayers, devour widows houses. Mat. 23.14.

And are in a Capacity to Creep into houses, and lead Captive silly women
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts. 2 Timothy 3.6. Yea, (if it were
possible) to deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24.24. but that their names are
written in heaven, Luke 10.20. and the foundation of God (which is the Election
of his Children) remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Lo, thus they seem externally to the World, like harmless Sheep; but they
are internally to the Church, Mat. 7.15.
ravenous Wolves.

They appear extrinsecally like innocent Lambs; but they are intrinsecally
devouring Lions.

Foris Catones, Intus Nerones, Grave Cato's without, but Cruel Nero's within:

They have Jacobs voice, but Esaus heart and hands.

They are (...), Men of double minds, having a heart, and a heart, to comply
both with persons and times (for their own advantage) as all occasions are
offered; swimming like Fishes with the stream, and steering all their courses
and passages (temporizingly) suitable to the present times.

Shifting their Sails with the turning of every wind, and sowing satisfactory
pleasing Pillowes, under godless, graceless, and wicked men's Elbowes.

Resembling those four hundred flattering falfe temporizing Prophets; 1 King.
18.19.
who were not only invited, but also advanced to Jezables table.

Such Ambidexters playing with both hands, They are like Janus with his two
faces, who looks both before and behind;

They are like those Israelites, who speak both Ashdod and Hebrew. Nehe. 13.24.

They are like the Barnacles, who are both flesh and fish:

They are like Balaam, Number. 23.25.
who does both bless and curse.

They are like Tullie amongst the Romances, who could not (for the present)
fully persuade himself, whether he should take part with Caesar or Pompey.

They are like Tytides amongst the Grecians, who could not resolve whether he
should adhere to Achilles or Hector.

They are like the Tribe of Ephraim amongst the Jews, which was as a cake upon
the harth not turned, Hos. 7.8. baked on the one side, but raw on the other.

They are like the Church of Laodicea amongst the Gentilos, which was neither
hot nor cold, Rev. 3.15.

And therefore as lukewarme-water offensive to the stomach, and incident to be
spewed out of the mouth of Christ.

They are like the Ostriches which have wings to fly, but never do fly;
pretending that to be in their deceitful heads and hearts, which they have
neither purpose nor ability to perform.

They are like the Beasts of Ethiopia, called Nabes, or Camelopardales, whose
heads resemble the Camel; their necks the Horse; their legs and feet the Ox;
and their spots the Tiger. Fronti nulla fides.

They are like the Herb Moli, whose flower (as the Herbalist reports) is as
white as milk, but the root thereof as black as ink.

They are not in practice, much unlike the Cameleon, or fish Polypus, who
change themselves into variety of Colors; or like to Protheus, Metamorphosing
themselves into diverse forms; of whom it was said, Formas se vertit in omnes,
he turned himself into all fashions.

Yea, they imitate those outside persons who have musked mouths, but stinking
breathes: whose words and ways are like the Hermites breath, wherewith he both
warmeth his fingers, and cools his broth.

And thus have I (as briefly as I could) both truly and plainly deciphered unto
you, the both dissembling and cursed condition of such Church-lacerating
Hypocrites; who, when they are so deceitfully furnished, and wickedly
qualified, lo, then they have fitted themselves meet to be listed under Satan
(their infernal General) the Prince of darkness, 2 Cor. 11.14.
who can transform himself into an Angel of light.

For then they can work craftily and politiquely, as well as fight stoutly and
boldly under his Banner of Dissimulation, for the enlargement of the hellish
Territories of his Kingdom of Darkness.

Lo, thus the Devils hypocritical Soldiers, serve him as well internally by
craft and subtilty, as externally by strength and corporal ability; working
mischief every way (that lies in their power) against the holy and harmless
Members of the Church of Christ.

But let all such Soul-destroying Hypocrites know for their present
convincement, that true Piety was never pinned upon the sleeve of wordly
Policy: and that no service can be acceptacle to God, but that which is
performed with the hearts sincerity.

But I beseech you mistake me not, let me not be accounted an Enemy, because I
tell you the truth, Gal. 4.16. Neither make me that Requital, which the
obstinate Jews did to the Lords Prophet Jeremiah, when he justly reproved them
for their sins. Jer. 18.18. Then said they, come, and let us imagine some
device against Jeremiah: for the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor
Council from the Wise, nor the Word from the Prophet: Come, and let us smite
him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

If thus you shall requite me, then may you justly fear, that the righteous
Lord will be wrathfully displeased with you, and that may redound to your own
ruin.

But let me crave your candid censure; for I call Heaven and Earth to record,
that I speak not this out of the spirit of betternesse against the Saints of
God, whose sanctified Conversation is answerable to their holy profession,
zealously serving, and faithfully worshipping the living God in spirit and
truth as he commands.

Yea, Ioh. 4.24.
my hearty Prayers (I sincerely confess) are constantly unto God for them,
that he would continue them in the ways of holiness, and daily increase the
number of them in our Land; and that they may splendidly shine as Lights in
obscurity, in the midst of a perverse and crooked generation amongst whom they
live; that so they might not only glorify God themselves, but also be holy
Patterns, and godly Examples for imitation unto others, whereby to draw them
the more speedily to the service of God.

But I speak only, and that reprehensively, of those who are mere
tongue-tipped-table-Gospelers, having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5
who only make a show of sanctity, having their hearts full of all manner of
guile and hypocrisy; who are facilie perceptible by their Fruits, and
evidently conspicuous to the world by their Actions, walking in the ways of
dissimulation, which lead to the infernal Pit of eternal perdition. Mat. 24.5.


And therefore, if such persons will become true Members of Christ's Church, let
them stand no longer at a distance from the Church, but let them labor with
expedition to purge out their own Corruptions, abandoning their former lewd
Conversations, humble themselves for their sins, come in and close with
Christ, and speedily pray for the Churches Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Consolation.
Psa. 126.6
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

And heaviness may endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
but joy comes in the morning.

Considering also, that Christ calls none unto him with a promise to comfort
them, but those that are grieved persons.

Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat. 11.28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

And remembering the Cordial that Christ gave unto his Disciples, when he was
to depart from them, and in them to his whole Church, John 16.20. Ye shall
sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

That is, ye shall rejoice that ever you were sorrowful.

As if Christ in other words should have said unto them, Comfort your hearts my
beloved Disciples; for although I shall leave you for a while as Pilgrims in
the wilderness of this wicked world; yet notwithstanding, ye shall hereafter
come to the land of the heavenly Canaan, even to the new Jerusalem whither I am
now going, and there you shall receive the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. Psa. 16. ult.
where there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.

The Lord (without doubt) will preserve his Church from the scratching Paws of
savage Bears; the tearing Mouths of ravenous Wolves; and the covetous
Clutches of greedy Cormorants; who lie daily and hourly in wait to supplant,
subvert, and devour Her: and all under the spetious pretense of Piety, the
counterfeit show of Holiness, and candid color of Religion.

Will not Christ, Mat. 23.37
who wept over Jerusalem, and would often have gathered the Children of the
Jews together, as a Hen gathers her Chickings under her wings, preserve his
Church from perishing?

Certainly yea.

And will not God, who clotheth the Lillies, Mat. 6.26, 28.
and feeds the fowls of the air, preserve his Church under the wings of
his Providence, Zach. 2.8.
whom he tendereth as the apple of his own eye? Undoubtedly yea.

Conjugall-love is strong;

Paternall-love is powerful;

Loyall-love is very effectual; But

Divine-love, viz. the love of God to his Church far transcends them all.

Can a mother forget her child, Isa. 49.15.
and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though they should forget,
yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord to his Church.

Yea, and let the Church also listen to that sweet Expression of the Lord, by
his Prophet unto his people, Isay 51.7, 8. Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law: fear ye not the reproach
of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

For the moath shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my Salvation from
generation to generation.

So that the Church of Christ needs not to fear, though at any time she
should be plunged into the depth of calamity, for rather then her Persecutors
shall go unpunished, the Lord will make the very moathes and worms, and other
contemptible creatures of the earth, to be the Instruments of her enemies
confusion, and his hand shall bring unto her everlasting salvation.

And therefore, what although the Church for the present, sits pensively, and
mournes like a desolate widow tristively, weeping and lamenting for the
personal absence of Christ her Husband? Mat. 28. ult.
yet notwithstanding, his comfortable Spirit is present with her, and also will
be unto the end of the World.

And at the appointed time there will be a cessation from all her sorrows; for
he will joyfully return unto her, lovingly embrace her, Rev. 7. ult.
and wipe away all tears from her eyes: and then she shall receive a full
deliverance from all afflictions both of body and soul.

Then that confident expected (...) shall be turned into (...) that Slavabit
into Salvavit, he will save, into he has saved.

And then all the violent brumall winter storms of bloody persecution shall be
fully passed over, and the glorious sunshine- beams of Gods loving and
comfortable countenance most splendidly shine upon her.

And then all the Chains of her afflictions shall be broken asunder, Psa. 124.6
and she delivered as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler.

And the Lord will give unto her beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, Esaias 61.3.
and the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

And when all these consolatory Blessings are come upon her, then hearken unto
her rejoicing, Isay 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul
shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, and covered me with the robe of righteousness, he has decked me
like a bridegroom, and as a bride tyreth her self with her jewels.

Beloved, the serious consideration of this, may serve as an Antidote to keep
the Church of Christ from despair; for the year of her everlastaing Iubile
will certainly come.

Oh what unspeakable joy and ineffable comfort does this afford unto all the
distressed Members of the Church of Christ! considering that although the
Church of Christ be subject to sorrows, yet the Lord bestows upon her
proportionable comforts.

Whereupon the Psalmist in the person of the Church experimentally confesses,
In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. Psalm. 94.19


And therefore let the Church continually comfort her self with this
infallible confidence of Gods love and mercy toward her, that as Christ put
forth his hand and preserved Peter when he was in danger. Mat. 14.31.


So in like manner, the Lord will never suffer those that are his to sink in
the bitter waters of Marah, and sorrowful Seas of this turbulent life, so
far as to perish; but will sanctify all the dispensations of his providence
unto them, and sweeten all their sorrows with the comforts of his blessed
Spirit, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and will also give an issue in all their afflictions, that they may be able to
bear them.

And therefore let them comfort themselves together, and mutually pray one for
another.

O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Exhortation.


1. To pity the Church when she is in calamity.

2. To labor to become true Members of the Church of Christ.

3. To use the means to attain the end for procureing the Churches Peace.

1. To pity the Church when she is in calamity.

And herein I shall speak, 1. Generally, 2. Particularly.


1. Generally, and that shall be concerning this whole Kingdom, whereof we are
all Members, and wherein also we live.

And of that I say, Be thou exhorted, O England, and seeing the Lords
Judgments are now in our Land, Let the Inhabitants thereof learn
righteousness, Esaias 26.9. And speedily be reclaimed from all thy wickedness;
and frequently, faithfully and fervently pray unto the Lord, to fill thy heart
full of the rich Graces of his blessed Spirit; and endeavor by the power of
his grace and blessed Spirit, to live the life of grace, to subdue all thy
natural corruptions, to resist all sin and wickedness whatsoever; to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world, Tit. 2.12.

And heartily lament all thy sins, fully forsake them, and speedily turn
unto the Lord our God.

Come thus to the Lord with confidence, that he will receive thee, and for his
mercy and promise sake thou shall be received; for there is still mercy with
the Lord, Psalm. 130.4
that he may be feared; and we are not (as yet) consumed, because his
Compassions fail not. Lam. 3.22


And though our Sins have abounded, Romans 5.20
yet his Grace does Superabound.

And therefore to us he will certainly be merciful, if we can be truly
sorrowful.

For, although every sin be damnable; yet no sin actually condemns, but
the sin of impenitency.

Therefore let my council now be acceptable to thee O perplexed England; Esaias
55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found; And call upon him while he is nigh at
hand.

Draw near unto God in Prayer, in Faith, and in humbleness of heart, that
thou may be healed.

Come to the Lord prayingly, confidently, and humbly, that thou may find
mercy: Lest the righteous Lord in displeasure against thee, suddenly depart
from thee, and so thou becomest both ruinous and desolate to thy utter
Confusion.

2. Particularly, Beloved, we know experimentally, that in the Natural body,
if any Member be wounded, all the rest jointly do their best endeavors to
succor and help it.

The Ear is open to hearken after a remedy for it.

The Eye looks upon it.

The Hand touches it.

The Tongue calls for a Chyrurgion to cure it.

And all the Members of the same body (in a sympathizing way) are ready to
relieve it.

And shall not the Members of Christ's Mystical Body be as ready to pity one
another, and to relieve each other when they are in distress?

That were not only a Sin, but also a Shame unto them.

What? shall the promptness and practice of the Flesh, condemn the dullness
and slacknesse of the Spirit?

Shall a Natural Sympathy, outstrip a spiritual Congruity?

And shall Natural Pity, transcend spiritual Piety? (...). God forbid.

It was Saint Paul's Exhortation to his Galatians, Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Intimating thereby, that there is mutual love between those that are true
Members of the Church of Christ.

So that, if one of them be grieved, all the rest that hear of it, are
afflicted for that party till he be relieved.

An instance hereof we have in the Churches practice on the behalf of S.
Peter, Acts 12.5. when Herod had imprisoned Peter, the faithful Members of
Christ's Church met together, and earnest prayer was made of the Church unto God
for him.

Oh how greatly does this condemn the practice of all those unnatural
Persons, who hearing that the Members of Christ's Church are in distress, do
wholly shut up their bowels of Compassion from them, and will neither relieve
their Bodies with their Purses, nor their Souls by their Prayers!

2. To exhort all those that are (as yet) without, to labor to become true
Members of the Church of Christ, without which there is no salvation.

And for this cause S. Luke reports, that the Lord added to the Church from
day to day, Act. 2.47.
such as should be saved.

The Church of Christ is most excellent in her self, because in her alone
salvation is to be found, and no where else.

Answerable unto that preservative Expression of S. Paul to the Centurion and
the Soldiers, concerning the Mariners, Acts 27.31. Except these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved.

When the Lord destroyed the Old World by the general Deluge of water, none
were preserved but only those that were with Noah in the Arc. Genesis 7.23.


Which Arc was a Type and Figure of the Church of Christ.

And beloved, thus shall it also be at the end of the world, when Christ shall
come in the Clouds to judge both the quick and the dead; none shall be saved
from everlasting burning in the fire of Hell, but only those sheep that are
of Christ's fold, Mat. 25.34.
even those that are true Members of the Church of Christ.

Now lest any should be deceived, thinking themselves to be true Members of
Christ's Church and are not.

I shall briefly lay down some Marks, whereby they may try themselves whether
they be or not.

And for brevity sake I will but only Hint at some of them.

Marks.
1. Peace. 2. Holiness. 3. Love. 4. Regeneration. 5. Obedience.
1. Peace. Concord amongst the Children of God, is like the agreement and
harmony in Music: yea, it is well pleasing to God, and acceptable to all good
men.

God is the God of Peace, 1 These. 5.23. The very God of peace sanctify you
throughout.

And he is also the Author of Peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the Author of
confusion, but of peace, as we see in all the Churches of the Saints.

And his Children are the Children of peace, Isay 11.9. None shall hurt or
destroy in all the mountain of mine holiness.

And Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount, pronounces a blessing unto them that
labor for Peace.

Blessed are the Peace makers: Mat. 5.9.
for they shall be called the children of God.

When as King Solomon who had his name from Peace, built that most glorious and
stately material Temple for the Worship of God; it is very remarkable, that
in the making thereof no Noise was heard, by strikeing or beating upon any of
the materials whereof it was made; the which Temple was also a Type of Christ;
Esaias 53.7.
who was mute like a sheep before the Shearers, and with Patience did bear
silently many injuries and indignities, not only offered unto him, but also
laid upon him.

In imitation whereof, all true Believers in Christ, who are the Spiritual
Temple of the living God, 1 Cor. 3.17. ought both silently to suffer, and also
patiently to endure the troubles and miseries of this their military Warfare,
according to that rule of our blessed Savior, learn of me, Mat. 11.29
for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

And S. Paul, when he was to leave his Corinthians, he exhorted them to Peace,
that after his departure from them, they might have the comfortable presence of
the God of Peace with them. Leaving them this memorable Valediction at his
ultimum vale.

Finally brethren, fare ye well: be perfect: 2 Cor. 13.11.
be of good comfort: be of one mind; live in peace, and the God of love and
peace shall be with you.

So that, to live peaceably toward others, is a Mark of the true Members of
the Church of Christ.

2. Holiness. The Apostle S. Peter speaking to the faithful, who should be
heirs of everlasting glory, exhorts them to be holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

Heaven is an holy place, and none must inhabit there but holy persons, viz.
Saints, those that are made holy by the blood of Christ, those whose souls are
washed in the blood of the Lamb.

Whosoever is not thus qualified, must for ever from heaven be excluded, Apoc.
22.15. Without shall be dogs, and Enchanters, and whoremongers, and mutherers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves, or makes lies.

Yea, the Apostle is peremptory herein, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men,
and holiness, without the which no man shall see the Lord.

Therefore labor to find this Grace of Holiness in thy self, for it is an
infallible Mark of the true Members of the Church of Christ.

3. Love. Spiritual Love is the most excellent effect of the Soul, and also a
fruit of Gods blessed Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

Yea, and our blessed Savior to distinguish his Disciples from the profane
persons of the world, expresses Love as the cognizance of distinction.

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, Ioh. 13.35
if ye have love one to another.

So that spiritual Love is also a Mark of the true Members of the Church of
Christ.

4. Regeneration. Art thou sensible of thy new Spiritual birth? Do thou
find in thy self experimentally Mortification and Vivification? a killing of
the Old man, and a quickening of the New? do thou feel the power of Christ's
Death in thee more and more to mortify and kill thy sins? his Blood to
sanctify and purge thy heart? and the Virtue of his Resurrection to quicken thy
soul unto newness of life? and to make thee stand manfully, and with an
undaunted courage and magnanimous Resolution, valiantly to fight, against Sin
and Satan?

If these things be in thee, they are certain Evidences unto thee, that thou
art a true Member of the Church of Christ.

5. Obedience. This is a satisfactory Duty, well-pleasing and acceptable both
to God, and Man.

The time was, and that of late years, that England had a plentiful Peace,
and a peaceable Plenty throughout this Kingdom, and also lived in filial
Fear of the righteous God, and dutiful Obedience to Her lawful Sovereign;
at which time the Lord even loaded Her with plentiful Store, both of
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings: She being then for satisfactory
Accommodation to Her Inhabitants, Genesis 47.6.
far transcending Goshen to the Israelites in the Land of Egypt; insomuch,
as that She was comfortable to Her Friends, terrible to Her Enemies, and the
glory of all Her neighbor Nations round about Her: so that, they all must
bear Her witness, that as once the Dew of Heaven fell down only upon
Gideon's Fleece, when as all the Earth beside was dry about it; So in like
manner, the Dew of Gods Blessings has only fallen upon this our English
Kingdom, when all our neighbor Countries have been destitute of it, lying
dry and unfruitful, and being also utterly untilled by the Plough of the
Farmer, but yet every where harrowed by the Hand of the Soldier, and almost
rent in sunder, with all those great Calamities, which the fierce Fire and
cruel Sword could bring upon them: all which while (until of late years) our
English Nation lived in Peace, dwelt without Fear, sat in Safety, and slept
Secure: But when flourishing England waxed wickedly wanton, supine, and
careless, and fell from the Light of Grace, into the Darkness of Sin,
wilfully walking in corrupt ways, according to the carnal Lusts of Her own
sinful Heart, being very dishonorable to God, distasteful to all good Men,
and disgraceful to the Protestant Religion; and also grew both Unthankful,
and Unfruitful, and like an untamed Heifer, Ier. 31.18.
cast off the yoke of Her dutiful Obedience, both toward God, and Her
lawful Sovereign:

Lo then! the Lord in Judgment against Her, being wrathfully displeased with
Her, turned Her Peace into War, Her Plenty into Penury, Her Strength into
Weakness, and Her Glory into Shame: since which time of Alteration, She has
liberally plucked the Grapes of gall, and plentifully drank the gall of
Bitterness.

Yea, and so deeply has She drank of the bitter and poisonous Dregs
thereof, as that those deadly Draughts which lately have been forcingly given
Her, have turned the Lives of many thousands into Death.

And yet, woe! and alas! She still remains incorrigible, under Gods
afflicting hand, by the sharp strokes of his Rods of Remembrance; and will
not yield Obedience to God and Man, as in the sacred Scripture She is commanded.

Obedience, is twofold, in respect of the Persons to whom we owe it: 1. Unto
God. 2. Unto the King.


1. Unto God, for himself, as being our Celestial Sovereign.

2. Unto the King, in God, and for God, as being Gods Terrestrial Vicegerent.

So that, Caesar must have Casars, as God may have Gods; that the body of
Christ may be kept without a Rent, as his Coat was without a Seame; and that
thereby also may be both produced and continued, a melodious Harmony,
delightful Agreement, and sweet Consent amongst our selves, in this English
Christian Commonwealth, whereof we all are Members, and wherein we live.

Therefore, Obedience, either Active or Passive, must be yielded to all lawful
Authority: whereas, 1 Samuel 15.23.
Rebellion being as the sin of Witchcraft. The which as an infernal,
polluted Embryo, lurking in the hateful Heart, of a malicious, malecontented,
disobedient, and revengefull spirited Person, having her sinful Increasing,
cursed Birth, wicked Growth, and mischievous, bloody, and polipragmaticall
Operation, by the hellish working, pernicious provocation, and damnable power
of the Devil; is not only diametrically repugnant to our subjective Fealty,
but also utterly abhorrent to all Christian Loyalty: Heb. 10.26, 27.
and being wittingly, willingly, and wilfully, (contrary to the Light both of
Knowledge and Conscience) committed, continued, justified, and maintained, the
condemnable, pestilent Incendiarie, for the present Overthrow, and speedy
Confusion of a Christian Commonwealth, the hateful Compendium of cursed
Cruelty, the horrid Epitome of all Impiety, and the very Character of the
Firebrands of Hell; wanting nothing to all such illegal Actors thereof, but
only the sharp fatal Stroke of impartial Death, whereby to cut assunder
the brittle Thread of their mortal Lives, and thereby to send their sinful
souls into the deep Dungeon of Eternal Darkness, there to be intollerably
tormented, with the Devil, and all damned Spirits World without End.

The word translated Rebellion, is in the Original (...) a Radice (...) which
properly signifies Bitterness, and is applied to Apostasy and Disobedience;
and that in a twofold respect:

1. Because Rebellion is more distasteful to God, than bitter things are to the
Palate of that Man (between whose Taste and Bitterness there is an Antipathy)
who naturally desires to taste only those things that are sweet.

2. Because it provokes and exasperates both God and Man, unto Wrath and
Bitterness.

For, in one and the same Act of Rebellion, there may be committed both a Sin
against God, and a Trespass against Man; So that, both being offended by the
same Act of Rebellion, they are also both of them thereby provoked to Wrath and
Bitterness, against the Offenders.

Rebellion, is the Forerunner of Gods Vengeance, to the Actors Confusion.

According to that fatal Querie of the Lord by his Prophet Jeremie concerning
the Jews, Do they provoke me to anger, Ier. 7.19.
says the Lord, and not themselves to the confusion of their own faces?

So that, Rebellion, being Disobedience, provokes to Wrath, and Wrath works
Confusion, to the Provokers thereof.

To satisfy the carnal Lusts, inordinate Appetites, and greedy Desires, of
military desperate Rebels, in their violent prosecution of horrid Rebellion,
either by bloody Murder, or plundering Theft, is unto them (for the present)
very sweet; but the Consequent of it, to all those that are guilty of it, will
certainly prove according to the Original signification of it, viz: very
bitter: answerable to Abner's speech of Joabs devouring Sword, viz: 2 Samuel 2.26.
Bitterness in the latter end.

So that, he that conscionably cares not Now for that cursed Act of his Sin,
shall compulsively care Hereafter for the bitter Smart of his Punishment.

The word Sword, in the Hebrew language, is, (...) ab Exsiccando and Vastando
dictus: a Radice (...) id est, Exsiccatus fuit: both which words have a
distinct Difference, as well in Pronuntiation, as in Signification, and yet all
the Characteristicall Consonants of both which words, viz: (...) of Schem, and
Ponghall in Gnavar, Noune and Verb being the same, may both necessarily and
also profitably serve to put us all in mind, of a reciprocal Punishment
waiting upon the Sword, when it is not rightly used, as God in his Holy Word
has expressly commanded.

The which is very perspicuously instanced unto us, in mischievous minded,
sanguine hearted, and bloody hand-acting murtherous Joab; for Joab having
slain Abner and Amasa, men more righteous and better then himself, must die
(for so doing) by the Sword of Benaiah, notwithstanding his hastening to the
Tabernacle of the Lord, 1 King. 2.28.
and there laying hold on the horns of the Altar.

What? Has bloody Joab committed Murder upon Murder, against that holy
Commandment of the righteous Lord which expressly forbids the perpetration
thereof, saying, Thou shall not kill. Exodus 20.13.


And then would he have the Lords sacred Tabernacle to be his preservative
Protection from due deserved Punishment for it? No, No, that may not be; his
Counterfeit Holiness could not so far palliate his murtherous Ungodliness,
nor still the loud voice of His crying Wickedness, as to exempt him from
Execution: but the just punishing sinrevenging Hand of the righteous God will
follow after him, must overtake him, and inevitably seize upon him to his
deadly Destruction.

His golden outside of Religion, and deceitful seeming Devotion, could not
preserve him. No safe Sanctuary of preserving Refuge could murtherous Joab
find, wherein to secure his bloody life, from the swift Swords fatal stroke
of impartial Death, but Volens, vel Nolens, Lex talionis, whether he will, or
will not, the Law of Retaliation must both necessarily, and also inevitably be
executed upon him.

So that, as Joab himself had formerly done to others, the Lord rewarded him
with the same Punishment upon his own head. 1 King. 2.34.


Thus Joab's bloody Murder must Recalcitare, id est, retro pedem jacere.

By which just rebounding, and retrograde punishing Passage, of bitter
Punishment retorted, from sweet Sin committed, we evidently see, that Sin
and Punishment are Reciprocates, being both of a close Connection, and near
Relation, resemblingly characterized in Hipocrites Twins, suitable in
Corditions; and being deeply involved together, have their unhappy Reflections
upon each other: who may not unfitly be paralelled to the Camets Catuph T: and
Chateph Camets T:
amongst the Hebrews, of whom it is said, Idem esse recipiuntur; varying not
any thing in Figure, as here plainly appears, and also differing nothing at
all in Signification, but only in the length of time in Pronuntiation.

So in like manner, the Work of Sin goes before, and sometimes the same
Wages of Punishment (very shortly) follows after.

As it fared with Chush the Son of Jemini, David's Enemy, of whom David
himself spoke by way of Sins penal reflection, Psalm. 16.
He has graven and dug up a pit; and is fallen himself into the
destruction that he made for other.

The which reciprocal Punishment justly proceeds, from the strict hand of
our impartial God.

God often punishes Offenders, in the same kind wherein they themselves have
offended: as they have done unto others, even so in like manner, God himself
does unto them.

According to that doleful Expression of Adoni-bezek concerning himself,
Judge. 1.7.
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbes and their great-toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God has rewarded me.

And also answerable to that scornful Exprobration of deriding Eliphaz to
distressed Job, I have seen, Job 4.8.
(says he) they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.

And therefore in the fear of God, let every one of us who profess the Name
of Christ, always do unto others, Mat. 7.12.
as we would they should do unto us.

For so to do, is the very Drift, and Scope of the sacred Scripture. Ever
remembering those equal requiting words of our blessed Savior, Mat. 7.2.
With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

Lo thus! the righteous Lord being the just Revenger of all Injuries, but
especially of Murder, paid Joab home in his own kind.

According to that Law which God gave unto Noah after the Flood, when he came
forth of the Arc to replenish the Earth, Who so sheddeth man's blood, Genesis 9.6.
by man shall his blood be shed.

Hence then, let all those that are guilty herein, tremble at the consideration
hereof; for if Cain will murder Abel, then shortly after, the blood of Abel
will cry up into Heaven for Vengeance against Cain. Genesis 4.10.


So in like manner, the blood of those innocent English Persons, whose Bodies
have been lately murdered in our Land, by the fierce Violence of their
furious Adversaries, cries up into Heaven against the Murderers of them, for
speedy Vengeance to fall upon them: like those faithful Souls of the blessed
Martyrs under the Altar, who cried with a loud voice against their bloody
Persecutors, Apoc. 6.10
saying, (...), How long o Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

Oh then! that the serious Consideration hereof, might so deeply take place in
the hearts of all those that are guilty herein, that they may speedily
endeavor (especially now in this time of War) to make their Peace with God
and the King whom they have offended; lest Wrath break forth to the uttermost
against them, and speedily seize upon them, and then there be no Remedy for
them.

And for the speedy Reclamation, and present Reformation of all such guilty
Offenders; I humbly entreat, and also heartily desire them all in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, to consider diligently of the immortality of their Souls, and
that upon the short and weak Thread of this brittle and mortal Life, depends
the welfare or ilfare of their Eternity; and also attentively to hearken to the
vexing Instructions, and checking Dictates of their troubled Consciences, which
cannot choose but be full of horror, although remorselesse: And then answer me
in their own Souls, if they do not often hear to their great Terror within
them, a powerful, divine, convincing, and condemning Echo, summoning them to
appear in the Clouds, at the General Assizes, before the High-Bench Bench of
the Lord Chief Justice of the whole World, and Peers of Heaven; there to
receive their just and deserved Doomes, for their wilful Disobedience unto
lawful Authority?

And therefore, as all such Persons tender the glory of God, and the
everlasting welfare of their own Souls; let them stand no longer at a
distance, but let them mourn for their sins, and speedily come in, and lay
hold upon the present Opportunity, of being reconciled both unto God and Man,
that so they may be in the favor of God and love of their King; that thereby
they may have Mercy from God, Peace in their own Consciences, the manyfold
Distempers of our Kingdom cured, and our Land enjoy again her former pristine
peaceable Condition: for if ever they will make their Peace with God and the
King in this particular, Now is the time; and therefore let them not neglect
it, lest their negligence therein turn to their utter Destruction.

For it is a Maxim in Divinity, that to none belongs the mercy of
forgiveness, but only those who are Desisters from sin, and Repenters of
sin: And as for all the rest who constantly have fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. they are justly reserved (by the
righteous Judgment of God) to the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude 13.


And for the continual preservation, both of my self and all others, (who
fear God and honor the King) from that cursed and damnable Condition of
Rebellion; I shall ever pray with that Good Old Hebrew Patriarch Jacob, as he
did against the heinous and crying Sins of Simeon and Levi, his wicked and
bloody Sons, Genesis 34.
who were (...) Brethren, Instruments of Iniquity, Destinate for Division;
whose bloody Cruelty began with Craft, prosecuted eagerly in crafty
Blood-thirstinesse palliated with Religion, and ended murtherously in the blood
of the wounded Shechemites, to their deadly Confusion. (...)
(...)
O my Soul! come not thou into their secret: Genesis 49.6
unto their Assembly (mine honor) be not thou United.

The word here translated Secret, is in the Original, (...) id est, Concilium,
vel Coetus Consultantium. Wherein also according to Jacob's sense is implied,
Impiorum: From which for ever, Good Lord deliver us all.

The Sword of the Lord and Gideon, is but one two-handed Sword; and when it is
wrested by violence out of the hands of the King, then does God take it into
his hands, and with it wound the head of his Enemies, Psalm. 68.21. O consider
this, ye that forget God; and the King, and God in the King; lest he tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22.

Oh! whose Christian Sympathizing heart bleeds not within him, at the deep
Apprehension, and serious Consideration, of the fatal and destructive Actions,
of the dismal Days, in these mortiferous Times wherein we live? Wherein also
many thousands are so far from yiedling either Active or Passive Obedience
unto lawful Authority, as that they do not only wilfully reject it, but also
wickedly practice against it, without any remorse at all toward their poor,
distressed, over-oppressed, and languishing Patients: yea, and so far are
they from sorrowing for those persons, who so bitterly and sharply suffer by
their so doing; as that they rejoice in it, and also take delight in the
perpetration of that heinous, horrible, black, and bloody Sin of Rebellion.

And yet such pestilent Agents, being both the Church and Commonwealths
Disturbers, do oftentimes deceitfully express to the World, that they
earnestly desire to have Peace, and heartily pray for a speedy Period to these
present Troubles, and also greatly mourn for so great store of Christian
English blood, which of late has been so profusely, fluently, and violently
shed in this our Kingdom.

And yet notwithstanding, all their fair Pretenses, patheticall Speeches, and
mournful Expressions for Peace, when once they plainly perceive, that there
is any Proposition really intended, and seriously proposed, for a firm,
settled, and well-grounded Peace throughout this whole Kingdom; Lo then! they
are as averse in disposition to Peace, as Readiness Armor was to the body of
David, 1 Samuel 17.38, 39.
when he was to fight with the Giant Goliath.

Lo! thus like gross and palpable Hypocrites, they deceitfully profess that
with their fallacious Mouths, which they never really purposed in their
guilefull hearts, and also utterly deny the practice thereof by their vicious,
disquietfull, and contentious Lives.

Rebellion, stands (this very day amongst us in this Kingdom) at the Bar of
Gods Justice, expecting every hour the giving up of the bitter Verdict of due
deserved Guiltiness, and from thence the irrevocable Pronuntiation of the
direful and fatal sentence of Condemnation, and that (without Repentance) to
a perpetual and datelesse durance of Damnation. Oh, fearful, and intolerable,
Romans 13.2.
Punishment!

And for the speedy Prevention hereof, I do here heartily wish, that some
patheticall Aposiopesis would modestly whisper, and secretly suggest to each
man's Conscience that is guilty thereof, the intolerability of that Punishment
justly due to the Sin of Rebellion: and that through the operation of Gods
Grace and blessed Spirit in their hearts, there may be a speedy Reformation in
their lives; that so the damnable Sin of Rebellion, may not Syren-like be
unto them, the subtle bewitching Inchanter, and immediate fallacious
Forerunner, of their both temporal and eternal Destruction.

And although there be (at this day in our Land) such violent Opposition
against Kingly Authority, yet notwithstanding, a faithfull-hearted Subject,
will readily make expression as occasion is offered, of his loyalty to his King.

And as far as the King has a lawful Supreme power to Command; the Subject
ought to have a willing heart, and ready hand to Obey: forasmuch as the dignity
of a King transcends the Subject, so much is the Obligation of the Subject to
his King: Neither is the Duty less which we owe to our Sovereign, then the
Safe-gard we claim by his Protection; as the Center next under God, from which
we derive our Honors, and to which we owe our Services: and the same Kingly
hand of beneficence and power, which dispenses honors and safety unto the
Subject; points out the lines of dutiful Obedience, and obliged Loyalty to
His Prince.

Our gracious Sovereign, has formerly and also frequently cast his Princely
Eyes, of sweet Favor and loving Kindness, upon many of his mean Subjects,
who were but of low Degrees; and also freely raised them up unto high
Dignities; not only by conferring great Honors upon them, but also store of
Wealth (accordingly) wherewith to maintain them; whereby they were (almost)
become Companions of Princes.

Quest. But what Requitals have many of them made His Majesty, for His so
Graciously dealing toward them?

Answ. They have fallen off from Him, Spoken hardly of Him, Adhered to His
rebellious Enemies against Him, Raised up unnatural War upon Him, And also
drawn (by their verbal Persuasions, and personal Examples) many thousands of
this Kingdom after them, for to effect those things, which themselves with
others projected against Him.

What? Could Christian English Subjects be thus forgetful, of so great, and
undeserved, Princely Favors, freely conferred upon them?

Did they receive such Kingly Courtesies, from the beneficent Hand of a Royal
and bountiful Benefactor?

And have they rendered Him no other Requitals for them, but only unnatural
Opposition against Him?

And to such a One also as He is, being Constituted by the God of Heaven, for
to be their lawful Sovereign upon Earth?

And whose royal Person is sufficiently known to be of eminent Worth and
Integrity, who constantly beautifieth the Protestant Religion, with the
gracious Example of His holy Conversation; and who has also given most ample
Testimony of His real Affections to the Peace, Good, and Welfare of this our
English Kingdom.

To whom also even out of Conscience, by the Oath of Allegiance, they are
strictly obliged for to yield Obedience?

Oh, ineffable Ingratitude!

For whose unnatural and ungrateful Requitals, His Majesty may (at this day)
both truly and also mournfully take up against them, the Lords just Complaint
against the Obstinate Jews, I have nourished and brought up Children, but they
have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2.

Lo thus! woe, and alas! (even David-like has He been dealt with by them)
They rewarded him Evil for Good, to the great discomfort of his Soul, Psalm.
35.12.

And as such pernicious Persons, by those their rebellious Actions, have
publicly evidenced to the World, that they were His Majesty's professed
Enemies: I do heartily wish with the earnest desires of my Soul, that it may
not too truly be said of some others, who were accounted His Majesty's
faithful Friends, (and upon whose Fidelity (under God) His Majesty greatly
depended, being confident of their constant Loyalty toward Him) that they have
dealt treacherously with Him, by abusing that Authority conferred upon them;
some of them (being Selfe-Seekers) corruptly executing His Majesty's
Commissions, granted forth for His Majesty's Military service Promotion,
betraying that Trust reposed in them, by underhand dealing sinisterly for
their own private Advantage, receiving black Bribes secretly, wherewith to
minorate His Majesty's rebellious Enemies pecuniarie Mulcts just deserved and
assigned present Satisfaction.

Whereby wicked avaricious Policy being in the Front, and corruptly commanding
the Vaunt-gard, hindered (very unhappily) the just and necessary furtherance,
of His Majesty's compulsive Military Service in the Rear.

Nam pecunia est nervus Belli.

And others by delivering up (unnecessarily) those strong garrison Holds, of
Forts, Castles, Towns, and Cities, which longer (with safety) they might have
kept, had their pusilanimous Spirits been magnanimously heroical, and
perfidious Hearts subjectively faithful; by which their so treacherously
doing, they greatly weakened His Majesty's Royal Power against His professed
Enemies, utterly ruined His Loyall-hearted Party in their outward Estates, and
wickedly enriched themselves with the cursed Mammon of Unrighteousness. Luke
16.9.


So that, of all such Judas-like Friends we may truly say with the Prophet
Micah, A man's Enemies are the men of his own house, Micah 7.6.

All which detrimentall Effects together with many more, have lately been
unhappily produced amongst us in this our Kingdom, which have proceeded from
the deadly sin of cursed Covetousness, the which also have been, is, and
will be, to the great prejudice of the Actors thereof themselves, as well as
others: according to that true saying of an ancient Poet.

Ipse cupido nocet multis cupidoque cupido.

Had such unconstant and false-hearted Persons, both timely and carefully taken
into serious Consideration, (had it been but for their alone particular
Welfare) but only those unhappy and bitter Fruits which such cursed Trees of
Treachery might have produced to themselves alone, for their own particular
Ilfare; peradventure that Consideration might have been as a Bridle to have
restrained them: viz. the outward just disgraceing, and due deserved public
vilifying of their Reputations and Persons, after the pestilent Perpetration of
such Treachery, though never so eminent in the eyes and esteem of others
before the Discovery; the inward discontentments and vexations of Mind,
deeply wounding themselves with the unappeaseable Horror of their guilty
Consciences, which will continually gripe, gnaw, and terrify them, unless
they be cauterized; but most of all, the everlasting Damnation of both their
Bodies and Souls for ever, to the dark and unconceiveable tormenting Pit of
eternal Perdition: the which (without true Repentance) will at the last
Judgment day certainly be their Portion.

Oh! that such guilty Persons had timely laid to heart even in those their
days, the Felicity of Fidelity, and the Misery of Treachery; so might they
faithfully have performed their loyal Promises, which might have conduced to
their own both Temporal and Eternal Peace: but woe, and alas! the former of
these is (to them) already past, and God grant the latter be not too late.

I shall not (censuring charitably) doom such guilty Persons being
Selfe-servers, (for such their treacherous black-Workes) to the Land of
Eternal Darkness, for so to do, far transcends both the Power and
Knowledge of any Mortal; but I will speak both of them, and to them, by way
of Interrogation, for their present Convincement, and future Animadversion:

What? could seeming-loyall Subjects deal thus disloyally with their King?

Did He prefer them to honorable Places above others, depending upon their
Fidelity; and have they requited His loving Kindness with no less then
damnable Treachery?

Were they so far entrusted by Him, and have they dealt thus deceitfully with
Him?

Did they pretend themselves as faithful Friends to help Him, and have they
proved His perfidious Enemies for to hurt Him?

Oh, treacherous Dealing!

This is (...) indeed, Simulatio, ab (...), and (...), id est, Occultatio
judicii, and Malum sub specie boni celatum. It is Iniquity in a Mystery, even
masked Ungodliness, a These. 2.7. Et dum non cognoscitur, non cavetur: and
being in their black Breasts not descried, it could not be declined. The which
treacherous Iniquity, being most detestable, abominable, and double Impiety,
cries aloud in the Ears of God, for Vengeance to fall upon the pernicious
Perpetrators thereof.

I greatly tremble at the serious Consideration hereof; and therefore, let none
that are guilty herein, falsely flatter themselves in their corrupt hearts, with
deceitful hopes of perpetual Impunity; for assuredly, such Hypocritical,
Treacherous Malefactors, for such their Notorious, Perfidious, and cursed
Malefactorship, cannot (without great Repentance) escape the heavy Wrath, and
just Judgment, of the sin-punishing, just-revenging, righteous God, but it
will follow after them, overtake them, and seize upon them to their Destruction.

Fidelity, and Treachery, are ever at Enmity; they are like two great
Warriors, in one and the same Heart, stisly striving, violently opposing, and
fiercely fighting against each other for Mastery.

And as they are Heterogenean in Conditions, so in like manner, (as they
prevail) they produce contrary Effects: viz.

Fidelity, Joy, and Comfort. But

Treachery, Sorrow, and Terror.

As for Example,

Fidelity, seeks no Corners, but shines splendidly, as the bright Beams of
the glorious Sun in the firmament of Heaven at Noonday, when he is in his
chiefest Brightness, fullest Splendour, and greatest Luster; to the great
comfort of the Actors thereof, and all others concerned therein:

But Treachery, lies in Obscurity, ever fearing the Light, and always
trembling at the remembrance of the Touchstone of Truth, the which may not
unfitly be compared to that thick, black, tangible Aegyptian-Darkenesse, sent
as a Punishment upon Pharaoh for his Disobedience, Exodus 10.21.22. The sharp
Smart whereof has lately been bitterly felt, by too many thousands in this
our Kingdom, to the great terror of Conscience to the Committers thereof, and
sorrowful utter Ruin of many others thereby.

Fidelity, desires heartily (though it be to her Hinderance) the full
performance of that Trust reposed in her: but Treachery, labors craftily
(for her own Advantage) to falsify her Promise to those that entrusted her.

Fidelity, wishes lovingly the welfare of others as well as her own: but
Treachery, endeavors secretly but only for her own safety, not careing
for the Ruin of all others.

Fidelity, being rightly principl'd, is syncerely guided by the blessed Spirit
of God, who is the King of Glory; and he sweetly affects her, and lovingly
leads her, in the delightful and pleasing Paths, of Obedience, Truth, and
Righteousness; and at the End of this World he will certainly remunerate her,
with the full Fruition of Eternal Happiness: but Treachery, being falsely
grounded, is corruptly guided by the cursed Spirit of the Devil, who is the
Prince of Darkness; and he leads her on blindly in the deceitful Ways, of
Disobedience, Error, and Unrighteousness; and (for her sinful Service) he
will surely reward her at the End of this mortal Life, with the bitter and
cursed Wages of Everlasting Death.

Fidelity, Larke-like rejoices at the Light, and desires to be publicly
Exemplary to all others, singing praises to God with a comfortable Conscience,
because her works are wrought in God: but Treachery, Batte-like (being an
unclean Bird) flies not abroad but only in Darkness, Lev. 11.19.
desiring no Notice to be taken of her, for when once the Light approaches,
she keeps her self close in a Corner, as not daring to appear in the Light
of Truth, because her Works are not wrought in God, but only by the Subtilty,
Instigation, and Power of the Devil.

Lo! thus we evidently see, that there is as great an Antipathie,
Contrariety, Disparitie and Difference, between FIDELITY, and TREACHERY, as
is between Light and Darkness, Truth and Error, Obedience and Rebellion,
Peace and War, Life and Death, Heaven and Hell, God and Satan.

So that, no marvel although our perplexed Kingdom be (at this day) so
greatly divided; having lately had therein, the damnable Sin of Treachery so
frequently practiced.

Those that have done such treacherous Works, may justly challenge to
themselves their due deserved Wages; which Works of Treachery, must have the
Wages of Iniquity, the which Saint Paul expresses in that Theological
Aphorism of his to the Romans, (...), The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
ult. Death temporal to the Body in this life, and (without repentance) Death
eternal to both Body and Soul in the life to come.

And therefore, now as a spiritual Physician, for the speedy and perfect
Curing of sick, fore, and wounded Englands great Distractions, and manifold
Distempers; my Soul sincerely desires, and Heart also earnestly wishes, as a
Christian, sensible, and sorrowful Sympathizer, of Englands woeful Distresses,
that (...) the strong Omnipotent God, would Graciously be pleased, in much
Mercy and tender Compassion, toward this bleeding, sinful, English-Nation,
for to set home to the guilty Consciences of all obstinate Offenders, all those
infallible Truths, that here already have been, together with all other that
hereafter shall be delivered by Me, being but (...) a weak, infirmed,
Mortal, and sinful Man; and to make them become Divine, Physical, convincing
Aphorisms, serving as prevalent, healthful, sovereign, spiritual Potions,
for the speedy Curing of blind, ignorant, sinful and sick Souls; that so
they may prove to the Souls of diseased Persons, as sweet Balsame of Grace
wherewith to heal them, for their present Preservation, and also to keep them
from future Destruction; being made by the mighty power of God, Profitable to
teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16.
And through the Divine Operation of his Blessed Spirit, to work so powerfully
by them in the hearts of all those Persons (of what Quality soever) that are
any ways guilty, of Disobedience unto lawful Authority, as speedily to open
their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them, which are sanctified by faith in Christ, Acts 26.18. And also to
rouse them up, from lying any longer in the drouzie Lethargy of their sins,
under the hellish Power, and damnable Domion of cursed, bloody, and sinful
Rebellion; lest Pharaoh-like, they sleep so long in their Sins, until the
voice of Gods mighty thunders, Exodus 9.23.24.
and hail mingled with fire from Heaven, awake, and rouse them up.

And to prevail so far with them, as to walk in those wel-pleasing Paths,
both to God and the King, which the sacred Scripture expressly commands, of
that subjective Fealty, Christian Loyalty, and dutiful Obedience, which all
Subjects owe to their lawful Sovereign: For to live Anarchically, where there
either is, or else ought to be Monarchical Government, is to live (as it were)
Without God in the World. Ephesians. 2.12.


But if obstinate Rebels will not be awaked, rouzed up, and reclaimed, then let
them hearken to the Lords Servant Moses, predicting their fatal Doomes, He
that hears the Words of this curse, and blesses himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, although I Walk according to the stubbornness of
mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, the Lord Will not be
merciful unto him: but then the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and every curse that is Written in this book shall
light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven, Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20.

Oh, fearful Judgments! What? both Temporal and Eternal? Not only
corporal for the Body, but also spiritual for the Soul? And both of which
Punishments no less then insufferable, and that for ever?

Lo! this must needs inevitably fill a sensible guilty Heart, full of
perplexing Amazement, and tormenting Horror.

And let Me also tell them, both as a timely faithful Remembrancer to them,
of their past and present Sins, and also as a Christian sensible Sympathizer
of their future Sorrows; they may all justly fear, that unto them belongs,
that fatal prophetical Expression, judiciously pronounced against Old Elies
disobedient and rebellious Sons, They hearkened not unto the voice of their
Father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2.25.

And therefore, in Christian Pity, and tender Compassion toward them, my
greatly grieved Heart shall woefully mourn, and sympathizing sorrowful Soul
bitterly weep in secret for them, Jer. 13.17.

When there was no King in Israel, every man did whatsoever seemed good in his
own eyes, Judge. 21.25. Anarchie looseneth the Bridle, whereby wicked men take
liberty to themselves for the perpetration of all ungodliness, without any
Restriction; and will thereby (in a short time through the perverseness of
their wicked Wills, and prevalency of their cursed Corruptions) become like
wild Horses left to themselves, without their Riders to command them.

Such loose Libertines, and carnal Gospellers, despise Government, and speak
evil of them that are in Authority, Jude 8.

By whose wicked Words and Works, great Detriment befalls both Church and
Commonwealth.

Those good, necessary, and Ancient Laws of this Kingdom, which formerly have
been, and still ought to be, the Rules of the Subjects continual Obedience,
to all lawful Authority; are now (by such Anti-monarchicall Persons) converted
into Club-lawes: For, the Arbitrary and Military power is now grown to such an
height; as that will you do such a Thing? Or will you pay such a Sum? If
answer to either Question be made, No: Then presently follows, take him
Soldiers by the power of the Sword; but if ye cannot apprehend his Body, then
speedily seize upon all his Goods with violence, and sell them with expedition
for his disobedience.

Is this the Liberty of the Freeborn Subjects?

Is this the Privilege of the English Nation?

God forbid that Zion should be built up with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity; Micah 3.10.
that were abhorring judgment, and perverting all equity.

Was it ever known that the Children of God strove to erect and establish a
Religion by the power of the Sword?

To lay the Foundation thereof in Blood?

To draw obedient Subjects (against their wills) into Disobedience?

To make others (with themselves) to falsify their sworn Fidelity, to their
lawful Sovereign?

To compel the Conscience, and force it by Violence?

To kill the Body, to convert the Soul? and that also without affording any
time of Preparation for the Kingdom of Heaven?

The which is rather a Prevention of the Souls Conversion, and consequently
the Destruction of both.

Lo! such sinful, heinous, and diabolical Practices, were never formerly
heard of to be in this our Land, especially amongst those who desire to be
reputed as refined and purified Christians, who also publicly profess
themselves to be Saints, zealously walking in the Ways of Holiness,
constantly living in the Power of Godliness, and also faithfully performing
all their Works in Righteousness: every particular whereof necessarily
requires, a far more ample and larger Discourse, than this superficial,
short, occasional Glance expresses.

Oh then! what a great, happy, and rich Blessing, is a godly, virtuous, and
Religious King, from whom his people (under God) receive the whole Benefit of
Religion and Justice? He is the Anointed of the Lord, the Nurse of the Church,
the Father of the Commonwealth, an Husband to the Widow, a Mouth for the
Dumb, Limbs to the Lame, the Light of our Eyes, the Breath of our Nostrils;
and without whom (where there either is, or else ought to be Monarchical
Authority) both Church and Commonwealth will be in the way of Confusion; of
which our selves (of late) have bitterly tasted by woeful Experiment.

Oh then! how ought we to love our Dread Sovereign, to obey Him, to do our
best endeavors to preserve Him, to magnify God for Him, to rejoice in Him,
and both constantly and heartily to pray unto God for the long continuance of
Him amongst us, and His happy and prosperous Reign over us, and that (now at
the last) the All-powerfull God of Heaven would be pleased (in mercy toward
our Gracious Sovereign,) to arise in his own Strength, and make bare his own
Arm on His behalf, and to smite through the Loins of all His Enemies, bow
down the Backs of all His Adversaries, and enable Him to set His feet upon
the Necks of all those that either now do, or hereafter shall rise up in
Rebellion against Him, and to direct and protect Him continually from all
Treacheries, Conspiracies, and Treasons, and to hedge Him about with his
Providence and Protection, Zech. 2.^.
and to be constantly as a Wall of fire round about Him, to preserve Him from
the Violence of all adversary Power both bodily and ghostly, and to raise Him
up Forces (both by Sea and Land,) potent and powerful, and to let his blessed
Spirit come along with them, and direct them in all their military Practices,
and teach their hands to war and their fingers to fight, and cover their
heads in the day of Battle, and give them the Victory over all His, Their,
and Our Adversaries, and to wipe away all tears from His Eyes, and cheer up
His sorrowful heart, with the sacred Influences of comfort from his blessed
Spirit, and comfort Him for the time in which he has afflicted Him, and for
those years wherein (of late) He has suffered Adversity, and to dissolve the
Bonds and break the Fetters of His Captivity, and re-establish Him in His
Throne of Righteousness, for the advancement of Gods Glory, the farther
propagation of Christ's Gospel, the extirpation of all Popery, Heresy,
Superstition, Atheism, and all other Sects, and Schisms which are (at this
day) remaining in this our Kingdom, dissonant to Gods Will revealed in his
Word, for the Peace and Tranquillity of this Land, and the flourishing Estate
of this Church and Commonwealth wherein we live; distasting (as He has ever
done) both Alteration of the true Religion, and Toleration of any other;
choosing rather to suffer a long, hard, tedious, and barbarous Imprisonment,
than to perjure Himself, by the Breach of that Oath formerly taken by
Himself, at His Coronation.

Oh therefore! (in Gods fear) as it is our bounden Duty, let it also be our
constant Care, and frequent Practice, to pray to the Glorious, Mighty, and
Great God, for our Gracious, Pious, and Religious King; together with His
illustrious Offspring, that there may never be wanting one of that Royal
Race, to sway the Scepter of this our Kingdom righteously and religiously,
until Christ shall come in the Clouds at the latter day for to judge the World.

The very officious Denominations of King and Subject, are necessarily useful
for them both, whereby to put them both continually in mind, of what they ought
inevitably to perform, in all their particular Actions each unto other, viz:
the one by Office to Govern, and the other in Duty to Obey, and both of them
(at all times) to perform the same in Obedience to God; unto whom they must
both of them be (one day) responsible if guilty, either by omitting those Good
things which God has commanded, or by commitring those Evil things which God
has forbidden, viz: Rex a regendo dictus. Subjectus a subjiciendo dictus.


And to the end that Subjects may not be ignorant of this their Duty of
Obedience, Almighty God himself, who is the great and universal Monarch of
the whole World, having all Kings and Subjects at his own Command, expressly
commands us (in the holy Scripture) to honor the King whom he has made his
Vicegerent (over us) here upon Earth; the which Honor consists in the
hearty Expression of our willing and loving Obedience toward Him; the
Resistance of which supreme Authority, by Subjects casting off the yoke of
their lawful Obedience, being upon the Penalty of no less (to the illegal
Actors thereof) then Damnation. Romans 13.2.


So that, whosoever he is, that by wilful Disobedience (contrary to the Light
of his Knowledge and Conscience) trespasseth injuriously against the King, whom
God has expressly commanded to be Honored and Obeyed; does very wickedly even
by the same sinful rebellious Act, (as far as in him lies) smite through
the King even at God himself. What? shall God constitute a King and appoint
him to reign over a People, and command the People to Obey him? Romans 13.1. and
to Pray for him? 1 Timothy 2. v. 1, 2. and shall the People dare to disobey him,
and revile him?

Oh! that many thousands of this Kingdom were not (at this day) deeply guilty
of this cursed condition. What other thing (I pray you) may such a sinful
Quality in such a perverse People be called, then contemptuously smiting at God
himself through the King?

Yea, and so dearly does God affect, and tenderly love, those who are lawful
and religious Kings, as that, whatsoever Subjects shall do to such their
lawful Sovereigns, (delegated by God himself to the sublime Offices of
supreme Authority) either by yielding dutiful Obedience to them, or else by
wilful Disobedience resisting them, the everlasting Lord Paramount of all
Dominion, Almighty God himself, who is (...) the King of Kings, accounts the
same as done to himself: for (through Gods Mercy) there is so near a
Relation, and close Connection, betwixt God himself, and such religious Kings,
as that in reference hereunto, (...) Kings are called Gods themselves; and that
in a twofold respect, Primo, in respectu Potestatis. Secundo, in respectu
Pietatis.


First, because of that extraordinary Power and Authority which God has
conferred upon them above others:

Secondly, because of that exemplary Piety and Integrity which God requires to
be in them beyond others. And what Kings soever are thus qualified by God, both
with Power, and Piety, as (blessed be God for it) our Sovereign is, they carry
continually the Character and Image of God himself in their Persons amongst
the People. And to this alludeth that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said ye are Gods, and ye all are the Children of the most High. But
being subject to mortality, therefore, ye shall die like men, and fall like one
of the Princes.

Lo! thus corrupt hearted, and virulent spirited Persons, by such their
Disobedience unto so qualified, lawful, and Kingly Authority; become even
Fighters against God, Acts 5.39. The which Truth is perspicuously evidenced
unto us in that religious Dehortation given to those Israelitish Rebels, who
took up Arms and fought against their lawful King, Fight not against the
LORD GOD of your Fathers; 2 Chro. 13.12. Intimating thereby to the whole World,
that whosoever takes up Arms, and fights against his lawful King, fights
even against God himself.

Hence then, let all those that are guilty herein, tremble, tremble, yea,
tremble with Amazement, at the strict Rumination, and serious Consideration, of
so great, horrible, and ineffable Impiety; the unfathomable depth whereof, does
far transcend the deepest and largest Comprehension both of Men, and Angels;
that weak and mortal Men, should be so sinfully wicked, as to fight against
the Omnipotent and Immortal God, which all those Persons certainly do, who
after such a manner as is here declared, do oppose, take up Arms, and fight
against their lawful King.

Lo! such graceless and godless Persons, have just cause to fear, that the
righteous Lord will open the revengefull Quiver of his displeasure, and from
the strong bent Bow of his unappeaseable Anger, swiftly and fiercely send forth
the sharp Arrows of his furious Indignation against them, whereby they shall
be deadly wounded to their utter Confusion. According to the Lords righteous
dealing, toward those revolted Rebels, adhering to wicked and usurping
Jeroboam, who took up Arms and fought against their good, and lawful King
Rehoboam; unto whose malecontented and rebellious people, Jeroboam gave way to
their Worship in Religion, after that manner which best pleased them,
displaced and drove away the Lords faithful Priests and Levites, from their
lawful Habitations, and also utterly suppressed them from the necessary
Execution of their sacred Offices, who were conformable to the Law, and
dutiful Subjects to their King, lest they should keep up the peoples hearts in
Obedience to their lawful Sovereign; these things he did, thereby to further
his wicked Designs against their just and rightful King Rehoboam, whose
Wrongs (shortly after his Death) were mortally vindicated by his son Abijah:
for God stirred up the Spirit of good Rehoboams Son Abijah, and he raised an
Army of Four hundred thousand men, and with them feared not to go against
wicked Jeroboam, who had an Army of Eight hundred thousand able fighting men,
and fought against him, surprised him, destroyed his great and mighty Army,
and was (through Gods Blessing unto him) established in his Fathers Throne,
where he lived and reigned with great Honor, and Kingly Glory all the rest of
his days, in which he begot two and twenty Sons, and sixteen Daughters, and
then slept with his Fathers, and his son Asa reigned in his stead. Of the
which great and admirable Victory which God gave to Abijah, the Scripture
expresses in these words, Abijah and his people slew them with a great
slaughter, so that there fell down slain of Israel, (...) five hundred
thousand chosen men, 2 Chronicles. 13.17. The which words (being the Language of the
Holy Ghost) both may, and also ought usefully to serve, as a memorable Caveat
unto all Rebels that either now are, or hereafter shall live upon the face of
the Earth, to take heed that they neither take up Arms, nor fight against
their lawful King: for, here you plainly see, that it was neither their
gratnesse in Number, nor expertnesse in Warlike Service, that could preserve
these Men from Ruin, but they must be mortally wounded, fall down, and be
destroyed, because they had rebelled, taken up Arms, and fought against their
lawful Sovereign. And God is the same God in these days that he was in
those, as he has done in times that are past, so can he do for times that are
to come; for he is JEHOVAH, he changes not, Mal. 3.6.

So that, although Rebellion lies never so long lurking abstrucely in the
corrupt hearts of disobedient Persons, yet notwithstrnding, when once she
appears practically in the view of the World, actuating her cursed Designs,
against that lawful Authority unto which she ought to subject her self with
all dutiful Obedience, then she must not look for any long Continuance: For,
look into the Generations of old, even from the Creation of the World until
this very day, and then tell me, if ever any rebellious Persons taking up
Arms, and fighting against their lawful Sovereign, have enjoyed one Age of
an uninterrupted continued Prosperity; but that the black Clouds of just
Revenge have appeared unto them, and fiercely showred down the terrible
Storms of Gods righteous Vengeance upon them, to their deserved Confusion?

Object. But here peradventure some may object, Why should any tell us of
Rebellion? or of taking up Arms and fighting against our lawful Sovereign?
or of Confusion that is like to befall us for our so doing? What? Are not we in
the Favor of God? Has not God assisted us in all our Endeavors? Have not we
had the Blessing of God upon all our Military Practices? Has not God made us
Victorious? Have not all our Attempts been successful, and Designs
prosperous? Wherefore then should not we comfort our selves, and both boldly
and fearlesly go on in the same ways (which others call Rebellion) wherein
now we walk?

Answ. Unto which I answer with the words of Solomon, There is a way which
seems right to a man: but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove.
14.12. And Prove. 11.19. He that pursues evil, pursues it to his own death.
Yea, and it is one of the greatest Judgments that usually befalls the men of
this wicked World, when God suffers them to prosper in their sinful Courses.
Prosperity is no infallible Argument of Gods Favor, neither is Adversity any
evident Testimony of his Displeasure, for sapient Solomon tells us, that no man
knows either love or hatred, of all that is before him, Eccles. 9.1. And that
There is a just man that perishes in his righteousness: and there is a wicked
man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness, Eccles. 7.15.

And therefore, let no such blind infatuated Persons, being mis-guided by
their erroneous Conceptions, falsely flatter themselves with any such fallacious
Conceits, of being in Gods favor, because their actions (for the present) are
prosperous; for they can never comfortably assure themselves of Gods gracious
Love and special Favor toward them, (though never so prosperous in their
Designs) unless they have his fear before their eyes, which teaches them to
abstain from the working of all Iniquity, and to depart from the practice of
all Impiety, which none of those either do, or can do, so long as they
continue in the sinful perpetration of horrid Rebellion.

Now for a spiritual Salve wherewith to cure this carnal Infirmity, I do
refer all such deluded and selfe-deceiving Persons (for their farther and
fuller Convincement herein) wandering in the foggie Mists of blind Ignorance
and dangerous Errors, to that clear and infallible light of Truth which the
holy Scripture (by way of Collection) expresses, viz. That every successful
and prosperous military Action which the Providence of God permits, is not
justifiable in the sight of God from the Actors thereof, although God himself
commands it to be done.

Lo! this Truth evidently appears unto us, in the military Practices of Jehu
that Valiant, Courageous, and Kingly Captain, who exceedingly prospered in his
Warlike Actions, and did great Execution upon diverse Malefactors, and that
also by Gods own appointment; and yet notwithstanding, even Jehu himself must
be accounted as a Murderer in the sight of God, for his heart was not sincere
in the service of God, he was a Selfe-seeker and Selfe-server, aiming at his
own Ends, and not at the Glory of God: and therefore God threatened to visit
the blood of Izreel upon the house of Jehu, Hos. 1.4. What Jehu? That
prosperous, Valiant, and victorious Conqueror? Must He who did so much
military Service, and that also by Gods own Injunctions, and express
Commands? Must He (I say) be accounted as a Murderer in the sight of God? yea,
even Jehu himself must be reputed guilty of Murder, and his Posterity must be
responsible and suffer for the same.

And therefore deceive not thy self with the false Conception of warlike
Prosperity, for prosperous Successes in Military Services, are not always
infallible Arguments of the Favor of God: Josiah.
for one man may perish in them, and yet be in Gods Favor; and another man may
prosper in them, Jehu.
and yet be in Gods Displeasure.

The prosperous Success which some wicked men have in their evil Actions, does
Dadulus-like make them Wings, whereby they will mount so high toward the Sun,
until the heat of God's just Anger shall melt the Wax which holds the feathers
thereof together, and then themselves Icarus-like must fall down into the deep
Sea of God's Displeasuer, to their deadly Destruction.

Prosperous Success in evil Actions, makes wicked men think that they are
carried on as the Sun, Moon, and Stars are, without any restraining Resistance.

Yea, as long as there is a prevailing Ingredient, the which with prosperous
Success answers the Expectation of wicked men in their ungodly Enterprises;
so long they will endeavor to make all those their evil Actions justifiable,
because (for the present) they serve their turn, being compatible with their
own carnal Contentment: and will continue mustering up their Forces marching
still forward, and John-like driving on furiously in their pestilent,
pernicious and perverse paths of rebellious Impiety, though (at the last) their
so doing should prove to the Destruction of themselves, and many others.

Every Logician will rationally tell us, that the Consequence will necessarily
follow its undoubted Premises;

Hence then, Syllogis.
the Argument may thus be framed, viz.

Whosoever shall rebelliously take up Arms, Proposit.
and fight against that lawful Authority, unto which he ought legally to yield
Obedience and Subjection, (though never so prosperous therein for the present)
does thereby make himself liable to the Malediction and Wrath of God:

The guilty Consciences of too many thousands of this English-Nation, Assumpt.
will hereunto (at this day) add the Assumption:

And what subtle Sophister is there to be found in all this sublunary World,
Conclusion.
that without great absurdity can deny the Conclusion?

Furthermore, for our fuller Satisfaction in this particular, we must
necessarily consider, the Cause of wicked men's such prosperous Success, as it
reflects upon God permitting the same.

The Primary, Chief, and Efficient Cause, a qua res est, and causa causati,
sine qua non est Causa. Upon which all other Causes with their concomitant
Circumstances have their Dependence; and from whence also all inferior Agents
fetch their Strength and Action; is, The Eternal and Omnipotent Power of
Almighty God, as the only Center from which all Operations first spring, and
the boundless Circumference into which all Actions run. Nam, Aug.
Deus est in omnibus rebus causa essendi. For all Powers have their being from
God. Answerable to that of the Apostle, For whom are all things, Heb. 2.10.
and by whom are all things. And also according to that Nominal Attribute of
God used amongst the Grecians, denoting his Essence; viz. (...). being derived
(...), because (by his Omnipotency) he runs through, and compasses all
things whatsoever. Ephe. 4.6.
Who is above all in his Power; and through all by his Providence. Heb. 1.3.
Psalm. 103.19. Mat. 10.29.30. Ephesians. 1.11.
Whose powerful Providence does continually govern all his Creatures, and all
their Actions. And, in both Creatures and Actions, at all times, and in all
places, working all things after the council of his own will.

And, as alluding to this very Purpose, the Natural Philosophers themselves
call God Principium, (...), Effectivum, primam Naturam, primam Causam, Causam
infinitam, primum Motorem, primum Movens.

And farther also, as by Philosophy we learn, that the Soul of Man is the
Original Cause of all Motion in Man; lame and impotent Motion only excepted:
the which proceeds from another Cause; viz. some defect in the Body. Even so,
by Divinity we are taught, Genesis 2.7.
that God is the Life of the Soul. And without him, we can have neither Life,
Act. 17.28.
Moving, nor Being. Answerable to that Expression of Christ himself to his
Disciples, Ioh. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing. And that acknowledgment also of the Church
herself concerning the Almightie's Power, Psalm. 74.13.
God is my King of old: the help that is done upon the earth, he does it
himself.

So that, we may truly collect from Philosophy, that, God is the Beginner and
first Cause of Motion; but, not of defective Motion: that is from our Selves.
And also safely conclude from Theology, Amos 3.6.
that, God is the Original and Author of every Action; but, not of any Evil in
any Action: that is, from the Committers thereof themselves.

Hence then we may learn this infallible Point of our Christian Religion,
without the true Knowledge and right Understanding whereof, it is not possible
for us to preserve the Purity of Christian Doctrine, in diverse other
Orthodoxall Points of our Protestant Religion: viz. that the merciful
Concurrence of God's Power, in all the good Actions of Godly men, by his
Providence working; and the just Withdrawment thereof, from all the evil
Actions of Wicked men, by his Permission suffering: makes clearly for the full
Justification of the righteous God, and the just Condemnation of unrighteous
Men. According to that condoling Complaint of the Lord himself, concerning
Israel's just, Hos. 13.9.
and due deserved Self-Ruine, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self; but, in
me is thy help.

And here, (for the farther clearing of this Point, which to many Persons may
seem somewhat abstruse) we are inevitably put in mind of the Decree of God, and
the Will of Man: and, ought also therein seriously to consider, of their joint
Concurrence in one and the same Thing, and several Orderings and Operations,
in particular Actions: for, to Order, and to Act, are two several Things, and
may also be differently done, by two particular Persons, in one and the same
Action; and yet the One, not compelled by the Other, either to Order, or Act.

As for Example,

God's Decree does not enforce Man's Will; but, the Will of Man works and
moves of it self. Yea, the Will of Man has in it self the beginning of evil
Motion, and sins willingly. Therefore, though the Decree of God imposes a
Necessity upon all secondary- Causes, so that, they must needs be framed and
disposed according to the same; yet, are they not coacted or compelled
thereunto: but, are all of them carried with their own voluntary Motion. So
that, God's Decree does move all secondary- Causes, but, not take away their
own proper Motion.

For, all secondary- Causes, are so moved of God himself, being the primary-
Mover of them; as that, he always does well, holily, and justly, in every one
of his particular Movings, Psalm. 145.17.
being righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. But, the
secondary- Causes themselves being moved, are carried in contrary Motions,
according to their own Nature and Frame. If (therefore) they be Good, then they
are carried unto that which is Good: but, if they be Evil, then they are
carried unto that which is Evil. So that, according to the double beginning of
their Motion and Will, there is a double and diverse Work and Effect performed
by them.

From whence then we may safely collect, that the Decree of God does not take
away the Will of Man, or the Contingency thereof; but, only order and dispose
it.

The which Disposal both of Man's Will and its Contingency, is not done only
in part, but also even to the full, and that by the just Decree of our holy
God. According to that Expression of Solomon, Prove. 16.33.
The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord.

The words there translated Lot and Lap, are in the Original Language of the
Old Testament (...) Haggoral ve Chek, and the next words following, viz. the
whole disposition thereof, are (...) Colmischphato. Intimating thereby, that
nothing ought to be attributed to Chance or Fortune, because all things are
determined in the Council of God, which shall come to pass: and, by the Power
of his Decree, Providence, and Permission, (in his due time) they shall be
effected.

True it is indeed that the translated Scripture tells us of Chance and
Fortune, yet ought we to be informed, that there is nothing casual in regard
of God's Knowledge, but there are many things casual in respect of Man's
Ignorance. So that, we must not ascribe any thing to blind Fortunes
Performance, but attribute all unto God's Allseeing Providence; yet so, that
the Divine Providence does not take away the Will of Man, or the Contingency
thereof: for God according to the common Axiom of the School, non necessitat,
sed facilitat, he does induce the Godly to do good with Alacrity, not enforce
them against their Will with the least Urgency.

A plain and pregnant proof we have to this purpose, by the Fall of Adam, being
(at the first) both Himself and his Will made good; yet, mutably good: for he
so stood, as that he might fall. The Cause of whose Fall was, the voluntary
Inclination of his own Will unto Evil. Not that his Will was any thing at all
forced, or by any Violence of God's Purpose compelled thereunto: but, Adam fell
of Himself, without any Coaction (at all) from God.

And, for the better clearing of this Point, we must a little farther consider
of Adam in first Condition; to whom God gave (at his Creation) Naturam
flexibilem, a flexible Nature, being subject to mutation: creating him in
Potestate standi, seu Posse cadendi, in Power of standing, or Possibility of
falling. His Power of standing proceeded from God, as being his Creator; his
Possibility of falling came from himself as being but a Creature. Aug. Con.
Whereupon Saint Augustine says, God made Man ex nihilo, of Nothing: and
therefore left in Man a Possibility to return in nihilum, into Nothing, if he
transgressed the Command of his Maker.

And thus, Man was even ab Origin suo, from his Creation, very incident to his
Alteration. The which evidently shows the great Difference between the
Omnipotent and Unchangeable Nature of the holy God, and the Impotent and
Instable Condition of sinful Man. For, it is a Maxim in Divinity,
Immutabiliter esse bonum, proprium solius est Dei. Mal. 3.6. Heb. 6.17. Isa.
14.27. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. Job 9.12. Pro. 21.30.
To be immutably Good, is only proper to God.

Hence then we may learn, that the Decree of God, did not take away Adam's
Will, nor the Contingency thereof: but, only order and dispose the same.

So that, Adam's Fall was (...), id est, Spontaneus, Voluntary, even of his own
Accord, without any Compulsion by any other. Whereupon, a learned Writer says,
Beza.
Volens peccavit, and proprio mout. He sinned willingly, and of his own proper
Motion.

The Guilt of whose Sin has spread it self through the whole World, even as a
Leprosy, upon all his Offspring; strictly obliging them with himself to
eternal Punishment, into which Adam (by that his Fall) joyntlyentangled
himself, and all his Posterity. For, as the Person of the first Man corrupted
the whole Nature; even so, that very Nature it self, does now corrupt all the
Persons of his Posterity.

The which bitter Root of Adam's planting, has brought forth innumerable
Multitudes of wild Gourds, 2 King. 4.39.
whereof all his Posterity must needs taste, though it be with never so great
Distastfullnesse, yea, and Death it self to them all. Romans 5.12.
For Sin and Death, being cursed Correlatives, will (one day) cleave as close
together, 1 Samuel 15.33. Romans 6.23.
as Samuel's Sword and Agag's Flesh did to each other: no way under Heaven can
possibly be found out, to keep them afunder.

So that, all the Sons of Adam, that either heretofore ever were, now are, and
hereafter shall be, (as they taste thereof) may justly cry out against
themselves, as did those Children of the Prophets, to the Prophet Elisha, when
they had so distastfully tasted of their own bitter Broth, (...) Mavet bassir,
2 King. 4.40.
id est, Latin, Mors est in Olla. Death is in the Pot.

Therefore, no Evil at all, be it of the least Nature whatsoever, (either in
the Fall of Adam, or in any other Person whomsoever) ought to be imputed to the
Decree of God, but, must fully, and only be attributed to the Will of Man. The
which wholly proceeds from the voluntary Inclination of Man's own Will unto
Evil. Ezekiel. 18.31. Romans 6.12.


The stinking Camarina, filthy Puddle, and foul Fountain whereof, being the
very Seed and Spawn of all Sins whatsoever; which so greatly infecteth,
contagiously contaminateth, and pestilently poysoneth the Bodies and Souls of
all Adam's Offspring in this World, is, Original Sin, viz. the cursed
Corruption of Man's polluted Nature, the which is Originally born, and
propagated together with our Selves; being by natural Generation lineally
descended from the defiled Loins of our polluted Primogenitor, disobedient
Adam: which makes all the Sons of men as long as they live in this world, so
incident to fall into Sin.

For, Sin- Original, and Sin- Actual, are, Species subalternatae inter se,
Kinds subordinate one to another, the Latter having an hereditary Relation to
the Former, as the Daughter to the Mother; the Original, being (as it were)
the Cause and Root, and, the Actual, the Effect and Fruit, proceeding from the
same: and both Original and Actual, jointly concurring, and cursedly
conducing to the utter Ruin of all Sinners. And thus, 1 John 5.19. Hos. 13.9.
the whole world lying in wickedness, every one that perishes therein, is the
sole-Causer of his own Destruction.

And here, if We of this English Nation would seriously consider, and should
strictly search with soundness of Judgment, either as deep Divines, or
profound Philosophers, into the mysterious Manner of God's working against us,
in these present Distractions amongst us; we shall evidently find no small
Argument to be drawn, from the great Disparity, between Divine, Providence, and
Worldly Policy: the General Result whereof must necessarily be, this ensuing
Hebrew divine Aphorism,

(...) id vulgo apud Latinos dicitur, Homo (...) Proponit; Pro. 16.9. Pro.
16.33. Psalm. 33.11.
sed Deus Disponit. Man merely Proposes; id est, Voluntas Hominis: that is,
the Will of Man; but, God wholly Disposes; id est, Decretum Dei, that is, the
Decree of God. Answerable to that Expression of Solomon, Prove. 19.21.
Many devices are in a man's heart: but, the council of the Lord shall stand.
For, as in the vast Frame of Nature, Bodies compared one with another seem
Heterogenean, consisting not only of different Constitutions, but also of
diverse and sundry opposite Operations: yet notwithstanding, as so many Wheels
in an artificial Engine, are by the same Hand directed to the same common Use;
even so, all the Councels and Actions of men, howsoever they seem casually to
meet with, and oppositely to justle one against the other; yet, are they
certainly pre-ordained by the same Infinite Council, to cooperate to the same
Universal End.

The which Proposal of Man, and Disposal of God is a Proposition which
amongst worldly minded Politicians, is better known as a Proverb, then
acknowledged in their Practice. And yet, the longer they Run in this Maze of
Worldly Policy, the farther they Estrange themselves from Christian Piety: and
the Distance which at the first seemed to be below their Sense, will at the
last be found to be above their Understanding.

And thus may it also one day befall those super-polipragmatical Politicians of
this Age in this Land, now amongst us; who when they are in the midst of their
Mirth, and have mounted themselves up to the highest Step of their usurped
Power and Ambition; even then, Dan. 5.6.
they may Belshazzar-like be stricken with Fear and Consternation, for those
horrid, bloody, and treacherous Actions, which they have now usurpatiously
attempted: at which time through their Unskilfulnesse for the wise managing of
those wicked, though weighty Affairs, being then justly infatuated by the
justice of God against them, they may in a confused Combustion, Act the part
rather of Phaeton then of Phoebus, to the Confusion of themselves and many
others.

But, had such politic Persons been so religiously happy, as to have had so
much saving Acquaintance with the Word of God, for the good of themselves and
others; as they craftily had, and still have, with their own wicked Wills,
cunning Combinations, and pernicious Projects, against both King and Kingdom;
they should doubtless have heard the Lord in the holy Scriptures (before this
time) both frequently calling to them, and also severely threatening to inflict
his Judgments upon them: the which (long ago) would have staggered the
politic Council of the Wicked, and turned the worldly Wisdom of the Wisest
of them into Folly. But, they resembling the blind Andabates will not see,
Psalm. 58.4, 5.
and as deaf Adders refuse to hear the Truth declared to them; whereby their
Consciences might be convinced, their Souls converted, and their Lives
reformed: that so, there might be a speedy Peace fully concluded, and firmly
settled throughout this whole Kingdom, between King and Subjects; for, the
Glory of God, and Welfare of our English-Nation.

But, woe and alas, may we of this English-Nation (at this day) justly cry out,
that those pernicious Politicians being averse to Peace, are in their present
Practice become like wilful Mariners, having (as it were) already shipped
themselves for a dangerous Voyage, and are now desperately resolved to sail
along in the vast Ocean, as the windy Gusts of their new Council will drive
them, and the inconstant Tide of Occasion shall befriend them; adventuring all
Hazards of their own and others Safety, which by the means of Enemies,
Tempests, Rocks, Gulphs, Whales, Quicksands, etc. may any ways befall them;
running rashly thereby, the great Danger of their own and many others, both
Temporal and Eternal Ruin.

Lo! such desperate Rebels by their pernicious practices in Rebellion, may not
unfitly be paralleled to those impious Spirits Zijm and Ochim, Isa. 13.21.
breathing-out nothing but destructive Desolation, against our poor distracted,
and distressed English-Nation.

And yet notwithstanding, all the Adversaries Opposition (at this day) against
Kingly Authority, there was never under the Cope of Heaven a clearer Truth, so
ancient, so generally acknowledged by all Christians, and that also in all Ages
since the name of Christ was first professed upon the Earth, as is, the
Doctrine of Faith in God, and of Obedience to lawful Princes; which being
fully known, and thoroughly practiced, does alone (indeed) make Christians, and
Christian Religion, manifestly to differ from all other People, and Religions
in the World: and the same Orthodox Doctrine, England has willingly embraced,
and obediently practiced for many years last past with Glory to God, and
Comfort to Herself; until of late, the horrid sin of Rebellion like the
Witchcraft of Circe transformed Her into another Creature: which strange,
unhappy, and unlooked-for Metamorphosis, does mournfully minister (at this day)
just Occasion to every religious, and judicious Spectator, both to exclaim of
Her, and to lament for Her: She being now foully fallen off from the holy
Condition of Her first Creation. For the sacred Image of God stamped in the
reasonable Soul of man, is to the Children of God both Law and Liberty; as well
to preserve the just Rights of their lawful Princes, as the full Freedom of
their own Privileges: but, the ugly Emblem of Satan, imprinted in the
unsanctified Souls of wicked men, is to the Sons of Belial Liberty without Law;
respecting only the full Freedom of their own Privileges, nothing regarding
the just Rights of their lawful Princes.

That (...) Behemoth, Job. 40.10.
the multitude of earthly Beasts, the belluina multorum capita, that many-fold
headed serpentine- Hydra, (I mean) the rebellious Anti-monarchicall Patty of
the English-Nation; whose Hearts, Heads, and Hands, by affecting, projecting,
and acting, the heinous Sin of horrid Rebellion against their lawful
Sovereign; do thereby show themselves rather heathenish and mischievous
Monsters, then rational and religious Men.

And here, I willingly would demand, What is that which those obstinate Persons
would have, who (at this day) thus rigidly, barbarously and violently oppose
our Gracious King?

Would they violently take from Him that Sovereign Right which the God of
Heaven has freely given Him over Them? Would they wholly anihilate all Kingly
Authority? Would they utterly abolish the worthy and ancient Church Government
of this Kingdom? Would they fully destroy the good, wholesome, necessary, and
fundamental Laws of this Land? Would they speedily turn a well settled
Monarchy, into a licentious Anarchy, whereby themselves might live like loose
Libertines without any Restriction? If these be their Intentions, then let me
tell them as a timely Remembrancer, these things for them to do, are not only
Irregular and Impious, but also Difficult and Dangerous; and therefore, let the
desperate Attempers thereof take heed, least by their earnest endeavoring to
Effect them, they do most miserably involve this whole Kingdom, both Church
and Commonwealth, into a Labyrinth of Languishment, and Chaos of Confusion.

When God at the beginning had made Adam, he gave him Power over all the
Creatures, so that, there was nothing but Monarchy at the Creation; and the
like also was restored to us by Christ at our Redemption: and so to be taken by
us, both from the Father and the Son, as the best, most excellent, and only
Form of Government for all Nations in the World. And, not only Monarchical
Government appointed for Men, but (also as it were) for all other Creatures in
the World, for every Species of all Creatures have a Subordination to some one
of the same Kind; as the Birds of the Air to the Eagle, the Beasts on the Land
to the Lion, the Fishes in the Sea to the Whale, the Bees in their Hives to the
Chief Governor amongst them, etc. But woe and alas! the irrational Creatures
by the very Instinct of Nature yield more subjection to their Superiors, then
the Rebels of England living in the Light of the Gospel do (at this day) to
their lawful Sovereign.

And as a farther Aggravation to his Majesty's Affliction; diverse of those
pernicious Politicians that are guilty of, and also Agents in this horrid
Rebellion against our lawful Sovereign, are such as have been raised to great
Honors by Court-Preferments, who with their court-like Dissimulation seemed to
their over-credulous Kingly Master as Angels of Light by their Words; but, woe,
and alas! they proved to be against Him like Devils of Darkness by their
Deeds. Even such as those ungodly and wicked Doers were of whom the Psalmist
complained, which speak friendly to their Neighbors, but imagine mischief in
their hearts. Psalm. 28.3. And thus equivocatingly they dissembled the
profession of Fidelity toward Him in their Mouths, keeping treacherously an
impious Disloyalty against His Royal Person, Crown and Dignity in their
Hearts; the which as Opportunity offered it self to them, they manifested (to
the uttermost) in their Lives.

But, against all such unnatural and ungrateful Rewarders, Solomon
pronounces a sorrowful Sentence, Pro. 17.13.
He that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. The
Evil of such impious Ingratitude shall constantly dwell with, and certainly
bring Punishment upon such evil- Rewarders.

To render Evil for Evil, is the Part of a Beast: to render Good for Good, is
the Part of a Man: to render Good for Evil, is the Part of a Saint: but, to
render Evil for Good, is the Part of a Devil. And yet notwithstanding, woe,
and alas! the last of these Renderings have lately been, and still are rigidly
Rendered to our Gracious Sovereign, by his ungracious and ungrateful Enemies.
So that, our gracious, lawful, and loving Sovereign, may justly (at this day)
say of those his graceless, lawless, and envious Enemies, as the princely
Prophet David himself (in his days) spoke of his cruel, injurious, and false
Friends, Thus have they rewarded me evil for good, Psalm. 109.4.
and hatred for my good will. For, thus diabolical has their Disposition
been, in their late perverse Passages acted against Him.

And therefore, of, upon, and against all such evil Agents, may we all (at this
day) with causefull heavy Hearts complainingly cry out, Quis furor, O caeci,
and surdi scelerum? O you blind and deaf men, what strange Madness to act such
Evils has seized upon your Spirits? What can you justly imagine will be the
final conclusion of these continued Courses, but only the calamitons
Confusion of the English-Nation; which by such your pestilent Practices you
will bring upon your selves with many thousands of others, to both your and
their deadly Destruction? And yet, in the Interim, know all of you assuredly,
that all your Power upon Earth is limited by the Power of Heaven; and when God
shall be pleased to relieve his own Children that are now by your Tyranny over
them greatly afflicted; then your usurped Power will be totally restrained, and
your selves also wholly confounded. And then the Children of God shall joyfully
sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 124.7.
Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers: the snare is
broken, and we are delivered.

So that, although the Plots and Counterplots of Rebellious Men, may be
craftily contrived, pernitiously prosecuted, and (for a while) also absurdly,
abusively, and violently acted, by ambitious, malicious, and wickedly witty
cunning Politicians; yet notwithstanding, both themselves and all their Actions
have Relation to the Divine Providence and Permission; and when once the Lord
God Omnipotent shall be pleased to look down (from Heaven) with his pitiful
Eyes of tender Compassion, upon the bleeding Condition of poor, distracted, and
distressed Englands Affliction, and to arise in his own Strength, make bare his
own Arm on her behalf, and take the Matter into his own Hand; he can put an
Hook into their Nostrils, and a Bridle into their Lips, whereby to restrain
them; and also (maugre all their Designs) speedily bring their greatest Power
to its utmost Period: for the Divine Eternal Providence, and Wicked Worldly
Policy, may not unfitly be compared to the Ark of God, and the Idol Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.3, 4. the Former shall (for ever) stand, but the Latter (in God's due
time of punishing) must certainly fall.

Oh! how ought the serious Consideration hereof, to quench the fiery heat, and
quell the fierce fury, of the most desperate deceived Rebels, from their
farther military prosecution against their lawful Sovereign?

And here as a memorable Caveat against all such desperate Rebels, let me
instance unto them, that fearful Judgment which befell Adonijah for his
Usurpation.

The hauty Heart of aspiring Adonijah, being proudly puf'd up with an ambitious
desire of Kingly Power; prepared for Himself Charets and Horsemen, and Fifty
men to run before him, whereby to express publicly to the World his Regal
Magnificence: and also spoke very largely to that purpose, saying, (...) Any
emloch. 1 King. 1.5.
I will reign.

Lo thus, in his Thoughts he Projected, by his Words he Declared, and by his
Actions he Attempted, quantum in se, what lay in his Power, even by his wicked
Usurpation for to Rule the Kingdom of Israel, unto which he had no Right, for
it properly belonged to his Brother King Solomon. But what became of him for
his Usurpation?

Lo, the just Judgment of God seized upon him, insomuch, as that, (although
Himself was of the Blood-Royall) His days were ended in blood. 1 King. 2^.25.


And here my Heart compells my Hand to iterate these tragical Words, as a
Christian Caution, to all the obstinate Rebels of our English-Nation, whereby
to deter them from any such godless and graceless Usurpation; HIS DAYS
WERE ENDED IN BLOOD.

God give them Grace to amend their Lives in this Particular, least as bad, or
a worse End befall them, for the like Usurpation (at this day) practiced by
them.

For in the heinous Sin of bloody Rebellion, there lies secretly wrapped up,
the just Vengeance of the righteous God; and when the Sin of Rebellion is
thoroughly ripe, then the due deserved Punishment of it will certainly break
forth, and fiercely fly upon the Committers thereof, to their inevitable and
deadly Destruction.

Insomuch, as that those pernicious Persons, whose Heads (at this day) project,
whose Hearts affect, and whose Hands act the Sin of Rebellion, against their
lawful Sovereign; the Prophet David who was inspired with the blessed Spirit
of God plainly tells them, Psalm. 62.3.
They shall be slain all the sort of them; yea, as a tottering wall shall they
be, and like a broken hedge.

And yet notwithstanding all this, methinks I hear some obstinate and
incorrigible Rebel, who desperately desiteth (though against both the Word of
God and the Laws of this Land) to continue still in his own present and cursed
Condition, to persist in his perverse Paths, and to walk in the wicked Ways of
his own rebellious Heart say unto me;

What necessity is there for so much to have been spoken of concerning
Monarchical Authority?

Must we subject our selves so strictly thereunto?

Can we not evade it? but must we inevitably be obedient to it?

Quest. What although in Ancient time, the Old Testament under the Law required
such Obedience to Kings as you have here declared; yet notwithstanding, we who
are Believers do conceive, that we are not obliged to such Obedience to Kings
now in the New Testament under the Gospel; and therefore, why should Obedience
to Kings be so earnestly preached unto us, and so strictly pressed upon us in
these days? Does the New Testament bind us to such Obedience?

Answ. Unto which I Answer, The holy Apostle S. Peter, who was himself a
Gospel Preacher, called immediately to that sacred Office by Jesus Christ, and
also inspired powerfully with the Holy Ghost; and according to that heavenly
and blessed Inspiration expressly commanded the Jews, and in them also all
Christians to the End of this present World, in these very words, (...), 1 Pet.
2.17. the which words being translated are, Fear God, Honor the King.

He there links God and the King together, as justly he may, for there is such
a near Relation, and close Connection betwixt God and the King, as that the
true Fear of God, and due Honor of the King, are Individuals; they are
Inseparables, never to be divided, but constantly dwell together, in one and
the same sincere Heart, of a faithful Servant to God, and loyal Subject to
the King.

Hence then, let none (deluding the World) fallaciously say, they have Gods
true Fear before their Eyes, who have not really the Kings due Honor in their
Hearts.

And if the Kings due Honor be in their Hearts, then it will both constantly
and perspicuously appear in their Lives, for every Tree is known by its
fruits, Mat. 7.20.

If Men truly fear God, then will they also faithfully honor the King, in
God, and for God, whose Vicegerent He is.

Which due Honor of the King consists in the Peoples Love, and Obedience to
Him: viz: when as His People shall obediently Love Him, and lovingly Obey Him.

The which Fear of God, and Honor of the King, in such a People so qualified,
will inevitably work in them, a constant, cordial, and universal Obedience
to all the Commandments of God, as also an hearty wel-wishing toward their
lawful Sovereign, by frequently, faithfully and fervently praying to God for
Him; and also a continual wel-speaking of Him, constantly vindicating His
Honor, by boldly contradicting all those that falsely and maliciously speak
against Him; and also helping Him to the uttermost of their Abilities, both
with Persons, and Purses, as Necessities require, and Occasions are offered.

So that, if disobedient to the King, then fearlesse of God; and if fearlesse
of God, then ready to run into all Impiety; and that with as much Violence and
Eagerness as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. Jer. 8.6. Of which our
distracted England (of late) has sorrowfully tasted by woeful Experience.

But woe, and alas! the quite contrary Effects, to those which the true Fear
of God, and due Honor of the King produce, have not only been formerly, but
are also still both too fluently and frequently practiced, by too many
thousands (amongst us) in these Dismal and Disastrous Days.

Insomuch as that,

If sturdy Tumults arising, and violently proceeding, by the which driving our
Dread Sovereign (through fear) from His Royal Habitation, be honoring of
Him, then (at the beginning of these Troubles) He was Honored.

If furiously chaseing His Majesty's Royal, peaceable, and innocent Person,
from place to place, circumventingly pursuing Him, and craftily hunting after
Him, (even Saul-like toward David) as a Partridge upon the Mountains, be
honoring of Him, then He has been Honored.

If Raising Forces upon Him, and taking up Arms against Him, whereby to
suppress His Regal Power, be honoring of Him, then He is Honored.

If Separation of His lawful and Royal Consort, to gether with all those
Olive Branches, His Dear and Princely Children from Him, be honoring of Him,
then He is Honored.

If Deprivation of all His just Rights, Privileges, Prerogatives and Revenues,
unjustly from Him, be honoring of Him, then He is Honored.

If the Imprisonment of His Royal Person, abridging Him of His Princely
Liberty, and falsely calumniating His Candid and Royal Reputation, be honoring
of Him, then He is Honored.

Lo! these are a few of those many inhumane Injuries, and barbarous
Indignities, which formerly have been, and still are most injuriously
perpetrated against Him.

Oh, pitiful Condition, into which (at this day) He is deeply involved.

Is this that Legal Active Obedience, which all Loyall-hearted and Dutiful
Subjects, (who rightly fear God, and heartily honor the King) owe to their
Just and Lawful Sovereign? God Forbid.

And the Lord in much Mercy, with his tender Eyes of loving Pity, look down
from Heaven, and speedily deliver this our distressed, guilelesse, faithful,
and true hearted Israelite out of all His Troubles.

Methinks I hear His Majesty in the Anxiety, Anguish, and Bitterness of His
Soul, with great Solicitude, Sadness, and Pensiveness of Spirit, whose pious
Affections (through Gods grace) moving Him to follow Christ His Captain, and
(as a faithful spiritual Soldier) manfully to fight under his Banner,
against Sin, the World and the Devil, is now brought by the Providence and
Permission of God into the fiery Furnace of Affliction, for the firm trial of
His saving Faith, and profitable Christian Exercise of Gods heavenly graces
within Him; and also (by probability extracted from fatal Conjectures) in the
very Twilight of His time, betwixt the Day of Life, and Night of Death, (being
now a PRISONER in Carishrooke-Castle in the Isle of Wight) mournfully
complaining unto God, in these words:

Oh! my loving and compassionate God, who by thy most holy, wise, and powerful
Providence, do continually preserve and govern all thy Creatures, and all
their Actions; I humbly pray thee for Jesus Christ his sake, to grant me Pardon
and Patience; thou that searchest the heart, and triest the reins, thou
know the Sincerity of my Souls Service toward thee; my constant Resolution
for the continuation of the Protestant Religion; the careful Preservation of
the Ancient Laws of this Kingdom; the rightful Privileges of Parliament;
the just Liberty of the Subjects; the firm Settlement of Truth and Peace
amongst the People; and the Conscience I make of keeping that Oath administered
to Me, and also taken by Me at My Coronation: for which things sake, etc. I am
now deeply involved into great Misery: and therefore, O My tenderhearted God,
take Me into the safe custody of thy powerful Protection, and shelter Me under
the preservative Wings of thy special Providence; for the fierce Floods of
popular Rage are risen up against Me, the swelling Surges of mischievous
malicious Adversaries look big upon Me, the rough Waves of the rude Multitude
strive to overflow Me, the proud Billows of insolent insulting Enemies have
almost overwhelmed Me, and the violent Streams of the bitter waters of
Affliction are also every day ready to swallow Me up: all which I know thou
can (if thou will) suppress at thy Pleasure; who stillest (when thou
please) the raging of the Seas, Psalm. 65.7.
the noise of the Waves, and the madness of the People. And now, o Lord! in
this My great Extremity, I fly unto thee who art Almighty, with whom there is
Help, from whom there may be Relief, upon whom depends My Hope, and in whom
rests My Confidence; one Deep calling upon another, Psalm. 42.9. the Depth of
My Misery, calling upon the Depth of thy Mercy, craving thy present and
powerful Assestance, for My speedy and joyful Deliverance. And though (for
the present) My Body from Liberty be restrained, yet (through thy Mercy toward
me) My Heart with grace from thee is greatly enlarged, and Love in Me toward
thee much increased: thou have often put the oil of gladness into My heavy
Heart, and such sacred Influences of heavenly Comforts I daily do receive from
thee, as that I nothing doubt of thy Mercy toward Me.

Oh, my dear God! thou have been graciously pleased to make Me thy
Vicegerent over three Kingdoms; but woe, and alas! I am now deprived of all
that Power which formerly I had in them all three; abridged not only of that
sweet Society of My dear Consort, but also of all My loving and tenderhearted
Children, who might in this My great Distress (as comfortable Cordials to My
heavy Heart) afford Me some Comfort; and those who formerly were, and still
ought to be My loyal Subjects, are now risen up against Me, have here
Imprisoned Me, and I am now become not only as an Abject unto them, but also
the very Object of their Reproach, Scorn, Contempt and Derision: and none of
My Subjects in all My three Kingdoms, will vouchsafe to rescue Me out of Mine
Enemies hands.

And in this My great Distress, My tears have been my meat day and night,
Psalm. 42.3. while Mine Enemies daily and hourly reproach Me, and also craftily
plot greater Mischiefs against Me; not only for the deadly destruction of My
mortal Body, but also for the utter Extirpation of Monarchical Authority;
whereby My Royal Issue and their Princely Posterity, should (for future times)
be for ever abridged of all their just, lawful, and Kingly Power (in this
Kingdom) after Me: for which My potent Adversaries so wickedly intending, and
cruelly practicing against both My self and Mine, I have often eaten the bread
of Carfulness, and mingled my drink with weeping. Psalm. 102.9.


Now in this My deplorable, captivated, and calamitous Condition, I beseech
thee, O My gracious God, who breakest not the bruised reed, nor quenchest the
smoking flax, look down with thy favorable Eyes of fatherly Pity upon me,
and let thy merciful and loving Bowels of tender Compassion yerne toward Me;
Hear my prayer, o Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy
peace at my tears, Psalm. 39.13. And if it shall please thee (O my good God) to
deliver Me out of the hands of Mine Enemies, whereby My Life may be preserved
from their fury, I shall ever praise thee, for being so merciful to Me; but
if otherwise (in thy heavenly Wisdom) thou have decreed, concerning the last
Period, and inevitable Expiration of My natural Life, that (Martyrlike) I
shall deeply drink with My blessed and sweet Savior, in his own passionate
Cup of bitter Death, and so My mortal Body to perish and be destroyed by the
Violence of the People; yet shall I ever acknowledge thee to be righteous, and
will always (even to the last breath of My Life) pray from the ground of My
Heart, Lord, pardon whatsoever I have done amiss through the whole course of
My Life, and sanctify all the Dispensations of thy Providence (in these My
great Sufferings) unto Me, forgive all Mine Enemies their cruel and unnatural
dealing toward Me, lay not their Sins to their Charge, and then, Not my
will, but thine (o righteous Father) for ever be done.

Lo! these pitiful Passages (proceeding from His Majesty's greatly grieved
Heart) together with many others, methinks I hear Ecchoing in mine Ears; for
which by way of Christian Sympathy, as well as obliged subjective Duty toward
His Majesty, my heavy Heart (Heaven is my Record) does often pray privately, and
sorrowful Soul mourn secretly on his behalf: and so in like manner, all
other loyal hearted Subjects ought for to do as well as my self; that
thereby we might prevail with the God of Heaven, for our gracious Sovereign
His present Deliverance out of all His Troubles, and speedy Re-establishment in
His Throne of Righteousness.

The which over-joyous and welcome Blessing, to this perplexed and distracted
King-dome, our good God (in his great Mercy) grant to us all, for the Glory of
his great Name, the Peace of this disquieted Land, and the slourishing Estate
of this English Church and Commonwealth wherein we live: and let all those who
sincerely profess and faithfully love the Lord Jesus Christ, truly searing
the living God, and heartily honoring their lawful King, say hereunto
unfeignedly (with my self) even from the very ground of their HRARTS and
SOULS, So be it. Amen. Amen.

Oh! let us all in the filial fear of God, both continually remember,
carefully observe, and constantly put in practice, S. Paul's patheticall
Exhortation to his Romans, If thine Enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give
him drink, Romans 12.20. And also that pious Precept of our blessed Savior
Christ Jesus (in that holy Sermon of his in the Mount) unto the people, Love
your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefull use you, and persecute you, Mat. 5.44.

What? are we expressly commanded to be thus helpful to our Enemies? and shall
we sit still contentedly, and suffer our royal Friend, our nursing Father,
yea, our Gracious Sovereign to remain in Prison, and not strive to rescue
Him? to lie in Misery, and not labor to relieve Him? Shall not His Extremity,
be our Opportunity? and such a One also as He is? of whom we may all truly and
deservedly express this Encomium and Commendation, without the least touch of
pleasing Flattery; that He is one of the Jewels of the Protestant Princes of
Christendom, for those rare, incomparable, and celestial Endowments and
Qualities, that so illustriously (at this day) shine in His royal Person;
being as a perfect Pattern of Patience, and precious Pearl of Piety unto His
People: and amongst them to be remembered (for the same) even from Generation,
to Generation.

Lo here, we Loyalists of this English Nation, may all justly cry out against
our selves, and that with watery Eyes, heavy Hearts, convincing Consciences,
and sorrowful Souls, Oh, superlative Remissness, disgraceful Disloyalty, and
ineffable Ingratitude! For We, even We our selves in this Particular, are (at
this day) deeply guilty of too much Slacknesse and Negligence herein: And how
shall all those that are sworn to subjective Fealty, be able to answer for
this their perjured perfidious Remissness, before Christ the just Judge both of
quick and dead, when he shall come in the Clouds (at the latter day) for to
judge the World?

But although His Majesty in this present pitiful Predicament, and extreme
woeful Exigent, is (at this day) by His seeming-loyall Subjects so remisly
regarded, and unnaturally neglected, as to suffer His Majesty's Continuation in
Durance, and His Adversaries still insultingly to triumph over Him: yet let me
tell them, and also in them the whole World, that a truly loyall-hearted
Subject will constantly, carefully, and diligently, out of his dutiful
Obedience, study with his best Endeavors, to the uttermost of his Power,
though it be to his own Prejudice, for to help his Prince.

And here I will relate unto you, one remarkable instance of a loyal-hearted
Subject, unto which you may all hearken with Admiration.

There was a right Noble and Valiant Knight, whose name was Zopyrus, who seeing
Darius the King his Master could hardly surprise Babylon, bethought himself of
a wonderful strange practice:

Domi se verberibus lacerari tote corpore jubet, nasum, and Iabia, and aures
sibi praecidi, says the Historiographer. Justin. lib. 1. in fine.

He went home to his own house, and caused his servants to rent his whole body
all over with whipping him, and also to cut off his nose, his lips, and his
ears: And then speedily running to Babylon, in such a fearful and mortified
manner, he made the Assyrians believe, that Darius the King had exercised this
Cruelty upon him, because he had spoken on their behalf, counselling him for
to break up his Siege, and to remove his Army from assaulting their City.

The Assyrians hearing this report, and the rather thinking it to be true,
because they saw him so shamefully dis-figured in his body; were presently
persuaded for to make him their Chief Captain.

By which means he betrayed them all, and surrendered both them and their City
into his Masters hands.

O most faithful, loving, and loyal Subject, yea, most worthy, resolute, and
Courageous Heart, who spared not the parts of his own Body, but voluntarily
dismembered himself for to help his Prince.

I do earnestly wish, with the hearty desires of my soul unto God, on our
Dread Sovereign. His behalf; that His Sacred Majesty may find many such
Subjects, yea may see us all as true unto God, faithful to Himself, and
constant to our Country, as Zopyrus was to his Prince.

Ob. But here peradventure some may object against me, You are (indeed) very
sharp in your Reprehensions, but we suppose milder passages might be more
prevalent.

Ans. Unto which I answer,

Every Minister of God is strictly obliged by the infallible Rule of Gods Word,
(at all times) to reprove Sins; but more especially those sins that are
most raging and predominant, both when and where he preaches: otherwise he
will prove but a false Prophet, daubing deceitfully the walls of his spiritual
building with untempered Mortar, to the great dishonor of God, and utter
destruction both of himself, and many others.

And for mine own particular herein, as I hope to have communion with God in
Christ, I only aim (in the whole Current of this my Book) at the Glory of
God, and both temporal and spiritual welfare of this our English Nation; that
we may all unanimously worship God in the beauty of Holiness, and once again
enjoy Gods healing and comfortable Blessing of Peace in our Land.

And therefore dispense I pray you, with my boldness and sharpness in
reproving; for wild Horses must have rough Riders, and when mild Persuasions
will not prevail, then sharp Corrections must be used, or else the wounded,
putrified, and sinful souls cannot be cured.

And thus as briefly as I could, I have here hinted at some Marks of the true
Members of the Church of Christ.

Motives.
Prayers of all the true Members of the Church of Christ.

For, when they pray, they pray not Particularly for themselves alone; but they
pray generally even for all the sheep of Christ's Fold, as well as for
themselves.

So that, although that most excellent, necessary, and holy prayer of Jesus,
called the Lords-Prayer, containing in it both heavenly fullness of matter, and
also exactness of order, be (at this day by some) so much neglected;

I will not say (censuring charitably) despised:

Yet notwithstanding the true Members of Christ's Church will never desert it,
but will ever highly account of it, strictly observe it, and frequently use it;
earnestly endeavoring, and heartily desiring the welfare of others as well as
their own.

That God-man Preacher, Christ Jesus, our blessed Lord and only Savior, who
spoke as never man spoke, Joh. 7.46. yea, he was also without sin, 2 Cor.
4.21. and therefore he could not err.

And shall that Prayer which he has made for us, be (by us) excepted against?
God forbid. Yea, far be it from the Protestant English-Nation, who zealously
profess the Name of Christ, to be guilty hereof.

Let not, oh let not us (I beseech you) repute that holy and heavenly Prayer of
our Blessed Savior Christ Jesus to be ridiculous, and as unnecessary,
trivial, and frivolous; being made by the wisdom of God, published from the
mouth of the Author of all Truth, yea, by the voice of him, who is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, John 14.6. even Truth it self: for Quicquid in Deo,
Deus est. The judgment of Man may err, Humanum est errare. He may pray, and
not obtain. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, Jam. 4.3. A man
may pray long and often, and yet his Prayer may be erroneous or defective; he
may pray for those things that may rather hurt, than help him, and yet his
prayer may proceed from the utmost of his understanding; and he may also ask
many good things at the hands of God, and yet omit diverse things which he ought
earnestly to crave of God, both for himself and many others: but that holy and
heavenly Prayer of our Jesus, is both true and perfect, even the Truth and Word
of God it self; and therefore well might Christ deliver it to his Disciples as
a Pattern, saying to them, when ye pray, say, Our Father Which art in heaven,
etc. for it is the very Sum, Complement, and Epitome of all Prayers
whatsoever; containing in it all things necessary both for our Bodies and
Souls, even for this life and that which is to come. It is a PRAYER far more
than worthy to be written with Letters of purest Gold, in Tables of the most
precious and permanent Marble, as a continual religious Commemoration to all
succeeding Ages, and the constant form of Prayer-practice for all Posterity:
yea, the very Marrow, Pith, Substance, and Quintessence of all necessary
Prayers, to be offered up to the God of Heaven, by the sons of Mortals, is
contractedly contained in that Prayer. And therefore whenever thou prayest,
lest thy Prayers (though long and many) should be erroneous or defective, be
sure thou concludest with that holy and heavenly prayer of Jesus, that thou
may ask and receive, both for thy self and others, all those necessary
things contained therein; and so benefit others by thy Prayers, as well as thy
self.

helpful assistance of the blessed Angels.

This truth the Apostle declared to the Hebrews, Heb. 1. ult. where speaking of
Angels, he says, Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
for them, who shall be heirs of salvation?

Yea beloved, if we be true Members of Christ's Church, then there will be a
near Relation, a sweet Society, and a heavenly Communion, between the blessed
Angels and our selves.

The which confisteth in these five ensuing Particulars.

1. They, and we, shall be Fellow Servants; worshipping and serving one and the
same God, as the Angel himself confesses.

2. They, and we, shall be Brethren in the Testimony of Jesus, as the same
Angel affirms in the words following.

3. They, and we, shall be Fellow-Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb.
12.22.

4. They are Soldiers under the Standards of God, and are also our Guardians;
Psalm. 34.7.
we are under their protection, and are also their Charge.

5. They are our Patterns, and we their Resemblances; both for Obedience
whilst we live here upon Earth, Mat. 6.10. and also for Glory hereafter in
Heaven, Luke 20.36.

Peace of Conscience, the which transcends all earthly and mundane Comforts.

It was reported of Socrates that he so greatly delighted in Virtue, as that no
kind of sorrow did ever alter his countenance.

But beloved, the inward Jubilee of the mind in the Kingdom of Grace, does
far excel his condition: which stands not in meat, or drink, or any
other outward things, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17.

The which Peace of Conscience amongst the Ancient Fathers has many honorable
Titles given unto it;

They call it Agrum beatitudinis: Hortum deliciarum: Gaudium Angelorum: Domum
Spiritus sancti: and Paradisum animae.

They call it a Field of Blessedness: a Garden of Delight: the Joy of Angels:
the House of the holy Ghost: and the Paradise of the Soul.

So that, I may truly say, The Spirit of a true Member of the Church of Christ,
being sound in sincerity, and seconded with a good Conscience, is able to bear
out all his infirmities, together with all the miseries incident to his humane
Nature: And through the power of Gods Grace, is able also to encounter with the
terrors of Death, and the fearfullnesse of the Grave: yea, to endure with a
gracious humility, even the glorious presence of God, and his holy Angels at
the last Judgment Day.

Whereas, there is no Peace to those that are without the Church, Esa. 57. ult
continuing in their sins.

So that, if any one of them had strength in his Limbs transcending Sampsons,
and power in his Bones excelling all the sons of Anack united together: yet
notwithstanding, unless his Conscience be seared, he shall often hear to his
terror, an Authenticke Divine condemning Echo, summoning him to appear
before Christ's Tribunall-Barre, to give an account of all his evil thoughts,
words and works; the which will so greatly terrify his bitter, afflicted, and
wounded Conscience, as that he shall be restless, even in the midst of all his
earthly delights, and worldly pleasures.

For, unless the Consciences of such wicked persons are Cauterized, they have
often times gripings and gnawings, and horrible convulsions within them, which
are as it were certain flashings of the flames of Hellfire unto them, before
they come into that place of torment.

But the Peace of Conscience which the true Members of the Church of Christ
have, is so comfortable a Cordial unto them, as that it made the Apostles to
rejoice in their afflictions, Act. 5.41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer for their Masters sake.

This was it that made Paul and Silas to sing in prison at midnight. Act. 16.25


And as Augustine says, made holy Job more happy in Stercore, on the top of a
Dunghill, then Adam was in Nemore, in the midst of Paradise, because, as he
says of himself, Job. 27.6. I will keep my righteousness, and will not
forsake it: mine heart shall not reprove me all my days.

So that, Nihil jucundius, nihil tutius, nihil diutius bona Conscientia: fremat
Orbis and orcus illa erit secura. There is nothing more sweet, nothing more
safe, nothing more durable, then a good Conscience; rage World, and roar Hell,
that Person who has this Peace of Conscience within him, is ever at quiet.

Love and Favor of God.

Beloved, if we are in the Love and Favor of God, then God has a will for to
do us good, and we know he wants no power, for he is Omnipotent.

Impotent men, when those whom they love are in distress, would sometimes
help them but cannot: but no impediment can let, nor obstacle hinder, the
Omnipotent God.

If an earthly King favor any man, and bear a special Love toward him, what
needs that man to care though the Subjects hate him?

So in like manner, if we are in the Love and Favor of God, we need not fear
either the raging Malice of Malignant men, or the hellish fury of Devouring
Devils: For the Love of God toward us, will be as Armor of proof for us, to
defend us against all their bloody malice, fierce fury, and raging cruelty;
whereby God shall be glorified, our selves preserved, and our Enemies
confounded.

So that these Motives seriously considered, should stir us up to labor to
become true Members of the Church of Christ.

I Will close this passage with the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. We are
Ambassadors for Christ: as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to God.

And therefore let all those that are (as yet) in their natural condition,
hasten to become true Members of the Church of Christ, and speedily Pray for
her Peace.

O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

The Third and Last Use is to exhort us all in Gods fear, to use the Means to
attain the End for procuring the Churches Peace, and that must be by Praying
for Her.

And therefore, let us all zealously labor by our hearty prayers to awake
Christ, and earnestly entreat him to rebuke the boisterous winds, and the
raging waves of the turbulent Seas, wherein the now distressed Church of Christ
(amongst us) between Scilla and Carybdis does dangerously sail; and cause
unto her with glory to himself, and rejoicing to us all, a comfortable Calm.
Mat. 8.26.


Whereby also Glory may once again dwell in our Land.

And let us not cease to importune (...) The strongmost mighty God, Esaias 9.6.
to arise in his own strength, and make bare his own arm on the behalf of
his Church, Psalm. 68.1.
and to scatter abroad all her enemies.

And to infatuate the Counsels, blast the Designs, and confound the
Enterprises, of all those malevolent spirited Persons, that are Enemies to the
Peace of our Church and Kingdom.

And by the joint forces of our Prayers together, to set upon God with an holy
violence, that he would be pleased to set on work his Power, his Wisdom, and
his Goodness, for the speedy exaltation of his distressed Church, and the
utter confusion of her implacable Adversaries.

Yea, let us all on her behalf, cry unto God for her Peace prayingly, and pray
for her Peace cryingly, and through the importunity of our uncessant prayers
unto God on her behalf, give him no rest until he be entreated of us; and
till he repair and set up our Jerusalem, Esa. 62.7.
the praise of the world.

And herein let us take the Prophet Jeremy for our Pattern, Jer. 9.1. Oh that
my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.

And let not our hearts be possessed with blockish Senslesnesse, and Stoik
Stupidity, called by the Philosophers (...), for that is averse to our fellow
feeling of others calamity, and also repugnant to our Christian Charity.

But if as fellow-feeling Members of the Churches miseries, we faithfully and
fervently pray for her Peace when she is in Calamity; doubtless the Lord will
be entreated of us; and when it shall make most for his glory, and her good,
Rev. 7. ult
the Lord will wipe away all tears from her eyes, and will give her rest.

Whereby also to many other of Gods former blessings bestowed upon us, this of
Peace may be added as one more, having thereby (as it were) our lives given us
for a Prey in this time of War; it might be unto us as a farther engagement
of our humble and dutiful Obedience, to carry our selves ever hereafter
toward Him, as a people preserved by their God.

And that so we of this English Nation, may in sincerity of heart amongst our
selves, joyfully sing in this our Land, that Angelical Antheme, once sang at
the birth of our blessed Savior; Glory to God in the highest, Luke 2.14.
and on Earth Peace, Good will toward Men.

The which Glory to thee our heavenly Father, we heartily entreat the
assistance of thy powerful Spirit working in us, to perform unto thee; and
blessing of Peace and Good Will amongst our selves, we humbly pray thee to
bestow upon us; that so there may be a blessed and speedy Period to all the
present distractions in this our Kingdom, and thy blessing of Peace upon thy
poor, distressed Militant Church in this our Land.

That we may all with one mind, and one mouth, rejoycingly say, with the
blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 1.94.
He that is mighty has done great things for us, and holy is his name.

And also justly say (in Confidence and Thankfulness) with the Prophet David,
We shall not die, Psalm. 118.17.
but live and declare the works of the Lord.

And that, both in our Church and Commonwealth, Mercy and Truth may lovingly
meet and hold together: Psa. 85.10
and Righteousness and Peace sweetly embrace and kiss each other.

That the Son of righteousness may arise, Mal. 4.2.
(and speedily come amongst us) with healing in his wings.

That so the Rents of this divided Kingdom may be closed, and the Breaches
thereof made up; and the destroying Angel put up the Sword of thy Justice,
into the Sheath of thy Mercy; that the Sword of vengeance may eat no more
flesh, nor drink no more blood in our Land; but that the current of Christian
English blood may speedily be stopped amongst us; Psalm. 144.14.
that there may be no more leading into Captivity, no crying, nor complaining
in our Streets, but that we may all continually keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace; Ephesians. 4.3.
and joyfully serve thee our gracious God, with that willing obedience, and
comfortable alacrity of heart as thou command.

And so we that are thy people and sheep of thy pasture, Ps. 79. ult.
shall give thee thanks for it for ever: and will always be showing forth thy
praise for the same, even from generation to generation.

Hear us, and help us, and heal us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of
thy name who art the God of Peace, and for thy dear Son his sake who is the
Prince of Peace, to whom with thine own Majesty, and God the the holy,
blessed, and sanctifying Spirit, three Persons, and one Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, and only wise God; we ascribe as is most meet of us, and of all
thy Creatures; all honor and glory, power, praise and majesty, might,
dominion, and hearty thanksgiving, from this time forth for evermore.

AMEN.
Deo Patri, Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, omnis Laus and Gloria in Seculo.
FINIS.
(...).
(...)

