THE Muggletonians Principles PREVAILING: BEING An Answer in full to a
Scandalous and Malicious Pamphlet, Entitled A True Representation OF THE
Absurd and Mischevious Principles of the Sect called MUGGLETONIANS; WHEREIN The
aforesaid Principles are Vindicated, and proved to be infallibly True. AND The
Author of that Libel, his Scandalous Title and Subject proved as False to
Truth, as Light is to Darkness: And that he knows no more what the true God is,
nor what the right Devil is; nor any true Principle or Foundation of Faith, for
all his great Learning he so much bosts of, then those Jews that put the Lord
of Life to Death: For learned and taught Reason is but natural, and so falls
short of the Glory of God; as will appear in the following Discourse.

Things that are despised has God chosen to bring to naught Things that are, 1
Cor. 1.28. By T. T.

Printed in the Year of our Lord God 1695.

The Epistle to the sober Reader.
Curtious Reader,
I Have here, in this ensuing Treatis, Vindicated the Principles of them People
called Muggletonians, from that Aspersion and Slander that envious Reason has
cast upon it; I being a Member of that Body, and knowing those Principles to be
Truth, having lived in the Knowledge and Practice of them above this Thirty
Years.

Now in that Providence should bring thee in, to see this my Answer, and shall
find some things very strange to thy Understanding: And tho, perhaps, thou
can not apprehend it at first View for Truth, yet if thou can preserve
thyself from dispising it, thou do well to thy own Soul.

Therefore keep thyself from Judging, 1 Cor. 2.15.
if thou will live in Peace, because that none can judge of Spiritual Things but
Spiritual Men: And know this, that the un-judging Man is easy, and may
afterward come to Believe, being in the time of a Commission, and so with the
Five wise Virgins bring Oil in their Lamps, before the Door be shut, Mart.
25.4.
or Death aproach.

But to Contend against Truth held forth by a Commission from Heaven, is an
evident Sgn of Rejection, for it will prove a Sin against the Holyghost:
Therefore I advise thee but to take care of these Two Things; the one, Not to
break the Law; the other, Not to despise Prophesy, because they are both
Damnable: And more People are Damned for breaking the Law than any other Sin,
for the Sin against the Holyghost is not committed in every Age, but only in
the time of a Commission; so that more People have committed that Sin within
this Forty four Years then has done of Thirteen Hundred and Fifty Years
before: So that these Two things are to be shunned, the last most especially,
Matt. 12.32. Romans 6. ult. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephe. 2.1.
because there is no Sacrifise for that Sin, but the other is Pardonable in the
time of a Commission, by having Faith in the Doctrine thereof, and living free
from the Breach of the Law after, as to the Act. This is the Benefit of a true
Ministry, but no true Ministry, no true Conversion from the Act of Sin: Jer.
23.32.
But the Elect are preserved from the Act of Sin, and kept in innocence of
Life, at such Times, and in such Places as Truth is not known by their
generated Faith, which leads them to that Threefold Precept of the Prophet
Micha. 1st. To do Justice, Mich. 6 8.
2dly. To love Mercy, and 3dly. To walk humbly with God: This is the Substance
of pure and undefiled Religion: Stand fast here, and be Happy.

So that from what thou find here written, thou upon sight thereof must
examine thy own Heart, and see how it stands in this Case; if thou can prove
thy Election by Faith in the true God, now he is made manifest, it is well for
thee, and the Benifit will be thine; but if thou can not believe it, yet if
thou dispisest it not, thou art not against us, nor against thy own Soul,
neither are we against thee, be of what Religion or Opinion thou will; but
shall leave thee as the Two Seeds shall find thee at the last Day.

And so wishing well to all sober Men, but more especially, to such as are not
offended with these plain Truths touching the Lord Jesus Christ being that most
High and Mighty God, and Everlasting Father, so abundantly exalted through the
Scriptures of Truth, as is now explained and fully declared, by the Third and
Last spiritual Commission, which was to finish that sacred Mystery of God's
becoming Flesh; and now it is finished, if thou can Believe: And he that has
Ears to hear, let him hear.

FAREWELL.
THE MUGGLETONIANS PRINCIPLES PREVAILING.
CHAP. I.
THe Church of God was never without opposition; nor Truth without Hatred; for
in that there are two Seeds, there must be a War entroduced, because the Seeds
are in opposition to each other, being from two several Roots, Faith and
Reason, Light and Darkness, God and Devil; so that the Seed of the Woman and
the Seed of the Serpent will hold continually Enmity.

Now you that have Accused the Muggletonians Principles for Impiouse, and
Mischevious, let us come to the Trial of it, with you and of you, and see how
you durst be so bold, as to make so false a Representation of the Muggletonians
Principles; that you should Entitle your Diabolical Pamphlet by the name of a
True Representation of the Absurd and Mischevious Principles, of the Sect
called Muggletonians.

If you the Writer thereof, had cast them Aspersions upon our Persons, and not
upon our Principles, we would have borne it with silence, but in that you have
judged our Faith to be Blasphemous and Mischevious, which we have received from
the Bounty and Love of God; therefore in dispising and condemning it, you
despise and condemn our God; so in this Case we must resist you, and stand
forth for the defense of our Faith.

And although it should be where Satan's Seat is, yet we will not let go our
Inheritance, for our Inheritance lies in the Belief of our Principles, wherein
we have the Charter of Heaven sealed to us; therefore we will not only
vindicate those our Principles, which you so wickedly Represent, but will also,
through Grace, seal to them with our Blood, if your Law can do it, and we be
called thereunto.

For we are able to maintain those Principles for Truth; therefore let us now
come to the Trial of Truth, and let us set our Principles each against the
other; and them, whose Faith and Wisdom is greatest, let them hold the other
under in Bondage for ever.

Sir, You are come forth to Curse a quiet and still People, who meddle not with
your Affairs, nor Magistrates Affairs: We lift not up our Hand, nor make use of
a Sword of Steel to slay any Man: We defraud no Man, we wrong no Man; neither
are we for thrusting you out of your Earthly Possessions; no, not out of your
Pulpits or Parish-Livings; we will have none of them: But on the contrary, we
are Obedient unto all the Civil Laws of the Land, and give to every Man the
Respect due unto him.

All therefore that we desire of you is, That we may pass peacibly through your
Country toward our Inheritance; but you are not willing that we should, no
more than Edom was with Issrael; Numb. 20.
but have presumed to stop our Course, by judging and condeming our Faith: Now
if our Faith be true, as we know it is, then you have given Judgment against
your self; you were not aware of that Caution of our Saviors Saying, Judge not,
and thou shall not be Judged; Matt. 7.1
Now in that we know that our Faith is of God, and is Truth, therefore is it of
Power to reign over that which judges it.

But if we might come to Reason together, then I would demand of you, wherefore
you did send out your judging Pamphlet against us, and would not subscribe your
Name to it? Were you afraid of holding Trial with us, for fear you should be
worsted by us, as others have been heretofore; and so were for working Mischief
privately, and yet ly in Cognito, thinking, belike, that Faiths Power could not
find you out, to give you an Answer; otherwise how could you find a Name to
your Book, and a Name to the People you wrote against, but have found never a
Name for your self, but have left it to us to find a Name for you, which
according to holy Writ is Elimas a Corrupter, Acts 13.10.
a sworn Enemy to Truth, and the Accuser of the Brethren; being of a worthy
Descent, Successor to Simon Magus; being newly crept out of the College of
Priests, which came out of the Mouth of the False Prophet; such a one as
Amaziah the Priest of Beth-el, Rev. 16.13. Amos 7.12.
who could not abide a poor Prophet, a Herds-Man, that he should once speak
near the King's Chapel, because it was the King's Court, in which Learned
Amaziah was the Doctor and Chaplain.

Thus have you dealt with these Prophets of the Lord; and for fear that this
poor Prophets Doctrine (which you, like Amaziah, call Mischevious) should take
any Ephect amongst the People: From hence you have secretly spread this your
Pamphlet into your Brethren, the Priests, Hands, all the Nation over; and have
endeavored to make our Principles as Contemptable and Odious as possibly you
could, in order to make them seem the more Rediculous; and this your Book must
be as a Pattern for them to frame their Arguments by; and those their Arguments
must be as Bulworks of Defense to them, and as Bullets shot against us.

Sir, Esther. 3.8.
You have acted in the very same way as Haman did against Israel, saying in
this manner to the King, There is a certain malicious and mischevious People
scattered abroad amongst the People in all places, and their Laws are differing
from all People; neither keep they the King's [Church-Laws] therefore it is not
for the King's profit to suffer them; let them be destroyed; for their
Principles are mischevious.

Now I being a Member of this despised People, seeing your Spite and Malice
against us (who have broke no Law) am from hence moved to return an Answer, and
this my Reply shall not spare you, although I am given to understand, That you are
a Doctor of the National Church, for God and Faith is no respecter of Persons
in such a Case; Therefore this my Reply shall pursue you until it overtake you;
and when it has overtaken you, it shall fasten a Witness in your Conscience,
that you have been a Fighter against God, his Prophets and People, and against
the Sacred Scriptures; and a false Representer of the Muggletonian's
Principles, and I shall not be long in proving the same: For,

In the Preface of your Book you say, That John Reeve was, by Profession, a
Baker; which Saying of yours is utterly False: So here you have forfited your
Title Page, which instead of a true Representation is a false one.

But you bring him in as a Baker, to make him the more Contemptible with the
Learned; but if he had, would that have made him more incapable of being God's
last Messenger, I tro not, no more than it did Amos, who was but a Herds-Man as
aforesaid.

For this is evident, that the Saints have found in all Ages, that the Learned
have ever stood up as an Enemy and Judge of spiritual Truth; as will more appear
in the sequel of my Discourse: But to proceed to

The Accusation against us.
In your Presace you call us, poor deluded Souls, and by the Name of a
contemptible and pernicious Sect; and blasphemiously affirm, that it is made up
of Impiety, Nonsense, and Absurdities; and that we have not so much as the
Shadow of Reason to support us: From hence, say you, we will not submit to the
Trial of it, being incapable of Argument, and that you wrote not that your
Trealise for our Sakes, that have not Reason and Argument (as you say) to
answer you; but for the Sakes and Satisfaction of the World, and of the
Learned, who are capable (say you) to hear Reason and Argument.

CHAP. II. ANSWER.
AS to them Judging and Condemning Censures against us, shall be answered Chap.
15. And as to your Reason and Argument, you so much bost of, I am willing to
allow it its Prerogative, and give it its due of having Government as to all
Terrestial Affairs. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Acts 26.3. and 18.14, 15.


But wherefore should it enter upon God's Prerogative, so as to take upon it to
judge divine Things that are Eternal, Luke 20.14.
by its unclean serpentine Reason.

But to such as are learned in Faith's School does know, Matt. 11.25.
that he that does Minister spiritual Things, is to lay Reason and Argument by,
as to the sinding out of any heavenly Secrets by the most persingst Reason that
is.

For Reason is not Heaven-born, James 3.15.
and so is but Natural; and it is the natural or moral Law that enlightens it;
but Faith being of another Nature, which is Spiritual, Psalm. 19.7. John 1.4.
and so the Law of Faith serves to quicken and enlighten Faith; and when it is
enlightened, then she Rules as Mistress over Reason.

Therefore, though the Kingdoms of this World lys in Reason, yet the Kingdom of
Christ lys in Faith, which ever appears simple, John 18.36. Luke 17.21. 2 Cor.
1.12. Luke 1.53. and 6.25
and yet it is this poor despised Seed that receives the Gospel; its the Simple
and the Foolish that catch Heaven: The Poor are filled with the Substance of
spiritual Truth, when as the Rich in Reason, Notion, and Argument, are sent
empty away.

Therefore away with your Arguments where Faith is sought, Matt. 4.18. Amos
1.1. Acts 18.3. Coll. 2.8.
there the Fisher, the Herds-man, the Tent-maker; Ai, and he that you call the
Baker, rather than the Philosopher, are to be trusted.

Do you teach the World by your Reason and Argument, as you say; this manifests
that you and your Brethren are the Worlds Ministers, and the World hears you;
and hence it is that you appeal to the World, 1 John 4.5. John 7.7.
for the World will Love its own.

Here now you appear to be a right Legolist, Deuteronomy. 27. Judge: 17.10, 11, 12, 13.
in imitation of the Levits of old; for that Priesthood was to teach Reason,
the Moral Law for its reasonable Service, that it should not Murder, Commit
Adultery, Steal, or bare false Witness, which Reason is subject to do.

But all the Prophets spiritual Declarations belonged to the Elect Seed of
Faith, Psalm. 119.100.
and was spoken into that innocent Nature that cannot do Evil, and that in
order to a further degree of Knowledge, Love and Obedience.

Wherefore then, if by your Teaching you can keep your Disciples in Sobriety
and the Bounds of Reason, this is a Virtue, and brings with it the Temporal
Blessing promised that Seed; but if so it be, Deur. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
that your Reason will seek Lordship, John 19.7. Mat. 18.6.
and would be a Judge and Controwler of Faith, it is nothing less than a Devil,
and will be damned to Eternity.

And herein appears your Blindness, notwithstanding your earthly Wisdom, Ezekiel.
34.17. Matt. 25.33. 1 John 1.17.
because by it you cannot distinguish betwixt the Two Seeds of Faith and
Reason, or the Law and the Gospel. But to proceed, and come to the Matter in
Question.

Would you Priests have us be tried by your Arguments? Then you are like to
have the Cause, if you must be your own Judges, like the Jews by our Savior,
his Prophets and Apostles.

But this we presume to tell you, that your Reason, being but Natural, 1 Cor.
2.13. 1 John 4.1. Romans 2.2. Acts 17.2. and 24, 25.
therefore it cannot try spiritual Truth, but our Faith can try your Arguments,
and it can take up Reason as a Servant, to argue with you in the Balance of
your own Reason, the Angels Nature fallen; nevertheless we can no more agree
than the Prophet Jeremiah and those National false Priests did in the like
Dispute.

Because Faith, when it takes up Reason, it takes it up, not to expound and
open the Sense of Scripture Sayings, but as a Servant, to Illustrate that
Revealed Word by Argument, for the further Confounding of that unclean
domineering Reason that does oppose its spiritual Sense.

But on the contrary, when learned Reason takes up Words of Faith, it expounds
it by the Imagination of Reason, Romans 1.25. Revel. 3.9.
in respect its Reason is Lord in its Soul, and so turns Truth into a Ly; and
the Elogancy of its Speech must form the Substance of the Matter, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Revel. 11.2.
and then War is proclaimed against the Truth, and so Truth must be trod under
Foot.

Thus did the false Priests deal by Jeremiah, Come, say they, Jer. 11.19.
let us devise Devises against him, and let us destroy the Tree with its Fruit,
and let us out him off that his Name may be no more Remembered: That is, let us
destroy his Person, which is the Tree; and let us destroy its Fruit, that is,
his Doctrine or Declarations, for he is in bringing in another Priesthood,
therefore Report and we will Report; Jer. 18.18. and 20.10. and 2.8. Mal. 2.7.
let us frame our Arguments against him, for he says, That they that handle
the Law know not God, when as it is written, That the Law shall not perish from
the Priests, nor Counsel from the Wise.

Misrepresenting Doctor, are not your Arguments answerable to theirs, even to a
Hair: Therefore as true Wisdom was departed from them, so it is now from you,
and from all those National pretended Gospel Ministers, tho you bost as they
did; yet have you nothing but an empty Title, not so much as a grain of
spiritual Sense appears; but as it was their Blindness, so it is yours, who
understand not, that the spiritual Law of Faith will never depart from that
Spiritual Priest, the true Christrian, Ezekiel. 7.26, 1 Pet.
but his Lips shall ever preserve true Knowledge: And this Priesthood will never
terminate, but will be with them to the end of the World.

For after Faith is enlightened by a Commission from Heaven, then it needs no
other Teacher, 1 John 2.^^.
but that Unction which it has received; for the Spritit of Faith is Christ's
Vicar.

But your outward visible Worships that are taken up from former Commissions,
they are ended, and the spirit of God is gone out of them; but this will bring
a Box upon my Cheeks, by you Non-Commissionated Minister, as your Predecessor
did to Micaiah the Prophet, with a, 1 Kings 22.2^.
Which way went the spirit of God from me to thee.

But as the Law of Faith, Isa. 59, 21, Heb. 10.58.
which we have known and received, will never depart from us, so we need not to
your assumed counterfit Priesthood, but live by our own generated Faith now
awakened, or eluminated, Ephesians. 5.14.
by the Doctrine of this Commission of the spirit; for we have no new Faith
given, but the old awakened, as aforesaid; for Faith was but once given, 2 Pet.
^.18.
and every Commissionated Prophet, Messenger, or Minister of God, Ads a further
Light and Knowledge to it.

So that now, through Grace, we have attained to a more principal Degree of
Knowledge of the true God, and the right Devil, than others had before us; so
that from hence, we are not wanting in Wisdom to answer your strongest
Arguments your Reason can devise, (...). ^1.^1.


Therefore muster up your Army, raise all your Forses, from all parts, and from
all your Priests that you have distributed your Books to; yet shall you never
be able to disprove by your Subtilty, quell by your Power, (...)
or subdue by your Force, the Muggletonian's Principles, because Salvation, and
nothing less is their assured Walls and Bulworks.

But to your following Arguments, I apply myself to Answer by truth of
Scripture.

The Accusation against us.
In Page the First, you make your Book to consist of Two Queries. First,
Whether John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggleton, are sent of God. Secondly, Whether
they are the Witnesses spoken of in the 11th. of the Revelations.

To your First Querie; you have largely repeated several of their Saings, which
you say, they pretend to be true Characters, and Evidences of their Commission.
Now, after your Ramble in Page the 4th. your First Evidence is, That John Reeve
says, That God spoke to him Three Mornings together: And say you, Muggleton
says, That it is God's speaking plain Words, to the hearing of the outward
Ear, as well as the inward Soul, that does make a Man a Commissioner.

This Evidence, say you, is of no value; because, say you, I cannot tell,
whether it be a true Voice, or an imaginary lying Voice, such a one as John
Reeve said was in John Robins: It is, say you, but their say so. And then you
conclude saing; For let their Voice be never so true, if it be alone, and
without the visible Evidence of working Miracles, it is of no value: As also,
you say, it must be proved by Scripture; without which you make it of no value,
etc.

CHAP. III. ANSWER.
1. THis your way is to overthrow all Prophesy: Numb. 11.29. 2 Pet. 1.19. 1
These. 5.20.
You will tie God to work Miracles, or you will not belive him: Either God
must do as you will have him, or he must not be God.

It is no wonder that you cannot distinguish between a true Voice and a false;
because God never chose you by Voice, nor never will. But how should you
believe a vocal Voice, when as your God has never a Tongue: You have made it
here plainly appear, that you are of the same Spirit of those murdering Jews
who bid Christ, come down from the Cross and they would belive in him. Matt.
27.42.
True Doctrine, without Miracles, is to you most detestable.

2. Again, Isa. 6.8. and 52.1.
was not all true Prophets chosen by voice of Words; nevertheless the Seed of
the Serpent could never believe them, Jer. 15.10.
neither could the Priests or Rulers ever abide them; and there was few of them
but what was either Persecuted or put to Death, 1 Kings 18.22.
by the Magistrates and their National Priests: There was 450. false Prophets,
mustred up against Too or Three true Prophets, as Elijah and Micaiah; and one
of them must strike Micaiah one the Cheek; as aforesaid, and this Priest and
Ahab's Son flung him down to bracke his Neck.

But Elijah, the Representor of God's Person, by Word of Power slew them all,
Z^ph. 1.4.
as a Tipe of the Destruction of all false Prophets, and false Priests, at the
end of the World: Such a Miracle you want.

When Isaiah Prophesied of his God's becoming Flesh, Isaiah ^5.1.
not one would believe him, neither Priest nor People: Therefore, said he,
Lord, who has believed our Report; 1 Kings 19.
and Elijah said, That all were gone after Baall. Nor regarded Truth, for that
was ever hated; I hate him, said Ahab, 1 King 22 8.
for he never said Good of me, but Evil; It Is now as it was then, unless we
could bring Fire from Heaven, as Elijah did, there can be no Belief; and it
must be to destroy them; it might Convince them, but it would never Convert
them. Psalm. 78.32.


If Miracles were wrought now, what would it avail this bloody unbeliveing
World; they would but say as the Jews said of Christ, Matt. 12.2^.
That they were don by the Devil.

But what said Paul, Toungues and Miracles are but for a Sign, not to them
that believe, but to them that believe not; 1 Cor. 14.22. John 10.4^.
but Prophesy serves for them that believe only: John the Baptist, a great
Prophet, and yet did no Miracle.

Thus you call in question the glorious Truths of God, under pretense of John
Reeves's Weakness, as to outward Miracles, that you might believe, when as his
Commission is all spiritual.

Now the Seed of Faith believes not, because of the Miracles wrought, by the
Lord or his Prophets; but in that they were of the Election, and fore-ordain'd
to believe, for the saving of the Soul; and as the Christian Dove waits for a
Sign within him, or from behind Reason, (...) 30.21.
for a Word saying, This is the Way, walk in it: Even so, on the contrary, the
carnal Serpent, he requires a natural Sign before his Reason, that may be seen
with his outward Eye, to make him believe spiritual Truths; and therefore
Reason Cries, saying, Where are you Miracles, and where is your Scripture
Evidence to prove it: Prove by Scripture.

Now if this Witness should write nothing but what is exactly set down in
Scripture, then should they write nothing at all: But always true Prophesy has
something new to deliver. J^r. 31.22.


Again, Did the Prophets and Apostles write, Matt. 15.32. 2 Pet. 1, 21.
by Imitation, or Study, or by Inspiration only; they might allude sometimes to
the Prophets Words for Convincing of Gainsayers.

Furthermore, the Scriptures in themselves are Words of pure Truth, to all that
spiritually dissern them; and that is, such as have the Life and Power of them
in their own Souls; John 6.63.
but they that have not the inner Life and Meaning thereof, they study the
outward Letter by their Reason, to find the Life and Meaning thereof, O^ed.
6.8. John 7 52.
and then, this their Imagination, the Child of study, trumpits out it is own
Conceptions upon it.

This is the work and way of all the seven Anty Churches of Europe, every one
of them endeavoring to prove their Ministry by the Letter of the Scripture, or
by the Light within them; but never a one from the glorious Voice of the
everliving God without them: And from hence, though they Judge and Condemn each
other for false, whilst they are all false, yet can they agree to Fight against
God and his true Prophets, by the Letter of the Scripture.

And you keep these Chests and Boxes of presions things, but the Jewels and
Treasure is quite gone, and is a Stranger to you; you know it not, but do
Despite unto it, and put your own Imaginations into the Letter, 2 Pet. ^.3.
verse 3. (...) ^.10.
and so turn and wind it about like a Nose of Wax, and make it speak for your
Honor and Riches. Oh! how profitable has this Letter of the Scriptures been
to Reprobate Preachers.

Wherefore then, we who are called Muggletonians, in scorn do boldly affirm,
That though you have got the Letter of the Scriptures, and run away with it, as
a Dog does with a Bone, yet none of its spiritual Declarations were ever
written for your Instruction, Romans 15.4. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Jer. 9.23.
but for the Instruction of the Seed of Faith: For the Law only belongs to you,
and it may make you wise, but not unto Salvation; that is the Property of the
Gospel to the Seed of Faith, the Seed of the Lord's own Body; for it is the Man
of God that is made Wise unto Salvation; 2 Timothy 31.15.
so that he must be a Man of God, and have Faith in those Scriptures, before he
can be Wise unto Salvation, because they are given by Inspiration of the holy
Spirit, and no Man can know them but by the same Spirit as those had that wrote
them.

These things considered, how then is it possible that you should apply
Scripture to purpose, when your Wisdom is not Inspiration, 1 Cor. 4.20.
but Education; what will your Form do to you without the Power: If you have
the Words of God, and not that Word which is God, what good will your Word do
you.

What Commission have you to preach to the People; Christ tells you that you
are but Thieves and Robbers climbing up to Heaven by Ordinances of your own,
and your own stolen Doctrine; John 10.1.
for you steal the Words from your Neighbor, the Seed of Faith, and then Cry,
Thus says the Lord.

What do you bring as an Offering, but what you have stolen from others; do you
delver anything but Trascriptions and Historical Notions, the Repetitions of
the Letter of the Scriptures. and the Sentences of the ancient Fathers; 2 Cor.
10.16.
there is the Line you boast in, so that you do no more, in ephect, but rob the
Dead to cloth the Living: For have you so muth as opened the Meaning of one
Text of Scripture in all your blind Pamphlet; you have named the Words, and
then left them to Answer for them selves, as I shall show hereafter.

Again, you further Object against their Doctrine of Infalibility, in that they
say, They write by an unerring Spirit: Now, say you, an Infalible Spirit implys
the highest Certainty: But, say you, his Book is Inconsistant with it self; for
Muggleton says, I am persuaded in my spirit, and I do rather belive that there
were Seven Hundred Thousands, than Seven Thousands, Revel. 11.13.
though the Revelation of John does but express it but Seven Thousands: Now,
say you, to be persuaded, and to belive a Thing to be so, are Inconsistant to
Infalibility; for that admits no less than I am sure of it, say you.

CHAP. IV. ANSWER.
THE Prophets did both of them write, by an infallible and un-erring Spirit,
the Doctrine of them Six Principles, the Knowledge of which, John 17.3.
Salvation does depend upon; but as to some particular Points that are besides
the Foundation, there is not that Nessessity to be so positive. But as to the
Essential Points of Faith, they were written by an un-erring Spirit, and are
infallibly True; and against Men and Angels they affirm it, and we as truly
believe it, to the great Peace and Satisfaction of our Minds: For what is it
that can satisfy the Mind of Man but Truth, having the Seal of Life in it, as
every true Minister of God has.

For every true Minister of God has Power to set Life and Death before Men and
can say, Matt. 18.18.
Now is fulfilled such and such Things: Also he that is sent of God, 1 Cor.
2.15.
knows the Things of God, and he that believes in such a One, knows the
Things of God likewise.

But how can you judge of Infalibility; that do not own your self Infalible, but
Falible? What is Falible but a Lie, and must a Lie be the Judge of Truth? He
that knows the Mind of the Lord, he may Instruct from the Lord; 1 Cor. 2.15.
Verse. 16.
but he that has not the Infalible Spirit, does from his lying Spirit
prescribe Rules to God, and would be God's Counselor.

Now must such ignorant, carnal, sleshly Men as these Judge Infalibility, that
have, nor own no other Spirit but what is Falible: But to come to the Point and
Charge against Lodowick Muggleton.

For although the Prophets and Apostles were Infalible, as to all essential
points of Faith; yet as to other things that were circumstantial, and not so
essential, in such things Prophets and Apostles may differ about them in their
Experience and Judgment.

Thus Paul withstood Peter, Gal. 2.11.
and Reproved him; and though Paul there gainsaid Peter, yet in some other
things Paul himself was not positive: As for Instance, Paul treating on
Marriage, 1 Cor. 7.6.
he speaks as the Prophet Muggleton does here, and tells the Believers, That it
was his Judment, That it were better for them not to Marry: And further adds
That he [thinks,] ^ V^se 39.10.
That this his Judment is right, and that it was from the Spirit of God.

Now, I presume, (by what you have said of these) that had you been living
then, and had heard of Paul's talking of having the Infalible Spirit of God,
you would presently have judged him a false Apostle, notwithstanding the
Miracles he had done; and that he had contradicted himself; and that his
[thinking] was inconsistant to his Infalibility, and so was not to be Believed.

Again, if you had heard that Paul Circumcised Timothy, Asts 16.3.2. Gal. 5.2.
and yet nevertheless told the Galatians, That if they were Circumcised they
could not be Saved. I say, had you been in those Days, Would not you have said,
That Paul had Contradicted himself, and the Scriptures both? Matt. 28.2. Luke
24.2.
and would not you also have judged the Four Evangelists to have Contradicted
one another in several places; for as you Judge and Condemn these, so you would
have Judged them, for these were sent by Jesus Christ, and Paul was sent by no
other God.

Again, in Page 9. you quote John Reeve, saying, that he says, That he is
Endued with a divine Gift, to write a Volom as large as the Bible; and as pure
a Language as that is, without looking into any Book, or having any real
Contradiction in it. Upon these Words you make the Reflection fallowing.

Your Accusation runs thus, saying.
That if the purity of the Language be a Sign of Truth. Then, say you, I am
sure it is far from being either True or Infallible. For, said you, they do not
write true English, nor good Sense; as likewise, it often fails in the
propriety of Words, in Concord; and Connection; being without Method, Purity, or
Elogancy, etc.

CHAP. V. ANSWER.
SIR, in Answer to this, The truly Wise do know, that God's Messengers never
regard fineness of Speech, but soundness of Matter: Not so much the Original of
Words as the Original of Things, even such as they, are moved too by the Holy
Ghost; and not such Language as you are moved too by your Educated Spirit of
Reason; which is the Angels nature Fallen: But in that, you have no where
contradicted our Principle, which shows what the Person and Nature of Angels
are; therefore there is no Occasion given here to Dispute it; but to Return to
the matter aforesaid.

Spiritual Truth, or Gospel Life, was ever plain, and was never delivered with
new quined or highflown Words of Man's Wisdom. 1 Cor. 2.1.
This made an old learned Philosophical Bishop Judge so hard by the Revelation
by John, not thinking it John's, because of the Rudeness of the style:
Dionisius.
For, said he, I see his Greek not exactly uttered, the Dialect and Phrase not
observed: I find him, said this Bishop, using barbarous Phrases.

And Paul was called a clouter of Skins, a Cobbler by the Philosophers, and a
Man of no Breeding: And he acknowledged himself but rude in Speech, though not
in true Wisdom; but he had taken some Learning up at the Foot of Gamalial, but
he laid it down there again, as soon as the Spirit of Faith became his Teacher:
All his Wisdom that he now valued, was the Knowledge of Christ Crucified, and
Risen again; which his former Wisdom could not know, Acts 22.3.
but on the contrary, was the Persecutor of him.

Again, Spiritual Truth, or Faith, was ever brought in Naked and Simple, and in
poor Array: But Falsehood does ever endeavor to Attire herself in all her
Bravery. These Rascals, said the Pharisees, are Accursed, they know not the Law:
But said Paul, 1 Cor. 12.8.
That Learning of theirs will com to naught

But as for Truth, That guides to Heaven; John 1.4.
it needs no Gloss to make it seem better then it is, for it has Light enough
in it self, to show it the way to Heaven.

The Scriptures were written in as homely a style as Reeve's and Muggleton's
were; only wise Men in Reason, have put them into a better Form, and now boast
of their litteral Accuteness, whilst they are out of all spiritual Power; and
it must be so, 1 Cor. 13.1.
for he that has learned nothing of Truth, must Teach by an Eloquent Tongue of
empty Words only.

For Sophisters, who want substance of Truth, must use-their Sophistry, to
corrupt Truth, and adulterate the true Sense, and then cover their own Errors
with Paint.

And thus have you done. in this Libel of yours; for in Page 18. you affirm,
That John Reeve does say, (pretending to quote his Words) That the Substances
of Earth and Water were from all Elements: When as John Reeve's Words were in
that place, That the Substance of Earth and Water was from all Eternity.

Thus you turn their good Sense into Nonsense, and so belly them; for by this
your way of clowding their Words you would darken the Sense, and make them
appear the more Rediculous; and to prevent a further Dispute in that Subject,
of the Substance of Earth and Water being made of nothing, which you were not
able to maintain; and though you say, you would confute that Principle, yet
passed it by, and would say no more of it: And so you let it drop.

Now, as to your Elogancy of Speech; your Tongues and Languages you bost so
much of (and you have need of it to paint your Errors, as aforesaid) we will
leave this all to you Babal Builders, Revel. 18.31.
as acquired by your Study and Learning; it being your Trade, which teaches
your Reason to play upon the Letter of the Scripture as upon a Harp, being very
mellodious to the outward Ear: And by these means you (Arts-Masters) grow Rich
and Honorable, according to your skilful Merchandising of the Letter of the
Scripture, Revel. 18.7.
and Ancient Fathers and Philosophers: These must all be made to agree
together, for the Scripture must either make good Philosophy, or else
Philosophy must be brought to make good the Scripture; and in your wise
handling of this, you grow Rich; some Hundreds, some Thonsands a Year,
equalling the great Men of the Earth; and as to others of your Brethren, though
they be more inferior, yet must they be called Masters, although they be but
Servants; yet will they be well paid, for no Penny, no Paternoster.

So having found you all in the way of Balam, to Bless and Curse for Money,
which is your Souls chief Delight, there I leave you to go on in your Trade,
and receive your Wages of Men here, and of God hereafter, M^^^ 3.7. M^^^ 3.11.
John ^^13. Jude 11. P^^l. 3.19. Matt. 1.5. and 7.23.
whom you pretend to serve; then will you have a fall Reward.

A further Accusation against this Witness you have, for affirming the Power of
Sealing Men up unto Eternal Life and Death, as they Receive or Despise their
Doctrine: This you deny, that any Man ever had this Power: Saying, That it is
quite contrary to the Scripture, and the Temper of the Gospel, which is Love;
and then bid us prove it by Scripture.

CHAP. VI. ANSWER.
IT is confessed by us, Titus 2.11. Ephesians. 1.5.
that the Tmper of the Gospel is Love; but then that Gospel and Eternal Love is
but to the Seed of the Lords own Body, and it must needs be so, because that
Grace is written in Faiths Nature; and though that Seed did fall in Adam, John
10.27.
yet the Gospe^ came to seek and to save that which was lost and fell in Adam;
for the Serpent's Seed never fell in Adam, M^^k 2.17.
nor never knew themselves lost. So the Gospel belongs not to them, but
according to their Obedience to their own Law, so they have the Blessing of the
Law, That the Rain may Rain, and the Sun may Shine, Mart. 5.45.
and the Earth bring forth her Increase, with long Life and Health: And thus
Christ, which is the Gospel, showed his Love to that Seed, when he wept over
Jerusalem: Luke ^.6. and 14.14.
Now as he was Man, he wept to see what temporal Judgments they would bring
upon themselves.

But then, on the other hand, as he was God, Ma^t 22 13. J^^^ 6.7 Ma^t: ^. and
13. 11. and 11.34.
he rejoiced at their eternal Destruction; for upon their despising those
Declarations of his, he thereupon pronounces upon them eternal Wrath; calling
such Devils, Scrpents, and a Generation of Vipers, John 12.10.
and that they should not escape the Damnation of Hell: And John the Baptist
pronounced the like Sentence; and all the Apostles had the like Power after
they had received their Commission.

As for that Saying of Christ's to them, matt. 5.44.
To Bless, and Curs not; that was but when they were but private Believers; as
also, it taught that Clemency, as not to resist temporal Iujuries: matt. 16.19.
But when they had received the Holy Ghost, then was the Keys of Heaven and
Hell Committed to their Charge; Luke 10.16.
and they had Power by them, to Bind and to Loose, to Remit and to Retain Sin.
Luke 20.23.
What was that but Blessing and Cursing? For the Blessing of a Commissionated
Prophet or Apostle, Psalm. 24.7.
it opens the Gate of Heaven; that is, it opens the Heart in Love, to that God
that sent such a Message of glad Tidings of Salvation: So on the Contrary, the
Curse of a Prophet, it opens the Gate of Hell; That is, Acts 7.54.
it opens the Heart in Envy, Malice, and Revenge; and whose Heart that
spiritual Key does open no Man can shut; and whose Heart they shut no Man can
open.

Therefore it was that Paul said, That they were the Saver of Life unto Life, 1
Cor. 6.2. Heb. 10.29. These. 5.20.
unto those that believed them, and the Saver of Death unto Death unto those
that despised them. Again, Paul and the rest of the Apostles, did declare, That
whoever denied the Faith of Jesus, or despised Prophecy, or turned Apostate,
that there could be no Sacrifise for such Sins, 1 John 3.8. and 5.16. 2 Cor.
2.16.
neither were such to be Prayed for; but upon the contrary, to be sealed up
unto eternal Death.

All the Spiritual Declarations of the Prophets reach to the eternal State of
Man, for they pointing at their God's becoming Flesh, and that, upon his Death
and Resurrection the eternal State of the Two Seeds of Faith and Reason takes
being; for the Resurrection of Christ gains Power to raise the Dead, and give
each Seed his Reward.

And therefore the Gospel apropriates David's Key to belong to it, Psalm. 149.4.
which Key lies in such and the like Sayings, The Lord takes Pleasure in his
People, he will beautify the Meek with Salvation; this is the Key that opens
Heaven: And as follows, Let the high Praises of God be in their Mouth, and a
two-edged Sword in their Hand; and then with the other Key and Sword, To
execute Vengance upon the Heathen, and Punishments upon the People; To bind
their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron; To execute upon
them the Jndgment written: And this is the Key that opens and none can shut,
and shuts and no Man can open. Psalm. 149.9.
This Honor, says David, belongs to all living Saints. For these Keys and
Sword belongs to all Saints; Isa. 54.17. and 57.4.
and David himself, in those and the like Sayings, had flung into the Fire all
that despised his Spirit of Prophecy, of his God's becoming Flesh, and Sealed
them up in these Words; Saying, divide their Tongues, Psalm. 55.9.
for I have seen Violence in the City. Cast them down in thy Anger, Consume
them in Wrath, Psalm. 59.13.
let not them come into thy Righteousness, blot them out of the Book of Life,
and let them not be written with the Righteous; Psalm. 140.10.
Let burning Goals fall upon them; let them be cast into the Fire.

The Prophet Jeremiah likewise, meeting with the Seed of the Serpent, opposing
his spiritual Declarations, concerning God's becoming Flesh, and his Sufferings
by that Seed, Seals them up to Death Eternal; for they were for devising
Devises against that Doctrine of his; therefore he powereth forth these
Imprecasions against them; saing, O Lord, Jor. 18.23. and 29.22.
forgive not their Iniquity, neither blot out their Sin from thy Sight, etc.
And then changing his Words, he speaks in the Person of God saying, Jer. 23.14.
They are all unto me as Sodom. So that we see that the Prophit's Curse is
God's Curse: Jer. 6.30.
And further says he, The Saints shall call them Reprobate Silver.

This is Gospel Power; the Laws Curse penetrades down into the Grave, Ez^k.
32.24 26.27 29.
the first Death; but the Gospels Power and Curss raises it again from the
first Death into a second and eternal Death; being a living Death, and dying
Life.

And thus we see, that every true Minister has Power to set Life and Death
before (...): And that Ministry that has not that Power, Mark 16.16. John 3.18.
is no true Ministry. Now, what a blind Guide is this, that connot see these
plain Scriptures; but cries out, Prove this by Scripture. Woe be to all such as
are led by these blind Guides! Oh, that all the Elect were but delivered from
their Captivity and Bondage under their Formalities, and might come to hear of
Truth; that their Joy and Peace might abound, being the Seal of eternal Life.

But it is a wonderful thing, that such Preachers as those, who cannot Believe
that any Prophet has Power as aforesaid, and yet they themselves shall take
upon them to Judge Man's Faith, and Condemn him for it. so is it not a wicked
thing to deny the Prophets and Apostles Power of the Keys of Heaven and Hell,
and yet presume to do that thing themselves, whilst they acknowledge themselves
but falible Men: Does not this Make you justly damned in your selves? But it is
no wondering at it, for what says the Scripture, He has blinded their Eyes,
John 12.40.
they Stumble at Noonday: They have all the Spirit of Slumber.

And now I shall return to Answer this Misrepresentor's false Reflections upon
our main Principles; yea, such as the very Scriptures stands upon, and on which
eternal Life wholly depends.

In Page the 18th. you bring in John Reeve sciteing him thus; Saying, God is
not a Spirit, but has a Body: Your Reflections are thus.

The Accusation.
The Scripture makes a Body and a Spirit Tow opposite things, so that a Body is
not a Spirit, nor a Spirit a Body Eccles. 12.7. A Spirit has not Flesh and
Bone, Luke. 24.37. The Scripture calls God a Spirit, but never a Body; God is
not in form of a Man, but is invisible, and no Man ever Saw him or can.

CHAP. VII. ANSWER.
1. Your Citation is false; For John Reeve's Words are thus, That God is not a
Spirit without a Body. By your false Citation, you would have your worldly
Disciples to think, That he affirms, That God is a Body without a Spirit. But,
to come to the Point; I must tell you, That the Body and Soul are not Two
contrary Things; and if your Solomon, Eccles 3.19.
told you so with one Breath, he tells you the quite contrary in another: but
many times wise Solomon's, Verse 20.
do not know the meaning of their own Sayings.

Solomon was a wise Man, 1 Kings 3.12. and 12 24 and 11.4.
but the Wisdom which he craved, and that God gave him, was but natural; so
that Solomon's Writings are but the Operations of his natural Reason, and from
sum intrigate Sayings of his Father David: So they are no Scripture, for he was
no Prophetical Man. Matt. 12.42.


2. Again, If the Body and Soul are two contrary things, (as you say) and in
Oposition to each other, then was the Body and Soul of Christ at variance, with
it self; and in Oposition with each other, and so two oposite Things: If so,
then Christ's Body did not go to Heaven, nor never would: And belike, you do
not belive that Christ's Body is in Heaven, any more than the Quakers; and I
know not how you should believe it, because your God has never a Body: So
Christ is none of your Fatherly God if he have a Body.

Can a Spirit live and subsist without a Body; where do the Scriptures say,
That God is a Spirit without a Body: Did not you learn your own Catechize, or
if you did, have you forgotten? does it not teach (saying) to your Pupils, That
God is a Spirit, Or a spiritual Substance, most Holy, Wise, Just and Infinite.

Now if it be so, that God has a Substance, then he must on necessity have a
Body: And if he be Holy, Wise, and Just, he must have a Person to possess his
ravishing Glory in, and yet to be of uncompounded Purity. Exodus 15.3.
Is it not said, That God was a Man of War; that shows that he is in the form
of a Man: Also Christ told the Pharisees, Ma^^. ^^.17. Josh. 9.1. 3.
That there was no Man perfectly Good but one, which was God.

3. Moreover, if your Soul can be more Wise, Just, and Holy without your Body,
then turn it out of the Body, and see what Holiness and Justice it can Act
without its Body. 1 Cor. 6.19.


But the Truth of Scripture is, That God had a Body and Person from all
Eternity; R^vel. 21.23. and 1.14 and 10.1.
a spiritual Body, brighter than the Sun, more clear than Christial, and that
is the Reason why Mortality cannot behold him as he is in his full Glory: Deuteronomy.
10.6.
If God was willing at any time that some of his Servants, the Prophets, should
behold him, he was compelled to vale his Glory, so as that their frail Nature
might be in a capasity to behold him.

And this we further affirm, That we can sooner find in Scripture, that our God
has, and ever had, a distinct Body of himself, than you can find in Scripture
a Trinity of Persons in one Godhead; for if you find Three distinct Persons,
then you must find Three Bodies; and where then is your Spirit God become.

4. Again, is not the Scriptures clear, That the Fathers of old did see God,
Genesis 17.3. Exodus 24.10. Isa 6.5. John 35.9. Exodus 33.23.
and ever beheld him in Form and Shape of a Man: Will you say that God assumed
that Shape, and yet had no Shape of his own; this is to make God a Conniver.

It is no wonder, as I said before, that you despise John Reeve for saying that
the Lord spoke to him to the hearing of the Ear; for you do not believe that
God has any Tongue to speak at all: For, say you, a Spirit has no Flesh, and
has no Body: For, say you, Body and Spirit are Two contrary things.

As the Scripture says that God has a Body, Dan. 7.9. Revel. 10.1. and 1.14.
John 6.^. Psalm. 94.9 N^m^. 12.8. Isa. 6^.5.
so it attributes to this Body, Hands, Eyes, Face, Nose, Mouth, Ears, Arms,
Legs, Breast, Heart, Back, etc. And yet must he have never a Body, this is
clearly to deny Scripture, for the Scripturian says, That God has a Body; but
the Antescripturian says, That God has neither Body, Parts, or Shape, but yet
is an infinite vast God, filling all things, and is in all Places at one and
the same time, and so can neither Assend nor Descend, Come nor Go, but is
everywhere at once; as your great Augustine says.

This is yours and the Worlds monstrous God: Are those the Men that are so
capable of Argument; if we should be as ignorant in the Scriptures as you, it
were no matter if our Tongues should cleave to the Roof of our Mouths.

I wonder you are not ashamed to pretend to Scripture; do you believe the
Scripture? Certain I am, that there are many Doctors of your Church that does
not believe them at all; for instance hereof, there is one of your Doctors,
namely Dr. More: This Man, in one of his Books, called his Cabila, does little
less than give the Scripture the Ly; for treating upon the Creation of Man by
Moses, says That the Scriptures does not always speak according to the
exactness of Truth, but according to their Appearance in Sense and the vulgar
Opinion; and he quotes Chrisostim, Bernard, and Aquinus, as holding the same
things, and instances it as to the Creating of Adam and Eve: Saying thus, God
has no Figure or Shape, although Moses says he has; he only permits the
Ignorant and Vulgar People to Believe so, it being his Prudence and Policy so
to do.

Now is not this Odious, for what Prudence is it to Flatter, Dissemble, and
Deceive the People; for must Gods Prophets be but like Politicians of State,
pretending one thing, and acting another.

Again, this Man brings in Moses speaking thus; God took of the Dust of the
Ground, wrought it with his Hands into such a temper that it was fit to make
the Body of a Man; which when framed, then comes near to it with his Mouth, and
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life.

And when God had made a Woman of one of Adam 's Ribs, he takes her by the
Hand, and brought her to Adam; so when Adam was awaked, Ge^. 2^.21.
he found his Dream to be true, for he dreamed that God took a Woman out of
him, for God stood by him with a Woman in his Hand.

Now it is true, says this Doctor, Moses spakes in this manner to satisfy the
rude Multitude, who was ever ready to think that God was in Form and Shape as
they were; and thus Moses complied with their Humor, and permited them to
belive so; yet, says he, it is a Contradiction to the Idia of God, to have
Figure and Shape.

Now what say you to this, is not this giving Moses the Lie? Moses, you see,
would permit People to believe, That God was in the Form of a Man: Now why will
not you permit us to believe so? Moses did not count this Doctrine a
mischievous Principle, as you do; but you, with this Man, set your selves
against Moses, and against the Scriptures; they are counted no other than a Lie
with you: Now it is clear by this, that many of you Doctors are stark blind
Athists.

your Protestant Church is now grown as blind with Age, almost as your Fathers
the Papists, and as Atheistical as one of the Popes, who said, That that Fable
of Jesus Christ had brought their Church great Riches: And one of that Church
said to me, that the Scriptures were but balderdash Stuff.

Now as to that saying of Christ's to his Disciples, That a Spirit had not
Flesh and Bone as he had; it was only to inform them that there was no such
Spirit as the World imagined, that could be seen, that had no Body; for Eyes of
Flesh must have a Substance for its Object: Therefore said Christ, handle me
and see, for I have a Body, a Substance of very Flesh and Bone; John 20.2^.
and they felt, and believed him to be their Lord and God.

For Christ, from hence, would have them for ever after to know that all
Spirits, whither of God, Men, or Angels, are always invisible; for it is the
Body that is visible, for the Soul that is in it is always invisible, which
Spirit comprehends all visible things, yet cannot Live, Act, or Operate without
its Body. And so much for that Principle.

Again, Page 19th. you Representor object against that most divine and
misterious Principle of God the Fathers becoming Flesh; and call this a
Doctrine quite contrary to Scripture, and produce those Scriptures for Proof
against us; namely, that God sent his Son made of a Woman, And the Word was
made Flesh; but, say you, there is not one Word, That the Father was made Flesh.

CHAP. VIII. ANSWER.
IT is confessed by us, Gal. 4.4. John 5.26. and 10.18. Epb. 5.2.
that the Scripture says, That God sent his Son, as also, that Christ came of
himself, and that he laid down his Life of himself. Now if he laid down his
Life of himself, then where was the Father but in himself; for it was his
divine Spirit that was the Father, by which he could lay down his Life by that
self, and by that self could take it up again: For God transmuteing his
spiritual Body into Flesh so gained the Godhead and humane Nature together,
Heb. 1.3.
and so has a Twofold Self Humane and Divine.

Therefore, when he says, he has Power of himself to lay down his Life, Titus
2.14
then he speaks as in Referance to his Godhead; and when he says, That he can
of himself do nothing, and the like, Isa. 45.15, 21, 22, 23. ^^^pared.
then he speaks as in relation to his Manhood: God then hideing himself in that
Manhood.

Again, if it be granted, That Christ is God and Man, then it must be
acknowledged, That where Christ is, there the Father is; John 14.^.9. Gal. 1.4.
1 ^et. 2.24.
and Christ affirms it himself, saying, That he that had him, had the Father,
and he that had seen him, had seen the Father.

Now from all this, does it not plainly appear, That he was the Father himself,
as well as the Son: And John says, John 1.1. Verse 1^. Mat^. 1.20.
That in the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God: And this Word
was God; and that God, or Word became Flesh: Then surely that one God was
Father as well as Son; unless you can prove there were Two Gods, or with the
Arians, That Christ was one with the Father in Union, but not in Essence; and
if so, then every Believer is as much God as Christ is: But you have your Two
Gods, one of which, you say, took Flesh, the other did not; here you divide the
Sub stance.

What a Monster do you here make of God; for you had before Christ's Incarnation
those Two Gods in Heaven, a Father God, and a Son God; and that Son you say,
The Father Begot before all Worlds, and then was begot again in this World; so
your God the Son was Twice Begot, or Twice Made: Is this good Sense, is this
your Wisdom, is this good Divinity; nay, without all Controversy, this is quite
contrary to Scripture, and to sober Reason also. Z^ch 1^.9. Deu^. 6.^. Isaiah
42.8. and 48.11. Psalm 103.20. Heb. 1.6.


For was there ever any more than one God, and did not the Prophet Isaiah say,
That God would not give his Glory to another; and yet it is said, That all the
Angels of God should Worship Christ, Isaiah 45.23. Phil. 2.10.
and that to him every Knee should bow; and that not only in Earth, but in
Heaven also: Re^^l. 22.6. Compared with Verse 14.
Who then could share with him, for he was the Lord God of all the Prophets,
testified by the Angel unto John; which Angel bid John worship God, even that
God of the Prophets, which was no other but Jesus Christ; Therefore it is said,
I Jesus have sent my Angel, and behold I come quickly, etc.

There is no other God to come, no other Father, no other Resurrection and
Life, 1 John 2.23. and 5.7. 2 John 9. Acts 4.12.
no other Name or Power but Jesus Christ our Lord, tho Men or Angels should
gainsay it; as I have abundantly showed in a Treatis entitled [None but
Christ.]

Moreover, John 17.3.
to prosecute this Principle a little further here, because it is our Life and
Foundation Principle, and it is impossible for any Man to be saved that shall
presumptuously despise this Doctrine of Jesus being the everlasting Father after
so plain a Discovery.

I am now to inquire how you Trenitarians, Sosinians, and Arians, bring Christ
in for your Savior: You say, That by the Fall of Adam all Men had incurred
Damnation, and so were become God the Father's Debtors; and the Father standing
upon Justice would not be Reconciled with them, without the full payment of
that Debt, as Life for Life. Now, say you, the Father was so far pleased as to
send his Son, to pay the full Debt: And, say you, this Son came voluntarily and
paid the Debt; and by this means satisfied the Wrath of his Father, and so
purchased your Life by his Ransom.

Wherefore, if it be so as you Teach, That the Father is distinct from that
Son, then are you not beholding to the Father at all: For take this Similitude
for the Elustration thereof; Suppose, I owe a Man a 1000 Pounds, or more, and I
have not wherewith to pay him, and he will not forgive me any of the Debt; or I
must either pay it all, or to Prison; there to remain till I have paid the
utmost Farthing; The Son of this my Creditor sees the Strait I am in,
Commiserates my Case; steps in voluntarily, and pays the Father the full Debt,
and so sets me at Liberty.

Now in this Case, who am I most beholding to, the Father, or the Son; not to
the Father at all, for he was for Justice, and I wanted Mercy: The Son
therefore was my Friend, and to him only am I bound, and him only am I to Love,
Serve, and Obey.

This is the very plain Case; Phil. 3.8. Ephe. 6.24. 1 Cor. 16.22. 1 Timothy 6.15.
Revel. 5.12. Jonn 17.5. 2 Cor 5.19. 2 John 9. John 8.36. 1 Pet 1.19. and 2 Pet.
6. Heb. 2.14.
it is the Son Christ Jesus that all the Elect Seed of Adam are beholding to,
and not to any Father that either is, or ever was distinct from him: But the
Father of Christ was his own Godhead Spirit, which through his eternal Love to
the Seed of his own Body, was moved to change his Spiritual Body, (which was
his everlasting Son) into Flesh, to the end he might be capable to dye, and
shed his Blood for their Redemption; as also, that he might have Power to raise
the Seed of the Serpent to a Second and eternal Death, for their Cruelty acted
against him and his Elect Seed.

Therefore his coming in Flesh was foretold by Isaiah, and all the other
Prophets; Isaiah 9.6.
and that the Son that was to be born of a Virgin, should in time be called the
mighty God, and everlasting Father: Now at this time this Prophesy is
fulfilled, and by this Commission of the Spirit, he is both called and known to
be the high and mighty God, and everlasting Father: This Scripture is
possitive, and shall command all primative Scriptures to bow down to it.

Thus the Scriptures are clear, to all that are appinted to Salvation, that
Christ Jesus is that one only, and alone true God, and everlasting Father: To
this the Holy Patriacks agree, observe their Testimony, which is consonant to
Scripture, being grounded upon Enoch's Prophesy.

Sim shall be glorified, when the great Lord God of Issrael appears on the
Earth as a Man to save Adam; for God taking a Body upon him (namely of Flesh
and Bone) and eating with Men, shall save Men.

Ye shall see God in the shape of a Man (said Zebulon) he is the Savior, he is
the [Father] of Nations; he that Believes in him shall certainly Reign in
Heaven, says Levy and Judeth.

God shall appear and dwell amongst Men upon Earth, to save Israel; the Highest
shall visit the Earth, eating and drinking as Man with Man; he shall save
Israel: That is, God hiden in Man.

At the last Day we shall rise, every one of us, to his own Scepter, says
Benjamin, Worshipping the King of Heaven, which appeared in the base Shape of a
Man; and as many as believed in him shall Reign with him at that time: And all
faithful Men shall rise again, and the Residue to Shame, because they believed
not in God that came in the Flesh to deliver.

Thus it is made Clear, That God the Father became Flesh; but one Evidence more
from John, before I conclude this Point: He, in Admiration of his Lords Love
cried out saying, 1 John 3.1.
O What Love the Father has bestowed upon us, but the World knows him not,
but we know him.

Now, who was this Father of Love, was it any other but the Apostles Jesus; his
following Words does show it as clear as the Light; saying thus, We, who are
his Apostles do know him; and we further know, that when [He] does appear we
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is: That is, Psalm 3.21.
when he comes to change our vile Bodies, and make them like his own glorious
Body, then shall we see him as he is in himself, one personal God Clothed with
Flesh and Bone, as a Garment of eternal Glory.

This is the Faith (says John) That makes Pure, and he whose Faith abides in
Jesus Christ, that came by Water and Blood, has the everlasting Father; and he
that holds this Faith sineth not: That is, he sineth not to Act; he may have
the motion to Sin, but it preserves from the Act; for that golden Grace of
Faith crusheth that Cokatrice Egg of the Motion of Sin, before it become a
stinging Serpent, and so Conquers and Overcomes.

This is the Doctrine of the Gospel, and he that Imbraceth it has the Father
and the Son, 2 John 10.9.
where and to whom the Blessing and the Salvation of God-speed is given: This
is the true God, and the Amen, 1 John 5.20. Revel 3.14.
and all other Gods are Idols.

This is the Muggletonian's Principle, which the Ante-Scripturian calls a
mischievious Principle. Thus you curse the true God, and defy the Holy one of
Israel, choosing to your self a God of your own lying Imagination.

In Page 19. you further Object against that Principle, how that the Godhead
dyed. This, say you, is quite contrary to Scripture, which says, God is
Immortal, and that he has Immortality 1. Tim. 1.17. and 6.16. Also, you say,
That Muggleton teaches, That the Soul of Man is Mortal, and turns to Dust: To
this, say you, the Scripture tells us, That the Souls of Men are alive after
their Death. Matt. 22: 32. And, that God is said to be their God after they are
Dead, Matt. 10.28. And that we are not to fear them that can kill the Body and
not the Soul. And that Lazarus, when he dyed, went to Heaven, and Dives to
Hell, Luke 16.22.

CHAP. IX. ANSWER.
The Scriptures, Acts 20.28.
say that God purchased the Church with his Blood: Now the Blood of Christ was
no other but the Blood of God, and when he power'd forth that Blood, then did
he power forth his Life; for Life lay in that Blood.

Therefore it is said That he powered forth his Soul unto Death, Isaiah 53.12.
Heb 9.14.
and that he offered up himself through the eternal Spirit: What is that, but
that the eternal Spirit entered into Death, or passed through Death, in a
Moment, into eternal Life; Death being too weak to keep him under; Coll 2.9. 1
Cor. 15.54.
so that whatever Life was in Jesus did enter into Death.

Therefore he that was the Alpha and Omega, Revel. 1.18.
the First and the Last, was Dead, but is now Alive; and behold he now lives
for ever more, and is that immortal only wise God, blessed for ever: So that we
do affirm, 1 Timothy 6.16. 2 John. 7. Revel. 1.18.
That God is immortal; and we also know that Eternity did become Time, for
Flesh was in Time, and Time did become Eternity again.

Now, in that you Teach, That God cannot dye; it is evident that you do not
belive that Christ was any God at all; so that you Trenitarians, Arians, and
Socinians, you are all a like, and that you are no more Christians then they:
For it will necessarily follow, That if it were nothing but humane Nature, or
Life in Christ, that died, then the Death of any other Man had been equevolent
to Christ's Sufferings, and as Meritorious as his; and so your Spirit God,
without a Body, might have saved you by sheding of any other Man's Blood.

But the true Christian does know that no Blood can make Atonement for Sin,
but the most precious and unvaluable Blood of a God; to believe this, John 6.54.
is to drink his Blood: And to believe that that blessed Body of his was no
less then the very body of God, this is to eat his flesh; so that whosoever
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood so, has by so doing gained the full
assurance of Eternal Life; this is a standing Truth, and shall prevail.

But how is it possible you should believe this, when as you cannnot believe
that any Life dies at all; for say you, The Soul of Man is alive after Death;
here your Ignorance appears very great for all your Learning; Where did you
ever find by Scripture, That the Soul of any man was ever alive without its
body? The Scripture no where affirms it, if rightly understood; they are but
old Wives Fables, or Monks and Friars Forgeries, and heathenish Principles from
their own blind Imaginations.

As for those Sayings concerning Dives and Lazarus, it is but a Parable, Luke 16.
and so must have a Spiritual meaning; for Souls without Bodies have no
Tongues, nor Eyes, nor Bosoms, as that Parable speaks of; but that Parable was
only to set forth the two Seeds here in Mortality, which is largely opened by
this Commission of the Spirit.

And as to Christ speaking of God being the God of the living, and not of the
dead, it was spoken to the Saduces, who denied the Resurrection; therefore
Christ shows that there was a necessity of a Resurrection, Act 2.31. and 13.36.
seeing that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of the Prophets were dead,
and their Sepulchers are with us at this day; and if God do not raise them
again to that Glory their Faith was pitched upon, then was he the God of the
dead, and not of the living, in that all dyed to him instead of living to him.

And as to that saying, Fear not them which can kill the body, etc. That is,
fear not him that may kill both Soul and Body by a natural death, but rather
fear him that has an absolute power in himself to slay both Soul and Body with
an Eternal or second Death.

Moreover, when the Scripture says the body dies, does not that include the
soul, or natural Life? What have you your natural Learning for, but to
understand the natural sense of words? Do you not find, that that which our
Translation calls body, the Greek calls souls? as Numb. 6.6. there it is
said, That he shall come at no dead body, in our Bible; but after the Greek,
your own Doctors read thus; He shall come at no dead Soul.

Is it not said, Genesis 2.17.
That man was made a living soul? And was not the threatening charge given out,
That that soul that sinned, Ezekiel. 18. verse, 20.
that soul should dye? and yet say you, the soul cannot dye.

Now that which the National Ministry do make a ground of the Immortality of
the soul, is to all spiritual wise men, an evident proof of its Mortality; as
where it is said, so such a one dyed, and was gathered to his people; now
whether is it, that they were gathered but into the grave? As for instance, see
2 Kings 22.20.

If the Soul can enjoy Heaven without its body, Col. 3.4. 1 These. 4.14.
what matter of a Resurrection? but it is certain that the Scriptures affirms
the contrary, and that there can be no Salvation without a Resurrection.

When God shall raise the dead, Mat. 13.41. c. 24.31. c. 25.31. John 5.^8. c.
11.43.
he has his Angels attending to gather the Saints together, as God raises
them; neither God nor his Angels does not bring their Souls from Heaven to
^^ume their dead bodies; but our God raises Soul and Body together, out of the
Grave by a word speaking, as he did the Body and Soul of Lazarus.

Again, on the other hand, 1 Revel. 20.13. Isa. 66.24.
must all the damned Souls come from Hell to fetch up their cursed bodies? What
Hell do they come from, but out of the Grave, Soul and Body out of the Grave;
and when the Soul and Body rises, Jer. 17.13. Mich. 7.71. Ex^d. 10.21. Revel.
10.10.
then the Devil rises to his eternal Punishment; and this Earth will be the
place of the Devils Torment, where he acted all his Lies and Cruelty; there
shall he suffer eternally (after the Elect Men and Angels are assended with
their God into Eternal Glory) the Plagues of Egypt were a Tipe of this.

These things will be so in their time: And so much in answer to this Principle.

In page 20th. you oppose John Reeve for saying, How that but one Angel fell
from his Created Purity and Glory.

This Doctrine, say you, The Accusation.
is quite contrary to Scripture; which tells us in Jude, That the Angels fell:
and this, say you, cannot be applied to Kain and his Posterity: For they, say
you, by our own words never fell: And as for Kain, say you, He never was from
that fallen Angel, but was of Adam's begetting as well as Seath. And again you
affirm also, That all Kain's Offspring nerished in the Flood.

CHAP. X. ANSWER.
IF that Offspring of that Serpent-Angel that was cast from Heaven could know
it self, Isa. 29.10. John 12.40. Rev. 11.7.
then you might know that these Angels spoken of in Jude were the Offspring of
Cursed Kain, the Serpent Angel transmuted into Flesh, and reserved in Chains of
Unbelief, and the Darkness of Ignorance: For Jude spoke of no other Devils but
what were clothed in Flesh; and it was they that were the Devils ordained to
condemnation.

And therefore mind; for he brings in Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Rebellious
Jews against Moses, and those upstart Hypocrites who denied the Lord to be the
only and alone true God, and yet pretended his Name: All these, says he, were
ordained to condemnation in that Serpent-Angel aforesaid, being reprobated in
the Seed; and Kain was that Seed. And therefore Jude pronounces the Woe unto
them, as the Offspring and Seed of Kain, v. 11.
to whom Eternal Torment does belong.

Again, Rev. 12.7.
where it is said, that there was a war in heaven, Michael and his Angels
fighting against the Dragon and his Angels: That Michael was the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus in all his Angelical Believers; and the Dragon was the Spirit of
Cursed Kain, in all his Seed. This War was on Earth, though said to be in Heaven,
because the Original of both Seeds came from Heaven; for there never was any
actual Rebellion in Heaven, but that Angel-Serpent aforesaid being cast out,
all his Seed fell in him, and was cast out with him, and so actual Rebellion
took place: And therefore, said John, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, for
the Devil (not Devils) is come down amongst you. Verse 12.17.
And it was this Devil that brought the Woe, both to Saint and Serpent; in this
Warfare does these Two Woes take place to them Two Seeds; one in this Fight
having his Heel bruised, Genesis 3.15. Rev. 13.7.10.
which is in Persecution, loss of Goods, and Death natural; the other having
his Head bruised by the Saints Weapons of War, which reaches to a second Death.

And this Devil that was cast down, 1 John 3.12.
was the Father of Cain, from whence all Wickedness and Cruelty has flown; for
Cain was the very Firstborn of that Devil, and the fullness of that
Serpent-Angel's- Godhead lived Boddily in Cain; and such of his Seed, that
have in them a great Share of that piercing Reason, or God-head-power, became
potent Angels, Lords and Governors of this World, it being given to that Seed;
and they labor in this their Kingdom, to imitate the grandeur of that Glory
their Father, the fallen Angel, had before his Fall, and to come as near to it
as possibly they can.

And here it is, Ezekiel. 29.3.
That the Prophet Ezekiel compares Pharaoh King of Egypt to the great red
Dragon: And the Assirian Monarch was said by the Prophet, to be in Dignity,
Power, Glory and Buty, like unto his Father the Angel before his Transmutation
into Flesh, Chap. 33.3.
when he walked once in the Garden of Eden, being greater than several others
of his Father's Children: The great Kings of Babylon were said to be, from
Lucipher, and therefore were called after his Name, Lucipher the Sun of the
Morning: And they are said by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 14.12.
To be cast down from Heaven, which could not be, if they had not proceeded
from the fallen Angel.

And as they were cast down from Heaven in that Angel, even so they were for
exalting their Thrones above the Stars, and to be like unto God; which does
show, That they were evil Kings, and evil Beasts For good Kings, and such as
proceed not from Cain, they are not for exalting themselves so high, as to that
Heavenly Throne of judging of Men's Faith and Conscience; neither will they
tiranise over their Subjects, but do Justice according to the Law. But to the
Matter aforesaid.

The great King of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28.3.
seems to out-top all the foregoing Kings with Angelical Perfection; for he is
said to be the very anointed Cherub himself; he having as great a Share of that
lost Glory as his fallen Nature could afford him; for that Angel that he
proceeded from was a Church, which was the highest Order of Angels; and this
King was of the highest Degree of Wisdom, Buty, and Glory: And therefore his
Perfections was such, Verse 13.14.
as that he was said to be Wiser than Daniel; by which Wisdom he had gotten him
Riches of Gold and Silver in abundance; as also in his Kingdom all sorts of
cunning Arts and Siances, and a great Merchant, mighty in Traffic: All this
from his Father the Angel.

Therefore, said the Prophet to this Prince, Thou have been in Eden, the Garden
of God; every presious Stone was thy Covering; yea, the Tabret and the Pipe was
prepared in thee in the Day that thou wast Greated: This was not Adam, but the
Angel, etc.

Again, Thou art the anointed Cherub that covers, and I have set thee so.
(Again, says the Prophet) Thou wast upon the Holy Mountain of God, and have
walked in the midst of Stones of Fire: Thou wast perfect in thy Ways from the
Day thou wast Created, Verse 15.17.
till Iniquity was found in thee: Thou have corrupted thy Wisdom, by reason of
thy Brightness.

Now can this Prince of Reason, so exalted, be derived from any other Root,
but that Angelical Reprobate, That was cast down from Heaven for his Pride, in
those his great Perfections. Matt.
Therefore his Wisdom is said, to excel Daniel 's: And so it might be said to
excel Adam's too.

Therefore these Princes are not related to Adam, but to that Angel, that
corrupted his Wisdom of piersing Reason; for had his Wisdom flowed from Faith's
Nature, it could not have Corrupted it self; but the Wisdom of Reason is
subject to Sin: Yea, Reason it self, (tho so noble a Nature, and splendant, if
not upheld by that Power that Created it) is Sin it self; and here is the
Offspring and Root of all fleshly Glory: So that, that which is adored for a
God is damned for a Devil. If this gives Offense, I cannot help it: But to
proceed.

Again, Whereas you, (the Opposer of the Muggletonians Principles) say; First,
That Cain was of Adam 's begeting; And then Secondly, That all Cain 's
Offspring perished in the Flood: These are both absolutely false: For,

First, It is evident, That Adam never begot Cain, neither do the Scriptures
affirm it, if rightly understood: For tho Moses says, Genesis 4.1.
That Adam knew Eve his Wife, and she conceived and bare Cain; yet Moses does
not say, That she conceived Cain of Adams Seed: And therefore in the very next
Words after, Moses has these Words [ And she again bare his Brother Abel.]
Verse 2.
Without mentioning a Word of his knowing of her after; and this was to keep
the Seeds of aspiring Reason in the dark; for Eve had conceived Cain of the
Serpent Angel, before ever Adam knew her; and that was it that made her full of
Lust after her Innocent Husband.

Again, 1 John 3.12.
To clear this further, Does not the Apostle John say, That Cain was from that
Serpent-Angel, which he calls by the name of Wicked one. Now dare you say, That
Adam was that Wicked one, from whence (as John says) the Spirit of Cain
sprung: Surely no, for that were Wickedness indeed to Men that profess
Scripture.

Furthermore, Gain and Abel, although they are said to be Brothers, Matt. 1.15.
yet their Brotherhood comes but by the Mother's side, even as it is apparent,
that Holy and Jacob, the Two attributed Fathers of Joseph, the Husband of Mary,
were Brothers by the Mother's side.

Now it is worth the minding here, That Joseph could not be the natural Son of
both those Men; for observe in the Genealogy of our Savior, Matthew makes
Mathan to be the Father of Jacob, and Jacob the Father of Joseph: But Luke
makes Melchi the Father of Hely, Luke 3.22.
and Hely the Father of Joseph.

Now here is a different Race, for Jacob, the natural Father of Joseph, he
proceeded from Solomon, but Hely sprung from Nathan, and was Joseph's Father by
Law or Title, but not by Nature.

Therefore, as Hely was the supposed Father to Joseph, and Joseph the supposed
Father of Christ; even so was Adam no more than the supposed Father of Cain;
nay he is no where called the Father of Cain, not in all the Scriptures: But on
the contrary, that Cain's Father was called that Wicked one, or Devil; for
Wicked one and Devil are both of one signification. See and Compare, Matt.
13.19. Luke 8.12. Mark 4.15.

Therefore it is without all Controversy, That Adam was not that Wicked One,
Satan, or Devil, that begot Cain: Nay your own Doctor Ainser, upon Genesis
says, That Cain was from the Devil; and he cites some of the Hebrew Doctors
for Proof of the same: Saying, That they Teach how that Cain was born of the
Filth, and Seed of the Serpent, which was conveyed into Eve: And that one
Menacham, a Jewish Rabi says, That unto this World there cleaves the secret
Filthiness of the Serpent, which came upon Eve; and because of that Filthiness
Death is come upon Adam, etc. But no more of this here, having wrote largely
upon it in a Treatis Entitled, Truth's Triumph, or the Witness to the Two
Witnesses, which may some time come to public view.

Secondly, as it is proved that Adam did not beget Cain; so it is false for you
to say, That all Cain 's Offspring perished in the Flood. Now you that affirm
this, will find it to the contrary; for if that had been so as you say, then
there would be no Damnation for any that have been borne since.

But tho Cain was dead, and most of his Offspring, Genesis 9.25. and 3.14.
Compated. Isa. 1.4. and 14.20. Deuteronomy. 12.5.
yet his Seed was alive in cursed Ham; so that the Curse given to the
Serpent-Angel in the Womb of Eve run in a Line, even from Cain to Ham, and so
to Ishmael and Esau, and so on to the end of the World: For although Ham was begot
by Noah, a good Man, and an elect Vessel, yet was not Ham of that good Seed;
for Noah had in him Two Seeds, as all Men else have, since the Sons of God saw
the Daughters of Men, Gen ^.^.
and took them Wives of such as were the Seed of Cain: And so the Seed of Adam
and that Seed of Cain, through Copulation, did perticipate of each others Seed;
Matt. 1^.37.
and which Seed is uppermost in Conception, that Seed grows to be Lord over the
other; Matt. 10.37.
and so a Man comes to have his Denomination according to the Predominancy of
his Seed: And thus it was with Ham, for Cain's Seed was predominant in Ham's
Conception.

So it was with those Jews that boasted themselves to be of Abraham: John
8.38.33.37.44.
And tho they might be Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh, yet Christ
branded them for Devils, telling them, That the Devil was their Father: Which
was no other than Cain, being the first Liar and Murderer.

Now, from hence, all sober Men may see, that a Devil and a Saint is all one to
you; for you can find but one Scripture Seed; for God and Devil, Heaven and
Hell, Saint and Serpent, with you come all from one Root.

Now, seeing it is so with you, I would advise you to leave off playing the
Hipocrite, and forbear telling your Hearers, That any of them will be Damned:
For if there be but one Seed, and that Seed the Seed of Adam, then all will be
saved; so deal plainly to your People, and Preach to them general Redemption,
and prove it from Paul's Words, where he says, That as in Adam all dye, 1 Cor.
15.22.
so in Christ shall all be made alive.

But will yea, or nill yea, this we must tell you, That there is a Seed, Romans
9.27. Mat. 9.13.
namely Cain and his Offspring, that never fell in Adam, but in the
Serpent-Angel, and so are incapable of ever being Redeemed by Christ: 2. Pet.
2.12. John 17.9. 1 Timothy 2.4. Matt. 18.11. and 10.6. Romans 11.26.
For when on Earth, he never prayed for them: For tho he would have all Men
saved, yet it is but all those that fell in Adam, that he has any spiritual
Salvation for.

This is that which makes that Seed fret themselves, Mal. 3.15.
and call it a mischevious Principle; and it will prove sad to that mischevious
Man that Condemns true Prophesy; and the true Believers thereof; as likewise,
Isa. 5.20.
that justifies the Seed of the Wicked to be the Seed of Adam, who was the
Seed of God.

Your farther Accusation Runs thus.
In Page 20. You say, That there is a Devil distinc^ from Man, and would seem
to prove it from that Devil that tempted Christ; which you would have to be a
bodily-Spirit; and you scoff at wicked Imagination being the Devil: And from
hence you query from that Scripture, Mark 5.4. Saying, Does Imagination break
Chains, etc. And that their affirming, That Ely should be Christ 's
Representative: This you call all Fable.

CHAP. XI. ANSWER.
IF you will have a Devil without a Body, you must go seek out a newfound
World, to sind out your unknown Devil: The Works of this Devil are manifest,
and yet you cannot know him; for is there any Wickedness in this World but what
flows from that Carnal Spirit of Men and Women, Revel. 18.2. Matt. 15.19. Gal.
5.19.
who is a Kingdom of Wickedness in that Tophet or Bodies of theirs; for it is
the Heart where the Court is kept, and is the only Nussery of all evil Spirits
conciv'd there by Imagination.

Oh! the depth of this Imagination in this its bottomless Pit, and the
uncleanness of the same: Do but compare Scripture, Genesis 6.5. Jam. 4.5, 6.
Isaiah 32.6. Jer. 17.9.
and in it we may find a very Pit-Devil: All the Imaginations of Man's Heart,
(says God) are Evil, and continually Evil: What Is that but the Devil. And has
not this continual Work its first Formation in the Heart, being its own Work
from its own Seed; and its Work is in this manner following.

For this is to be minded, That as the Spirit of Faith in the Heart of Man, is
the Womb or Mother, for the Revelation of Faith to beget a Son out of the Seed
of Faith.

So likewise the Seed of Reason is the Womb or Mother, for Imagination to beget
a Son or familier Spirit, James 1 15. and 2.15 16. James 4.1.
for all evil Spirits are conceived in the Heart: If Envy be conceived, then
Murder is brought forth; if Lust be conceived, then Adultery is brought forth;
and if a familiar Spirit is conceived, then it brings forth such a Spirit as
speaks forth Motional Voices; Jer. 23.16. Isaiah. 8.19. Deuteronomy. 18.10.
and if by its Transformation into Angelical Light, then as false Prophets, it
produces Visions, Revelations, and internal Voices within them: Now this
familiar Spirit is nothing else but a Witch; so that when it Motions forth
Spiritual or Religious Matters, Ephesians. 6.12.
then it becomes spiritual Witchcraft, and when it Motions forth upon a
Temporal Account, then it becomes natural Witchcraft: The one or other of these
Witchcrafts almost all the World lies under.

Therefore it follows, That this familiar Spirit that is begot by Imagination,
does sometimes produce such a Voice in it self, as if some Spirit without them
did appear to them without Bodies, and Reveal things to them, 1 Samuel 28.1.
as it was by the Witch of Endor, and as Samuel spoke in Readiness Consience.

This has been a common thing in all Ages, and Gilt of Conscience can quickly
quine an Object, and produce a motional Voce, thinking it is without the Body,
whenas all is but from the Familiar Spirit.

And when this Familiar Spirit, or new begot Wisdom is quickened in the evil
Heart, Exodus 1.10. Jer. 4.22.
it grows from Strength to Strength, from one degree of Knowledge, to a further
degree of evil Knowledge and evil Wisdom, Creating to it self such things as God
never Created; as an immortal Soul, or Spirit, without a Body: And it has made
it so, as that it can appear in any Shape, Form, or Likeness, whether it be
God, Man, Devil, or Angel: All are made Spirits without Bodies.

Also it has Created to it self, such a Devil as can whip into Man, and out of
Man, at his Pleasure: And when Sin is Committed, then all the Evil is charged
upon that boddilis Devil: And yet Men must be hanged for Murder, whenas, they
say, it is a bodilis Devil that is the Murderer, or temps to Murder.

And more then this, the Devil must be chained in Hellfire; and yet a bodilis
Spirit, and in all places at one time, where he can tempt all the World to Sin,
and yet no body can see him; and yet he is in Hellfire in Chains, but may be
called out at the Pleasure of a Witch: This is the Worlds Bugbare Devil, and
the pitchy Darkness all the World lies under.

Thus we see what Fruits the Imagination of Reason brings forth: And whereas
you scoffingly ask, Mark 5 4.
whether Imagination breaks Chains, pointing to that saying of the Gospel.

Here you show your Ignorance, that cannot distinguish between Devils in
Nature, and Devils produced by Accidents in Nature: Nay, you know nothing at
all, of neither the one nor the other, and so make no difference of their
Actions.

For tho Distempers in nature are devilish, yet not damned Devils: For this we
sind, that Christ never called distracted or mad Men Devils; for these may come
through some extraordinary Fright, Grief, or Loss; and in some may increase to
that strength, as to break Iron Chains: For having broke the Brain, the Seat of
Reason is quite out of order, and so makes them more strong then when their
Reason was in Order. And Christ never Judged and Condemned these, but cast
those fiery Distempers, and divilish Diseases out, and restored them to their
right Mind.

So that it is not the Distracted or Unreasonable that Christ Condemned, but
the Learned, and Sensible, and Prudent Man; even such as commit Murder for
Conscience sake, and condemn true Prophesy, from their conceated Wisdom of
high-flown piercing Reason: This is evident throughout all the Scriptures,
especially in the Learned Scribes and Pharisees, Mark 2.6. Luke 20.20. Matt.
26.3. Luke 20.5.
Who held a Counsel, and Reasoned in themselves how they might entrap Jesus in
his Words.

And that Devil that tempted Christ, he was one of them, and no such bodilis
Devil as your Reason has created to it self, that should carry Christ up to
the Pinnacle of that outward material Temple in Jerusalem, no, no: But against
all your Wisdom of Reason, we affirm, That he was a Man-Devil, being a Learned
Scribe, well Read in Scripture, and could argue the same from this Pinnacle of
his subtle Pate; but Christ repulsed his Scripture Argument with Scripture
again, saying, It is written, thou shall not temp the Lord thy God, but him
only thou shall serve.

Now where was this Scripture written, was it not in Deuteronomy. 6.13, 16? And was it
not written to Men endued with the Wisdom of Reason? It was not written to a
bodilis Devil; for bodilis Devils do not commit Murder, Adultery, or tempt God,
it is Man that does all this; and it was to Man that the Law was given, Exodus
20. and Deuteronomy. 4.13.15. Psalm. 78.18 and 41.56.
and so the Law says, Thou shall not Tempt the Lord thy God, as your Fathers
tempted him: And again, You shall not corrupt yourselves.

Now, from what is here said, James 1.14. and 4.1.2.7. Compared.
it must needs follow, that if Pride, Envy, Lust, Covetuousness, and Hipocrisy
be the Devils in Men, are not Men and Women those Devils that are brought under
the Power of those Evils: When the Apostle said, That the Devil should cast
some of them Saints into Prison; Revel. 2.10.
the Saints were not cast into Prison by Devils that had no Bodies.

Therefore lay not your Brats at other Men's Doors, John 6.70. and 8.44. Acts
1^.10. Isaiah 3.9.
but charge your own Souls home with the Evil you do; For as it is Man's own
Soul that Sins, so it is his own Soul that must suffer.

This will prove true, and so will that of Moses and Elias, although you call it
all Fable: For why will you ty God up to your Imagination of cursed Reason? Is
anything too hard for God to do, Genesis 22.16.
when his divine Wisdom moves him to it? Did not he Swear by himself, to
himself, what he proposed to do? Psalm 8.5. Phill. 2.7, 8.
And may he not, by the same Rule, change his own glorious Condition into
Flesh; and having humbled himself to himself, John 17.5 19. Matt. 27.46. and
2^.2. Luke 24.4. Acts 1.10. Revel. 22.9.
may he not cause his Humanity to Pray and Cry unto his Divinity within him, or
to his spiritual Charge, committed unto his Angels, without him, for a further
Manifestation of his unserchable Power in Shame and Weakness, as well as in
Power and Glory.

Is it not written, How that his Angels had given them a Charge to watch over
him? And did not Moses and Elias do so, from his Birth to his Assention? Also
is it not written, Luke 1.17. Matt. 4.5. M^^^. 4.5. Matt. ^7.12.3.
That John the Baptist came in the Spirit and Power of Elias? Which is plain
that John the Baptist had his Commission from Elias; for there was none greater
in Heaven then Elias was at that time, for God was then on Earth, eating and
drinking with Man as Man, as was before said. Thus much may serve to satisfy
all sober Men, who will not violently oppose plain Scripture.

Again, you further object against that Saying of theirs, where they affirm,
That no one ever did declare the Knowledge of the true God, in his Form and
Nature, as they have done.

Now, in Answer to this, say you, There was Sabulus and Noetus held but one
Person in the Diety, called by different Names: These, you Representor call
Broachers of our Doctrine, which you judge so mischevious.

CHAP. XII. ANSWER.
IF these Bishops of Sabulus and Noetus taught so, they were in the right of
it, and they might hint at Truth, but they wanted a full Revelation; for it was
not Revealed to them as it is now, and these Two Prophets never read any of
their Writings, neither do I think that there is any of them, that are truly
theirs, in being: We have the Prophets and Apostles Writings through
Providence, to show that Christ was the only God, although they were very sparing
in their Proof how God became Flesh, to what this Commission does, and
wherefore; why, because the Mystery of God was not to be finished (according to
John) until the Days of the Voice of the Seventh Anty-Angel's sounding of his
Trumpet, or Ministry; Revel. 10.7.
namely the Quakers: And Sabalus and Noetus were before the sounding of the
First Anty-Angel, the Papist with Power.

Sabalus the Bishop being about Two hundred Years after Christ, and Noetus was
Contemporary with him; so that this being in the time of the Ten Persecutions,
there was Truth then in the World, and a Trinity of Persons in one Godhead had
not got Footing at that time during the Ten Persecutions.

But after Religion was set up by Emperial Power, then Bishops were chosen out
of Learned and Philosophical Men, and Churches (as they called them) builded,
and Riches given for their Support; then were Sinods and Counsels called, to
establish Error and formal Worship, and to suppress Truth: That was ever
without outward Pomp and Glory.

Thus was Noetus and Sabalus's Doctrine Judged Heresy, both by Trenitarian and
Arian; and tho they Cursed, Excommunicated, and Condemned each other, by
several Counsels, as if Hell was broke loose; and so it was for the Thousand
Years time after Satan's Binding was ended, Revel. 20.
as soon as the Ten Persecutions were over, for then the Devil went forth to
deceive the World with false Worship, as John declares.

The Arian, being but as a Branch sprouted out of the Roman Catholic, although in
Constansius's Days, and some time after a very great Branch, insomuch that the
Catholics could not then bost of Number; for in the Counsel of Ariminum and
Selencia there was 560 Bishops, the greatest Convention that ever was known,
and yet they Decreed the Arian Faith: So that will you Catholics say, That
Number is an Argument of Truth.

But whichsoever of them that got the Emperor of their side gained Power over
the other; so that both of them, although they persecuted each other with deadly
Hatred, as they got upermost in Power, nevertheless they could agree together,
to kill Christ in his Members, and to tread the Holy City under Foot, of
innocent minded Men and Women, Revel. 11.1.
by their Penal Laws, that could not bow down to their outward Formalities and
Antichristian Principles: These were as Two Thieves that Trtuth was Crusified
between. Matt. 27.38.


Now these Catholics prevailing, and they having, not only the Scriptures
ordered by the Emperor Constantine to be Translated into their Tongue, but
likewise their learned Counsels collected and gathered into a Heap, and all the
other Writings of preceding Bishops: Then must them Books and Traditional
Reports be viewed by the Learned, now made Bishops, and what Agreed and Aquiest
with their Principles was counted Apostolical; and what did not agree, Revel.
2.2.
was rejected and counted Heresy; or else they Translated them falsely, playcing
down some things of their Sayings, and leaving others out that made against
them.

And when any Man was by these established Bishops Judged or Accused for
Heresy, tho he lived before their Days, then all his Books must either be
Currupted or Burned; for they must be made to speak quite contrary to what they
did in several things, on purpose to make those Authors the more Contemptible:
For it was ever so, that all that are Non-Commissionated Ministers of God, and
such as head an Anty-Church, are for hideing Truth from the People, as the
Papists do the Scriptures, to the end they may keep up their fleshly Honor; so
that there is but little known and received in the World at this Day, as well
as heretofore, but the universal common Opinion.

Therefore it is, that your National and Traditional Churches does so sound
forth their own Triumphs, raise heaps of Authors of the First Centuries, as
agreeing with their Catholic Principles; Crying Antiquity, Church-Visability,
famous Men are on our Side, etc.

When as the Truth on it is, all is but Clamor and Noise; for many of your
Authors are mere Forgeries and Lies. For Instance.

1. There be several Books that have the Name of such Men's Works, as were never
their Works; as Abdyus Bishop of Babylon, is said by some of your Catalogue
Makers to live in the Days of Christ; others say that he knew their great
Church-Historian Egisipus, that lived near Two Hundred Years after: Now the one
of these must be a Ly; and they make the Substance of this Book to be of
curious Talk with Bodilis or Infernal Devils, which is a mear Roman Forgery.

2. There is also that which is called Saint James the Apostles Leturgie, which
has a Prayer in it for all that live in Monastries, and yet there was none
built of some Hundreds of Years after the Apostles Days.

3. And that Egisipus, before spoken of, has Five Books under his Name: But it
is said by some of your Church Writers, that Ambrose that Roman-Church-Bishop
(who lived in the Year 380.) was not only the Traslator, but the Author of them
Books; which is like enough, for he was not chosen Bishop for his Goodness, but
for his Greatness; even as one of the Dukes of Savoy was chosen Pope for his
Greatness sake, as your Church History does show.

4. These Corruptions have been very Common, and very Ancient; for Dionisius
Bishop of Corinth, who lived about the Year of Christ Two Hundred, complained
sadly of his being abused in this Nature: Therefore, said he, in one of his
Books (if that Book was his) I wrote several Epistles, but the Messengers of
Satan has sown them with Tares, pulling away some things, and putting to other
some, for whom (said he) Condemnation is laid up.

And as there was these Forgeries and Corruptions aforesaid, so likewise there
is many of your other great Authors which you would make Apostolical, and yet
they do not agree with you in several things that you quote them for; nay some
Differences are so great between you, that I wonder you do not Condemn them for
Heretics, as for Example.

1. Turtulyon, who lived in the time of the Ten Persecutions, being a great
Historian, and by your Church counted famous, did not much contend for Bishops,
nor much valued Ordination; but said, That Laymen were Priests, and gave this
Reason for it; saying, That after Faith is Received, then Man lives by his
Faith, and that Faith, said he, becomes Christ's Vicar; and from hence he
concluded that Three Believers will make a Church.

He also denied Childrens Baptism; and therefore, said he, Why hastneth this
Innocent Age to the Remission of Sins, we are much more wary in worldly Things;
Is it meet we should commit the Sacrament of Baptism, which is a divine Thing,
unto them we would not commit the Things of this Earth: He also condemned
Second Marriages, and much more Persecution for Consience: All these things are
quite contrary to you.

2. Irinius, Bishop of Lions, who, it is said, knew Ignasius and Policarbus,
yet he held and tought, the Souls Mortality.

3, And Justinus, who lived in those Days, you cannot deny but that he did both
hold and teach, That God was in the Form of a Man from all Eternity.

4. And further, There was never a one of all these aforesaid, that held a
Trinity of Persons in one Godhead; No not Oregen himself, whom your Church
does so extol, although he turned Apostate, and denied the Faith, and Sacrifised
to Devils, to save his Life; but what is he so cried up, both by Papist and
Protestant, for; is it not for his lofty Style, and philosophical Notions, and
in that he would make his Divinity to stoop unto his Philosophy? For he held
with Plato, 1. The Souls Infusion, and tought that all Souls were made
together, and sent down from Heaven to be Imbodyed.

2. He Tought, That after we rise again, we shall have all need of Baptism to
purge us clean. 3ly. He in one place condemned Second Marriages, and in another
Contradicts it again. 4ly. He Tought, that Devils were Bodilis-Spirits; and
also, that all Devils would be saved at last. This sure is it that pleases you
at a Hair.

But as to his Doctrine concerning God, that cannot please you so well, for the
Arians challing him to be for them, and therefore they say, That Oragen denied
That the Son was to be Adored or Prayed too; for he is, says Oregen, not the
Author, but the Procurer of the good Things of God: So that we pray not to him,
but to God for his sake. And Augustine your Saint produces this as Oregen's
Opinion concerning God. And thus much as to your great Apostolical Fathers, as
you call them, who lived in the time of the Ten Persecutions.

As to those other Ancient Popes, Bishops, Fathers, and Counsels, that have
been set up by the Roman Imperial Power and Authority, I shall not treat on
them here; for he that has but a Grain of spiritual Sense predominating in
him, will easily see them no other but the Mother of Harlots, or Mystery
Babylon, that sets upon Tongues, Nosions, and Languages, as has been unfolded
in a Treatise entitled, The White Devil uncased; which may come to be extant
in time.

This is the Sum of your Church History; so that what Satisfaction can any Man
have by all your Authors and Apostolical Fathers, as you call them, as also
your Translators of their Works, who were most of them Corrupters, each one
endeavoring to force the Matter to suit with his own Opinions, as Epephanius,
Rufenus, and several others, who it is said corrupted several Authors.

So that all their Books are but troubled Waters to drink, being not of that
Ephecasy as to quench the Thirst of Sin; for their Silver is become Dross,
their Wine is mixed with Water of a standing Poole. Isaiah 1.22. John 4.14.
This will not pass current with us, for no Wine to us like the Wine of the
Spirit; no Water to us but the Water of Life; no Balm for us but what is in
Gilliad, in one Personal-God-Man, Christ Jesus, blessed for ever, that will be
accepted of with us, the only true Christians in the World at this Day.

Therefore take you all your Books and Learning to yourselves; we have but
Three to Read, to wit, the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Witnesses of the
Spirit: In these is fullness of Perfection; for the Light and Life of their
Words, shining in our Hearts, is the Rule, Prop, Stay, and Guide of our Faith;
which is but one, and this one Faith has one God of a single Person or
Substance for its Object to pitch it self upon, and not a Trinity of Persons,
or Substance; but Father, Son and Holyghost is one single Substance, and no
more; which cannot be denied, neither by Scripture, or sober Reason; for,

First, Was not the Eternal God-Head-Spirit the everlasting Father.

Secondly, Was not that glorious Body, wherein God the Father did eternally
Dwell, The eternal Son.

Thirdly, And was not that powerful Word, which proceeded from his
God-Head-Spirit through his glorious Mouth the Holyghost, or holy Spirit, by
which he made the Worlds, and governs all things.

Is not this Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, Heb. 1.3. John 1.13.
Ephesians. 4.5. Isa. 45.21, 22. Chap. 43.10.
more agreeable to the Scripture of Truth, then any other Trinity, to all Men
that acknowledge but one eternal Being, and no more? Now your Trinity of
Persons, will neither be made to agree with Scripture Reason nor Sense; so that
your striving to explain it does but the more darken the Sense about your Airy
God, and you are quite lost in your Definition, and now of late more than ever:
Are you made a confounded Babel, and your Clargie does clash one against
another, which does make your Hearers begin to stager, as well it may: For,

1st. One Party of your Church does Hold and Teach, that God is [Three distinct
Persons, and but one Substance] which is a Contradiction.

2ly. The other Party of your Church Teaches, That God has not only [Three
distinct Persons] but [Three distinct Substances likewise;] and from hence does
boldly charge the Homansion, or one Substance, with the Heresy of Sabilism, as
they call it.

3dly. The contrary Party makes their Rejoinder again, and charge the other
Party with holding of a plurality of Gods: For, say they, if there be [Three
Substances] then there is [Three Gods,] which is true enough.

4thly. Again the adverse Party Replys, saying, That if there be [Three
Persons] there must be [Three Substances] (which is true enough too:) And they
give the Reason why they are to hold Three Substances, as well as Three
Persons; it being a forst-put. For, say they, there is now a greater Necessity
than ever there was, to Hold and Maintain Three distinct Substances, as well as
Three Persons: Otherwise, say they, we are in great Danger to loose the
Catholic Faith, by the revival of the Heresy of Sabalus, which walks
publicly abroad, tho under the Disguise of a new Name: And therefore if we do
not allow the Godhead entirely to be [Three distinct Substances] as well as
[Three distinct Persons] then comes in Sabalism: And there is an end then (say
they) of the Trinity.

5thly. To this, the other old dark Light Replies, saying, That if by Retaining
the old Words of [Three Persons and one Substance] there is Danger of loosing
the Catholic Faith, it must be lost out of the Catholic Church: And the
Revolt by Sabalism (say they) must be both the most lasting, and the most
general Apostatise that ever was foretold, or feared, should happen to the
Christian World. But, say they, we hope we need not to be frighted out of our
Religion.

And thus, Revel. 18.10.
you see what a Confusion is fallen upon you; your Babylon is now crying out,
Alas, Alas! Did not the Prophets and Apostles speak of these Things: Now is
fulfilled that Saying of David's to the full, Divide their Tongues, O Lord,
Psalm. 55.9.
for I have seen Violence in the City.

Does not this your Division tend to Confusion, Isa. 11.11, 15.
or is it not Confusion it self in a superlative Degree? For tho you be
divided, yet our God is not divided, 1 John 5, 7.20.
but is one, Yesterday, to Day, and for ever: For I demand,

First, How can Christ be called the great, Heb. 13.8. Titus 2.13. 1 Timothy
1.17. and 6.12,
the High and Mighty God, if he has Two other Gods to share with him? And,

Secondly, How can Christ be Eternal in your Creed, if he were begotten?

Thirdly, And how can that, which receives a Being from another, ever be made
equal with that which has its being of it self alone?

Certainly, whatever you Trinitarians say to the contrary, yet it is evident
that you make Christ no more than a titular God, the very same with John
Biddle, that you so much disown in your Pamphlet: But I cannot see any great
Difference between you; I am sure you are as much out of the Way of Truth as he.

For, said John Bidle, Christ is our Lord and God: But how, Why, said he, not
Really, but Apelitive, as Magistrates are called Gods; and so he makes him God
by Deputation, as to Title; being God, not in Nature, but in Name; and so is
subordinate to God.

Now, do not you do so too; for you make the Son but to be begotten: And if you
will make him God, yet he must be divided from the Father and Holyghost. Now
this is certain, that if there be a Father distinct from that blessed Body of
Christ, it must then be as John Bidle said; and therefore it is, that John
Bidle, as well as Arius and S^sinus, make him but Man; because they would have
but one single God: But you, if you make him God, yet you will divide him from
the Father, and from the Holyghost; and so, at the best, you make him but a
Third part God.

And whereas you are so bold, as to condemn Sabulus and Noetus, for worshipping
one personal God, under the Names of Father, Son, and Holyghost; condemning and
judging them for Broachers of Heresy, how will you free yourselves from this
Crime: As also those Counsels of Arians and Trenitarians, as cursed them and
their Principles; together with those Counsels and Sinods, on both sides
judging and condemning each other with deadly Malice, as your Church History
does show: What, were those the Church of God? No.

But when God gathers up his Jewels, many of those that have been judged
Heretics will rise Saints, Mal. 3.15, 16, 17, 18. Acts 24.14.
and many of those that your Churches have Canonized for Saints, will rise
Devils: For no Persecutors of Conscience will escape the Stroke. If any Man
object Paul's persecuting the Church, they may know that Paul at that time
acknowledged no Jesus at all; therefore when both sides acknowledges a Jesus,
take heed how you Persecute.

I have been something larger than I intended, as to the Church History, and
that because your Church does so much boast and Glory upon Antiquity, like the
Papists; for there is no great Difference between you nor the other Churches,
only in outward things; for the essential Points of Faith is one and the same
with you all; for you have all one God, and one Devil, one Heaven and one Hell.
So that if one of you be true, you are all true; and if one of you be false, ye
are all false: Therefore it were well, if your Reason would be so moderate, as
to bear with, and forbear one another; being you are all one, both in the Root,
and in the Fruit, but that you will never do; but on the contrary, you will
ever be exciting the Magistrates to Persecution and Bloodshed: Revel. 17.3. and
15.6.18. and 18.24.
But happy is it for that Nation in the Temporal, and that Nation or Holy City
in the Spiritual, whose Magistrates are so prudent, as not to harken to the
Priests Instigations; but on the contrary, to stop the Course of the Violent by
wholesome Laws.

These are those good Beasts, or head Magistrates, Revel. 4.6.
spoken of by the Scriptures, who are said to have Eyes before and behind: The
Eye of Faith before, which shows them that Conscience belongs to God; and the
Eye of Reason behind, to see that all Affairs in the Temporal be kept well,
exercising Justice and true Judgment; Romans 13.3.
preserving and defending the Innocent who break not the Civil Law: And on the
other hand, Acts 5.38.
punishing the Transgressors of any of the Civil Laws of the Land, according to
their Demerit.

These, and such like Magistrates, are the truly Nursing Fathers, and shall
prosper: This we leave to Providence, and proceed.

In the latter end of your Pamphlet, you pretend a great many of Contradictions
committed by Lodowick Muggleton and John Reeve; but the Answer before might
serve for them all that are worth the Answering; yet I shall Answer to Two or
Three Things more that you charge against them.

In Page 25. You say, That John Reeve does affirm, that no Man can foretell
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, but by Revelation: From whence, say you, the
Astrologers are much beholding to him, who tells them they write their
Alminacks by Revelation, if they therein foretell Eclipses, as what Astrologer
does not.

CHAP. XIII. ANSWER.
1. HERE you wrest their Words, and frame a wrong Sense of them; for the Time
when an Eclipse falls out is one thing, and the Time of the Ephects of Working
is another: Of some of the Eclipses, the Astrologers say, the Time of their
Ephects last for so many Months, others the Time of so many Years, before the
Ephects will have done working.

Wherefore then it follows, that John Reeve does not say, That none of the
Figurative Merchants does know when, or at what time an Eclipse will fall, but
their Ephects, and time of them Ephects, how long they will be in working:
These Things, said John Reeve, can no Man know, but by Inspiration; which is
positively True.

And thus you, Church-Doctor, raise Slanders to blast their Reputation; and so
Truth comes to be vilified as I showed before, for Truth may be buried under
Falsehood for a time.

Again, page 25, you charge them with another Error, saying, That they affirm
that the Eclipse of the Moon is never but when it is near the Sun. When as, say
you, it is manifest that its Eclipse is when it is opposite to the Sun, and
that the Earth is between them, which does occasion it by withholding its
borrowed Light. But to this I answer.

2. Here again you have abused John Reeve, and in plain terms belied him; which
one would think a Man of that seeming Purity would not have done: For John
Reeve does not deny its Eclips when opposite to the Sun; but says (for these
are his Words) the Eclipse of the Moon is through her near conjunction with the
Natural Light or Ruler of the Day, or a Planatary Fire, answerable to its
nature that occasions the Eclipse.

Now this we do affirm, and your Astrologers do not deny it but that there are
Stars of a fiery nature, and Experience shows it: For what is the reason that
there is more heat when the Sun is in Leo, then there is when it enters Cancer,
when as the Sun is nearest to us, when it enters that Sign, but only that the
Heat is occasioned by the rising of some Fiery Stars, as that which they call
the Dog Star, and others of the like nature.

So likewise the occasion of the Moons Eclipse, it is not by the Sons not
rendering its borrowed Light, by reason of the Earths interposing her self
betwixt those Lumenaries; but it is through her being near to some of them
Fiery Stars, as those which the Astrologers call the Dragons-Head, or
Dragons-Tail; one of which being always near to the Moon when she suffers an
Eclipse.

3. We do likewise affirm that the Moon borrows no Light from the Sun, but that
it is a real created Light of it self; Genesis 1.16.
for Moses says, That God made two great Lights; but your Astrologers and you
say, That God made but one: Whether should we believe, Moses or you? for says
Moses, One of them is made to rule the Day, and the other is made to rule the
Night.

4ly. The Sun and Moon are of contrary natures, one is fiery hot, the other is
cold and watery; therefore it is contrary to Reason that the one should receive
any Light from the other, and therefore there can be no agreement betwixt them,
for Experience shows us that the Moon is cold and watery, being made out of the
Water, and so is the Lady of the Water, and occasions the Ebbing and Flowing of
the Seas, and the running of all Rivers, drawing the Waters after her, as the
Loadstone does Iron.

But on the other Hand, the Sun is hot and fiery, being the Captain of all Fire,
and so draws combustible Matter up to it self, which occasioneth Thunder, which
is a War betwixt Fire and Water; and thus they appear in their contrariety of
Natures, which we see further by Experience, that the clearer that the Sun does
shine, the hotter it is; but the clearer the Moon does shine, the colder it is.

So that from what is said, may be seen who the Astrologers are most beholding
to, whither to you, or John Reeve, let all Men judge; for John Reeve, in this
Prinsiple, is as contrary to the Astrologers, as the Sun and Moon are contrary
in Nature.

Furthermore, You object against John Reeve, for saying that the Sun, Moon, and
Stars move all in one Firmament: And for saying, That they are not much bigger
then they appear to us. To this you say, That they are quite contrary, and that
they move in several Orbs, and that each Orb at so much distance from each
other, as the Astroligers affirm.

CHAP. XIV. ANSWER.
1. IS it not as good Sense, and better, to believe, That the Sun, Moon, and
Stars move all in one Firmament, or Heaven, as so many as Nine several Heavens,
as your blind Astrologers teach you: And yet our fleshly Eyes can pierce
through them all; nevertheless every one of these must be so many Thousands of
Miles beyond each other; and this blind Opinion must be ratified forsooth,
because the Planets and fixed Stars have several Motions; and therefore from
hence you will have these several Heavens, and these their differences in
Motion, must show their difference in Hight and Substance.

2. Because Saturn moves so sloly, as to be near upon Thirty Years in finishing
his Course through the Twelve Signs, whereas the Sun finishes his in one Year:
Therefore, from hence, do you conclude, that he must be of necessity Thirty
times higher, and Thirty times bigger than the Sun, and Thirty times further to
go; nay, and the next Orb above Saturn to move so slow, as to be Forty
Thousand Years in finishing his Course; Pray how many Millions of Miles is it
to that Heaven, or Primum Mobila? One of your Mathematisians say it is, One
hundred and seventy Millions eight hundred and three Miles.

Is this your Wisdom, in which you say we are not capable to answer you in? I
pray, Is this good Pulpit Doctrine? One of your Ministers that I did know, whose
Name was Mountney, did mount so high, as to affirm, in the Pulpit, to his
Parishioners, that it was so far to the Primum Mobila, That if it were possible
to fling a Millstone down from thence, that it would be Seven Years before it
would reach this Earth: And yet in another Doctrine he taught, That a departed
Soul would be in Heaven in a Moment, which is much higher than that primum
Mobila.

And your reverend Doctor More, before quoted, must be remembered here, for he
Taught, That a Star of the first Magnitude is Twenty thousand times higher than
this Earth, and Nine hundred thousand times biger than the Moon.

These are your rare learned Men, I wonder how they could get a Line of that
length to measure so far, and yet to stand upon this Earth: But let them go on,
for the time of their Sophestry is almost at an end. But to conclude this
Point; as you upon our Principles of the Sun, Moon, and Stars aforesaid, do
call all Men to be Judges against us; so we, to retort your Language, do call
all sober Men to judge, whether your Opinion of Sun, Moon, and Stars be not an
Error of the greatest Magnitude; and also, whether you have done us Justice,
yea or nay. And so much in answer to your first Query.

CHAP. XV.
SIR, your Second Query, or latter part of your Pamphlet, was to prove Lodowick
Muggleton false from his Interpretation of the 11th. Chapter of the Revelation
of John.

But your Proof is but your Denial, for you do not so much as show the meaning
of one Word in all that Chapter: If they could but assended up to Heaven in a
Cloud, as they had showed how Moses and Jesus did, all had been well enough;
even as the Jews, if they could but have seen Elias to have come in Person, as
John Baptist did, then they would have believed as they said.

So, if you could but have seen these Prophets to assend up in a Cloud, then
perhaps you would have said you would have believed them: But soft (say you)
they are not the Two Witnesses, for they cannot assend to Heaven, for John
Reeve is dead: Besides (say you) they must have been put to Death by the Hands
of Violence, and then to have risen again, and ascended to Heaven, in the sight
of all Men.

This is all the Interpretation you can give of them; which is none at all, and
all the Proof you have against them: And as to Lodowick Muggleton's
Interpretation of that Chapter, you seem to be at a great Loss about it, being
astonished at his Words: For, (say you) I cannot tell how to reconcile his
Words; and from hence you fling all off to others, saying, Reconcile them as
can, for I cannot.

And what is the Difference and Matter that cannot be Reconciled: Why, say you,
he says, That they Two are the Two Witnesses; and yet they say, That the Body
of those Two Witnesses are the Letter of the Scriptures, and that the
Witnesses, or Letter, was slain 1350 Years before, and yet was slain in them
again by the Beast out of the bottomless Pit. To this I answer.

1st. Here you would have the Letter to be slain, whenas it was the Spirit and
Life of that Letter that was slain; for the Life being gone, therefore the
Letter of the Scripture remained as a dead Body, in regard there was none
living that could give a true Interpretation of it.

Now this Spirit and Life was killed 1350 Years ago; for the last of the Ten
Persecutions did kill and root out all the true ordained Bishops, or Ministers
of the Gospel; so that there was none left to give the Holyghost to others, by
laying on of Hands; so then there was no quickening Power remaining until a new
Commission was given, which now is fulfilled at this Day; for the same Spirit
that gave the other Witnesses their Commission, has chose these to be
Witnesses.

3dly. So that they having received that same Spirit of Life from God, as the
others had; therefore it is they only that can, and do Interpret the Letter of
the Scripture; for the Scripture is put into their Hands, as the Priesthood was
into the Hands of Aaron, and they by their Interpretation do put Life into the
Scriptures, making it to stand upon its Feet in the Consciences of Men and
Women, with great Power, both to the Seed of Faith, and to the Seed of Reason,
John 6.63. and 15.36.
to save and destroy; for Words of Truth have Spirit and Life.

4thly. And as that Spirit of Reason did kill that Spirit of Life that did
speak that Letter, so that now that Spirit and Life is come into them again,
they will stand upon their Feet, and kill the Spirit of Reason with a Death
Eternal; for there is now both Body and Life in the Scriptures, and it is the
Body of the Witnesses of the Spirit, which is not a dead Body, but a living
Body now, and so will remain to the end of the World.

5thly. Again, whereas you do affirm, That these Witnesses do declare, that the
Spirit and Life was killed in them by the Beast out of the Bottomless Pit, in
their Persecutors: That saying of yours is utterly false, and you did it
maliciously, on purpose that his Words might not be reconciled; for Lodowick
Muggleton did say, That the Beast out of the Bottomless Pit made War against
them, and would have killed them, if their Law could have done it. And that
roaring Lion Jefferies did say afterward, That he was sorry that their Laws
were so unprovided, that they could not take away Muggleton 's Life.

So that it is apparent, that the Spirit and Life of these Two Witnesses is not
killed; but after the Two Winnesses of the Spirit are dead, the Spirit and Life
will remain in vigor.

6thly. Wherefore as the other Two Witnesses of Water and Blood did last to the
end of the appointed time of their Commissions, even so likewise will the
Revelation of this Commission last to the end of the World; for tho the Doctrine
is declared as to the Substance; yet in that Doctrine will Revelation arise,
grow and increase, in such as hear it and understand it, to their eternal
Happiness, Joy, and Glory; and shall Prevail and Triumph over all Forms and
Opinions in Religion, that now totters more than ever through its own
Instability.

And now Sir, are you not either Blind or Malicious, or both, that would forge
Contradictions where there is none; yea, and to make Lies, on purpose to make
Truth appear Infamous? So that are not you a Shifter of all Shifters, and know
not where to six, or what to say, or how to disprove it, either by Scripture or
sober Reason? It Is a poor Shift to falsfy the Words of your Oponant, because
you have not anything that seems plausible to Answer.

Sir, is this your Learning? Pray do you believe that Book of the Revelation by
St. John, to be true Revelation, and a part of holy Writ? If you say you do,
then why will you not give your own Centiments of so much as one Verse, and
tell the Meaning thereof? And if this Interpretation of theirs be not good
Sense, why do you not Reprove them with better?

But finding your Ignorance to be such, therefore it had been better for you to
have let this Book alone, and plainly to have said, That it was Sealed, and you
could not read it in its own Sense. And it had been better for you to have let
these Two Witnesses alone, and all the Believers of it alone; but you were
appointed to that end, that your Lies and Slandees against it may bring you to
a full Reward.

For this Book of the Revelation by John was not written for your Edification,
but for the Instruction of this last Witness, and Benifit of the Seed of Faith,
to the End of the World, as a peculiar Blessing Sealed to them from Heaven: And
therefore by this Blessing of Faith and Knowledge in the Scriptures of Truth,
which is now given unto us, we do from hence find, that you have no part of the
Blessing of this Book of the Revelation of St. John, as may appear by these
Seven Particulars following.

As First, This Commission of the Spirit has seen into the Book of Life,
wherein they have found the Names of the Prophets, Apostles, Chap. 20.15.
and the Witnesses of the Spirit Recorded there, as true Commissionated
Messengers of God; but your Name was not found there as a Minister of God: This
is the first Evidence of your Exclusion.

Secondly, These Witnesses, and the Believers thereof, Chap. 14.3.
have looked and seen those Hundred forty and four thousand Virgins that were
Redeemed from the Earth, standing with the Lamb, their only God, on Mount Sion,
singing that new Song of, all Praise to the Lamb: But you, not having learned
that Song of, all Praise to the Lamb, were not found amongst them; but we,
Chap. 17.5. and 22.18.
looking about, have seen you in that great City, Mystery Babylon, the Mother
of all Harloting and Blaspheming Priests; who are said, by the Spirit, to have
the Curse of this Book, for ading and taking away from it. For you add your own
Imaginations to it, and so from thence will make your own confounded Reason to
be the Judge of it; as I showed before in Chap. 2.

Thirdly, As we have seen you add your own vain Thoughts to it, so likewise
have we seen you taking away from the Words of this Prophesy, Chap. 11.2.
and the Two Witnesses thereof: For you will not suffer those last true
Prophets to have any Footing here, but would thrust them out of the Book of
Life, Chap. 18.7.
and thrust yourself into it.

But this Commission shows us, That God will take away your part out of the
Book of Life; not that you had any there, but that you thought you had, and
thought your Name was there; but you are not in the Book of Life to be found,
neither as a Teacher, nor as a true Believer, as those Two Witnesses are and
the true Believers thereof: We have found our Names in this Book of Life of the
Lamb, Chap. 3.5.
the only and alone wise God, to our eternal Comfort, and his everlasting
Praise.

Forthly, Again, you have further taken away from this Book, Chap. 22.4. and
2.18. and 19 12. and 1.18.
in that you denied God to have any Body, Face, or Shape: So that as the
Blessing of this Book is, That the Saints shall see his Face; so the Curse of
this Book is, That such as have denied him, as aforesaid, shall never see his
Face to their Comfort.

Fifthly, you have likewise taken away from this Book, Chap. 1.8.18. and 2.8.
in that you teach, that the Alpha and Omega did not die: But this Book does
declare that the Alpha and Omega, the First and the last did die, and shed his
Blood; by which he redeemed his Elect Seed; so what part can you have in this
Purchase, seeing you deny that God had any Blood, or offered up any Life by
sheding of the same.

Sixthly, 1 John 5.20. Revel. 19.16, 17. and 15.13. and 1.8. and 22.^.16. and
18.8. and 17.14.
You also further add, and take away from this Book of John, in that you say,
That there is a God distinct from Christ: And further say, That Christ Jesus
our Lord is not the sole God: But this Book of John owns no other God at all
but Jesus Christ; giving him the Titles of First and Last, the Alpha and Omega,
King of Kings, God, very God, true God, great and almighty God, and the God of
all Prophets: Where then should there be any other God besides Jesus Christ our
Lord; for this divine Apostle, who lived and leaned in the Bosom of this Lord,
knew not any other God, as is abundantly proved.

Seventhly and lastly, This God, the Lord Jesus, you have Renounced, his
Prophets you have Persecuted and Belied, the true Faith you have despised; for
you have not only Contradicted and Despised the Doctrine of the Second
Commission, which was the Commission of Blood, but you have also, to agrivate
your Crime, called the Doctrine of this Third and Last Commission, which is the
Commission of the Spirit (and which is one of them three great Armies that in
Heaven will follow the Lamb upon white Horses, Chap. 19.14.
which is the Righteousness of Faith in his blessed Person: I say you have
called this Commission) Blasphemy, Delusion, Deceat: And that it is (say you)
made up of Impiety, Nonsense and Alsurdities: And in general, calls them
mischevious Principles, Confusion and Contradiction; and that we are a peraici
ous and contemptable Sect, etc.

So that, from hence, it does plainly appear, Chap. 19.15.20. and 21.27.
That you have brought yourself under the Judgment and Sensure of that Book of
John, and of this Commission of the Spirit, which does so fully explain that
Prophesy, being sent to finish the Mystery of God: Chap. 10.7.
And now behold it is finished, and you have beard, and now you will find,
Psalm. 62.11.
that Power belongs unto this God, and to this his Commission of the Spirit.

FINIS.

