A compendious Prologue, or Epilogue, to the duply-tripartite-patheticall,
unpublished studies (animadvertory, suppeditatory, to the Kings Majesty, his
Dominions and Adherents) of J. T. (a hearty wel-willer to his King and Country)
since the incursion of these intestine wars, etc. Being a conservatory
dilation, and cordial application, to the use and advantage of all in all.
Dread Sovereign,
THese labors of your loyal real Subject, as they were at first undertaken,
so have they been prosecuted, chiefly for your Majesty's and Kingdoms good; by
which your Majesty especially (and many others) are premonished and summoned in
entire affection, (if you will at last) to work out your own, and your
Subjects (committed to your charge) good, by yet honorable, discreet, cordial
return and residence with your faithful, fairly, first elected, and often
acknowledged Parliament: It was the wisdom and understanding, nay, the
righteousness of the people of Israel, to observe and do the Statutes and
judgments the Lord commanded them by the hand of Moses, for their good: In the
opinion of your Subjects generally (dread Sovereign) it is your best, wisest
course in the sight of all Nations, which shall hear thereof, thus to return.
Do it personally dread Sovereign; advise to, and act it (God enable you)
Nobles and Gentlemen: The learned say acts agimus; God that made us without our
selves, will not save us without our selves: There is no peace nor good to be
expected in England, etc. till every man do his duty, discharge his place: As
the Parliament (I take it) have continually performed their parts, so (dread
Sovereign, excuse my humble subjugall boldness) it concerns your candid
Majesty to discharge yours. O God enable all: If three be a willing mind, what
can hinder? Abraham would not contend with Lot his inferior, but gave him the
pre-eminence: The Parliament are again preparing Propositions; if there be not
a real general compliance, doubtless the just God will (whenever) take
vengeance: Tremble, stand in awe, whosoever it concerns (especially those that
shall but go about to stop this work from the Kings Majesty, his ear, his
eye, or both; or from any other it necessarily or hopefully concerns for the
public good) sin not against Englands, etc. present peace, and your own
future good; the great King that is placed upon the holy hill of Sion, will
certainly break the thus absolute, conscience telling, still repugners to peace
(he has had them in derision all this while) with a rod of iron, and dash them
in pieces like a Potters vessel; Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be
instructed ye Nobles, etc. Gods wrath is not a little kindled, his plagues and
vengeance will absolutely fall heavy somewhere (where is the fault) if there be
no remedy.

This the following labors are (no Epithesis, but) in every part full of love
and real persuasion to a blessed, by all much to be desired and endeavored,
Peace; nay, so full of (truly columbine) reduplication and repetitory
ingemination; that truly you may esteem them nonsense, loquacity: But yet take
heed, in this vast, civil breach, be not so uncivil to judge so; the school
of Heaven may, will admit of Totologies, especially in such a case, such a time
as this is.

If thou can (I wish thee for thy good, do it) find opportunity hereby (by
these poor equanimall inculcations) to benefit thy self, thy Country, honor
thy God; do it, thou shall well satisfy thy loyal hearty Suppliant; please
thy gracious, if you consent, just, righteous dealing, if you refuse, God: We
ought to do (especially in such a business as this) that which is wel-pleasing
and acceptable to God. The whole current of the Scriptures denounce and publish
many blessings to the obedient, curses of all sorts to the disobedient, Deuteronomy.
28. Levit 26. chapters especially.

Deuteronomy. 4. 25, 26.

Deuteronomy. 1. 43, 44.

And the Amorites which dwelt in that Mountain, came out against you, and
chased you as Bees do, and destroyed you in Seir even unto Hormah.

Josh. 11. 20. Moses.

2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16. Amaziah, and he sent unto him a Prophet, which said unto
him, why have thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver
their own people out of thine hand.

And it came to pass as he talked with him, that the King said unto him, art
thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten? Then
the Prophet forbear and said, I know that God has determined (for it came of
God, ver. 20.) to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not
hearkened unto my Counsel.

Zeph. 3. 5.

Psalm. 9. 20. Selah.

Deuteronomy. 12. 28. with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou
do that which is just and right in the sight of the Lord thy God.

Luke 16. 31.

Tit. 2. 7, 8.

Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary part
may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

2 Timothy 2. 7.

ver. 15.


