CLITO: A POEM ON THE Force of Eloquence.

Neque enim ulla non propria Oratoris est Res, quae quidem ornate dici
graviterque debeat. Hujus est in dando Consilio de maximis rebus cum dignitate
explicata Sententia; ejusdem and languentis populi Incitatio, and effraenati
Moderatio. Eadem facultate and Fraus hominum ad perniciem, and Integritas ad
salutem vocatur. Quis cohortari ad Virtutem ardentius, quis a Vitiis acrius
revocare, quis vituperare Improbos asperius, quis laudare Bonos ornatius, quis
Cupiditatem vehementius frangere accusando potest? quis Moerorem levare mitius
consolando?

Cic. de Oratore, lib. 2. cap. 9. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers of London and Westminster. M.DCC.

PREFACE.
THE following Poem, whereof Mr. TOLAND is the Author, was handed about a good
while in Manuscript before I could get a sight of it; tho, by reason of the
differing Characters and Judgments it underwent, I left no stone unturned to
procure it. And I must confess that after a Friend had at last obliged me with
it, I could discover none of those monstrous, pernicious, most terrible, and
intolerable things which some weak-sighted or envious people reported. But
there is something so new and singular in the management of it that highly
pleased me; and I verily believe that one or two of my acquaintance were
frighted, not so much at the Contents, as at the Writer's poetical Liberty in
his ranting and ALMANZOR-like strain, as if they thought he would in good
earnest buckle on his Armor, or fasten Wings to his shoulders, and go about to
perform in person what he would gladly leave others the honor of atchieving at
his persuasion, contenting himself with such a moderate part of the Action as
might probably fall to one man's share. But taking my leave of these Gentlemen,
I think my self bound rather to offer my excuses to him for making this
publication without his consent. I know Poetry is not his Business, how much
soever it may be his Diversion; and that particularly this Scheme of his
Studies was never intended to be communicated to the World. I am wholly
ignorant what induced him first to write it, or why he did it in Verse, which
is a Talent on which he was never heard to value himself beyond a Song or such
slight performances. But this I learnt, that having given Copies of it to a few
private Friends, and these (as it commonly happens) to their Friends, it came
at last into the hands of more persons than were friendly, honest, or
judicious, as I need not tell those who heard the strange representations that
were made of it; tho I cannot see how it should be displeasing to any, but such
as are angry at bottom that Liberty and Religion are preferred to Slavery and
Superstition. At least there is nothing of it inconsistent with our own
established Government and Church, of both which we may without vanity affirm
that they are the most excellent of their kinds: no National Religion being
less interested, or more rational; and no other Commonwealth being now so free,
or having so good a Foundation and Disposition to attain all the perfections of
Government. Therefore, after I had fully assured my self that the Poem was of
his composition, I knew no better way of doing him the office of a true Friend,
than by letting every body see how little ground there was for the Complaints
of his peevish Accusers. By CLITO is meant a certain eminent Man, who is no
more supposed to have held this Discourse, or to be of all these Opinions, than
the principal persons in PLATO's or CICERO's Dialogues to have said whatever we
read of 'em there, tho introduced for the dignity of the Subject, and as a mark
of the Author's esteem. Mr. TOLAND himself is understood by ADEISIDAEMON, which
signifies Unsuperstitious, and is a Name these same Lines demonstrate to be
very proper. Whether VICTORINA be only a Fiction, or the designation of a real
Mistress, good manners will not let us too curiously enquire: but be this as it
will, such a Character was absolutely necessary to assuage that Divinity, which
(as the Poets speak) inspired him with so much fury before. All the rest is
plain enough, and consequently there needs no longer Preface to so short a Book.

W. H.

CLITO.
CLITO the Wise, the Generous, and Good,
Better than whom none ever understood
Or Things or Words, would yet distinctly know
How far the Force of Eloquence could go
To teach Mankind those Truths which they mistake,
And who the noble Task durst undertake.
To him ADEISIDAEMON thus replys:
O thou, whose Age my younger Years supplys
With Virtue's Precepts, and my Contry's Love,
What Laws below, or Powers there be above,
Made bold by thy Example, and the Fame
Of ancient Heroes (whose immortal Name
Might serve alone all Errors to reform)
I shall the welcome Labor thus perform.
IN common Words I vulgar things will tell,
And in Discourse not finely speak, but well.
My Phrase shall clear, short, unaffected be,
And all my Speech shall like my Thoughts be free;
Not grave enough to fright the Young away,
Nor yet for elder Company too gay.
BUT when the Crowd I Am chosen to persuade
By long Orations for the purpose made;
Or by what reaches more with more success,
The labored Compositions of the Press:
Then shall my fertile Brain new Terms produce,
Or old Expressions bring again in use,
Make all Ideas with their Signs agree,
And sooner Things than Words shall wanting be.
Harmonious Sounds the attentive Ear shall please,
While artful Numbers Passions lay or raise;
Commanding Vigor shall my Thoughts convey,
And Softness seal the Truth of all I say:
I Will sooth the raging Mob with mildest words,
Or sluggish Cowards rouse to use their Swords.
As furious Winds sweep down whatever resists,
So shall my Tongue perform whatever it lists,
With large impetuous Floods of Eloquence
Tickle the Fancy, and bewitch the Sense;
Make what it will the justest Cause appear,
And what is perplexed or dark look bright and clear.
Not that I would the wrongful side defend;
He best protects who is ablest to offend:
As the same Force which serves to curb our Foes,
Can hurt those Friends who on our Love repose,
And for whose sake we would our Lives expose.
THUS armed, thus strong, thus fitted to persuade,
I Will Truth protect, and Error straight invade,
Dispel those Clouds that darken human sight,
And bless the World with everlasting Light.
A noble Fury dos possess my Soul,
Which all may forward, nothing can control;
The fate of Beings, and the hopes of Men,
Shall be what pleases my creating Pen.
WHO formed the Universe, and when and why,
Or if all things were from Eternity;
What Laws to Nature were prescribed by JOVE;
Where lys his chiefest residence above;
Or if he is only but the World's great Soul;
Or parts the Creatures are, and God the whole
From whence all Beings their Existence have,
And into which resolved they find a Grave;
How nothing's lost, tho all things change their Form,
As that is a Fly which was but now a Worm;
And Death is only to begin to be
Some other thing, which endless change shall see;
(Then why should men to die have so great fear?
Tho nought's Immortal, all Eternal are.)
Whether the Stars be numerous Suns, or no,
And what is their use above, or Power below;
What Planets are inhabited, what not;
How many new emerg'd, what old forgot;
If the dull Earth dos turn about the Sun,
Or that bright PHOEBUS round this Globe does run;
Whence the magnetic Force; how Winds can blow;
What makes the Ocean duly ebb and flow;
How com th'alternat Seasons of the Year,
And why the Weather's warm, cold, dull, or clear;
How Animals and Plants increase their kind,
And what is the source of Life, of Soul or Mind;
How Stones and Metals, Sands or Shells are framed,
Shall only after me be rightly named.
Thus quick as Thought I unconfined will fly
Through boundless Space, and vast Eternity;
Nature to me appears in no disguize,
Nor can one Atom escape my prying Eyes.
O Glorious LIBERTY! for thee I Will prove
The firmest Patron that ever Tongue did move;
I Will always execute what you decree,
And be the fatal scourge of Slavery.
Ambitious Tyrants, proud and useless Drones,
I Will first expose, then tumble from their Thrones:
Some their foul Crimes shall expiat by Death,
And some in Exile draw their hated Breath.
Their warlike Troops I shall with ease disband,
And conquer those who all besides command;
I Have known a Senate with some magic words
To Forks and Spades transform their bloody Swords:
Those hect'ring Braves, who vaunt their Force so loud,
A Patriot's Tongue can humble with the Crowd.
Our fearless Youth (if these are at an end)
Will their own Rights by their own Arms defend,
And punish Nations when they dare offend.
But, by the Soul of him who JULIUS killed,
When I perceive that Oracle fulfilled,
Which was to me pronounced by men Divine,
That All gos well when Whigs and Torys join;
I Will sing the Triumphs of the good Old Cause,
Establish Justice, reinthrone the Laws,
Restore the Nation to its perfect health,
Then Power usurpt destroy, and form a Commonwealth.
BUT what in faint Ideas I conceive,
A matchless Hero will by Facts atchieve;
That Freedom he restored he will maintain,
Encourage Merit, and lewd Vice restrain.
Our Laws, Religion, Arms, our Coin and Trade,
All flourish under him, before decayed;
In this more safe, more mighty, and renowned,
Than if ten thousand Successors he crowned:
For often a just and valiant Prince's Name
Degenerat Sons by horrid Crimes defame.
Her BRUTUS Rome had not so long adored,
If he had made himself her Sov'rain Lord.
O Godlike BRUTUS! for thy Contry's good
Thou did not shrink to shed thy Childrens Blood!
And sure at home if thou were so severe,
Thou Would never labor for a Foren Heir.
But more than Tongues can speak, or Pens improve,
The World and I expect from WILLIAM's Love,
His People's Darling, Heavens peculiar care,
The Branch of Peace, and Thunderbolt of War.
THRICE happy they who see thy Youth renewed,
O potent Britain! thy worst Foes subdued,
The proudest Kingdoms for thy Friendship sue,
And all free States their Safety place in you.
Their products East and West shall send to thee,
Both Indys gladly will thy Handmaids be;
The North unlocks her adamantin Door,
And what the South conceals thou shall explore.
Thy mighty Fleets our Honor will regain,
And the Flag's Triumph every where maintain.
Thy Sons shall reap fresh Laurels near and far,
Umpires of Peace and Leaders still in War.
High Heaven alone shall over thy Buildings sway,
And that alone be fairer thought than they*
Submissive Kings shall on thy Senate wait,
While Nations thence expect to hear their Fate.
Let Learning then, and Manners be thy care,
The Proud to humble, the Distressed to spare,
And to free those who slavish Fetters wear.
BUT what if Tyrants never were heard of more?
What serves it equal Freedom to restore,
So long as other Monsters, worse than they,
Rule all Mankind with a despotic Sway?
These are fit Objects of a Hero's rage;
But where is the HERC'LES to redeem the Age?
NO longer thus the World shall be misled
By him that is falsely called the unerring Head.
His Triple Crown I scornfully will spurn,
And his proud Seat to heaps of Rubbish turn,
Fright all his Vassals into Dens and Caves,
Then smoke to death the sacrilegious Slaves.
The swarming Herds of crafty Priests and Monks,
The Female Orders of Religious Punks,
Cardinals, Patriarchs, Metropolitans,
Franciscans, Jesuits, Dominicans,
And such like barbarous Names Ecclesiastic,
Such superstitious, villainous, fantastic,
Coz'ning Rogues I Will evermore disturb,
Sense shall their Doctrins, Force their Malice curb.
Nor will I here desist; all Holy Cheats
Of all Religions shall partake my Threats,
Whether with sable Gowns they show their Pride,
Or under Cloaks their Knavery they hide,
Or whatsoever disguise they choose to wear
To gull the People, while their Spoils they share.
As much as we revere those worthy men
Who teach what is peaceful, necessary, plain;
So much we should such Hypocrites impeach,
As only Jargon, Strife, and Impire preach.
RELIGION's safe, with PRIESTCRAFT is the War,
All Friends to Priestcraft, Foes of Mankind are.
Their impious Fanes and Altars I Will o'erthrow,
And the whole Farce of their feigned Saintship show;
Their pious Tricks disclose; their murdering Zeal,
And all their awful Mysterys reveal;
Their lying Prophets, and their juggling Thieves
Discredit quite; their foolish Books (as Leaves
From Trees in Autumn fall) I Will scatter wide,
And show those Fables which they fain would hide.
WHEN I Have performed these Feats, new Danger calls;
From Earth I Will soar, and scale high Heaven's Walls
To pull false Gods from thence, that Men may see
There Is but one, true, all-perfect DEITY.
Sound Reason is the Law that likes him best,
Of Good and Ill the never-erring Test.
His sacred Temple's every good Man's Heart,
Where his choice Gifts he freely dos impart;
But they deserve and share his first Applause,
Who stake their Lives in their dear Contry's Cause.
An honest Mind is the best Prayer he needs;
Paid with good Works, for him no Victim bleeds.
With Forms and Postures he is never pleased,
Nor is his Wrath with Bribes to be appeased:
But, happy in himself, he neither wants
Ought we can give; nor greater Blessings grants
Than solid Sense, and an industrious Pain,
Riches with this, Wisdom with that to gain.
FROM this high Steep with hasty flight I Will bend,
And to the Bosom of the Earth descend;
To those dark Shades I Will introduce the day,
And the vain Terrors of HELL's Court display.
But wicked Deeds shall not unpunished go,
Tho not as Priests and Poets falsely show.
Those Old-wives Tales, imaginary Fears,
The Cause of Horror, and the Source of Tears,
I Will soon destroy; extinguish all their Flames,
Dry up their Rivers, break their rattling Chains,
Poison their Serpents, fright each hideous Form,
Cerberus choke, and PLUTO's Castle storm,
Legions of Fiends to Atoms I Will reduce,
And leave bad Men no Temter for excuse,
But such lewd Thoughts as their vain Fancy draws,
Rebels to Reason's just and easy Laws.
The best Repentance is to sin no more,
And to the Owners what they have lost restore.
Hell's always flaming in a Villain's Mind,
Who Is self-condemned, abhorred of all Mankind,
And still suspicious of a Fo behind.
VIRTUE's its own Reward; nor Rage of Foes,
Nor Frowns of Friends can Virtue discompose.
Tho Malice, Fraud, and Envy may combine,
Spite of their Fury Innocence will shine.
An honest man, when thousands treat him ill,
His conscious Virtue will support him still,
Till undeceived the World repairs his Fame,
Life yields him Honor, Death a glorious Name.
THUS powerful Eloquence shall teach the Wise
Vile and absurd Inventions to despise;
And Fools will mend when abler men exhort,
Or by strict Laws are kept from doing hurt.
But as no Rule without exception is,
So Fools in LEARNING com not under this:
For neither Brains nor Books make them improve,
Nor Laws restrain, so much they Mischief love.
The easiest things they speak in Terms uncouth,
And emty notions hug for solid Truth.
Sworn Foes to Reason, whose resistless Light
Condemns their Pride and Ignorance to Night:
Slaves to Authority, the Bane of Schools,
Because all Times have Precedents for Fools*
If in right ways I cannot such direct,
I Will spoil their Trade, their Vanity detect.
As sick men ordered by their Doctors Bills
To breath that Air which quickly cures or kills;
So shall my Words like Thunderbolts be hurled,
And will confound or mend the erring World.
BUT, when from Cares and public Business free,
Bright VICTORINA my loved Theme shall be,
The softest Words the sweetest Things will tell,
And all I write or speak be fine and well.
When she inspires, I must great things pursue;
If she approved, what Wonders could I do?
I should than all to com discover more,
And would eclipse those Lights which shined before.
But her dear Image calms my raging Breast,
All should be still to lodge so fair a Guest,
Who hating me, I Am cursed; or loving, ever blessed.
THVS far I spoke; and CLITO all approved,
Except what last was said of her I loved.
He did not blame my Passion, and allowed
A virtuous Woman's Heart might well be wooed;
But that her Hate (like other Ills) the Wise
Should soften first, or, missing that, despise:
For Cowards lose by a too quick Despair
What Is gained by nobler Souls who persevere,
And in Success or Merit Victors are.
WE part; and each went where he wished to be,
I to my Study, to his Garden He.
FINIS.
JUSTUM and tenacem propositi virum
Non civium Ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni,
Mente quatit solida; neque Auster
Dux inquieti infidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus:
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Horat. lib. 3. od. 3.
