True Old Light EXALTED ABOVE Pretended NEW LIGHT OR TREATISE OF Jesus Christ,
He is the Light which enlightens every one that comes into the world.

(...) the sense both of the Quakers, Arminians, and other Assertors of
Universal Grace; whose Light is proved to be Darkness.

Delivered in Nine Sermons, by JOHN TOMBS, B. D. And commended to public view
By Mr Richard Baxter.

PSALM. 43. 3. (...) thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them (...)
to thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacle.

LONDON, by. A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Sign of the Anchor and Bible in
Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To the Honorable Sr THOMAS WIDRINGTON Knight, Sergeant Teril, and Sergeant
Fountain, Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of ENGLAND.
THe incessant and importunate inculcation of this monition, by the miserably
deluded Quakers [look to the light within you] not distinguishing but
confounding it with Christ, giving thereby cause to conceive, that they
acknowledge no other Christ as their Savior, but such a fancied one, as they
have imagined to be in them, being sadly resented by me, as causing one of the
most pernicious Schisms of our days, in drawing many weak, though perhaps
well meaning souls, to neglect Scriptures, Ministry of settled Teachers,
Christian-Church-Communion (which tends to Atheism, irreligion, and perdition)
moved me at first to Preach, and since to compose for the Press these ensuing
Sermons. In which I have endeavored to show Christ to be, and how he is the
true universal lighting Light, and the insufficiency of that magnified Light
in each, which those forenamed erring persons with the assertors of universal
grace and selfedisposing freewill of man have avouched. It is charged hotly by
many on those whom they term Anabaptists, though not rightly, as if they were
Authors or Fautors of this delusion of (Quakers and much to that purpose was
objected against my self by that Reverend Brother, whose Epistle is prefixed to
these Sermons, in his Letter to me, which is Answered by me in the 63d. Section
of the 3d. part of my Review entitled Antipoedo baptism) But I hope that by our
Declaration Printed December. 12. last (to which I find two Quakers have made
injurious Answers) and by my Answer in that Section, together with the reading
of these Sermons, the truth will be cleared, and my self with those other
Brethren who joined with me in that Declaration, will be discharged from those
evil surmises and insinuations which heighten our devisions: for the taking
away or lessening of which if I were offered upon the sacrifice and service of
the faith of Gods Elect, I should count my self happy. The Author of the
Epistle hereto annexed imputes the rise or spreading at least of the errors of
Quakers, and divisions of the godly to a Popish Jesuiticall practice, for the
undermining and ruin of the Churches of Christ in those Nations and this
Commonwealth, and he fears nothing so much as a toleration of Popery in
England, as the means to destroy the Protestant Churches now near an utter
destruction by the union of Popish Princes and plots of Romishs Agents. I hope
the Lord will not so desert the Parliament, your Honors, or any other of the
assertors of our just Liberties, as to allow such a Liberty, as will bring the
whole State and all the Churches of God into the servitude of the Roman man of
sin. We have had experience of their and Satan's devices by them, their
implacable hatred of all that Idolize not the Pope and a piece of Bread, to
make us wary how we permit such Serpents to lie in our bosoms. Their activity,
subtility, perfidiousness, cruelty beyond any sort of men, that ever yet
appeared in the world, especially to really godly Persons, should alarm and
awaken us to bethink our selves, before it be too late, of preventing their
intrenching among us. And since Quakerism is but a posterne to let in Popery,
which English Protestants would undoubtedly fight against to the death, if it
marched under its own Colors and Leaders, it is necessary that such an eye be
had on Quakers, as that the Preaching of the Gospel be not hindered by them,
nor their growth such as may oppress those, whom they revile and hate without a
cause. To show the falsehood of the chief foundations of Popery the supposed
Cathoticism of the Roman Church, the Supremacy of the Pope, and the truth of
their unwritten traditions, I have written a Book now in Press, which has an
Epistle of the same Reverend Brother (whose Epistle is here Printed,) prefixed,
by which appears our union and concurrence in the common cause of Christ
against oppugners of it. And having regard to your Honors, and the esteem
which is due to you as being a constellation of the first magnitude in this our
Commonwealth, I presume to offer this Writing to your Honors for your use, and
to subscribe my self

Your Honors humble Servant in Christ John Tombs.
Lemster in Hereford shire the 3d day of the last Month vulg. Febr. 1. 1659
To the Reader.
Reader,
IF thou live in England, it is like thou have heard of (if not seen) that new
and strange generation of people called Quakers: And if thou be one that have
not lost thy faith and wit, I may presume that thou art grieved for their folly
and impiety, and wonderest at their brazen-faced impudency, and lamentest the
dishonor which they bring upon the Christian name, and blushest at them as the
Nations shame. But all understand not their original and tendency: who sends
them forth; and what is their design. Had there been no other discovery of
these, they are legible enough in their doctrines and their works. He that is
no stranger to Popery, and is conversant in the writings of the Friars and
Jesuits, may perceive who taught them their doctrine of universal sufficient
light; of Perfection, against imputed righteousness; of the necessity of an
infallible judge; that concupiscence antecedent to consent is no sin; their
undervaluing the Scriptures, and many the like. The principal work of the
Papists and Quakers is to take off the people from the holy Scriptures, and
from the Reformed faithful Ministers. This is none of the work of Christ, who
teaches his Discipies by his Spirit, Word, and Ministers conjunctly. He that
would have no Ministry, would have no Church and no Christ: And he that would
have another Church and Ministry, in reason should tell us plainly which is the
Church and Ministry which he would have. If it be the Papal, why do they not
speak out and say so: does juggling suit with matters of eternal life or death?
If it be not the Papal but the Quakers, it cannot be the Church and Ministry of
Christ. For the Church and Ministers of Christ have been not only conspicuous
since his Ascension and sending the Holy Ghost, but also have been that part of
the world which providence has tendered, and for which the earth has been
sustained, and for whose happiness all things do conspire. But the Quakers
Church (if they have any) is but about ten or twelve years old at utmost:
unless the Weigelians, Paracelsians, Behmenists, and the rest of the Fanatics
in Germany, or the Familists in England and New England may be accounted their
progenitors: And yet their Church will not be found to be of two hundred years
continuance. Indeed Stubbe (Sir H. Vane's egregious Vindicator) had neither
wit, nor modesty, nor fear enough to restrain him, from telling the world (in
his malice, page 36.) that it was ignorantly said of me, that [The Quakers had
no being in the world, till a few years ago] and the Gnostick adds that [as to
the generality of their opinions and deportment, he does AVOW it out of as sure
and good records as any can be produced, that they can plead more for
themselves from the first two hundred seventy years, then Mr. Baxter for the
present orthodox Religion laid down in the Saints Everlasting Rest, or the
Confession of the Assembly.] But when will the undertaker produce these
Records? Such a heart and face might have served him to avow, that the holy
Apostles were railing lying Quakers, or whatever filthiness had come into his
thoughts. Some of their abominable opinions and practices, have troubled the
world since the Romish iniquity did abound: but no times were freer from them
then the first, and none more unlike to them then Christ and his Apostles,
however Satan would gain credit to his impieties, or discredit to the Gospel by
his apish imitations. The witness of their late Leader James Nailor is
regardable, who in his Recantation says that they are [Unclean Spirits gene
out from the unity of the truth and light by which we have been called and
gathered into one Christ Jesus, the Head over all his, blessed for ever: whose
name has been greatly dishonored by many wild actings, and his innocent
Spirit grieved, and many simple souls deceived, -- and that the work of the
murderer and devourer is therein, against the life of God in his Temple: which
though they seek entrance under pretense of humility; promising some great
things, and more holiness in that way, to steal into simple minds, yet being
got in, exalts himself above the seed of God, and tramples the meek spirit
under foot. -- And by this (says he) you shall all perceive that Spirit,
whatever it pretends, it will secretly withdraw your entire love from the flock
of God, already gathered, and cool your affections and zeal toward their
present meetings: and if you judge it not there, it will grow on with an evil
eye, to spy out for their failings; and to delight to hear of them with an
hidden joy, whispering them to others, and adding thereunto, with a desire to
see them broken, and their nakedness laid open, if anything be amiss. And thus
it has wrought in a mystery of wickedness in some unjudged, until it be
seated in the throne of open enmity and strife against the Lambs of Light,
preferring the society of the profane before them, and taking part therewith
against them, joining to any who seek to scatter them. And whatever pretense
this Spirit covers it sellf with, this I declare against it, (having been kept
by the good hand of God, to see it revealed in its ground and end) that it is
the old Spirit of the Ranters, which now in a new way makes head against the
Light of Christ and life of the Cross, which is the only thing that stands in
its way, by condemning its filthiness in every conscience.]

Thus speaks James Nailor, after his lamentable experience, and the Papers he
has written (against me and others) for their way. And yet his followers will
not be undeceived, nor follow him in his Recantation.

Had they their will against the Ministry in this Land, would it promote the
Gospel, and the salvation of the people? Who would instruct them publicly and
privately? As constantly, and diligently, and soundly, as now they are
instructed? If there were joyin Hell, what joyful tidings would it be to the
infernal Spirits, to hear of the accomplishment of the desires of the Quakers,
and their partakers?

The accusations against us, which the grand accuser of the Brethren has put
into their mouths, are partly from our hearts (unknown to them) and partly
from our duties (imputed to us for our crimes) and partly from our afflictions
(in which they should rather compassionate us, then reproach us.)

Yesterday in the Congregation and the streets, a stranger that never saw my
face before, cried out [The judgment of the Lord is gone out against thee,
thou hypocrite, thou painted Sepulcher, that have an outside of humility, but
an inside of pride; an outside of godliness, but within is envy, wrath, malice,
and all wickedness: in the day of thy misery thou shall remember me.] When I
heard the man, I blessed God that had caused me to be contented with his own
approbation, and given me the testimony of my conscience, that my soul, and
life, and all that I have is devoted to him, and that I have a most just
heart-searching Judge, that yet has the compassions of a Father. And I
wondered that sin should ever prevail so far with men, as to harden them to so
open and impudent an usurpation of the prerogative of God, while they pretend
to know the hearts of men, as soon as they see their faces. And I thought with
compassion on the state of weak unsettled consciences, that are like young
Horses among Drums and Guns, that are frightened merely by a noise. As if any
man that could but repeat a Scripture-threatning, and speak terribly, and
counterfeit himself a Prophet, should frighten us from our peace and faith.

And it is our very preaching and labors for our peoples souls, that is the
principal thing they hate us for: And the more laborious and faithful any man
is, the more maliciously do they oppose him; being incomparably more patient
with a Whoremonger, or Drunkard, or profane Worldling, then with such, So that
our diligence (so strictly commanded us by God) is with them our crime. That we
do not (as the old worldly Readers did) follow the Plow and Cart, and labor
about earthly business, when we should be doing the spiritual work that we are
engaged in, and that our peoples souls require, though we are commanded to
[meditate upon these things, and give our selves wholly to them] 1 Timothy 4. 15.
A good Minister of Jesus Christ, being one that is nourished up in the words of
faith and of good doctrine, whereto they do attain.] verse. 6.

The great word by which they think to make us odious to the people (working on
their carnal minds and interests) is that we are Hirelings, because (forsooth)
we bargain for so much, or else we will not preach. But Satan is a liar: By
Gods assistance, we will preach while we have life, and strength, and liberty,
though instead of maintaining us, they spit in our faces. But we dare not
encourage our people to be ungrateful Monsters, nor sacrilegious Thieves, to
detain the Tithes or Glebe that never was their own, nor they nor their Fathers
never paid for, nor had the least pretense of title to. For my own part I never
took Tithe, by suit or force to my self, and resolved still that I never would
do it: but if ever I were put to suit, I give order to the Collectors, to give
all that they recover to the poor, with all the damages and addition, that so
neither I may have Tithes by Lawsuit, nor the wicked worldlings be encouraged
to damn their souls by sacrilege, while I connive at it. And sure I am that it
was God that told the Israelites, Mal. 3. 8, 9. They were cursed with a curse,
even the whole Nation, for robbing God in Tithes and Offerings. And that Christ
says to the Tithers of Mint and Cummin, Mat. 23. 23. These things ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the other undone: And that the primitive Christians
sold all, and laid at the Apostles feet, for the maintenance of themselves and
of the poor: And that the Holy Ghost has fully decided the controversy, 1
Cor. 9. That we have power to forbear working, verse. 6. And not to go on
warfare at our own charges, verse. 7. And that the Law about Churchmaintenance
is so far from being repealed, that Paul proves he says not these things as a
man, because the Law does speak the same, verse. 8. The Ox is not to be muzzled
that treads out the Corn; which God speaks in care of his Ministers and
Churches, though Quakers would have more care of Oxen. Do we not know that they
which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? (even on a
stated maintenance) and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, verse. 13, 14.

Is it a crime to eat and be clothed? Or are Ministers most unworthy of their
daily bread? Shall Lawyers and Physicians live on their professions, and only
the Preachers of the Gospel be thought unworthy of any competent maintenance in
the world? Or will not Christ (that will reward a cup of cold water given to
his servants, taking it as done to him) severely one day reckon with these
unthankful men, that grudged a competent maintenance to his Ministers, and
made it their reproach that they live? When he had generally required, G^l. 6.
6, 7. [Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches
in all good things: Be not deceived, God is not mooked: for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap.] And yet we desire none of their
communications: but only that they deny us not that which never was their own.

But they say, that their Teachers are content with food and raiment; and so
should we. To which I answer, we are content with it: Where there is one
Minister that has much more, I believe there is ten, if not twenty that are
hardly put to it, to have ordinary food and raiment for themselves and
families: And yet if they be enabled to relieve the poor, or to breed up their
children (at least) to some honest trade, it would not have been grudged them,
if their holy doctrine had not first been hated, and these Apostates proved
more ungrateful Monsters, then many Turks or Heathens are.

The Affliction with which they reproach us, is, the unreformedness of our
people; They tell us, as the Papists do, that none are converted by our
Ministry. But how ill the Lord will take it at their hands to blaspheme the
workings of the Holy Ghost, and deny his grace, that manifests it self in
thousands of his servants, and to put the name of Satan on the sheep of Christ,
these wretches are shortly like to know, to their everlasting horror, if
repentance prevem it not. To our joy, and the praise of the grace of God, we
see (though not in all places alike) so many hundreds and thousands of souls
converted, within these few years by our Ministry, that all the malicious
Spirits in Hell, and slanderous tongues on earth, shall not deprive us of our
comfort, nor God of the honor, nor these converts of the happiness hereof.

But what if some Ministers do labor with less encouragement and success? Is
that their fault? Or is it long of wicked hearts? And of slanderers that
reproach their Ministry? When Christ bid his Apostles shake off the dust of
their feet against the refusers of his Gospel, and told them, it should be more
easy for Sodom in the day of judgment, then for them; would they have cast
this as a reproach upon the Apostles, which was the sin and dreadful misery of
the people? O what deceivers of poor souls are these? That would turn the eyes
of obstinate sinners thus from the observing of their own iniquities. And what!
Are we better then the Apostles? And then Christ himself? How few did he
convert, that spoke as never man spoke? How many thousand remained malicious
cruel enemies? And how many places did the Apostles preach in, where they
converted not one (I think) for a hundred, that some of us see converted in one
Parish? And why do not the Papists and Quakers observe, how they condemn their
own Ministry by this Argument? Do they make Papists and Quakers of all where
they come? How few do they win in a whole Country? I have here allowed them to
dispute in public; and they frequently preach and rail in the Market place:
and yet it is but a few weeks, since they passed through this Town with this
Lamentation. [What miserable places are Kederminster and Bewdeley, that we
cannot convert one soul in them!] And yet to make a man a Quaker, is a far
easier matter then to make him an honest godly man: as it is easier to make a
man an uncharitable railer, then a meek and charitable Christian.

Their great pretense, when they dishonor the Scripture and the Ministry, is
to lead men to a Light or Word of God within them; and this is their cry in our
Assemblies and our streets [Hearken to the Light and Word within you:] and the
sufficiency of this they clamorously defend; and accuse us grievously for
contradicting them. But what mean these dark contentious men, when their words
are freed from confusion. Do they affirm that all men have the light of Reason?
And who denies it of any, but Idiots and Infants? Do they maintain that Reason
by the help of natural evidence in the creatures, may know much of God and
duty, even so much as to leave men without excuse, at the bar of God? And who
denies this? Do they maintain that this Light is from Jesus Christ, both as
the author and restorer of nature? And by whom among us is this denied? Do they
say that repaired or reprived nature, may be fitly called grace? About this
also we have no mind to quarrel with them; so they will not with Pelagius
exclude supernatural grace hereby. Do they hold that common supernatural light,
outward and inward, objective and inherent, is given to many (at least) of the
unsanctified, that live under the preaching of the Gospel? And who
contradicts them in this? Do they hold that, as the Sun is appointed in
nature, to be the light of every man that comes into the world, though some
parts of the earth were never illuminated by it, and blind men partake not of
its light, and the night or shutting our eyes or windows may exclude it; so
Christ is by office the Sun in the world of grace, giving men actually all the
gracious light they have, and being sufficient himself to enlighten all, and
giving them an illuminating Word, which is sufficient in its own kind, to do
its own part; though many are blind, and many for their sin are deprived of the
communication of this light? Why all this we maintain as well as they. Do they
say that all this light (within us and without us) is to be hearkened to and
obeyed? Why what man did they ever speak with, that is a Christian, that denies
it?

But if they make man's Reason in faculty or act, or any of this inward light,
to be Christ personally within us, and deny any Christ but such a one that is
essentially one with such a light, (that is, with every wicked man) we abhor
this Infidelity and blasphemy, and marvel that such hellish darkness should
have the face to assume the name of light. If they maintain that the common
Reason of the world, is sufficient to bring men to the Faith of Christ, without
any other kind of light, from the Spirit, or written or preached Word; I would
fain be resolved in these few Questions.

Q. 1. How comes it to pass that all Nations that never heard the Gospel, are
utterly void of Faith in Christ, when the Nations that have the Gospel do
generally know him more or less?

Q. 2. Why did not the world believe in Christ, even generally, before his
coming? if Reason was then a sufficient Light?

Q. 3. Why did Christ preach himself while he was on earth, if the people had
all sufficient Light before?

Q. 4. Why did he send his Apostles to preach through the world, if the people
had sufficient Light before?

Q. 5. Why did he set Pastors and Teachers in his Church, if all have a
sufficient Light within them?

Q. 6. Why do the Quakers go up and down teaching men their own Doctrines, if
all men have sufficient Light already?

Q. 7. Why do they cry out against us as being in darkness, when all men have
sufficient Light within them?

Q. 8. Will they pray for more light and grace, or not? If not, they are
impiously proud: If yea, then it seems they have not yet light and grace
sufficient.

Q. 9. Whereas they say, the light within is sufficient, if obeyed: Our
Question is, Whether it be sufficient to make men obey it? For that is the grace
that we are speaking of, that causes men to hearken, believe and obey: For
Faith is not of our selves, but it is the gift of God: And men's hearts must be
opened, as Lydia's was, Act. 16. to hear and receive the truth revealed. Now to
say, that the Light or Grace which is given to cause us to Believe and Obey, is
sufficient if we will believe and obey, is ridiculous: as if Christ should have
said to Lazarus, [I will raise thee, if thou will first raise thyself.]

Q. 10. But how can any Light be sufficient, (were a man never so obedient,) to
reveal that which is not manifested by it, or by any Revelation that does
accompany it? No Light or Revelation among the Heathens in America, does tell
them that Christ was incarnate, dyed, rose, ascended, or intercedeth for us, or
is the King, Priest, or Teacher of the Church, or will raise the dead, and
judge the world. How then can their light be sufficient to help them to the
belief of this? I think it is past controversy, that no man has sufficient
Grace for salvation, till his last breath. For if God add not more, for his
preservation, excitation and perseverance, all will be lost.

But this point (which Quakers most insist on) the Reverend Author has very
judiciously handled in this Treatise, and therefore I shall say no more of it.
The truth is here opened (to the shaming of their errors) with great Scripture
evidence; which impartially considered, may easily convince all that believe
the Scriptures: and make it appear that the Light that is in these men is
Darkness; (Luke 11. 35.) Though the difference, and too-eager Disputations
between the Reverend Author and my self, about the point of Infant Baptism, be
too well known, yet it is our desire that it be as much known, that we desire
to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; as Members of the same
Head and Body, uniting our force for the common Truths against the pernicious
adversaries thereof: And though we own not in each other, or our selves, the
discerned errors of doctrine or life, which through humane frailty we may be
guilty of; Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, we desire to walk
by the same Rule, and mind the same things; hoping that if in any thing we be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto us. (Phil. 3. 15, 16.) I
think it is time for men that have any sense of the common interest of
Christianity and Reformation, to lay by those contentions that have brought us
so low, and almost made us a prey to the common Romish adversaries: The Lord
grant it be not too late. The two great works of the Jesuits in England, are
to procure Liberty for the Profession of Popery, and to weaken, if not take
down a fixed able Ministry: They cannot do this work of themselves, without the
help of men professing a zeal for Reformation. But how much they have promoted
it by such hands, and how much they are likely further by them to promote it, I
had rather lament with daily tears, than open to a generation of deluded souls,
that will not believe they are doing the work of the Devil and the Pope, till
they find themselves in Rome, or the Inquisition. It astonisheth me to foresee,
(if a wonder of mercy do not prevent it,) how these contetious souls will be
worryed by their consciences, and ready even to eat their flesh, when they see
(by the conjunction of foreign and Domestic Papists) the Cause of Christ once
trodden down in the hand, and see how they betrayed the Gospel of their
Posterity, into the hands of tyrannous Idolaters, and how the familistical
Juglers of these times, made use of them to set up Popery: Which ^ow is the
work that is already so far carried on, that all our endeavors, if united,
are like to be little enough to prevent. We are not so childish as 'to fear
lest Quaking should become the National Religion: We know these squibs will
soon be out. But those that animate them, have Italy and Spain, and Austria,
and France, Armies and Navies, and swarms of Friars and Jesuits at their
backs; and I take their Liberty and Dominion, to be words almost of the same
signification. But let the Curse of the Almighty Defender of his Church, yet
follow the underminers of his holy Truth, and confound the builders of this
Babel! And never let the Deliverances in 88, and from the Powder Plot, be
buried in the ruins of an ungrateful apostatized Land! When you hear, that
among our Rulers it shall be endeavored, that Liberty for Popery shall be
granted, and secured from interruption from any future Parliaments, then
remember what I say, and let the consciences of those that have betrayed us, be
awakened, and let them see then what friends they have been to our Religion,
and whither their uncharitable perverseness has brought a miserable Land.

I have already told the Episcopal Brethren, that Bishop Usher and I did fully
agree in half an hour, and therefore it is not long of us, that our wound is
yet unhealed. And (though I never treated with Mr. Tombs about such a matter)
I am confident that he and I should agree in one daiestreaty, upon terms of
communion, charity, and forbearance, among those of our several ways. And
therefore if we yet continue unhealed, let the shame and horror lie on them
that are obstinate in their uncharitable ways. And that it should be harder to
agree with the Congregational Brethren, is incredible. Why then is there not
long ago, a settled concord among all these? That yet there should be a
frustration of all Assemblies and endeavors to these ends, and so easy, so
necessary, so Christian a work should be yet undone (yea obstinately resisted)
after so many years experience and opportunity, till we are all ready to be
devoured by the common adversary, this is our astonishment, and Englands shame,
and especially of some that have been the hinderers, and will cost the
consciences of some men dear, when God arises to judge the earth, and
vindicate his honor which they betrayed, by their self-blinding and
Church-troubling Pride. Reader, as I invite thee to the perusal of this
Treatise for thy edification, so do I most earnestly entreat thee, if thou
be a divider, to study the nature of holy Charity, and Catholic Unity, and
follow us that desire to lead thee to the Love and Concord of the Saints. And
to further this work, I entreat thee also impartially to peruse Mr. William
Allen's Retractation of Separation; which if thou will do with a Christian
frame of spirit, then go on to destroy the Church by divisions, and further
their work that would betray us to the Papists, if thou can. If our
wickedness have not caused God to pass an irreversible Decree, of departing
from us, and leaving England to be a stye of Romish abominations, he will yet
cause his people to retreat from their divisions, and presently to hear the
Voice of Peace: For which I shall daily pray and groan, and labor according to
my power; and if God deny it me, and tell me this is not a world that is fit for
so great a mercy, I hope I shall long the more for Heaven, and cry and wait,
for the glorious appearing of the Prince of Peace. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Amen.

Richard Baxter.
October 17.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. Christ the Light.
SEct. 1. Of the Evangelists scope, method, the reading and meaning of Joh. 1.
9. Sect. 2. Christ is the Light, and the term Light, explained. Sect. 3. Christ
is Light as the Prince of life. Sect. 4. Christ is Light as the Lord of Glory.
Sect. 5. Christ is Light as cause of Peace and Joy. Sect. 6. Christ is Light in
respect of his Purity and Wisdom. Sect. 7. Christ is Light in respect of Truth
and Grace. Sect. 8. The application in a double Use, to see the estate of men
without Christ, and to draw our eyes to him.
SERMON. II. Christ the True Light.
Sect. 1. Christ no counterfeit Light. Sect. 2. Christ more then a typical
Light. Sect. 3. Other Lights not Lights, in comparison of Christ. Sect. 4.
Christ the Original Light. Sect. 5. Christ the perfect Light. Sect. 6. Christ
the effectual inlightning Light. Sect. 7. Christ was the true Light in respect
of the Truth of his Word Sect. 8. Application by way of vindication of our
selves, from the accusation of Quakers, as if we denied the Light, John 1. 9.
and warning to shun false Lights.
SERMON. III. Christ the inlightning Light.
Sect. 1. Christ inlightens all things with their natural light as Creator.
Sect. 2. Christ inlightens the world with the knowledge of God as the Prophet
of the Church. Sect. 3. Christ as High Priest enlightens with the Light of pea
and joy in God. Sect. 4. Christ as King of Saints enlightens with the Light of
glory. Sect. 5. Christ enlightens by his natural power as Gods Son, and by
special commission as sent of God. Sect. 6. Christ enlightens by his Preaching,
Example, Spirit, Apostles, now in this time; by his power and glory in the
world to come. Sect. 7. Christ enlightens by reason of his own luster, and his
Fathers design to show him to the world. Sect. 8. Application by way of
inference, that we are to bless God for Christ's enlightening, and all that are
Christ's are children of Light.
SERMON. IV. Men coming into the world need Light from Christ.
Sect. 1. The necessity of Christ's enlightening is asserted, because of the
blindness which is in all at birth. Sect. 2. Universal corruption at birth, is
proved from Joh. 3. 6. Sect. 3. Vacuity of Light without Christ enlightening,
is proved from Romans 8. 7, 8. Romans 3. 9, 10, 11. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Mar. 7. 21,
Jam. 1. 14. Sect. 4. Vacuity of Light without Christ enlightening, is proved
from Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Job 14. 4. and 15. 14. and 25. 4, 5, 6. and 11, 12.
Psalm. 51. 5. Jer. 10. 14. and 17. 9. and experience. Sect. 5. Every man needs
enlightening by Christ, by reason of the many evils consequent on sin. Sect. 6.
Application to make us sensible of sins evil, and the worlds vanity, and to
provoke us to seek a treasure above, and Light from Christ to comfort us.
SERMON. V. Every man has Light from Christ to make him inexcusable.
Sect. 1. A natural Light from Christ is yielded to be in every man, and the
opinions of Free-willers of its sufficiency are set down. Sect. 2. The opinion
of the Quakers concerning a Light in each man, is enquired into. Sect. 3. Some
Light is in the most barbarous, yet the knowledge of the most refined Gentiles,
may be conceived to come from some acquaintance with the written Law or
Tradition from Adam. Sect. 4. The Light without the written Word which was in
the Gentiles, in the utmost extent of it was imperfect. Sect. 5. The Gentiles
Light by nature served to restrain from sin and to leave men inexcusable. Sect.
6. Application to justify us against Quakers, and to warn us, that we act not
against our Light.
SERMON. VI.
Containing thirty Arguments out of Scripture against the Quakers opinion, of
the sufficiency of a Light in every man to guide him to God.
SERMON. VII. Every man's Light within him is not of it self a sufficient safe
guide unto God.
Sect. 1. Ten Reasons more are urged against the Quakers opinion, of the
sufficiency of the Light in every man to guide him to God. Sect. 2. Objections
of the Quakers for the universality and sufficiency of Light in men, are
answered.
SERMON. VIII. All spiritual saving Light is from Christ.
Sect. 1. All spiritual saving Light of knowledge, peace, joy, hope, life, and
glory, is from Christ. Sect. 2. Christ enlightens Gentiles as well as Jews with
spiritual Light. Sect. 3. There is not sufficient direction in the acts of Gods
common providence, to lead men to the knowledge of Gods grace in Christ. Sect.
4. Application to move us Gentiles to rejoice in this Light, and not to rest in
humane reason.
SERMON. IX.
Christ is to be chosen and followed as our Light, whereunto we are exhorted to
use him as our Light, and Directions given to that end.
Books published by the Author.
Christ's commination against Scandalizers, on Luke 7. 1, 2. Printed for Richard
Royston at the Sign of the Angel in Ivy-lane London.

Jehovah Jireh, or Gods providence in delivering the godly, in two Sermons on 2
Pet. 2. 9. on occasion of preserving Bristoll from a plot to deliver it to
Prince Rupert, March 7. 1642. Printed for Michael Sparks at the blew Bible in
green Arbor London.

Fermentum Pharisaeorum, or the Leaven of pharisaical Will Worship, in a Sermon
on Mat. 15. 9. Printed for Andrew Crook at the green Dragon in Paul's
Chruch-yard London.

Anthropolatria, or the sin of glorying in men, on 1 Cor. 3. 21. Printed for
John Bellamy at the three golden Lions in Cornhill London

Two Treatises concerning Infant Baptism, to wit an Exercitation and Examen of
Mr Stephen Marshall's Sermon, Printed for George Whitington, and to be sold by
W. Larnar.

An Apology for the two Treatises, Printed for G. Calvert at the black spread
Eagle at the West end of Paul's London.

An Antidote against the venom of a passage of Mr Richard Baxter's Epistle
before his Book of Rest, Printed for Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles at the
West end of Paul's London.

An Addition to the Apology, in a Letter to Mr Robert Baillee of Scotland,
Printed by Henry Hills next door to the Sign of the Peacock in Aldersgatestreet
London.

Praecursor, or a Forerunner to the Review, Printed for the same.

Antipoedobaptisme, or the first part of the full review of the Dispute
concerning Infant Baptism, Printed for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd in
Popes head Ally near Lumbard-street London.

A plea for Antipoedobaptists against Mr John Crag's Dispute and Sermon at
Abergavenny, Printed for Henry Hills above named.

Antipoedobaptisme, or the second part of the full review of the Dispute
concerning Infant Baptism, Printed for the same.

Joannis Tombs Beudleiensis refutatio positionis Doctoris Henrici Savage
Londini typis Henrici Hills.

Antipoedobaptisme, or the third part of the full review of the Dispute
concerning Infant Baptism, London Printed for Henry Hills above named.

Felo dese, being a Collection of twenty Arguments against Infant Baptism, out
of Mr Richard Baxter's second Disputation of right to Sacraments, with an
Answer to his ten Reasons for his practice of Infant Baptism, Printed for the
same.

A short Catechism about Baptism, containing the chief grounds of the
Controversies concerning it, in forty Questions and Answers, Printed for the
same.

True old Light exalted, Printed for Thomas Underhill atthe Anchor and Bible in
Paul's Churchyard London.

Christ the Light.
SERMON. I.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. Of the Evangelists scope, method, the reading and meaning of Joh. 1.
9.
THe Gospel of John, the longest liver of the Apostles (as Hierome terms him
in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastic Writers) was written last of the four, and,
as the matter gives us occasion to conceive, to supply the things omitted by
the rest, and so might be termed the Paralipomena, or things left, as the
Greeks term the Book by the Hebrews termed the words of days, by us, the
Chronicles or Records of times. That it was written in opposition to the new
fancies or haeresies of Ebien, Cerinthus, and other fanatiques, is intimated by
Iraeneus lib. 3. adv. haer. c. 1. 11. and others. Against whom he opposes the
Antiquity, Divinity, and Operation of Christ in certain Aphorisms, set down in
the first 5 verses. And then to distinguish him from John the Baptist, he
declares 1. John's Mission, ver. 6. 2. His business, ver. 7. 3. His
inferiority to Christ, ver. 8. 4. Christ's preeminence above him, ver. 9. which
words are spoken of Christ Jesus, whom John terms the Word, ver. 1. who is said
to be flesh, and to dwell among us, ver. 14. of whom John testified, ver. 15 to
have been his Ancient; and, whether they are the words of John Baptist, as is
conceived, or the Evangelist, as seems most probable, they show his excellency
above John Baptist, who was denied to be the light, though he were that he
might bear witness of the light. Heinsius exercit. sacr. l. 4. c. 1. seems to
conceive, that the pointing being altered, the words might be read thus; He was
not that light, but that he might bear witness of the light he was, (referring
(...), ver. 9. to the end of ver. 8.) The true light which inlightneth every
man coming into the world, was in this world, and the world was made by him,
and the world knew him not, ver. 9, 10. But the supplement of Beza, [this man]
or as our Translators has it, That was the true light, is better and more
agreeable to John's phrase. But then there is another doubt, whether it should
be read thus; That was the true light coming into the world, which inlighteneth
every man, by a trajection: Or as ours read, as the words are placed, That was
the true light, which inlighteneth every man which comes into the world.
Grotius after Cyril, Augustine, and some others likes the former as best,
because Joh. 3. 19. and 12. 46. where he speaks of himself as light, he so
expresses himself as coming into the world as light, and so he would have the
sense to be of his coming into the world, not by his birth, but appearing as a
Teacher; as when it is said, Joh. 6. 14. This is truly the Prophet coming into
the world. But 1. such trajection being without necessity, and so disordering
the words, 2. The phrase in these, and John 18. 37. being as fitly interpreted
of birth, as of appearing as a Teacher, I rather choose the reading of our
Translators. But then there is some doubt about the meaning, what is the light
with which, and how he inlightens every man coming into the world. Two ways he
may be said to inlighten, and accordingly two sorts of light may be meant, and
two ways may the words be expounded. There is a natural light of reason and
understanding, which every person coming into the world has, though not all in
the same measure in the exercise, by reason of the different temper and state
of the body which the soul dwells in: And this light is conceived to be meant,
ver. 4. where it is said, that the life of Christ was the light of men, which
expressing what was, when all things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made that was made; It can be well understood of no other light then
natural reason by the creation of Christ; and to this sense, it seems to make
that ver. 10. it follows after ver. 9. Which inlightneth every man coming into
the world, the world was made by him. And then the sense is this; That or this
person of whom John was to witness, was the true or excellent light, which or
who inlighteth with natural reason and understanding, every man coming into the
world by natural birth, as being made by him. This sense is followed by the
most of Protestant Commentators I meet with, and seems to be genuine. The other
sort of light is spiritual light expressed thus, 2 Cor. 4. 6. The inlightning
of of the knowledge of the glory of God in the person or face of Jesus Christ.
And this sort of light is from Christ's preaching and Spirit, and is mean ver.
5. where it is said, The light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. And of this light Christ is the cause, as the Prophet of
his Church, Luke 1. 79. Joh. 3. 19. and 8. 12, etc. And thus is Christ said to
inlighten every man; that is, every man that is enlightened, has his light
from Christ: as when it is said, Psalm. 145, 14. The Lord upboldeth all that
fall, that is, all fallen persons that are upheld: or he lights every man,
that is, all sorts of men, as Col. 1. 28. every man, is meant all sorts or
Nations of men. And these I confess are good senses: yet methinks, the
addition [Who comes into the world] does intimate, that this inlightning is of
every man that is born. 2. At his birth, and so is to be extended to every
person of humane nature, and the natural light he has at birth; which I have
chosen to handle, that I may clear the mistake of those who are termed Quakers,
who have this text almost perpetually in their speeches and writings, insomuch
that in the Catechism of G. F. that is, George Fox, a prime leader of them,
this text is almost in every answer to the Questions there propounded,
repeated: And it is the common speech of them, and almost all their preaching,
Look to the light within thee. My intent is, therefore to consider what that
light is, which is in each person, and to show that it is not sufficient to be
a man's guide without the holy Scripture, and therefore that erroneously they
make it Christ and direct men to follow it universally as their rule. To this
end, I shall consider, 1. How Christ is light. 2. How he is the true light. 3.
How he lights. 4. How men come into the world. 5. How far every man is
enlightened that comes into the world with natural light. 6. How all spiritual
light is derived from Christ, and in what sense Christ may be said to inlighten
every man with it.

Sect. 2. Christ is the Light, the term Light is explained.
The first thing to be considered, is, That the Word, that is Jesus Christ is
Light. Thus he says of himself, Joh. 12. 26. That he was come a light into the
world. And Simeon said of him, Luke 2. 32. That he was a light for the
lightning of the Gentiles. To conceive of this point, two things will be to be
explained; 1. What is ascribed to Christ by this Appellation of Light. 2. In
respect of what nature he is thus termed.

To resolve the former, it is to be considered that the term Light is sometimes
applied to lucid bodies, as the fire is termed the light, Mark. 14. 54. where
Peter is to be warmed, (...), at the light; that is, the fire. And so Candles
are termed lights, Act. 16. 29. as it is usual with us also in our common
speech. And thus God is said to have made two great lights, Genesis 1. 16. the Sun
and the Moon. Sometime for the quality of light, which is a visive quality, 1.
In the lucid body chiefly, as the light of the Sun, Rev. 22. 5. 2. From it in
the air or middle body by which it is carried to the eye, as the light in the
air which shone round about Paul, Act. 26. 13. 3. In the eye by which the
objects to be seen are discerned, in which respect the eye is termed the light
of the body, Luke 11. 34. Now of all qualities there is none more amiable or
desirable. Eccl. 11. 7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing to
behold the Sun. By reason of whose beauty most Nations, who knew not the true
God, did imagine the Sun to be God, and accordingly did adore it, and sacrifice
to it, which Job disclaimed, Job 31. 26, 27, 28. If I beheld the Sun when it
shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and mine heart has been secretly
enticed, and my mouth has kissed my hand, this also were an iniquity to be
punished by the Judge: for I should have denied the God that is above. By
reason of its light, warmth and other influence, the Sun is magnified by
writers, as seeing, and hearing all things, as the common Parent of all
sublunary bodies; insomuch that the Peripatetick Philosophy makes the Sun with
man, to generate man. The Holy Ghost foretelling the coming of the Messiah,
Mal. 4. 2. terms him The Sun of Righteousness. And Zacharias speaking of
Christ, Luke 1. 78, 79. says, Through the bowels of mercy of our God, in which
the dayspring or Sunrising from on high has visited us, to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. So that what excellency
the Sun has in respect of its light, is to be conceived of Christ in a
spiritual way, but in a higher degree; and whatever excellency the light
signifies in the Metaphor, is more truly verified of him then any Angels of
light, or Children of light among men.

Sect. 3. Christ is Light as the Prince of life.
1. By [Light] is often in Scripture signified life: Psalm. 36. 9. For with thee
is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light. And even in this
Gospel says Christ, John 8. 12. I am the light of the world, he that follows
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. And John 1.
4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men. Job. 33. 28. He will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.
Ver. 30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light
of the living. Psalm. 49. 19. The soul shall go to the generation of his
fathers, they shall never see light. Psalm. 13. 3. Lighten mine eyes, lest I
sleep the sleep of death. Hence to sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,
are conjoined, Mat. 4. 16. Luke 1. 79. In respect therefore of life in Christ,
and communicated by him, he is rightly termed the light Now that he has life
in himself at his disposal, is affirmed by him, Joh. 5. 21. As the Father
raises the dead and quickneth, so also the Son quickneth whom he will. Ver.
26. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he also given to the Son to
have life in himself. Joh. 14 6. Jesus says to him, I am the way, and the
truth, and the life: no man comes to the Father but by me. Joh. 11. 25. Jesus
says unto her, I am the resurection and the life. 1 John 5. 11. And this is
the record that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son:
who is termed the Word of life, 1 John 1. 1. That eternal life which was with
the Father, and was manifest unto us. Ver. 2. The Prince or Author of life, Act
3. 15. The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. which being
spoken of the resurrection of the body, it appears that he is the light in
respect of natural life, as well as spiritual, at the first creation, as well
as at the future resurrection. As it is certain that some sort of living
creatures are produced by the Sun, so it is certain that the Son of God is the
Prince of life, who has life in himself, and imparts it to other living
beings; and in this respect is justly termed the Light.

Sect. 4. Christ is Light as the Lord of glory.
2. By Light is often meant glory and majesty. There is one glory of the Sun,
another of the Moon, and another of the Stars, for one Star differs from
another in glory, that is light, 1 Cor. 15. 41. The light which made the face
of Moses shine, Exodus 34. 29. is termed 2 Cor 3. 7. the glory of his
countenance, and the shining of Christ at his transfiguration, Mat. 17. 2. is
termed glory, 2 Pet 1. 17. and thus Christ is Light, that is full of glory and
majesty, the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. Even on earth John says, Chap. 1. 14.
And we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. And
doubtless however in Christ's outward shape there appeared no more then
ordinary, or rather less then ordinary splendor; yet in his preaching there
was such glory as made the people astonished, for he taught them as one having
authority, Mar. 1. 22. In his Miracles there was glory, so as that Verse. 27.
they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying,
What thing is this? What new doctrine is this? For with authority he commands
the unclean spirits, and they do obey him. And Joh. 2. 11. This beginning of
Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Gaiilee, and manifested forth his glory, and his
Disciples believed on him, And Verse. 15. When he made a scourge of small cords,
he drove out the sellers of Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, and changers of money, all
out of the Temple, and overthrew their tables, and powered out their money; and
when Officers were sent to apprehend him, they returned answer, Joh. 7. 46.
Never man spoke like this man. He commanded Lazarus to come forth out of the
grave, and he came forth, Joh. 11. 43, 44. He rebuked the winds and the sea,
and there was a great calm, Mat. 8. 26. These and many more things which
appeared in him and were done by him, manifested that he was indeed Light, that
is a person of splendor, glory, and Majesty, notwithstanding his emptying
himself in the form of a servant Phil. 2. 7.

Sect. 5. Christ is Light, as cause of peace and joy.
3. By Light is often meant peace, Isa. 45. 7. I form the light and create
darkness, is expressed in the next words, I make peace and create evil, Jer.
13. 16. While ye look for light, that is peace. In like manner Light is put for
joy, as Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart, Prove. 15. 30. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, Isa.
60. 20. The Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended. Darkness takes away mirth, but the appearing of the
day brings joy: The Sun is that which chears all things by its light, and so
does Christ dispell storms, makes peace, and begets joy. Whence he is styled
the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. Peace I leave with you,
says Christ, my peace give I unto you, not as the world gives give I unto
you: Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid, Joh. 14. 27.
These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in the
world ye shall have tribulation: But be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world, Joh. 16. 33. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you,
that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that
your joy may be full, 1 John 1. 3, 4. As from the Sun all the light, serenity,
and sweetness of the air, whereby the spirits of men are refreshed, the members
warmed, the whole body cheared, is derived; so from Christ are all the pleasant
apprehensions of peace with God, all the joyful taste of his favor, all the
quickening hopes of heaven, which a Christian soul partakes of.

Sect. 6. Christ is Light in respect of his purity and wisdom.
4. By Light is meant holiness, purity, or clearness: Nothing more free from
defilement then light; all the jakes and dunghills and filthy lakes in the
world cannot pollute the light of the Sun, and therefore it is fit to resemble
holiness. And accordingly God is said to be Light, 1 John 1. 5. that is pure,
as it is said, Chap 3. 3. And thus the Lord Christ is Light, being anointed
with the oil of gladness above his fellows, as loving righteousness and hating
iniquity, Psalm. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 9. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. He could challenge his most prying adversaries, Joh. 8.
46. Which of you convinces me of sin?

5. By Light is meant wisdom: Light is a discovering quality, Ephesians. 5. 13. All
things that are discovered are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever does
make manifest is light. Light pierces through the most narrow chinks into the
lowest holes: and so does wisdom find out the most hidden things through small
hints. Daniel is said to have light, and understanding, and wisdom found in
him, in that he was able to interpret dreams, and show hard sentences, and
dissolve doubts, Dan. 5. 11, 12. But beyond all, the Lord Christ was light: the
Spirit of the Lord did rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of
the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2. 3. No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows
any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat.
11. 27. Jesus knew all men, neither needed he that any should testify of man,
for he knew what was in man, Joh. 2. 24, 25. He knew the thoughts of the
Seribes, Mat. 9. 4. He knew Judas would betray him, before Judas had conceived
the treason, Joh. 6. 70, 71. He opened the secret counsels of God, foretold the
future troubles of the Jews, persecutions of his Disciples, his own death and
resurrection, the preaching of the Gospel, and gathering of his Church over the
world, which are accomplished, and the resurrection of the dead at his return
to the final judgment, which will be undoubtedly brought to pass in the day of
the Lord: So that of him it is true which we read, Dan. 2. 22. He reveals the
deep and secret things, he knows what is in the darkness, and the light
dwells with him.

Sect. 7. Christ is Light in respect of truth and grace.
6. By Light is meant truth, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the testimony: if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them:
that is no truth in them, or no comfort to them, say others. He that does the
truth, says Christ. comes to the light, Joh. 3. 21. Light and truth are
either the same, or very like, and helpful to each other, Psalm. 43. 3. Oh send
out thy light and thy truth. Now light well agrees to Christ under this notion,
since he is the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14. 6. All his words were
words of truth, his Gospel the Gospel of truth, Jam. 1. 18. Col. 1. 5. If ye
continue in my Word, says Christ, Joh. 8. 31, 32. then are ye my Disciples
indeed. And ye shall knew the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

7. By Light, favor, and grace, and goodness, and love are meant, Numb. 6. 35.
Job 29. 3 Psalm. 4. 7. Prove. 16. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance is
life, and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. Lightsomeness in the
face, is a sign of goodness and love in the heart; as on the other side, a
lowering grim visage is a sign of a tyrannical and imperious spirit. Light is
the most diffusive and communicative of all qualities, and so fitly resembles
grace and love. And so it is said of Christ, Psalm. 45. 2. Thou art fairer then
the children of men: Grace is powered into thy lips, therefore God has blessed
thee for ever, Cant. 5. 16. His mouth is most sweet; yea he is altogether
lovely, 1 Pet. 2. 3. If ye have tasted how gracious the Lord is, Luke 4. 18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has aneinted me to preach the
Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of fight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are braised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And
the eyes of all them that were in the Synagegue, were fastened on him: And he
began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: And
all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of
his mouth, Verse. 22. All his words, looks, deeds (except when he had to do with
proud hypocrites, and incurably wicked persons) did evidence a dove-like
spirit, harmeless, compassionate, kind, patient, full of love and goodness. He
went about like the Sun doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil, Act. 10. 38. And therefore in this respect is to be termed the Light by
excellency. The Word dwelt among us full of grace and truth. Of his fullness we
have all received grace for grace. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John
1. 14. 16, 17.

2. This attribute of light is given to Christ, both in respect of his divine
nature, in respect of which it is said, Joh. 1. 4. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men, and in respect of his humane, concerning which it is
said, Joh. 9. 5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world:
Which I shall show when I speak of his enlightening.

Sect. 8. The Application in a double Use to see the estate of men without
Christ, and to draw our eyes to him.
For present we may hence infer, 1. That they who are unacquainted with Christ,
are in darkness: Ye were once darkness says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 8. minding
them of their estate antecedent to their being in Christ. A man without Christ
preached and believed, is like a person in darkness. 1. He is in respect of his
estate as a man in the dark, in that he cannot discern his own condition, how
unclean he is, what danger is near him, what way to avoid it, what help to use.
He that is out of Christ, and sees not by his light, discerns not the filth of
sin, nor the keeneness of Gods anger, nor how to remove the one, or to assuage
the other. 2. A man without the light of Christ, does neither know God truly,
nor his precepts or counsel, and so knows not how to address himself to God.
nor how to observe Gods eye on him, nor what gifts he tenders to him, nor what
directions he gives him.

3. A man without Christ his light, is like the Syrians, who were led to
Samaria when they imagined they were in Dothan. It Is easy for Satan or any
deceiver to lead them hell-ward, when they pretend to direct them heavenward:
Any cheat, any error or delusion may be put on him, that wants Christ to be
his light. 4. He that wants light from Christ, is as he that walks in the dark,
one while he stumbles here, another time he wanders there: If he be in the way,
yet it is more then he knows, and therefore is uncertain whether it be best to
go forward, or backward, or stand still. How full of uncertainty have been the
most witty Philosophers, the most skillfull Rabbis, the most acute Papists in
their way, following their own reason, or tradition of men! How miserably do
they stumble and fall, and hurt their souls! How sadly do they wander out of
the way, when they think they are in it! 5. Want of light from Christ, leaves
men in fears and perplexities what shall befall them. The light of Christ
secures the soul, assures its happiness; but he that knows not the way of
Christ, nor whereto it tends, is afraid of death and judgment to come, is
doubtful whether he have any interest in God, fears the mention of Hell, of
the Devil, of the coming of Christ, turns Quaker at the sight of an armed man,
whines like Adrian the Emperor, when his soul was departing. 6. A man without
the light of Christ, can do no spiritual work as he should. As he that is in
the dark, can neither thresh corn, nor make his clothes, nor plow, nor sow,
nor do other necessary useful works: So it is with him that is not enlightened
by Christ; he can neither pray, nor praise God, nor do any other holy work, or
manage any business that pertains to Gods glory, and Christ's kingdom. A dark
Dungeon is a miserable place to live in, and no less, or rather a thousand
times more miserable is it, to be excluded from the light of Christ.

2. If Christ be light, then should our eyes be toward him. Light is
attractive of our eyes: It is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, it is that
which Infidels adore as God. Should not we magnify the Lord Jesus as the Sun
of Righteousness? Should not our eyes and our hearts be drawn after him? Sold
not our souls adore him? He is the Son of his Fathers love, Col. 1. 14. and
should he not be of ours? The Church, the Spouse of Christ says, he is all
desires, Cant. 5. 16. and so does every soul that knows him. He is the highest
born Prince, of great Majesty, of most noble disposition, of most loving
nature, of incomprehensible beauty, of superlative power, of largest Empire, of
most ample riches; there is not the thing to be named which is desirable, which
is not Christ's. Oh then, that we could fall in love with Christ, long after
him, remember him with delight, hearken after all the tokens of his appearing,
inquire into his walking places! Shall people travel far, throng much, be at
much cost to see a gracious Queen? Shall besotted Papists, take a long and
dangerous pilgrimage, to see Christ's pretended Vicar, though sometimes a most
horrible monster, more like the Devil then Christ, and shall not our hearts
travel after Christ, and converse with him? Sure no excuse will be taken, since
there can be no reason alleged for it, for those that dote on men and women,
and gold, and pearls, and yet forget Christ; are inamoured on pictures, and
neglect the living beauty of Heaven, the Lord of Glory. Be wise therefore, O ye
Princes and people of the world, kiss the Son, worship, love, rejoice in, wait
on, follow the Image of the invisible God, the Heir of all things, in
comparison of whom, let all sublunary beauties be as dirt, and all the precious
things of the earth be as dung to you.

Christ the True Light.
SERMON. II.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. Christ no counterfeit Light.
HOw Jesus Christ is Light, has been showed, how he is the True Light, is next
to be cleared. It is said of him, whose Name is called the Word of God, Revel.
19. 13. that he was called faithful and true, ver. 11. And in reference to
him, it is said, 1 John 2. 8. The true light now shines. Now Christ is said to
be the true light, 1. In respect of his being, which is usually termed
Metaphysick truth. 2. In respect of his sayings, which is Logic or Moral truth.

In the first sort of truth Christ is said to be the true light, 1. To
distinguish him from those which were counterfeits and feigned lights: For true
is opposed to that which is only in pretense, but not really such. Our Lord
Christ says, Joh. 10. 8. All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers;
that is, were not true lights, meaning this not simply of all, not of Moses, of
whom it is said, Isa. 63. 11. Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his
people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the Sea, with the
shepherd of his flock? Nor of David, of whom it is said, Psalm. 78. 72. That he
fed Israel according to he integrity of his heart: But of such as the Prophet
Zechariah chapter 11. 17. says, We to the idol shepherd that leaves the flock.
Such as were the false Prophets among the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, and
Lawyers, in and asore Christ's time, who instead of being sent by God, came of
themselves, ran and he sent them not, yet pretended a Mission from God. In like
sort Paul says, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. For such are salse Apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel:
for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, therefore it is no
great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness. But the Lord Christ came from the Father, John 16. 28. was sent
by him, Joh. 17. 3. He spoke not of himself, but the Father which sent him,
gave him Commandment what he should say and what he should speak: whatsoever
he spoke therefore, even as the Father said unto him so he spoke, Joh. 12. 49,
50. So that he was not a light by usurpation, imposture, disguise or
transformation, but by a true Commission as sealed by his Father, Joh. 6. 27.
sanctified and sent into the world, Joh. 10. 36.

Sect. 2. Christ more then a typical Light.
2. Christ is the true light in contradistinction to those, which were only
Types or Shadows, representing Christ to come. The word [true] is used in this
sense, Heb. 8. 2. A Minister of the true Tabernacle; that is, not only of that
shadowy Tabernacle, which was only a parable or figure for the time present, as
the expression is, Heb. 9. 9. but the real Tabernacle, for an Image of which
that Tabernacle was made. Again Heb. 9. 24. it is said, Christ is not entered
into the holyes made by hand, which were figures or antityps of the true, but
into Heaven it self, where the holy place of the Tabernacle is made the
antitype and representative, and Heaven the true holy place. In like manner
there were lights in the Tabernacle, there were lamps and lights of pure oil
burning in the Tabernacle, there was fire at the Altar, which at first came
down from Heaven, and these were shadows of things to come, but the body is of
Christ, Col. 2. 17. And in this sense also truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.
17. There is mention of seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which
are the seven Spirits of God, Rev. 4. 5. But this hinders not, but that Christ
might be shadowed by the lamps in the Tabernacle, and the fire on the Altar,
since that which was signified by them, the inlightning the people of God, who
are the holy Priesthood of God, and the making ready the Sacrifice that it
might be accepted with God, was most truly verified of Jesus Christ, through
whom we now worship the Father in spirit and truth, Joh. 4. 23, 24. and our
spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Sect. 3. Other Lights are no Lights in comparison of Christ.
3. Christ is the true light comparatively, as being the chief light, in
comparison of whom other lights are not to be so termed. It Is true, John
Baptist is said to be a burning and a shining light, Joh. 5. 35. And the word
of the Prophets is termed a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And
Christ says of his Apostles, Mat. 5. 14. they were the light of the world. Yet
they were as no lights in comparison of Christ, who was in the bosom of the
Father, and has declared him, Joh 1. 18. as (...), one that himself saw him,
and who received not the Spirit by measure, and therefore spoke the words of
God above others, Joh. 3. 35. As in like manner we are lights, who now preach
the Gospel, yet comparatively to the Apostles, who could say, That which was
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, and
our hands have felt of the words of life we declare unto you, 1 John 1. 1, 3.
we are but dark. The Law was a light, and the Commandment was a lamp, Prove. 6.
23. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 105. Yet in comparison of the Gospel of Glory of Christ,
who is the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it is scarce to be termed light, but as
the Starlight is as no light when the Sun is risen, so even that which was
made glorious, to wit, the giving of the Law, had no glory in this respect by
reason of the glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3. 10. That is, in comparison of the
Gospel, which is as the day star, and Sunrising, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

Sect. 4. Christ the Original Light.
4. Christ is the true light, as being the Original light, from whom other
delegated lights, which are set up in Christ's stead, as it is 2 Cor. 5. 20. do
borrow their light. It is true, the Father of our Lord Christ, is termed the
Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. And Christ is light of light, light from the
Father of lights, yet all is so fully invested in Christ, that he could say,
Joh. 16. 15. All things that the Father has are mine. And therefore he says
even of the holy Spirit himself, whom he calls the Spirit of truth, that he
shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
Ver. 13. And he shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you, Ver. 14. And when the Prophets testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow, it was the Spirit of
Christ which was in them, that did signify them, 1 Pet. 1. 11. And in like
sort, when the Apostles, by their preaching, were lights of the world, yet they
received from Christ that which they declared, 1 John 1. 2, 3. And those
Believers who were brought to the knowledge of Christ among the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 3. 3. are said to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by the Apostles. So
that as the light of the Sun is the true light, because it is the fountain of
light, the Moon and other Stars borrowing their light from it: in like manner
Christ is the true light, as being he from whom the Prophets, Apostles, and
holy Teachers derive their light, which they impart to the world.

Sect. 5. Christ the perfect Light.
4. Christ is the true light, that is, the most perfect light. [True] is taken
for that which is perfect, which attains the end, to which nothing is wanting
requisite to the use of riches, Luke 16. 11. opposite to the Mammon of
unrighteousness, which is defective, not sufficient to make a man happy. Now
Christ is the true or perfect light, 1. Because he is the highest light, the
rising-Sun, or dayspring from on high, or the height, to wit, of Heaven, Luke
1. 78. A light placed on high, and that rises from Heaven, is a greater light
then a Beacon fired; and a Beacon on a hill fired, then a Bonfire in a low
valley. The Original of Christ being a light, which came from God, that was
from above, Joh. 8. 23. makes him the more conspicuous and greater light. 2.
The light which is universal, is a more perfect light then that which is a
light to one part only, as the Sun is the most perfect light, because his
going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit to the end of it:
and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, Psalm. 19. 6. Now Christ is the
light of the world, Joh. 8. 12. Not only the glory of the people of Israel, but
also a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32. Acts 13. 47. 3. That is the
most perfect light, which is without any mixture of darkness. Mow Christ is
light, and in him is no darkness at all. Lord, said Peter, Ioh. 21. 17. thou
know all things. Surely there was no error in Chrlst, which might darken
his understanding; or nescience, which might disable him from inlightning
those, that sit in darkness, and guiding their feet into the way of peace,
Luke 1. 79. which is the chief use of the heavenly light of Christ. 4. He is a
perpetual light. John was a light for a season, Ioh. 5. 35. he was to decrease
in his luster and use, when Christ was to increase, Ioh. 3. 30. The Prophets
and Apostles were lights in their time, but they had on earth their eclipses,
the Prophets could not always declare the mind of God. Nathan, 2 Samuel 7. 3.
bid David do all that was in his heart, and yet ver. 4. that night he had a
countermand. Elisha said, 2 Kings 4. 24. of the Shunamite, her soul is vexed
within her, and the Lord has hid it from me, and has not told me. Prophetic
light was not, as the Schoolmen said truly, in them, in manner of a habit,
which might dispose them to reveal the mind of God at any time, but holy men of
God spoke as they were carried or moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. And
the Apostles did not always speak by the Spirit, Peter was to be blamed when
he compelled the Gentiles to live as do the Jews, Gal. 2. 11, 14. to him whom
Christ said, Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, he after said, ver. 23. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense
unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of
men. But it was otherwise with Christ, his knowledge was habitual, always
ready in every thing he was to speak to, never deficient, he needed not that
any should testify of man, Ioh. 2. 25. He spoke what he had seen and heard,
Ioh. 3. 32. we speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen, ver. 11.
He whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives not the spirit
by measure unto him, ver. 34. The Prophets and the Apostles were lights in
their time: but their light is set, I mean their personal preaching cease.
Zech. 1. 5. Your Fathers where are they? And the Prophets, do they live for
ever? 2 Pet. 1. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle,
even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. But of Christ it is said, Romans 6.
9, 10. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, death has
no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in
that he lives, he lives unto God, Ephesians. 4. 8. When he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, ver. 10. He that descended, is
the same also that ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all
things, to wit, with his light; as it follows, ver. 11, 12, 13. And he gave
some, Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some Pastors
and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. So that Christ is now not
only a permanent light, but also more eminent, shining as he did on the earth
to the Jews, so more gloriously, since his ascension, to the Gentiles. And
though the man of sin has much obscured the light of Christ; and the mystery
of iniquity that began to work in Paul's time has prevailed, after the working
of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, yet shall that wicked
one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2. 7, 8, 9.

And then shall Christ shine more gloriously in his day, and with him the
righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew.
13. 43. And then shall the Lord be to them an everlasting light, and their God
their glory, Isa. 60. 19.

Sect. 6. Christ the effectual inlightning Light.
Christ is the true light, that is, the effectual light, which does indeed that
which light is to do. As he is termed the true bread which was from Heaven,
Ioh. 6. 32. because he gives life to the world, ver. 33. He that eats of
this bread shall live for ever, ver. 58. And as he is termed the true vine,
Ioh. 15. 1. Because he yields fruit as a vine, so is he termed the true light,
because he does inlighten effectually. John 8. 12. I am the light of the world,
says Christ: be that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life. Ioh. 12. 46. I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness. There are lights, that
like ignis fatuus, foolish fire, lead men into dark places, lakes and bogs,
whereinto they that follow them perish: There are lights that for a while lead
men in the way, and then soon go out, and so leave men in darkness and
perplexity. But the Lord Christ leads always in the right way, even in the way
of life; neither is he ever extinguished, but so shines, as that whosoever
follows him, shall be directed aright in his way, be guided into the way of
peace, Luke 7. 79. With thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 9. is the fountain
of life: in thy light shall we see light. There is an amazing light, that by
its brightness, does as it were strike dead, and cast down to the earth,
Revel. 1. 16, 17. When Christ appeared to John in his glory, and his
countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength, upon the sight of him John
fell at his feet as dead. When Saul journied to Damascus, about noon suddenly
there-shine from Heaven a great light round about him, so that he could not see
for the glory of the light, but was blind for some days, Acts 22. 6. 11. Acts
9. 9. The Lord Christ is an excelling light, yet not striking dead, nor casting
down, nor blinding, but rather an erecting light, a clearing light, a directing
light, an enlivening, and inlightning light; which would lead me to the
consideration of the way of Christ's inlightning, but that somewhat more is to
be said of the truth of Christ the light.

Sect. 7. Christ was the true Light in respect of the truth of his words.
2. Christ is the true light, in respect of his sayings, he delivered that
which was truth, which is Logic truth, and the truth he spoke according to his
mind, which is moral truth. 1. He could freely say, John 8. 14. Though I bear
record of my self, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whether
I go. Ver. 16. If I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and
the Father that sent me. Ver. 17, 18. It is written in your Law, that the
testimony of two men is true: I am one that bear witness of my self, and the
Father that sent me bears witness of me. Ver. 26. He that sent me is true,
and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him. Ver. 28. When
ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do
nothing of my self: but as my Father has taught me, I speak these things. Ver.
31, 32. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Ver. 40. But now ye
seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God.
Ver. 45. Which of you convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye
not believe me? Joh. 10. 25. The works that I do in my Fathers Name, bear
witness of me. Ver. 37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know
and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. Joh. 16. 10. The words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self: but the Father that dwells in
me, he does the works. In which speeches, our Lord Christ avers the truth of
the light, that is Doctrine or Words he taught, in that they were received from
God, and witnessed by him, which was proved, 1. By the works which Christ did;
which were invincibly proved to be of God, by the greatness, frequency,
freeness, and goodness of them, being in opposition to Satan, and with such
evidence of all freedom from imposture and acquaintance with Satan, that even
those who followed not Christ, did in his Name cast out Devils, Luke 10. 49,
50. And by this he refuted, Luke 11. 19. the Pharisees, who imputed his casting
out Devils, to an assistance of the Prince of the Devils. 2. By the
concomitants and consequents of his lifting up, which was his death on the
cross, Joh. 11. 32, 33. For, 1. The prediction of it, with the fulfilling
thereof, showed he spoke from God, whose property it is to foretell future
contingents as certain. 2. The things themselves proved him to come from God.
1. The wonderful accidents that happened at his death, Mat. 27. 54. the renting
of the Vcil of the Temple, and of the rocks, and the quaking of the earth, and
opening of the graves, made the Centurion and his Soldiers say, Truly this was
the Son of God. 2. His Resurrection, not withstanding all the obstruction used
by Pilate and the Jews, with the rising of many bodies of the Saints which
slept, and appeared to many in Jerusalem, manifest by the many and undoubted
signs thereof to many persons many times proves his descent from God. 3. The
giving of the Spirit on the great day of Pentecost, in the sight of Proselytes
from all Countries, which was also done by Apostles in other places, together
with many Miracles in his Name, proved that he taught the truth he received
from the Father. 4. The dispossessing of Satan of his Empire in the worship of
Idols, and the giving of Oracles as from them, and the drawing of the Gentiles
to him, as he foretold, Joh. 12. 31, 32. in which was part of the great mystery
of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3 16. which we at this day see accomplished, together
with many other Prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem, its treading down
of the Gentiles, the Preaching of the Gospel over all the world, the calamities
of the Jews, the persecution of the Christians, with other things, Matthew. 24.
Luke 21. and elsewhere, abundantly demonstrate that he was the true light which
came down from Heaven, in respect of the Doctrine he taught, and words he spoke.

His words also appear to be the true light, from the matter of them, and the
ends whereunto they tend, and the effects of them. For, 1. The matter of them
is pure like God, containing holy Precepts, not amorous Poems, or sophistical
quirks of wit, or curious devices of art, or cunning maxims of State policy, or
glorious achievements of war, or any thing that tends to exalt man, but such
Precepts and Revelations as make man spiritual, heavenly, wise, like unto God.
There is nothing vain and fabulous, like to the 2 Pet. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 2. 4. 2
Cor. 4. 2.
frothy wit of men, nor deceitful, like to the wily old Serpent, but solid and
weighty, concerning peace with God, conversion unto him, denying our selves,
taking up our Cross, following of Christ in patience contentedness,
meekness, humility, and such like things, as show faith in God, and hope of a
reward in Heaven; all plain without flattery of men to induce them to follow
him in hopes of earthly preferment, and worldly wealth, or pleasure, or praise
of men, but the clean contrary: yet are they such things as, when declared,
appear so necessary for sinners, so full of goodness, and congruity to
Prophetical Predictions, that the conscience of men not listed up with
pharisaical concei's of self-righteousnesse, nor obstinately addicted to their
own lusts, will assent to and embrace them. 2. The ends of them, and the
effects, are the salvation of man, and the glory of God. All that Christ spoke,
it was to comfort the humble and afflicted soul, Luke 4. 18. to ease the
burdened, Matthew. 11. 28. to direct them to God, to reform the evils in Gods
worship, to take men off from covetousness, hypocrisy, and such evils as are
pernicious, to believe in God, to love each other, to lay up our treasure in
Heaven, not to be excessively careful for the things of this life, with
whatever else might bring men nigh to God, and alienate them from this present
evil world. And accordingly so were and are the effects, regeneration or new
birth, rejoicing in God, mortification of the deeds of the body, comfort in
tribulation, a life of faith, love to the Brethren in Christ, and everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace. All which, with inumerable other
Characters and Symptoms of Christ's Doctrine and Testimony, do show that he was
the true light, and that what he spoke to Pilate, Joh. 18. 37. was right, To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth: every one that is of the truth hears my voice.

Lastly, That in respect of his sincerity or moral truth he was the true light,
it is manifest in that as he said to the Jews, he sought not his own will, but
the will of the Father which sent him, Joh 5. 30. That he sought not his own
glory, Joh. 8. 50. Which appears in that he sometimes forbad the spreading of
his fame, withdrew himself when they would have made him King, Joh. 6. 15. was
content to be deprived of ordinary conveniences, Luke 9. 58. In a word, made
himself of no reputation, or emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being in fashion as a man,
he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even to the death of the
cross, Phil. 2. 7, 8. that he might give Testimony to the truth.

Sect. 8. Application by way of Vindication of our selves from the Accusation
of Quakers, as if we denied the Light, John 1. 9. and warning to shun false
Lights.
From that which has been said, 1. It may appear, that those who go under the
name of Quakers, do unjustly accuse public Preachers, as if they did deny the
true light, which inlighteneth every man that comes into the world; that they
deny Christ the light: for so in their speeches and books they do frequently
charge them. None that I have seen, is more profuse and frequent in these
charges then G. F. that is, George Fox, in his Catechism, who says, p. 7 Toat
neither the Jews nor Christians, do believe in the light, which does inlighten
every man that comes into the world, though they profess some of Christ's and
the Apostles words, which the Jews do not. P. 9. he says, Teachers by the will
of man (meaning public Preachers in England) and Professors say, that Christ
does not inlighten every one that comes into the world, and they deny Christ.
P. 13. That none can confess Christ, but who confess the light which every
man is enlightened withal. But frequently in the same paper, he terms such as
acknowledge not the light, which he imagins every one has, Antichrists,
Deceivers, not Teachers of Christ, but deniers of him, p. 15. But this
crimination is but the raving of men, that are used to make clamours and
outcries without any proof. Though the text plainly enough distinguishes the
light inlightening, and the light in every man, from that true light
inlightning, yet they do not, or will not understand this difference, but
confound the light inlightning (which is indeed Christ) with the light within
each man, which they term Christ, and therefore make them that deny the light
within, to be deniers of Christ; as if a man must deny the Sun to be light, who
does deny the light to be in blind Bartimaeus his eyes And yet we do not deny
the light which is in every man that comes into the world, only we deny the
sufficiency of it self, without Scripture, preaching, and learning, to bring us
to God, and to direct us in his worship, and to make known Christ to us, and
the way of reconciliation and salvation by him. Again, because we call the
Scriptures a light, and the Preachers lights, therefore they exclaim against us
as if we denied Christ the light, and the light within. Whereas there is no
repugnancy between these: Christ is the chiefest and highest light, and yet the
Law of God, the Scriptures, the Apostles are lights of the world. Would any man
in his wits reason thus? The Sun is the great light in the Heavens, and the Sun
inlightens the eyes, therefore he that calls the Moon a light, or a torch or
candle a light, denies the Sun to be the light that inlightens all the world,
and the light that is in men's eyes. Sure these men, while they thus, I cannot
say argue, but clamor, give occasion to sober men, to question whether they be
not of those that come into world without light, that have no light in them,
since they cannot discern the want of reason in these sottish speeches, more
suitable to idiots and children, then to men of ripe age. But I rather choose
to pray God to give them light, then to upbraid them with their darkness: and
to acquit our selves from their charge, rather then discover their folly.

2. However it is necessary, that we be all warned to avoid false lights, and
to make use of Christ the true light. There is much affectation and pretense of
new light in these our days. Nor is it to be denied, but that, through the
blessing of God, much light, either new or newly appearing, has shined forth:
sundry points in Divinity, sundry texts of holy Scripture, have been lately
more cleared then they were in former days. Nevertheless, it is to be heeded,
that under pretense of new light, many vain fancies are vented and received,
and that Satan has prevailed with many to put darkness for light, and light
for darkness. Of these none have more manifestly denied Christ, then those
that make a Christ within them the true light; and while they except against
the light of the Scriptures, and the Word preached, under pretense of Christ
being the Word, they put darkness for light, in that they make the natural
light in each man, which is but darkness in spirituals, as if it were to be
heeded as men's rule in all sorts of duties, and knowledge of the things of God.
Doubtless such men do really deny Christ, who deny the words of Christ to be
their Rule: He that rejects ms, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him, says Christ, John 12. 48. And where to find Christ's words if not
in Scripture I know not, which while men leave, and deny to be the Gospel, but
direct men to the light within them, and call that the Gospel, they do plainly
reject Christ the light, and follow the false light of men's vain imaginations;
nor can it be expected but that they should walk in darkness, and stumble and
fall to their destruction. Be persuaded therefore as you desire your safety, to
make use of Christ the true light indeed, not in that sense in which Fanatics
call Christ the light in them, which is not the true Christ or true light (who
is in heaven, but shines forth in the Scriptures, and the explaining and
preaching the doctrine which is contained in them) but a mere phantasme or
foolish fire, which serves not to guide but to delude men. The same is to be
said of them that follow Ecclesiastic traditions unwritten, Popes
determinations, Prelates, and Councils Canons, Fathers sayings, as their light:
Concerning all whom it is true, that there is no light in them, that they are
not derived from Christ the true light, except they agree with the words of
Christ in the holy Scripture, whereby the true light does enlighten, as is to
be showed in the next point to whch I proceed.

Christ the Enligtening Light.
SERMON. III.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. Christ enlightens all things with their natural light, as Creator.
THe next point is, that Christ Jesus is the enlightening light. The dayspring
from on high says Zacharias, Luke 1. 79. has visited us, to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, Luke 2. 32. Simeon terms
him a light to lighten the Gentiles. For explication of which, it will be
requisite that I show, 1. With what light Christ does enlighten. 2. Whence it
is. 3. By what means he does enlighten. 4. Why he does enlighten.

1. The light with which Christ does enlighten is manifold: 1. There is a
bodily light in inanimate bodies, such as are the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, of
which Moses says, Genesis 1. 16. And God made two great lights, the greater light
to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the Stars
also: And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the
earth, and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light
from the darkness. And it is said, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were
the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. 2. There
is a natural light of creatures, which have sight to discern what is convenient
for them, and accordingly do move toward that which agrees with their nature,
or remove from that which they discern inconvenient to them. Of the light or
life of these beings, it is to be conceived that the word which was in the
beginning with God, was the cause, according to that of the Evangelist, Joh. 1.
3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made. 3. There is a rational light of men, whereby they are able to judge of
what in duty they do or omit, and have a conscience or privity to their own
actions as either right or wrong. And of this also Christ is the efficient, as
the words following Joh. 1. 4. import, In him was life, and the life was the
light of men. All these sorts of light the word enlightens with, as Creator;
it being said of him, That by him were all things created that are in heaven,
and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or
dominions, or principalities or powers, all things were created by him and for
him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1. 16,
17. And to like purpose it is said, Heb. 1. 2, 3. By whom also he made the
worlds, and upholding all things by the word of his power.

Sect. 2. Christ enlightens the world with the knowledge of God, as the Prophet
of the Church.
There are other sorts of light which are from Christ, as his Fathers Officer
sent into the world, and anointed for the recovery of man sallen by sin. 1.
There is the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, which is by the
enlightening that is in the face or person of Jesus Christ, as Paul expresses
it, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Whereby it is that we see as through a glass the glory of the
Lord with unveiled face, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Not as it was with Israel, when they
could not look on Moses without a veil over his face, as it is ver. 7. 13. Till
Christ appeared in the flesh, the Gentiles were darkness. Paul says of the
Galatians, Gal. 4. 8. Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto
them which by nature are no Gods. Of the Ephesians, Ye were once darkness, but
now are ye light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. Of the Corinthians, Ye know that ye
were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb Idols, as ye were led, 1 Cor. 12. 2.
The Jews also had their minds blinded, the vail remained untaken away in the
reading of the old Testament, which vail is done away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 14.
The being of the true God was so little known to the Gentiles, till Christ
appeared to be a light to the Gentiles, that they were not only without God in
the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Insomuch that the Athenians themselves, sensible of
their ignorance of him, inscribed their Altar thus, To the unknown God, Act.
17. 23. confessing God was unknown of them: But they were also so vain in their
imaginations, that they imagined those things to be Gods which were no Gods,
but creatures made to serve them, being imparted unto all nations under the
whole heaven by God, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Yea and under diverse resemblances, the meaner
sort of living creatures, Romans 1. 23. And dead men, and Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20.
And for the Jews, they understood not the counsel of God in giving of the Law,
and the appointing sacrifices and ceremonies; till by the light of Christ the
end of these things was revealed. But the only begotten Son which is in the
besome of the Father, he has declared God, Ioh. 1. 18. revealing his true
being, and thereby undeceiving the Gentiles, and his counsels in the giving of
the Law, and appointing the legal worship, and thereby has enlightened the
Jews. And this enlightening is proper to him who tells us, Mat. 11. 27. All
things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him. This light is derived from Christ as the great Prophet
of the Church of God.

Sect. 3. Christ as high Priest enlightens with the light of peace and joy in
God
2. There is a light of peace with God, which is by Christ, who is our peace,
reconciling both Jews and Gentiles in one body by the cross, having slain the
enmity thereby, Ephesians. 2. 14. 16, This is that peace which Christ calls his
peace, which he promises to his Apostles, Joh. 14. 27. where he says, Peace I
leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives give I unto
you, let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. And again, Joh
16. 33. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me you might have peace,
in the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world. So that this light of peace with God, begets the light of peace and
joy in the hearts of those that are Christ's; insomuch that being justified by
faith, and having peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, they rejoice in
the hope of the glory of God, and not only so, but they glory in tribulations
also, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. This peace of God which passes all understanding,
keeping as a guard their hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. 7.
Hence it has come to pass, that even when the wicked are driven away in their
wickedness as with a storm, yet the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.
32. As Oecolampadius when his light failed him near his death, told them about
him, that he had light enough within him. Hereby the holy Martyrs and
Confessors when the heavens were black over them, the rage, frowns, threats,
tortures of tyrants, violently rushed upon them; yet stood unmoved without
being shaken by any terror or grief from them. Who shall separate us says
Paul, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay in
all these things we are mare then conquerours through him that loved us. For I
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. This light is derived from Christ, as the high Priest of
the people of God.

Sect. 4. Christ as King of Saints, enlightens with the light of glory.
3. There is yet a higher and more illustrious light from Christ, to wit the
light of glory, which is termed by the Apostle Paul, Col. 1. 12. the
inheritance of the Saints in light, and by our Lord Christ, Joh. 8. 12. the
light of life, which is that eternal life, which is said to be the gift of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23. This is that blessed light of the
new Jerusalem, which has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it, for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof,
and the nation of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it, Rev. 21.
23, 24. Of this light the glorified Saints shall be fully partakers at the
resurrection, when the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. Their vile body, or body of debasement, shall be
changed by the Lord Jesus Christ, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. which is now more glorious then it was on the
Mount, Mat. 17. 2. and yet then he was transfigured, and his face did shine as
the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light. And for their spirits,
doubtless they shall then have far greater light. Now we see through a glass
darkly, or in a riddle, but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then
shall I know even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. They are before the throne
of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the
throne shall dwell among them, they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more,
neither shall the Sun light on them, or any heat. For the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains
of water, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7. 15, 16,
17. And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, Rev. 21. 4. No night, or gloomy day, but perpetual
light and serenity, everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; all clouds of
fear, sorrow, ignorance, despair, disquietnesse shall fly away. And this light
shall be from Christ as the King of Saints.

Sect. 5. Christ inlightens by his natural Power, as Gods Son, and by his
special Commission, as sent of God.
2. The natural light that all creatures have in their several kinds, is from
that natural power which Christ Jesus has as the Son of God, by whom he made
the worlds, who being the brightness of glory, and the characteo or express
Image of his person or substance, bears or upholds all things by the word of
his power, Heb. 1. 2, 3. To this purpose tends the speech of Christ, Joh. 5.
17. My Father works hitherto and I work, from whence the Jews gathered, that
he termed God his own Father, making himself equal with God, ver. 18. to which
Christ answers, ver. 19. Verily, verily, I say to you, the Son can do nothing
of himself, but what he sees the Father do, for what things soever he does,
these also does the Son likewise. Which show that Christ asserted a coworking
with his Father in all his works, and power answerable to it. The light of
knowledge of God and his counsel, of peace, and joy, and comfort, of glory and
everlasting blessedness, the Lord Christ communicates, as by special
Commission delegated by his Father, sealed, sanctified, and sent into the
world, whereby he was made the light of the world, according to what he says,
Joh. 9. 5. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. And ver.
39. For judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not, might see,
and that they which see, might be made blind. The administration of the affairs
belonging to the Kingdom of God, was committed to him for inlightening,
governing, protecting, delivering, raising up from the dead, and advancing his
Church, subduing the devils, reproving and condemning opposers of his Doctrine
and work, judging all in his great day. All things, says he, Mat. 11. 27. are
delivered unto me of my Father, Joh. 5. 20. For the Father loves the Son, and
shows him all things that himself does: and he will show him greater works
then these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father raises up the dead, and
quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will. For the Father judges
no man: but has committed all judgment unto the Son, Mat. 28. 18. All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in earth. By reason whereof, and his being made man
to do this work, he is said to come down from Heaven, not to do his own will,
but the will of him that sent him, Joh. 6. 38. And it is said by Zacharias,
Luke 1. 78. The day spring from on high has visited us, to give light to them
that sit in darkness.

Sect. 6. Christ inlightens by his Preaching, Example, Spirit, Apostles now in
this time, by his Power and Glory in the world to come.
3. The inlightening with the later sorts of light, imparted by Christ as sent
into the world, is from him in this time now, or in the world to come. That
inlightening which is now in thistime, is either by himself or his Deputies,
immediately, or by mediation of others. 1. Christ in the days of his flesh, or
as it is expressed John 9. 5. As long as he was in the world, was the light of
the world. 1. He was the light of the world by his preaching, wherein he was as
the Sun, still moving and inlightening all sorts, and in all places taking
occasion to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, to the poor and all sorts
of people who resorted to him. After his temptation he went about all Galilee
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and
healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the people,
Mat. 4. 23. When he preached in the house, there was such resort to him, that
his Mother and Brethren could not come at him by reason of the press, but
stood without desiring to speak with him, but he preferred the work of reaching
the people, before private conference with his Mother, Mat. 12. 47, 48, 49, 50.
No sooner was he got out of the house, and come to the sea side, but great
multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship and
sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore, and he taught them many
things by Parables, Mat. 13. 1, 2, 3. After he had been in a desert a while,
when he came out, seeing much people, was moved with compassion toward them,
because they were as sheep not having a Shepherd, and he began to teach them
many things, Mark. 6. 34. He was wont to go to the Mount of Olives to pray,
Luke 22. 39. And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all
the people came unto him, and he sat down and taught them, Joh. 8. 2. When he
was in the way traveling, when he was at meals, he was still teaching his
Disciples, or those that were with him. He neglected eating, to prosecute the
work of winning souls, and lightening them by his preaching. And this he
counted his meat, as he told his Disciples, Joh. 4 34. My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. By this means the people
which sat in darkness saw great light: and to them which sat in the region
and shadow of death, light sprang up, Mat. 4. 16. Thus Jesus Christ has
abolished death, and brought immortality and life to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

2. Christ was a light also by his Example. Good example does inlighten men,
not only directing, but also provoking others to follow their steps. Men as
they are sociable, so they love to do as they see others do. Hence it is that
they live as much by examples as by Precepts. Wherefore says Christ, Mat 5.
16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Now of all the examples that ever
were, there was none more illustrious then Christ's: None so full of love,
goodness, meekness, patience, humility, contentedesse, obedience, innocence,
quietness, holy zeal, courage, diligence in his work, self-denial,
heavenlynesse, faith, hope in God, and whatever else is amiable and imitable.
He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil,
Act. 10 33. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; when he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Per. 2. 22, 23. The real
of Gods house did eat him up, Joh. 2. 17. It was his meat do do the will of him
that sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4. 34. He was the good Shepherd,
that laid down his life for his Sheep, Joh. 10. 11. Having loved his own which
were in the world, he loved them to the end, Joh. 13. 1. Though he were their
Lord and Master, yet he washed his Disciples feet, ver. 23. 24. Though he was
rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be
rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Being in the form of God, he made himself of no reputation,
but took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men,
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. He pleased not
himself, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached God, fell
on him, Romans 15. 3. The Son of man came not to be ministered to, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. In all these
things, and in all other his words and deeds he did shine forth so clearly,
that even his enemies could not but acknowledge him to have been a holy and
just person: even before Pontius Pilate he witnessed so good a confession, 1 Timothy 6. 13. that Pilate who condemned him, yet acquitted him from fault, and
the malefactor that suffered with him testified, that he had done nothing
amiss, Luke 23. 4, 14, 41.

3. Christ did inlighten now in this time, as the expression is, Mark. 10. 38.
after his resurrection until the day in which he was taken up, by giving
Commandments through the Holy Ghost unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, to
whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs,
being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 2, 3.

2. After his departure out of the world into Heaven, he was and is an
inlightening light, now in this time mediately. 1. By sending of the Holy
Spirit, whom he promised to send to the Apostles from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, and that he should testify
of him, Joh. 15. 26. And guide them into all truth: that he should not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he should hear, that he should speak, and would show
them things to come: he should glorify Christ, for he should receive of his,
and should show it to the Apostles, that all that the Father had were his, and
therefore he said, he should take of his, and show it to them, Joh. 16. 13, 14,
15. Which was accordingly accomplished when the holy Spirit was given to them,
and those Prophets, and other Teachers, whom Christ gave to his Church, were
endued with the Holy Ghost after his ascension. To whom and to the rest of
Believers, the holy Spirit is given as the earnest of their Inheritance, and
thereby the eyes of their understanning are enlightened, that they may know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 14, 18. Who receive not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God, that they might know the things which
are freely given them of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Because they are Sons, God sends
forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, crying Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6.

2. By the sending of Apostles and other Teachers into all Nations, of whom in
that respect he said, Mat. 5. 14, 15. Ye are the light of the world. A City
that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it
under a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in
the house. Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. Paul says of himself, To me is this grace given, to
inlighten all men, as the word (...) signifies, being the same which is used
Joh. 1. 9. And indeed, Christ when he ascended up on high, led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men, some Apostles, and some Prophets: and some
Evangelists: and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. who were Angels of
light, and being placed on high hills, in great Cities, and on Candlesticks in
many Churches, were eminent lights in the world. So that was said of the
Heavens, Psalm. 19. 4. was verified of them, Their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world, Romans 10. 18. By which light
the unfruitful works of darkness, to wit, the w^les of the powers of
darkness, in their Idolatries and other wickedness, was discovered, and
innumerable souls brought out of the power of darkness into the Kingdom of the
Son of God. From whose light succeeding Teachers, by preaching the Gospel, and
baptizing Believers, which the Ancients called inlightening, many millions of
people through the Roman Empire, and other parts of the earth, became
Christians, and were added to the Children of light: and these Teachers are
termed Stars in Christ's right hand, Rev. 1. 20.

Lastly, In the world to come, as the phrase of Christ is, Mark. 10. 30. As the
lightening that lighteneth out of the one part under Heaven, shines unto the
other part under Heaven: so shall also the Son of man be in his day, Luke 17.
24. Then shall he put on his glorious apparel, and deck himself with light as a
garment, and being attended with all the Angels of light, shall come in the
glory of his Father, and raise up the bodies of all the Children of light, and
bring them to the light; so as that those eyes which were boared out for
acknowledging him, shall see him riding on the clouds of heaven triumphantly,
and they themselves shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father. And then he
shall be our noon-light, we shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

Sect. 7. Christ inlightens by reason of his own luster, and his Fathers design
to to show him to the world.
The Reasons why Christ is thus an inlightening light, are 1. From his own
property; he being light of himself, is as all light is, apt to communicate his
light to the world. As the property of the fire is to burn, and the property of
water to moysten, so it is the property of light to shine forth: Nothing is
more diffusive of it self, and apt to show it self to others, then light:
Darkness hides things, but light makes them appear. As the Prince of darkness
disguiseth himself, puts on the form of a Serpent, or Samuel; loves to act in
the night, to keep men in ignorance and blindness, it being the way most
agreeable to his Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of darkness: so the Lord Jesus,
the Lord of glory, loved the light, his Kingdom being the Kingdom of light. His
birth was manifested by a Star, Mat. 2. 2. he being the Star that should come
out of Jacob, as Balaam foretold, Numb. 24. 17. And there was darkness over
all the Land at his death, so that the Sun was darkened, Luke 23. 44, 45. Which
showed that then the Sun of righteousness was eclipsed. His preaching was in
the light, I spoke openly, said he, Job. 18. 20. to the world, I ever taught in
the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in
secret have I said nothing. His life and practice also was so illustrious and
open, that he could boldly appeal to his adversaries own testimony of him,
Which of you convinces me of sin? Joh. 8. 46.

2. Christ was the true light inligntening the world by his Fathers special
design, 1. Out of special love to his people, for whose sake Christ was
anointed to preach the Gospel to the poor, sent to heal the brokenhearted, to
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, Luke 4. 18. According to the Prediction,
Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3. Arise, be enlightened, for thy light comes, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth,
and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his
glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Which is applied thus by Paul, Ephesians.
5. 14. Wherefore he says; Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light. 2. Out of special affection to Christ. For
the Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand, Joh. 3. 35.
For the Father loves the Son, and shows all things that himself does. For
as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them: even so the Son
quickneth whom he will. For the Father judges no man, bus has committed all
judgment unto the Son: that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has
sent him, Joh. 6. 21, 22, 23. To this end it was that the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among men, (and they beheld his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. And to this end
did he appear to John, Revel. 1. 13. clothed with a garment down to the foot,
and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white
like wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire. And his feet
like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnase; and his voice as the
sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven Stars: and out of
his mouth went a sharp two-edged Sword: and his countenance was as the Sun
shines in his strength, ver. 14, 15, 16. His last glorious appearing, as it is
termed, Tit. 2. 13. shall be with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2 These. 1.
7, 8, 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe, God having highly exalted him, and given him a Name
which is above every Name: that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: And that
every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of
God the Father, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.

Sect. 8. Application by way of Inference, that we are to bless God for
Christ's inlightening, and all that are Christ's, are Children of Light.
From that which has been said, it follows 1. That there is much cause that we
should bless God for this incomprehensible benefit to men, especially us
Gentiles, of raising up Christ to be the inlightening light of the world. Sure
all light which shows to inlighten, and not to amaze, is a great gift. They
that have been long blind, or kept in darkness, and after recover their sight,
and see the light, how are they over-joyed! When blind Bartimaeus received his
sight, he followed Christ glorifying God, Luke 18. 43. And shall not we
glorify God, who receive lightfrom Christ, not only to follow him in the way
in which he traveled on earth, but also in the way in which he passed into
glory? We sometimes seem to wish, that God would send us the light of Heaven,
and will we not praise God who has sent his Son from Heaven to be the true
inlightening light to guide us to Heaven? Zacharias blessed God, that by his
tender mercy the dayspring from on high has visited us, to give light to them
that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the
way of peace, Luke 1. 78, 79. Simeon desired to live no longer, after his
meeting with Christ in the Temple, but blessed God that his eyes had seen his
salvation, which he had prepared before the face of all people, a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel, Luke 2. 28, 29, 30,
31. Herein we are bound to imitate them, and to be enlarged in our blessing
God, and glorifying him for this great enjoyment of the true inlightening light.

2. Since Christ is the inlightening light, they that are Christ's are Children
of the light, and of the day, not of the night or darkness, 1 These. 5. 5. They
therefore that abide in darkness, and walk in darkness, have no communion
with Christ. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And
what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. Now he that hates his Brother, is in darkness, and
walks indarknesse, and knows not whether he goes, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2. 11. And what is their practice, but practice
of harred of their Brethren, whose tongue; are still venting reviling speeches
against their Brethren, as not in the light, because they confess sin in
themselves, and make not the light in their own consciences a sufficient light
to guide them, but sollow the light of the holy Scriptures? Surely these are
not in the light, who are so full of self-boasting of their own perfection, and
Pharisee-like, despising others. Were we in error, yet in meekness those that
oppose themselves should be instructed, 2 Timothy 2. 25. if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. Wherein they failing
and following the Prince of darkness in railing accusations, Jude 9. show
themselves not to be in the light of which they brag, but in darkness. And so
likewise they do in not coming to the light of the Scriptures taught by
Preachers, whom they contemptuously term Priests. Herein also they show
themselves not to be children of the light, in that they will not disclose
plainly what they hold, but hide their opinions in cloudy misty expressions;
and when by quistions put to them, there is endeavor to find them out, they
shift in answering, and fall to reviling. In a word; all that walk in hatred,
pride, ignorance, intemperance, uncleanness, deceit, and such like evils, show
they are not in the light, nor have communion with christ, but abide in
darkness. You that would approve your selves to be in Christ, must cast away
the works of darkness, and put upon you the armor of light, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather,
Romans 13. 12. Ephesians. 5. 11. But of this more in that which follows.

Men coming into the world need Light from Christ.
SERMON. IV.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. The necessity of Christ's Enlightening is asserted, because of the
blindness which is in all at birth.
COming into the world has a double sense, either entering on some action or
business among men, or showing themselves among men; and so false Prophets are
said to come into the world, or to go out into the world, 1 John 4. 1. And in
this sense it is a truth, that Christ coming into the world as a Prophet, Joh.
6. 14. was the true light inlightening: But I gave Reasons against this sense,
Sermon. 1. Sect. 1. Or coming into the world is meant of humane birth, in the
same sense in which it is said, that a man is born into the world, Joh. 16 21.
which I conceive meant by Christ's going forth from the Father, and coming into
the world, Joh. 16. 28. And his coming into the world, Heb. 10. 5. Grotius it
is true, annot. on Joh. 1. 9. argues from the distinction of being born and
coming into the world, Joh. 18. 37. that the coming into the world, is still by
showing himself to the world: But that is not cogent, since the same thing may
be meant by two expressions. But however it be meant, when it is said of
Christ, that he came into the world, yet here, where it is said of man coming
into the world, must be meant of humane birth, which seems most probable for
the reasons given before, and accordingly, this point is thence deducible, That
every that comes into the world, needs light from Christ. Which position is
true, 1. Because every man is born destitute of spiritual light in the things
of God, concerning his duty and the way of salvation. 2. Because every man is
liable to death and trouble, and wrath, and evil from God, as he is born into
the world: and Christ came a light into the world, to remove both these sorts
of darkness, and none else can do it. The former of these is to be the more
fully confimred, because it overthrows the main position of the Quakers, that
every man has a light within him sufficient to guide him, so as that following
it, he may please God, and be saved without the light of Scripture, or
preaching of public Teachers. And it also confirms the Doctrine of Original
corruption, and particular effectual converting grace, against universal
sufficient grace, and power of freewill, in the state man is in before
conversion, which Papists. Arminians, Socinians, Freewillers maintain, and the
perfection and merit which after conversion Papists and Quakers do assert.

Sect. 2. Universal corruption at birth, is proved from Joh 3. 6.
I shall begin with the words of Christ, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. To understand
the force of the argument from hence, it is to be considered, that Christ uses
these words in his conference with Nicodemus, as a reason of the necessity of
new birth by water and the Spirit, that a person may enter into the Kingdom of
God. The Kingdom of God meant Joh. 3. 3, 5. is to be understood of the Kingdom
of glory, or that state of everlasting happiness, which none but those that
are clean, sincere and really holy, shall ever be admitted to: in which sense
it is taken, when conversion, obedience, humility, and such like qualifications
are prerequired to it, and it annexed to them, as Mat. 5. 3, 10, 20. and 7. 21.
and 8. 11. and 18. 3. and 19. 14, 23, 24. and 21. 31. Mark. 9. 47. and 10. 14,
15, 23, 24, 25. Luke 6. 20. and 13. 28, 29. and 18. 16, 17, 24, 25. Act. 14.
22. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and 15. 50. Gal. 5. 21. 2 These. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 4. 18. James
2. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 11. The visible Church does admit into it many that are proud,
and impure in heart, and therefore the qualifications of holiness and purity
here prerequired are not necessary for entrance into it. Whence it follows,
that the new birth prerequired as necessary, Joh. 5. 3, 5. is of the inward
man, to that real holiness which is opposite to uncleanness or unholinesse
which was in the first birth; and consequently, when it is said, That which is
born of the flesh, is flesh, must be thus expounded, impure and sinful, or
vicious, according to that sense which the term has, Gal. 5. 16, 17, 19, 24.
which is confirmed by the opposition in the other part of the verse, That which
is born of the Spirit, is Spirit: For as to be Spirit, is meant of true and
real holiness, which is the genuine fruit and effect of being born of the
Spirit; so the being flesh which is the consequent of being born of the flesh,
that is by humane generation, Joh. 1. 13. must be meant of sinful and impure
corruption. They that expound it only of doing the actions of natural life
without sin, or of mere weakness without sinfulness, such as was in Eve before
she sinned, reach not to the scope and force of Christ's reason; for in respect
of these there is no necessity of new birth, for entrance into the kingdom of
God. A person may do the actions of a natural life, and be weak without sin,
and yet not for that reason excluded out of the kingdom of God. A person may
be spirit, and yet flesh in that sense, that is weak, and do the actions of a
natural life; whereas here he that is flesh, is opposed to him that is spirit,
and therefore natural life or Infirmity without sin is not all that is meant by
flesh; there is pravity and impurity of mind expressed by flesh, as well as
naturality or infirmity. It is true by flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 15. 50. which
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, is meant a humane body in its weakness and
imperfection. But thus in this life, they that are born of the Spirit are
flesh, whereas Christ says, he that is now born of the Spirit is Spirit; and
the new birth which makes us no longer flesh and blood in that sense, is not
the birth of water and of the Spirit mentioned, Joh. 3. 5. but the power of
God, by which he will raise us up, 1 Cor. 6. 14. the birth of water and of the
Spirit, Ioh. 3. 3. 5, 6. is here in this life, the other is not till the
resurrection: therefore the same is not meant by flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 15.
50. And flesh, Ioh 3. 6. but in the one place that weakness is meant which is
removed by the power of God, and the voice of Christ at his coming to
judgment; the other that sinful blindeness, ignorance, concupiscence, which
is consequent on humane generation, and is removed by the preaching of the
Gospel made effectual by the Spirit of God: Whence I argue, If that which is
born of the flesh by humane generation, be flesh that is corrupt, ignorant,
depraved with proneness to error and evil concupiscence, so as that it must be
born again of water and the Spirit, before it can enter into the kingdom of
God; then every man that comes into the world by mere hnmane generation, is
void of light to guide him in his way to God and to salvation, until Christ
enlighten him: But the antecedent is true, as has been showed by opening the
Text, Joh. 3. 6. therefore also the consequent.

Sect. 3. Vacuity of light without Christ enligtening, is proved from Romans 8.
7, 8. Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 23. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Mar. 7. 21. Iam. 1. 14.
The same thing is further proved from the words of Paul, Romans 8. 7, 8. Because
the carnal mind, or minding of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the
flesh cannot please God. In which speech the Apostle assigns the reason, why
the minding of the flesh is death: Now by flesh is to be understood the sinful
pravity that is in man, for neither mere natural weakness, such as was in Adam
and Eve before they sinned, nor the doing of natural actions without sin, nor
the minding of these are enmity against God or death, or impossible to be
subject to Gods Law: But the minding of the innate pravity, whose works are set
down, Gal. 5. 19. Now such are all that are not in the Spirit, ver. 9. and that
by birth, Joh. 3. 6. Therefore all that come into the world are flesh, and till
they be in the Spirit, are void of that light which might bring them in
subjection to the Law of God, and so need Christ's enlightening. The same may be
further confirmed from the allegation of the Apostle, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12.
where to prove that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, it is alleged
out of Psalms the 14. and 53. that it is written, there is none righteous, no
not one, there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after
God; they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one; which cannot be true if understood
without limitation, since then the Scriptures should be false, that say that
Noah was a righteous man and walked with God, Abraham was one that God himself
testified of to have feared him, Abel obtained testimony that he was righteous,
God testifying of his gifts, Heb. 11. 4. Of David God said, I have found David
the son of Jesse a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will,
Act. 13. 22. Therefore it must be understood of all before they are enlightened
and converted, and so proves that all without exception are void of saving
light, till Christ do enlighten them, and being universal, is to be conceived
to be from their humane generation. If any say, that many of the things there
said, as that with their tongues they have used deceit, their mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness, ver. 13, 14, etc. cannot be said of Infants; it is
granted in respect of the actual practice, yet in respect of their disposition,
inclination, and aptitude to commit them, they may; which is further urged from
ver. 23. where he concludes, that all have sinned, and are come short of the
glory of God. Hereto I shall adjoyn the speech of Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 14. where he
says, that the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. In which speech he expressly makes natural men not only
nonintelligent of the things of God, before they have the Spirit of God, by whom
Christ enlighteneth; but also incapable of knowing them, because they are
discerned spiritually, that is by the Spirit. All the difficulty is, who is
meant by the natural man. There are that understand by it, not every man that
is unregenerate, but the most sensual, and such as are guided by their senses
altogether: But the Text opposes the natural man to the spiritual, and makes
all the inability to be from the defect of the Spirit of God; and therefore
understands the most rational man by [the natural man] if he want the Spirit of
God. Nor is the conceit of him, that by [natural man] understands the weak
Christian, and by spiritual the strong Christian, opposed to babes in Christ, 1
Cor. 3. 1. right. For though the Apostle says, he could not speak unto them as
spiritual, but as to carnal, to babes in Christ; yet does he neither make babes
in Christ an equipollent term to carnal, as all one with it, or deny babes in
Christ to be spiritual: But as the Apostle says, Romans 7. 14. be was carnal,
though he were a strong man in Christ, because he was in part carnal, his flesh
did sometimes draw him to fin against his will; so babes in Christ may be
spiritual, and yet carnal in part, by reason whereof he could not speak to them
under the fin of contentions, as to spiritual persons, but as to carnal. But
that the term (...) notes a natural man, or one that has no more then his own
soul to guide him, is besides the reasons in the Text, made more probable by
Jam. 3. 15. where to the wisdom from above, is opposed that from the earth,
from the soul, from the Devil, Jude 19. Soalary men are described, such as have
not the Spirit; in neither place is the word fitly rendered sensual. But were
it yielded, that 1 Cor. 2. 14. the word translated [natural man] signify a
weak Christian; sure it follows, if a weak Christian cannot know the things of
the Spirit of God without Christ's enlightening, much less a man not so much as
a babe in Christ: Yea the Apostle faith, 2 Cor. 3. 5. he was not sufficient of
himself, to think any thing as of himself.

But besides these Texts, when our Savior Mar. 7. 21. makes evil reasonings,
thoughts, and folly, to come from within out of the heart of man, he surely
makes men's hearts void of light, till they be enlightened with his light: And
when James, Chap. 1. 14, 15. makes every man's sin the issue of his own lust, as
every good gift from the Father of lights, who of his own will begets us again
with the word of truth, Jam. 1. 17, 18. he intimates there is not light in us to
avoid sin, till the Father of lights begets us again with the word of truth.

Sect. 4. Vacuity of light without Christ enlightening, is proved from Genesis 6.
5. and 8. 21. Job 14. 4. and 15. 14. and 25. 4, 5, 6. and 11, 12. Psalm. 51. 5.
Jer. 10. 14. and 17. 9. and experience.
To these Texts in the new Testament, I shall add more out of the old: As
first the words, Genesis 6. 5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, and that every imagination, or the whole imagination or frame of the
thoughts of his heart, was only evil continually, or every day, which speech is
with little alteration repeated, Genesis 8. 21. the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth; which speech is not a censure only of the Giants that
werein the old world, but of all men, even from the youth of man, without any
exception of any, and therefore is from their generation. Nor is it to be
conceived to be an excess of speech, expressing more then was true; for Genesis 6.
5. it is given as a reason of the great wickedness of man, and Gods intended
severe punishment, and set down as the object of Gods view on his inquisition;
in the later to set out the greatness of his patience, by the greatness of man's
sinfulness, to which ends those speeches had been impertinent, if they were
understood as expressing more then was true. For then they had not expressed a
true inquisition, or a just reason of a severe judgment, which is always to
be expressed as befits a Judge, whose judgment is according to naked truth,
Romans 2. 2. not with Rhetorical amplifications after the manner of Orators, or
a right reason of Gods patience, if the provocation were not as great as the
words intimate. Now this being supposed true, we may hence argue thus. If every
imagination, or the whole imagination or frame of the thoughts of man's heart,
be only evil continually, or every day from his youth or childehood, then every
man till he be enlightened by Christ, wants light to guide him in the knowledge
of his duty, and the way of salvation, for if the thoughts be not right, the
actions are not right, nor the light sufficient, if men stumble and fall, it is
an argument they want light; but such is the imagination of man's heart, as the
Texts do express: Therefore every man that comes into the world, wants light
to rectify his thoughts about the things of God. And that this pravity of men's
imaginations, is an hereditary and not merely voluntary, or an acquired disease
by use, custom, or imitation, the speech of Job does intimate, Job 14. 4.
where to deprecate Gods bringing him into judgment with him, in a bemoaning
plight he thus speaks, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one: Wherein Job expresses, that it is no marvel that all men's lives are so
short and so full of trouble, because all being unclean naturally, none by
natural generation can beget a clean child. And if all are unclean morally as
they come into the world, then all are void of light (for that is a chief part
of moral uncleanness) till Christ enlighten them.

The same is confirmed by other passages in the Book of Job, as Chap. 15. 14.
What is man that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he
should be righteous? Job 25. 4, 5, 6. How can he be clean that is born of a
woman? Job 11. 12. Vain man would be wise; though man be born like a wild Asses
colt: Which speeches do plainly assert man's uncleanness, and unrighteousness,
and ignorance, as he is born into the world by natural generation.

To which may be adjoined that speech of David concerning himself, Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me; which is
not likely to be meant of any special sin of his mother, of whom no such thing
is related; nor is it likely that he would mention it to her reproach, nor
would it be pertinent to his confession of his own sin, nor is likely to be an
Hyperbole, or excess of speech, as Psalm. 58. 3. Joh. 9. 34. For those
Hyperbolical expressions are descriptions of a man notoriously and openly
ungodly in the course of his life; whereas David however he sinned in the
matter of Urijah, yet in respect of the constant course of his life, was a man
after Gods own heart, and therefore it seems to me to note his original
corruption by natural conception, as the cause of his great enormity in the
matter of Urijah, and to aggravate his sin as springing from himself: Now of
such corruption, want of light to guide us in our way to happiness, is a chief
part.

That which the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, Jer. 10. 14. Every man is brutish in
his knowledge, and Jer. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, or incurably sick, who can know it? do express such a
destitution of light, truth, and rectitude, as show that the heart of man is
very evil: Which being spoken of men universally as they are unchanged, can be
well imputed to no other reason or cause, then the derivation of sinful
corruption to all mankind, by natural generation.

To all which allegations from Scripture, experience adds abundant
confirmation, since the ignorance, unteachableness, frowardness, untractableness
of persons, especially in duties of Religion, and the worship of God, until by
Catechizing, Preaching, Discipline, Government, and other means, whereby the
wildeness of men's spirits is tamed, they be brought to some sense and
conformity to their duty: And even then when by such means the hearts and
lives of men are somewhat fashioned, yet upon every new provocation of fear or
hope, they quickly draw back from any good course, and embrace any error,
unless by the Ministry of the word, help of Government, and work of Gods
Spirit, they be strengthened, do fully show that of themselves persons want
light to guide them, and power to uphold themselves in any thing that is good;
but on the contrary are prone to receive impressions, and to hatch devices of
sin and error, till Christ do enlighten them.

Sect. 5. Every man needs enlightening by Christ, by reason of the many evils
consequent on sin.
As for the second reason of man's needing light from Christ, by reason of the
evils consequent on our natural darkness, which are not to be removed but by
Christ's enlightening; it is in like manner manifest by Scripture and experience.

For 1. It is plain from Scripture, that by one man sin entered into the world,
and so death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that, or in whom all
have sinned, Romans 5. 12. By the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, ver. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 22. In Adam all die. Now it is by Christ, who
enlighteneth men's eyes, that this death and condemnation are removed, and by no
other means. In Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. Even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, Romans 5. 18.

2. Besides death and condemnation, all mankind are liable to innumerable
evils, to lighten the burden of which, the enlightening of Christ is very
necessary; for that alone can give support and comfort to the soul in the
bearing of them. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Job 5. 7.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble, Job 14. 1.
Sufficient unto the day, says our Lord Christ, is the evil thereof, Mat. 6. 34.

1. Man of all creatures is born most obnoxious to harm; he is born naked and
weak, unable to make provision for his own sustenance: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb says Job, Chap. 1. 21. We brought nothing into this world, 1 Timothy
6. 7. The greatest Prince is born as naked as the meanest Peasant, and all come
crying into it, as bewailing their entrance into the world. Though the Parents
rejoice that a child is born into the world, yet the child does not so. Other
creatures can quickly help themselves: Many years pass over a childs head ere
he can beg bread, much less earn it. He wants a great while both feet to seek
it, and tongue to ask it, and hands to take it, and teeth to eat it.

2. To obtain it much care and labor is necessary: It is the doom awarded to
Adam, Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou
return to the ground. There is much pains, and cost, and care, and hazard in
all employments, whereby a livelihood is obtained; but in none more then in
tillage and husbandry, whereby the provision of bread the staff of man's being
is procured; and after all the industry, and skill, and charge, that is used,
the ground is cursed for man's sake, thorns and thistles it brings forth to
man, Genesis 3. 17, 18. Sometimes the seven lean kine devour the seven fat ones;
the years of scarcity exceed the years of plenty, so as that there is no bread
to be had, nor seed to so we the ground.

3. Besides, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 39. 6. Surely every man walks in a
vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, he heapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them. That which a man has labored for and
gotten together, often times he has no use of it: Sometimes it perishes of it
self, sometimes it is stolen or plundered from him: He that is as rich as Job
was one day, is as poor as he was the next day: Sometimes a man so idolizeth
his wealth, that he has not a heart to use it, but only to look on it, and to
talk of it: Sometimes sickness, or death seizes on him, and then as it was
with the vain man, Luke 12. 20. his soul is taken from him, his projects fail,
his goods are as uncertain owners; which caused Solomon to say, Eccl. 2. 18.
Yea I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun, because I should
leave it unto the man that shall be after me, and who knows whether he shall
be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labor wherein I
have labored, and showed my self wise under the Sun: This is also vanity.
Whence he infers, Ver. 22. For what has man of all his labor, and of the
vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? For all his
days are sorrows, and his travail grief, yea his heart takes not rest in the
night: This is also vanity.

4. There is much more evil consequent on that darkness, or sin which is
entered into the world, by reason of the frequent annoyances, persecutions, and
temptations which are caused by the enmity of the world, and the acting of our
adversary the Devil, who continually goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour. By which it is that all people are full of troubles, civil
and foreign wars, which waste people, and their wealth; private quarrels,
which undo many to was and houses; Law-suites, and factions, and ^^iulations,
and discords, which ruin many persons and families; brawls and jarres, and
contentions, which overthrow many houses, and cause perpetual vexation. Many
secret murders, adulteries, perjuries, idolatries, and other evils, are caused
by the Prince of darkness, which verify that censure of Solomon, Ecol. 1. 14.
I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, and behold, all is
vanity and vexation of spirit.

5. Beyond these, from the darkness of our own hearts, there do arise so many
perturbations of mind, fears, jealousies, dotages, vain hopes, ambitious
desires, foolish imaginations, inordinate anger, impatience and discontent,
sometimes by provocations, sometimes causlesse, upon tales, surmises, mistakes,
dreams, sancies, impostures, contingencies, and otherwise, as make the mind of
man like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 57. 20.

6. But most of all the conscience of sin, and the sense of Gods wrath, and
the fear of death and judgment to come, over whelm the spirit of man with
horror, make Felix tremble, Cain turn Vagabond, Saul grow desperate, and
betake himself to one that had a familiar spirit, Judas become his own
executioner. In a word, make many through fear of death* all their lifetime
subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. This being of all other the greatest torture of
the soul, when God hides his face from a person, which made Job express
himself in this lamenting ditty, Job 13. 24, 25, 26. Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and hold me for thine enemy? Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro?
And will thou pursue the dry stubble? For thou writest bitter things against
me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. For as Solomon says
truly, Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a
wounded spirit who can bear8

All these things, and innumerable other evils, experience shows to infest the
life of man, against which the only remedy is well advised reason, composedness
of spirit, patience, says, hope in God, which must be communicated from
Christ, who enlightens all with natural or supernatural light; of which I am
next to speak.

Sect. 6. Application to make us sensible of sins evil, and the worlds vanity,
and to provoke us to seek a tredsure above, and light from Christ to comfort us.
In the mean time by that which has been said, 1. It is necessary for our
good, that we should be sensible of these two things.

1. That sin is an imbittering thing, that takes away the relish and pleasure
of all the goods we have under the Sun, and of our very lives themselves. Agag
thought, if he had escaped death, then bitterness had been overpassed, and
therefore he came to Samuel delicately, 1 Samuel 15. 32. But experience showed,
that there is often more bitterness in life then in death. Nor is it likely to
be otherwise as long as sin remains, for that is a root of bitterness, Heb. 12.
15. a root that bears gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. While there is sin in
our eating and drinking, there will be bitterness in our meats and drinks:
While there is sin in our nuptials, there will be bitterness in our marriage
society. All states and conditions here, will have their frets, their gnawing
worms, and eating mothes. When God corrects man with rebukes for iniquity, he
makes his beauty to consume away like a moth: Surely every man is vanity, Psalm.
39. 11.

2. That we have little cause to glory in our birth. It is the property of many
to boast of their birth, it is the manner of all Parents to rejoice at their
childrens birth. But the sense of sin should take away our glorying in our
selves, the sight of our black feet, should abate our high conceits of our
white feathers, and the sense of trouble should allay the excess of our joy in
posterity, and rather provoke us to imitate them that wept at births, and sang
for joy at burials. Were it not that God makes women forget their travel, they
would breed no more and were it not that God hides from the eyes of men the
evils that accompany life, they would choose strangling rather then life, and
were it not for the consolations of Christ, the burdens especially of the godly
would be unsupportable, especially when they complain with Paul, Romans 7. 24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Earth
is but a real dungeon, though to some it is an imaginary Heaven.

2. It is necessary, 1. That we seek our good in other enjoyments then this
world. Who would make his bed upon thorns? Who would choose his dwelling on
the mast of a ship, where winds, and storms, and perpetual tossings take away
all rest? Surely our best enjoyments our best habitation here are no better. We
project many things, and promise much to our selves in Wealth, Wife, Children,
Friends, Houses, Preserments, and other things, but upon a just account we find
all but ciphers, which make no sum. How often does Solomon tell us, when he
had cast up his reckonings, that vanity of vanities, all is vanity, Eccl. 12.
8. And why should we set our eyes then on that which is not? Prove. 23. 5.
Surely the true light holds sorth better counsel, Luke 12. 33. Provide your
selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not,
where no chief approaches, nor m^th corrupts, a treasure of Gospel grace,
the new Covenant, the heavenly Promises, the Communion of Christ, the
fellowship of the Spirit, and the life of Faith, and these will never deceive
our expectations. It were a good wish, if righly minded by the users, God send
us the light of Heaven.

2. Let us prize the light of Christ, and make use of it to prevent, lessen,
hear, deliver us out of all the present evils. Paul had learned to do so, Phil.
3. 12, 13. I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where, and
in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungery, both to
abound and to suffer need, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me. It is indeed the inlightening of Christ which clears up all
to us, in the most stormy and cloudy day; it will make us look abroad, and
travel with strength in our journey, and run the race which is set before us,
and after Paul's sad complaint, take up with his conclusion, I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7. 25. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is
thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law.
But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.

Every man has Light from Christ sufficient to make him inexcusable.
SERMON. V.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. A Natural Light from Christ is yielded to be in every man, and the
Opinions of Freewillers of its sufficiency are set down.
LIghting every man that comes into the world, is meant either of such light
which is by Christ as Creator, termed natural, and this is conferred upon all
men without exception of any person; or of such light as is by Christ as
Mediator, and this is conferred, though not on every single person, yet on all
sorts and Nations of men, and it is termed supernatural. Concerning the former
sort of light, it is yielded that there is natural light from Christ given to
every man who comes into the world by humane birth. 'This light is the light of
reason and knowledge agreeable to humane nature, which if it were not conferred
on every man, he should not be rational, but should be degraded into the rank
of beasts. It is true which the Psalmist says, Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is in
honor and understands not, is like the beasts that perish. But this only
shows, that man by extinguishing his light does brutifie himself, not that he
was without all natural light in his originnl. All experience shows, that each
person, even the most natural fool, has some light of reason, by which he can
apprehend some things pertaining to humane being, and some way express his
mind, though in respect of civil or moral, or religious affairs, he be
unteachable. All the difficulty is, how far it extends in all, or may be
improved by them that use it best. In this matter there have been various
opinions. The Pelagians of old, are said to have held, that each person had so
much ability by his own free will, and by his natural light, as that he might
love God, and keep the Law, and resist temptations; though after by Councils,
and the writings of adversaries, they were driven to yield a necessity of
teaching and outward proposition of divine truths to men to that end. Some of
the Schoolmen, and later Papists do hold, that each man has so much light and
power in him, that if he do what he can, God is ready or bound to give him
grace necessary to salvation. And this way go Arminians, and other assertors of
the power of free will in them that never heard of the Gospel of Christ
preached to them; conformably whereto, in the Pagans debt and Dowry, p. 20. it
is said, that by a faithful and careful use of those natural abilities, that
light of reason, conscience and understanding, which every person of mankind
under heaven receives from God, he may and shall receive from him yet further,
that which shall be of saving import and consequence to him. Not much short of
these is that French divine of much note, who maintains universal grace
objective, though not subjective, that is, though there be not such an
universal working by illumination, or other operation of the Spirit of God, so
sufficient or effectual as to beget says in every one, yet there is so much
revealed to every man, even those that have not heard of Christ, as might, if
they would apprehend it, beget faith in God to salvation.

Sect. 2. The Opinion of the Quakers concerning a Light within each man, is
inquired into.
Out of the Principles of these men, whether instilled by Popish Emissaries,
which have crept into the English Armies and Churches, or some other way, that
sort of people, who now go under the name of Quakers, from their usual quaking
before they began to speak, thereby deluding the people, as if they waited for
a Revelation from God, though most of their speeches of all of them, have been
their usual invectives against Preachers, and pressing men to follow the light
within them; these people, I say, have drawn their tenet of an universal light
in every man that comes into the world, without Bibles, Preachers,
Church Communion, Christian Ordinances, to know his duty so as that he may be
perfect: which is indeed the reviving of old Pelagianism, or worse, and tends
to the making of Christian Religion, if not all Religion whatsoever,
unnecessary. Those who heretofore or at this day maintain this universal
sufficient light, besides these Quakers, are many of them subtle disputants,
and do set down their opinion distinctly, and argue for it acutely, though they
decline the express owning of Pelagius his grosser expressions, and Puccius
his natural faith, and Hurberus his universal election. But the Quakers, as
they are for the most part destitute of that art of reasoning, so they decline
all conference, in which they may be pressed to state the point in difference
distinctly, and to deliver their proofs, and answer objections: but instead
thereof by clamor and reproaches, which please their silly followers, they
reject all motions tending to a fair debate of the point in controversy. Being
desirous to know what they held, one of them brought to me James Nailors Book
termed A salutation to the seed of God, and Love to the Lost: which being in
many passages obscure, I delivered to him that brought me the Book, fifty five
Queries to be answered by them, yea, or no, as the person had required of me to
answer his Queries. The Answer, though made by one, formerly known to me, as a
person of some ingenuity and learning, yet was framed otherwise then I
required, declining to answer affirmatively or negatively to the Question, as
by me propounded, but shifting off a plain Answer, and instead thereof, venting
personal invectives. Yet to my third Question, which was thus, Do you believe,
that those men, who were never taught the Doctrine of the Law, or of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, have commonly a light within each of them, which may guide
them to the true knowledge of God, and his ways, unto everlasting life?
Omitting his words of obloquy, thus he answered; The Law is spiritual, and
there is no Nation or people into which the sound of it has not come; and the
Gentiles which had not the letter, were a law to themselves, showing the effect
of the Law written in their hearts. And Christ is the true light which lights
every man that comes into the world with a spiritual light, the one loves this
light and brings his deeds to it, and by this light is led from his evil deeds
into the knowledge of God, who is life eternal in Christ to know; the other
hates the light because his deeds are evil, and loves darkness rather then
light, and there is his condemnation. And their sound who were Ministers of
this truth went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world,
Romans 10. 18. In which Answer there is not an express resolution of the
Question, but sundry shifts to avoid a plain Answer, as 1. Whereas he asserts
that the Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14. which is the Law of the ten
Commandments, or the last Precept of the ten; and the Apostle ver. 9. says, I
was alive without the Law once, which intimates that he was once without the
Law; that is, without the right knowledge and understanding of it. And Romans 2.
14. the Gentiles (of whom my Question was) are said twice not to have the Law;
yet this Answerer asserts, There is no Nation or people into which the sound of
it has not come: and to avoid the objection arising from the words, uses this
expression, And the Gentiles which had not the letter, whereas the words are
express, they having not the Law. 2. He patcheth together different
Scriptures, Joh. 1. 9. Joh. 3. 19, 20. as if the light communicated by Christ
coming into the world, were the same with that, with which in his sense he
lights every man that comes into the world; not heeding, that, if every man
that comes into the world had a light sufficient to guide him, and that even
the Gentiles (of whom Paul says, Gal. 4. 8. that they knew not God) had a
spiritual light, and that thereby some were led from their evil deeds, into the
knowledge of God, who is life eternal in Christ to know, then none were in
darkness, contrary to Paul, Ephesians. 5. 8. none were without Christ, or without
God in the world, contrary to Paul, Ephesians. 2. 12. then Christ need not come
into the world to inlighten men, nor sond Ministers of this truth into all the
earth, since they had this light before. Christ was come into the world to
inlighten them with spiritual light, and if Christ does inlighten with this
spiritual light every one that comes into the world, there are none but come
to the light, they having it within them, and it does reprove their deeds
whether they will or no. But it is no marvel, that men that boast so much of
light within them, show so much darkness of mind in their expressions, it
being true of them, as Christ said of the Pharisees, Joh. 9. 41. Because ye
say, We see, therefore your sin, or blindness, remains. However it may be
hence gathered, that this is their conceit, That every man that comes into the
world, even the Gentiles that had not the letter, (by which he means the holy
Scriptures or Bible) or any Preacher or Teacher to instruct them out of it, yet
had from Christ a spiritual light, and that one loves this light, and brings
his deeds to it, and by this light is led from his evil deeds into the
knowledge of God, who is life eternal in Christ to know, the other hates the
light, because his deeds are evil, and loves darkness rather then light, and
there is his condemnation. Whence it plainly appears, that those two points of
Pelagianism, Popery, Arminianism, Socinianism, and the Frecwill way, are their
Opinions, that every one has a light within him, or there is such revelation
imparted to every man in the world, that if he would use it, he might come to
saving knowledge, and that it is left to every man by his own freewill to
difference himself from others. This universal light is so magnified by George
Fox in his Catechism, that he tells us, that it shows all the ungodly ways that
ever a man has acted in, and hard speeches; with that light a person will come
to see Christ the Savior of his soul, from whence the light comes to save him
from sin; that it brings him to Christ, and to confess him; that it gives the
knowledge of the God of the world that rules in them that are disobedient to
this light; that it gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, the true knowledge of the Scriptures, which light being one in
them all, and they come to the light, and loving the light, they all come into
fellowship one with another, and being out of this, they are in jarres and
confusions, that it lets see sin and transgression, which has separated from
God, and the Mediator between God and him, and might have peace with him, and
that he might see Gods Covenant of light, and know his reconciler with which he
is reconciled to God, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 18. and to see the Kingdom of
Heaven, that it brings them to love God above all, and to fulfill the Law, to
know their election, their bodies to be the temples of the Holy Ghost; that
they must scoff, reproach, backbite none, nor have malice to any, but to be
meek and humble; with it they come to see the hope of glory, to sanctify the
Lord in their hearts, that it keeps from error, guile, all distraction and
distemper, drunken thoughts, imaginations, conceivings, and his own reasonings.
In a word, they ascribe all to it that we ascribe to the Gospel; yea it is
termed the Gospel, the first principle of pure religion, they that profess to
believe the Scriptures, in God, in Christ, yet not believing in this light they
deny Christ; that neither the Jews nor Christians do believe in the light which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, though they profess some
of Christ's and the Apostles words, that none can confess Christ but who
confess the light which every man is enlightened withal, that they who do not
teach this are teachers of the world, Antichrists, Deceivers, that the letter
(meaning the Scripture) is not the light, nor the word. He denies them to be
Christians that cry up Erras Pulpit, and the Priesthood and the Temple, and the
Jews Sabbath, and the Ordinances of the first Covenant, and that take tithes.
More to the same purpose is delivered by George Fox, Hubberthorn, and many
more, insomuch that Farnworth in his discovery p. 12. says, Loving the light,
it will guide you to God from all men, that you need never look at man more.
Which is indeed their aim, that they may draw off people from Scriptures,
Preachers, Church Fellowship, Ordinances, pay no dues to Ministers, nor submit
to any Church Discipline, which is that which they call liberty of conscience;
not considering, that if their hearers may be guided by their own light to God,
that they need not look at man more, they need not look at themselves, nor meet
to hear them, nor entertain them to teach them; yea, that by their reasoning,
the Quakers themselves show they do not believe in the light, that they deny
Christ, while they look at Fox, Parker, Goodier, and such Teachers, and
maintain them: and that the divisions between Fox and Naylor, and others, show
that their light within them is not one, but that they are out of the light.
However they assert, 1. That there is a light in every man. 2. That this is
sufficient to guide them to God of it self. 3. That it is a rule to show duty
and sin. 4. That there is no need of other teaching of man. 5. That this is one
in all. 6. That it is the Gospel. Now because this is the main prop of the new
Antichristian Religion, or frenzy of the Quakers, and leads them into the
pernicions courses they take; I shall show, 1. What is to be ascribed to the
light that is in each man, whether from the birth, or after imparted to them,
in this business of guiding us to God. 2. That neither is it of it self a safe
rule for us to follow, in things moral or spiritual; nor by any engagement is
God tied, or has declared himself resolved, to give supernatural light to him
that uses this universal light well. 3. How the Objections may be answered. 4.
In what manner Christ imparts supernatural spiritual light to every man.

Sect. 3.
Some light is in the most barbarous, yet the knowledge of the most refined
Gentiles, may be conceived to come from some acquaintance with the written Law,
or tradition from Adam.

To clear the first of these proposals, it is to be premised, 1. That God has
imprinted in all, even the most barbarous people, some relic of light; though
in some of them it is so small, that it can hardly be perceived whether there
be any sense of sin or wrath of duty or reward, of God or Devil, heaven or
hell. Sure such people as are men eaters, do all at the beck of their witches,
do seem to have scarce any sense of sin or duty; yet because there is some fear
of an unseen power and his wrath, they may be said to have some conscience,
though the writing therein be almost defaced. 2. That some people that never
had the Gospel nor the Law made known to them, as the Jews and Christians have
had; yet have attained to so much knowledge and practice of moral duties, that
in some acts of righteousness, temperance, chastity, fidelity, and such virtues
they have equalled, at least in respect of their outward demeanor toward men,
if not exceeded not only Jews, but also most Christians. 3. And in the
knowledge of God, though therein they were most defective, yet they attained to
so much knowledge and right apprehension of him, as enabled them to correct the
vulgar errors concerning God, although they were very blind about the distinct
notion of the true God and his counsels. 4. Nevertheless that it can hardly be
avouched, that that knowledge in Morality and Divinity which they attained to,
was by mere light of nature, or by their own study and invention; but it may
with very probable reason be conceived, that they had much of their knowledge
of these things by tradition from Adam, and acquaintance with the Hebrew
people, and their written laws or unwritten traditions. Sure there are so many
footsteps of their rites in their customs, of their writings in their Poets,
and Historians and Philosophers works: There are such relations of their
Philosophers travail into Egypt; besides this, that the most understanding
people were such as did trade with Phenicians and Egyptians, next neighbors
to Israel; as may give us cause to think that the cream of that knowledge they
had, was not from a light within them (for then why should not other people as
well as they have attained to it) but from a light without them, darted
directly on Israel, but from them yielding some strictures of light, and
glimpses to the Greeks, Italians, and other people.

Sect. 4. The light without the written word which was in the Gentiles, in the
utmost extent of it was imperfect
However what the Scripture makes deducible from other means then the
Scripture, or it or experience proved, that the most barbarous people attained
to, we may safely ascribe to this natural light. Of these things, 1. It is
certain the being of God, his eternal power and Godhead might be, and was known
by the things which God created, as the Apostle, Romans 1. 19, 20. Because that
which may be known of God, is manifest in or to them, for God has showed it
unto them: For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, Psalm. 19. 1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handywork.

2. Gods providence ordering and disposing all the motions of the creatures
with incomprehensible wisdom, for the benefit of the universe, might be
discerned from the admirable, and useful, and constant order, motion, influx,
properties and operations, the creatures have. Psalm. 19. 2, 3, 4. Day unto day,
utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge: There is no speech nor
language where their voice is not heard: Their line is gone out through all the
earth and their words to the end of the world. Act. 14. 16, 17. Who in times
past suffered all nations to walk in their own way; nevertheless he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. From Gods
creating and providing for man, not only the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 6, etc.
Psalm. 104. and elsewhere, but even Philosophers among the Gentiles have taken
occasion to magnify the divine wisdom, power, and goodness: And yet the most
witty people knew not distinctly who this God was, but did ignorantly worship
him under this title of the unknown God, as Paul says of the Athenians, Act.
17. 23.

3. They did or might know that God was invisible, Romans 1. 20. That he was a
Spirit. Aristolle terms him (...), an intelligence or mind; Deus est animus,
said the Latin Poet: That he knew and judged thoughts, and discerned the most
hidden things was known by them, as their accusing or excusing themselves by
their own consciences between themselves, apart from others showed, Romans 2. 15.
And yet when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened; professing themselves
wise they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an
image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and to four footed beasts,
and creeping things, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.

4. They did or might know that God was to be worshipped. Aristotle in his
Topics says, To dispute whether God and parents deserve honor, deserves
punishment. All nations says Tully, l. 1. Tusc. quaest. acknowledge a Deity
and divine worship, and yet they understood not that God that made the world,
and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells
not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as
though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all things life, and breath,
and all things, Acts 17. 24, 25.

5. They knew that God was to be pacified by prayer, and sacrifice, and vows,
and obedient minds, and repentance, and executing of judgment, as may be
discerned by their carriage, Jonah 1. and 3. Chapters; yet knew not any thing
of the great sacrifice which God had prepared to take away sin for ever, and
they often applied themselves to pacify the Devil even by humane sacrifice,
instead of seeking peace from the true God.

6. They did or might know the low condition of man in comparison of God, as
the Psalmist says of himself, Psalm. 8. 3, 4. When I consider the heavens the
work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have ordained; what is
man that thou art mindefuil of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him?
And infer the absolute sovereignty of God, as the Apostle does, Romans 9. 20.
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
And as he does conclude, Romans 11. 6. For of him, and through him, and for him,
are all things, to whom be glory for ever. And yet men have complained of their
hard destiny, and imagined God a debtour to them, and that God should fulfill
their pleasures, as well as they do his will; and self-exalring under the name
of magnanimity, was by Aristotle made a virtue, vapouring, a man's excellency.

7. They might and should have known that parents are to be honored, wives to
be cherished, children to be nurtured, justice to be administered; yet many
thought they might neglect parents commands, to please their companions; and
deny them maintenance, to keep an undue and rash vow; and put away wives, for
light causes; and expose their children; and violate right, to gain preferment
and greatness.

8. The Apostle tells us, Romans 2. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not
the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the
law, are a law unto themselves, which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, or witnessing with them, and
their thoughts the mean while, or between themselves, accusing or excusing one
another; which proves that there was some sense of sin and duty in the most
barbarous people, and accordingly there was and is some kind of government and
administration of justice among them. Some sins as of murder, adultery,
robbery, perjury, breach of faith and trust, parricide, and some other sins
have been judged to be horrible evils, which they durst not commit. Abimelech
Genesis 20. 5. durst not use Sarah, when he knew she was Abraham's wife; and yet he
thought he should have been innocent, if she had been but his sister. Either by
instinct of nature, or by tradition from Adam, adultery was judged a horrible
crime, when simple fornication, sodomy, and other uncleanness, were reckoned as
no faults by the Gentiles, which knew not God, 1 These. 4. 5. Parricide was
counted such a sin as none durst commit; no law therefore was made against it
by Salon. Tully pleads for Sextus Roscius Amerinus, that he could not be guilty
of it, because he was sleeping at the time of his Fathers death, which the fury
of his conscience would not have permitted, if he had been guilty of parricide.
And yet self-murder to avoid tyrants rage, was applauded; theft if cunningly
acted, was allowed by Lycurgus; drunkenness, and whoredom, and murdering in
fence-playes and duels, either made religious services, or matter of glory.

9. They might and did by natural light know, that God did discover and avenge
secret murders, adulteries, perjuries, sacrilege, and other evils, that he
had (...), an avenging eye; and hence was there much fear of thunderclaps,
storms, earthquakes, plagues, and many means used to pacify the anger of the
Deity. Yet they were not sensible of the eternal judgment to come, though they
imagined punishments to be awarded to Malefactors after death. The Barbarians
of Melita, Act. 28. 4. when they saw the Viper hanging on Paul's hand, said
among themselves, No doubt, this man is a murderer, whom though he has
escaped the Sea, yet vengeance, (...), suffers not to live.

10. They might and did imagine, that God was a rewarder of good deeds; in
defense of their Country, in doing justice, and such like acts, and some
counted it their chief good to do virtuous acts: But they knew nothing of the
resurrection of the dead, and the life everlasting, prepared for them that
believed and obeyed the truth of the Gospel.

In these, and many more things, the Gentiles, which knew not God, had some
natural light, in some it was more clear then in others, in some so dusky and
dim, that it was scarce discernable: but in none such as that it could be a
constant universal Rule to direct them in what they were to do, or Warrant to
justify them in what they had done, or means to show them how to come to God,
and enjoy communion with him, and to save them from wrath to come.

Sect. 5. The Gentiles light by nature, served to restrain from sin, and to
leave men inexcusable.
Nevertheless this light, though insufficient to direct for justification and
salvation, yet was useful for two ends: 1. To restrain men from such excess
of sin, as would otherwise have destroyed humane society. It being the
contrivance of God to let men live together, though very evil, till their
iniquities be full, and when sins are ripe, then to put in the sickle, and cut
wicked men down, either by a particular or an universal judgment. In the mean
time, as he gave the Law to the Jews, because of transgressions, Gal. 3. 19.
either to restrain them, or to abate punishments, till the seed came to whom
the Promise was made, that there might be a people among whom the Messiah
should appear: so to other people he gave a Law in themselves, to prevent the
extirpation of the Nations, by bridling men's lusts through conscience of sin,
and fear of punishment, till the time should come of their calling into the
Church.

2. Besides this end God has another, in respect of himself, that they might
be inexsusable who sinned against the light in them, and God might be justified
in his sentence and judgment upon them. Therefore it is said, Romans 1. 20. That
the eternal power and Godhead, was made known from the Creation of the world,
by the things that are made, that they might be without excuse, who held the
truth in unrighteousness, and when they knew God, glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful: but were filled with unrighteousness, though they knew
the judgment of God, that they that commit such things are worthy of death,
ver. 29, 31. Whence it is, that Gods judgment is proved to be according to
truth, Romans 1. 2. and, God found to be true, though every man be a liar, as it
is written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might
overcome when thou art judged, Romans 3. 4. Ignorance of the Law being not to be
pleaded by them who did evil against the innate light of their own spirits,
forasmuch as that fact must needs be voluntary, which is done against the
knowledge and judgment of a man's own conscience.

Sect. 6. Application to justify us against Quakers, and to warn us that we
act not against our Light.
From this which has been said, we may infer, 1. A plea for our selves against
the clamorous, but unjust accusation of the Quakers, who use with loud
vociferations even to hoarsnesse, and with continual printed pamphlets, to
charge public Preachers with denying the light within each man: whereas such
light is not at all denied by them, but is acknowledged to be a great benefit
to mankind. That which is denied, is, That the light within each person, is
alone of it self, without the Scripture, a sufficient direction to bring us to
God, and instate us in his savor; or a sufficient warrant of it self to to
justify our actions. It is useful, but not in such a measure as the Quakers
make it, as if persons were to look to it and no other Rule, and that they
might well enough be without Scripture, Preachers, Church Discipline,
Ordinances of the New Testament, and such other helps as God vouchsases to
guide his people by into the way of peace. Wherein how much they are mistaken,
shall be showed in that which follows.

2. In the mean time each person is to make use of the light within him so
far as it is indeed light, and useful. Certainly it concerns every man, so
far to look to the light within him, that he do not as it is said of some,
Job 24. 13. rebel against the light. A man's own conscience is so far a Law
to him, that though it cannot of it self justify, yet it may condemn: My
meaning is, a man's own light cannot warrant of it self without the Scripture, a
man's actions to be lawful which he does according to that light. Our Savior
tells there are some that shall think they do God service in killing the
Apostles, Joh. 16. 2. Paul told Agrippa, Act. 26. 9. I verily thought with my
self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.
So that herein he followed the light within him, and yet he counted this his
great sin, 1 Timothy 1. 13. The Quakers accuse often falsely, and revile most
abominably, others who are no whit inferior to themselves, and they say they
follow their light within them, and yet he that reads and believes such
Scriptures as these, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Jude 8. 9, 10.
cannot but think their practice to be from the Devil, and not from Gods Spirit.
If following the dictate of a man's own conscience could warrant his action, the
most horrid acts of misted Idolaters, Papists, Pagans, Mahometans, fanatiques
should be free from censure and control. Yet if a man do that which he thinks
to be evil, though it were good or lawful in it self, it would be sin to him,
and so much the greater, in that it is a sign, that he who does thus, shows,
that his principle by which he acts is naught, even then when he does good, and
that it is but by accident that he does it. Yea, that man who does good
against his conscience, is but an hypocrite in so doing, though the thing in it
self be right and good. But when a man does evil, which his conscience tells
him is so, he commits a sin of the highest degree, as to him that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4. 17. that is, sin in an high
degree. Hence great horror of spirit has attended them that have omitted good
which their conscience told them they should do, and much more horror in them
that have done evil against their conscience, as in the case of Judas, Spira,
and others Instances might be given, and therefore if Quakers intended no more
then this by bidding men look to the light within them, that they should take
heed that they omitted not the good their consciences told them they ought to
do, and that they did not the evil which their consciences judged to be so, we
should accept of their warning. Surely it will concern you, as to look that
your conscience be not erroneous, so that when your conscience is rightly
informed to follow it, and when it goes wrong yet to suspend the act which it
condemns, if you desire peace. There will be no plea to acquit him before God,
or to quiet his own spirit, who proceeds to act against the light of his own
conscience. And a sin against the light of nature is so much the more
damnable, in that it is against the most irrefragable evidence. He that
doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith. For whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.

Every man's Light within him, is not a sufficient safe Rule of it self to guide
him in the way to God.
SERMON. VI.
Containing thirty Arguments out of Scripture, against the Quakers Opinion of
the sufficiency of a Light in every man to lead him to God.

Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
YOu have heard how imperfect the light of the Gentiles, in things moral and
religious is: and what the Quakers and others ascribe to the light in every man
that comes into the world, and to the free will of man in that condition he
now is by nature: It will be my work now to prove the Quakers to err, in their
making each man's own light within him his Rule, yea his complete safe Rule and
Guide, to open the meaning of Scripture, discover all sorts of sins, teach
all duties, lead to God, to Christ, to Heaven, without Scripture, Preachers,
and other helps: That it is not such of it self, nor to be followed by it self,
I shall prove by many Arguments, and then consider whether God be bound to give
men supernatural light to direct men to Christ, to him that shall use well his
natural.

The first Argument I take from the point proved in the fourth Sermon before,
and the texts therein alleged, which evince, that men as they are born into
the world, are destitute of spiritual light in the things of God, that concern
man's duty, and the way of salvation; whereof some are so express, that they do
directly oppose the position of every man's having a light in him as fit to
guide or warrant his actions. As namely, when it is said, that none
understands, none seeks after God, Romans 3. 11. The natural man cannot know
the things of the Spirit of God; for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.
14. Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil continu^lly
from his youth, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Every man is brutish in his own
knowledge, Jerem. 10. 14. The heart is deceitful above all things, Jerem. 17.
9. Which could not be true, if men's light of understanding were such, as that
each man may follow in all sorts of moral and religious points his own light,
as a safe and complete rule or warrant to direct and justify his way or
action. The Argument in form is this: Their light is not a safe and complete
rule to warrant and guide their actions for pleasing God, who understand not
nor seek after God, who cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, whose
imaginations of the thoughts of their heart are only evil continually, who are
brutish in their own knowledge, and whose heart is deceitful above all
things. But these things are said of all or some men, Therefore every man's
light within him is not a safe and complete rule to warrant and guide his
actions for pleasing of God. The Proposition none will deny, but they that
think that a blind man may be a fit guide. The Assumption is the words of holy
Scripture, which G. F. says in his Catechism, p. 56. We are to believe before
learned men. The Conclusion then follows of it self.

2. Argument is from that which is showed Sermon fifth, That the light which
without the Scripture was in the most improved Gentiles, in the utmost extent
of it, was imperfect: Whence I argue, their light was not a safe and complete
rule or guide to direct or justify them in their worship of God, imaginations
of God, the knowledge of all sin and duty they owe to God, who confessed God to
be unknown, who ignorantly worshipped him, who had a foolish darkened heart
about their thoughts of God, who judged many sins to be either no sins, or
laudable acts, who took vices to be virtues: who had vain, and uncertain, and
contrary conjectures of these things, and many of them from the Devils Oracles,
carried away to dumb Idols as they were led, 1 Cor. 12.

2. For a rule and guide should be certain which will not deceive. But the most
improved Gentiles confessed God to be unknown, ignorantly worshipped him, with
the rest of the things mentioned, as Acts 17. 22, 23. Romans 21. 22, 23. and
elsewhere is manifest, Therefore they had not a light within them sufficient to
guide them; and if not they, then much less the most barbarous, and by
consequent none of the Gentiles, who had not the Scripture, nor such other
teaching as Gods people were taught by, had a light within them which might be
a complete and safe rule or guide to them for the pleasing of God.

3. Argument from John 1. 5, 10, 11. near to the text which is so much urged by
Quakers, where it is said, The light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not, ver. 5. The true light mentioned ver. 9. was in the world,
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own
and his own received him not, ver. 10, 11. Which proves many of the Jews were
darkness, and that they knew not the true light, nor received him. Whence we
thus argue: They had not a light within them sufficient to be a safe rule and
guide to direct and warrant them in their way for pleasing God, who were
darkness, when the true light shined, who knew him not nor received him; for
sure they that are such, must be destitute of that light which might safely
guide them, who were so dark and ignorant, as not to know the true light which
enlightens every man. But so it was with many, even of the Jews themselves,
when Christ was in the world: Therefore they had not sufficient light in them,
and consequently none; much less every man has a sufficient light to guide him
safely in his way to God, without the Scripture, and the Spirit of God, over
and above the common light of reason and understanding, which every man by
nature and study attains to without them.

4. Arg. From those Texts of Scripture which do expressly tell us, that before
the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, the people to whom they were sent
were darkness, sat in darkness and in the shadow of death: Such are Ephesians. 5.
8. Ye were once darkness, Mat. 4. 16. The people that sat in darkness, have
seen a great light, and to them that sat in the region and shadow of death,
has the light sprung up. Whence I argue, They had not a sufficient light
within them, to be a safe and complete rule and guide to direct them in their
way to please God, and to warrant their actions if they followed it, who were
darkness, and who sat in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death;
unless we will imagine that darkness is light, and as the Quakers do, put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, to whom the Prophet denounces woe,
Isa. 5. 20. But some there were before Christ's and his Apostles preaching to
them, who were darkness, who sat in darkness, and in the region and shadow of
death: Therefore every man had not a sufficient light within him, to be a safe
and complete rule and guide to direct him in his way to please God, and to
warrant his actions if he followed it: And if not then, neither have we now.

5. Arg. From Luke 16. 8. where our Savior says, The children of this world
are wiser in their generation, then the children of light: The opposition of
children of light, to the children of this world shows, that the children of
this world, are not children of light; and if they were the same, the speech of
Christ would be foolish in preferring one sort before the other, as wiser in
their generation. Hence therefore I thus argue, If every man had a light within
him, sufficient to be his rule and guide of it self to direct him how to please
God, then every man should be a child of light; for to be a child, is all one
as to be a person that has light in him to guide him, so as to please God. But
every man is not a child of light: Therefore every man ha^h not a light safe
and sufficient within him, to guide him in his way to God, and to be the
complete rule of his actions Godward.

6. Arg. Is from Act. 26. 18. where Paul says, Christ sent him to the Gentiles
to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye
are a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has
called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Ephesians. 5. 14. Wherefore he
says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. From whence I argue, They who are to be turned from darkness to
light, called by God out of darkness into his mavelous light, who are to
awake and stand up from the dead, that Christ may give them light, had not a
light within, as a sufficient safe guide to direct them in their way to God;
unless we suppose darkness to be light, men among the dead, fit to guide
themselves. But so it is said of both Jews and Gentiles in those Scriptures:
Therefore sure they had not such a light within them, as Quakers say is in all.
If they had such a light, they should have been directed to follow it, not
turned from it, the Apostles should have called them, as the Quakers do, to
follow the light in them, and not have called them out of darkness, nor
required them to awake and stand up from the dead, that Christ may give them
light: Nor should we do, as the Apostles did, bid men leave the darkness in
them; but as the Quakers do, look to the light in them.

7. Arg. From Romans 10. 14, 17. How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? So then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. For he that comes to God must believe that he is,
and is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Whence I argue, That is not
a sufficient guide in our way to God, which cannot of it self make us
believers; for that is not sufficient to guide us to God, that is not
sufficient to beget faith, since there is no coming to God without faith, as is
told us, Heb. 11. 6. But the light within us cannot of it self make us
believers, since the Apostle says, How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they bear without a Preacher? So then faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; which were vain speeches, if
there were another ordinary way by a light within us to beget faith: Therefore
the light within us is not of it self without preaching, a safe sufficient
guide in our way to God.

8. Arg. From Romans 12. 2. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
that acceptable and perfect will of God. Ephesians. 4. 23. And be renewed in the
spirit of your mind, Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed
in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Whence I argue, They who
must not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of
their mind, that they may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect
will of God; who must put off the old man, and be renewed in the spirit of
their mind; who must put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, had
not a light within them antecedent to this renewing, which might enable them to
prove what was Gods acceptable will, nor be a sufficient safe, rule to guide
them to God. For if they had, what need such transforming, renewing,
nonconformity to the world, putting off the old man? But all that have access
to God must be thus transformed, renewed, put off the old man, as the Texts
show: Therefore they have not a light within them, as a safe sufficient guide
to lead them to God.

9. Arg. From Psalm. 81. 11, 12. But my people would not hearken to my voice,
and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lust, and
they walked in their own counsels. Act. 14. 16. Who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways: Whence I argue, That light in man cannot be
a safe sufficient guide to a man in his way to God, to which the leaving a
person, by God is reckoned as the greatest curse and judgment, for refusing to
hearken to God; but to leave a person to his own imagination, lust, to walk in
his own counsel, in his own way, (which is all one as to leave him to the light
within him) is reckoned as the greatest curse and judgment to a man from God,
for refusing to hearken to Gods voice, as the Texts show: Therefore the light
within each person is of it self no safe guide. The Quakers prescribe to men
that as their rule, which God counts their curse.

10. Arg. From Romans 16. 25, 26. Now to him that is of power to stablish you
according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the
revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began, but now
is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the
Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience
of faith. 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8, 9. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world to our glory,
which none of the Princes of the world knew; but as it is written, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, Ephesians. 3. 9. And to make all men
see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the
world has been hid in God. Col. 1. 25, 25. Whereof I am made a Minister,
according to the dispensation of God, to fulfill the word of God, even the
mystery which has been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made
manifest to his Saints. 2 Timothy 1. 9. The purpose and grace of God is now made
manifest, by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has brought
immortality and life to light by the Gospel: Whence I argue, They had not a
light in them as a sufficient safe guide to God, from whom the mystery was hid,
which concerned the grace and purpose of God, into whose heart the things which
God had prepared for them that love him entered not, to whom life and
immortality was not brought to light. But from the Gentiles the mystery of God
was hid, life and immortallity was not brought to light, nor did the things God
had prepared for them that love him, enter into their hearts: Therefore they
had not a light within them, as a sufficient guide to God.

11. Arg. From 1 Cor. 2. 11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man but
the Spirit of God. Romans 8. 9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his. Jude 19. Having not the Spirit. Joh. 14. 17. The Spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive. Whence I argue, They have not light
within them sufficient to guide them to God, who have not the Spirit of God,
because they cannot know the things of God without the Spirit. But every man
has not the Spirit of God: Therefore every man has not a light within,
sufficient to guide him to God.

12. Arg. From Mat. 11. 27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, and
no man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Joh. 14. 6. Jesus says unto
him, I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the Father but
by me. Whence I argue, They had not a light within them to guide them to God,
to whom the Son did not reveal the Father, who did not go by the Son as the way
to the Father. But the Son did not reveal the Father to every man, nor did
every man come to Christ, Joh. 1. 5. 10. and 12. 38. and 5. 40. 43. Therefore
every man had not a light within him, sufficient to guide him to God.

13. Arg. From Mat. 11. 25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank
thee O Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even so Father, for so
it seemed good in thy sight. Mat. 13. 11. It is given to you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. Whence I
argue, If God hide the things of God, which concern the knowledge of himself
from some, and reveal them to others; if to some be given to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of heaven, not to others, then every man has not a light
within him, as a sufficient guide to direct him to God. But the antecedent is
true as the Texts show, and the consequence is evident of it self: Therefore
the consequent is also true.

14. Arg. From those Texts which speak of Christ as a light come into the
world, Joh. 12. 46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes
on me should not abide in darkness. Joh. 8. 12. Then Jesus spoke again to them
saying, I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Joh. 9. 5. As long as I am in the
world, I am the light of the world, Joh. 3. 19. And this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds were evil. Luke 1. 78. Through the tender mercy of our God,
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Luke 2. 32. A light to lighten the
Gentiles; which would have been needless, if every man had a light within him
before Christ his coming into the world, sufficient to guide him in the way to
God: Yea the Text supposes persons in darkness before, to sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, and to have need of another light without them to guide
their feet into the way of peace, and that the Gentiles were without light.
Whence I argue, That opinion which makes the coming of Christ into the world,
to be the light of the world needless, is an error. But the opinion of the
Quakers concerning a light in each man that comes into the world, sufficient
to guide him into the way of peace of it self, makes the coming of Christ
useless, and asserts that persons had light, when the Text supposes they were
in darkness: Therefore their opinion about the light within each person, is a
manifest error.

15. Arg. From those Texts which make the Scriptures necessary and useful to
give light to men, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. And that from a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. Romans 15. 14. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that wethrough patience and comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope, Mar. 12. 24. And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not
therefore err, because ye know not the Scripture? Joh. 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me. Whence I argue, That opinion which terms the Scripture the
letter, in disparagement of it; that makes it unnecessary; which dehorts from
searching it; and directs to follow the light in each man without it, is
contrary to the testimony given by Paul and Christ concerning the use, virtue,
and necessity of Scripture, to keep from error, to make wise to salvation, to
give comfort, to furnish for good works. But such is the opinion of the
Quakers, as their words recited Sermon. 5. show: therefore it is contrary to
Christ's and Paul's speeches. Christ says, Search the Scriptures, Quakers say,
No, but look to the light within you.

16. Arg. From Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Psalm 119. 105.
Thy Word it a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Whence I argue: That
Opinion which makes supposed light within each man, which is often disfonant
from the Law and the Testimony, and the Word of God, a safe rule and guide to
each man, is erroneous. But such is the Quakers Opinion, which is contrary to
the Law and Testimony, and Gods Word, opposing Ordinances, Ministry, and many
other things, Therefore it is erroneous, and their speech is without light in
it.

17. Arg. From Ephesians. 4. 11. When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men:
And he gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and
some, Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Hence I argue,
That Opinion and practice is evil, that makes every man a Teacher, and Teachers
set by God for the work of the Ministry needless, and as if they were no gift
but a burden to the Church, cries them down, is contrary to Gods and Christ's
way, and so Antichristian. But thus does the opinion and practice of the
Quakers, Therefore it is evil and Antichristian.

18. Arg. From Ephesians. 1. 17. I make mention of you in my prayers, that God may
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, the
eyes of your understanding being enlightened. Hence I argue: That Opinion which
makes it unnecessary to pray for the Spirit to enlighten men's eyes in the
knowledge of God, is impious. But thus does the opinion of Quakers, which makes
each man's light in him a sufficient and safe rule and guide in his way to God:
Therefore it is impious.

19. Arg. From Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors? Hence I argue: If
each man's light within him be a sufficient and safe-rule and guide to each man
in his way, and every man follow it (as they do unless in presumptuous sins
against conscience) then there be no errors or sins of ignorance in man, or
they may be understood by each man, but the Psalmist says there are errors,
and so many, that he makes them as not to be understood by any: Therefore each
man's light within him, is not a sufficient and safe rule and guide to him in
his way to God.

20. Arg. From Acts 17. 30. And the times of this ignorance God wi^ked at; but
now commands all men every where to repent. Whence I argue: If each man's
light within him be a sufficient safe rule and guide to direct him in his way
to God, then he need not repent of his ignorant worship of God, for then he
followed the light in him. But God commands men to repent of the ignorant
worship of him, Therefore each man's light in him is not a sufficient and safe
rule and guide for him to go by in Gods worship.

21. Arg. From Prove. 3. 5, 6, 7. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and
lean not to thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall direct thy paths. Be not wise in thine own eyes. Romans 12. 16. Be not wise
in your own conceits. Whence I infer, That which makes a man to lean to his own
understanding, to be wise in his own eyes, in his own conceir, is a pernicious
Opinion; for it makes a man not to depend on God for teaching him in his ways,
but makes him proud and listed up. But the Opinion of the Quakers concerning
each man's own light in him, as a sufficient safe rule of it self, to guide him
in his way to God, makes him to lean to his own understanding, to be wise in
his own eyes, and his own conceit, Therefore it is a pernicious Opinion. These
Quakers bless men in following their own light, when God says, Isa. 5. 21. Woe
unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

22. Arg From Judges 17. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but
every man did that which was right in his own eyes. Psalm. 106. 39. Thus they
were defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own
inventions. Whence I argue, If to do that which is right in our own eyes, and
to follow our own inventions, be the sign of wicked men, and a going a whoring
from God, then to look to the light within us, and to follow it, is not a safe
way to God, but the way to depart from God. But the Antecedent is true,
therefore the Consequent. The truth is, God forbids the following of our own
supposed light, as the greatest impiety, which the Quakers place all their
godliness in.

23. Arg. From the same text I argue, If each man's light within him were to be
his guide, then Kings and Rulers should not restrain men from, or punish them
for doing that which is right in their own eyes, but the contrary is supposed,
Judges 17. 6. where the defect of Government is made the permission of every
man to do that which is right in his own eyes, therefore each man's light in him
is not to be his rule and guide specially in Religion.

24. Arg. From Prove. 14. 12. There is a way which seems right to a man: but
the end thereof are the ways of death. That guide is not a safe guide, which
may lead a man into a way whose, end is death: But the supposed light in a man
may guide him into a way whose* end is death, for that way that seems right to
him may be the way to death, and a man follows his supposed light, when he
walks in that way which seems right to him: Therefore the supposed light which
is in each man, is not of it self a sufficient safe guide of a man in his way
to God.

25. Arg. From Prove. 22. 615. Train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old, he will not depart from it. Foolishness is bound in the heart
of a Child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. Hence I
argue, If there were in each man who comes into the world a light, which might
of it self be a sufficient and safe guide to lead him to God, then there should
not be foolishness so bound in the heart, which has need of the rod of
correction to drive it far from him; there would not be need to train up a
child in the way he should go, he might guide himself without such training:
But the contrary is manifest from the text. Therefore there is not in each man
that comes into the world, such a light as might of it self be a sufficient
and safe guide to lead him to God.

26. Arg. From Joh. 6. 44, 45, 65. No man can come unto me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be
all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard and learned of the
Father comes unto me. Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is
of God, he has seen the Father. Therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. Hence I argue, If
each man's light within him were of it self a sufficient safe guide to lead him
to God, then there would be no need of a further drawing or gift of the Father,
that he might come to Christ, his own light without any other help would make
known Christ to him. But this is contrary to the words of Christ, therefore
each, man's own light, is not of it self a sufficient safe guide to lead him to
God.

27. Arg. From 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God. 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast
that which is good. Hence I argue, If each persons light within him were a
sufficient and safe guide of it self to lead him to God, then no man need to
try other men's spirits, or prove all things, left he be deceived, since if he
follow his own light he is infallible, nor is any man to be distrusted, unless
he appear a voluntary deceiver, fith his own light will not misguide him. But
these things are absurd and contrary to the wariness Christ prescribes, Mark.
4. 24. Take heed what you hear: and the Apostles in the places cited, therefore
the light within each person, is not of it self a sufficient safe guide to lead
him to God.

28. Arg. From Psalm. 139. 23. Where David prays, Search me, O God, and know my
heart: try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any wicked way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting. If David had a light within him, of it self
a sufficient and safe guide to God, he should not have been jealous of his own
heart or thoughts, so as to need God to search, know, and try him, and lead
him, he might lead himself: But it is otherwise with David, and therefore he
knew he had not a light within him, as a sufficient safe guide to lead him into
the way everlasting.

29. Arg. From Deuteronomy. 4. 8. And what nation is there so great, that has
Statutes and judgments so righteous as ast this Law which I set before you this
day. Ver. 6. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes
and say, Surely this great Nation, is a wise and understanding people. Psalm.
147. 19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob: his Statutes and his judgment;
unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his judgments
they have not known them. Romans 3. 1, 2. What advantage then bath the Jew? or
what profit is there of circumcision? much every way: chiefly because that unto
them were committed the Oracles of God. Hence argue, If each Gentile had a
light within him as a sufficient guide in the things of God, as the Quakers
teach, then they had known Gods Statutes and Judgments, Gods Oracles had been
committed to them as well as the Jews, they had had as righteous Statutes, and
been as wise a Nation as they. But all these consequents are false and contrary
to the texts, therefore each Gentile which came into the world, had not such a
light within him, as might be a sufficient safe guide to him in the things of
God.

30. Arg. From Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not
known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. Hence I argue, That
was not a sufficient safe guide of itself to God, which without the Law neither
did nor could discover sin, the sin of lust: But the light within Paul, and
so much more of other men, neither did, nor could discover sin, even the sin of
lust, without the Law: Therefore the light in each person, is not a sufficient
safe guide of it self, without the written word, to lead him to God, and to
warrant his actions.

Every man's Light within him, is not of it self a sufficient safe guide unto
God.
SERMON. VII.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. Ten Reasons more are urged against the Quakers opinion, of the
sufficiency of the light in every man to guide him to God.
HItherto I have argued against the Quakers opinion, of the sufficiency of each
man's light within him from Scripture: I shall now argue against it by Reasons;
whereof the first is this: If each man's light within him is his rule and a safe
guide, then what each man conceives according to his light within him is right
and true; for what is according to the rule and a safe guide, is true and
right, it being proper to a rule, to be the measure according to which each
thing is to be tried, and that cannot be a safe guide that erres: But what each
man conceives according to his light within him, cannot be right and true, for
one man's conceits do sometimes contradict another. Thus it is reported by
Quakers themselves, that George Fox contradicted Jaws Nailor; nor do I think
all Quakers are of one mind, when they follow the light in them. And if they
should agree, yet he that should say all men's conceits, who follow the light in
them, were the same, none contradicting another, would appear either
monstrously impudent, or extremely mad. Now sure two contradictories cannot be
both true; it is resolved on by all that have the use of reason in an ordinary
measure, that it is impossible that the same thing, at the same time, in the
same respect, should be and not be, be so and not be so: Therefore it is
against the very light of nature, and first notions of humane reason, that each
man's light within him should of it self be a sufficient right rule and safe
guide to him, in that which concerns the knowledge and way of God.

2. That which is variable and alterable, cannot be a persons rule: For it is
the property of a rule to be invariable, and the same at all times; the rules,
measures, and weights, and dials, and squares, and what other things are made
if they be varied, they cease to be rules, for rules should be fixed and
certain. But there is nothing more variable then men's light in them; that which
is this day taken for light, is to morrow judged to be darkness; and that light
which is this day in a person, may be lessened to morrow; a person may become
frantic and doat, who yesterday was heard speak with applause: Therefore each
persons light cannot be his rule, so as that at all times he should be bid look
to it, and follow it as a safe guide to him, as Quakers do.

3. If that light which each person has in him should be his rule, and his
guide, then it were unnecessary, and unsafe, and foolish, to trouble himself to
seek counsel of another, and to be guided by his light: But this is contrary to
all resolutions of wise men, and contrary to all experience of the necessity of
taking counsel, and the course of all people that are not wilful fools. All
men magnify the wisdom of the aged, and others who give counsel, they are
honored as the most necessary persons in humane society. It is threatened as
the heaviest judgment of a people, to take away from them the counselor,
Isa. 3. 3. The wise woman said, 2 Samuel 20. 18. They were wont to speak in old
time, saying, they shall surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the
matter. Prove. 11. 14. Where no counsel is, the people fall; but in the
multitude of counselors there is safety. Prove. 12. 15. The way of a fool is
right in his own eyes; but he that bearkneth unto counsel is wise. Prove. 15.
22. Without counsel purposes are disappointed; but in the multitude of
counselors they are established. Prove. 19. 20. Hear counsel and receive
instruction, that thou may be wise in thy later end. Prove. 28. 18. Every
purpose is established by counsel; and with good advice make war. Prove. 24. 6.
For by wise counsel thou shall make thy war; and in multitude of counselors
there is safety. All men in their right wits do condemn rash persons as
foolish: He is a wise man said Hesiod, that takes good counsel; he is wiser
that gives; wisest that gives and takes; but a very fool that neither gives nor
takes good counsel, Arist. Ethic. ad incom. l. 1. c. 3. But by Quakers
doctrine, they are wisest who follow their own light, for they follow a safe
and sufficient guide, which none but men out of their wits do assert, it being
contrary to all experience of all men concerning themselves, and others since
the Creation, to this day.

4. If that each persons light within him be a sufficient and safe rule and
guide to him of it self, then the meetings of Quakers to consult about any
affairs in common, or to teach each other, or to communicate revelations, is
needless and vain, since each may guide himself by his own light; that is done in
vain by more, which may be done by fewer: Would not we censure him as foolish,
who would travel far, and bestow much cost for that elsewhere, which he might
have without labor and cost at home? Especially if it be as they say, that
each man is to look to his own light; and that is it which they most of all
tell them, it being in a manner all that they say at those meetings of them,
where I have been present; which when I have heard, I have admired at the
silliness of some hundreds of people, who have come many miles to hear a person
in a close of pasture in a hot Summer day on a stage, nothing almost but brawl
against others, and instruct them in nothing, but bid them look to the light
within them; and yet they stood a great part of such a day in a crowd, to hear
such speech.

5. If each persons own light in him be his guide and rule, then is it in vain
to desire and expect revelations and discoveries, which they had not before,
since they have light within them of themselves. Therefore when they compose
themselves to their quaking fits, that they may have some word of the Lord to
speak to people; what is this but either an hypocritical devise, when they
pretend some new revelation, and do but repeat again what they have often said;
and blasphemous, to term this the word of the Lord, and pretend it to be from
the Spirit of God, when it is but their ordinary talk, and some of it false and
unrighteous, or else al needless thing, since they have light within them
sufficient to guide them, without other revelation?

6. That which is the worst of all: By ascribing so much to the light within
them, Satan has this advantage, that whatever he can imprint on them as their
light (which persons are very apt to take as from God, when it suits with their
wills and lusts, or comes into them with force and supernatural impulse) they
must receive it without examination, and obey it. By which means Satan has
drawn persons to horrid acts, which they have judged necessary duties: As to
omit elder instances; the things related by Gilpin of Kendal concerning
himself; and that which happened nearer to us, concerning the young man that
drowned himself in a little puddle in a ditch not far from Worcester, that he
might meet with Christ, not many years since, do give us sad proof how the
Devil works on Quakers, who are deluded by this principle of following the
light within them, without Scripture.

7. If every man's light within him be a sufficient and safe guide unto God,
then there is no difference to be put between wise and foolish, learned and
unlearned ones; it is as safe a way which the unlearned and foolish follow, as
that which the wise and learned follow in matters of Religion, and moral
behavior. He that is counted unlearned and foolish, if he follow his own
light, does as well as he that is never so wise or learned: Whereas Solomon
tells, Eccl. 2. 13, 14. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as
light excels darkness; the wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool
walks in darkness.

8. If every man's light within him be a sufficient safe guide in his way to
God, then the Philosophers light before they had the Gospel preached to them,
was a sufficient safe guide to them; for sure they had as much light within
them without the Scripture as any, and did improve it to the utmost; and the
Jewish Rabbis, besides the natural light in them, did by the study of the Law,
and tradition of Elders, endeavor to attain to the knowledge of God: Yet says
the Apostle to the Greeks that sought after wisdom, the preaching of Christ
crucified was foolishness; insomuch that the Apostle 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. uses
this exprobration, Where is the wise? Where is the disputer of this world? Has
not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom
of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe.

9. If every man's light within him were a sufficient safe guide to him in
Religion and morality, then do all Lawmakers ill, to put any Laws on them, to
restrain them from doing what they like; then do Judges ill, in passing
sentences of condemnation of them; then do men ill to reprove them; Parents,
Tutors, Schoolmasters, ill to teach them otherwise; then is all Government and
Magistracy unprofitable; Rulers are not Ministers of God to us for good, but
only to molest and oppress us; then they that set their children to School do
foolishly; Universities, and Schools of Arts, to breed them up in literature
and good manners, are vain; and all these are to be abolished, which were a way
to lay all waste, to level people, as well in manners and knowledge, as
estates, to reduce us to barbarism, to make the nation a wilderness, yea to
depopulate it, and in fine drive away the Spirit of God from us, and introduce
unclean spirits to repossess us and our Land. It is such a course as tends to
expel all that is excellent, and may better us, and to fill the Nation with a
generation of fools, in whom God has no pleasure, Eccl. 5. 4. and does by
consequent condemn all the men of worth in the world, since the Creation, of
folly and blindness.

10. Lastly, If every man have a light within him, which is a sufficient safe
guide to him, then I suppose they will grant that I have such a light within
me; and if every man is to follow this light, then I am to follow my light in
me: Now my light within me shows me, that the Quakers opinion about the light
in them is an error; that they pervert fouls by bidding men follow it; and
draw them off from making the Scriptures their rule, terming it disparagingly
the letter; and oppose Preachers, reviling them, openly thwarting them and
molesting them in their work of teaching the people out of the Scripture; and
this is not only my light, but the light of millions of men besides me: Yea I
think all the sober men of the world that ever were, have found by experience
their own darkness, and ignorance, and have groaned under it, bewailing it to
God, and applying themselves to the use of such means, as might bring light
into their souls. Out of all which I conclude, that this opinion of Quakers
which I have refuted, is the most sottish opinion that ever was hatched,
instilled into them by the prince of darkness, not by the Spirit of God, and
tends to the dissolution both of religious discipline and civil government; yet
they say, or rather brawl somewhat for their opinion, which is now to be
considered.

Sect. 2. Objections of Quakers for the universality and sufficiency of light
in men, are answered.
That which they most urge, is the Text Joh. 1. 9. which makes not for them,
nor against us, who deny not that every man has a light from Christ; but the
kind of it, that it is spiritual, and the sufficiency of it, that of it self
it is a safe guide to God: Of which enough is said before.

They allege also Luke 17. 21. Where it is said to the Pharisees, Behold the
kingdom of God is within you: Therefore in every man. Whereto I answer, 1.
That the particle translated [within you] may be as well, and to my
apprehension more truly rendered [among you] which is the translation in the
Margin. 2. That the sense is, the kingdom is not to be expected as a future
thing; but as it is Mat. 12. 28. The kingdom of God is come unto you. Luke 11.
20. The kingdom of God is come upon you. Luke 10. 9. The kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you: Which is not meant of light within, but the preaching of
the Gospel, or the presence of the Messiah (who was among them, Joh. 1. 26.)
without them the light within each man cannot be meant by the kingdom of God:
For the kingdom of God is a thing that was not before Christ's appearance in the
flesh, and was taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles, Mat. 21. 43.
which is not to be said of the light within every man. Nor is it said, the
kingdom of God is in every man, but within or among you Pharisees or Jews, to
whom the Gospel was at first sent: For John the Baptist preached, Mat. 3. 2.
The kingdom of heaven is at hand; and Christ went preaching the Gospel of the
kingdom. Mat. 4. 17. and Mat. 11. 12. From the days of John the Baptist the
kingdom of heaven is forced. Mat. 13. 10. Every one that hears the word of
the kingdom: Which and many Scriptures show, that the kingdom of God is not
extended to every man, nor every hearer, but to those that hear the Gospel, and
receive it.

It is alleged that the Apostle says, Romans 2. 14, 15. That the Gentiles who
had not the law, did by nature the things of the law, these having not the law
are a law unto themselves: Whereto I answer, that it is true of the Gentiles,
that their own consciences were a law unto themselves, but not so far as to
convert or guide them to God, but to accuse or excuse them to themselves, as
the very next words show: Who show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their consciences bearing them witness, and their thoughts between themselves
accusing or excusing.

It is alleged that it is said, Col. 1. 23. That the Gospel has been preached
to every creature under heaven; therefore every one has the light within him,
which is the Gospel: To which I answer, the Gospel is not the light within each
person, but that word without them which was preached to them, of which Paul
was a Minister. The light within each person is by creation, and inward work of
the Spirit; but the Gospel is the word brought to our ears by Preachers without
us, which is never received by many of those to whom it is preached. And when
it is said to be preached to every creature, the meaning is not that every
particular person heard it; but as when Christ bids them preach the Gospel to
every creature, Mar. 16. 15. the command is not that they must preach it to
every particular person, even to Infants, for that had been an impossible work;
but that they should preach it to any indefinitely, not restraining them to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, as he did formerly, Mat. 10. 5, 6. In which
sense the Apostle says, Col. 1. 28. He warned every man, and taught every man;
that is any without difference who occurred, whether Jew or Gentile.

It is often urged that it is said, Col. 1. 27, Christ in you the hope of
glory; therefore it is Christ within a person which is the hope of glory, which
some of them have made their Savior, and not he who was crucified at
Jerusalem; and this fancied Christ within them, they seem to confound with the
light within them, and the Gospel. But I answer, 1. That this is a mere
fantastic delusion, to imagine a Christ in themselves different from that
Jesus Christ born of Mary, who is the Savior of the world; nor is there in the
words, Col. 1. 27. any ground for such a distinction: For the term rendered
[in] may as well be rendered [to] as it is verse. 23. If not, the meaning is,
Christ is in them the hope of glory, that is, Christ who is in them by faith,
or Christ who is the hope in them, that is, their hope of glory. 2. However
this is certain, that Christ in them, cannot be meant of the light that is in
every man, for that is by generation; but this Christ in them was only in the
Saints, verse. 26. And by Preaching, whereby God made it known, which had been
hid from ages and generations, verse. 25, 26, 27, 28.

It is alleged that Jerem. 31. 34. God promises, And they shall no more teach
every man his neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord: for
they shall all know me, from the least unto the greatest of them. Therefore
every man has a light in him, and needs no Preacher.

To which I answer, 1. That it is manifest from Heb. 8. 10, 11. that this is
not a declaration of what all men have upon their birth, but what some shall
have under the new Covenant by special grace, and therefore is not meant of the
light within each person whatsoever; for that was as well under the first
Covenant, but those who are specially called under the Gospel. 2. The meaning
is not that they shall have no more teaching at all; then Gods word had been
broken, when Paul taught the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6. But either the
meaning is, they shall not teach by such obscure shadows or predictions as they
did before, but so plainly, as that they may with unveiled fact, behold the
glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. which seems the most genuine meaning by Verse.
9, 10. Or in a comparative sense, their knowledge shall be so abundant, as that
each person who hears the Gospel and believes it, shall be able of himself to
know the Lord.

It is urged that Isa. 54. 13 it is said, All thy children shall be taught of
the Lord; therefore every man has a light within him.

Answ. 1. All thy children, cannot be meant of every one that comes into the
world: Our Savior has taught us, Joh. 6. 45. to expound it of one sort of
persons, those that have heard and learned of the Father, not all. 2. Nor can
it be meant of that teaching, which is by the light within a man common to him,
with every man besides; but that peculiar teaching of God by his Spirit and his
Gospel, whereby a person comes to Christ; that is believes in him, which is
never by the mere light which each man has in him by humane birth.

It is yet further urged that it is said, 1 John 2. 27. But the anointing which
ye have received of him abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you;
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth and is no
lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him: Whence they would
gather, that each man's light within him, or at least each persons light within
him, who has the Spirit of God, is sufficient to teach him without Scripture
or Preacher, which is the thing they aim at, that there may be some color to,
make Scriptures and Preachers seem needless.

To it I answer, The speech is in opposition to those that seduced them, Verse.
26. who were the Heretics of those times, whether Ebionites, Cerinthians,
Nicolaitans, or Gnostics, whom he terms Antichrists, Verse. 18, and 22, 23. He
mentions their heresy, the denying the Father and the Son; which was done, by
pretending a more sublime and refined doctrine then the Apostles taught; of
another Creator then the Father; of the Son, as only in show and appearance
come in the flesh, crucified, risen again; in opposition of whom, he tells them
they were armed by the anointing and its teaching, and so they need not any,
(that is any of those seducers mentioned Verse. 26.) should teach them, nor that
any other doctrine upon any pretense whatsoever should be taught them, but that
which they had been taught by that anointing. Now how did that anointing teach
them? Undoubtedly by the Apostles, as is manifest by Verse. 24. Let that
therefore abide in you, which you have heard from the beginning, which is
expressed plainly to be that, which he and other Apostles taught and declared
unto them, Chap. 1. 1, 2, 3, 5. To which he says, The Spirit bears witness,
1 John 5. 6. And says, 1 John 4. 6. We are of God, be that knows God hears
us, be that is not of God hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of truth
and the Spirit of error. Whence it is apparent, 1. That they only, not every
man, have no need that any teach them, who have received the anointing. 2. That
it is not meant, that they have no need of any man's teaching any thing at all;
but that they have no need of the seducers doctrine, pretended to be more exact
and sublime. 3. That the teaching of the anointing was not by peculiar
immediate revelation, but by bearing witness to what the Apostles taught. 4.
That they only that receive the doctrine of the Apostles, are taught by the
anointing. 5. That when it is said, the same anointing taught them of all
things; it is not meant of all things simply, for then they should have been
omniscient, they should have known the day and hour in which the Son of man
comes; whereas Christ says, the Father only knows it, Mar. 13. 32. but of
all those things concerning the Father and the Son, of whom the Heretics
pretended a deeper knowledge then the Apostles had. Now these things being
premised, this Text is against the Quakers, not for them; for it asserts not a
light in every man, but only in those in whom the anointing was; nor a teaching
of that anointing by peculiar immediate revelation, but by the Apostles
preaching, which is the same with the doctrine of the Scriptures; and so proves
the Quakers not of God, who hear not the Apostles, are not guided by the
Scriptures, but by a peculiar light within them, falsely ascribed to the
anointing of the Spirit of God, and teach other doctrine then what is received
from the Apostles; and so is a warning to us that we should not hear them; and
justifies the Preachers who preach the doctrine which the Apostles delivered;
and shows those only to have the anointing and to be rightly taught by it, who
receive their doctrine, which is in the Scriptures.

Sect. 3. The opinions of Gods obligation to the user of natural abilities well
and of universal calling, are errors pernicious.
It remains that I should say something of the other opinions mentioned, Sermon.
5. concerning the certainty of Gods communicating that which shall be of saving
import to every man, that uses his natural abilities faithfully and carefully,
and universal calling by that which is termed objective grace. For though my
purpose was only to examine the Quakers opinion about a light in every man, yet
since these two opinions do come very near the Quakers opinion, and did either
beget it at first, or do much serve to confirm it, and are the high way to the
opinion of the Gentiles salvation, who lived virtuously, though the Gospel were
not taught them by any Preachers sent to them; and of those who hold that every
man may be saved in his own Religion, if he live honestly; which tends to make
Christ's coming in the flesh unnecessary; Christian Religion and the preaching
of the Gospel more then is simply necessary to salvaiion; which quenches zeal
in propagating the Gospel, professing of Christ, resormation of Religion, and
suffering for the Christian doctrine; and fills the Land with luke warm
Neutralists, mere Moralists, and Atheists: I shall briefly examine them.

The opinion of Gods engagement to him that uses faithfully and carefully
natural abilities does suppose 1. That there may be, if there never were, a
faithful and careful use of natural abilities by every person of mankind
under heaven: This use is to be conceived to be for the finding out of the
knowledge of the true God, his will and counsel, and the observing them. Now
this cannot be conceived to be in any, who has not a heart to be subject to
God, if he might know his will, and to worship him, if he could understand how
he should do it, and does carefully study to find out these, and enquires
diligently after them. But the Scripture tells us, Verse. 1. that the minding of
the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8. 7, 8. Now all they are supposed to be in the flesh who are not in the
Spirit, Verse. 9. those two members comprehending all men: Now no man is in the
Spirit who is not in Christ, Verse. 9, 10. and he that has only natural
abilities is not in Christ; till a man believes in him he is not in Christ:
Therefore no man that has only natural abilities, has a heart to be subject
to God, if he might know his will; nor to worship him, if he could understand
how to do it; nor will carefully study to find out these, and enquire
diligently after them; and therefore the supposition of a faithful and
careful use of natural abilities by every or any person of mankind to come to
God, is a supposition of an impossibility, as the state of mankind now is. To
this Argument may be added that our Lord Christ tells us, Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit: Which speech though it be understood of the most diminute impossibility,
that is a moral impossibility only; yet in that sense it will evince, that none
of those men who have only natural abilities (by which they can never be made
any other then corrupt trees) have or can have an inclination to use faithfully
or carefully their natural abilities for God, but only for themselves; so that
if they do at any time enquire after God, it is by reason of some kind of
preventing work of God, not by any application of themselves faithfully and
carefully to seek after God. I omit the Arguments which I have used Sermon. 4th
and 6th before, to prove destitution of spiritual light, and imperfection of
natural light to guide us to God, which prove that it is vainly supposed that
any man, much less every man, either will or can in his mere natural estate,
use his natural abilities faithfully and carefully to seek after God.

2. It is supposed, that he that does thus use his natural abilities, shall
receive from God yet further that which shall be of saving import and
consequence. For quicker dispatch, I omit the search both into what a man must
do, that he may be said to have thus used his natural abilities; and what that
is of saving import and consequence which he shall receive, and say that if it
were supposed a man did use his natural abilities thus, yet there is no
assurance that he shall receive from God that which is of saving consequence,
which I prove thus: 1. If those Jews and Gentiles who have used as well as
they could their natural abilities, have not received from God that which is of
saving import and consequence, then there is no assurance given of every man's
receiving from God that which is of saving import and consequence, who shall
faithfully and carefully use his natural abilities of reason and conscience.
But the antecedent is true: Therefore also the consequent. The consequence is
of it self manifest, and the antecedent is proved by instances. The young man
mentioned, Mar. 10. 20. that observed all the Commandments from his youth,
insomuch that it is said Christ loved him. Verse. 21. And that he was not far
from the kingdom of God. And Israel that followed after the law of
righteousness, but attained it not, Romans 9. 30. used as well as they could
their natural abilities, and yet received not that which was of saving import
and consequence from God. And the Greeks which sought after wisdom, yet by
wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Therefore there is not assured that,
which is of saving import to the well using natural abilities.

2. If God use a clean contrary way to lay his right hand on the head of
Ephraim, and his left on Manasseh; I mean to bless with saving grace the worst
of the Gentiles, and to reject Jews most zealous of the law, then he gives not
assurance of their receiving that which is of saving import and consequence,
who faithfully and carefully use their natural abilities. But the antecedent is
true, as Ephesians 2. 1, 2, 5. Col 2. 13. Romans 9. 30, 31. Romans 10. 2. Tit. 3. 3, 4.
appears: Therefore also the consequent.

3. If the Scripture do exclude works of righteousness, which men do from being
the reason of giving saving grace, and ascribe it entirely to Gods will as the
adequate reason, then he does not assure that which is of saving import and
consequence to them, that use natural abilities faithfully and carefully. But
the former is true, Tit. 3. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 9. 16. Mat. 11. 25, 26
Therefore also is the later true.

4. If God were engaged to give to him that well uses natural abilities, that
which is of saving consequence, then he is so engaged by the worth of the work,
or by some promise he has made thereto. But neither of these is true; not the
former, because no works done by a man in the flesh please God, Romans 8. 8.
Without faith it is not possible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Not the later; if
there be any such promise let it be showed. I know it is usually urged that
Christ faith, Mat. 25. 29. To every one that has shall be given, and he shall
have abundance; which is used by many, to prove that God has promised to give
supernatural grace to him that well uses natural light. I will not enter into
an accurate discussion of the meaning of this Text, nor ser down the various
limitations with which it must be circumscribed, that it may be found true. Dr
Robert Abbot in a particular Lecture, Dr William Twisse, Vindic. great. l. 3.
Errat. 2. Digr. 1. Sect. 6. have done much to clear it. It is enough for the
present purpose, 1. That the talents cannot be meant of natural abilities. 1.
Because both the parables Mat. 25 1. 4. do express the occurrences pertaining
to the kingdom of heaven: Therefore the use of the talents is the use of
something pertaining to it, not of what is common to all humane kind. 2. The
talents are said to be given to servants, Verse. 14. Luke 19. 13. Therefore the
talents are not natural abilities which every man has. 2. The speech must be
meant of the Gospel, the hearing, understanding, and receiving of it. 1.
Because the parable expresses the occurrences belonging to the kingdom of
heaven. 2. Because Mat. 13. 11, 12. it is made the reason why it was given to
the disciples of Christ to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but to others it
was not given. 3. Because Luke 8. 18. it is made the reason why they should
take heed how they hear; which had not been pertinent, if the promise of giving
more were not to them that rightly hear and receive the word. 4. It is more
fully cleared by Mar. 4. 23, 24, 25. where Christ having said, If any man have
ears to hear let him hear, it is added, And he said unto them, Take heed what
you hear; with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you; and unto you
that hear shall more be given. For he that has to him shall be given, and he
that has not from him shall be taken away, even that which he has. Luke 8.
18. it is even that which he seems to have. 3. The having does hence also
appear to be meant of hearing with a hearing ear, and of obeying the Gospel; it
cannot be meant of bare possession, but of right using, because he that had but
one talent had possession; yet is said not to have, because he did not well
employ it. The sense then is, To him that hears the Gospel with an hearing ear
and an obedient heart, more knowledge, comfort, spiritual abilities, and
happiness shall be given; but an unfruitful disobedient hearer shall lose all
the comfort and happiness he seemed to have.

All spiritual saving Light is from Christ.
SERMON. VIII.
Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into
the world.
Sect. 1. All spiritual saving light of knowledge, peace, joy, hope, life, and
glory, is from Christ.
IT remains that I consider the senses in which Christ as the great Officer of
his Father, or Mediator between God and man, enlightens with spiritual light
every man that comes into the world. I said that the Text may be understood of
this light two ways, 1. That all who are enlightened with spiritual light to
salvation, have it from Christ. 2. That he does enlighten all sorts and nations
of men with spiritual light. I shall consider both.

1. That all who are enlightened with spiritual light to salvation, have it
from Christ, is the same with that which Christ says, Joh. 14. 6. I am the
way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me. And it
is proved in the several sorts of spiritual and saving light, that all who have
them, have them from Christ. 1. There is the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, as the expression is, 2 Cor. 4. 6. and that is in the face of
Jesus Christ. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is
in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh. 6. 46. Not that any man
has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the Father. Joh.
14. 7. If ye had known me, ye should have known the Father also, Verse. 9. He
that has seen me, has seen the Father. Believe thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? The words that I speak unto you I speak not of my
self, but the Father that dwells in me, he does the works. Mat. 11. 27. All
things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him. From whence it is apparent, that the light of the knowledge of
God and his grace which brings salvation, is all from Christ. It was the
Spirit of Christ which was in the Prophets, which testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 11. 2. There
is the light of peace with God, which is derived from Christ and no other. 2
Cor. 5. 18. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ. Verse. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them. Verse. 21. For he has made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Isa. 53.
5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
1 Pet. 2. 24. who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that
we being dead unto sins should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye
were healed, Col. 1. 19, 20. For it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, and (having made peace through the Blood of his Cross) by him
to reconcile all things to himself, by him I say whether they be things in
Earth or things in Heaven. All then that have the light of righteousness and
peace with God, have it from Jesus Christ, who is therefore termed by the
Prophet Isai. 9. 6. the Prince of peace, and was represented by Melchizedeck
King of Salem, that is, Heb. 7. 2. first being by interpretation King of
righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is King of peace, Isai.
9. 7. of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. 3.
There is the light of spiritual joy, comfort, hope, courage, boldness, and
confidence before God, which is derived from Jesus Christ and no other. We are
the circumcision salth the Apostle, Phil. 3. 3. who worship God in the spirit,
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Romans 5. 10,
11. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. And not only so,
but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the Atonement, Col. 1. 27. which is Christ in you the hope of glory,
Phil. 2. 1. If there be any consolation in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ,
Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of
him, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Wherefore remember, that ye being in time passed Gentiles
in the flesh, that at that time ye were without Christ being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. When they were without Christ they had no
hope, 1 These. 4. 13. whereby it is evinced that all spiritual joy in God, all
the comfort against death and wrath to come, all the courage and boldness and
confidence before God, all the hope of the glory of God in which they rejoice,
Romans 5. 2. all the spiritual strength they have to endure and do is from
Christ, Phil. 4. 13. It is the peace of God which passes all understanding,
which keeps men's hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, v. 7. The light of
life, as it is termed, John 8. 12. the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col.
1. 12. is from Christ and him only. 1 John 5. 11. And this is the record, that
God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, he that has
the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life. John 3. 36. He
that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the
Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. Romans 6. 23. For
the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Romans 5. 17, 18, 21 For if by one man's offense death reigned by
one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the
offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor. 15. 22. For
as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Acts 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. 1 Cor 1. 30, 31. But of him
are ye in Cerist Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness
and sanctification and redemption, that according as it is written, he that
glorifieth let him glory in the Lord. Out of all which we may infer, that all
the light of spiritual knowledge, whereby we know the way to God, and
understand his will and counsel is from Christ's irradiation, in whom are hid
all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom, Col. 2. 3. that all our light of
peace and amity and favor with God is communicated to us by the appearing of
Jesus Christ in man's horizon, without which there would have been an eclipse of
the light of Gods countenance for ever, that all our joy in the holy Ghost, our
everlasting consolation, boldness, courage, and confidence in God is through
Christ who strengthens us, without which we had been sick unto death for ever;
that our eternal life, glory, salvation, is from Christ his resurrection and
appearing, without which an everlasting night of torment and horror had scized
on us, we had been in utter darkness, where is nothing but weeping and wailing
and gnashing of teeth.

Sect. 2. Christ inlightens Gentiles as well as Jews with spiritual light.
The other sense of the Text is, That the light of Christ is not confined to
the Jews, but extended to the Gentiles, that he does with spiritual light
inlighten all sorts and Nations of Men, according to the prediction of Simeon,
Luke 2. 32. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel. A thing which was much gainsaid by the Jews, who could not
brook it, That the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, as Christ speaks, Mat. 21. 43. for
which the chief Priests and Pharisees sought to lay hands on him, v. 46. And
when Paul had made a Narration of his converson, and how Christ appeared to him
and said to him, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles, the
Jews gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their voices, and
said, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should
live, Acts 22. 21, 22. So odious and abominable was the mention of the calling
of the Gentiles to be the people of God. And yet (so great was the blindness of
the Jews in reading the Prophets) the thing was frequently and plainly
foretold by the Prophets, Isa. 42. 1, 4. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine
elect in whom my soul delights: I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring
forth judgment unto victory. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have
set judgment in the earth, and the yles shall wait for his law, Mat. 12. 18,
19, 20, 21. I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles, and in his name shall the Gentiles trust, Isai. 42. 6. I the Lord
have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand and will keep thee,
and give thee for a Covenant of the people for a light of the Gentiles to open
the blind eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit
in darkness out of the Prisonhouse, Isa. 49. 9. And he said, It is a light
thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth, from
which place Simeon seems to have taken his expression, Luke 2. 31, 32. and is
alleged by Paul Acts 13. 47. to that end, Isa. 55. 5. Behold thou shall call
a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee shall run unto
thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of Israel, for he has
glorified thee, Isa. 60. 1, 3. Arise, be enlightened, for the light is come. and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, And the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Accordingly our Lord Christ
does often declare himself to be the light of the world not confining his
appearing to the Jews only, but as the Sun of righteousuess he was to
inlighten all Nations, John 8. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them saying, I
am the light of the world; he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life. John 9. 5. As long as I am in the world I am
in the light of the world, John 12. 46. I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes on me should not walk in darkness. Whereby the term [world]
is meant specially the Gentiles, as the Apostle uses it, Romans 11. 12.
according to that speech of Christ John 12. 31, 32. Now is the judgment of
this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out, and I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. Which thing our Lord
Christ insinuated in the parables of the invitation of all sorts in the high
ways to the marriage of the Kings Son, Mat. 22. 9, 10. and to the great
Supper, Luke 14. 22. and the prodigal Son, Luke 15. 32. and more plainly
foretold John 10. 16. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold: them
also I must bring, and they shall my voice, and there shall be one flock and
one Shepherd. For though our Lord Christ Mat. 15. 24. says, I am not sent but
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and commanded his twelve Apostles
Mat. 10. 5; 6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the
Samaritans enter ye not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, yet did he begin to Preach to Galilee of the Gentiles, so that the
people which sat in darkness saw great light: and to them which sat in the
Region and shadow ^f death light was sprung up Mat. 4. 5, 16. and when the
woman of Canaan pleaded for her self and her daughter, that though she were a
Dog, yet the Dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters table, Mat.
15. 27. Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman great is thy faith: be it
unto thee even as thou will, and our Lord Christ did Preach himself to be
Christ to a woman of a City of Samaria, called Sychar, who was thereby brought
to believe on him with many of that City, John 4. 41. And after his
resurrection he gave express commission to his Apostles to make Disciples of
all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. to go into all the world, and to Preach the Gospel
to every Creature, Mark 16. 15. appointing all sorts of Disciples to be
Baptized in all Nations, according to which injunction, they went forth and
Preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with
signs following, v. 20. And when Poter stuck at it to go to the Gentiles when
Cornelius sent to him, God resolves him by a vision and a charge of the spirit
with the descent of the spirit upon them, that he bad also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18. which thing he alleged in the
Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 7. when he said, Men and Brethren, ye know that
a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the Word of the Gospel and believe, and God which knows the hearts bare
them witness, giving them the holy Ghost as he did unto us, and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. To whom James
assented adding v. 14, 15, 16, 17. Simeon has declared how God at the first
did visit the Gentiles to take out of them a people for his name, and to this
agree the words of the Prophets as it is written, Amos 9. 11. After this I will
return: and will build again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down;
and I will build again the ruins thereof, and will set it up, that the residue
of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is
called, says the Lord, who does all these things. Which thing was also made
known to Ananias concerning Paul, when he was told, that he was a chosen vessel
unto him to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of
Israel, Acts 9. 15. and to Paul himself, Acts 26. 17, 18. I have appeared to
thee, and now send thee to the Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan huto God. Whence he took it
that the Gospel of the uncircumcission was committed to him, Gal. 3. 7. that he
was a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity, 1 Timothy 2. 7. which thing he
counted his special privilege, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. Unto me who am less then the
least of all Saints is this grace given that I should Preach among the Gentiles
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and (...) (the phrase in the text) to
enlighten all men, or make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery,
which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who created all
things by Jesus Christ. Hence in the setting down the great mystery of
godliness 1 Timothy 3. 16. this is one chief point, that God was manifested in the
flesh Preached to the Gentiles, and believed on in the world. For which reason
it is said Tit. 2. 11. that the saving grace of God has appeared or shined to
all men, and so Christ inlightens every man that comes into the world with
spiritual saving light.

Sect. 3. There is not sufficient direction in the acts of Gods common
providence to lead men to the knowledge of Gods grace in Christ.
How all spiritual light is derived from Christ, and how he inlightens all
sorts of men with it, has been showed before in some measure. Yet it is to be
observed, that he inlightneth Jews and Gentiles differently: the Jews by his
own personal Preaching and example, the Gentiles by his Apostles and the gift
of his Spirit instead of his personal Preaching. There is another way which as
I said before, has been conceived by some, that God vouchsafed to the Gentiles
before Christ's coming in the flesh; and in like manner he does now to those
who never heard the Gospel, in an universal calling to the knowledge of his
grace in Christ by his beneficence and patience toward all men, and by the
ordering of the Heavens and other Creatures in the world, which are objects fit
to induce men to enquire after a Mediator and the Gospel, and that thereby men
men might find out that which might lead them to faith, and this has been
styled universal objective grace. Against this opinion besides what is before
said may be objected.

1. That it is said Acts 11. 18. When they heard these things they held their
peace and glorified God, saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life, which shows that they gathered that God had granted
repentance unto life to the Gentiles, in that the Gospel was sent to him, and
not by any thing that before was vouchsafed to them; therefore they judged not
that repentance was granted to life by an universal calling, in the view of
Gods providence before. If any say Cornelius was a praying believer before, it
is granted. But 1. he was but a single person, 2. he was a Proselyte of the
gate, and came to the knowledge of God, not merely by use of natural abilities,
but by the Law and the Prophets, which acquainted him with the promise of
Christ. If it be said that Romans 2. 4. it is said, Or despisest thou the riches
of his goodness and forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance, it is granted; but it does not
follow therefore that the bare observation of Gods goodness, patience and
forbearance was a sufficient direction to lead them unto repentance unto life,
which could not be without the intervention of that Mediator and sacrifice, who
could not be discerned by that direction alone.

2. If there had been such a direction to come to God, the mystery of the
Gospel and the grace of God could not be said to be kept secret since the world
began, and made manifest to all Nations, then by the Scriptures of the
Prophets, Romans 16. 25, 26. it had not been the hidden wisdom of God in a
mystery as it is termed, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Which was from the beginning of the world
hid in God, Ephesians. 3. 9. From ages and generations, Col. 1. 26. but had been
revealed before by his patience, goodness, and forbearance, and the frame and
ordering of the Creatures contrary to those texts. If it be said, that the
Apostle says Romans 10. 18. But I say have they not heard? yes verily, their
sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the word. It is
answered, that though the words as they are Psalm. 19. 4. are meant of the
motion and illumination of the Heavens, yet the Apostle by way of allusion
makes use of them only to show that since the Apostles Preached the Gospel,
the Word of God was made known to all Nations for the obedience of faith, as it
is, Romans 16. 26. and this to be his meaning appears from v 14, 15, 16, 17.
whence the hearing mentioned v. 18. appears to be of the word of faith by
Preachers sent, who bring the glad tidings of good things, Preach the Gospel of
peace, and their feet are therefore beautiful. If it be said that Col. 1. 23.
the Gospel is said to be Preached in every Creature under Heaven, I grant that
the particle in the Greek is and, which commonly is translated in, but there it
is to be translated to, being redundant, as not only by the use of the phrase
Mark 16. 15. to which it is likely the Apostle had reference, but also by the
words may appear, since the Gospel Preached is said to be heard by them, of
which Paul was a Minister; and were it to have the sense, which those which
read [in] would have, it should not be restrained to every Creature under
Heaven, since in the Heavens according to their sense the Gospel is as much, if
not more, Preached, as in every Creature under Heaven.

3. If there had been a sufficient direction in the ordering of the Creatures,
and acts of divine providence to bring us to God, then the counsel of God
might have been found out by man if he had used his natural abilities
faithfully and carefully. But the Apostle does expressly deny this, 1 Cor. 2. 9,
10, 11, 12. saying not only that they have not entered into the heart of man,
but also that they are the deep things of God revealed by his Spirit, not to be
known but by it, as no man knows the things of man but the spirit of man, that
they are freely given of God, and we receive his Spirit to make them known to
us.

4. If there had been a sufficient direction in the acts of divine common
providence toward all men to lead us to the enquiery and knowledge of Gods
grace in Christ then there had been an universal calling thereby. But the
Apostle denies men's calling to the communion of Gods grace to be universal, 1
Cor. 1. 9, 24, 26. therefore there is not an universal objective grace or
sufficient direction in acts of common divine providence to lead us to Gods
grace. If it be objected that it is said, that the Gentiles held the truth in
unrighteousness, because that which ought to be known of God was manifest in
them, or to them, for God has showed it unto them. I answer it is true, and the
next v. 20. shows that if (...) be to be read, not, what may be known, but what
ought to be known of God, as that Author would have it, yet v. 19. it is not
said, all that ought to be known of God was revealed to them, not the counsel
of Gods grace in reconciling them to himself, but only his eternal power and
godhead, which are understood by the things that are made, v. 20. and the evil
of some sins and necessity of some duties, Romans 2. 14. and that the effect of
these is not conversion to God but inexcusableness, Romans 1. 20. and 2. 15.

5. If the Scripture term those times wherein the Gospel was not Preached to
the Gentiles, nor the written Law or Prophets sent to them the times of
ignorance which God winked at or overlooked, and by the Apostles then commanded
every man every where to repent, suffering all Nations in times past to walk in
their own ways then he did not by his acts of common providence sufficiently
direct men to attain to his grace. But the antecedent is true, Acts 14. 16. and
17. 30. Therefore also the consequent. If it be said that Acts 14. 17. it is
said, Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good and
gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons filling our hearts with food
and gladness, and Acts 17. 25. that he gives to all life and breath and all
things, that he made all Nations of one blood, for to dwell on all the face of
the earth, and has deterwined the times before appointed, and the bounds of
their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might seek
after him, though he be not far from every one of us, v. 26. 27. It is
granted: but it is denied that the thing witnessed thereby, was that gracious
and good affection which he bears unto the world through Jesus Christ, his
inclination unto peace with men upon their repentance, as the said Pagans debt
p. 12. For those acts of providence do not so much as show, that by one means
or other God is taken off from the rigor of his justice and severity of his
wrath against sinners, but only that he deferres it; nor is it true that what
is related Acts 14. 17. is all the Evangelicall Doctrine Preached at Lystra by
Paul, for it is said before v. 7. that they were at Lystra, (...) Preacbing the
Gospel. Nor is it consequent, that because the Apostle faith, Heb. 11. 6. He
that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently him, that therefore this is all the faith or belief that the
Apostles makes simply and absolutely necessary to bring a man unto God, i. e.
into grace or favor with him; nor is it true. For then many of the Gentiles
had been brought into Gods favor without faith in Christ contrary to Ephesians. 2.
12. John 14. 6. Acts 4. 12. 1 John 5. 11, 12.

6. If the grace of God given us in Christ before the times of ages were
manifested by the appearing of Christ who abolished death, and brought life and
immortality or incorruption to light by the Gospel, then it is supposed this
grace was not to be seen before. But the former is true 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
therefore also the latter.

7. If it were so that the acts of Gods beneficence Acts 14. 17. testified his
gracious affection unto the world through Jesus Christ, then we might believe
by reasoning without Preaching, but that is contrary to Romans 10. 14, 15, 17.
Ergo

8. If there were no more faith absolutely necessary to bring a man to God then
the belief of Gods being and reward of diligent seeking then a faith short of
belief in Christ, would purify the heart and save, yea works would save; for
such a faith would be accepted only by reason of the works it produces. But
this takes away the main end of the Gospel. Which tells us that we are saved by
faith not by works, that all might be of grace, and boasting might be excluded
and Christ might be all in all, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30,
31. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Tit. 3. 4, 5. therefore that opinion is to be rejected as
making Christianity unnecessary, and moral Philosophy sufficient to salvation.

Sect. 4. Application to move us Gentiles to rejoice in this light, and not to
rest on humane reason.
As for us Christian Gentiles it concerns us

1. To magnify the rich grace of God in causing the Lord Christ to come as a
light to the Gentiles. Oh let all that love the salvation of God admire, exult,
glorify God for his mercy as it is written, For this cause will I confess to
thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And again he says, rejoice ye
Gentiles with his people; and again, praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud
him all ye people; and again Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and
he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust,
Romans 15. 9, 10, 11, 12. There are a company of bastard Christians, or rather
Hypocritical Atheists risen up. who talk (I know not whether they believe
themselves) as if every man might be saved in his own religion, or in his own
opinion though there be no religion in him, if he live honestly, he of a fair
civll debonaier behavior, though these secretly follow their own lusts, and
when it is for their advantage slight rules of justice, and temperance. These
count the knowledge of Christ, preaching of the Gospel, zeal for the purity of
Gods worship and service and Doctrine of Christ superfluous, and therefore are
so far from magnifying the love of God in sending Christ to be a light to the
Gentiles, that they rather profanely deride the esteem of it, and hate those
Preachers and zealous Christians, who earnestly urge men to follow the light of
Christ, as an eyesore to them, disquieting and vexing them, who mind only their
own pleasure and profit, and would not be disturbed by any discourse of God, or
Christ, Heaven or Hell, or judgment to come; were such persons sensible of the
state of the world before Christ's coming in the flesh, the barbarous rudeness,
the abominable idolatry, the horrible cruelty, the beastly uncleanness, the
notorious perfidiousness that the best of those Nations were inured to, they
would prize more the light of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel. However it
be with such as are either naturally or voluntarily blind, or judicially
blinded, so as the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ does not shine
unto them, yet you who have been once enlightened, and have tasted of the good
gift of God, and of the powers of the world to come, methinks should take heed
how you let the relish of Gods goodness, and memory of his loving kindness in
giving Christ to be your light, be lost. We may justly, and should if we were
sensible of our benefit have a new song in our mouths, even a song of
thanksgiving to our God, and join in comfort with the Prophet our praecentor
Isa. 54. 1. Sing O barren thou that did not bear, break forth into singing,
and cry aloud thou that did not travel with Child: for more are the children
of the desolate Gentiles then the children of the married wife the people of
the Jews.

2. It concerns us to take heed how we doat on our own reason, or the most
exact Writers of morality, or the most perfect patterns of civility and
ingenuity, and neglect the light which Christ has brought into the world.
There is a good use to be made of the writings of the Gentile Philosophers,
Orators, Poets, Historians: I am not so severe, as some ancient Councils were,
utterly to forbid the reading of their Books: No not to the younger Students if
they read them with a Christian eye, and a sound judgment, which is to be an
Index Expurgatorius of many passages in them: yet if men rest there and be
inamoured on them and prefer them, as Politian did, before the Gospel, they
may justly expect to be lashed by God, as one of the Fathers is said to be for
his inordinate affection and immoderate delight in Ciceroes works. I would not
altogether forbid society with ingenious, civil, and moral men: there may be
much good behavior learned from them. But if we converse with them, and not
with the children of the light, If we conform our selves to this world, and be
not transformed in the renewing of our minds, that we may know what that good
acceptable and perfect will of God is in Christ, if we behold not with open
face as in a glass the glory of the Lord, nor are changed into the same image
from glory to glory even as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We may be
amiable to men, but not lovely in Gods eyes, we may win men's applause, but
shall loose Gods favor. Let us be wise therefore so to use Candles that we do
not burn daylight, I mean that we so make use of all the reason, and humane
wisdom and virtue we have our selves, or discern in others Writings or
examples, that yet we chiefly eye and follow the grand light the Sun of
righteousness the Lord Jesus learning him, by studying the great counsel of
God which he revealed and denying our selves take up our Cross and follow him
as his Disciples.

Christ is to be chosen and followed as our Light.
SERMON. IX.
Containing an Exhortation to use Christ as our Light.

Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world.
THe principal Use of all I have said is, That you may be induced to embrace
and follow the Lord Christ as the great light of the world. Besides the
evidence out of holy Scripture, to prove him to have been sent from God a light
into the world, the accomplishment of what he foretold, the success of his
errand which he declared with the great wisdom and holiness in all his sayings
and doings, do amply confirm it. It is true, among the Gentile Philosophers
there was light, but it was dim; there was light in the Law, but it was
imperfect; no light which is truly such is to be rejected, yet in comparison of
the light of Christ, it was but darkness. Philosophers light guided men well in
some things, in most did lead men into crooked and dangerous ways; in the true
worship of God they were wholly dark. The teachers of the Law did teach many
things aright about Gods being, works, worship; but in the great business of
reconciling man to God, erecting the kingdom of heaven, and the coming of the
Messiah to judgment, were as blind as Moles. No man has ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man being in heaven,
Joh. 3. 13. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father he has declared him, Joh. 1. 18. Compare Gospel
precepts and promises with the most accurate sayings of any other Writers not
divinely inspired, and you will find the former exceed the later in wisdom
and truth, as much as gold does lead; or bread, acornes. Indeed the things are
such as none but a holy person would declare, they are so opposite to sin and
ungodliness, specially when they did inevitably exasperate men's rage, and
procure persecution unto death. They are such as none could declare but he that
came from God; they are so agreeable to what the Prophets and holy men of old
delivered; so much advancing Gods glory; overthrowing Satan's kingdom; and
leading men to God: The predictions of things to come concerning; himself, his
Apostles, the preaching of the Gospel throughout the world, the persecutions of
his Disciples, the propagating of his Church, the destruction of Jerusalem, the
giving of the holy Ghost, his death, resurrection, ascension, the dispossessing
Satan of his Empire in the world, the conversion of the Gentiles; which are all
accomplished, besides many other things not yet finished, but yet in fieri, in
doing (of which the things already done, besides the signs of the nearness of
their accomplishment, do give firm assurance) do make infallible proof of
Christ's being that true light which enlightens the world. Nicodemus, though one
of that Sect which most envied his repute, yet was forced to tell him, Rabbi,
we know thou art a teacher come from God, for no man can do these miracles that
thou do, except God be with him, Ioh. 3. 2. The Devil has attempted to raise
some up, who might as Christ's apes make show of doing such things as Christ and
his Apostles did; but their imposture has quickly appeared. Neither Julian,
nor the Jews of the first ages, nor other adversaries of Christ, though great
impugners of Christianity, could ever evince any falsehood in the Evangelists
relations of Christ and his acts. The witnesses of them though persons of
understandidg and intergrity, laid down their lives in testimony of them,
notwithstanding the sorest tortures used to force them to a denial, in spite
of all the practices of the Devil; yet the preaching of Christ crucified,
prevailed to pull down the Idols of the Nations, and to bring in a sort the
known world to the obedience of the faith. Though the jews contradicted and
blasphemed, the Roman Emperors raged, Lucian jeered, Libanius wrangled, Julian
calumniated, Papists corrupt, Gnostics, Heretics, Fanatics, Quakers,
adulterate and cloud the truth of Christ, they do but piss against the Sun; the
light of Christ's doctrine, the truth of the Gospel, does and will shine forth:
Nor can all the cavils of modern Atheists, or the dust raised by new
Phantastiques, take away the brightness of Christ's light, or hinder its
enlightening from others then themselves. And shall we after all the arguments
given of Christ's being the true light, follow after ignes fatuos, under
pretense of new light? What real comfort, or spiritual help to holiness, or
heavenly directions, do they give to lead men to God, better then Christ has
done? May you not discern a vainglorious spirit, a self-seeking, proud, carnal
spirit in them? What do their censures of others show, but a mind to extol
themselves? Their reviling, but their disturbed passions, and impatience of
gainfaying? Their affected speech, looks, carriage, but a desire to hide their
falsehood, and to insinuate into the affections of those unwary souls, whom they
would ensnare? What do all the devices of Jesuits, Popes, and their agents tend
to, but either by force or subtility to set up the monstrous power of the man
of sin, and their own domineeting over men's consciences under him? What is
there in their conclave but policy? In their Council of Treat but deceit? In
their Jesuits and Casuists but juggling? Have not the Jansenists proved them so
versatile in their determinations, as to make their resolutions such as might
fit all humors? What is there but fraud in their doctrine and practice, about
keeping faith with Heretics, deposing, destroying Princes excommunicate by the
Pope, equivocating answers upon oath with mental reservations? And shall we go
after such Masters, and leave Christ? Remember we that one is our Master, even
Christ, Mat. 23. 10. And when any shall solicit us, either not to adhere to
Christ as our teacher, be it under pretense of being Christ's infallible Vicar;
or not to read or hear his Gospel preached, be it under pretense of a
sufficient light within them, or a new revelation; reject them. Forget not that
Christ has warned you, that if any shall say unto you, lo here is Christ or
there, believe it not, Mat. 24. 23. Say as Paul, Gal. 1. 9. If any man or Angel
preach any other Gospel then is taught, by Christ, let him be accursed. We will
not venture our lives upon Mountebanks, and will we venture our souls upon
deceivers? Shall we follow our own conceits which so often prove foolish, and
neglect Christ's doctrine which always proves wise and safe? No, no, let us
answer as Peter did for the rest of the Apostles, Lord to whom shall we go,
thou have the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou art
that Christ the Son of the living God, Ioh. 6. 68, 69. Oh that I could find
your minds so established in the truth, so armed against all the wily methods
of the Devil, so instructed in the truth, that you may not be as children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men and cunning craftiness; whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but
speaking or seeking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the head even Christ, Ephesians. 4. 14, 15. Alas! what can we expect, but if
we follow blind leaders (as all are that teach the things of God, otherwise
then Christ and his Apostles did) we should fall with them into the ditch, into
everlasting perdition? On the other side, there is so much plain and clear
light in Christ his doctrine, as will guide our feet into the way of peace.
Away then with all such obtruded or insinuating teachers, us endeavor to hide
from us the light of Christ shining in his doctrine, recorded in Scripture. Let
the word of Christ dwell richly in us in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. Let Us say as
that blessed Martyr did, None but Christ, none but Christ: That Christ which
preached, died at Jerusalem, that word of his which is written in my Bible,
shall be my light, to the testimony of Jesus, to his everlasting Gospel I
stick; if men speak not according to it, it is because there is no light in
them, Isaiah 8. 20.

To this end it will concern you to take with you, and observe these
Directions. 1. To take heed of false lights, under what disguise soever they
come. The Lord Christ foretold his Disciples, Mat. 24. 24. That there should
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and should show great signs and
wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they should deceive the very
elect; concerning whom he says, Verse. 23. If any man shall say unto you, Lo
here is Christ or there, believe it not. Of these he had forewarned Christians,
Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Paul had foretold, Act. 20. 29, 30. that
after his departing, grievous Wolves should enter in among them, not sparing
the flock; and that of the Ephesian Christians, themselves should men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them; and thereupon
warns the Ephesian Elders to take heed to themselves and to the flock, over
which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, Verse. 28. Paul tells the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. of false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light. And of such he admonishes the
Romans, I beseech you brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18.
Peter also tells, 2 Pet. 2. 1. that there were false Prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among Christians, who privily
should bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them. 1 Ioh. 2.
18. And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many
Antichrists. 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. All which passages do demonstrate the great danger of Christians
being beguiled by deceivers, who are cunning in transforming themselves, as
their master Satan does, into Angels of light, that they may seem Ministers of
righteousness. Wherefore it concerns all such as regard the safety of their
souls, not to be facile in entertaining such as pretend to hold forth light,
but to examine what they suggest, and to try before they trust. To which end it
will be needful,

1. That we be of discerning Spirits, to know the disposition of persons that
pretend light; whether they be proud, arrogant, self-seeking, vainglorious,
covetous, more vehement then considerate, obsequious for advantages, but
otherwise wilful.

2. Concerning their proceedings; whether they deal with the weakest, before
they argue with the ablest; whether they affect more show of holiness, then
proof of doctrine; whether they love not to conceal their opinions, till they
have ensnared men, by raising a high esteem of their persons; whether they
practice not to disparage others, that they may engross the esteem and
affections of men; whether they be not much in talk, little in deed. These and
many more enquiries may much prevent the deceits of those, that with feigned
words make merchandise of weak souls. But

3. The chief way is to try what they obtrude upon us by the Scripture. Such
Owls will not endure this light; but as Tertullian terms them, they are
Lucifuga Scripturarum, they fly the light of the Scripture, and endeavor to
make odious the teachers of it. If they cannot prevail to keep it from men in a
strange language, they will corrupt it with false glosses; if they cannot
suppress Preachers, they will render them suspected or infamous; if they cannot
shut out the light of Scripture and Preaching, they will set something else in
competition with it, as the Authority of the Church, a Council, Pope,
tradition, light within each, or some other thing, to hide the light from
shining forth. Therefore it chiefly concerns men in these times, wherein men
are exceeding busy to pervert, and thereby to darken the truth, to be very
diligent and circumspect in examining by the Scripture what they hear; their
doctrine is the fruit by which false Prophets are to be known, Mat. 7. 15, 16.
If they speak not according to the Scripture, it is because there is no light
in them, Is. 8. 20.

4. Use should be made of the Ministers appointed to teach us by him, who
ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying of the
body of Christ, that we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in
love, may grow up in all things unto him, who is the head even Christ, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 14, 15. Certainly nothing more prevents the practices of deceivers,
then learning from a solid Ministry, and associating with sober and stable
Christians.

2. To move us to make use of Christ as the true light, it is necessary that we
should become sensible of our own darkness. If ye were blind says Christ,
Joh. 9. 41. ye should have no sin, but now ye say we see, therefore your sin
remains. Because thou faist I am rich and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and blind,
and naked, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may
be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou
may see, Rev. 3. 17, 18. They that apprehend a light within them without
Christ, are incurably blind; such fond imaginations lock men fast up under
invincible ignorance. As he said, that to be incredulous is the sinews of
wisdom; so may I say, that to be jealous of our own darkness, is the readiest
way to drive us to Christ the true light. Experience will tell us, that they
who talk as if they knew as much as Preachers can tell them, are found when
tried, the most ignorant sots; and those who are so well conceited of their own
strength and wisdom, as to count the counsel and warning of others
unnecessary, bidding them not care for them, are soon caught by cunning
deceivers. To become a wise improver of Christ's light, it is of great moment to
discern our own blindeness; and then a Christian learns most, when he finds
his own ignorance. Such sense of our own emptiness, begets an appetite to
wholesome doctrine; when such as conceive themselves full, have no stomach to
the most precious truths of Jesus Christ, but are filled with windy vanities.

3. It concerns those to Whom the light of Christ is held forth not to shut
their eyes against it when held before them. For this says our Lord, Joh. 3.
19, 20. is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should
be reproved. And indeed it is the sign of a man that is filthy and resolved to
be filthy, of a man incurable and marked to destruction, who shuns that light
which should direct him to discern his error and to learn his way. Nor can
there be a greater indignity to Christ then when he is come into the world to
be one light to have our minds possessed with a resolution not to receive it.

4. If the light shine into thy soul from Christ, so as that any convictions or
discoveries of truth from Christ get into thee, take heed that thou hold it not
in unrighteousness nor seek to quench it. The wrath of God, says the Apostle
Romans 1. 18. is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men that hold the truth in unrighteousness. Where lust imprisons light:
Where corrupt affections put out the Lamp of truth there is no entrance of the
light of Christ into that soul.

5. The light must be believed, as our Lord Christ says, John 12. 36. While we
have light we are to believe in the light, that we may be children of light.
Believing the words of Christ is indeed the reception of Christ as our light.
When we entertain the Gospel of Christ, we do behold with open face as through
a glass the glory of the Lord, and are transformed into the same image from
glory to glory as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The more steddily we
eye Christ the more assimilated we shall be to him. His Doctrine will fashion
our minds, his example will direct our practice, so as that in a good sense we
shall be christed with Christ, he will be in us and we in him, one with us and
we with him, not we live, but Christ live in us. Faith is the Loadstone of the
soul which draws the soul to Christ, and makes a man to be as he was in this
world crucified, risen, ascending up with him, dead to the world, living unto
God.

6. There must be a love of the light, Its the greatest sign of a man wilfully
evil when he hates the light, and its a good sign of a man truly good, when he
can delight in that light which discovers his own evils. Christ has therefore
determined this to be the great condemnation, that men love darkness rather
then light: for that's the sign they side with the Prince of darkness, and that
men that do the truth come to the light, that their deeds may be manifest that
they are wrought in God, John 3. 19, 20, 21. The more light is rejected the
more purely voluntary any sin is, when men are willingly ignorant they are
incurably evil; But the more love and delight there is in the light of truth
the more freely it is chosen, and more fully embraced. Light is a most
delightful quality, unless it be to illaffected eyes, and so is truth to all
but such as are of vitiated spirits: the more Heavenly the light is, the more
pure, and so the truth of Christ the Lord from Heaven is the clearest truth and
most amiable. Moses gave a Law, but in shadows; Christ the only begotten Son
which is in the bosom of the Father he has declared God, and his will without
obseurity: He was full of grace and truth, then which nothing is more lovely,
and therefore the more the averseness is from the Gospel of Christ the more
estrangedness there is from the life of God, and the more the light of Christ
is entertained, the more of the love of God dwells in that person.

7. That a man have light from Christ it is needful he should awake out of
sleep, Ephesians. 5. 14. A careless soul that's heedless of what truth is held forth,
that snorts securely, and dreams sweetly of peace when there is no peace is no
more capable of benefit by the light of Christ, then a man that's of a drousie
sleepy head, that folds his hands, and minds nothing but his bed and pillow.
Of using bodily light, not only sore eyes, but also drousie heads are offended
with light. Watching is necessary to the use of Christian light, which being
neglected, the Prince of darkness easily binds the hands and shaves the hair
as Dalilah did Sampsons, which makes his strength depart from him. To keep our
souls safe it is needful we keep our eyes waking, and to pray with the
Psalmist, Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not the sleep of death, Ps. 13. 3.

8. To this must be joined standing up from the dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. Graves and
Vaults for dead bodies are not fit receptacles of light: To be among men who
have no spiritual life in their souls, to be associated with mere carnal
worldlings, voluptuous Epicures, proud selfish men is as inconsistent with the
enjoyment of the light of Christ, as for a seeing man to lie among the dead,
which are cut off from Gods hand. A child of light will have little but
darkness from such unholy souls as are full of darkness, yea doubtless such
company will by their own reasonings, and Satan's sophistry blow out the light
of Christ that it shine not where they are. Hence it is that among such persons
all discoveries of sin or duty, Gods counsel or Covenant, Christ and his
Church, Heaven and Hell are tedious: No talk, or action among such is more
acceptable then that which proceeds from an earthly spirit. Scripture truth,
holy Sermons, spiritual experiences are unsuitable to that mirth they delight
in, those contents that please them, those ends they aim at. Whence it is that
they put out that light, which crosses their designs, and wish that neither
God did see them, nor Christ judge them, nor Preachers teach them, nor any Saint
converse with them. Doubtless then a soul that affects these cannot long endure
such quench-coales, nor join with such extinguishers, but as he is made a child
of light so chooses to be with them in whom is light.

9. It will concern those who own Christ as their light to judge themselves and
their ways by his light. It is the great benefit of light that it does not
make manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13. And thus by the light of Christ the evil of our
ways is reproved, the ways of God approved: we know the righteousness of God,
and our unrighteousness. Now this is no small benefit to have light to discern
our own errors, which without light from Christ we should never have unstood.
It is our advantage that God covers our sins, and we discover them. He that is
ignorant of them cannot correct them: but walks on in them without shame or
sorrow, as a man that walks in the night neither sees how foul his clothes
are, nor knows how to make them clean. Hence it comes to pass that for want of
light the carriage of most is so unhandsome and unlike the Gospel that they
not only shame themselves, but also cause others to stumble. A wise Christian
therefore will be often judging himself by the light of law discovering his
transgressions, and the light of the Gospel showing his estate in Christ.

10. It will be needful not only to use the light of Christ to judge our selves
by, but also to order our actions by. I am the light of the world says Christ,
John 8. 12. be that follows me shall not walk in darkness. There cannot be
unsafe walking by Christ's light: there is no danger when Christ our light goes
before. Walk in the light says Christ while ye have the light lest darkness
come upon you, John 12. 35. How many millions are there of souls perplexed and
tortured all their life with fears and doubts for want of walking by the light
of Christ in Scripture, and chosing rather to walk by a light and sparks of
their own kindling, which in the end either goes quite out or burns so dim
as to leave them in darkness of spirit and horror of conscience. And no
marvel since it is Gods just judgment, that such as neglect the light Preached
should follow the mares of humane reason, the examples, customs, dictates of
men, and in conclusion lie down in sorrow, Isai. 50. 11. such foolish fires
will lead to nothing but bogs and praecipices: But Christ the true light when
his Gospel is followed guides the feet of men into the way of peace, Luke 1.
79. Oh that then all that talk of the light within them would follow the light
about them, even the light of Christ's Gospel and example, whereby the greatest
security is obtained and the surest advancement with God, since he that follows
Christ his light shall be where he is. Then would men walk honestly or decently
in good fashion, not in banquetings and drunkennesses, not in chamberings and
wantonnesses, not in strife and envying, if they would put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and not make provision of the flesh unto lusts, Romans 13. 13, 14.

11. The light of Christ is to be used as our weapons or tools to defend our
selves or to work with. The night is over, the day has approached: let us
therefore put off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, Romans
13. 12. The truth is, light is the chiefest instrument for safety and work. If
a man be without light he can neither defend himself nor offend an enemy. If
any man walk in the day he stumbleth not because he sees the light of this
world. But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no light
in him, says christ John 11. 9, 10. I must work the works of him that sent me
while it is day, the night comes, when no man can work, John 9. 4. As the
bodily light is given us by God to fight and work, so spiritual light is given
us by Christ to fight the good fight of Christ, and to do the works of God. He
then that would make use of Christ's light must be armed with his Doctrine, that
he may be able to repel Satan's fiery darts, and expel him as Christ did by the
sword of the spirit which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. And he that would
improve the light must be doing that business which the word of Christ directs
him to, and to that end it must dwell richly in him in all wisdom, Col. 3.
16. Their own light in men makes them rather wranglers with others sometimes
the best (as is seen in Quakers) then contenders against their own lusts, and
moves them to disturb others in their work, and to be busy bishops in another
diocese, rather then to lookinto their own charge: but the light of Christ
directs us to steady to be quiet and do our own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.

12. And Lastly, Make use of the light of Christ for thy comfort and rejoicing.
The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, Prove. 15. 30. Truly the light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is to behold the Sun, Eecl. 11. 7. But the light
of Christ his Gospel does far more rejoice the heart, and is much more
delightful to the soul then bodily light can be to the eyes. It is it which
removes doubts, griefs, fears, despair in life and at death. Oh how sweetly
might men live, how comfortably might they dye, if they did make use of it?
Light within you whatever Quakers tell you will leave you in perplexity, when
you shall have most need of comfort. But if you believe in the light of Christ
as it is held out to you in the Gospel you shall see the light of life. Be
persuaded to disclaim the pretended new light within you as your sufficient
guide to God, and choose the light of Christ from Heaven in his Gospel to walk
by, and it will guide and comfort you surely and sweetly to eternal life.

FINIS.

