A BRIEF TESTIMONY To the Great Duty of Prayer, Showing the NATURE and BENEFIT
Thereof. To which is added, Above one Hundred Eminent and Select Instances that
God did answer Prayer. Collected out of the Record of the Holy Scriptures.

By J. T. one of the People called Quakers.

With a Postscript by J. F.

Watch and Pray, Matt. 26.41. Col. 4.2. And and things whatsoever ye ask in
Prays, believing, ye shall receive, Mat. 21.22.

And prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the
Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing that there shall not be room
enough to receive it, Mal. 3.10.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Northcon in George-Yard in Lombard Street. 1695.

A BRIEF Testimony, etc.
WAtch and Pray, was the Command of our Mat. 26.41.
Lord Jesus, the Holy Author of the Christian Religion: He gave a good reason
for this Command, That ye enter not into Temptation. And knowing how incapable
Man is to perform any good of himself, promised to pray Jo. 14.16.
the Father to send the Comforter that he may abide with us for ever, even the
Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive; and in the 26 v. says, but the
Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, which my Father will send in my Name, He
shall teach you all things; then certainly, Prayer, so great a Duty to God, and
beneficial to our selves, is included. Our Lord puts Watching before Prayer,
that we may have due regard to, and wait upon his Holy Spirit to feel its
leadings and assistance therein. As Paul advised Timothy in both his Epistles
not to neglect the 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
Gift of God which was in him: For waiting upon the Lord in the Gift of his
Spirit is necessary for all to be found in, who desire to perform this Duty
aright (or indeed any other work which is acceptable unto God) if we go about
Prayer and take not this advice we begin wrong; for from Mat. 15.19.
within (as our Lord said) proceeds all Evil. Therefore we have need to apply
our selves to within, to find the Remedy where the Disease is; and as we wait
in true silence, ceasing from our own Thoughts and willings, with our Minds
stayed and fixed upon the Lord, trusting in him we shall be made sensible of
our Wants and Infirmities, and the Sin which does most easily beset us; thus as
the state of our Souls is opened to us, shall see our own Nothingness and
Inability, to resist any appearance of Evil of our selves. God will not despise
such who are poor in their own Eyes, but will direct them by his Holy Spirit
how to ask, not only inclining their wills to Prayer, but opening their
Understandings also what to ask for. And inasmuch that we know not at what time
the Devil our 1 Pet. 5.8.
Adversary (who goes continually about seeking whom may he devour) will assault
us, nor with what Temptation he will come, therefore can there be any set time,
or from of words prescribed which we must use to God, when we implore his
Succor and Relief; otherwise than we feel the drawings and motions of his
Spirit in our Hearts, which will not be wanting to incline and assist us upon
every occasion; yea, very often not only when we are tempted, but at other
times also.

Various were the Methods both as to time and words as well as place, which the
Holy Men of Old sought the Lord. Daniel and David Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 55.17.
sometimes prayed three times a day: David also Psalm. 119.164.
praised God seven times a day: Paul besought the Lord 2 Cor. 12.8.
thrice upon one occasion; and the Primitive Christians were commanded to pray
Luke 18.1. 1 These. 5.17.
always.

If we diligently watch, and are brought into a right frame of mind, and moved
of the Lord to Pray, we need no more doubt of the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, to teach us what we shall pray, when we approach before God, than when
we are called before Magistrates for the sake of Christ, which was promised the
Holy Ghost, Mark 13.11.
shall teach us the same hour what to say.

The Primitive Christians knew not how to pray as they ought, but as the Romans
8.26.
Spirit helps their Infirmities; then surely we have great need to be
diligent in the application of our Minds to the same holy Principle; that
thereby we may be made fit to offer unto God an acceptable Sacrifice, an
Offering seasoned with his Grace, from whence God may smell a sweet favor and
accept it from us.

The Holy Spirit is the mystical Salt, whereof the outward Salt under the Law
Levit. 2.13.
was a Figure, where it is said, Neither shall thou suffer the Salt of the
Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy Meat Offering; with all thine
Offerings thou shall offer Salt. This Salt was to season and purify every
Sacrifice, yea, and every Sacrificer too in this Dipensation; for our Lord
Jesus brought it nearer, when he said every one must be salted Mark 9.49.
with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt. Without which our
Offerings will be of no more acceptance with the Lord, than was the Prayers and
Oblations of the Jews of Old, whom God reproved thus, saying, Isa. 1.12.
When ye come to appear before me, who has required these things at your
hands? But if we keep the Conditions upon which the promises are, the Lord will
certainly keep his word; Who said, seek and ye shall find, ask and it shall be
given, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Not such Petitioners as the
Apostle James speak of, Ja. 4.3.
who asked, but received not, because they asked amiss; but seek in Faith and
Humility, believing God is present, and able to do all things. Our Lord
promissed all things, Mat. 21.22.
whatsoever ye ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

The Parable of the unjust Judge, Luke 18.1. to 8.
and importunate Widow; and the Man who called up his Luke 11.5.
Neighbor at midnight to supply him with Bread to feed his traveling Friend:
And of Parents giving good things to their Children, Luke 11.11.
are great inducements to us, to be found in the frequent practice of this
excellent Duty.

And though the despised People of God, called Quakers, have been evilly
traduced, and grossly misrepresented, as if they denied this great Ordinance or
Duty of Prayer; I have not heard of any People upon Earth, who own Prayer more
truly, and whose Spiritual Interest it is so to do.

1st. They own it truly, because they believe and declare it unto others as a
fundamental Truth, that God in his Mercy has given unto all Men, through Jesus
Christ his dear Son 1 Cor. 12.7.
a measure or manifestation of his Spirit to profit withal; without which, as
has been already said, we cannot do any thing acceptable to God. This is the
Comsorter that teaches all things, the word of Faith nigh in the Heart Romans
10.8.
and in the Mouth. It is also called the word Acts 20.32.
of Grace, which is able to build us up, and give us an Inheritance among them
which are sanctified through Faith which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This
Word, Spirit, Light or Grace which came by Jesus, and and through him is extended
unto all Men, is a remedy which God has in Mercy provided for Man; and it is
as universal as the disease: For as by the Offense of one (Adam,) Romans 5.18.
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of
one (Jesus Christ) the free Gift came upon all Men unto justification of Life.
This is the Christians guide and teacher in all things, especially in things
immediately relating to God; and as this Spirit sanctifies the Heart, and
brings forth a pure Offering out of it, God accepts thereof; he regards Truth
in the inward Parts, not outside appearances only, but the sincerity of Heart.
It was his demand of Old, Prove. 23.26.
Son give me thine Heart. Not a multitude of words without this, will prevail
with God. Our Lord reproved Mat. 23.14.
the Pharisees for their long Prayers, when their Hearts went after their
Covetousness, yet thought like the Mat. 6.7.
Heathen, to be heard for their much speaking, or vain repititions; but he
commended the poor Publican, who in the sense of his Sins made a full
Confession, but a short Prayer: Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a Sinner; and pronounced him rather justified than the
Pharisee.

And because we dare not offer up Prayers to God, until we feel our Hearts
moved thereunto by his Spirit, which makes Romans 8.26.
intercession for us according to the will of God; no more can we join with
those who pray without the sense of this Spirit and fear of God, and can
immediately turn from their vain and idle Discourses to Prayer, and from their
Prayers back again to their Discourses. We have been convinced not only that
such Prayer avails nothing with God, but also that he is displeased with it,
for he has said, Exodus 20.7.
I will not hold them Guiltless that take my Name in vain.

The Public Prayers put up to God in the name of Jesus, in our Solemn
Assemblies for the Worship of God, as many Thousands can bear us witness are
evident Proofs that we do not only own, but use true Prayer.

2dly. It is our Spiritual Interest to be frequent in this Practice, for we
daily reap the benefit thereof. If God take care of Sparrows, Luke 12.24. to 28.
cloth the Grass, and array the Lilies, and feed the Ravens Job 38.41.
when their young Ones cry unto him, will not he regard us, and hear our
Prayers and Cries when we make Supplication to him in the Name of his Son, in
whom he is well pleased; Mar. 1.11.
and for whose sake he is pleased with Man, and grants us supplies suitable to
our Necessities: We have good reason to love Prayer, even from the Experience
we have felt thereof in our selves: And truly as the case stands with us, we
should be very unhappy without this privilege. It is well known manifold and
cruel have been the Sufferings of this People, whom Men have persecuted,
reviled, and spoken all manner of Evil against falsely for the sake of Christ,
and the Righteousness of his Kingdom, as our Lord foretold long since Mar.
5.10, 11.
would be the portion of his followers; and they have not only patiently born
what was permitted to come upon them from unreasonable Men; but Satan also by
himself has used great and manifold endeavors if possible to drive them from
their Faith and Obedience in Christ, to effect which, has raised Enemies
within, and we have often found it to be as our Lord said, a Man's Enemies Mat.
10.36.
are those of his own House, Inward Assaults, Temptations and Buffettings: The
Devil envied and raged at them, the World hated and persecuted them, what sad
Condition should we be in, if we had not this privilege to fly to God, and
seek his Face, like Children, when they are apprehensive of Danger, run with
great boldness to their Parents, and though sometimes they cannot express
themselves to relate their fears and troubles, yet their Parents have
Compassion, and receive them with open Arms, and ready to defend them to their
utmost. How much more, as our Lord said, Luc. 11.13. Joh. 10.29.
Shall our Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? None is
able to pull us out of his Hands, he is greater than all.

It cannot be related what immediate Comfort and divine Aid such have received
who truly sought his Face; whereby they have many infallible Proofs that there
is a God Psalm. 65.2.
who hears Prayer, and lifts up the Light of his Countenance upon his
Children, whereof their Souls are more joyful than those Psalm. 4.7.
whose Corn and Wine increases, and they have been thereby so strengthened and
filled with Heavenly Joy, that they have esteemed all their Sufferings,
Tribulations, Slanders and Reproaches, as Riches, being so many tokens of their
Discipleship to Jesus, whom they desire to follow, that they may receive the
Promise, Mat. 5.12.
Great shall be your reward in Heaven.

Therefore let none slander nor defame us with this false Charge of denying
Prayer; for we do faithfully declare, as above, that we sincerely own and
practice it, and have good cause to continue therein, both our own Experience,
and the Examples of others: Holy Men and Women as they are recorded in Holy
Scriptures, in the several Ages of the World, they prayed to God upon many
Occasions and Exigents.

I shall give some instances of such who prayed, and the Lord did signally
appear, and granted them their Requests. Let us pray in Faith as they they did,
and our Petitions shall be heard, for God is the same as ever he was, as
willing to hear, and as powerful to save as in former Ages. My Hand is not
shortened that I cannot Isa. 59.1. and 10.2.
save, neither is my Ear heavy that I cannot hear, says the Lord.

But before I shall mention those places of Scripture that regard the virtue
and power of Prayer, I would be well understood what I mean by Prayer; true
Prayer is a desire of the Soul, whether expressed by words or not, from a sense
of the want of that the Soul prays for, which sense no Man can give himself: It
is the Spirit of God alone, and to those this Spirit of Prayer is given, who in
some measure obey the Spirit, turning at its reproof from the evil, and that
which is reproveable in the sight of God; and this is the true reason why so
many miss in this great Duty; they pray amiss, having not a sense of what they
pray for.

I say, true Prayer is not only words, the best of words, for the Essence and
Life of Prayer, is that divine sense which is received through the preparation of
the Heart by the Spirit of God; and it is this sort of Prayer I recommend in
this short Discourse; and if People would be serious and kind to themselves as
to consider how little they receive of that they ask for, and how much they are
daily found in a Contradiction to their own Prayers; they would easily see how
much they are out of the right way of true Prayer. Our Lord commanded Watch and
Pray; therefore they that would pray aright must watch, they that watch must
wait: And what must they wait for? that God would please by his Spirit, to
prepare their Hearts to worship him acceptably. Therefore no Man can prescribe
Forms to the Holy Ghost: For as the Holy Spirit begets sense of wants, so many
times wants beget words, and such words have a Spirit and Life with them, this
is praying in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; to wit, in his Divine Power
and Authority, and therefore successful, and that in all Ages as the following
instances do evidence and illustrate.

Jacob wrestled with the Angel, he wept and made Genesis 32.25. Hos. 12.3.
Supplication, and by his strength he had power with God, and prevailed like a
Prince. Ja. 5.17.
God shut up Heaven at Elias Prayer for the space of three years and an half,
that there was a great Famine; he prayed again, and the Heavens gave Rain, and
the Earth brought forth Fruits.

At the Prayer Josh. 10.12.
of Joshua, the Sun and Moon stood still for the space of a whole day. Samuel
prayed, and the Lord 1 Sa. 7.9, 10.
discomfited his Enemies with a terrible Thunder. Abraham prayed, and obtained
Promises of a Son Genesis 15.
to be his Heir, and of the Land of Canaan for an Inheritance, with the
innumerable increase of his Seed. Jacob prayed, and escaped the edge Jen. 32.
and 33. Chap.
of the Sword, for he was greatly afraid of his Brother Esau; but God turned
the Heart of Esau, that he embraced him kindly, and parted so. Gideon in great
weakness prayed Judge. 6.
to the Lord, and was made strong, and confirmed by signs, and became a
deliverer of Israel out of their Bondage. Isaiah the Prophet, and Hezekiah the
King prayed, 2 Kings 19.
because of the Threats and Blasphemy of Rabsheka General of the King of
Assyrias Army, and the Lord heard them, and opened the mouth of his Prophet to
foretell good unto Israel, and sent his Angel who slew in one night 185000 Men
of the Assyrians, and Israel was delivered at that time. At the Prayer Genesis
20.17.
of Abraham, God healed Abimelech, the King, his Queen and Family. At the
entreaty Genesis 25.21.
of Isaac, after twenty years Marriage, God gave him two Sons. Rebecca, and
Hannah, both besought God, concerning Children, and their Prayers were
answered. Moses, Aron, and Phineas, were lively Genesis 25.22. 1 Samuel 1.27.
Types of our Lord Jesus, the one Mediator between God and Men, and were as
Saviors to the People, often making intercession and atonement for them, when
the Anger Exodus 32.11, ^4. Numb. 25.13, and 16, 43, to 50.
of the Lord was kindled against them.

Christian Reader, much might be said upon this Subject, and many more Examples
brought out of the Holy Scriptures, of those wonderful things wrought by Prayer
and Faith, particularly of the many Supplications made to our Blessed Lord
Jesus when on Earth; upon which he raised Mat. 9.25.
the Dead, healed Mat. 8.5, to 13, verse.
the Sick, and forgave Luk 7.47.
Sins: To which Examples the Apostle James might allude, when he exhorted the
Primitive Christians to Prayer: And if any be Sick, let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray over him; and the Ja. 5.14.
Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if
he have committed Sins, they shall be forgiven him. But I shall say the less,
intending to annex hereunto above an Hundred Instances Collected out of the
Holy Scriptures, whereby in a short time one may see (for encouragement) those
miraculous things wrought in former Ages; which otherwise we cannot find in
much reading, being mixed in Scripture among other matters. I thought to
conclude here, but must take notice of another great inducement we have to this
Duty; and it is the greatest Example of all that can be brought, to wit, Our
Lord Jesus, he who commanded us to Watch and Pray, set us himself for a
Pattern: And though the Father always Joh. 11.41, 42.
heard him, yet for the sake of others, He cried with a loud voice. It is said
in another place, though he was Heb. 5.7.
a Son, yet in the days of his Flesh he offered up Prayers and Supplication
with strong Crying and Tears unto him that was able to save him from Death, and
was heard in that he feared. He sought Luke 4.4^. and 5.16.
solitary places, praying Mat. 14.23. Luke 9.18.
alone unto the Father until Mark 6.48.
midnight; yea, sometimes Luke 6.12.
all night. For what were these things done, and the Records thereof preserved
till now, but for our Learning? We have great need of it, for we can have
nothing but what we receive; and though God be good, and a full fountain of all
Blessings, he will be sought unto for these things. Therefore let us be
faithful in doing what is his will, and refusing whatsoever is contrary
thereunto; and we need not doubt but God will hear us when we call upon him, as
the Scripture says, If any Man be a Worshipper Joh. 9.31.
of God, and does his will, Him he hears.

London, 29, 11. Month, 1654/5. John Tomkins.

INSTANCES OF THE Answer of Prayer.
1. ABraham, the Father of the Faithful, being Childless, prayed unto the Lord
for an Heir, complaining that Eliezer, the Steward of the House, was like to be
his Heir. And the word of the Lord came to Abraham, promising, he whom he
supposed should not be his Heir, but he that shall come forth out of his own
Bowels shall be thine Heir, whose Seed he promised should be for number like
the Stars in the Firmament, Genesis 15.2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Abraham Prayed for Ishmael his Son, and God answered him, (and repeated the
abovesaid Promise of giving him a Son by his Wise Sarah,) and said, as for
Ishmael I have heard thee; behold I have blessed him, and will make him
fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve Princes shall he beget, and
I will make him a great Nation, Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, which was fulfilled, see
Genesis Chap. 25.13, 14, 15, 16, 18.

3. Abraham prayed to the Lord for King Abimelech, his Queen, and Family, and
they bare Children, who before were Barren, Genesis 20.17, 18.

4. Abraham prayed for Sodom, and the Lord was entreated so far, that if there
were but Ten Righteous Persons therein, he would spare the City for those Ten
sake, Genesis 18.23, to 33.

5. At the Prayer of Lot, the Lord spared the City Zoar for a refuge, when he
fled from the destruction which came upon Sodom, Genesis 19.18, to 23.

6. The Eldest Servant of Abraham prayed to God to give him success in his
Errand, and a Token whereby he might be certain which was the Person that was
to be his Master's Wife, and the Lord granted him his Request; that that very
Maid coming to the Well, and should with willingness (upon his asking her for
Water) say to him drink, and I will give thy Cattle also, was she whom God had
appointed to be a Wife for Isaac, Genesis 24.12, to 45.

7. Isaac being Childless for twenty years after Marriage with Rebekah, prayed
to the Lord for his Wife, and the Lord was entreated of him, and Rebekah bare
Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25.21, 26.

8. Rebekah being with Child, enquired of the Lord, and God answered her; two
Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thee,
and the one People shall be stronger than the other, and the Elder shall serve
the Younger, Genesis 25.22, 23.

9. Jacob in his return from Padan-Aram, News was brought him that his Brother
Esau was come out against him with Four Hundred Men, and Jacob was greatly
afraid and distressed, and prayed unto God for deliverance from the hand of his
Brother; and God heard Jacob, and turned the Heart of Esau, so that when he
came near, he ran to meet Jacob and embraced him and kissed him, Genesis 32.6, 9,
and 33, and 4.

10. Jacob wrestled with the Angel (and wept, and made Supplication to God) and
like a Prince, had power with God, and prevailed and obtained what he prayed
for (a Blessing) and the Lord blessed him, and changed his Name from Jacob unto
Israel, Genesis 32.28, and 35, 9, 10. and Hosea 12.4.

11. The Children of Israel sighed by reason of their great Bondage under the
Egyptians, and they cried to God, and he heard their Prayers and Groanings, and
remembered his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and said, I have heard
their Cry by reason of their Taskmasters, and I am come down to deliver them
out of the hands of the Egyptians, Exodus 2.23, 35, and 3.7, 8, 9. Numb. 20.16.

12. At the Prayer of Moses, the Plague of Frogs over the Land of Egypt ceased,
and the Frogs died, Exodus 8.12, 13.

13. Moses prayed, and the Plague of Flies also ceased throughout Egypt, for
the Lord did according to the word of Moses, and removed the Swarms of Flies
from Pharaoh and his People, there remained not one, Exodus 8.29, 30, 31.

14. Again, at the Prayer of Moses, the Plague of Thunder, Lightning, etc.
ceased in the Land of Egypt, for as soon as Moses went out of the City, and
spread abroad his Hands unto the Lord, the Thunder and Hail ceased, and Rain
was not poured upon the Earth, Exodus 9.28, to 33.

15 At the Prayer of Moses, the Plague of Locusts ceased, for the Lord turned a
mighty strong West Wind which took away the Locusts and cast them into the red
Sea, there remained not one Locust in all the Coasts of Egypt, Exodus 10.17, 18,
19.

16. When Israel murmured at Marah, because of the bitterness of the Waters,
Moses cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a Tree, which, when he had
cast into the Waters, the Waters were made sweet, Exodus 15.24, 25.

17. Israel murmured against Moses at Massah for want of Water; he fled to the
Lord by Prayer, and cried unto him; God heard, and commanded him to go to the
Rock at Mount Horeb, and smite it with his Rod, and Water gushed out thereat
sufficient for the whole Camp, Exodus 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

18. Because of the Idolatry of Israel, in Worshipping a Molten Calf, when Moses
was in the Mount, God's Wrath was kindled against them; and the Lord said to
Moses, now therefore let me alone that my Wrath may wax hot against them, and I
may consume them at once, and Moses besought the Lord his God for his great
Names Sake, to turn away from his fierce Wrath, and the Lord repented of the
Evil which he had thought to do unto his People, Exodus 32.1, to 14.

19. Moses prayed to the Lord for his Presence, and that he would please to
show him his Glory, and the Lord promised him his presence, and also
condescended to Moses in his later request, as far as poor Mortal is capable to
receive; and God said to him, thou can not see my Face and live; behold
there is a place by me, thou shall stand upon a Rock, and it shall come to
pass, while my Glory passes by, I will put thee in a clift of the Rock, and
cover thee with my Hand, and I will take away my Hand, and thou shall see my
back parts, Exodus 33.10 to 23.

20. Israel murmured at Taberah. and God was angry with them, and kindled a
Fire which burnt amongst them, and consumed them in the uttermost parts of the
Camp, and Moses prayed to the Lord and the Fire was quenched, Numb. 11.1, 2.

21. Because of the sedition and murmurings of the Israelites, Moses was sorely
oppressed and spread his Case before the Lord, complaining that the governing
those People was a Burden too heavy for him to bear, and God heard his
Complaint, and commanded him to gather seventy Elders of the People, promising
he would take off the Spirit that was upon Moses, and put it upon them, and
they (said the Lord) shall bear the Burden of the People with thee, that thou
bear it not thy self alone, Numb. 11.10, to 17.

22. Aaron and Miriam murmured against Moses, for which God was angry with
them, and struck Miriam with a Leprosy as white as Snow; and Moses prayed to
the Lord: saying, heal her now, O God, and after seven days she was received
into the Camp again whole, Numb. 12.11, to 13.

23. Upon the Evil Spies report of the good Land, Israel was about to choose
them Captains to return back to Egypt again; and then Moses, Aaron, Joshua and
Caleb dissuaded them from it, for it provoked God grievously; and he said to
Moses, I will smite them with the Pestilence and disinherit them, and will make
of thee a greater Nation, etc. And Moses prayed to the Lord for Israel, saying,
Let the Power of my Lord be great, and pardon I beseech thee the Iniquities of
this People; and God answered Moses, I have pardoned according to thy word,
Numb. 14.1 to 20.

24. At the sedition of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, the Congregation was gathered
against Moses and Aaron; and God bid them separate themselves from the People,
that he might destroy them in a moment, and they fell on their Faces and said,
O God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, shall on Man Sin, and will thou be
wroth with the whole Congregation? And the Lord heard them, and spared the
Congregation; but bad them separate the People from the three chief movers of
the sedition; and God caused the Earth to open and swallow them up alive, and
all that appertained to them, Numb. 16.1, to 32.

25. Because the Israelites loathed the Manna which God gave them from Heaven,
they were stung with fiery Serpents that they died; and Moses prayed for the
People, and the Lord commanded him to set up a Brazen Serpent upon a Pole, that
every one that looked upon it, should live, Numb. 21.3, to 9.

26. The Lord acquainted Moses of his Death; Moses besought God for a
Successor, and God appointed Joshua the Son Nun, in the stead of Moses, Numb.
27.12, to 20.

27. Israel fled before their Enemies, Joshua sought the Lord by Prayer, and
the Lord instructed him what to do, and how to find out the cause thereof,
Joshua 7. Chap.

28. At the Prayer of Joshua, the Sun and Moon stood still, that there was no
Day like that before or after; for the Lord hearkened to the voice of a Man,
Joshua 10.12, 13, 14.

29. Israel, under a true sense of their great declension from the Law of God,
in their Distress cried unto the Lord, and he heard their Prayers, and raised
up Othniel, Caleb's Nephew, who delivered them out of the hand of their
Enemies, Judge. 3.9, 10.

30. Israel again did Evil, and the Lord suffered Eglon King of Moab to oppress
them, and they were tributary to him Eighteen years; but they cried to the Lord
under their Distress, and he heard them, and raised them up Ehud the Son of
Gera, a Left Handed Man, who delivered Israel out of the hands of their
Enemies, and the Land had rest Eighty years, Judge. 3.15.

31. After Ehud was dead, Israel sinned again, and provoked the Lord, and he
sold them into the hand of Jabin King of Canaan, and Twenty years he mightily
oppressed them; and they cried to the Lord in their Distress, and he heard
their Prayers, and raised up Deborah a Judge, and Baruck a General, who rescued
Israel out of the hands of their Enemies, Judge. 4.

32. Israel sinned against God the fourth time, and he suffered the Midianites
greatly to impoverish them; so that when they had sown their Corn in the
ground, they came and their Cattle, and eat and destroyed their increase,
insomuch they made them Dens in the Mountains and Caves in the Earth, and they
cried to the Lord because of the Midianites, and he sent his Prophet to show
them their Backslidings, and raised up Gideon a poor Thresher of Wheat to be a
Judge over them; they overcame Oreb, and Zeeb, the chief Princes of Midian, and
obtained quiet for the Country Forty years, Judge. 6.7. and 8.28.

33. Gideon having seen an Angel, was afraid, and prayed to the Lord, and God
heard, and comforted him, Judge. 6.22, 23.

34. At the Prayer of Gideon, his Fleece of Wool was wet with Dew, and all the
ground about it, was dry, Judge. 6.36, 38.

35. Again, at the Prayer of Gideon, his Fleece of Wool was dry, and upon the
ground, about it was wet, Judge. 6.39, 40.

36. Israel, for their great Apostasy and Worshipping the Gods of the Nations,
the Anger of the Lord was hot against them, and he suffered the Philistines and
Ammonites to distress them sorely, and they cried to the Lord, who at first
seemed to reject them, and bid them Go to the Gods they had served; but Israel
renewed their Suit, and confessed their Sins, and forsook them and served the
Lord, and his Soul was moved with their Misery, and God put his Spirit upon
Jeptha, who was both Judge and General over Israel, and subdued their Enemies
under them, Judge. 10.11, 12. Chapt.

37. At the Prayer of Manoah, the Father of Sampson, the Angel of God, who
before had appeared to Manoah's Wife, appeared again unto him, and instructed
him and his Wife, how they should order Sampson when he was born, Judge. 13.8,
to 14.

38. After Samson had slain 1000 Men with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, he was sore
a-thirst, and prayed to the Lord, and God heard him, and caused Water to issue
out of a hollow place of the Jaw Bone, and Samson drank, and his Spirit was
revived, and he called the place En-hakkore, which is to say the will of him
that called and cried, Judge. 15.15, to 19.

39. Hannah prayed to the Lord for a Son, and he granted her the Petition which
she asked of him, 1 Samuel 1.9, to 27.

40. Eli, the high Priest prayed the Lord to give unto Hannah more Children,
instead of Samuel, which she had dedicated to the Lord, and the Lord answered
his Request, and gave her three Sons and two Daughters more, 1 Samuel 2.20, 21.

41. At the Prayer of Samuel the Prophet, and Judge in Israel, the Lord
Thundered with a mighty Thunder upon the Philistines their Adversaries, and so
discomfited them, that they were smitten before Israel, 1 Samuel 7.9, 10, 11.

42. Israel having required a King to rule over them, contrary to the mind of
God: It grieved Samuel, and he prayed to the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and
directed him what to do, 1 Samuel 8.5, 7, 8, 9.

43. At the Prayer of Samuel, the Lord sent Thunder and Rain, which caused the
People greatly to fear the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.18.

44. David having heard that Saul was coming to Keilah, to destroy it for his
sake, and that the Men of Keilah would deliver him up into the hand of Saul;
David prayed to the Lord, and besought him to tell him whether they would do as
he had heard, and the Lord answered him they will; by which means David and his
Men left the City, and escaped the hands of Saul, 1 Samuel 23.10, to 13.

45. David seeing 70000 Thousand fall by the Pestilence, prayed to the Lord,
and the Lord directed David by the Prophet Gad, to rear an Altar, and offer
Burnt-Offerings thereon, and he did so, and the Lord was entreated, and the
Plague was stayed, 2 Samuel 24.17, to 25.

46. There was a Famine in the days of David three years, and he sought the
Face of the Lord concerning it, and God answered and showed him wherefore it
was, and afterward the Lord was entreated for the Land, 2 Samuel 21.1, and 14.

47. Solomon above all things prayed for Wisdom, and his Prayer pleased the
Lord, and he granted him not only Wisdom, insomuch that he was the Wisest Man
that ever was; but God added to his Wisdom, Riches, and Honor, so that there
was no King like him, 1 King. 3.7, to 12.

48. Solomon having finished that Famous Temple, gathered Israel together at
the Consecration thereof, and kneeled down on a Brazen Scaffold made to that
purpose, and made a large and solemn Prayer to God; when he had finished his
Prayer, Fire came down from Heaven and consumed the Burnt-Offering and
Sacrifices, and the Glory of the Lord filled the Temple, so that the Priests
could not enter in; and God also appeared to Solomon by night, and said, I have
heard thy Prayer; and gave him many Promises upon Condition that he and his
People should observe his Statutes and Judgments, 1 King. 8. 2 Chro. 6. and
Chap. 7.1, 12. to the end.

49. At the Prayer of the Man of God, the Arm of Jeroboam King of Israel, which
was dried up for holding it out against the Prophet, was restored again, and
became as it was before, 1 King. 13.6.

50. Elijah prayed earnestly that it might not Rain upon the Earth, and it
rained not for the space of three years and six months, 1 King. 17.1. James
5.17, 18.

51. Elijah prayed again, and the Heavens gave Rain, and the Earth brought
forth her Fruit after three years and six months Drought, 1 King. 18.42. Jam.
5.18.

52. At the Prayer of Elijah, the Son of the Widow of Zarephath, was raised
from the Dead, 1 King. 17.20, 21.

53. The Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Mannasah went out to War
against the Agarites, and they cried to the Lord in Battle, and he was
entreated of them, because they put their trust in him, and God gave their
Enemies into their hands an exceeding prey, viz. 50000 Camels, 250000 Sheep,
2000 Asses, and of Men 100000 1 Chronicles. 5.20, 21.

54. At the Prayer of Elijah, the Fire of the Lord fell and consumed the
Burnt-Sacrifice, and the Wood, etc. to convince the Idolaters that the Lord was
God, 1 King. 18.36, to 39.

55. Elijah being persecuted by Jezabel, fled into the Wilderness, and there
prayed to the Lord; as he was asleep, an Angel awaked him, and bid him arise
and eat, for there was a Cake ready baked on the Coals, and a Cruise of Water
at his head, and he eat and drank, and lay down again; and the Angel awaked him
the second time to eat, and he did eat, and in the strength of that Meat
traveled forty days and nights to Horeb the Mount of God, 1 King. 19.4, to 8.

56. At the Prayer of Elisha the Shunamite's Child was raised from the Dead, 2
King. 4. and 33, 34.

57. At the Prayer of Elijah the Lord opened the Eyes of Elisha's Servant, and
he beheld how his Master was defended and surrounded with Horses and Chariots
of Fire at the same time when the Host of the Syrians had encompassed the City
to take the Prophet, 2 King. 6.13, to 17.

58. At the Prayer of Elisha the Host of the Syrians was smote with blindness,
for they were sent to apprehend him, 2 King. 6.18.

59. They, the Host of the Syrians, being blind, the Prophet Elisha led them to
Samaria, even into the hands of their Enemies, and he prayed the Lord to open
their Eyes, and they saw, and behold they were in the midst of Samaria, but he
would not suffer the King of Israel to hurt them, but caused him to prepare
Provisions for them, and they went safe home to their Master the King of Syria,
and came no more into the Land of Israel, 2 King. 6.17 to 23.

60. Vzziah sought the Lord, and God made him to prosper, and helped him
against his Enemies, and made the Philistines, Arabiaas and Ammonites,
Tributaries to him; but he grew proud with the Success that was given him, and
invaded the Priests Office, and assumed to offer Incense in the Temple; for
which he was a Leper to the day of his Death, and was deposed the Kingdom, and
his Son Jotham reigned in his stead, 2 Chronicles. 26. and 2 King. 1.5.

61. The Idolatry of Israel was so great, the Lord suffered the Kings of Syria
to oppress them sorely; and Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened
to him, and gave Israel a Savior, so that they went out from under the hand of
the Syrians, 2 King. 13.2, to 5.

62. Now for a long time Israel had been without the true God, and without a
reaching Priest, and without Law. In those times there was no Peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great Vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the Countries; and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of
City; for God did vex them with all Adversity, and they repented, and put away
the abominable Idols out of Land, and sought the Lord with their whole Desire,
and he was found of them, and gave them Rest round about, 2 Chronicles. 15.

63. Sennacherib King of Assyria, sent a blasphemous threatening Letter to good
Hezekiah King of Judah; and Hezekiah went up into the House of the Lord, and
spread the Letter before the Lord, and prayed unto the God of Israel; and the
Lord sent the Prophet Isaiah to comfort him, letting him know he had heard his
Prayer, and would defend Jerusalem, and save it for his own sake, and his
Servant David's sake: And it came to pass that Night the Angel of the Lord slew
185000 of the Assyrian Host. So Sennacherib departed home to Nineveh, and his
Sons killed him as he was worshipping his Idol Nisroch, 2 King. 19. 2 Chronicles.
32.20, 21.

64. Huldah the Prophetess foretelling the Destruction of Jerusalem: But, said
she, in the Name of the Lord, tell the man that sent you to me: Josiah King of
Judah, because thy Heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before the
Lord when thou heardst what I speak against this Place, and the Inhabitants
thereof, that they should become a Desolation and a Curse, and have rent thy
Clothes and wept before me, I also have heard thee, says the Lord; therefore
thou shall go to thy Grave in Peace, and thy Eves shall not see all the Evil
which I will bring upon this Place, 2 King. 22.15 to 20.

65. Hezekiah receiving the Message of Death from the Prophet Isaiah, turned
his Face to the Wall, and prayed to the Lord, and the Lord sent the same
Prophet back to tell him he had heard his Prayer, and seen his Tears, and would
add to his Days Fifteen Years, and the King went abroad in Three days after, 2
King. 20.

66. Jehosaphat King of Judah, being in great Distress because of the Army of
the Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites, who came to Invade the Land, he went to
the Temple, and prayed to God, with all Judah, their Wives and little Ones, and
the Lord sent his Prophet Jehaziel to comfort them, and let them know they
should not need to fight against them; for the Lord caused Moab and Ammon to
fight against Mount Seir; and when they had destroyed them, every one helped to
destroy one another, 2 Chronicles. 20.

67. Hezekiah prayed for the People, in as much as they had eaten of the
Passover, and we not cleansed according to the Law; and the Lord hearkened to
Hezekiah, and healed the People, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.

68. Manasseh, that idolatrous and wicked King, who filled Jerusalem with
Blood; for his great and many Impieties God suffered the King of Assyria to
carry him Captive to Babylon, bound in Fetters of Iron; and in his Affliction
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself, and prayed unto him, and he
was entreated of him, and heard his Supplication, and brought him into his
Kingdom again in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. and he put down Idolatry, 2 King.
21.16.

70. Jeroboam, when he had revolted with the Ten Tribes, there was War between
him and Judah, 800000 of Jeroboams Army against 400000 of Judah; and Israel had
caught Judah in an Ambuscade. When Judah found their Enemies both before and
behind them, they cried to the Lord; and God heard them, and turned the Success
of the War upon Judah, and smote Jeroboam, and all Israel, before Judah and
Abijah their King; and they slew of Israel 500000 chosen Men, 2 Chronicles. 13.

70. Ezra, in his Return with some of the Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem,
proclaimed a Fast, and besought the Lord to preserve them and their little Ones
in their Journey; for he was ashamed to ask the King for a Guard, because he
had told him, the Hand of the Lord was upon all them for good that seek him. So
the Lord was entreated, and his Hand was upon them, and delivered them from all
their Enemies that lay in Wait by the Way, Ezra 8.21, 22, 23, 31, 32.

71. Nehemiah being at Susan, and hearing of the Affliction and Reproach of his
Brethren (the Jews) the Remnant that were left of the Captivity at Jerusalem,
and that the Walls of the City were broken down, and the Gates burnt, he
mourned, fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven for Israel, and that God
would turn the Heart of the King toward them; and the Lord heard his Prayer,
and inclined the Heart of Artaxerxes Emperor of Assyria, to grant him Letters
of Commission to build Jerusalem, and repair the Walls thereof, and unto the
Governors of the Provinces to assist Nehemiah in this good Work, Nehem. 2.

72. Wicked Haman by Lies obtained of King Ahasuerus a Decree for the
Destruction of the Jews; when Mordecai the Jew, knew it, he rent his Clothes,
and put on Sackcloth, he and Esther the Queen, and all the Jews cried with a
bitter Cry to the Lord, and God answered their Prayers, and turned the Heart of
the King, that he Reversed the Decree against the Jews, and Haman was hanged
upon the same Gallows he had erected for Mordecai; so that the Jews had Light
and Gladness, Joy and Honor, and a good Day, and many of the People of the
Land became Jews. Esther 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 Chapters.

73. Job in his many grievous, bitter and sore Exercicises, often prayed to the
Lord, and kept his Integrity, and the Lord at last turned the Captivity of Job,
and gave him twice as much as he had before, Job 7.17 to 20.10. and 14, and
42.10.

74. The Anger of God being kindled against Job's Friends, because they had not
spoken of Job the things which were right, Job prayed for them, and offered
Burnt-sacrifice, and the Lord accepted Job for them, Job 42.7, 8, 9.

75. David, when he fled from Absalons his Son, who raised a Rebellion in his
Kingdom, cried to the Lord, and God heard him out of his holy Hill, and smote
all his Enemies, and restored him again unto his Kingdoms, Psalm. 3. 2 Samuel 18.8.

76. David, in his Distresses, called upon the Lord, and he heard his Voice out
of his Temple, and his Cry entered into his Ears: And God gave him the Necks of
his Enemies, and delivered him from the striving of the People; so that his
Enemies were subdued under him, 2 Samuel 22. Psalm. 18.

77. David hid himself in a Mountain in the Wilderness of Ziph, because Saul
sought his Life every Day; and the Ziphims informed Saul thereof; and David
prayed to God, and the Lord suffered not Saul to take him; for while he was
pursuing David, Messengers came and told Saul the Philistines invaded his
Country. So David was delivered at that time, Psalm. 54. and 1 Samuel 23.14, 26,
28.

78. David being hid in the Cave at Engedi, Saul and 3000 Chosen Men pursued
him; and David prayed to the Lord, as may be seen in the 57th Psalm, and God
heard him, in delivering Saul into the Power of David, who might have killed
him, but would not suffer them that would; which had such Effect upon Saul,
that he confessed his Fault, and acknowledged David to be more righteous than
he, and went home, 1 Samuel 24.1, 3, 5, 22.

79. Saul sent Soldiers to beset the House where David was, to kill him; and
David prayed to the Lord to defend and deliver him; and he escaped by the means
of his Wife Michal, 1 Samuel 19.12. Psalm. 59.

80. David sought the Lord by Prayer, and God heard him, and delivered him out
of all his Troubles and Fears, Psalm. 34.4.66.17, 19.

81. The Church prays to be directed where Christ feeds his Flock; he directs
her, and gives her gracious Promises, Canticles 1.6 to 11.

82. The Lord sends forth Jeremiah, whom he had ordained a Prophet to the
Nations; he, in the Sense of his own Weakness, prayed to God, saying, O Lord
God, I cannot speak, for I am a Child. And the Lord answered him, Say not, I am
a Child; for thou shall go to all I send thee; be not afraid of their Faces, I
am with thee to deliver thee, Jer. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.

83. Jeremiah, because of the Hatred of the People, complains to the Lord,
and God answers him, Verily it shall be well with thy Remnant, verily I will
cause the Enemy to entreat thee well in the time of Evil and Affliction. Jerem.
15.10.

84. Jeremiah prayed again to God, and he answered him, If thou take forth the
Precious from the Vile, thou shall be as my mouth; and I will deliver thee out
of the Hand of the Wicked, and redeem thee out of the Hand of the Terrible,
Jer. 15.18 to 21.

85. Jeremiah, on behalf of Judah and Jerusalem, when in Captivity, called upon
the Name of the Lord; and God heard their Voice, and hid not his Ear at the
breathing of their Cry, but drew near in the Day they called upon him, and
said, Fear not, Lam. 3.55, 56, 57.

86. Ezekiel besought the Lord, that he would not make a full end of Israel;
and the Lord showed him that he would save a Remnant, and gather them from
among the People and Countries where they were scattered, and gave them one
Heart, and put a new Spirit within them, Ezekiel. 11.13 to 20.

87. At the Prayer of Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah unto the God of
Heaven, the Lord revealed Nebuchadnezzar's Dream to Daniel, which neither
Nebuchadnezzar could remember, nor all the Wise Men of Chaldea tell him; and
God gave Daniel also the Interpretation of the Dream, Dan. 2.17, 18.

88. Daniel prayed to the most High God for the Return of the Captivity of the
People Israel; as soon as he began to pray, God sent the Angel Gabriel before
he had ended his Prayer, to comfort him, and inform him of the determined time
of the Return of the Peoples Captivity also, touching the Messiah our Lord
Jesus his coming in the Flesh, etc. Dan. 9.

89. The Lord showed unto Amos the Prophet the Judgment of Grasshoppers which he
would bring upon Israel; and the Prophet prayed to the Lord to forgive them,
and the Lord heard his Prayer, and repented of what he intended, and said, It
shall not be, Amos 7.13.

90. And the Lord also showed to Amos, and called to contend by Fire; but the
Prophet prayed to the Lord, and the Lord repented again, and said, This also
shall not be, Amos 7.4, 6.

91. God having threatened to destroy Nineveh, the People repented, and cried
mightily to God, and God heard their Prayers, and saw their Works, and had
Compassion, and repented of the Evil that he said he would do unto them, and
did it not, Jonah 3.3, 10.

92. Jonah being Three days and Nights in the Belly of the Fish, from thence he
prayed unto the Lord, and God heard him, and spoke unto the Fish who vomited
Jonah upon dry Land, Jonah 1 and 2 Chapters.

93. At the Centurions Prayer of Faith, our Lord Jesus spoke the Word, and the
Centurion's Servant was healed, Matthew. 8.5, 8, 13.

94. The Disciples of Jesus being in great Distress by reason of a Storm at
Sea, prayed unto him to save them, or else they perish; and he arose and
rebuked the Winds and the Sea, and there was a great Calm, Mat. 8.23 to 27.

95. Peter walked upon the Sea, but when he saw the Wind boistrous, his Faith
failed, and Peter began to sink, and cried to his Lord; and Jesus immediately
stretched forth his Hand, and caught him, Mat. 14.29, 30, 31.

96. Though our blessed Lord Jesus seemed at first to resuse the Syro-phenician
Woman, who besought him to heal her Daughter vexed with a Devil, yet when she
would not be denied, being content to be counted as the vilest, so she might
obtain Mercy from our Lord; he beholding her Faith, healed her Dauther, Mat.
15.22 to 28. Mark. 7.26 to 29.

97. A certain Man having an only Son, who was sore vexed with a Devil, kneeled
down and prayed unto our Lord Jesus; and he rebuked the Devil, and the Child
was Cured that very Hour, Matthew. 17.14 to 18. Mark 9.17. Luke 9.38.

98. Two blind Men sitting in the Way, hearing that our Lord passed by, cried
to him to have Mercy on them, and the People rebuked them, but they were the
more earnest in their Suit; and Jesus had Compassion on them, and touched their
Eyes, and immediately they received Sight, and followed him, Matthew. 20.30, 34.

99. And there came a Leper to Jesus, kneeling down, and said, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me whole; and our Lord touched him, and he was cleansed
from his Leprosy, Mark 1.40, 41, 42.

100. Jairus, one of the Rulers of the Synagogue fell at the feet of Jesus,
beseeching him to heal his Daughter, who lay at the point of Death, but being
detained by the Woman, who was Cured of her Bloody Issue by a touch of his
Garment: News was brought to the Father his Child was Dead. Our Lord hearing
the word, encouraged the Maids Father and went to his House, and raised her to
Life again, Mark 5.22, to 41.

101. At Bethsaida, they brought a Blind Man to Jesus, and besought him to
touch him; Jesus put his hands upon him, and he was restored to his sight, and
saw every Man clearly, Mark 8.22, to 25.

102. Poor Blind Bartimeus, was earnest with our Lord to have mercy on him;
being charged to hold his Peace, Cried the more earnestly, Jesus comforted him,
and bad him go away, and immediately he received his sight, Mark 10.46.

103. And the Angel said to Zachariah, Father of John the Baptist, Fear not,
for thy Prayer is heard, and thy Wife Elizabeth shall bare thee a Son, Luke
1.13.

104. The Thief upon the Cross at the last Hour repenting, prayed unto our
Lord, and Jesus had mercy upon him, and promised him that he should be that day
with himself in Paradise, Luke 23.42, 43.

105. The Church prayed to God that he would direct whether Justus or Matthias,
whom they had in choice, was the Person whom God did choose instead of Judas;
and the Lord ordered it that the Lot fell upon Matthias, Act. 1.24, 26.

106. The Church being under Persecution, flees to Pray er, that God would
strengthen his Servants to spe ak his word boldly; when they had prayed, the
place wherein they were assembled was shaken, as a Notice that the Lord heard
their Prayer, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the
word of God with boldness, Act. 4.23, to 31.

107. At the Prayer of Peter and John, the Disciples received the Holy Ghost.
Act. 15.17.

108. At the Prayer of the Apostle Peter, Tabitha was raised from the Dead,
Act. 9.40.

109. Cornelius the Centurian prayed to the Lord always, and an Angel appeared
and told him his Prayers and Alms were come up for a Memorial before God, and
the Lord ordered it by his Divine Providence, that Cornelius was farther
informed concerning the Kingdom of God by the Apostle Peter, Act. 10.1, 2, 3,
4.30, to 43.

110. Peter being in Prayer, saw a Vision, wherein he was taught not to despise
the Gentiles, as a Preparation for the Gospels being Preached to Cornelius the
Centurion, and other Gentiles, Act. 10.9, to 16.

111. Prayer being made without ceasing by the Church, for Peter, whom Herod
kept close in Prison, and intended also farther mischief against him, God sent
his Angel who delivered Peter out of Prison, Act. 12.5, to 11.

112. Paul, and Sylas, being in Prison, and in the Stocks, Prayed and Sang
Psalms, and suddenly there was a great Earthquake, and immediately all the
Doors were opened, and every ones. Bonds were loosed, upon which the Jailer and
all his House believed in God, Act. 16.25, to 34.

113. Saul being struck down by a Light from Heaven, was three days and three
nights without Sight, and Fasted and Prayed unto God, and the Lord heard him,
and commanded Ananias to go to him, and lay his Hands on Saul, who was
afterward called Paul; and Ananias did so, and Saul received his sight, and
soon after Preached the Gospel, Act. 9.8, 11, 17, 20.

114. Paul prayed, and laid his Hands on the Father of Pulius, the Governor of
Malta, and he was healed of a Fever, and Bloody Flux, Act. 28.8.

115. Paul was Buffeted by a Messenger of Satan, and in his Temptations he
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from him, and the Lord heard
him, and gave him this Answer, My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness, 2 Corinthians. 12.7, 9.

And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole
Spirit and Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus. Faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it, 1 These. 5.23,
24.

AN Earnest Persuasive, By way of POSTSCRIPT, For all to Mind and Receive Gods
Holy Spirit in their Hearts, That thereby they may be taught True Prayer; And
be thoroughly Qualified for the Right Performance of all other Religious Duties.

Ephesians. 5. v. 18, 20. Be not Drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be filled
with the Spirit; giving Thanks always for all Things unto God, even the Father,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By JOHN FIELD.

POSTSCRIPT.
BY the foregoing Testimony and Instances, it plainly appears,

That Prayer is of great Use and Benefit, and has been greatly Answered, and
wonderfully Encouraged by the Lord.

And it is natural (to all those that God by his Word has begotten unto a
lively Hope in Christ his Son, and has sent forth his Spirit into their
Hearts) for them to cry, Abba Gal. 4.6.
Father.

Its their Duty to make their Supplications unto him that has begotten them;
because it is by the Spirit of his Son in their Hearts, that they see their
Wants, and the Sufficiency and Willingness there is in him to supply them; who
is a God that hears Prayer.

It Is Gods Spirit that makes sensible of Wants, begets Desires, and raises
Cries in the Soul to him; and is therefore principally to be minded and waited
in.

Whosoever slights Gods Spirit, neglects to wait in it, and disregards the Work
and Motion of it in their own Hearts, can never rightly and sensibly know their
Wants, nor what to ask, or pray for, or perform that Duty of Prayer as they
ought.

It Is my tender Council and Advice, in great Love, and much good Will to all
that believe this is the Gospel-day long since Joel 2.28.
prophesied of; And that own the time is come, wherein the Father has
(according to Christ's Prayer, whom he always hears) sent the Comforter, even
the Spirit of Truth, which is the Holy John 14.26.
Ghost, and that Credit, what the Apostle says, who declares a Manifestation
of the Spirit is given to 1 Cor. 12.7.
every one to profit withal.

To such I say,

1. Prize, O prize the great Love of God and Christ herein!

2. Be humbly thankful unto God for this unspeakable Gift.

3. Answer the End for which he has given this blessed Spirit; receive it,
wait in it, hearken to it, turn at its Reproofs, and give up to be led by it,
that ye may be the Sons of God.

4. And then you thereby will not only like the Publican Matthew. 18.13.
see your Conditions, be moved to Pray in a Sense of your Wants, but be enabled
to serve God acceptably, through Jesus Christ, and taught thereby to worship,
and live to him, and know his Things, and understand the Mysteries of his
heavenly Kingdom.

Therefore I earnestly bebeseech all, sligh not, grieve, nor 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
quench the Motions of it, neglect not this Gift, nor your diligent waiting
upon God in it at all Times, and in all Places, in all Services, and Religious
Duties wait in it, to be fitted by it; and neither pray, nor sing without it;
for the true Praying 1 Cor. 14.15.
is with it, and true Singing in it.

And there is no Access unto God, nor Admittance to the Throne of his Grace (to
receive Help in the time of Need, but through Ephesians. 2.18. Romans 5.2.
Jesus Christ, and by this Spirit.

And although the World that lies in Wickedness, hates and grieves this Spirit,
mocks and derides at it; and those that direct to it, and are guided by it, yet
this Spirit convinces John 16.8.
them of their Sin and Unbelief, of their Righteousness and Judgment, which is
not given them, nor wrought in them by this Spirit, and therefore it reproves
them thereof.

Oh therefore, tender Reader! love, receive, wait in, join to obey and follow
this Holy Spirit, and then it will open your Understandings, quicken your Souls
to God; make you alive, and beget you anew to him; wash and sanctify your
Hearts, purge your Consciences from dead Works, and bring you to serve the
living Heb. 9.14.
God, who is a Spirit in the Spirit and Truth; and enable you to walk in
newness Romans 7.6.
of the Spirit, and out of the oldness of the Letter, and beget, increase and
continue Love in your Hearts and Souls to God and Christ, to his Church and
People, to his Law and Testimony, and to the Holy Scriptures, which the Holy
Men of God wrought as they were moved by this Holy Ghost or Spirit* which
Spirit I am commanding and recommending unto you, to be your Conductor and
Leader, your Guide and Instructor in your Pilgrimage through this low World,
and Vale of Tears, that so you may pass the time of your sojourning 1 Pet. 1.17.
here with Fear; and give your selves to Reading the Holy Scriptures, and to
Waiting upon God in this Spirit, and Praying to him in it, and Asking of him
Wisdom, and Meditating in his holy Law that converts Psalm. 19.7.
the Soul, and regarding his Testimony, that makes wise the Simple; and do not
content your selves only to hear of God and Christ, and those Memorable Things,
and Noble Acts of the Righteous, recorded in Holy Writ, and that plenteous
Redemption, eternal Life and Salvation they were Witnesses and Partakers of,
nor with saying over Words compiled, and put together by the Wisdom of Men,
called Prayers; but through Receiving and Obeying this Holy Spirit, and
believing in God and Christ, from whom it proceeds, may know and partake of
that Life and Understanding it gives, be born of it, baptized 1 Cor. 12.13.
by it, washed, sanctified and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and by the Spirit 1 Cor. 6.11.
of our God; and also taught and assisted thereby to pray to him, which is the
sincere Desire, and hearty Supplication of your well-wishing Friend,

Who once more earnestly entreats you not to quench this Spirit, neither
disregard the inward and secret Convictions, Reproofs, and Counsel of it, in
your Hearts.

For it is that Spirit that searches 1 Cor. 2.10.
all Things; yea, the deep Things of God; and God by this is certainly
reproving and counselling the Children of Men in this Age and Generation, as in
days past; and shows and Reproves them for their evil Thoughts, wicked Words,
ungodly Deeds, and execrable Oaths; and by this Spirit is certainly counselling
People to think on him, to consider their Ways, to amend their Doings, to speak
in his Fear.

And to Refrain from Oaths, and Cursing, and all ungodly Speaking, and to Crase
to do Evil, and Learn to do well, that he might wash away their Sins, and
pardon their Offenses, for Christ's sake.

Therefore have a care, Oh! have a care, I beseech you, for your never-dying
Souls sake, for your present Peace, and future Happiness-sake, that you do not,
like them of old, set at naught all Prove. 1.24, to the end.
Gods Counsel, nor slight his Reproofs; for then know assuredly God will laugh
at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes, like Defolation, and your
Destruction like a Whirlwind, when Affliction and Anguish shall come upon you.
Then, O then if you call upon him, he will not answer: if you seek him early,
you shall not find him, because you hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear
of the Lord, therefore you shall eat of the Fruit of your own ways, and be
filled with your own Devices.

But whosoever obeys Gods Holy Spirit, and is guided by it, shall be quiet
Prove. 1.33.
from Fear of Evil, become his Son, and have a Place in his eternal Kingdom for
evermore. Therefore love and obey it, says

Thy Real and Well-wishing Friend, JOHN FIELD.

FINIS.

