To the Supreme Authority, THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc.
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected inhabitants of the County of Wilts.
CAlling to mind the Grounds and Ends of the late War and Bloodshed in these
Nations; how signally you were owned by God in your former management of the
Government of this Commonwealth, and how miraculously, even beyond the
expectation of most men, after a long Interruption, (which the Lord in his
infinite wisdom suffered, to try and humble both you and us) you are again
peaceably restored to the performance and exercise of your Trust, (as you are
the Peoples Representatives:) And withal considering, to our great rejoicing
and satisfaction, your late Declaration, That you will endeavor (by the Lords
assistance) to s;ettle the Government of this Commonwealth upon such a
Foundation as may assert and secure our Liberties both as Men and Christians,
and that without a single person or House of Peers; we cannot but bless the God
of all our mercies for putting this opportunity into your hands, and inclining
your hearts (notwithstanding all the disconragements which lie before you) to a
further prosecution of your duty, in reference to the safety and freedom of
this Commonwealth; and do judge it a duty incumbent upon us, cordially to close
with this miraculous Providence of God, whereby his precious Cause is again
vindicated and the hearts of the good People of this Land in a great measure
revived and comforted; and to contribute our utmost endeavors for strengthening
your hands, in the further carrying on the great Work of Reformation in this
Commonwealth: it being our earnest desire, that your last works may be your
best, and that you may have such a special and more then ordinary presence of
God with you in your Debates and Resolves, that both we, and the generations to
come, may have abundant cause to bless his Name for you, as the most famous and
memorable Parliament that ever engaged for the Liberties of England, etc.

And that we may the better express our cordial Affections to this
Commonwealth, and to your Honors, as you are entrusted therewith, we shall
take the boldness as others have done (with whom we are engaged in the same
Cause) humbly to lay before you the sincere Desires of our hearts, and to
particularize a few of those things, which may by the blessing of God conduce
to the establishment of Common Right and Freedom, and may answer the
expectations of our dear Countrymen, Who have hazarded their lives and estates
in that precious Cause which you and your victorious Army have so ofen and so
eminently asserted in your Remonstrances and Declarations.

1. That the Magistracy and Milicia of this Commonwealth may be speedily
settled in the hands of confiding persons, such as fear the Lord, and have given
testimony of their love to all his people, and of their faithfulness to the
Cause of this Commonwealth; according to your Declaration of the 7th of May,
1759.

2. That care may be taken (according to the mind of God) for propagating the
Gospel of Jesus Christ in this Commonwealth, and the due encourgement of all
the faithful, godly and peaceable Ministers and Professors thereof: And that
all Penal Laws and Statutes which do entrench upon the Liberties of
conscientious Christians of different persuasions in matters of Religion, may
be repealed and made void.

3. That no persons whatsoever may continue too long in Power, either Civil or
Martial; but that they may be in a capacity to be governed and ruled, as well
as to govern and rule: And that no person, by virtue of any Tenure, Grant,
Charter, Patent, Degree, Birth, or Military employment, may be privileged or
exempted from subjection to the Laws: And that the Liberty and Freedom of the
people may be so tendered and secured, both in their persons and goods, that
they may not be proceeded against but upon the transgression of some known Law;
and that all Trials for life may be only by Twelve sworn men of the
Neighborhood; and no conviction had or made, but upon the testimony of two or
more sufficient Witnesses.

4. That all Punishments inflicted upon Delinquents in this Commonwealth, may
be equally proportioned to their several Offenses, (according to the Laws of
God and Nature) that so the precious lives of our dear Countrymen may not be
forfeited upon trivial and slight occasions.

5. That the Legislative power of this Commonwealth may be so ascertained in
the Representatives of the People, (duly chosen by them) that neither a Single
Person, Senate for life, nor House of Lords, may have any share therein, nor be
coordinate therewith.

6. That you will abbreviate and regulate the proceedings at Law, and in your
grave Wisdoms devise a way that the people may have justice duly administered;
and their Suits speedily determined, near their dwellings: And that the Laws
may be so modeled and framed, that they may not in the least countenarce or
support Monarchy, but be every Way suitable and subservient to the Government
of a Free State.

7. That you will endeavor speedily and effectually to revive and restore the
Trade of this Nation, and encourage the Manufacture of Clothing, wherein many
thousands are concerned, and which has no small influence upon this
Commonwealth: And that you will use some means to keep the people from Beggary
and Idleness, in such a good and fruitful Land as this is.

8. That satisfaction may be given to those well-affected persons who lent
money on the Public Faith, and are now in great Want and Penury.

9. That you will take into consideration all such Corporations and Charters as
do any way Monopolize or abridge the Birthrights and Liberties of English men,
and which are no other then Badges of Kingship and Royal Prerogative, and
therefore unsuitable to the Government of a well-regulated Free State, which we
humbly desire may be speedily settled by your Honors, for the benefit of the
present and succeeding Generations.

10. That you will appoint a Committee to receive such Rational Proposals as
shall be made by sober discreet persons, in order to such a Settlement, as has
been practiced in the first forming and introducing of other Commonweals or
Free States.

11. That a strict Survey may be taken, and a Pious and Public Improvement
made of the several Hospitals of this Commonwealth; that so the Profits and
Revenues thereof may not be converted to private uses, contrary to the
intention of the Donors.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

The 22 of June, 1659.
This Petition being this day presented to the House by diverse Gentlemen of the
County of Wilts, it was read, and the Gentlemen called into the House. The
Speaker gave them this answer: Gentlemen, the House has read your Petition,
and find a great deal of sobriety and wisdom in it, and many expressions of
good affections; and they have commanded me to give you the Thanks of this
House for your Petition, and your good affections and expressions: and I do
give you the Thanks of this House for your good affections and expresions
accordingly.

Printed at LONDON, for Livewel Chapman, 1659.


