Licensed,

August 14. 1685. TO. L'ESTRANGE.

Cuckolds-Haven: OR, AN ALDERMAN No Conjurer. A FARCE. Acted at the QUEEN'S
THEATER in Dorset Garden.

By N. TATE.

LONDON, Printed for J. H. and are to be sold by Edward Poole, next door to the
Fleece Tavern in Cornhill. 1685.

TO THE HONORABLE COLONEL Edmund Ashton.
SIR,
AS you will find the following Scenes drawn from the Stores of that great
Master Ben, I hope you will think the Contrivance no ill Imitation: That they
had no better Success on the Stage, was for this Reason: The principal Part (on
which the Diversion depended) was, by Accident, disappointed of Mr. Nokes's
Performance, for whom it was designed, and only proper; which caused a
Retrenchment of whole Scenes in the Action, that are in this Copy inserted. As
it here lies together, if the Plot be not too regular for Farce, and ought not
rather to have been called Comedy, I dare trust the Reader for the rest.
Notwithstanding all the Disadvantages in its Appearance on the Stage, you were
pleased, Sir, to discover some Beauties through the Cloud. However, I am not so
much concerned for a Work of this Nature, as to impose the Protection of it
upon you. My Ambition in this Address, is, to own my good fortune in your
Acquaintance, and Advantages from thence, as to Nobler Species of Poetry. I
speak not with relation to any Essays of my own, but for improvement of my
Skill in the best Latin Poets. When Ben Johnson was informed, that a certain
Person had done him Injury, he cried out with Indignation, I made the
Ungrateful Man understand Horace. Obligations of this kind, indeed, are
unvaluable. I presume (Sir) I could before pretend to a Grammarians, or
Commentators knowledge; but this was understanding like a Dutchman:

From whom, the Author's more obscure become,
The Fogs of Holland cloud the Wit of Rome;
While these the Vehicle of Words essay,
The subtle Spirit flies unseen away.
They understood the Words, but you the Poet. Your Judgment does not terminate
in what is expressed, but takes in the whole Scope of Fancy, and feels the
flame of the Poet, while he labored with Inspiration. In short (Sir) you make
their very Spirit visible; and with piercing sight discover those Beauties,
which their Art threw off to such distance, that they were not discerned by
Vulgar Eyes. The World must allow me to pay this Acknowledgment: It is what I
heard owned (while a Stranger to you) by a E. of Roscommon.
first-rate Judge, as well as Poet; he that was at once the Horace and Mecaenas
of our Age. know, Sir, you will pardon me, if on mention of that Noble Person,
I stain this Paper with a Tear.

Multis ille bonis flebilis Occidit,
Nulli flebilior quam Tibi -- -- -- -
Of many Obligations that endear his Memory to me, the Opportunity of your
Acquaintance was not the least; while I have heard you discant together on your
beloved Authors, Time seemed to me to be revolved, and I thought my self in
the Court of Augustus. I think the Nation is duly grateful for what he has
transplanted from their Language, though sparing of those Favors. We likewise
know, Sir, that you have not fate down with the bare knowledge of those ancient
Roman Treasures, without giving some parts of them the English Stamp. And to
hoard them in Secresy, is injury to your Country. It was always thought the
Perfection of an Honorable person, to be an Accomplished Courtier, Soldier,
and Scholar. All which Capacities are (Sir) without Complement, ascribed to
You. Nor may we omit, that Justice, Courtesy, and Condescension, which (in
relation to Inferiors) complete the Character of a Gentleman. As a just
Respect on these Worthy Accounts is rendered to you by all Persons, it is by
none more sincerely paid, than by,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, and Admirer, N. TATE.

PROLOGUE.
WE own, nor to confess it are ashamed, (framed.
That from tough Ben's Remains, this Piece was
But if Embellishments of Vanity
And Vice, are here improved to a degree
Beyond the Characters that Master drew,
We must the Ladies thank for that, and you,
So far above what Johnson's Age ever knew.
Our Scene's compact, and if it be not witty,
You must consider, Sirs, it is laid in the City.
Where yet we shall present one Sparkish Citt,
Who Drinks, Whores, Dresses, which I think is Wit;
Or, Mercy on three parts of this good Pit.
Lewdness and Dress must, by the Critics Pardon,
Be Wit, or 'gad ye ruin Covent Garden.
But Sense, or Nonsense, is to us all one,
Our Trinculo and Trapp'lin were undone,
When Lime's more Farcy Monarchy begun.
Oh! Were this Frantic Nations Woes too few,
But we must have both Dam and Devil too?
First, with the Old Serpent plagued of Associations,
And since, with viler Spawn of Declarations:
Whose poison such Distraction could create,
That Scyth-men listed to Mow down the State.
But now the Monster has her final Rout,
The very Dregs of Treason's Tap are out:
This Triumph then, with Just Applause be given
To Caesar's Conduct, and assisting Heaven.
Sense now shall flourish, Discord be no more,
For Wit and Peace are Caesar's to restore.
The Persons.
Alderman Touchstone, intended for Mr. Nokes, By Mr. Percivall. Golding, his
Sober Servant, Mr. Baker. Quicksilver, his Debauched Servant, Mr. Jevon.
Security, a Bawd and Usurer, Mr. Lee. Sir Petronell Flash, Mr. Williams.
Captain Seagull, Mr. Gillow. Mr. Bramble, a Lawyer, Mr. Hains. Mrs. Touchstone,
Mrs. Corye. Girtred, her Daughter, an Affected Cittess, Married and cozened by
Sir Petr. Flash. Mrs. Percivall. Mildred, the Sober Daughter, Mrs. Twiford.
Security's Wife, Mrs. Price. Syndefie, Punk to Quicksilver. Servants and
Sailers.
Scene LONDON. A NEW FARCE, CALLED Cuckolds-Haven. ACT I. SCENE I.
Touchstone's Shop at the farther End; Golding walking short turns before it.
Touchstone with Accounts in his Hand.
Touch. UPon Mortgage of his whole Estate remains due to his Lordship 300 l.
this comes of Prodigality, of his Lordships Stewards toward a Purchase for
himself 5000. There Is the fruits of Industry -- At Interest for Mrs.
Procure-well 1200. There Is Industry again -- Lent, Received, Receipts,
Receipts, Disbursements, Bonds, bonds, Judgments, etc. Well, we Married
Citizens had need of strong Heads to support what is put upon'em; our greatest
Care is, to look after them that should take the Care off our Hands. I must in
and settle these Accounts before --

[As he is going in, Quicksilver enters upon him and drives him backward.
Quick. Alack! alack, Sir! sincerely, I did not think of your Worship.


Touch. Thou insolent Varlet! What? stumble upon the very Face of Authority?
Do'it thou behold no Terror in this overture? Is this natural Type of
Reverence, and this Emblem of the Cities Honor, but Ciphers with you? ha!


Quick. Peradventure, Sir --


Touch. I will not be peradventured, Sir; Answer me directly. What loose Action
are you now bound for? what Comrades are you to meet? who gives the Supper? and
where is the Rendezvous? I will have an Account of all these in a Breath, in a
Sentence, in one Word, Sir.


Quick. Indeed, and in very good sober Truth, Sir --


Touch. Indeed, and in very good sober Truth, Sir! -- behind my back thou will
swear faster than a French Footboy, and talk more Baudy than a Midwife. -- I
tell thee, Sirrah, I am thy natural Lord and Master, William Touchstone,
Goldsmith and Alderman of London, an Alderman, Sirrah, Alderman; I will
likewise make thee understand that thou art my indented Servant, Francis
Quicksilver. -- Work upon that now.


Quick. Surely I am your bounden and most faithful --


Touch. Without Preamble, I will know what Diversion you are now a running to.


Quick. Surely one may use his Recreation with his Master's Profit.


Touch. Servants Recreations are seldom with their Master's Profit: -- - Work
upon that now --


Quick. Surely I was but going to a Funeral Sermon, Sir, -- of a dear Friend,
Sir.

[Crying.
Touch. Say thou so -- I protest I was to blame for chiding thee -- dear
Francis, I ask thy Pardon and am sorry for thy Friend with all my heart -- But,
Sirrah, seeing is believing, show me your Sermon-Book, produce your
Shorthand-Book, quickly I say.


Quick. Here, Sir.


Touch. Let me see it.


Quick. Sincerely, I shall come too late, Sir.


Touch. Let me see it I say -- what is here? Sol, la! me, fa! sol, sol, -- -
what has this to do here? -- With a Stone at the Gate, and a handsome young
Wench to rub my bald Pate. -- Why, thou Pagan Rogue: Thou have more Tricks with
thee than an Irish Run-a-way with seven years Improvement in the West Indies. I
will see further what Rigging you have about; off with that Cloak of Iniquity,
where are you?

[ Quicksilver dodges about him, at last Touchstone pulls off his Cloak and
discovers Flutes, Swords, Pumps, Racks, Dancing Shoes, etc. girded round him.
Hey-day, hey-day! what a Composition is here! Thou have more Trangams about
thee than a Hocus Pocus, or the Wonderful Fish that came Armed against Turk and
Pope.


Quick. Work upon that now.


Touch. Thou shameless Varlet, do thou deride me too? do thou laugh at
thy lawful Master, contrary to thy Indentures? I will make thee, Sirrah, at
Noonday for Penance, to walk in this Equipage from Leaden Hall to Ludgate.


Quick. I will as soon serve a Prenticeship to every Cuckold betwixt
Leaden Hall and Ludgate, by this Light. What a Plague, Sir, I am a Gentleman,
tho a younger Brother, and your Worships Servant.


Touch. Do thou Swear, Rake-hell? thy Father was an honest Tradesman.


Quick. But my Mother was a Gentlewoman, and with your favor, Sir, I will
swear by the Mothers side. Is it not for your Worships Advantage that I keep
Company? I am entertained amongst Gallants, they call me Cousin Frank; right. I
lend them Money; good. They spend it; very well. And when it is gone, must they
not strive to get more? must not their Land fly? and to whom? shall not your
Worship have the Refusal? How could Tradesmen thrive if Gentlemen were not
Unthrifts? how could Gentlemen be Unthrifts without Supplies for their
Debauchery? Well, the City ought to consider me. I am now going to a
Gaming-House; the Sparks fall to Play; I carry light Gold with me; Cousin
Frank, say they, some Gold for Silver; I change gain by it: They lose the Gold
and cry, Cousin Frank, Lend me some Silver; by which means --


Touch. Nay, the Rogue has Wit, that is certain; the Rogue has Wit -- I cannot
help loving the Dog -- but, Sirrah, did I gain my Wealth by Ordinaries? no. By
exchanging of Gold? no. By keeping Gallants Company? no. I hired me a little
Shop, sought low, kept no Debt-Book, garnished my Shelves for want of Plate
with good wholesome thrifty Sentences; as, Touchstone keep thy Shop, and thy Shop
will keep thee; Light Gains, make heavy Purses; Be merry, and wise. And when I
was Wiv'd having something to stick to, I had ever the Horn of Security before
my Eyes; you all know the device of the Horn, where the young Fellow slips in
at the Butt, and comes squeezed out at the Buckall. Yet I grew up to this
Dignity that you see here, and bear my Brows as high as my Neighbors; but thou
-- well, look to Accounts, your Father's Bond lies for you, Seven hundred art
thou run out of Cash.


Quick. I have proper Gentlemen's words for it, and well dressed! shall I deny a
Gentleman that calls me Cousin Frank?

Enter a Page.
Page. Which is Mr. Touchstone's Shop?


Gold. Here, Sir. What lack you, Sir? what do you buy, Sir?


Touch. Look you there now! there is your Fellow Servant, does he spark it?
well, if he outlast not an hundred such crackling Bavins as thou art, Heaven
and Men neglect Industry -- with me Boy?


Page. My Master, Sir Petronell Flash, presents his Service to you, and intends
instantly to visit you.


Touch. I understand you Boy: to Consummate Marriage with my Eldest Daughter,
my Wive's Dilling, whom she longs to call Madam -- Your Master shall find me
most unwillingly ready, Boy.

[Ex. Page. There Is another Affliction too; my Eldest Daughter is as Prodigal
as my youngest Servant. She must be Ladify'd forfooth, take all her Dress from
the Court, take Quality-Rambles, and keep Quality-Hours. Well, a piece of Land
she has, her Grandmothers Gift, let her Sir Petronell flash out that: But as
for my Substance, she that scorns me, as I am a Citizen and Alderman, shall
never be the better for that; nor shall that be the worse for her -- However --
Golding, come hither, Golding -- no, no, you Quicksilver -- I, I, Golding,
Golding my outmost Care is for thee, and my only Trust is in thee, look to the
Shop -- Mr. Quicksilver, look on the Brodigals Hog-trough in the Hangings
within, I say, Consider them: think upon Husks: Husks -- work upon that now.

[Exit.
Quick. Husks in your Wittal's weazon; and a Million of Milstones to the
Bargain. Here Is Authority with a Horse Pox.


Gold For shame how you Talk.


Quick. And who shall say me nay? I will both Talk and Swear, I am a Gentleman,
and may Swear by my Pedigree. Golding thou art yet -- -- but I Will improve thee
into a Man and a good Fellow, I will show thee Company with Souls in them,
Drink thee into good Blood.

Good store of brisk Claret supplies every thing,
And the Man that is Drunk is as great as a King.

Gold. Away with your Ribaldry Playhouse Morals.


Quick. I tell thee we will redeem, redeem the City's Honor, and show there
may be 'Prentices that are no Coxcombs. Shall our free Spirits be held in Bonds
of Calf-skin, and subjected to a formal Beard and Chain?


Gold. What would you have me do?


Quick. Do nothing, turn Gentleman and be Idle; the Curse of Man is Labor.
Will thou walk here from Sun to Sun between two Pissing Posts, or stand with a
bare Pate, driveling Nose, and Arms across under a rotten Pent-house?


Gold. Away, you Prodigal Fool.


Quick. That word again and thou art Immortal.


Gold. Thou Shuttle-Cock; Thou Gull of lewd Companions; I see thee already in
the Temple Rounds with half a Hat, thy Crevat the reversion of a Barber's Apron
-- soft, soft, unsheath that Iron, and I will make thee swallow it.


Quick. As I am a Gentleman, I Will get drunk incontinently, incontinently, grow
Valiant, and beat thee.

[Exit.
SCENE II. Security's House.
Wynifred Security's Wife, and Clogg giving her a Letter.
Clogg. From your Admirer Madam, Sir Petronell Flash.


Wyn. And are you certain my Old Security did not see you take it in?


Clogg. Pray think I understand my Office better.


Wyn. What an impudent Knight is this to continue addressing to me, and send me
word the same time that he is going to be Married, but for my sake and to
prevent Suspicion: it is a scurvy sure way, and I could have studdy'd better.
I Will hear no further from him.


Clogg. By your Beauties leave, Madam, I must presume to say you are not
altogether so wise as true politic Wife would be; who being Married to such a
Nicumpoop (I speak it with my Master's peace) whose Face confesses him what you
ought to make him), that you will out of conscientious scruple, defraud a poor
Old Gentleman of what he longs for, and makes it his whole studdy to compass
only a Modish Title; could he but write Cuckold he has his Ends; for look you
--


Wyn. What means the Varlet? why thou know the golden Fruit was never watched
so, as my Old Dragon watches me.


Clogg. Why, there you find his worshipful Ambition, the Top of it, the very
forked Top. Why should he keep you thus mur'd up in a back Room, allow you
never a Casement to the Streets, for fear of ingendring by the Eyes, forbid you
Paper, Pen and Ink like Rats-bane, search your half Pint of Sack, least a
Letter should be sunk in it? why all this Confinement but to make Men covet you
the more?


Wyn. I grant it indeed the only Method that could seduce me, and bring upon
his head what most he fears.


Clogg. Will you make benefit of Time and Truth? I am set over you, employed to
watch your Steps, your Looks, your very Breathings, and report them to him, now
if you will be a modish right sweet Mistress, we'll make a Cokes of this wise
Master, an absolute fine Cokes, quite disappoint the Care and Industry of such
a solemn and effectual Ass, an Ass to such good purpose as we'll make him.


Wyn. I understand you not.


Clogg. I am, it is true, my Master's man, but my Mistresses slave, the Servant
of her Pleasures and sweet Turns, and know all Points that will conduce to
them. I will contrive it so that you shall go to Park, to Plays, to Feasts and
Masquerades, take care you shall have such Rigging Sails, and Trim as handsome
Vessels should put forth with, I Will choose you Confidents, and Lovers, convey
your Letters, fetch you Answers, with all other Offices requisite to youthful
Blood and Beauty.


Wyn. This is most strange.


Clogg. And for Variety, at times (though I am not of Symmetry and Complexion
to boast a Sovereignty over Ladies hearts, like some of my sphere) yet I can
do, my sweet Madam.


Wyn. How Is this?


Clogg. Dear, delicate Madam, I am your little Paraquit, your Sparrow, your
Shock, your Pugg, your Squirrel.


Wyn. Impudent Slave! what can the Varlet mean by this Presumption? -- -- - Oh,
I have found it out, and was most dull not to conceive it before; My jealous
Husband put him on this Practice -- Where are you, Sir? for I know you hear me;
come from your peeping Corner; spare your self a little from your Watch to
applaud your Groom here, that so well follows your Instructions.

Enter Security.
Sec. Where is my little Bunting? why how now, Bird? what, in a Pett? I Prithee
what is the matter?


Wyn. Very well, you are a Stranger to the Plot, I warrant you? did not set
your Vassal here to tempt your innocent Wife with most uncivil Language and
Action?


Clogg. I sweat, I sweat.


Sec. I understand thee not, my Goldfinch.


Clogg. Sir, the Essex Squire has been thrice here since you went out, he will
Mortgage to his Uncle, unless you find him instantly.


Sec. That must not be -- What were you saying, Chick?


Wyn. Durst he presume to mention Love to me without Directions from you?


Sec. To mention Love to thee, Bunting? Conspire against my Honor? -- What
were thou saying, Clogg? is there any Danger of our missing of the Mortgage --
The Varlet durst not do it, my Lark. What? mention Lewdness to thee? any thing
that pointed toward Cuckolds Row?


Wyn. As if you were not planted on the Stairs, or behind the Hangings -- I am
sure 'twas your Direction.


Sec. Thou shall see, Bird, how I directed him,

[Puts off his Cloak, O thou most manifest Villain! Thou Fiend Apparent! Thou
declared Hellhound!

[Beats him.
Clogg. Sir, Sir, Sir.


Sec. Knave, Rascal, Traitor, have I found you? what, upon your first point of
Trust and Charge? the very Week of your Probation?


Clogg. Some Moderation, good Sir.


Sec. Have I for this conferred all Offices upon thee, made thee my Clerk,
Wardrobe Man, Caterer, Cook, Butler, Steward, and what transcends all these, my
Wife-watcher?


Clogg. Good Sir.


Wyn. But tell me, Cue; where were you all the while?


Sec. At Council Bramble's, Bird, drawing up of a Judgment. -- There is one
blow more for exercise -- You see, my Lark, how I directed him.


Clogg. Would you had done, Sir.


Sec. O Bird, what Blessings follow Industry, no less than three Forfeitures
this Morning. -- One more to put you in mind of the last? you are pampered with
your whole Pitchard a day, I shall reduce you to a Sprat, Rogue. Are you
tentiginous? ha!


Clogg. I shall expire -- -dear Sir.


Sec. And what'is all this care and toil of mine for, but to enrich thee, Bird?
Six Flanders Mares to your Coach, that is your Proportion. I do hunger and
thirst to do the good, Bird.


Wyn. Why am I then confined to one dark Room?


Sec. For thy good still, Bird, and beside, to please thee thou shall have thy
Cage new Painted. There Is conceit for thee. Turn me loose to the wittiest of
'em, and to the wisest too. What Trade like mine of Usury? All others complain
of Inconvenience. The Merchant says, Traffic is subject to Incertainty and
Loss; let them keep their Goods on dry Land with a Vengeance. Besides, their
Gains are unconscionable, two for one, or so; whereas I in my Lending of Money
am content with moderate Profit, 30 or 40 in the 100, so I may have it with
Quietness, and no Hazard.


Wyn. Thy Godfathers were in the right; Cue, thou deserve thy Name.


Sec. One Prays for a Westwardly Wind to carry his Ship out, another for an
Eastwardly to bring his home; and at every shaking of a Leaf he falls into an
Ague. The Farmer is ever at odds with the weather, sometimes the Clouds are
barren, their Harvests are too thin; sometimes the Season is too fruitful, and
Corn will bear no Price; whereas we that Trade only in Money, are pleased with
all Weathers; so the Sun and Moon stand not still, but make up Days, Months,
and Years.

Enter Mrs. Syndefie.
Syn. O Sir, Mr. Francis Quick-silver's below.


Sec. Bring him up, dear Charge, I do hunger and thirst to do him good. -- --
To thy Chamber, my dear Turtle.


Wyn. Let it be the Street Room this time, Cue.


Sec. It shall be the back Room, I have Sworn it in the violence of my
Affection to thee.


Wyn. One pair of Stairs then.


Sec. Two, Bird, Two. Thou see my Love in keeping thee so close, it shows
thou art my Jewel -- In my sight still?

Re-enter Syndefie with Quicksilver.
Quick. And how fares my Old Dad? does he digest Iniquity well still? and has
he seen my running Gelding dressed to day? O, my dear Syndefie, that Time were
half so fleet, my wished Enfranchisement would soon arrive.


Syn. Ah Frank, you wish you know not what! your Master's Wealth and Trust
supports you now, but when that Term's expired --


Quick. Why then I Will conjure Money to my Pockets, tho she were fled and dead,
I Would raise her with Aqua vitae out of old Hogsheads; while there are Lees of
Wine or Dregs of Beer, I Will never want her; Coin her out of Cobwebs; raise Wool
upon Eggshels, make Grass grow upon Marrow-bones, but I will make her come.


Syn. Come, you may yet provide a Stock for Traffic against your time expires.


Quick. Thou art a Fool Syn. Traffic! shall I, who am the Flower of City Wits,
turn Paltry Merchant, and trust my Estate to a Hogs-trough? what are Ships but
Tennis Balls for the Winds to play withal? footra for dull Preferments of the
City. I will to Court Syn.


Syn. What Winds or Seas have Hazard like --

Re-enter Security.
Quick. Ah Pox! and who taught you this Morality?


Sec. Long of this Witty Age, Mr. Francis, and your Mercurial Conversation.


Quick. Well said Old Dad, Thou Father of Destruction. I am bringing more
Widgeons into thy Usurious Nets. Claw me, claw thee, runs through Court and
Country.


Sec. Right, my subtle Quick. I do therefore hunger and thirst to do thee good.
-- -- -But what new Game have thousprung, my nimble Francis; for I do hunger
and thirst to do thee good?


Quick. A certain Knight of my Acquaintance --


Sec. I hunger and thirst to do him good.


Quick. Has present Occasion for twelve Hundred Guinneys: Sir Petronell Flash
by Name.


Sec. How? that Bankrupt Prodigal, I renonnce him and his Wants.


Quick. That is betwixt you and I, Dad: but this Day he Marries my Master's
eldest Daughter, and --


Sec. Bring me to him instantly, I hunger and thirst to do him good, come bring
me to him -- You were tentiginous, Rogue, were you?

[Exeunt.
SCENE III. Touchstone's House.
Girfred, Mildred, Poldavie with a French Mantoa under his Arm, Girfred's Maid.
Gir. For the Passion of Patience, look if Sir Petronell approach; that sweet,
that fine, that Alamode, that -- for Loves sake tell me if he come -- O Sister
Mill, tho my Father be a Paltry Tradesman, yet I must be a Lady, and I will be
a Lady, and I thank my Stars, my Mother must call me Madam -- does he come, off
with this scandalous Gown for shame, let not my Knight take in this vile City
cut at any rate -- does he come? -- tear it, Pox on it, tear't off -- Thus while
she sleeps, I sorrow for her sake -- What a dull English Animal art thou to
keep me an Age in torment? tear it off, I say.


Mild. Lord, Sister, with what disdain do you put off your City Tire? what
pains you take to make your self Ridiculous.


Gir. Lord, Sister Mill, that you will be pretending to Gallantry and Dress
with that mechanic Soul of yours! how often have I told you that you have no
Genius for these things? How should you understand Mien or bon Grace, the
Brillian and Negligence of a Court Carriage, the belle conceit of a Fan, and
the Esprit of a Fontnage? I have studdy'd these, things, and have fancy to
reach the Meridian of them.


Mild. To reach the Meridian of Folly, you mean, Sister.


Gir. Your Ambition, Sister, aspires no higher than to Marry a
Common-Council-Man, and a Crape Gown with a filthy English Cut may serve your
turn: but I must be a Lady. I like the humor of some City Dames well, to eat
Cherries at an Angel a Pound pretty well: to die Scarlet black Tolerable: to
line their Coaches with Velvet indifferent; but for a thousand other Niceties
they have no Fancy: they are my Aversion as I hope to be a Lady -- -- - Is he
not come yet? Lord, what a long Knight it is? And ever she cried shoot home,
shoot home -- -- yet I have known a longer -- --


Mild. Well, Birds that scorn their Nest before their Plumes are grown -- --


Gir. Still at your reprimands? Thou art more dull and troublesome than
Bow-Bell. When I am a Lady, I Will pray for thy Conversion to Sense; nay, I Will
vouchsafe to call thee Sister Mill; for though thou art not like to be a Lady,
yet it is possible thou may be saved as soon as I -- -- not come yet? -- --
and ever and anon, she doubled in her Song -- -- -Liberty, Liberty. Now
Monsieur Poldavie for your Reputation; come, fit it on.


Pold. Me sal please you Madam assurement,


Gir. There Is mettle for you! well, there is more Soul in one French Tailor,
than in a whole Company of our Train'd-Bands. Page, let me have the French
Song, it will help off this fatigue of Dressing.

SONG.
She.
THe Wise believe that I love none,
And some that I love All;
While none can call my heart his Own,
Each Portion is so small.
He.
Some say, I for Olinda dye;
My Breast so fierce a Passion warms;
Most think my hour is not so nigh,
But ah! They little know her Charms.
She.
My Heart's the Weathercock of Love,
Which every Sigh can turn;
And every amorous Breath can move,
But Nothing make it burn.
He.
My Heart is Love's mere Tennis-Ball,
Here tossed, there bandy'd up and down;
But in good Hands, if once it fall,
It Is lodged, it is then for ever gone.
[ Poldavie the mean time fits on her Mantoa, and her Woman puts on her
Head-Tire. And is this Alamode upon your Honor, Monsieur?


Pold. Ver fine, Madam; here it be close, here it be stiff, here it be
Capacity, and will keep your Tighs so cool. Here vas de faut in your Body,
Madam; but me have rectify dat defect with de effect of my steel Instrument;
my steel Instrument, Madam, have one Eye, but can ver well see to rectify de
imperfections in de Ladies Proportions, Madam.


Gir. And how must I bear my Hands now? light.


Pold. Ouy, Madam, now you be de Court fashoon, you must all ting light, tread
light, and fall light -- bon amy! dat be de Court Ambla.


Mil. Has the Court never a Trott, Monsieur?


Pold. No Trotta, no Tro^tt, but de false Gallopa, Madam.


Gir. An' thou had been an English Tire-woman, I should have beaten thee; for
I could learn another Story of Fontanges.

Enter Servant.
Serve. The Knight is come, Madam.


Gir. Is my Knight come? where is my Fan now? Sister, do my Cheeks look well?
give me a little Box of the Ear, to fetch the Color into them. So, so -- -- O
dearest Dear! How does my Errant Knight?


Mil. For shame, with more Modesty.


Gir. Modesty! why? I am no Citizen now: Modesty! am not I to be Married? you
had best keep me Modest when I am a Lady; the way of -- -- is a la negligence,
is it not my Hero?


Pet. Assurance there is necessary, Madam.


Gir. But why came you no sooner, Knight?


Pet. A most important --


Gir. And who were you with?


Pet. A true --


Gir. And was your Wine good?


Pet. If you --


Gir. And were your Company mad enough? for I must have you very lewd; it is
Alamode and great. Well, there is nothing can spoil our Happiness, but your
being too fond of me; fondness in a Husband is a mechanic thing. I hope
therefore you will prove wild, to justify your Quality.


Pet. I shall endeavor on my part, Madam.

Enter Mrs. Touchstone.
Mrs. T. Welcome, my honorable Guest; and when must this Marriage affair be
dispatched?


Pet. I come now, Madam, to consummate it; If Mr. Alderman pleases, you may
this Morning call a poor Knight Son-in-Law.


Mrs. T. And my Daughter Madam; what an Air is there! how well her Dress and
Quality becomes her!

Enter Touchstone. Look here, Master Touchstone, and weep your Eyes blind for
Joy; would you imagine this to be your Daughter? for my part, I scarce can.
What, no respect to her Ladyship?


Touch. Sir Knight, you are welcome to her Body; as for the rest, I am not
unwilling to forego it; because it is not in my Power to keep it from you.
There I think I am civil to you. Seven hundred Pound purchase of Land her
Grandmother left her, is yours; Her self (as her Mother's Gift) is yours; but
if you expect any thing from me, know, that my Hand Eyes open together; I do
not give blindly -- -- Work upon that now.


Pet. Sir, You mistrust my Means; I hope, I am a Knight.


Touch. Sir, what I do not know, I must be bold to say I am ignorant of.


Mrs. T. Nay, I can answer for his being a Knight; I know where he had the
Money to pay his Fees. And so might you have been a Knight, an' you had not
been an Afs; had I thought you would not have been Knighted, I would have dubbed
you my self -- but as for your Daughter --


Gir. I Mother, I must be a Lady anon, and by your leave, Mother, (I speak it
not without my Duty, but only in right of my Husband) I must take place of you,
Mother.


Mrs. T. That you shall, Lady-Daughter; and have a Coach too, as well as I.


Gir. And, by your leave, Mother, (I speak it not without my Duty, but only in
right of my Husband) my Coach-Horses must take the Wall of your Coach-Horses.


Touch. Come, come, the Day wears apace; I love to have a scurvy Business soon
over -- There I think I was civil again -- do you hear, Sir, how you will use
this Daughter of mine, I know not; and how she will deserve to be used, I know
less than the other: But I must tell you, Sir, that for your sake she has refused
known honest Men, well moneyed, better traded, best reputed -- -- Work upon
that now.


Gir. Citizens, ma soy, beastly Citizen, sweet Knight, as soon as ever we are
Married, take me to thy mercy out of this miserable City, from the scent of
Sea-coal, and the hearing of Bow-Bell; let us but Marry a little, and then down
with me, down with me immediately.

[Exeunt all.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Chair, Coat, Perewigg, and Band. After a confused manner, the Waits, Drums,
Trumpets, saluting the Bridegroom; Enter Touchstone, in his Night Gown and Cap.
Touch. Here Is a Noise with a Vengeance, as if a Pope were Roasting with Cats
in his Belly. Why, my House has been made a Tavern this Night; but my comfort
is, the Reckoning falls to my. Wife's Charge. Our Bellies have stowed more
sorts of Provision than Noah's Ark: It Is our City's fault, which, because we do
it but seldom, we do it the more sinfully. -- Hey! Quicksilver -- Here Is no
being heard without a Speaking Trumpet -- Quicksilver, I say, Mr. Francis
Quicksilver.

Enter Quicksilver.
Quick. Here, Sir. Uck!


Touch. Most worshipful Sir, will your important Affairs give you leave to
Dress me?


Quick. I should leave any Business to serve you, Sir; though I were fast
asleep. Uck!

[He puts on his Coat wrong, and Buttons it behind.
Touch. Foh, Sirrah! how you stink of Wine.


Quick. Would you desire a better smell, Sir? Uck! uck!


Touch. The Drunken Hiccough too, upon my Honor.


Quick. It Is but the coldness of my Stomach, Sir.


Touch. What, have you the Cause natural for it? The Wedding Night could not
moisten your Throat sufficiently, but the Morning too must rain her Dews upon
you.


Quick. An' please you, Sir, we did but drink to the coming off of the Knightly
Bridegroom.


Touch. To the coming off on him?


Quick. I, Sir, we drank to his coming on when we went to Bed, and now we are
up, we must drink to his coming off; That Is the chief Honor of a Soldier,
Sir; and therefore we must drink so much the more to it. Uck!


Touch. A very Capital Reason. I believe your Logic must be forced anon to
make three Silver Tankards out of two.


Quick. The Knight's Men are still on their Knees at it; and because it is for
your Credit, Sir, I would be Ioth to flinch.


Touch. I beseech you, Sir, to'em again: you are one of the separated Crew, one
of my Wife's Faction.


Quick. Of the sure side, Sir.


Touch. And of my young Ladies, with whom, and her great Match, I will have
nothing to do.


Quick. So, Sir, now I will go keep my Credit with 'em, an' please you, Sir.


Touch. By any means, Sir, I beseech you, lay one Cup of Sack more upon your
cold Stomach -- -- but have a care, Sirrah, your Head will be turned presently,
I can tell you.


Quick. Your Worship's Head is turned already, Sir.

[Exit.
Touch. What Is that, Rogue? ha! Drunk for my Credit, quoth-a? it is a sprightly
Knave this. I have two Daughters just like my two Servants; one has Grace, and
no Wit; the other Wit, and no Grace; There Is my Wife has neither. Well, Mr.
Alderman, thy Preferment is thy Comfort; and in that Consideration --

[Looks in the Glass, and sees himself wrong dressed. What Is here now? what a
profane Varlet is this, not to know the right side of an Alderman? -- he said
my Head was turned indeed. Golding, Golding.

Enter Golding.
Gold. Here, Sir; what does your Worship want?


Touch. Come, Dress me, Golding.


Gold. Undress you, Sir, you mean?


Touch. There Is a piece of Conceit too: well, every thing must have a beginning
-- -- How now Mil?

Enter Mildred.
Mil. How fare you, Sir, this Morning? has not the Noise disturbed you? it was
my Mother's humor.


Touch. So now, here is all the sober parcel my Family can show; the rest of my
House are giddy, the very Stairs and Walls stagger -- -- thy Mother, Mil, has
used me to Noise, I thank her. Let me see now, let me survey your two
Physiognomies; some Resemblance upon my Honor: Golding, I can tell thee for
thy comfort, thou will come to be an Alderman; I see by that thriving
Sheeps-face of thine.


Gold. Your Worship thinks too favorably of me.


Touch. Come hither, Mil; what think thou of thy Sister?


Mil. As a Sister, Sir; I hope well.


Touch. I would not give a Button for thy hopes of her, nor my own neither; but
tell me what thou think of her?


Mil. I am loath to think ill, Sir; and sorry that I cannot speak well.


Touch. Very good: and, Golding, how likest thou the Knight, Sir Flash? Does
not the Elephant look big? They say, he has a Castle in the Country.


Gold. Pray Heaven the Elephant carry not his Castle on his Back, Sir; the best
I can say of him is, that I know him not.


Touch. Golding, I commend thee, I approve thee, and I will make it appear that
my Affection is strong to thee -- -- My Wife has had her humor, and I will
have mine. Do thou see my Daughter there? she is not fair, not very fair,
somewhat favorable like me -- -- her Face, I must tell thee, has a great
Blessing with it; that it will give thee no reason to suspect her -- -- look
you, thou art towardly, she is modest; thou art provident, she is careful -- --
she is now Mine, give me thy Hand -- -- she is now Thine; Work upon that now.


Gold. Sir, I had too much Honor in your Service;

But to make me your Son --


Touch. Is to get me a Grandson, I take it. Come, ye modest Fools, I must have
you better acquainted: Lip her, slave, Lip her; what? do thou pauze upon the
Matter? why, there is thy Fellow Servants Francis, would have come over for the
King with half this Encouragement.


Gold. I scarcely, Sir, durst trust my happiness.


Touch. Nay, I was never forward to meddle with any thing that I durst not,
truth of it; let me see, Thou have a kind of a serious leering look too; a
little too much Modesty at present; but when thou art Married I warrant thou will -- ha! -- Thou will -- what was I a going to say now -- go, get you gone,
you little tynie Rogues; get you gone together.

[ Exeunt Gold. and Mild. Enter Quicksilver disordered.
Quick. Halloa, you pampered Jades of Asia.


Touch. Why, how now, Sirrah? what vein is this? ha!


Quick. Who cries on Murder? Lady, was it you?


Touch. So, Sirrah, you are past your drunker Hiccough now, I see.


Quick. And what is that to you, blind Bitch? will you mount the Trojan Horse,
and drive the Pigmies like Geese before you?


Touch. Drunk, upon my Honor; stark Drunk.


Quick. It Is for my Master's Honor, Strumpet.


Touch. I am told too, you keep a Whore in Town.


Quick. It Is for my Master's Credit -- Kiss me Baud -- I will salute thy
precious Person; I will salute thy nether Lip.


Touch. The Knave is loving in his Drink. -- -- -Nay, fie; pish, fie; I do
protest I will cry out a Rape.


Quick. Do thou hear, Doxie? Old Touchstone is a Cuckold.


Touch. Mercy on me! an Alderman a Cuckold -- -- -past Grace, that is certain. I
must proceed to Execution -- -- -There Is Ense rescidendum for you, Sirrah;
there is your Indentures; all your Apparel that I know of is upon your Back; and
so my Heart and Doors henceforth are shut upon thee.


Quick. Am I free then? Old Satan, I will tell thee


Touch. What now, Sirrah?


Quick. When this eternal substance of my Soul --


Touch. What then, Sir?


Quick. I was a Courtier in the Spanish Court, and Don Andrea was my Name.


Touch. Good Master, Don Andrea, will you march?


Quick. I will piss upon thy Threshold, and throw rotten Eggs against thy
Sign-Post -- ha! do thou shake thy goary Locks at me? -- avaunt, I say.


Touch. Help! Murder, murder.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. Security's House.
Security and his Wife Playing at Putt, Syndefie by them.
Sec. There Is up, Wynny, there is up; Come give me my Winnings.

[Kisses her: Look you there now; is not this better than to throw away
Guinneys at heathenish Bassett, and Comett? there is no Game, for Invention,
like Putt and One and Thirty: My Sow has Pigg'd too, is a notable piece of
Skill.

Enter Clogg.
Sec. Now, Sirrah, where have you been loitering all this while? let me see,
thou have been a whole half hour, five minutes, and three crochets completely.


Clogg. Master Quicksilver, Sir, is drowned at present in the Bride-Bowl.


Sec. And have thou been at Mr. Bramble's Chamber in the Temple?


Clogg. Yes, Sir, 'has dispatched his Client, and only stays for a Fee on the
other side too, before he waits upon you.


Sec. Fees on both sides may make a reasonable Livelihood -- -- -Come nearer,
Sirrah; and breathe upon me -- Wine, Wine upon my Conscience; would you think
it, Mrs. Syn? this Rogue has tasted Wine; swallowed it.


Syn. O, most unconscionable Hound!


Clogg. A single Pint, Sir, between a Friend and I.


Sec. And you Treated? Sixpence at a sitting, Rogue?


Clogg. Once in Seven years, Sir.


Sec. Once in Seven years, Varlet? do thou know what that amounts to? Thou
art a lusty young Knave, and scaping Tyburn, may live this Seventy years
yet. I will demonstrate to thee Sixpence once in every Seven years, Use upon
Use, will in that time arise to Twenty four Pound Twelve Shillings. What a
Fortune art thou fallen from -- Thou have seen this Mr. Bramble, Wynny, an
unconscionable old Rogue, that keeps his Wife locked up.


Wyn. Why then do you use me so?


Sec. I do it out of Love, my Bunting; that Knave does it out of Jealousy.


Wyn. As if you were not Jealous.


Sec. Not Jealous in the least; I am only afraid thou should make me a
Cuckold.


Wyn. Come, Cue; you promised I should go abroad the next fair Day, to the
Musick-House in the Fields.


Sec. It is not worth thy Pains, my Goldfinch; Look you, I can make you ten
times better Music.

The Froe She wan an Excise, etc.
Wyn. Ay, but there is a pretty Play in Moor-Fields.


Sec. Why, I will act thee a better Play my self. What will thou have? The
Knight of the Burning Pestle? or, The doleful Comedy of Piramus and Thisbe?
That Is my Masterpiece; when Piramus comes to be dead, I can act a dead man
rarely, The rageing Rocks, and shivering Shocks, shall break the Locks of
Prison Gates; And Phoebus Carr, shall shine from Far, to make and mar the
foolish Fates. -- Was not that lofty, now? Then there is the Lion, Wall and
Moonshine, three Heroic Parts; I Played 'em all at School. I roared out the
Lion so terribly, that the Company called out to me to roar again.


Wyn. I, Cue; but there is the Italian Piece, at Charing Cross.


Sec. You mean Punch, my intimate Friend and Acquaintance? I knew Old Punch his
Grandfather -- -- - you shall see.

[He Acts Punch.
Syn. Clogg, get me a Squib to complete the Sport.

[ Syndesie lays the Squib under his Chair, and blows him up. Quicksilver
enters upon them.
Quick. Why, how now Dad? what merry Pranks are these?


Sec. Nothing, nothing, Francis; a little conjugal Conceit for my Wife's
Diversion -- -- ah Lard, that my Gravity should be so apprehended -- -- - Come
up, Wynny, -- -- come to thy Chamber.

[Leads her out.
Quick. Now, my dear Syn, I am free as Elemental Air; the Indented Sheep-skin's
Burnt, in which I was wrapped; like Sampson, I have broke Philistian Bonds, and
in thy Arms, my lovely Dalilah -- -- - Come, let my Trunks shoot forth their
Silks concealed, and deck me like a Bridegroom.

[She brings forth his Periwigg, Crevat, Sword, etc. and puts them on him.
Syn. But alas, Frank, how will this Bravery be maintained now? your Place
maintained it before.


Quick. Why? and I maintained my Place.


Syn. There is no standing without Legs, nor flying without Wings, Frank;
there is none but must have Trades to live withal.


Quick. Away with your moldy Proverbs, Trades to live withal? No, I say, still
let him that has Wit, live by his Wit; and he that has none, let him be a
Tradesman.

Enter Security.
Sec. Witty, Master Francis! Indeed it is pity any Trade should dull that quick
Brain of yours -- Well, do but bring Knight Petronell into my Parchment Toyls,
and you shall never need to drudge in any Trade -- of my Credit, you shall not;
I do hunger and thirst to do thee good -- Do thou know his Wife's Land?
do thou?


Quick. Even to a foot, Sir; I have been often there. A very fine Seat, good
Land, all entire within it self.


Sec. Well wooded, Frank? well wooded?


Quick. Seven hundred Pounds worth ready to Fell, and a fine sweet House that
stands just in the midst of it, like a point in the middle of a Circle.


Sec. Excellent Master Francis! how I long to do the good! I even die, that
thou may inherit my Possessions -- for, on my Religion, Master Francis, I
meddle in this affair to do the Knight a Pleasure; and so 'pray tell him.


Quick. Get him the Money ready then, Dad; for inter nos, all that he was able
of himself to raise, is laid out on a Ship now bound for Virginia; the manner
of which Voyage is so closely laid, that neither his Lady-Bride, nor any of her
Friends know of it. Therefore as soon as her Hand is gotten to the Sale of the
Inheritance, and you have furnished him with the Money, he will instantly hoist
Sail and away.


Sec. And a frank gale go with him, Master Frank -- -- alas, we have too few
such Knights Adventurers; let his Wife Seal to Day, he shall have the Money to
Day.


Quick. This very Morning she intends for the Country to work, to which
Action, with more Engines, I purpose presently to prefer my sweet Syn here to
her, for her Gentlewoman; whom you, for better Credit, shall present as your
Kinswoman, newly come up to learn Fashions.


Sec. On my Religion, a most pithy Project; as good she spoil the Lady, as the
Lady spoil her -- -- - Syn, you are bound to Master Francis.


Quick. Look you, here is the Knight come already.

Enter Sir Petronell with a Writing.
Pet. I Will leave this fulsome Town immediately, here is no Diversion stirring;
Wit is at low Ebb, and Wickedness at a stand; I will away immediately.


Quick. You would do well to take some Guinneys in your Pocket, Knight, or your
Eastward Castle will smoke but miserably.


Pet. My Castle? why, thou know, Frank, that all my Castles are in the Air.


Quick. Why? whither is your Lady going then?


Pet. In Faith to seek her Fortune; I think I told her I had a Castle Eastward,
and Eastward she will go; her Coach, and the Coach of the Sun must meet full
Butt.


Quick. But how will you pacify her, Knight, when her Enchanted House becomes
invisible.


Pet. I warrant you, it is but telling her she mistook my Directions, and that I
will shortly down with her my self; in the mean time, it is but clapping a new
Gown upon her Crupper --


Sec. Right, Sir.


Quick. Well said, Old Dad; -- a among Friends, Knight, where have you made
your choice? the King's Bench, or which of the two Compters? for my part, I
like neither of them.


Pet. There is no jesting, Frank, with my Necessity. Thou know, that if I
raise not present Money for my Voyage, all is lost with me.


Quick. Why, that is the very Point, Sir; get but your Lady to set her Hand to
the Sale of her Inheritance, and my old Blood-hound here, shall smell out ready
Money instantly.


Pet. There spoke my Angel. I have brought her to it, and feigning my self most
extremely amorous, have urged Excuses for my stay behind. Child was never so
impatient to ride a Cock-horse, than she is to hansel her new Coach with a
Journey.


Quick. She would long for every thing, when she was a Maid. I Will lay my life
she will have four Children every year; what Charge and Humor must you endure
that while? and how will she hold you to your Tackle, till she is with Child?


Sec. Nay, there is no Turn-spit Dog bound to his Wheel more servilely, than
you will be to hers; for as the Dog never climbs to the top of his Wheel, but
when the Wheel comes under him; so -- you understand me, Sir.


Quick. Well said, Old Dad, again; nay, hark you, Sir; what Nurses, what
Midwives, what Fools, what Physicians, what Cunning-Women and Cronies, to tell
her Tales, talk Bawdy to her, make her Laugh, let her Blood --


Pet. Prithee no more: What a Death is my Life bound face to face unto? the
best on it is, that a large time-fitted Conscience is bound to Nothing. This
Indian Voyage will set all to Rights -- but see she comes to seek me out, and
take her leave of me.


Sec. And Mr. Bramble in the very Nick too; get her to Seal immediately; for I
do hunger and thirst to do you good, Sir.


Enter Mrs. Touchstone, Girtred, Bramble, Syndefie: Girtred in a Chair, with
Page and Attendants.
Gir. Further, ye dull English Blockheads, further. If I were but Lady
Mayoress, you must have brought me past the Portico -- Your Servant, Gentlemen.


All. Your Ladyships most humble Servants.


Gir. What a Bloom am I in all over? give me my Fan; I protest I am in general
Damp.


Mrs. T. Here is your Ladyships Handkerchief, Madam.


Gir. Thank you, Mrs. Touchstone -- Well, my dear Knight, I Will take notice of
you in Company now, because it is within our Month; but hereafter, as I am a
Lady, you must not expect it; it is not Alamode for Persons of our Quality.


Pet. We will be careful to neglect each other, Madam.


Sec. I have a humble suit to your Ladyship.


Gir. You are welcome -- but hold, you must not put on your Hat yet; Master
Francis Quicksilver, -- as I am a Lady, I did not know him: he makes me blush
so, that my Eyes stand with Water; would I were unmarry'd again.


Quick. I hope your Ladyship has no reason to repent --


Gir. No; but you know the first sight of a Bride puts strange Thoughts -- what
were you saying, Sir?


Sec. That your Ladyship would please to accept my Kinswoman here, to your
Service; she is newly come up out of the Country.


Gir. Is she a Gentlewoman?


Sec. She is, Madam; and one that her Father has a mind to bestow in some
honorable Lady's Service too --


Gir. To learn Breeding.


Mrs. T. And surely you have a discreet Choice in preferring her to her
Ladyship.


Gir. We supposed that, Mrs. Touchstone: These City Gentlewomen are so forward
-- -And can you do any Work that belongs to a Lady's Chamber?


Syn. What I cannot do, I shall be glad to learn, Madam.


Gir. And do you hear -- Old Gentleman, you may put on your Hat now, I do not
look on you -- I must have you of my Faction, not of my Knight's, to draw all
the Servants to my Bow, to tell me Tales, put me Riddles, read Aristotle while
I am dressing, to laugh extremely at the Country Gentlewomen when they have
made me Visits, to take no Care what is spent in the House, for it is all mine;
and in any Case to be still a Maid whatever you do, and whatever any Man can do
to you.


Syn. I am your Creature, Madam.


Gir. Very well, you shall ride down in my Coach with me immediately -- is it
not come yet? upon my Quality, I think I am with Child already, I long so for
my Coach. Can I be with Child so soon, Mrs. Touchstone?


Pet. But will your Ladyship be gone before I can possibly wait on you?


Gir. Let me, dear Knight: I d' so long to dress up thy Castle before thou
come.


Mrs. T. But must this little man, Madam, run all the Way a foot?


Gir. I warrant him; He gives no other Milk, as yet.


Mrs. T. Methinks it is pity: Good Madam, buy him a Hobbyhorse; let the poor
Knave have something.


Gir. You are impertinent, Mrs. Touchstone.


Page. Your Coach is come, Madam.


Gir. Is my Coach come? why, that is well said: methinks I am up to the Knees in
Preferment: farewell, Knight.


Pet. Will not your Ladyship be pleased first to Sign a slight Paper here?


Gir. What is it?


Pet. A Deed of Sale of your Country Seat: Mine is more large, and stands more
pleasantly, only the Arras being something faded, must now be changed to
Wainscot; and now for a Lady's Bedchamber Alcoves are all the Fashion.


Gir. I will have it all laid out upon my Castle; give me the Pen.

[She signs the Paper.
Mrs. T. What is your Ladyship a doing?


Gir. Interrogating again, Mrs. Touchstone?


Mrs. T. I will wait on your Ladyship to your Coach: I shall never sleep till I
hear your Ladyship is safe in your Castle, Madam, and that you live safe there
too.


Gir. Fear it not, Mrs. Touchstone: There were Giants in it formerly, but my
Knight has killed 'em all.


Mrs. T. And therefore he was Knighted, I presume.


Gir. Upon my Honor the Day wears apace; come Chairmen carry me to my Coach --
Adieu, Knight -- upon my Quality you shall not stir one step.


Servants. Heaven bless your Ladyship.


Gir. Thankyou, good People, thank you.

[She is carried round the Stage and so off bowing to the Company from each
side of her Chair.
Quick. Was there ever such an Adventure?


Pet. Why this, I hope, is not the first false Journey that a Lady has taken in
her Coach.


Sec. But when her Knight is upon a real Voyage. --


Enter a Sailor.
Sail. Sir Petronell, where are you? Captain Seagult stays for you on Board; it
will be Flood within this two hours.


Pet. We shall be time enough to reach Black-wall, where our Ship lies, against
Tide.

[Exit Sailor. Master Security, you see the urgency of my Affair; meet me an
hour hence at the Swan Tavern by Billingsgate, with your Money; and these shall
there be made over to you: and, Mr. Bramble, we must desire your Presence at
the Delivery.


Bramble. You have no further Service for me, Gossip?


Sec. Nothing at present, Gossip.

[Exit Bramble. Did you observe that peaching Petti-fogger, Gentlemen? a
Jealous old Hunks, that locks up his Wife.

[ Wynifred looks from above.
Wyn. Cue, Where is my Cue, there?


Sec. Here Bunting.


Wyn. Will Not you come Putt with me above Stairs, Cue?


Sec. I am busy, Bunting.


Wyn. But oneword, Cue.


Sec. Gentlemen, I will along with you immediately.

[Exit. [As he is going up, She calls to Sir Petr. throws him down a Letter,
and retires.
Petr. There is the Remora to my Voyage, Frank, -- how shall I sail and leave
my Heart behind? -- See here. [ Reads.

I have overheard your Voyage, and would share your Adventure; deliver me from
this Enchanted Castle, as you are a true Knight Errant.

Now Frank, my subtle Mercury, instruct me;

This were of a Masterpiece of rare Invention,

Could I but get this Helen once aboard,

Not Paris past the Seas with half such Pride.


Quick. I have a sudden lucky thought.


Pet. It is impossible, our time's so short; The Husband's watch is so shy upon
her while he is within, and when he goes forth, he comes directly to us. Rust
choke him, he is here again.


Quick. Leave me to work him.


Sec. Come Gentlemen, shall we dispatch? to the Tavern I know our noble Knight
will pay his Way: we'll take up the Money as we go; I am impatient till I do
him good.


Quick. The Knight will Treat most freely. But first, Dad, we have a weighty
Secret to impart to you in which we must have your wise Assistance. This
Gentleman, my Friend, has enjoyed a Gentlewoman whom you well know --


Sec. How Is that? a Gentlewoman whom I well know?


Quick. The Woman is your learned Councel's Wife, Mr. Bramble, that was here
even now.


Sec. Why? he deserves it, Frank; for keeping her locked up. I could contribute
to my learned Councel's Cuckoldom; but you say, the Gentleman has enjoyed her
already; wherein then can I assist him further?


Quick. He wants to take the dear farewell; and therefore, Dad, if you will but
take pains to bring out Mr. Council, your Gossip, to the Tavern where we are to
meet --


Sec. Nay, I would have him present at the delivery of the Deed.


Quick. I will watch his coming out, and bring his Wife disguised into our
Company; think but what Sport 'twill be to gull his Circumspection.


Sec. On my Religion, a most pithy Project! who would not strain a point of
Friendship for such a neat Device? ha! ha! ha! and the sport will be to hear me
Bob and Cut upon him.


Pet. Was there ever such an old Villain? it works rarely.


Sec. To overreach that Head that over-reaches all Heads, will be a Plot
rampant; well, I hope this Harvest to pitch Carts with Lawyers, their Heads
shall be so fork'd.


Pet. But how shall we disguise her on the sudden?


Quick. A Sailor's Gown and Cap, and Player's Beard.


Pet. But how shall she make bare her head, when thou present'st her to our
Company? I think it best not to have her appear.


Sec. Not for the World, I must have her coram; the very Soul of the mirth is
lost else -- I have hit it; you shall see, Gentlemen, what an old Brain can do;
I Will fetch you a Disguise.

[Goes out, and immediately Reenters. Look, Gentlemen, here is my Wife's best
Gown, which you may put upon the Lawyer's Wife; and for her Face it shall be
Masqu'd.


Pet. Most excellent.


Sec. And for doing this, I have two Politic Reasons. One is, That Mr. Bramble
may thereby have some suspicion that it is my Wife; and thereupon gird me with
his Lawyer's Wit. The other Reason is, That I shall be sure of my own Wife's
staying at home the while; for she will never go abroad undressed; do you mark me.


Pet. With Admiration.


Sec. Is it not rare? was I not born to furnish Gentlemen? Come hither, Clogg.


Clogg. Here, Sir.


Sec. Take this Key, and let your Mistress down into this Room for Air, till I
come home again.

[Gives him the Key.
Quick. Do you hear that, Knight, he will leave her freedom of the House till he
returns; so that as soon as he goes out to the Lawyers, I will slip in hither
again with these Cloths of his Wife's, dress her up in them, and bring her
Masqu'd to the Tavern, while he shall suppose her the Lawyer's.


Sec. Gentlemen, I will but send to Mr. Cash to have our Money ready against I
come from my Gossips.

[Exit.
Quick. You see, Knight, we have shamm'd my Dad here, with a Pretense on his
Gossip's Wife; what will you say if I make Earnest of it, and deliver that Lady
from her enchanted Castle too?


Pet. And so to go aboard with us? that were a Masterpiece.


Quick. We have been private Acquaintance too: I have sent a pretended Attorney
with a Sham Sub-Poena for her to be Witness in a Cause this Afternoon, at the
same time that Mr. Council is to be with us at the Swan with your Deed; and
rather than have her forfeit for Nonappearance he will let her come abroad; by
which means she will have Opportunity of meeting me by the Waterside.


Pet. Most admirable! what a History shall we leave behind us, Frank?

Re-enter Security.
Sec. Come, Gentlemen, shall we be stirring?


Quick. How impatient he is, as 'twere the Devil going to fetch the Lawyer.


Pet. And Devil He shall be, if Horns can make him.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III. A Tavern.
Captain Seagull, with other Sailors. C. Sea. Come, Drawer, Pierce your neatest
Hogsheads, and let us have Entertainment fit for our noble Colonel: He Will be
here instantly.


Draw. You shall have all things to your wish, Sir: will it please ye to have
more Wine?


C. Sea. Without measure, Slave; whether we drink it or no, spill it and draw
more.


1 Sail. Well spoken, noble Captain.


C. Sea. Fill all your Pots and Bottles; rank 'em like Soldiers, and though we
do not presently employ 'em, we'll keep 'em in Pay till we do.


Draw. You shall have all you will Command, Sir.

[Ex. Drawer.
C. Sea. Come Boys, this Indian Cantlet longs till we have it is Maidenhead.


2 Sail. But is there such Treasure there, as we are told?


C. Sea. Vast endless Mines: for so much red Copper as I carry thither, I will
have thrice the weight in Gold. They hinge their Doors with it, and bar their
Windows.


1 Sail. But do you meet no Clipticks nor Tropiques by the way? I pray what
sort of things are they?


C. Sea. Why, monstrous Creatures; not much unlike your Elephant; but there is
your Calenture is more inclining to a Dragon.


2 Sail. And is it a pleasant Country Captain?


C. Sea. As ever the Sun shined on; you have Autumn, VVinter, Spring. Summer
there, all without any change of Seasons, and that you would wonder at.


1. Sail. And what Government, good Captain?


C. Sea. You shall live free there without Sergeants, Lawyers, or
Intelligencers; you may be an Alderman, without being a Scavinger; attain any
Office, without 'Prenticeship; you may come to Preferment, without being a
Pimp; to Riches and Fortune enough and have never the more Villainy nor the less
Wit. In a word, you will have no more Law than Conscience, and not too much of
either.


2 Sail. And how far thither, Captain?


C. Sea. Some six Weeks Sail with an Indifferent Wind, and if I get to the
Coast of Africa, I Will Sail with any Wind; or if we make the Cape Finister, we
have a fore-right Wind till we come thither -- But see our noble Colonel!

Enter Sir Petronell.
Pet. Well met, good Captain Seagull, and my noble Gentlemen; now our sweet
hour of freedom is at hand: Come Drawer, fill us our Bumpers, to raise us for
the mirth that will be occasioned presently -- Here will be a pretty Wench,
Gentlemen, that will bear us Company all our Voyage.


C. Sea. To her health, noble Colonel, with Cap and Knee.


Pet. Thank you, good Captain, she is one whom I love dearly; but must not have
her known till we are aboard; and so, Gentlemen, here is to her Health.


Amb. Let it come, worthy Colonel, we do both thirst and hunger for it.


Pet. Right, Sirs, you hit the very Phrase of him that is my Pimp and Cuckold
too; though both unwittingly. About with it.

Enter Security, Bramble, and Wax.
Sec. See there, Gossip Bramble, their Voyage needs must prosper; they are on
their Knees for success to it -- Save my brave Colonel, and his tall Captains:
see, Sir, my learned Gossip Council Bramble, is come to take his leave of you.


Pet. A Health to my learned Council.


Sec. You must bend too Gossip.


C. Sea. By your leave, Sir, he must not Pledge his own Health.


Sec. No, Master Captain;

Enter Quicksilver, with Wynifred Disguised. Then here is one sitly come to do
him that Honor.


Quick. Here is the Gentlewoman your Cousin, Sir, whom with much entreaty, I
have brought to take her leave of you in a Tavern; and for that Reason the
Company must excuse her that she puts not off her Masque.


Pet. Pardon me, dear Cousin, my hurry and have of business at my going, forced
me to give you this Trouble.


Wyn. Thanks to your good Contrivance, my dear Cousin.

[Puts off her Mask to him aside, and puts it on again.
Bramb. Come hither, Wax, -- Here, take the Key of your Mistresses Chamber,
it is high time for her to attend the Court; I must not have her forfeit: Be
sure you stir not from her: And as soon as she has done witnessing, see her
Home again; Lock her up in her Chamber again, and bring me the Key to my Gossip
Security's.


Sec. How Is that, Mr. Francis? have you honored the Company with the Presence
of a fair Gentlewoman?


Fran. Pray Sir, take you no notice of her; for I can assure you, she will not
be known to you.


Sec. Good; but my learned Gossip Council Bramble here, I hope may know her?
ha! ha! ha!


Fran. No more than you at present, his Learning must Pardon her.


Sec. Heaven Pardon her, and for my part, I do.


Wyn. I am glad to hear that.


Sec. And so, Mr. Francis, Here Is to all this good Company that goes Eastward,
presently toward Cuckold'-Haven -- not forgetting my learned Gossip Bramble.


Fran. Has it gone round, Gentlemen?


Pet. It has, dear Frank; and terminates in thee.


Fran. Then -- -here is Eastward, Gentlemen, and so to Cuckold's-Haven.


Sec. Ha! ha! ha!


Bramb. What can this mean? that word strikes Terror through me.


Pet. Prithee, Couz, weep no more -- Master Security.


Sec. What says my dear Knight?


Pet. Our Friend, Mrs. Bramble here, is so dissolved in Tears, that she drowns
the whole Mirth of our Meeting; I do beseech you speak to her.


Sec. It Is shame and pity, Mrs Bramble; what weep in Presence of your Love?
What Is the Cause, Lady? is it because your Husband is so near?


Wyn. Yes.


Sec. And your Heart earns that you have a little abused him?


Wyn. Indeed.


Sec. Alas, the Offense is too common to be regarded.


Wyn. That Is true.


Sec. You are to blame to heed a jealous Dotard.


Wyn. Right.


Sec. To steal to a young Lover.


Wyn. Certainly.


Sec. Ha! ha! ha! Once more to Cuckolds'-Haven, Gentlemen, -- you will Pledge me,
Gossip? let us have a frisk of footing too: Come, have you pledged
Cuckold's-Haven, Gossip?


Fran. Strike up there.

[Here they all Dance, and compass Wynifred in.
Sec. Sir Petronell, your Cousin here is still in Tears; pray take her aside a
little and comfort her.


Pet. With your fair leave, Mr. Security.


Sec. Most heartily.

[He Locks in Sir Petr. and his Wife together. Come Sirs, another Round; He
that refuses to be drunk to Night, let him be never Sober.

[While the rest Drink, he goes harkening to the Door. About with it, it is to
Sir Petronell, and all his Captains -- you want it, Gossip. This
Cuckold's-Haven runs so in my mind.


Bramb. But hark you, Gossip, is not that Gentlewoman your Wife, that is gone
in with the Knight?


Sec. Why should you think so, Gossip?


Bramb. Because the shape and dress are very like.


Sec. Cucullus non facit Monachum, my Learned Council; All are not Cuckolds
that seem so, nor do all seem so that are so -- Oh, I break my Ribs!

Sir Petronell and Wynifred Re-enter. So, now Colonel and Captains, a good
Voyage to you, Adieu: I know you do not go my Way to Night, Gossip -- This
Cuckold's-Haven runs so in my Head.

[ Exit Security.
Bramb. There is some Mystery in this; I must needs after him to be satisfied.
Adieu, Gentlemen.

[Exit.
Drawer. Sir Petronell, here is one of your Watermen come to tell you it is
Flood, and that it will be dangerous going against Tide; for the Skies are
over-cast, and there was a Porpiece seen just now below the Bridge.


Pet. No matter, we can reach Black-Wall against Tide, and in spite of
Tempests. Come, one Round more, Gentlemen, while I discharge the House.


All. About with it.


Pet. Enough: Now Charge a Boat. Come, my fair Helen.


All. A Boat, a Boat, a Boat.

[Exeunt.
SCENE Changes to Security's House. Enter Security and Clogg.
Sec. Come, Clogg, help on with my Gown and Cap -- so, very well;

[Shuts him out. What a notable Device was this? well, what with the Conceit of
it, and my Wine together, methinks I am somewhat exhilarated, and feel as it
were an Inclination to Conjugal Performance: My Bunting will be surpised
extremely -- Do hear, Lark, Linnet, Goldfinch -- This is ever her way,
always at her Devotion in my Absence; I must disturb her.

[Opens the Closet Door. Nobody here? -- Clogg, Rogue, Vermin.

Enter Clogg.
Clogg. What is your Worship's pleasure?


Sec. Where is your Mistress, Varlet?


Clogg. Abroad Sir.


Sec. Abroad without my leave? then I am certainly a Cuckold. What, go abroad
in her Night Dress?


Clogg. In her Best Cloths, Sir.


Sec. How Is that? How came she by 'em?


Clogg. Your Friend, Sir, Master Quicksilver brought 'em in hither, stayed
till she put 'em on, and then took Coach with her, I heard 'em bid the Coachman
drive to the Tavern at the Bridge foot.


Sec. Monstrum horrendum: my Gossip was in the Right: what a Trap have I laid
for my Self? why, then she is not only Whor'd; but for ought I know, spirited
away to the Indies.


Clogg. She cried, indeed, farewell for ever, Cage.


Sec. I Will Plow up Rocks steep as the Alps in Dust,

And lave the Tyrrhene Waters into Clouds,

But I will reach them.

Enter Bramble.
Bramb. The Matter Gossip? what transports you so?


Sec. Undone for ever, Gossip; 'twas my Wife; on my Religion I thought she was
yours. Call me Ten Coaches, and as many Constables, I will to this wicked place
again, and seize the Traitors.


Bramb. They are all upon the Thames e're now, and if that Lady was your Wife,
she is in the Boat with 'em.


Sec. I Will take Boat after 'em, and fire their Ship.


Bramb. Take Boat in this tempestuous Night? Hark, how it Rains and Thunders.


Sec. I care not for the Weather, I will Row after to Black-Wall.


Bramb. And pray touch in at Cuekold's-Haven, Gossip.


Sec. Furies and Fate -- but hold, I must see first if she have taken any of my
rich Pawns along with her.

[Exit.
Bramb. Well for my Gossip, to intend my Wife, and get himself Cornuted! ha,
ha, ha. -- How now, Wax?

Enter Wax.
Wax. Oh! where is my Master Bramble? my poor Master, Bramble?


Bramb. What now, Sirrah? have thou neither Eyes nor Ears?


Wax. Sir, I have no Senses left! Oh, Sir, your Wife, my Mistress!


Bramb. Why, Sirrah, did not I give you the Key to lock her up at Home, as soon
as she had witnessed?


Wax. O, Sir, there was no witnessing; her Sub-Poena was all Sham, instead of
going to Westminster, she drove to Paternoster Row, where she took up Silks in
your Name by whole Pieces, and so on to the Goldsmiths in Cheap-siae, and
Goldsmiths in Lumbard-street, where she took up Rings and Jewels, all in your
Name still; from thence she went to the Swan at Bridge-foot, where Mr.
Quicksilver met her, took her to the Water, and instead of coming back
Westward by Coach, she is gone Eastward by Boat; Oh! ho! ho!


Bramb. Dare thou live to tell me this, Rogue? thy Name is Wax, Thou
should have stuck to her.


Wax. I did, Sir, till they pushed me off with their Oars, and sows'd me in the
Mudd.


Bramb. I Will Plow up Rocks steep as the Alps in Dust,

And lave the Tyrrhene Waters into Clouds;

But I will reach'em.

Re-enter Security. O, Whore unconscionable! what? Silks, Rings, and Jewels, to
such a Quantity, along with her.


Sec. Even so, Gossip, she has taken all with her.


Bramb. Mock me not, Gossip, I mean my Wife.


Sec. My Wife, that is run away by Water.


Bramb. Mine Is run away by Water too.


Sec. Yours gone too!


Bramb. Call me Ten Boats, I Will after'em, and fire their Ship.


Sec. What in this tempstuous Night? hark, how it Rains and Thunders.


Bramb. I do defy all weathers; I Will after to Black-Wall.


Sec. And pray call in at Cuckold's-Haven, Gossip.


Bramb. Furies and Fate! -- a Boat! a Boat! a Boat!


Sec. A Boat! a Boat! a Boat!

[Exeunt severally.
The End of the Second Act.
SONG.
HOw great are the Blessings of Government made,
By the excellent Rule of our Prince?
Who, while Trouble and Cares do his Pleasures invade,
To his People all Joy does dispense:
And while He for us is still carking and thinking,
We have nothing to Mind, but our Shops and our Trade,
And then to divert us with Drinking.
From him we derive all our Pleasure and Wealth:
Then fill me a Glass, nay, fill it up higher,
My Soul is a thirst for His Majesty's Health,
And an Ocean of Drink cannot quench my Desire:
Since all we Enjoy, to his Bounty we Owe,
It Is fit all our Bumpers like that should Overflow.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Cuckold's Point. Enter a Butcher's Man with a Pair of Ox Horns.
Butch. HAil, thou fair Haven of Married Men; for my part, I presume not to
arrive here, but only in Right of my Master, who sent me thus early to put up
these necessary Ensigns of his Homage.

[He climbs the Tree. Stand fast, good Timber, or I shall be blown into the
Thames: I think the Devils be abroad in a Storm to rob me of my Horns. The
Thames roars like any Ocean-Sea. Mercy on all honest Passengers. So, I think I
have made it look the right way, it fronts the City directly. How now, Tom?

Enter another laden with Hides.
Tom. No vent'ring by Water yet: Here has been most bloody work to Night.


Butch. As how, prithee?


Tom. Why, several People Drowned.


Butch. What did none 'scape?


Tom. Not one of them that were Drowned, for all that I can yet hear: just by
the Fisher's Hutt below yonder, there was a Boat over-turn'd, three Men
Passengers and a Gentlewoman. You may see 'em all shifted into the Old
Fisherman's Wardrobe; but the Woman wisely went to Bed.


Butch. Hark! what Cry is that?


Tom. A poor old Man in Gown and Nightcap, just crawled out of the River.

Enter Security.
Sec. Misfortune upon Misfortune, I have a hundred Drums in my Head; and half
the Thames in my Belly -- Let me see, where am I cast ashore, that I may go
home a righter way by Land? where is there any Sea-Mark, that I am acquainted
withal?


Butch. Look up, Father, are you acquainted with this Ensign?


Sec. What am I Landed at Cuckold's Point? I cannot bear it: I will run back
and drown my self.


Tom. Let it be in some warmer Liquor, Father: Come, we'll lead you to the next
House.


Sec. I will enter into no House, and look no Mortal in the Face; they are all
Cuckold-makers.


Butch. How his Wits are benumbed with Wet and Cold, throw a Hide over him, Tom,
and help lead him along.

[Exeunt leading him. Enter Sir Petronell, Quicksilver, and Sea-gull, in
Fisherman's Cloths and Nets wrapped about them.
Pet. A very fair Voyage we have made on it, my Masters; if our Throats had not
been too full of Claret to take in one drop of Water, we had lodged with the
Flounders till our Calls had burst: well, it is but imagining we are arrived at
some Outlandish Place, and these the Habits of the Country.


Capt. Sea. I tell ye, Sirs, for all this we are gotten to the Coast of
Normandy, I know it by the Elevation of the Pole, and the Altitude of the
Climate; this is nothing with us Sailors: I have been Drowned forty times in my
Life, before now.


Quick. One dry Hanging had done us better Service, Captain: How much Weight of
Gold can you get for red Copper in this Country, Captain?


Pet. Why, we have just as much Copper as Gold left, Frank; the unmerciful
Thames has swallowed All. Our Boat turned oft'ner than a Juggler's bag, and
rolled like any Porpice. Now if my Lady Wife has had as good a Land Passage
on it, as we have had by Water.

Enter Bailiffs.
1 Bay. These must be the Persons; Seize 'em: You have been sows'd in the
Thames, Gentlemen, and a particular Friend of yours has sent us to take you out
of the Cold Air.


Pet. A Pox of your Charity; what damned luck had we that could not Drown.


Quick. At whose Arrest, Scoundrels?


2 Bay. Only Alderman Touchstone desires to take his leave of you before you
Sail to the Indies; will you march along, Gentlemen.


Quick. This must be the Coast of Normandy, Captain; you know it by the
Elevation of the Pole.

Enter more Officers, with Security in the Ox Hide.
1 Bay. See, yonder comes our Mates with old Mammon.


Pet. Why, there is some Comfort yet.


2 Bay. Come, Brothers, let us home with the whole Covey together.


Sec. Rogues, Turks, Tartars, I will not drive one step further. This is
Cuckold's-Haven, and I will die on my own Territories.


1 Bay. Away with them.

[Exeunt leading them off.
SCENE II. Touchstone's House.
Enter Touchstone.
Touch. Ha! ha! Thinks my Knight Adventurer that we ken no Point of our
Compass? Have we never heard of the Speranza, the Cavillaria, nor the
Calinoria? well, my Errant Flash, and Runnegate Quicksilver, you may hurl a
dozen Caps to your bon Voyage; but if you reach any Point but Cuckolds, with
this Tide, I'il give you leave to make a Gravesend-Toast of me. I have sent
your Pinnace a Remora, and that from this Sconce of mine, without Powder or
Shot -- Work upon that now. Here Is Land Intelligence too, from my Lady
Daughter, and her Ladiship's Luck is as good as the Rest; She Will come to her
Castle, and they to the Indies, much about a time.

Enter Mrs. Touchstone.
Mrs. T. What, no News yet from her Ladyship? but we must allow Persons of
Quality their own time for things.


Touch. Yes, here is a small Packet from her Ladyship; she has been seeking
her Castle in the Air; in what Region I know not.


Mrs. T. I hope your Mechanic Worship will have the Manners to stay her
Ladiship's leisure; no matter for her Castle, what Account does her Ladyship
send of that fair Tenement of her Body?


Touch. Why, the fair Tenement of her Body, and her Maids Body were benighted
on the Common with their Coach; robbed, stripped and fairly thrown into a Ditch,
like two Snails In a Shell, with the Coachman a top on'em.


Mrs. T. O, Profane Accident, her Ladyship tumbled into a Ditch!


Touch. From whence she is returned to Town by Wagon, and at present
sojourning in a blind Tap-house in Pudding-Lane.


Mrs. T. And is this all your concern for the Matter? how if her Ladyship
should Miscarry upon it?


Touch. It were not the first time, sure; she has the Blessing to take after
her Mother; Thou have been my Cross these Thirty years, and now I will keep
thee to fright away Spirits.


Mrs. T. O, Insensible Monster! give me the Directions, I will, fly upon the
Wings of Motherly Affection, and wait upon her Ladyship incontinently.

[Exit.
Touch. I wonder I hear nothing from my Son Golding yet; he was sent for
betimes this Morning to the Guild Hall, and I am astonished at the Matter: If I
had not laid up some comfort in him, I should even grow desperate -- He comes
in my Thoughts -- How now, Son? what News at the Court of Aldermen?

Enter Golding.
Gold. In troth, Sir, an Accident somewhat strange, else it has nothing worth
reporting.


Touch. It is not borrowing of Money, then?


Gold. No, Sir: It has pleased the Commoners of the City to make me One of our
Ward, to Elect me one of their Common-Council-men.


Touch. How!


Gold. And the Alderman of our Ward to appoint me his Deputy; in which Office I
had an Oath ministered unto me accordingly.


Touch. Let me Kiss thy new Worship, my dear Son! -- what a Fortune was it, or
rather Judgment, for me to see that merit in him, which the whole City
conspires to Second? taken into the Livery of his Company the first Week of his
Freedom! chosen Common-Council-man, and made an Alderman's Deputy all in a Day!
the Wonder of our Times! Well, I will Honor Mr. Alderman for this, and think
the better of the Common-Councils Wisdom while I live, for thus meeting, or
rather coming after me in the Opinion of his Desert: Forward, my sufficient
Son; and as this was the first, so think it the least step of thy Promotion.


Gold. Sir, as I was not ambitious of this; so I seek no higher.


Touch. Excellently spoken again! this Modest Answer of thine blushes, as if it
said, Thou shall wear Scarlet shortly; I must tell thee, I hope to see thee the
other Monument of our City, reckoned among our Worthies, and remembered on the
same Day with Gresham and my Lady Ramsey: when Whittington and his Puss shall
be forgotten, and thy own Deeds played in thy own Time, by the best Company of
Moor-Fields.


Gold. You are too Prodigal of your Praise, Sir.


Touch. Well, I have a little News for thee too: Our lewd Crew are all in the
Officers Clutches e're now; and thou shall exercise Authority by way of justice
on 'em.


Gold. Your Pleasure, Sir, shall guide me.


Touch. See, the Officers are at the Door without; How miraculously it falls
out that thou should have the Place of a Justicer upon 'em: I am glad of the
Injury they have done me, that thou may punish it: Disgrace 'em all thou
can, be severe upon them, like a new Officer of the first Quarter.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Petronell, Quicksilver, Seagull, brought.
Pet. How implacably this Devil of ill Fortune pursues us?


Touch. Take your Chair, Mr. Justicer; I say, appear terrible to 'em; let 'em
know the Melancholy of a Magistrate, and taste the Fury of a Citizen in Office.


Gold. Sir, I can do nothing with them, unless your Worship charge them with
somewhat.


Touch. Fear not that, I will charge 'em and re-charge 'em rather than
Authority shall want Matter to work upon 'em.


Gold. Will your Worship please to Sit?


Touch. By no means, Son, it is your Office.


Quick. Must Golding Sit upon us?


Fang. Plain Golding, to Mr. Deputy's Worship?


Gold. What Persons have ye there, Mr. Officer?


Fang. The same, an' please your Worship, that were specified in our VVarrant.
This, Sir, is the Counterfeit Knight; This, his lewd Companion. --


Gold. What? a Knight and his Companion thus accoutred? where are their Hats
and Feathers, their Cloaks and Perriwiggs?


Fang. Truly, Sir, they had cast their Feathers before we seized 'em. Here Is
all the furniture we found amongst 'em.


Gold. Their Names, I say?


Touch. O this is most excellent: he should not take knowledge of 'em in his
Place, indeed.


Fang. Why, this, Sir, is Sir Petronell Flash.


Gold. How!


Fang. And this, Master Quicksilver.


Touch. Is it possible? I thought they had been gone to Virginia e're now with
this Noble Captain. You have made a quick return it seems, and doubtless a good
Voyage -- nay, Pray Sirs, be covered; how did your Biscuit hold out, I beseech
you? -- Sure I have seen this Outlandish Gentleman before. Good Master
Quicksilver, how one degree to the Southward has altered you.


Gold. Do you know these Persons, Mr. Alderman? -- forbear your offers a
little, you shall be heard anon.


Touch. Yes, Mr. Deputy, I had a small Venture aboard with them: Officers, you
may let 'em stand; I Will pass my word they will not run away: A Brace of honest
Gentlemen. One of 'em was my 'Prentice, that kept his Whore and Hunting-Nagg;
would Play you his Hundred Guinneys off at Basset most familiarly; and all on
my Purse. In fine, there was no remedy but we must part; for I shall be very
concise, Mr. Deputy. Since which time (for, as I said, I intend to be very
concise with your Worship) since when, I say, he has gathered up some small
Parcels of mine amongst my Customers, to the value of seven Hundred Pound more
toward furnishing this Indian Voyage, wherein this Knight was Chief, Sir Flash
here, one that Married a Daughter of mine, Ladify'd her, turned Two thousand
Pound of good Land of hers into Cash, sent her a Progress to his invisible
Castle, while he prepared for Sea, with a certain Usurers Wife, an' please you,
Master Deputy. Now to pronounce your honorable Pleasure.


Gold. If my Worshipful Father have ended.


Touch. I have an' please you, Master Deputy.


Gold. Why then under Correction.


Touch. Hold a little, Son, -- Now come over 'em with some fine Gird, as thus,
-- Knight, you shall be encountered; that is to say, had to the Compter; and
Quicksilver, I will put you into a Crucible, or so, -- ha! ha! he!


Gold. Then as the honorable Laws direct in these Cases.


Touch. Hold yet a little, Mr. Deputy, that your Worship may not be
over-burden'd, I will officiate a little.

[He takes the Chair. Sir Petronell Flash, I am sorry to see such flashes as
these come from you: for my own part do you see (because I will be concise with
you) I could wish I could say, I could say, I could wish, that I could say, I
could not see 'em; but such is the misery of Magistrates, and Men in Place,
that we must not wink at Offenders: fiat Justicia, ruat Coelum.


Quick. And then your Worship may catch Larks.


Touch. Without your Worship's Net, Sir, -- that I think was Wormwood, I love
Bobbing in a Magistrate extremely.


Gold. Will your Worship proceed?


Touch. Master Francis Quicksilver, would thou had turned Quacksalver: Thou
art a proper young Man; of an honest and clean Face, somewhat near a good one;
but thou have been too proud of it. Thou have Prodigally consumed thy Master's
Wealth on light Housewifes: And being by him gently admonisht at several times,
thou have returned thy self haughty, rebellious in thine Answers, thundering
out uncivil Comparisons, requiting all his Kindness with Coarse behavior: I
must tell thee, Francis, these are most manifest signs of an obstinate ill
Nature -- so much for Authority, now by way of Evidence.

[He places Golding again in the Chair.
Gold. Your Worship has acquitted your self most judiciously.


Touch. Your Worship does me too much Honor --


Quick. This Mockery is the worst of Tortures.


Touch. Hold thy peace, impudent Varlet! with what Forehead can thou speak,
having run such a Course of Riot? does not this Worshipful Person's Temper and
Fortune confound Thee? Thy younger Fellow in Service yet, now come to have the
Place of a Judge upon thee? Which of all thy Gallants and Gamsters, thy
Swearers and Swaggerers, will once condole thee till thou come up Holborn in
Triumph? for by the Clew of thy Knavery, and thy Chain of Concupiscence, thou
have most certainly brought thy self to the Cart of Calamity.


Quick. Worshipful Master.


Touch. Offer not to speak, Crocodile; I will not hear a sound from thee: Thou
have learned to cry at the Playhouse: Will it please you, Master Deputy, to
commit 'em all three to safe Custody?


Pet. Will you not take Security, Sir?


Touch. Take Security? why, I have him already; Mr. Fang, carry my Usurer and
Tarpoulin here, both to the Compter, without Examination: I will lodge my
Land-shark and VVater-shark in sowce together.


Gold. What remains then, but to dispose of these there too, till Mr. Alderman
shall be pleased to charge them farther: Take 'em away.


Quick. This is flat Tyranny.


Pet. No more Respect to Quality?


Touch. Nay, nay; on, on, on: You see here the Issue of Sloth; of Sloth comes
Pleasure, of Pleasure comes Riot, of Riot comes Whoring, of Whoring comes
spending your Money, whereof comes Theft, whereof comes Judgment, whereof comes
Hanging, and so my Quicksilver is fixed.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III. A Chamber in an Alehouse.
Girtred and Syndefie in fantastical Old Cloths.
Gir. Ah, Syn, did thou ever read in the Chronicle, of any Lady and her
Gentlewoman driven to that Extremity that we are^, Syn?


Syn. Not I truly, Madam; or, if I had, it were but cold Comfort that would
come out of Books.


Gir. Why? good faith now, I could Dine upon a lamentable old Story; do
thou know never a one, Syn?


Syn. None but my own, Madam, to be stolen from my honest Friends by a Prentice
in the habit of a Gentleman; upon Promise of Marriage brought to London here,
and now likely to be forsaken; for he is in Election to be Hanged, an' please
your Ladyship.


Gir. Nay, weep not, good Syn, for my Pett is in as fair Election to be Hanged
as He: Thy miseries are nothing to mine; I was more Promised Marriage, Syn; I
was Married, and had it, Syn; made a Lady by a Knight, who is now as good as no
Knight, Syn; and instead of Land in the Country, all his Living lies in the
Compter; there is his Castle now, Syn.


Syn. From which he cannot be forced out.


Gir. Hunger, they say, will break Stone VValls: But he is even well enough
served, who, as soon as he had got my Hand to the Sale of the Inheritance ran
away from my Ladyship, as if I had been his Punk, God bless us. Would the
Knight of the Sun, or Palmerin of England have used their Ladies so, Syn? or
Sir Lancelot? or Sir Tristram?


Syn. I know not, Madam.


Gir. Then thou know nothing, Syn: The Knights now adays are nothing to the
Knights formerly. They rid on Horseback, ours go on Foot; they went buckled in
their Armor, ours muffled in their Cloaks; they traveled VVildernesses, ours
dare scarcely walk the Streets; they were still engaging their Honor, ours are
ready to Pawn their Cloths: they would spur up at sight of a Monster, ours run
away from a Sergeant; they would help poor Ladies, ours make poor Ladies.


Syn. It is most true, Madam.


Gir. But let 'em vanish, Syn; yet the Thieves were most unconscionable to take
not only our Money, but our Cloths too.


Syn. A timely Consideration, Madam; for our Landlady, profane Woman, as she
is, has sworn by Bread and Salt not to trust us another Meal.


Gir. Let it stink in her hands then? she does not know the Honor she enjoys
in having a Lady under her Roof -- but thy best apparel is gone too, poor Syn.


Syn. I grieve for your Ladiship's sake, Madam.


Gir. Alack! that there are no Fairies now adays, to do Miracles, and bring
Poor Ladies Money: I Will sweep the Hearth at Night; or, why may not we too rise
early in the Morning, and find a Jewel in the Streets worth a Hundred Pound,
Syn? may not some Court Lady as she comes at Midnight from a Hot-water Shop,
look out of her Coach, and lose such a Jewel, Syn?


Syn. These are pretty Dreams, Madam.


Gir. Well, I protest, Syn, if I had as much Money as an Alderman, I would
scatter some of it in the Streets for poor Ladies to find.

Enter Mrs. Touchstone.
Syn. See, Madam, your Mother is coming up Stairs to us.


Gir. What, without sending first up to our Ladyship? upon my Honor it is
Unsufferable.


Mrs. T. Where is this unfortunate Emblem of Quality? where is your Ladyship?
-- O the Father! what a Transmigration is here? I will have my Eyes put out
incontinently, that I may not see this absurd Spectacle. What, will not your
Ladyship vouchsafe to know me in this Overture of Fortune?


Gir. Not if you presume upon my bad Luck, Mrs. Touchstone; you were best lay
the blame upon me now: it was you that should have lok'd to it; I did but my
Kind, to desire to be Married, it was my Kind, as a Citizen's Daughter, and to
be made a Lady, my Kind still: He was a Knight, and I was fit to be a Lady;
it is not lack of liking, but lack of living that severs us.


Syn. O good Madam, do not take up your Mother so.


Mrs. T. Nay, nay, let her alone; let her Ladyship grieve me still with her
bitter Taunts: I have not dole enough to see her in this miserable Case,
without her Silks, Point, Jewel, Fontanges of seven Stories: without a a little
Dog, a Page, or Gentleman Usher, or any thing that is fit for a Lady.


Syn. Except her Tongue.


Mrs. T. And I not able to relieve her neither, being kept down so as I am by
my Husband: Alas! when he was young, I could have come at any think that he
had; but now I can come at nothing.


Gir. Marry, out on him, for a fousty Mechanic; by this light, I think he is
not my legitimate Father. I hope, Mrs Touchstone, you have not debased my
Quality so much as to ask relief from him -- yet when I see -- yet when I view
this habit in the Glass, it makes the noble Tears gush out --

[She Cries.
Mrs. T. Nay, sigh not so, sweet Lady-Bird, dear Madam, Child weep not! I shall
die, if you cry and mar your Complexion thus. My Old Touchstone may be a Flint
for his obdurateness; but I will try my outmost Power to mollify him.


Gir. Give him seasonable Advice, Mrs. Touchstone; if he humbles himself, in
time I may be reconciled to him, and accept of a supply from him.


Mrs. T. Your Ladyship was always good natured, I must needs say; he is
presently going to the Compter, where your Knight and Mr. Francis are in
Durance together: I hear he intends to insult over 'em with his Gold End Son in
Law; but by a Letter that I intercepted, I have found an Intrigue of his, to
mortify him with All: Nolens volens he shall Dress you, Coach you, and set you
up again, Lady-Child.


Gir. Ay, will he set my Knight up too? So my Knight were up, it were no matter
though I were down.


Mrs. T. But your Ladyship must follow me to the Compter, then your joint
Presences will strike an Awe into him: I will hasten before, and send your
Ladyship a Coach; your Ladyships most humble Servant.

[Exit.
Gir. Come Syn, we'll take the Disconsolate Lady of the next Room along with
us; I long to hear the Story out of her Water Adventure, and get out of her,
who were the Parties concerned: Her Fisher-womans Straw-Bed, and our Ditch,
were Lodgings much alike. Come along, Syn.

[Exeunt.
SCENE IV. The Compter Prison.
Enter Sir Petronell and Quicksilver, dragging in Security by the Horns, Wolf
Master of the Prison.
Quick. Come, Dad, away with these Penitentials: Old Touchstone has us all in
the Wind, and resolves to make Holborn Martyrs of us.


Sec. Ah Franck, 'twas ungraciously done of thee, to seduce my Natural Wife,
and of you, Sir Knight, to abuse your particular Friend!


Pet. That Hunger'd and Thirsted to do me good; your own free Gift, Dad, and
you had good Land for it.


Sec. An' my Gossip Bramble, had not known of it, I could have had Mortal
Patience.


Wolf. Gentlemen, you had best resolve on some method for your safety. I can
assure you Mr. Touchstene will make a Sessions Business of it; and is coming
hither in person to tell you so.


Quick. You are under the same Condemnation, Dad, unless you bribe Mr. Wolf
here, and make one in our Plot; you must make one at Tyburn, for I shall peach,
Dad.


Sec. By no means Franck: I Will do any thing: What Plot?


Quick. Master Touchstone has always had great belief in Witchcraft, and is so
terrified about it, that he dares never be in the dark: I will counterfeit
being Bewitched, and you shall lay it to his Charge: He Will do any thing to get
quit of us.


Sec. Very well; France my Province: I can enact any manner of thing, I was
used to do it for my Wife's diversion, -- it was ungratefully done of you, Sir
Knight, -- Why, it is but rouling my Eyes and foaming at Mouth, (a little
Castle-Soap rubbed upon my Lips will do it) and then a Nutshell with Tow and
Touch-wood in it, makes me spit Fire like any Dragon. I Hunger and Thirst to be
about it.

[Noise here.
Wolf. Hark, he is at the Gates already; retire, and prepare for the Operation.


Quick. But first, Mr. Wolf, give him these Letters and try how far they will
work.

[Exeunt all but Wolf.
Enter Touchstone, Golding, and Bramble.
Touch. You say, Mr. Bramble, the Deed of Sale was of your drawing up, and that
you can find Flaws in it.


Bramb. I warrant you, Sir: Now shall I be revenged on my Gossip for his kind
Intentions toward me.


Touch. How now, Mr. Wolf, will you produce your Rats before us?


Wolf. Will your Worship be pleased to peruse these Letters of Submission from
them?


Touch. Sir, I do look for no Submission; I will bear my self in this Affair
like blind Justice: Work upon that now. -- Moreover, I do much wonder, Mr.
Wolf, that you should travel in this business so contrary to your kind: That
you, who are Master of a Prison, should endeavor the Release of your Prisoners.


Wolf. O Sir, I was never so mortified with any Men's Discourse or Behavior in
Prison: Yet I have had men of all Nations and Religions.


Gold. And which Religion liked you best?


Wolf. Troth, Mr. Deputy, they that paid their Fees best.


Gold. And these are Letters of Humility?


Bramb. Accept of no Humility, Mr. Alderman, you are a happy Man, and I Will be
bound to recover Thousands for you from my Gossip; but then you must be
Obstinate.


Touch. I warrant you, Mr. Bramble: I am Deaf, and will not hear, have stopped
my Ears with Shooe-makers Wax, drunk Lethe and Mandragora.


Wolf. Sir, you cannot imagine what a Change is wrought in them; the Knight
will be in the Knight's Ward, do what we can: and Quicksilver will be in the
Hole, if we would let him. I never saw Prisoners so penitent and devout: They
sat up all Night singing the Sinners Complaint, and Edifying the whole Prison.
Only Security goes a Note too high sometimes, because he lies in the Two-penny
Ward, a great way off, and cannot take his Tune. The Neighbors are not able to
rest for 'em, but come to ask what Godly Prisoners we have got there.


Touch. Which of 'em is so devout?


Wolf. Both Sir, Mr. Quicksilver especially: He has cut his Hair, reads the
Young Man's Advice, and has gotten the Sick Man's Salve without Book.


Touch. It Is strange he should have no Grace, I am sure he was brought up where
it grew.


Wolf. He has Converted one Snapp a Bailiff too; a Fellow that could neither
Write nor Read: He was called the Bandog of the Compter.


Touch. Mr. Bramble, I have one Scruple of Conscience; Shall I not lose all if
I Prosecute and Hang 'em?


Bramb. I tell you, Sir, as to my Gossip Security's Case; though he should be
Condemned to be Carted for a Bawd, or so; yet I will lay an Execution upon him
of two Thousand pound, let him acknowledge a Judgment, he shall do it in half
an hour; you shall not fetch him out till you have paid the Execution: This, if
I think fit, I can do, Sir, unless you otherwise engage me.


Touch. You shall have double Fees, Mr. Bramble: Mr. Wolf, set them all Coram.

Enter Petronell, and Quicksilver: They kneel.
Pet. Father!


Touch. Away Sirens. I will immure my self against your Cries.


Sec. Who would have thought your Worship were a Conjurer?


Touch. What mean the Varlets: I tremble at the Name.


Wolf. It will appear so, Sir. Mr. Quicksilver Vomits Nails, and crooked Pins,
and in his Fits repeats your Name incessantly.

Enter Mrs. Touchstone. A Letter.
Mrs. T. Good Mr. Alderman, be not so stiff: I have seen such a Spectacle of
Sorrow yonder.


Touch. Mr. Bramble, Golding; do I look like a Witch, an Alderman a Witch! I
abominated the Black Art from my Cradle.

[Petronell and Quicksilver whisper aside with Mrs. Touchstone.
Mrs. T. Nay, for my part, I have long suspected him for Necromancy.


Bramb. Better and better, Master Alderman, here is matter of Scandal for you
to proceed against them withal in the Doctors-Commons: This will bear vast
Damages.


Wolf. Let both your Eyes and Ears be Witnesses.

Security brought in, and set upon a Chair.
Mrs. T. O the Father! How he stares! This is plain Witchcrast; and see, he is
falling into a Fit as soon as he comes into his Presence.


Pet. You will perceive more anon.


Sec. My Wife is a Whore, I Will touch her no more: For why? She rides on a
Switch with Touchstone the Witch. -- Where is he?


Touch. How the Profane Fiend, within, calls upon my Name; but, I say still, I
will stop my Ears with Mandragora.


Mrs. T. Did you hear that, Gentleman? That very Word's enough to raise a
Spirit.


Pet. See how he foams!


Mrs. T. And swells:


Wolf. These Proofs are undeniable.


Bramb. Be not concerned, Sir, we'll prove it Forgery, and recover upon it.


Gold. Most palpable! A mere Conspiracy.


Touch. Nay, Gentlemen, the Person is Bewitched, that is most certain; but by
no skill of mine, as I hope to be Lord Mayor.


Sec. Buz, Buz, Buz.


Wolf. I pray observe him.


Quick. Oh! Oh! Oh!


Sec. She comes with a Needle, and puts it in,

He pulls it out, and puts in a Pin. -- Oh! oh!


Mrs. T. O Barbarous Wretch! How the poor Creature's Tortured? Come, hold a
Candle to the Wizard's Fingers ends, and that will give him ease.


Touch. I will clear my Conscience before a Magistrate.


Quick. You do not tumble enough.


Wolf. Alas, how he is vexed!


Mrs. T. It Is past all Contradiction.


Touch. What does he now?


Sec. He shows the taking of Tabaco, with which the Fiend is so delighted.


Pet. Now he fancies himself Cast away, and Swimming for his Life.


Mrs. T. How the Devil can Act!


Touch. O Terrible! What Swelling is that upon his Belly?


Mrs. T. Any Rising upon his Belly? Keep it down, keep it down.


Bramb. It Is mere Confederacy, you shall recover from Mr. Wolf too abundantly.


Gold. Mere Juggling.


Touch. I tell you, Sirs, I am astonished: There must be a Witch amongst us.


Sec. Oi Moi Kakodemon, Kai Tris Kakodemon, Kai Pentakis, Kai Mariakis.


Touch. Now he Curses me in Greek: Mr. Bramble, I would I were fairly off this
Business.


Mrs. T. What Paper is that flown out of his Throat.

[Reads.
To Alderman Touchstone, from Shoreditch. This is the Third time I am with
Child by you; yet to be forgetful to supply your Disconsolate Servant,

Dorothy Jerk.


Touch. This must be the Devil, I shall be undone.


Mrs. T. How, Mr. Alderman, Witch and Whore-master too?


Gold. Now, Sir, the Cheat appears most plainly; I Will take it on my Oath, I saw
your Wife give him that Paper.


Touch. And you saw it too, Mr. Bramble.


Bramb. Not distinctly, Sir.


Touch. But you can swear it.


Bramb. For half Costs. It Is most apparent, I will swear to it.


Quick. Your Gossip will see you double, to come over to us.


Bramb. Enough. These Proofs are pregnant, -- Mr. Alderman, you are the Witch,
-- You ratify?


Sec. Mum.


Bramb. I will manage the poor Lunatick's Cause, though I do it gratis: We will
make your Worship an Example.


Touch. Oh Hypocrite! Do thou forsake me too?


Gold. My Life for yours, Sir, stand to it.


Touch. And so I will; I am convinced now, it is all Roguery: Davie, go call Mr.
Justice Snappal hither presently. My Indignation is kindled, and I will
prosecute them to the Death.


Quick. This will not do: I will try the Experiment more.

[Exit.
Touch. But how if a Jury should give this Business against, and get Condemned
for a Wizard? I would this Concern were well off, and all Friends again.

Quicksilver reenters with the Hide upon him. Mrs. Touchstone shrieks out.
Security rises frighted, Quicksilver and he run over one another.
Sec. Mischief on your Cowards Heart; all is spoiled.


Quick. Why gave you me no Warning?


Gold. Now, Sir, I hope you are satisfied, you see the Implements, here is his
Mouse, and here his Bellows and false Belly; ha! ha! ha! We thank you,
Gentlemen.


Bramb. I told you, Sir, 'twas all a Cheat; we will recover swingingly from 'em.


Touch. I defy you, Mr. Bramble. I am o'er-joy'd to find my Honor safe: Well,
it was a witty Practice, and I forgive them all.


Mrs. T. Why, that is well said, they were resolved to make you Merry.

Enter Girfred, Mildred, Wynnifred, Syndefie, and Mrs. Bramble. Come, Sir, your
Pity must descend here too; you see they have all done Penance: Come,
Lady-child, you must ask your Father Blessing.


Gir. Not unless he desires it, Mrs. Touchstone.


Touch. She has Spirit for an Empress: Tell her, Wife, I desire her, to desire
my Pardon. -- Come, Son Golding, I must desire you too, to intercede to me, on
the Offenders Behalf.


Mild. I Will undertake for that, Sir.


Gir. O my mad Runaway, to forsake me in the first Month! But it was like a
Man of the Times.


Sec. Ah Wynny! Bunting, Gold-fineh, to break from your Cage, and leave your
Constant Cue.


Touch. Then, as I take it, here is my Lawyer that has been busy on all sides,
is fairly bauk'd on all sides; and my Usurer-Bawd proved a Cuckold.


Sec. Even my Learned Gossip, here, is in the same Praemunire.


Pet. We therefore beg of your Worship, and Mr. Deputy here, to see these two
Ladies peaceably re-settled with their Owners.


Sec. How will you advise in this point, my Learned Council?


Bramb. We have a Precedent for it in the wise Cato.


Wyn. But on Condition of Christian Liberty; and that we be locked up no more.


Mrs. T. All Reason in the World for it; and besides, Gentlemen, it is your
Interest; for as you came to be Cuckolds by locking your Wives up: for ought I
know, you may be Uncuckolded by giving them their freedom.


Touch. That Is very well said too. -- Come, Sirs, we must all Sup together, and
be Friends. Run before Davie, and buy up the whole Market. -- Mr. Wolf, you must
be our Guest too: We'll summon the City Music to us, with a Consort of the
whole Neighborhood.

To join their Voices in the highest Pitch,

And sing loud Thanks -- -- That I am found No Witch.


EPILOGUE.
WE have shown an Alderman no Conjurer. (were?
'Nouns, cries Pit-Bully, Who ever thought there
Have Patience, Sirs, next bout we'll show, if luck hold,
What Is strange indeed, -- -- -an Alderman no Cuckold:
A Privilege for serious Play too great,
But Farce has Privilege, Farce, our last Retreat:
For as kept Misses, when their Keepers tire,
With some new slight, revive the palled desire;
So Poets banking the old Roads of the Stage,
Bring Farce to tickle up the Enervate Age:
Poets, and Whores, you equally should dread;
A-like infections, where their Venom's spread.
What Is Poetry, but (...) Clap in the Head?
Yet Clapped Gallant sometimes gets Sound again,
No Cure for Gonorrhoea of the Pen
The Parallel holds further, as I guess,
There Is Whores for Need, and Whores for Wantonness;
So there is Sale Poetry, Poetry of Lord,
Worth just as much, as his sweet Lordships Word.
One Word more from the Author, I must say,
He once hit Farce, whatever he has done to day.
He then had Strength, you should have charged him then;
But Critics are a sort of Countrymen,
Their Valor of the true Militia-Strein;
Who from the fighting Foe, like Lightning fled,
But come like Thunder back, to Maul the Dead.
FINIS.

