Tom Tell-Troth: OR, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE DEVIL and the POPE, About Carrying
on the PLOT.
DEVIL. MY dear adopted Heir, mine only Son,
Thou that have fought, and all my Battles won,
Enlarged my Kingdom, and with Thousand Souls
Filled up the Cat'logue of my sulphury Rowles;
Whose fi'ry Bulls, and bloody Inquisition,
Feigned Purgatory, and thy false Tradition,
Beads, Images, thy Relics, Crucifix,
Indulgence, Pardons, and such taking-tricks,
Have more augmented my Infernal Host,
Than Pagan- Rome her self could ever boast,
And damned more Souls, than Heretics e're lost.
This to thy glory I acknowledge --

POPE. Grand-sire of Popes, it is kindness thus to own
What duty we thy Nose-led Sons have shown.
That Letter which I lately did receive
From thy dark Court, did me such courage give,
(Which I had answered (Sir) but for this Reason,
So many of our men of late for Treason
Have plied old Charon so, that he did swear,
Go and be damned your self, do you think I care
To be your Porter? I must tend my Fare.

D. Is he so flusht? I shall abate his fee.

P. And well you may, since it is increased by me.)
That welcome Packet (you may it believe)
To me, I say, did such new vigor give,
As had not that mysterious English Monster,
Which Popes or Devils never could truly conster,
Who all our Policies do circumvent,
That many-headed Beast called Parliament,
Crossed my designs, Englands admired Prince
Had fallen a sacrifice to thee long since.
But since your Devilship is pleased to come
In person, to your lower Court at Rome,
My zeal's blown up to such an heat, nay flame,
That I resolve it (in the Devils name)
Neither to stop or stay, I Will take no rest
Till I have once more fired that Rebel nest
Of Heretics; and if my Jesu'ts falter,
I will my self provide them each an Halter.
Had not base Cowardice appeared our foe
At White Hall, Windsor, and New Market too
Our work, I Am sure, had not been now to do:
But since they are so fearful of the Rope,
They shall expect it from their Father Pope.
The next occasion that does happen fair,
He that shall slip it, in faith, I Will send him where
He shall do penance for his pannick fear.

D. Heroickly resolved, I like it well:
But how will you go forward, can you tell?

P. That I expect from you; but the old Mask
I think will serve till we have done our task.

D. What mask is that, my Son?

P. Religion.

D. Right,
This managed well, with policy, and might,
Will do the business: wrest it as you please,
This way, or that, to give the Actor ease.
Make it a Shooing-horn, that will easily draw
Any thing on, and make it seem a Law.
A Stalking-horse, whereunder you may lurk,
Till you have accomplished your intended work.
It Is a brave guil^ed Mask that blears the eye,
And makes a lie seem truth, and truth a lie.
You Have put it on already, use it well,
And expect aid from all the powers of Hell.

P. I hope, most Infamous Apollyon,
You will be pleased to see how we go on;
And new inspire us with Ignatian zeal,
To make such Rents as none shall ever heal.

D. Doubt not my utmost aid, for it is the Pope
And his Adherents are the only hope
I have on earth; it is by your heads and hands
My Kingdom in the world so strongly stands.
Besides, if you consider well how I
Have taught you to equivocate and lie,
Then to confirm it by the Sacrament,
You Have little cause to doubt my male-intent.
A thousand ways I Have shown you how to gull
The cred'lous multitude, and do you --?

P. Nay, pray, Sir, be not thus enraged, that I
Ask the assistance of your policy.
Preceding Popes have by tradition told
What you by them, and for them did of old.
And I confess (dear Father) you have done
As much for me as e're you did for Son.
For which, I vow, I will not fail to sac're
Those dues to you, I owe unto my Maker;
And daily more endeavor Art and Powers
TO assure you (Sir) I am obliged yours:
Yet am I but a passive instrument
In your wise hands, to perfect your intent.
The Conquests that I win, belong to you,
And I hold it just, to give the De'il his due,
And truer Trojans, Sir, you have but few.

D. I am appeased. -- Observe now what I say,
Till all obstructions lying in our way
Be beaten down, my Scepter cannot sway.

P. Name what they are, Sir, and the Devil take me
If I don't do it, unless my Imps forsake me,
Which I don't fear, for they have plighted troth
To be thy faithful drudges and mine both:
And no reserves shall serve, that they can mint;
If Devil cheat Devil, then the Devils in it:
Equivicate they may with Heretics,
But not with thee or me, who know their tricks.
Thy counsel therefore Great Abaddon --

D. First set on work your Engines, to prevent
That adored Idol, called Parliament;
Hells greatest envy, Popery's mortal foe,
Popes plague and pest, and Rome's eternal woe.
These must not sit, for they will be laying open
All our ambushments, and sinister scope:
See this be done, and then there is no doubt,
But we shall yet bring matters brave about.

P. But grant they do, if we the Members choose,
Our party by it then can nothing lose.

D. But that is a devilish hazard, if we shall;
It Is sufer, therefore, there be none at all.

P. Agreed, and to this end, in us, I Will see
That nothing shall be wanting.

D. Nor in me.
Next, I advise, you speedily depose
Him, whom the Almighty his Vicegerent chose:
Let not that Bugbare, Idol, name of King,
Into your spirits any terror bring.
He is Heretical declared; -- it is good
To get his Crown by shedding of his blood,
It Is our great loss that He so long has stood.
Then England's Gloyr, King and Parliament
Destroyed, we cannot fail of our intent,
To pull down Laws both Civil and Divine,
And in their room to set up yours and mine.
A cunning cheat, the Church and State to mend
By killing Him that should them both defend.

P. St. Coleman good success unto it send.

D. This done, to Trap again, and with that game,
Cutting will not be amiss, that so the flame
May never extinguished be, but by a flood
Of the accursed Heretics heart-blood.
And to this end, see you an Army fix,
That you ben't bafl'd as in Sixty six,
And do your work by halves --

P. Each man shall strive who shall burn and kill most,
And I will pray, the Devil take the hindmost.

D. It shall be so; and so adieu.

P. Nay, stay,
And think if you have not somewhat more to say.

D. What is the Shipping you should set on fire?

P. It Is well remembered, my mischievous Sire.]
A little of that in the Thames, at Chatham too,
Would greatly weaken our Imperial foe,
And to our Friends, the French, huge service do.
It Is well you stayed, What more? --

D. Justice corrupt with Bribes; you see the bait
Is pleasing, and if large, is taken strait.
Make rents in Church, fire the Non-Con's zeal,
And Con's against him, till they each other peal.
Preach up the Ceremonies now, and when
You know 'twill tickle, Preach them down again.
Sometimes the Bishop you must style Divine,
That under those alone the Church does shine:
That all Fanatics, and their false opinion,
Are wholly mine, and set up my Dominion.
Sometimes John Presbyter commend, and cry,
They are the Preaching, Gospel Ministry.
Then for Plebeans, you will do very well,
To banish from their minds all fear of Hell.
Far from the guilt take punishment of sin,
And love to God will not restrain 'em in.
This to do better, take away the Law,
Give them the Reins, force not, but slyly draw;
The Law being taken away, sin is not known;
And so the game is up, the day your own.
Style grossest sins, slips of infirmity,
And Christian duties, false Idolatry.
Tell them that Christ has died, there needs no more
But bare belief, the rest may pass oth'score.
That Heaven's their own by Letters Patent granted;
And there is no sin can damn the Covenanted*
And I believe a small Arithmetic
May count the number that to God will stick.
How like you this my Son?

P. Like it Sir?
It Is like thy self, adored Lucifer.

D. Once more farewell, for I must to my Vault,
Where I have some already for this fault.

P. Nay, Father stay, by mentioning your Cell
Or Vault, where you and your Companions dwell,
A secret you have brought into my mind,
I fain would be resolved in: be so kind
To tell how Langhorn, Coleman, Gavan, Grove,
With the rest do like our Purgatory Stove?
Do they not cry that they were all betrayed,
And curse the Feast too, now the Reck'nings paid?

D. Son, I would tell, but if it comes to light,
It is enough our Vassals all to fright,
To make them tack about, and leave us quite.
And save their Souls by a full confession,
Which these have lost by damned equivication.
Hark then, my Darling Son, put close thine ear,
For I must only whisper it, for fear
Some Heretic should chance to over-hear.

P. I listen, Father, with my greatest care.

D. Such is their carriage Son (the truth to tell)
They make thy Purgatory a mere Hell.
They Are so enraged to see themselves defeated,
And flaming-mad to think how they are cheated
Of soul and body both, they vex me more
Than half the damned that I had before.
Hark, methinks I hear them! hark --
Coleman, Langhorn, Gavan, etc.
O horrid folly! where were our wits, our faith,
To credit him, who lies what e're he faith!
Ah! Popish zeal, which we before thought right,
Proves now the Devil turned to an Angel bright.
O had we but one hours reprieve from Hell,
To fetch him there, that taught us to Rebel;
With Father Pope, and all his smooth-tongu'd tools,
Who made us bloody Traitors, Knaves and Fools;
Whose cursed Indulgence, Absolutions, Bull,
Do silly Souls thus into mischief gull.
Let Us break our Chains and fly into the World,
And pull down him, that has us hither hurled;
Lay open the Plot, the people undeceive,
That never man may Papist more believe.
We Will tell the King what danger he is in,
Although they swear, and swear, and swear again,
We Will tell the Duke too, whither he is going
To his eternal ruin and undoing.
We will inform each Protestant we meet,
Of every disguised Priest that walks the Street.
There Is not a Romish Factor in the Nation,
But we will disclose him fully, and his station:
Bring them to Tyburn, and fill Charon's Boats,
Fuller than Bedlow has, or Dr. Oats.
Thus with one mouth your Holiness they Curse,
Threaten those things, yea, and Ten thousand worse,
Could they get out.

P. And will you let them go,
To ruin all our fair designs?

D. No, no,
Never fear that, my Son, do thou but have
All the rest thither, and I Will keep them fast,
Till thou thy self come to them at the last.
Where Popes, and Jesuits, and all the crew,
Which greatly has enlarged been by you,
Together shall lie down in infamy,
Torment and shame, to all Eternity.

FINIS.

