TO THE Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in PARLIAMENT
ASSEMBLED. The humble Petition of thousands of the well affected Inhabitants
of the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, with the
Borough of Southwarke, and places adjacent, in behalf of themselves and other
well-affected persons in the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
Shows,
THAT Your Petitioners having of long time been silent observers of the
malicious progress of the Oppressors of this Commonwealth, increasing
exceedingly both in numbers and strength from mean and low beginnings (being
then too much contemned) and withal observing to what an height of villainy and
impiety they are grown through their dissembled pretenses and Protestations of
mainetaining the true reformed Protestant Religion, the Liberty of the Subject
and privileges of Parliament: In the mean time, without any touch of
conscience, and in defiance of God, raising an Army of Papists, Outlawes, and
Traitors, being all incited and provoked to the robbing, burning, murdering
and destroying of the Religious, honest, and well meaning people; And that not
by a foraigne enemy, but (to the astonishment of all good men) by him whom the
people of this Nation have highly honored as their King, and used with
abundance of love and indulgence, whereof he has made no better use than to
bring them to slavery or destruction, as thousands of our dear Brethren have
found by most woeful experience: To effect which (open and professed violence
being not sufficient) the Irish Rebels are invited, and a most hellish plot
contrived, and countenanced by the Kings own Hand, and the Great Seal. Which
(had it taken effect (as blessed be God it did not) it had made one of the most
woeful bleeding spectacles that ever the world beheld, sufficient to witness
unto all men, that the Authors and approvers thereof have sold themselves to
work all manner of wickedness; which yet is made more evident by a late, most
unjust, and scandalous Proclamation, therein defaming, and (as much as in them
lay) dissolving the Parliament, against the fundamental constitution of the
Kingdom, and an express Act made this very Parliament, putting all wise and
considerate men out of doubt, that there remains no more hope of reducing
such wolvish dispositions by persuasions and right reason (which have been too
long applied in vain,) but by powerful force and constraint.

Having also observed (with greatest thankfulness,) the manifold endeavors of
this Honorable House, for suppressing these Outlawes and Traitors, being aided
and assisted therein with Men and Moneys from all parts of the Kingdom,
amounting to a great and numerous Army, and many resolved parties in diverse
Counties, and yet all of them not sufficent to dissolve their Forces, or not so
suddenly as the necessities of the people do require, thousands of them being
liable to misery through decay of Trade, and ready to perish as much through
poverty and want of necessaries, as through violence. And notwithstanding the
confidence reposed in the faithfulness and courage of his Excellency our Noble
General, and in the undaunted spirits of those under his Command, that have
voluntarily devoted their lives and estates to the service of the Commonwealth:
yet considering the doubtful hazzards of war, the miserable consequences of
prolonging thereof; the perilous relying of this so populous a Kingdom upon
one Army, the manifold miseries and distresses of our Prethren in Ireland, and
multitudes of our Brethren in most parts of this Kingdom, and the inevitable
ruin which is even ready to seize upon us all, if not very speedily prevented;
The cowardice wherewith we shall be branded to all posterity, if (when so many
of our Brethren are hazarding their lives, and the rest of the Kingdom would
do the like by our example) we should prefer our present case and sloth
before the purchase of a sound and lasting peace, and the quiet enjoyment of
that Religion, and those Liberties that God has endowed us withal: We are
pierced at our hearts, and our spirits even burn within us, that we can no
longer remain silent, but are constrained to address our selves in our usual
and lawful way, and to become most earnest and humble suitors to this most
High and Honorable House, that as in your Wisdoms, you have thought meet by
diverse and sundry Orders to invite all well-affected men in all parts, to
appear and lay out themselves for restraint of the common enemies, so you
would be pleased to make use of some more powerful means (then as yet has
been applied) to raise the whole people both in the City of London and all
other parts of the Kingdom. And for the more speedy effecting thereof.

That you would be pleased to ordain a Committee of such worthy members of
this Honorable House as are here expressed, who we hope will be entreated to
undertake the Service: Notwithstanding the many great employments of this
house, viz. My Lord Major, Mr. Morley, Mr. Blackston, Mr. Bainton, Mr. Asharst,
Mr. Strode, Mr. Bond, Mr. Gourdon Mr. Marten Mr. Hoile, Mr. Rigbie, Sir Henry
Heyman, and Sir William Masham. And to give them full and ample Commission,
that they, or any seven of them may have power to list and dispose as many of
the Petitioners as are willing, and all others of like affection to the Cause
in a warlike manner, into Companies and Regiments; to appoint a Commander in
chief, and all other Commanders and Officers to receive contributions and
subscriptions for Money, Ammunition, Arms, Horses, and any other necessary
Provision for strength and maintenance of an Army: And to compel all sorts of
men that shall by them be thought fit, (though unwilling) to contribute Moneys,
Horses, Arms and other necessaries as shall to them seem just and reasonable:
And to engage the public Faith for satisfaction of whatsoever they shall
receive for the public service. To call unto them for their assistance, and
to make Sub-Committees of such persons as themselves shall approve of, and to
put in execution whatsoever shall be necessary for this Service. That so the
fullness of their Commission may encourage the whole Nation as one man
(according to the true intent of the late Covenant, with all cheerfulness and
vigor to join themselves with us for the speedy ending this distructive
War. We most earnestly pray you according to that great power wherewith you
are solely entrusted by the people, that you will now at length break through
all opposition, and making use of a resolved and willing people; preserve both
your selves and them before the season be over, (which passes swiftly) and it
be too late. That as this present age, so the Ages to come may have real cause
to bless God for the wisdom, courage, and faithfulness of this great
Assembly.

For whom we shall ever pray, etc.
This Petitition was presented to the right Honorable the House of Commons,
the 20. of July, 1643. and a Committee was then appointed for the speedy
advance of this service.

This is licensed and entered into the Hall Book according to Order: Henry
Walley.

Printed at London for Peter Cole, and John Sweeting, 1643.


