THE BELIDES OR Eulogie and Elegy, Of that truly Honorable JOHN LORD
Harrington, Baron of Exton, who was elevated hence the 27th of FEBR. 1613.
wanting then two Months of 22. years old.

By G. T.

Mal fait, qui ne parfait.

London Printed 1647.

Since an untutored Belial, does invade
Our manners, rights, positions; has so made
A barbarous Medly, blending right with wrong,
Nick-naming Vice for Virtue, Poisons strong
For precious Amulets; and each one now
Plays the deaf Adder, stiffer is to bow
Then any iron sinew; since in Vain
Are all instructions, leaking out again
As fast as filled: it is apposite, that these
Ensewing, should be called the Belides.


TO The Right Honorable My very good LORD, WILLIAM EARL of SALISBVRIE, One of
the LORDS of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the
most Noble order of the GARTER.
NEither (Right Honorable) are these borne out of time; for (as Solomonsaies,)
The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot: and
here is this Scripture verified in your eyes. Here are good men celebrated,
their vertnes powered out to participation; or, if this indeed has been no
first, let it have acceptance yet as the latter rain: for so to pious
remonstrances, there appertains inculcation; and the Penpateuch of Moses, has,
after an Exodus, a Deuteronomium, a Lex repetita. These, I say, issue not
unseasonably; for thus have I found a way to correct and redeem some scattered
imperfect Copies, and clear my debt toward him, with whom I was long
conversant, at the same hearth, the same board, and in the same bed. Thus a
means of acknowledging my dependency, with your Lordships manifold
extraordinary favors: and thus by reprehending some others, have I (for the
time to come) laid a forcible tie upon my own behavior. After which account
given for the publishing, and Dedication, I rest,

Your Lordships most humble Servant, George Took.

THE BELIDES, OR EVLOGIE And ELEGY, Of that truly Honorable JOHN LORD
Harrington, Baron of EXTON, who was clated hence the 27. of Feb. 1613. wanting
then two months of 22. years old.
THe Noble Father had but lately run
His happy race, when set was eke the Son:
The son, a Sun of beauty, light and heat,
Without eclipse; a Sun that shines though set.
The liberal Arts that for his Daphne held,
And Laureat Valued was; a Son so seld,
That in his beams nor wanton fly, nor moa^
Might dally; such a Sun as could not dote
Upon a ruffling Phaeton: or leave
His kindly warm'th, combustion to receive
With any furious Dog Star. If to vary
The Metaphor, more efficacy carry;
I Will else compare him to the Plane of old,
That Xerxes hung with Rings, and chains of Gold.
Call him a tree that never did betray
His Arms, to night-Raven, Kite, or bird of prey.
I Will say he was a fruitful fair and good,
As any other plant within the Wood:
And this inscription to his Tomb advise,
He happy grew, fell happy, happy lies.
THE BELIDES, Or second Eulogie, and Elegy of the same.
LO Reader, as thou sometime do behold,
Sol like a An ancient gold Goine, stamped first at Bizantium: the Kings of
England offer these of fifteen pounds value at great Festivalls Camd. Rem. 168.
Besant of the brightest gold,
Upon an Easter-morne himself advancing:
And with a sacred joy affected, dancing
Over Forest tops, and on the brows of hills;
So rose this LORD. And as the Sun fulfills
Like a girt Giant his appointed race;
So with an able undiverted pace,
Performed his Pilgrimage: No fond delays
Could slack his sail, and bring him on the stays;
No rubs of either envy, hate, or fear,
Could check his speed; but with a full carriere
He still bore up, and now enjoyes the prize,
That wipes away all sorrows from all eyes.
He did not after the familiar fashion,
Present his GOD some withered lean oblation
Of sixty Winters; offered him no lame,
No sick, no motly sacrifice: But came
With his first born his youth; and then with Arts,
Wealth, honor, all his powers, all his parts,
Devoting them; and hallowed every day,
Made it a pious Altar. O but say
Thou fair exemplar, tell me happy soul;
How could thou so like oil, unblended roll
Among our terrene puddles? How converse
With manners so corrupt, and daily worse,
Yet unpolluted? (thus they say the clear
The light-foot Tigris also runs entire
Through Aretissa, like a silver wand A lake in Armenia.

Dimidiats it, without or being found
To mingle fish, or water,) Speak, O speak,
Did not the world resist? The flesh turn weak?
Did it not buffet thee with youthful heat?
What met'st thou with at Court? no leprous teat*
In City likewise many a rotten fly,
Can even the richest ointment putrify.
Or were thou never conveyed thou happy spirit,
Up to the Pinnacle of thine own merit,
And tempted there? But hell is still confined
Where heaven approves, and smoke it rain, blow wind,
Let floods conspire, yet the regenerate dwells
Upon a Rock, that all their spleen repells.
As an embowde a learned arch, when pressed
With greatest weight unites his curious crest,
Rendering a firmer strength: so gives temptation.
An edge to zeal; not other operation
Had in this cautious Lord then sacred rage,
And zeal no doubt redoubled. --
Hapless age,
How have thou here thy noblest jewels lost,
And such a confluence of Arts, as cost
Innumerous oil? they jointly met of old,
In that Quasi omnium ^erum genere dotata.
Pandora, which the Poets hold
So Paragon a piece, were congregate
After in The 9. Muses were expressed in the stone of i^*
Pyrrhus ring; and now of late
By Harringtons pursuit, as resident
Also with him, but nothing could prevent
The peremptory blow. Disastrous time,
and of a ruthlesse hand, how is our prime
Exemplar taken from us? Turn, o turn
Thy fatal sith upon the cumbrous fern,
The barren heath, let The Wife of Z^thus, turned into a Linnet, or
Thistle-Finch.
Aedons thistle thus
Be rather mowen, or else to Caucasus
Among the veneficious herbs, remove
Thy furious brand --
He was our dearest love
The general darling, such a wight as shone
I say, not with exterior precious stone,
With Diamonds, and Saphirs; these alas
Of the most caracts, are but curious glass,
Nor do their braging sparkles serve to read
The darksome night away, or in it thread
Vigiliaes thirsty Needle; no, be gone
Ye casual Doe-littles, our Harrington
Was grandly gifted with a serious sort
Of radiant principles; the Crown, the part,
Could not be taken from him: and as far
Out-did, and darkend each competitor,
As Titan does the poor Arctophilax.
One so sinceere, and of so little Wax
Among his honey, we may roundly gather,
If but his precious thread of life, had rather
Extensively bin lenghthen'd, lo the Court
How snugly sleeping in a various sort
Of trespasses and sins, being awaked,
By his example, nay divinely decked
With light and luster; even the City hence
Accended also, had in reference
To her conspicuous properties, bin writ
With London A City of Bythynia, so named a splendore.
Lampsacus; but nothing might
Defer his heavy knell. --
Forsaken age,
What circumstance of grief, or surplusage,
Importunate enough for such an urne,
So duly deprecated? do thou mourn
When foolish Tulips dye, and such as strive
Like Beeches, but of skin and leaf to thrive?
Such as examined, yield but mast, for Swine
And Squirrels only fit? do thou confine
Thy self to black, and often, I say, for these?
How may thou then with floods of tears, nay seas
Bewail this loss? how justly may thou call
Thy several creatures, and enjoyne them all
Immesur'd lamentation; bid the night
Extend her length, the day not come in sight
But water-loaden; Hang each Dorick Bell
With numerous tongues, and a continued knell
On every tongue; Command the beasts to roar,
And each sad noise be multiplied a score,
By the near echo's? For his death, I say,
As it decryes, and does so much decay
The general bliss; it is fitting to reviue
Old Hadadrimmons woe, or rather grieve,
Beyond a president. Why we may read
That ten of these, ten righteous might have freed
A very Sodom; when if taken hence,
Nor standing in the gap, what consequence
But sickness fretting out our strength, or dearth,
Epha's from Homers, but an Iron earth;
And God has also store of Palmer-wormes,
And clouds of locusts. Or else foreign arms
Shall ravage us, heaven r'ally with our foes,
Making their barbed horses at a lose
As swist as Eagles, Nay, (to pass by these,)
The elect are even those Images of Women used for supporters in buildings.
Cariatides.
And vigorous The like Images of men.
Tellamons, that shoulder up
The frame of time, and their conspicuous troup,
Their general list once ready for the barn,
Time is no longer: therefore mourn o mourn,
Thou desolated age; and now behold,
Me thinks the hollow clouds already rolled
Like a bes^ubber'd Turbant round about
Thy passionate brow; and now they lavish out
Innumerous tears. --
Yet herewithall reflect
And lay thy grief so right, that it detract
Not ought from Harrington, or seem decreed
For what becomes of him. It Is true indeed,
That death is to the course the carnal man,
A dismal vision; irefull, cold, and wan;
A ghastly shape in chains of darkness ty'de,
And hung with poisonous damps: but was a bride,
A morning star to him; and came as dressed
With precious sequells as the gladsome feast
Of conscience argue might. The worldling cries,
O whither am I summoned? why these eyes
And all the Ports about me rotting up,
Must now be loathsome jelley, stench, and roap
With pu^rid worms; nay since the charnall-house
Cries Give and still for more, some flindermouse,
Or base The Wees^l.
Galanthis, or the ratts may reign
At length within this scull. And then again
My dearest soul what shall become of thee?
And whither must thou now distrac^ed be
To frivolous atoms, and so lost among
The wandering winds? or shuffled else ere long,
Into some beast of burden, or of prey?
Some drugging Ass, or cruel Tiger? nay,
(Still frighting more) our Papalins will tell
Of sulphurous Of old Hecta.
Heclefort, of Heretofore Aetna.
Mongibell.
And other such, where many a peccant soul
A fly bred and living in the fire.
Pirausta-like, does ^lutter, fly, and crawle,
And fry in rigorous fire; or yielding these
Even all exploded, hell it self will seize
And justly swallow thee; woe worth the day
In which I was conceived. Lo thus I say,
The carnal man ends like a butchered swine,
And full of noise; when faith is so divine,
So clungly anker-holds, and fastens hope,
As even Addoulces Death, with all his troop
His Regiment of terrors; sin alone
Gives him a Dart, a sting, else has he none;
By sin is Death armed like a Judge severe,
With rods and axes, else that welcome were,
As when the laden sky with moisture fills
An upland meddow; It Is not death that kills,
But deadly sin; A Saint may like a Swan
Sing out his last breath; the regenerate man,
Even in a Lions teeth departs in peace,
And shall we then bewail this Lords decease,
As one we have not hope of? O when I
Must pay the (...) of nature eke and dye,
Be my last end his: let me close my race,
And fall like an impleat Rose-water-glasse,
That breaks with a perfume. --
His practice here
Was not (as is implied before) at dear,
And lamentable values, to possess
A late experience; 'twas not up to dress
Aethiop's in Pearl and Purple; to proclaim
Oppression justice, impudence to name
Assurance; or be tether'd in the looks
Of Dalilah or Dinah: these are books
Exteriorly how gilt, how neatly bound,
Yet loose and guilty. 'Twas not being gown'd,
And full of reverend Badges, to sell out
Yet by retayle, what office late he bought
By wholesale; nor was it to put away
The Mistress for the handmaid; to betray
His calling to his sports; (and now what store
Of Gentry have we, not intending more
Here upon earrh, then the Leviathan
Affects at Sea, and lavishly therein
To take their pastime?) Last of all, 'twas not
With (...) wicked worlding casting in his lot,
To feed impertinent Apes, luxurious swine,
Or fawning Dotterels, that each design
Of greatness sooth and second will; aye me!
How have I seen a sweet Rose-mary-tree,
Dropped with his Wood-seer; Water Lillies known,
While flourishing in Rivers high and grown,
Hung with these Cod-worms, that if drought exhale
The moisture once will boggle off, and fall
From whatso-ere to curry with the stream.
But none of these, no such opprobious beam
Was in this Barons eye; and where indeed
A Dathan, or a Dives may be said
To dye, and dye the death; our Harrington
But only fell asleep, but rests upon
His bed in safery; then, I say, direct
Thy blubbered eyes so right, they but respect
Thine own distressednesse; complaining not,
Nay nor so much as squinting once, at what
May become of him; to weep a rill,
Or through a river thus, why yet they mill
But lavishes his water, but mis-pends
It at the floud-gates; and then only grinds,
If tears be seasonable, not slatter'd out
In a preposterous manner, and about
Irrequisites. Here widely to set open
A door of grief, as if the door of hope
Were double locked and barred? Why but denote
When after rain some curious flower-pot
With Roses, Gelsomins, and sweet Brire,
Is animated, how it does inspire
The circling roof; or as a rich perfume,
In curles and eddies, issuing from the womb
Of some Illustrious Agat, does intrance
And ravish all the near circumference
With fragrant Odors; so while here conversing,
His soul was nobly A metaphor from the collet or beazel of a ring which is
that part of it, wherein we set ^estone.
colleted, dispersing
Such holy acts, that who but still reports,
With what success he daily troad the Courts*
Of his Creator? Yet it is common now
To meet theere but as Doves, and Sparrowes do.
Who but how faithfully he could confine
Civil respects how plausive, to devine,
To realls, semblances; and have thou found
An object, though like Ops with turrets crowned,
Nay rendering Citadels; if it becalme
And slack the sail of goodness, it is a balm
How seeming precious, yet that breaks the head,
And bar it by and main; set nor thy bed,
Thy Mammons bushel, nor delicious board
Upon thy candle, these like Iona's gourd
Are quickly worm-eaten: no let me sway
Thee to this pattern here, and who I say,
Who but while others spent their time, may cite
Our Harrington redeeming it? what wight
(How partial) to the most, and with the best,
But must prefer him? call him touch and test?
A web where Pallas left in warp in woofe,
Her rosy fingers; one that clove the hoof,
That jointly chewed the cud; and since approved
So paragon a piece, that was removed
The sooner hence, promoted from his lease
Of life more expeditely, to possess
The fee designed him, though a while suspended
In Nubibus --
It Is true that some incended
With terrene Objects, (will forsooth) conclude
Of life by many years, by longitude
Nor aim profundity; they Nestor praise,
And his three ages; emulate the days
Of old Methuselah; and this assise
So higly valued, tacitly replies
Upon our Harrington; but take thy will,
Contract still with the Creature, bandy still
For terrene complement; I worlding, line
Thy self with pulpe, with marrow, wash in wine,
And freely jove it; yet when all is done,
Or elevate this earth above the Sun,
Or all beneath is vanity. Nay keep
In mind my premonition, when thy sleep
Is broken at the smallest chirping bird;
When once the Ecclesiast. the 12. 6. Paraphrased.
marrow, that same silver cord,
Distempered is, and slackn'd; when the thin
The golden piamater, shrinks within
Her ruinous scull, leaving it bare and void;
The kidneyes and the reins (as wheels employed
From vena cava's Cisterne, to convey,
To distribute her nutrimentall whey)
When they lie cracked and comfortless; when these,
And other symptoms threaten stranguries,
Stopping of passages in the bladder.
Ischuria's sad, and all our terrene bliss,
Like a fair Jordan to be swallowed is
By mare martuum; then the tedious race
Of many years, congested also has
A sea of sin; then cautious Solomon
Petion'd not extent of time, his boon
Was wisdom only; then the sole dimension
Imparadising us, is that intention
And depth of life, religiousnesse; how long
We bustle here avayles not; Then his tongue
Who keeps from ill, his lips from any guile,
Does good, and follows peace; it is he the while
That loves to live, partaking happy days.
And since our Harrington exployted these
With such integrity, let me be bold,
Though giving a nefarious life (how old)
But spans and inches; his to measure yet
By miles, nay many leagues, for such was it
In depth and piety; to reckon his
A wedge of obrise gold, when Lamechs is
How tedeously continued, but a bar
Of garlic iron: then again infer,
That since thus expeditely fully summed,
Nor won with such an age so sin-benum'd
Longer to piece, he hasted hence to heaven,
His everlasting mansion. --
And how given
To leasings over, are the men who there,
Will situate (forsooth) a Bull, a Bear,
A Goat, a Scorpion, or a sort of gross
And dirty The Hyades, or five stars in the head of Taurus, so named, because
fore-tokening foul weather.
Suculae? when the morose
Orion, or Calisto hot has spent
A sensual life, yet to the firmament
Who basely cry their little goodness up,
Rewarding it with stars? nay take the troop
Of all our Ethnic Sages, if we cite
Even Aristides, far is he too light
Vpou the weights, and but a sounding brass,
A tinckling Cymball. Leave we then to pass
Such improprieties, reforming now
The A Crown of Stars, given her by Bacchus, and Patronimically so named from
Gnossos, the chief City of Creet.
Gnossian Crown, from Ariadnes brow,
To high and holy Hesters. Let us call
Medusa's head, Goliah's; and withal
The Perseus weilding it, a David. Grant
Alcides A configuration of fixed Stars.
Asterisme to Sampson. Plant
The Virgin Mother, in that glorious chair
Of Cassiopeia. Some will moral him for Wisdom and therefore in such grace
with Jupiter.
Berenices hair,
Chang'e into that which wiped our Saviurs feet,
To Mary Mawdlins. Nay that exquisite,
So gifted, worldly-wise Ganimdes,
Yet since an Ethnic as the rest of these,
And wanting the main principle; dissever
From his fair constellation, and for ever
Hereafter call it Harrington. Our sphere
Should rather only Cristian be, should wear
But sanctified inscriptions; relish but
Such Harbingers, as write the names without,
Of such as lodge within it; and for one,
That likewise of Illustrious Harrington.
Nor does it hinder his beatitude,
Though now asunder taken, and unskrew'd
Some little time, since it is but to be dressed,
Be polished more; and often thus in quest
Of trim, and properties appertient,
Do plighted lovers part, with smarter hint,
And rituall celebration, to bestead
Their after-nuptialls. I, we justly plead
His cross, his crown; his terrene dissipation
His endless comfort, even the generation
Of glorious habitudes. For lo there is
A right-hand-path, (the beauteous feet of peace
Are daily measuring it;) there is I say,
A path unparalled, a right hand way,
(The sumptuous allies Heliogabalus.
Pseudo Bassian made
Of gold and silver filings, were but lead
To this and merely refuse;) such a blessed
Ascent there is, (incomparably dressed
With radiant spangs; with many a glorious Ouch
Engraven and figured sumptuously, by which
We climb our endless comfort; to the wight
Incorrigibly vicious, it is as straight,
As much extenuated, as needles eyes
To Cables, nay to Camels; but who wise
As Serpents are. and Dove-like innocent,
Find it again so vast, of such extent,
They travayle up in triumph: Thus, we read,
Both Enoch, and Elijah likewise did;
And the luciferous trayle, so held by some,
For a Mosaic work, of many dim
Inferior Astericks; by some decreed
A Galaxia, dappled thus and died,
When petrish Juno suckling Hercules,
Bespilt her milk; yet some again profess
For Le Chemin Saint Jaques, for the track
Saint Jeames ascended by. and now to crack
This into kernel, when our Harrington
Was re-demanded; when his soul, that shone
Like a sweet Virgin-taper, gathered was
From out the precious socket; thus, o thus
By this same right hand passage, in the spur
Of some spiritual Chariot, Aethon far
Transcending and Eous, nay the top
Of Jacobs Ladder, and inducted up
Above all heavens: it there with relaxation
From earthly toil, injoyes an inchoation
Of immarcessible so glorious bliss,
As even the most elaborate Romances
Deciper not. --
His other relics borne
When to the grave, fell also blessed, like corn
Into good ground; nor such as when they dyed
Shall rise again, but even a purified
Spiritual body, and withal for ever
Immutable. As when a precious River
From weaving montley to the meads, and wreaths
For the sweet Nayades, his body sheaths
Within some cave, some A Cave in Somersetshire, out of which issues such a
stream, as not far from it drives a Mill.
Ookey, groping thus
By subterranean, and caliginous
Meanders many a furlong; as the while
Since washing and transpiercing many a pile
Of A medicinable earth found in Lemnos, and also about Blois.
terra sigillata, Samian A white and glewie kind of earth good against poison.
clay;
In Snail-like windings.
Lima^ons and Mazes, eating way
Through several hidden Mineralls, and veins
Of rich and medicinable Oar; attaines
By this contraction greater value, thence
Evades again of far more excellence.
Or look how sweet Alpheus, having bred
Innumerous Olives, hides his holy head
Beneath the ground, and as if heaven were won
Alone by The military word for cutopen, or underminig from sapper franco. is
sapping, closely buroughs on,
In darksome uncouth hollowes wandering far,
And many a tedi^us mile; till lastly near
Declaimed Olympus, (and whose procerous top
Is sung the gate of heaven) he flourish up,
And cheerly rise again; lo thus refined,
Thus happy shall his reliquies open rend
The grisly grave. O Death where is thy sting?
Where Hell thy victory? --
Nay still to wing
His exaltation, at the general doom,
When these two moyts must again become
Consolidate, be made a building pure,
Immortal, just, and as the Cynosure
Refulgent; then behold his blessedness
Shall full and perfect be; his Crown possess
Delices without crosses; joys still green,
Still mellow; such as neither eye has seen,
Nor heart conceives. The Iugler Mahomes
Does among other ravings, distribute
Indeed a kind of future Lubber-land
To his Heroes; if I must expound
It more at large, where all our terrene parts,
Demand their circular, their second Arts,
To flourish by; their winter to devour,
Deglutiate Autumn, melt his furniture,
To kerne, to sow it, till from hence succeeds
Another spring; yet in this place there needs
No winters help, and trees are always clad
With fruit both ripe, and green, and in the bud,
And likewise in the blooth. He dreams, I say,
But some voluptuous A Country South-East from Merico, and so beautiful, that
the Spaniard calls it Mahomets Paradise.
Nicaragua,
Had after death; nay by that chip of old
Poetic Virgil, the so high extolled
Hesperian Orchard, has he hewn him out
A carnal heaven; in which (forsooth) no doubt,
But virtuous men sit upon Carpets rich,
And under trees of massy gold, with much
Affection court their Paramours. Alas,
How Scarab like, and in a silly place,
Does this impostor fly? how seek to win
But sense, and titilion; things wherein
Ignobler creatures, even the Hawke, the Hound,
Nay very Vermin, oftentimes are found
To have precedence. Well miscreant,
Let Grill continue Grill, let him content
Himself with draffe and offall; yet for us,
We hope a glory consentaneous
To spiritual bodies; such as we may rather
Possess in future, then in present either
Relate, or in our narrow hearts conceive.
Yet with submissive modesty to drive
A bliss so heaped, and shook, and running over
Still further home; when time shall be no more
The several elements with fervent heat,
When once dissolved; with noise and terror great,
When heaven is past away, and he that here,
Was so malignly pierced, shall appear
Among innumerous Augels; when the last
Impetuous braying trumpe, has open cast
All graves, and sepulchers; asunder wrung
Each sheet of Lead, supplanted every clung,
And Iron sleep; when lo the great assize,
The final endless doom, that multiplyes
So many wonders, once is consummate;
And God has burnt the cockle, brought the wheat
Into his Grainer; then our Baron here,
Shall as the firmament be shinie clear;
Nay like the stars: then locally remaining,
Among the many holy thousands reigning
In Paradise; he shall enjoye the great,
The real, endless Sabbath. Then impleat
With sacred raptures, he shall cheerly bring
Immortal lauds, a free will offering
To his Creator: relish that Elisian,
Incomprehensive, beatick vision,
Even of our God himself. But here the gaze
At such a glory, does so much amaze,
Oppress, annihilate my feeble spright,
That I desist; or else again what wight,
So poorly stupid, but with Peter here,
Would seek to stay, and Tabernacles rear?
TO THE READER.
I Must ingeniously profes that though our vulgar Poesy pretend so much to
second causes, usually praying aid of wine and oil; yet are these ensuing,
merely such night-peeces, as for the most part were drawn without either;
their contexture succeding only to preoccupate, and forelay the mind from other
prejudice; for, after a competence of rest and sweet repose, the Senses being
then chained up in darkness, the mind more intent; and through an aptitude, a
brisknesse of fancy interposing, the muse then and thus, has often kept me
welcome company. On whose behalf, if she sometime ruff it higher, prove more
airie; yet a Soldiers Tract may be buskined above ordinary, may with some
propriety demand it, and these words of Art, those military dresses here and
there inserted. A Poet also has the prerogative freely to follow the
propensitude of his Genius; and our language as supplied from abroad, is of
richer variety for the cadence of either Prose or Verse. Verstegan will indeed
upbraid Chau-with it as prejudicial; and another Netherlander, has objected
our English to me, for made up of several shreds like a Beggars Cloak; yet
will their own Killianus acknowledge the Teutonick also thus ennobled; and our
language is rather by this assistance, a beautiful Mosaick-worke, or the Venus
of Apelles, since to render it such a Non-pareille, we have thus enriched it,
with several Foreine Jem's and winning features. Briefly, where these may
seem difficult and un-usuall; behold the Margent a present Oedipus for their
decypher, and fitter is it that that the Page should suffer, than the Master.

G. T.

THE BELIDES, OR EVLOGIE Of that Noble Martialist MAJOR WILLIIAM FAIREFAX,
Slain at Frankenthall in the Renish Palatinate, when it was besieged by
CONSALES de CORDOVA. In the Year 1621.

The Soldiers Character.
A Soldier must his enemy prevent
As well by stratagem, as open Mart:
Nestor and Ajax, have the selfsame Tent;
The Foxes head, march with the Lions heart.
He must be These had the disciplining of Nero, in his first five years. The
one in Arts, the other in Arms.
Senaca with Burrhus, reading
As well as action: these united, fashion
The real Caesar; when if single, breeding
But Marius, or some idle speculation.
He must be borne of such a happy star,
That when both strength, and artifice may fail:
(As puzzled often, in the crosse-wayes of war,)
Yet heaven relieve him, lead him to prevail.
He must have such a sanctified desire,
A soul so firmly to his Savior plighted;
That he may meet with death, in blood and fire,
And all his grimmest postures, unaffrighted.
And if in war to dye, yet so decease,
For justice; that his end, in war be peace.
THE BELIDES, OR EVLOGIE OF MAYOR WILLIAM FAIREFAX, Slain in the Renish
Palatinate, at Frankenthall, when it was besieged by Gonsales de Cordova. ANNO
1621.
THou that ignobly do the muse depaint,
At livery keeping her; for every Saint
Thou have a candle; every swad how vile,
A flattering couplet; moulting verse the while
As Geesse do quils, upon each sordid plash
Where thou may wallow; for unrighteous cash*
That can (I say) relate each hungry erust
By spreading Oaks, and Cedars; when untruss'd*
Who basely grovelling lies, and bramble-like
Grows at both ends; that do with myrrh and spike,
Dress every funeral pot; I charge thee fly
To such, whom blinds, false windows, and the by,
Can only set off; Fairefax disallowed
These illegitim Arts, nor shall he shroud
Himself among their smoke. --
And now draw near,
With an impassionate arrected ear,
All you (if any such there be) who take
No truce with Soldiers; you that can embrake
Their value so, twitting with personal crimes
The general calling; tell me, though sometimes
A Statist have his substituted gin,
Which like a Nunnery-turning-box, winds in
The gifts that come, himself the while unseen;
Must all the Classis therefore be with spleen
Prejudicated? since Divines (that be
The Church Snuffers) should be This according to some Writers was typically
employed by the golden snuffers in Solomon: Temple.
gold, and free
From any base allay; yet when we hear,
Of some again so leaden, that they fear
To meddle with the flame, permitting it
Vnsnuff'd to languish; shall we therefore twit,
The general Tribe of Levi? Madly bark
At clear and happy stars, because some dark,
And inauspicious are? To come to those
That must be paid in kind, let me disclose
My dearest Fairefax; who though set so soon,
That both his midday, and his afternoon,
With their expected influence were bereft us;
Has yet a blessed testimony left us,
Of martial goodness. As a stream descending
From his fair heads to sea, becomes in trending
More puissant, and fed by many a rill,
By many a precious brook, so widens still
His Channel, that at length it even surroun's
Whole Islands, drives the trade of populous towns,
Such was his progress here; and though the blood
Of many an Ancestor both great, and good,
Ran high within his veins; yet thirsting more
Then a reflected value, or to shore
Himself with borrowed crutches up; proceeding
A further course, of observation, reading,
And souldiership; he mounted the degree
Of real honors. And where some there be
Who lozange-wise, are but of bulk and might
At middle-race; that having all their light,
From sulphurous matches had, stink out at length,
And die like candle-snuffs; from strength to strength,
Our Fairefax daily grew up, till he crowned
His actions with his exit. To propound
Him yet more Graphickly, the Cynick bold,
That with his tacit emblem, so contrould
Irregular Athens. meeting such a wight,
Had toil and Taper saved; his aim was right,
And honest courses; nor by wearing broad
And manifold phylacters, to defraud
Again with carnal ends; but thus addicted,
He stood in nature: and for these afflicted,
Was resolute and bold, as Rome could vaunt
Fabricius under Pyrrhus Elephant.
It Is true, that some can polish off their ill,
And vicious ware; nay, I have known such skill
In shadows, that a picture while pretending,
Some Temple fair, with Isles couvexly bending
And running inward, windows jutting out,
Has still in Plano been: But Fairefax fought
A nobler fight, could not be thus accused
Of broken pits, nor other doubling used,
Than that of Ranks and Files. Now are we come
To his peculiar channel, and at home
Dimensions best are taken; Reader here
Double thy guards, I do, arrect thine ear
Yet straighter up; and know though I must yield
A spade a spade, nor can Bellona shield
From her debauches; yet our Armies ring
Of some such daring zelots, as out-wing
Those of old Rome. When Bulleine erst led on
His valorous Croysade, as the soldiers shone
With holy fire, each practicing to quit
Himself, like an abstemious Daniels chronicle. fol. 84. also Serres in that
expedition.
Nazarite;
So have we those, the shield of faith preferring
To that of Ajax; double soldiers, serring
The spiritual to the temporal corslet; these,
These are the gems of Crowns; the wondrous seas,
Imbroyling though with storms of blood, and fire,
Where Halcions sing; these are the soldiers, higher
Than Death or Hell, men dwelling in the Tents
Of holy Shem; with these the Regiments
Immortal, and the The old Romans had a Legion named Fulminatrix, and the
Christians under Aurelius were also named Legio fulminea.
thundering bands are filled;
These are the Soldiers that are Saints, and skilled
Indifferently to go to heaven a-bed,
Or in a whirlwind as Elijah did;
And one of these was Fairefax. --
Not to proule
For which at foreign hands, o say my soul,
With what propension have thou known him pay
The first fruits, primer-seisin of each day
And night to heaven? how damask his up-rise,
And then his set again with sacrifice,
With holy retributes? and thus applied
In chief to Mary, giving thus the Bride
Her due praecedence; afterward contest
The He or she that attends the Bride, and disposes the nuptial Feast.
Paranymph, seek Martha; live in quest
Of Arms and Arts. A practice judging those
That aim but meat, and raiment; but disclose
Their age alone by Gowts, or want of hair;
Or as the light melodious Grasshopper,
(So like an Ahimaaz, though she bring
Conspicuous tidings, cheerly dance and sing
The joy of Harvest in;) does yet become
To their year-strucken bodies, burdensome.
Those also judging as impertinent,
That in Curiosities in trifles.
Micrologies (forsooth) will slent,
And trifle time away; the webs they spin,
Are only Spider-like, and far too thin
For either sheet, or garment; nay we flush,
That violate whole ages hence, and rush
As fiercely to their wicked ways, as horse
To battle do; stigmatickly the course
Of time defacing, and his after-head
With often whips and wheels. Embellished
When oppositely, Fairefax wisely knew
To husband him, to make him moult and mew,
His noblest feathers; it is no garish, broad,
No rich material plume, but these that boad
Triumphs and Crowns; and reading, observation,
(As with a joint harmonious indagation
Assisting grace,) are those catholicons.
That purge our Adam; such Icarean pens,
As consequently point it to the sphere
Of endless glory, which our soldier here
Could witness well; whom that I more From unfardle.
unfurle,
And since we use to set off chains of Pearl,
And Precious stones and pearls of an ovall fashion.
Cylinders, by Negroes ears and necks;
So likewise with befitting foyles to mix
The prosecution; this was he, beyond
Exterior Aequipage, who wisely don'd
Paul's Complete armor.
Panoplia; wore his sword, his shield,
Helm, breast, and Arming pieces for the feet.
Supiters; even he that held
The sins at distance, modernly which reign
Among our Martialists; and neither gain,
The name of Bacchus, a strepitu and clamore.
Bromius, or Venus; nor the rambling heard
Of all their sinful Sectaries, debarred
His hope of happiness. --
To narrow these,
Nay hit the mark; he strove not troubled seas
As some Knights Arrant, who still in the fire
Must Salamanders live; and serve for hire,
Or Bell, or even the Dragon; hunting men
Like Nimrods, and of heart far harder then
The nether Millstone is; well Marius, well,
On on, proceed, do, draw thy sword and fell
The Under this the Kings of England and France used to parley, till it was cut
down by Philip the fair.
Gisors blessed Elm; with Clubs with long pikes in them.
morning-stars,
Impetuous canonads, and fierce Petars,
Keep Janus Temple open; issuing thence
Out-ragious murder, ^allow pestilence,
Cleanness of teeth; and others: yet ere long,
Astonishment and trembling, shall be wrung
Out likewise, as the portion of thy cup:
Nay thou shall rankly quaffe confusion up,
Even Dregs and all. --
Still that our Boute-feus
Dissected further be, for borrowed shows
Of edge and valor, he consulted not
Intoxicating Bacchus, waters hot,
Or rotten Relics; and the Magic In French, Chemise de necessite, and worn
against wounds.
shirt,
The like also is their Firmaillet.
Enchanted Collar, Psiny gives it this efficacy.
foe-defeating worte
Acheminis, and other such; with zeal
Abominate he could, as but a deal
Of spiritual Paliardise; and who colleagues
Him with such trumperies will gather Figs
Where only barren Thistles grow, and Grapes
Where Thorns alone, and Briars; it is to lapse
From the great God of Israel, and enquire
At Baal of Ekron; with diviner fire
Our Fairefax nobly was enraged, disdaining
These wicked arts, as while the right maintaining,
Enfeebling it; as only arming but
Ichneumon-like with dirt, that fences not
The fate of war: Nay he could challenge base
A Giant, who still receiving new force from the earth, had his muddy soul
shook out by Hercules in the yare.
Antaus and his earthen ware, the race
Soon broke to shreads; and often without a fit
Piece left, to fetch or water from the pit,
Or fire from the hearth. --
Next after these
That I may thoroughly sear, and cauterize,
The modern pride, like adle wheaten ears,
And starving Hysop of the wall, that bears
The head so perk, so lofty; his milice
How mettl'd, yet was such a modest piece,
As woorded not it self upon the last
When lo that empty thundring-tub, the braced
Sir From Passevolant Francois, which is such a soldier as Captains upon
muster days foyst into their Companies.
Pavolant, himself dilates, and tells,
And faces off, in swelling Ses'pedells;
Speaks only Buffe and Cannon; is so filled
With Eastern empty wind, that he can build
What ayrie Castles might if joined in one,
Make a new Vrbs Pensilis, a City of Egypt.
Theb's. Alas how have I known
Him march as like the compass on a Map,
He lightly swallow Kingdoms could, and step
Over Cittadels, and Cities; and in war
As if (forsooth) at every pace, a star
Must be stroke out; How have I known the blade
hat never lodged sub In nudo, non sub tecto.
dio, never made
His bed at Charlses waine, nor knows to fare
With this root Caesar's host lived long at Dyrrachium; some take it for the
wild Colewort.
Lapsana-like; and yet this Morion'd Hare
Talks like a Talbot. Thus, Saint Vide Ceres fol. 356.
Severin
The titler swells, till running from within
A threatened Alexandria; when employed
Saint Fougasses. fol. ^2^.
Severin the soldier, does or bide
Victorious on the spot, or else if hope
Perhaps turn Hagard, nobly furling up
Himself within his Ensign, so derive
A glorious winding sheet. And though we strive,
With rigid industry, lo A great undertaker before danger, but unexperienced,
Tacit. hist. fol. 5^.
Proculus
No A statue of wood, a Turk against which some will practice their weapons.
Jaquemard, no supercilious
A counterfeit skirmish, a May-dayes bickering.
Schiamachia, but the real fact
Can ripen speculation, can in tract
Of time politely quadrate; yet to Gath,
To The rendezvous, of those Giants that invaded heaven.
Phl^gra, to the sons of In some translations, the sons of the Giant; in others
as here. See 1 Chronicles. 20. 4.
Haraphath;
To the Kings enemies befall, that here
They quit their inland discipltne; and bear
Thou witness London, how it magnifies
Thy bars, thy bolts, thy buttresses; how cries
Thy reputation up. It Is true indeed,
That where the military The Dutch word for a soldiers, stipend ^s militare.
Sold and seed
Decorted is, our men we reckon trained,
Are only thus ironically fained;
And their abode may justly twitted be
The sluggards garden; but concerning thee
Conspicuous London, and thy martial yard;
How art thou disciplined, I say? how barred
With living Palisads? and all success
Betide thee still, nor drive the premises,
Then that there be degrees of merit; then
To regulate and justly tether men
Within their several distances; to scourge
Our bragging Meteors, herry stars; and urge
The modest grave Militia, late exployted
By Fairefax. --
Now since Candles how so lighted,
Obnoxious often to bushells are; since hate,
And lip-ey'd envy, seek to facinate
The noblest pieces; since there be, that dare
Calumniate this behavior, neither care
Disgracefully to challenge it, the cold
Of an inferior spirit; still unfold
We more our beauteous tap'stry, till the pleyt
So much demonstrating his martial heat,
Be likewise opened. Or if else we call
Him rich Arachne-work, and cite withal
His fair, his further purfles it is indeed
The Vestis scutu^ata: the garment wrought with Cobweb-work, peculiar to France.
genuine web of France, and here applied
With all propriety, since like a root
Transplanted, and removed, to retribute
The doubler flower; our Fairefax also drew
This active air: till (having gotten new
Materials once) for Seyne and Rhodanus,
He shipped him to the Fl^e, the dreaded It empties at the Brill, and is of very
dangerous access.
Maze,
Tessel, and barking The Hound is between Dort and Flushing, so named, a
fremi^u and latratu.
Hound; now critic judge
Whether this motion, may decypher edge,
Activity and heat. --
Then to fore-warne
Such eke of wealth and parts, as yet will turn
In their domestic pleasure, like a door
Upon the hinges, saying Lions roar
In foreign ways; and grant it so, yet God
Is far from The tutelar patrons of peculiar places, as St. Paul for London,
Saint Mark for Venice.
ascriptitious, nor abroad
Of any shortened arm; transport thee where
No Vultures eye could ever pierce, even there,
There shall his right hand lead thee: Israel thus,
How puzzled in a roaring wilderness
Was yet in safety; thus adventrous Drake
Could such a fortunate plus ultra make
To Magellane, so beat up both the hot
And frozen Zones, often with his glorious boat
Doubling the broad Equator; so be found
The first in chief, that put a girdle round
About our terrene Globe; the polar stars
Illuminate his The Heralds at his return gave him a Fesse-wave, between two
Pole-stars.
Coat. Our traffic, wars,
Are thus by noble Sindicks, soldiers tall
Accommodated; or if else they fall
In the pursuit, yet heaven is over-head,
And even in all degrees of latitude,
Impartially propitious. Thus again,
As far hence as Apollo takes his waine,
And baits his winged horse with spices hot*
To make their breath more influent; our remote
High-doing Sir Thomas Dale, who dyed at Messutapatan.
Dale ascended. And in fine,
So Fairefax propping while the Rhenish vine,
(By that sanguinolent Hercinian Boar,
Now given a prey to Foxes;) or before
Some Bafilisk, or His thigh was broken by a Canonnad whereof he died.
Drake, or Colverin,
Or other such, was elevated in
At those eternal gates. --
As who with skill;
And knowingly his journey manage will,
Does often from the beaten road withdraw,
Or to behold a Stonage, taste a Spaw;
Or with some subtle Artist to confer,
Or famous Scholar; or else to demurre
A while within some Minster, and consider
The Monuments, and Armory: so Reader
Be pacified, if in my pondrous course,
I thus my self refresh, and reinforce,
With change of objects. But descend we now
From running further Bias; from the bough,
Back to the bulk, the body; and so great,
So mettlesome his travail, such his sweat,
For skill and parts; that (as was touched before,)
From the fair continent, so decked with store.
Of Vines and Flower-delices; it impelled
Him to the grumbling Hound, the Or Texel, a little barren Island nominating
the fairest* channel for* Amsterdam, a staple of* the East Indies.
Tessel filled
With Indian rarities; the Maze, the Belgice V^^i, another channel for
Amsterdam, and more dangerous, as where sea men take in guides.
Fly,
That round imperative, so threatningly
Decyphering his channel. --
These the moats,
This the conspicuous place, where daily floats
A forest, thick as antique Lebanon;
The glorious mead, though yielding neither stone,
Nor almost scruples, where a more complete,
A paveder Cr^ta, now Candy; by the Grecians thus called of her having 100.
Cities.
He^atompolis, then Crete
Was ever Mistress of; and with as high
Innumerous broches, as stupendiously
Charging the lower Region. Here the Burse,
The Common*weale, ennobling by commerce,
Her Merchants, Princes. This the wily-brain'd
Prometheus, not improsperously detained
With after-gaming, not with umbrages,
Held in the hobler-hole; but measuring ease,
By such prevention; every gainest way,
Marching so Jeh^ like, he can I say,
The most outrageous Gennet barnacle.
And this the Magazine, for better tackle;
For his due trim, and manifoldly suited,
To steer a nobler course; that destituted
A France of such a Fairefax, listing him
Among her British aids. --
Nor of a dim
Inferior maniple, for if we file
Our emulous Leaders, he that we may style,
The A svvord to sacrifice with as also for punishment, and largely taken for
any thing fit for several uses.
Delphick, or the A broad svvord with a double forked point.
Chelidonian sword;
A double chief, and with Minerva stored,
As burganetted Pallas; he so crowned
With proof in That experient commander Sir John O^le; who formerly had lost
one of his eyes in service.
frontispiece, and our renowned
Our modern Cocles; he the Leader, whose
His colors were lost at the Roore, after which he displayed a watched
Colors, with this word inserted, Jusques Alors; implying Revenge, and the
recovery of some other again from the enemy.
Revengefull Ensign noble Fairefax chose
To rank him under, distributing there
His day to several studies; not a spare,
And vacant time, but fairly tricking up
With some contexture. Look as Hondius map,
Or Plantius, more to palliate their extent
Of empty sea, and wilderness; present
Here with a laboring ship, there with a whale,
Or Hippotame, and Neptune a cheval
Waving his furious trident; here with b^ Ruck,
That castell-volant, making such a mock
Of Behemoth; there with a Petagone,
Or Ptolomie, or Strabo, widely known
Cosmographers; all this, I say, to dress,
And set of their vacuity; lo thus,
Our Fairefax could his voydest time array
With laudable endeavors; and thou gray
Yet desperate Libertine, that do impose
No tie upon thy self; bring hither those
Thy threescore years, here to be disciplined
By this A monstrous bird, attributed to the Southern pole.
Julus. Let our youth, defined c A prima barb^ lanugine ita dici^^r.

Familiarly by sensual appetite,
And wicked ways, (as being far too light
Upon the weights,) also derive from hence
A different learning, which in consequence,
Is strength and marrow to the several bones,
Health to the navell, nay demises thrones,
And glorious Scepters; for entirely thus
Pre-occupy'd, does ammunition us
Against the siege of sin. or must I clear
It eke by president, our soldier here
Will fitly furnish me. --
Nor was he given
To that excessive Bacchus, branding even
Our Christian armies; tyrraniz'd by those
Debauches, on the soul that often impose
Such raving inter-regnums. I, behold
As the night-walking dreamer, fancy-fool'd,
And full of sundry crochets, antickly
Here as a brand to light his candle by,
Blows at a bedstaffe; or else for the door
Opens the casement; there again, before
Some casting-bottle, which his groping hand
Meets in the variegated tap'stry, pined
At Hellens silken side, as in a glass
Strokes up his whiskers; and still odly thus
Whimsies about the room; why so disguised,
(What if I rather say so bestializ'd?)
Is sense and reason, by that eb^ious pest
Now epidemiall; so does it contest,
And foil and fool their light, to such a snuff,
As in the socket, even with stench enough,
Lies drowning out; and for those red-ey'd men,
That add both drunkenesse to thirst, and then
Thirst eke to drunkenesse; that draw on sin
With shooing-hornes, and cart-ropes; these as in
The dangerous paths of death, and set'ling often
Upon their lees he shunned. --
Nor could the soft
Insidious Dalila, though she deprave
And cauterize, some to fed horses slave
His noble soul; this is the witch indeed,
That with her precious balm, so breaks the head;
As Nauplius, when Ulysses fleet was tossed
Upon the barred, inhospitable coast,
Of his Euboea; brighted all the night
With fiery beacons, scattered crescet-light,
As jointly woobegone, and hailing in,
To safe land-lock, and harbor; yet again
But rocks, and scyrts, so paying, that the leake,
And weather-beaten bothoms, with their wrack
Spread all the Hellespon^; lo thus, and thus,
Does Satan juggle, ruinating us
With his false fires; I, thus the Lady lust
Deals with her confidents, their carnal trust
Betraying so, that at her feet, a throng
Of broken Scepters, Swords, with many strong
And mighty men, like ribs of Argosies,
Lie split and scatrer'd; when by turning these
To B^yghes and Sea-marks, Fairefax wisely left
Her clean to lee-ward, bore up with his swift
Snug bothome still ahead; and let our old
Com-rades, tell if ^his draught, this model, hold
Save the true lines, and shadows. --
Not his speech
But seasoned was, and where some mouths with beach
Old Iron, any riffe-raffe laden are
Like Mortar-peeces; yet alas so far
Insensible, that this uncloven tongue
Is vaunted farther gracing; draffe and dung
Their portion be, reserving Pearl alone,
To those whose breath is like Zephyrus, strowen
With Violets and Roses; nor descends
To bark out Oaths at heaven, nor rudely rends
The Fig Leaves from our shame. --
But O be tough,
And true my shield, for still incensed enough
Comes envy hurtling on; and now she cries,
Away with these your whitely, your precise,
Your inkhorne precepts; tush we must conclude
The soldiers mark, his height, his latitude,
By a brave peremptory rage, by skars,
And garments rolled in blood: yet A monstrous Indian beast, very ravenous
after humane flesh.
Manticors,
And Tigers then are as imbrew'd, as even
The Crimmest Tartar; No, but thou have driven
A brutish paradox, and in despite
Of all thy malice, worthier far the wight
That rules his spirit; with the former sins,
That nobly can dispute; then he that wins,
A populous City. Is it true indeed?
Must then a soldier, be the swelling seed
Of tyrannous Anak? be with pride as hung
As with a chain? put violence and wrong,
On like a garment? must we seek his worth
In precipitious boldness? how has earth
Then lost her noblest sons? why sing we not
Giants which the Poecs say fought against heaven.
Enceladus, and Alm^ps? with the knot
Of mighty Hunters, heretofore that durst
So combat heaven? nay, rather let him first
Be truly pious, change to Of these see Jer. 35.
Rechabite;
Check Madam It imports an indifferent rifler either of friend or foe. See La
N^v^. fol. 8^^.
Picorce; for base indite
Ea^h bloudy-minded Lamech, scambling not
The sword at large, so limited to cut,
At such a narrow thread: let him be wise
And pious first, and how shall one surprise
And chase a thousand? how shall two, convert
Ten thousand men to flight? a soldier girt
To battle thus, so far out-wings dismay,
And evil news, that neither hills of prey,
Mountains of Leopards, nor depth, nor height,
Nor things to come, nor present, but his faith
Will bravely buckle with; when let the beast
That perkes his impious head, and makes a jest
Of martial sanctity; that speaks so loud
Of Ruffi^n boldness; let him cite the proud
(d) Porphirio, and his fierce Gigantine ^out, a The General of those Giants
that heretofore invaded heaven.

That heretofore for missive weapons, fought
With burning Oaks, and Mountains; yet their gross,
Even at the braying of (e) Silenus Ass, b This befell it (say the Poets) when
they sought to scale heaven: implying that the bouldest wicked, are yet full of
panick fears.

Is often baffled. --
Neither speak I this
To paliate ought in Fairefax, more remiss,
And over-flaxen; but alas the while,
False principles so fop us off, we style
Night Sunshine, darkness light; and many a dish
Of Serpents, and of stones, for eggs, and fish,
Deglutiate so; that seeing thus our horn
Laid in the dust, I needs must cry Return,
Return o Shulamite. --
It trenches not
Upon our Fairefax, nay we find him hot,
Even in the highest places of the field;
Look as the Scythian Arar^s, with mild,
With silent woolen feet, goes creeping on;
And not the poorest whelk, or angry frown,
Upon his gentle surface, till when pent,
When shackled in the boystero^s rocks, and rent
Among the horns of fearful precipices;
And then indeed he swells up, bellows, hisses,
Turns into fatal whitle pooles; yet again,
As soon as once evaded, grows serene,
And in the Champian mildly trends along;
Such was his disposition. Nay how young,
How tractable, how calm, yet netled once,
And over-roughly handled, his responce
Like flint, when iron-chidden, ready fire;
And A City of the Rhenish Palatinate, at the siege of which by Gonsales de
C^rdua, captain Fairefax was first in unequal opposition wounded, and after
slain by a Canonade.
Frankenthall, though long in poor attire
Peeping, and muttering low from out the ground,
Yet now bear up again; nor is thy wound
So desperately deep, but he that brings
Relief, and healing, underneath his wings;
That never wants a Gilead full of balm,
For his elect; shall turn thy woeful shalme,
Into the merry pipe; ere long refine
Thy sackcloth into beauty; Courage then,
Bear up, I say; and even for justice sake,
Here like a Trumpet lift thy voice, or speak
Else in a louder key; thou witness were
Of his high thoughts, of his audacious mart;
And fever-strook at the so dangerous quest,
Thou saw when hand to hand, he fiercely pressed
His strong immured foe; Those honored wounds,
From hence translating him, (while by their hounds
So many like Acteon eaten be,)
Thou can declaime; and lastly 'twas in thee,
That he so fell asleep, and hence was borne,
Like a well yielding shock of finest corn,
Into the barn. Does every truth require
Two or three witnesses? then what if here,
I likewise reckon up the encounter rough,
The Captain Cosmo Fernandes and Mr. John B^dels, who were their seconds, gave
a very daring testimony of them both
combat he and Welby; but enough,
Enough of this, and he that will report
Such illegitimates, must do it tart,
And cuttedly; then could I further tell,
How this exasperate inter-shock, befell
In their first tyrociny, even his bud
But newly putting open, and conclude,
But yet enough I say; for even the touch,
The glance already given, imports so much;
That envy still thy clack, detraction lay
Thy hand upon thy mouth; and by the way,
Having first interceded, with the great
Redundance of a lofty youthful heat,
For these delinquents, as a plea may slent
The trespass somewhat off. --
What virulent
Above the gall of Aspes, and crying sin,
That Nero nevcr dreamt of, Catiline
Durst not have perpetrated, has bin found
By our late Inventers of new and monstrous lusts.
Spinters, that we must compound
For it, with such a sea of civil blood;
Who has so cast the stone, like These comfraters by the plot of Pallas were at
the violent casting of a stone amongst them* ^ imbroyled into such a mutual *
slaughter as became their overthrow.
Cadmus brood,
That now we reek with mutual slaughter; nay,
Interpret civil sharp, for but to play,
As 2 Samuel 2. 14.
Abner heretofore. How do we dote
Thus on the frenzy duel? but begot
With Efts, and hideous Shriech owls, in the ruble
Of heathenish amphitheaters; a stubble,
Now valued corn; a carnage foysted in
At first, but classick now, and thought to spin
The web of honor. Say ye martial brood,
What He flew Toumnus, General ot the Tuscans, in single opposition.
Cossus, what He won several military Crowns.
Dentatus e're allowed
This fury? here alas no Civick Crowns,
No murall Trophies gotten; this renownes
Nor with Ovatiou These were for victories gotten without any grrat danger
Triumphs, nor with ^ich
Of Ferin, to carry; and being carried by the conqueror, as an offering to
Jupiter.
Feretrian spoils; let him that needs will pitch
His Tents with Kedar, and perversely shed
The blood of war in peace; that being led
By savage custom, dare provoke the wrack
Of an upbraiding conscience, with her black
And broken slumbers, let him on; perhaps
Heaven may be weary, or want thunderclaps;
Or Two hills of Thes^aly, which the old Giants projected to pile upon each
other, till they scaled heaven.
Pel^on else pyl'd upon Two hills of Thes^aly, which the old Giants projected
to pile upon each other, till they scaled heaven.
Ossa, may
Conceal him and his red sins at the day
Of judgment, let him on: but you that are
The true Heroes, bravely bidding war
As well to sin as Spain: you that in list
Will be with Saints and Angels, under CHRIST
Our * Princely Michael; O so learn to Dan. 12. 1. Braking of Artillery, is the
planting or levelling of it.
brake
The divine Cannon, that at length it shake
This Moloch down, whose bloody rites so cry
To heaven for vengeance; vent your courage high,
Upon the general foe; lo then are skars
The Trumps of fame, and stick a man with stars,
If thence brought off; by cartell ask repair,
And in camp closse, of such as quarrel dare
Your harths, and consciences; when these shall threat,
When these give on, then let your noble heat
Disgusted be, then take the point; a vein
If emptyed thus upbraids not; to be slain
With my dear Fairefax thus, is up to roll
The corpse in Trophy-work, and gain the soul
A palm in heaven. --
In fine that I may do
As Painters in their curious Portraits, who
The face deliniated, are wont in close
To set the hand, charged with a book, a rose
Or The ring of many hoopes, one of which we let hang as a remembrancer of any
thing.
Sovenance; his open was, a bearing
Of fair construction; a misterious wearing
The goods of fortune; and if such there be,
Such These were soldiers, holding what ere they could seize on to be good
prize. Whence the word was after taken for a theife.
Brigands, as will shave, nay basely flea,
The poor that fight for Sion; I, and this
Even to the teeth of death, as if their peace
Were made with him and hell; be Fairefax set
As opposite to these, to flint, and jet,
As snow and thistle-downa, whose open hand
could manage thus (I say) and so befriend
himself with our unrighteous Mammon here,
And Critic what remains, but thus my reere
Being brought up, now likewise thy reply
Upon the premises? tell if mine eye *
Be The Grae^^ were said to have but one eye, which at home they laid by, only
using it abroad: A tax laid upon such, as (neglecting their their own) are
only busiein others actions.
Graeaen-like incurious, doft at home,
Pragmaticall abroad; or there become
Like eyes in water, doubling the dimension,
Of weeds and pebbles; if my reprehension,
Strain Gnats, or swallow Camels; then again
Do thou the like, reporting not the maine,
By some peculiar ravings; let not hate
At random taken up, extenuate
The worth of soldiers; passion so mis-leads,
Prestigiats the senses so, that reeds
Have been reported spears, This at the Duke of Savoyes onslaught upon Geneva,
Sertes.
and trees for men;
Collect thy self (I say;) --
Nay rather then
To mis-repute our Mars, the belts restore,
The Medals, leases, Daniels Chro. 40. and Heywards Ed. the 5. 114.
titles, heretofore,
And ( b) Feifs awarded him; and touching these,
How often are they got by fucusses,
By sin, and subtle artifice; the slye
Tertullus Parrot-like, will clamber by
His flattering beak; Seralio hopes to find
A fortune, in his new made Sports and wagers invented to win kisses.
Cinerind;
I, such as are devoyd of swinke, and sweat,
Whose Trophies but Salmatida ^^olia: metaphorical borrowed of the ^^ff^mi^nat
river Salmacis.
Salmatidan, why yet
Are shuffled often into price and place;
When if we shall annex the soldiers case,
How sustinently prostrate at the Coucher a l'enseigne de lesto^le, to lie
without doors.
star,
Does he chalk out his bed, nay make it there
Amid the fiercest winter; who so driven
With horrid industry, to combat, even
The rivers, mountains, precipices, rocks,
Meteors, and rigid aires; what inter-shocks
Has he with hunger, thirst, contagion? here
A mess of Spartan Of this homely stuff see Plutareh in Lycurgus.
broth, is all his cheer,
Or else a Dogs, or Asses head, and bought
At Thus Tremelins renders it; which if the common Shekell be valued at 5
groates, comes to 6l: 13 s. 8 d.
eighty silver shekels; there for drought
He like a Being disproportionably hot by nature, it affects him to suck in the
cool air.
Dragon yawnes, and well the man
Who from a course, a dirty A drinking cup, so colored that the eye could not
distinguish of (...) and muddy (...) in it, and the gro^nds sticking fast upon
the inward belly ribs thereof.
Cothon, can
Relieve himself; what shall I say? his plant
Is Or little yellow milfoyle, in Latin Militaris her^a, because good to cure
vvounds.
Yarrow, sole for wounds; or we may grant
Him the The white Thistle, with which Charles the great used to cure his
soldiers of the Pestilence, and therefore named thus, Quasi Carolina.
Carlina Thistle, to correct
His rabious Fevers; nor must it deject
The soldier, though surrounded with a rout
Of cuttings, searings, pests; and when from out
The hurlement of a well foughten-day,
Some such as meritorious Fairesax, may
Come off all pargetted with blood, and dust,
All over grisly gules; will it be just
To rank him with the former? must onr blood
Decry'd be to Zacheus bags? abrood
Familiarly so spurious, so begot
By forged cavillation? nay denote
It with an omnious coal, the soldiers trade,
Is like his Pike, so plain, and weltlesse made
That each professed Immarinell, may bolt
Himself out for a Tactick; and the Colt
Of very Marvins Maro.
Mordant, and Bucephalus,
Thrasonickly be thundered, till he thus
Encroach upon our bread. --
That I propound
It nearer yet to heart; behold a sound
Of waters from the North; of many wrongs
So palpable, that Mattan there oppugns
In our late Translations Joshua, Zach. 3. 1.
Jehoscua daily; then again at home,
Our The united Provinces. ^ Ier. 46. 16.
Counter-skarp, our outer-works, have swom
Even annually with slaughter; yet we press
A flattering divination; may distress
Ship into Britain? does she not reside
Like (f) Carmel in the sea? and then so ^ry'd,
So dreadful, are her many flaxen-wings,
That not the fiercest The Whalefish. Psalm. 148.
Dragon, but she brings
At ease under her lee: thus heretofore,
The covering Ezekiel. 28. 24.
Cherub Tyrus, also bore
Him high upon the like, yet emptied was
Soon after from his vessel, made a place
Of fishers and their nets; and thou that do
Secure thy Dortor so, if Neptune boast
Him of our British So named of the river Gages inn Lycia, and only found
there, and in Britain.
Ieat; or use to wear
A Baldrick of our Of this see Tacitus in Agricola. 189.
Pearl about his bare
And brawny loins, yet say, will this amount
To side him always ours? was he not wont
To waft the Dane, the Norman? and what are
Our wooden walls, we sole to these refer
The hope of Athens? how is man so skilled?
Such an Such a creature as lives indifferently either at Sea or Land, as the
Otter, etc.
Amphibium, so to make us build
Upon a single string? I, this the case;
Our Ancestors were daily biddeu base
Within the heart of England; driven to fight
Among their hearths, their temples, for the right
Of their forefathers monuments, and bones;
And Reader then resolve me, when the stones,
The carved work, the polished corners, even
Of our whole Church attempted are, and driven
With fatal Axes, and with hammers at;
Shall we so much (alas) disconsolate,
Deject the Our Muster-Masters were now generally decry'd as illegal.
Veterane? --
O that I might
Respecting my peculiar, here recite
Of a sad prentiship, a ten years toil
In foreign Mars; the marrh of many a mile
Begirt with scalding Iron; sickness, want,
Expense of blood, as being conversant
Often with the King of Job 18. 14.
terrors; nay from out
His bitter grens, the very grave about
To close upon me, yet recovered; so
The shepherd sometimes takes a leg, or two,
Or else perhaps some parcel of an ear,
Eve from the Lions mouth; I feign would here
Like an Harpocrates immune my tongue,
And such a note as this, were fitter sung
Far off (...) proxy; but alas my lot
Has been so full of noise; that wonder not
If thus I therefore interpose, with deep
And many waters; furrows wide and steep,
For Orthodox Religion; and when now
The brawny keepers tremble, strong men bow,
And clouds Tremelius and I^niu^ expound this of Catarrhs and Catoracts.
return after the rain; when these,
With several almost Diseases which dis-inable action.
Sontick grievances,
Are come upon me^-like an armed man;
And nor like These at the intercession of Jason and Hercules were restored
from age to youth again.
Jolaus, or Aeson, can
I moult the Vernatio the cast skin of either snake or
Heckle of disabling eld;
Alas the while, why should I be compelled
Like Judges 17. 8. adder.
Micha's Levite, to go sojonrne there,
Where I may find a place; but hollow fear,
And how art thou so woobegone my soul?
So troubled now within me? tush, let all
The promontories, hills, and mountains vast,
Be rudely from the center torn, and tossed
Far off to sea, yer this is my defense,
It issues not by chance, but providence.
After which interposed Parenthesis,
I now again return to the milice,
And Mille-toyle the soldier; farther still
To press the consequents, the peace, the weal,
At rough and bloody rates, by these inferred;
Or if it seem perhaps too high, too hard,
For my poor narrow faculties; implore
We rather such a Muse, as being more
Polite, and Classick, may with sail enough
Bear up, and spoane it on, amid the zuffe
Of meddling censure. Nay to further force
Our present casting Anchor, lo the course,
The ruggid churl Orion, gotten eke
High into Cancer, still denounces thick,
Indomitable weather; therefore here
From plying in the doubtful maine, I steer
My weary bark to land. --
If any yet
Impose an Elegiack verse, be set
In close of all, as even my reere of reers;
Let him object, and say, what Panick fears,
What decimation, or phlegrean war,
So perpetrated, that we then demur
Upon the bliss of Fairefax? is a weak
A timorous Commander under C^sar. See his Comment.
Causidius slain, or any such, as like
The sinful Ephraimites, and carrying bows,
Yet turn again in battle; Trent, and Owse,
Are little for a pair of eyes to shed;
But Fairefax in a storm of hissing lead,
And Iron Cannonads, was gathered hence;
His several wounds, (a precious inference,)
Received in front, facing the foe; and thus,
When such a soul evades her prisonhouse
Of flesh and blood, the An allusion to his Coatarmour, being Argent, a Lion
rampant Sable, upon three bars geme^ur, gules.
Lion then indeed
Triumphs above his Gemeu-bars, is freed
From Trelisses, debrusings; sorrow here
Were a flat Soelecisme; ungently were,
To mingle Pinks, Carnations, Iuly-flowers,
Harvest with snow; or the prodigious showers
Our black-thorn hatching: therefore hence enforce
It far, and farther also; where some coorse
Is rigoriously pursued by Nemesis,
And even with all her snakes; Let us dimisse
It far, and far I say; assevering
Of holy Farefax, that where Angels sing,
He now enjoyes the kernel, omen, spirit,
Of his prophetic Emblem; does inherit
An endless requiem. And thus have I built
His monument and mine, though not of guilt,
And Guterd or channel'd.
chamfer'd Marble, yet of what may last,
When Absoloms proud pillar lies defaced.
Fame mounted on her nimble winge, as high
As well she might, without impeachment by
The Fiery heaven; and harten'd on, with change
Of woondrous Perspectivs, Engines as asistant to ye hearing as perspectives to
the sight
Juvans-aur's strange;
And other puisant engines: here imployes
Her Trumpetts, her innumerous cares and eyes,
Throughout our general hemisphere, to tell
The strife of tongu's; the joye the woc befell,
When our supreamest Egle-trussing chief,
The great GUSTAVUS, of his massy life,
Exanimated was* She nere has flow'n
So high a pitch before, has never blow'n
So discrepant a medley, with so clear
A candor forth; so yt Benvolio, here
But listninge well, thou have ye distant, prime,
Loud, several, clashinge passions of ye time.


THE EAGLE-TRVSSERS ELEGY, Or brief presented EVLOGIE, Of that Incomparable
Generalissimo GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS, The great King of SWEDEN, who in consequence
to manyfold and glorious Victories left his life also triumphantly and
laureated, at the famous Battle of Lutzen, the sixth of November. Anno 1632.

By G. T.

London, Printed 1647.

TO The Right Honorable, and my very good LORD, FERDIN ANDO LORD FAIREFAX
Baron of CAMERONE.
Right Honorable;
THe Press being now to rectefie some pieces of mine, formerly mis-recorded, I
have likewise added this old Elegy, and long racked up in darkness;
dedicating it thus with all propriety, since as relating to that imcomparable
HELD, GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS, what name among all our modern Worthyes, has so
nearly followed, into the spur of his triumphant Chariot, as that my good
Lord, which both your self, and yours, have so brightn'd with many glorious
successes. If either the style be quarreled, for high, and difficult; or
perhaps the method, as over-fancied, and unusual; yet when to handle such a
conquering, such a covering Cherub, what if invention strain somewhat beyond
it self; nay though expressions also be strange, and even sometimes
preposterous, yet was that labor improbus of the Latins, a very pathetical
piece of rhetoric; and thus also was Godfrey of Bulleines mettle upon mettle,
such an elegant soelicisme, as said him able to refine the most stain and, to
the most honorable bearing. Let it not therefore intercept your favorable
allowance, if I have taken an untroden path, where the common road was
disproportionable; and yet again, you may please to receive the tender
graciously, as being free from all unworthy respects; and with much candor,
intending only a discharg of that duty, which all good men owe your real
nobleness; amongst whom, and such as shall ever aim at your commands, no one
more affectionately desires to be listed, then

Your Lordships most humble Servant, GEORGE TOOK.

THE Eagle-trussers ELEGY.
FAME.
CAn Hamath then the great, and populous Or Ale^andria.
Noe,
Turn into rubble thus? must Eurus so
With scattered nets of Caterpillets, sup
The flower of Lebanon, and Bashan up?
Is all our pomp, but straw and stuble, blown
Before the wind; ye sons of men take down
Your swelling sails, call laughter made, reply
To joy what do thou; howl, o howl ye high
And mighty Cedars, knowing that your breath,
Is transient also in your nostrills; Death,
Implacably the fairest Eden turns
A desolate wilderness, to powder churnes
The most See Ezekiel. 28. 14.
anointed Cherub; even our great
Gustavus, how invictly whilome set
On his high places, now again goes less,
Acknowledging the worm his brother; this
Victorious Machabeus, (had he been
But a I^a quasi l^agavus.
Macrobius, even a Constantine,
It might have trophe'd him,) this chosen shaft,
In his illustrious range, surmounting often
The highest Eagle; he that measured has
The bridle of our bondage, tyrrannous Gath,
And all her sisters, with a line of woe,
To plunder and demolish; payning so
The bitter rage, the famine, fire, slaught,
In Heydleburge, and others; this devout
Dread In eight months he took in 80 Cities, Castles, and Sconces in
Pomerland, and Mechlenbourg.
Poliorcetes, this high extolled,
And eldest son of thunder, now is rolled
Up in his leaden sheet; and here so loud,
Oppugning, and tempestuous noyses, crowd
And clash together; such a storm of passions,
Such worlds of Pleadings, or orations.
Harangs, broken ejulations,
Ignatian shoutings, A kind of threatening clamor used by the Romans, when
joining ^attell.
Barrits, burning vows;
Even such a violent combustion ploughes
The Welking, I can hardly keep my wing.
To paraphrase the which, running this string
A little descant. --
Chorus. Hark how Futio cries
Victoria, Horn is broken, Arnheim flies,
The Saxonies comply not; Nay this fond
Obstreperous blurt, will boast not having don'd
His armor, yet as loud, as if about
To put it off; And then with many a shout
At our disaster, irreligious Gotz,
His nest of Of this see fol. 40.
Brigands, his A Brigade is a body more numerous than a Regiment, sometime as
big as two:
Brigado, whets
Again to blood and rapine; at whose din,
Both Two towns in Pomerland, which after the Citizens had first been tortered
and ravished, were plundered and burnt by the Imperialists.
Vckermound, and Paswalck, peicing in,
Solicit vengeance; this the Butcher, this
The rigid Arab, sleepst thou Nemesis?
These are the leaches daughters; then they shed
Innumerous tears, without alas our dread,
Alas our dead Adolphus; yet the while
Are these again so shuffl'd, with a shrill,
And crackling laughter, as some wilderness
Of thorns were burning; Monachum, or Combodunum, one of the neatest Cities of
Germany, and appertaining to the Bavarian.
Munchum crying, thus,
Thus would we have it; I, quoth Angelostadium, or Auriapolis, one of the
strongest pieces of Germany, where the Jesuits have an Academy.
Ingolstadt,
Now for your copper King; And hear'st thou not,
How furious a The boisterous noise of Armies when in battle.
Vacarm is jointly made,
By the fierce Saxon, the victorious Sweed,
The Frank, the Finlander? even how they drown
The world with clamor, make the champion groan
Beneath their prauncings? hear'st thou not, I say,
What thundering Canonads, promiscuous bray
Of rattling drums? or how the A word of art used by the French for the sound of
Trumpets.
Fanfars rage?
Or how the Fifes? and then what store of fledge
And whistling Lead, with on again, and charge,
And justice, and Adolphus? or how large
A throat, pragmaticall Ignatius sets
Wide open at it? or The chief Commander of the Boares opposing the
Evangelicalls.
Shwendy beats
The livid air, with hubbubs? --
Fame. I might style
The lumber almost deaffing, like to Nyle
Among his Catadups, still adding that
Of Scelestadt or Schlestadt, Perhaps the correption of civitas-scelest^, and
accordingly situat upon a river named Ill.
situate
With such a bitter brand, of Sainte-Vill',
Eusebia, Urijburge, now so dreading ill
To her municip laws; of Colonel General of the Crabbats, or Croats, men of
Croatia, the b being added for the fuller sound.
Isolaine
With his Crabats, (or call them else unclean
Devouring Harpies,) and a passionate rabble
Of clamorous others, disproportionable
To my discourse; besides, if weighing well
The dreadful medley, what nefarious toil,
May find a perfect, a continued Passion,
Among these broken ends, with fit relation
Claiming the Muses? so that I should here
Be silencing abruptly, yet my dear
Panaretus, must then thy bitter moan,
Pass as a serpent over-glides a stone,
And with no track behind? why maugre all
This strife of tongues, some lucid intervall,
May now and then perhaps, advantage us,
With thee upon his estimate; and thus,
(The noise even now relenting,) now thou cryest,
Come Death advance thee boldly, wherefore fleest Panar.

Thou such a precious wretch? I, now thy plaints
Are luculent enough, imposing rents,
Sackcloth, and dust, for beauty, dernings up,
Scarlet, and balm Nay with a tedious troop
Of several prodigies, thou bid'st the rocks
Dissolve like winters Ice; with inter-shocks,
The marine hills, and cliffs be tumbled over,
Removing Sea-marks, puzling all the shore
With creeks, and Chersonesses; do enjoyne
The A Hill in Over-patz. out of which, the Egar, the Menus, the Sala, and the
Nabus, run four different ways.
Feichtelbourge, augment his weeping eyne
To Poes, and Danubies; the Pyramid
So valuing This Tower is said to be 578 paces high.
Straesburgh, his aethereall head
Be now shrunk in wi^h anguish; A Lake in Gothi^, receiving into it 24 Rivers,
and emptying them all at one mouth, with such a noise, that it is named the
Devils head.
Weret rore,
As disimboging even an hundred more
Then twenty rivers; Bid'st unrip the tyles
Of sumptuous An Hill in the City of Prague, built with many Noble men's houses.
Rachine, thatch now with quils
Of wrathful Propentines, or pinions rather
By Dragons moulted, and with many a feather
Of rigorous Alienum tolens, one of the Harpies.
Aello; do condemn
Her golden-fretted rooms to Ohim, Jim,
Iackals and Satyrs; Blendest all the stars
With flaming Properly such swords as have endented edges.
Vir^lets, with fiery spears,
Injoyning Ziphii, blazing and bearded stars.
Xiphius, that his burning brand
Anew he raging, further still protend
To Diadems, and Scepters; and that Sol
Or doffe his golden hair, or in a caul
Of sad and rusty vapors, wind it up,
As relatives apperti^ent to the cup
Of trembling given us; and with such a gross
Of rigo^rous prodigies our Swedens loss
To suit and simboll. Then with hideous passion
At the disaster; and in contemplation
Of what may thence ensue, he bellows out,
Alas, alas the while, what resolute
Bonarges left us now, to counterpoise
The fierce Gran-torto? he that so destroys
Our Lambs, and Turtles, nay the very Kid
While in his mothers milk; nay children hid
Even in their tender The skin in* which the child at his birth is wrapped.
Seconds; (O my soul,
Oppose, abhor his secret.) Look when all
A tedious Barnaby, the Wolf has lain
In holts, and hollowes, as the shades begin
To lengthen out, to russet every light
Dis-colour'd object, thoroughly hunger-bit,
He waxes gant and grim; and Sol once gone
To the sea-shingle hence for pearl, upon
His morrow-grasse to melt, rages, and raves,
Barking at Cynthia, tearing open graves,
And sheep coats; and with many a horrid prank,
Frighting the Champion; such, and far more rank
His rage has been; and among mountains rude,
Of ashes, rubble, shattered spars, imbrew'd
With Rivolets of gore; lo where the broyl'd,
And crumpled geniusses, of poor dispoyl'd
Cities burnt be the Imperials.
New-Brandenburge, of Tyrschin, Budin, Gartz,
Infer as much. And thou regreet of hearts,
Dear Al^^^ Magde^^^urge, the City of Maidens
Parthenoplis, imbroder'd late
With high and bossie work, of Temples great,
Of aquaducts, of guilds, of bulwarks drad,
Burses, and Places appointed for trial of Masteries, especially shooting the
word it self signifying agg^^^a* But.
Doels, and even as turreted
As Berecynthia; how art thou become
An empty piece in plano, but a room
For moles, and worms to cast in? where alas
Thy ruddy virgins now? where all the gross
Of thy courageous youth, and those thy heads,
So hatched with reverend silver? nay which breeds
Excessive horror, even the sepulchers
Of very The Marquess of Onspach and his Ancestors Tombs rifled by the
Imperialists; who had done the like also to the Duke of Saxonies Ancestors, if
not diverte^ by a ransom of 80000 Dollars.
Princes, girt with Iron bars,
And Palezzado's; built of massy, tough,
And boisterous marble, yet are petty proof,
Against his hungry clutches; O let all
Such impious pillage, rankle into gall;
Be like the gold of Toulouse, or the theft
Of the Such a Bird, as snatching meat from the Altar, carries a Coal with it
to her nest.
Spinternix; but alas who left
To serve this execution? our elate,
Vnparalel'd Adolphus, knew to meat
Him with the bread of tears; to hamper him,
Sometime by force, anon by stratagem,
In some disert unextricable net;
Where like a savage Bull, he full of sweat,
Of swarthy foame, of dirt, and ordure base,
Lay stomackfully plunging; when alas
Who now I say? --
Fame. But here the general rout
Complyes again, and in so vast a shout,
With so much horror, rages even to heaven,
Like twenty Babels; that I must be driven
To spar mine ear up, least her silver drums,
Be cracked, or rudely beaten out: Nor comes
Now in my random, save a jangling farse
Of mutes, and visibles; save to discourse,
The miscellaneous, thwart imagery,
That still Armado-like, within mine eye,
Floats up and down; and with innumerous sorts
Of postures, mines, patheticall deports,
And ocular relations, up to dress
This empty cha^me; yet as if all excess
Implied inconstancy, the lumber here
Declines already, seizing not mine ear
With pristine horror; nay, as climbing up
Ascents, and hills, abruptly often chop
Into low valleys, now it sinkes so much,
That I return me to the further speech
Of our Panaretus, Or wherefore dream
I such an ayrie Castle, since for him,
Lo where distended, at the rotren root
Of an old doting Polland, breathing out
His last he lies; nor flexible to speak,
Save now and then Adolphus; or with weak,
And fumbling voice, perhaps I know not what,
Of death and Sweden; therefore here, my plot
Must be to change the scene; I, I, so fails
The wind in point, that we must veere our sails,
And now make ready for another bourd;
Hayle the maine boling there, I so, port hard;
And sweetest Zephire, with propitious store
Of fragrant breath, spur up our boat so hoar,
So bright a pace, as Neptune also boast
His Galaxia; for some other coast
Bear up I say, and while we snugly run
Thus on this second tack, behold how soon
The virtuous The word signifies one that has a shril voice.
Calasaster, fully fraught
With woeful thren's, and now already brought
Under our lee, Pathetickly supplies
Mine ear again; I hark how still he cries,
Calas. Comes al our hope to this? and beating then
His woeful breast, why lo the man of men,
Even he whose goodness, in his greatness sat,
Like Diamonds in gold; and where of late,
So many mighty can allege but words;
But Abraham was our father, or the birds,
And empty beasts of Heralds; far beyond
This shell of poor formality, was crowned
With real nobleness; he that could do,
What others but discourse; and often as two
Or three left Berries, may be found upon
A gathered Olives upmost boughs, was one
Of our best patterns, nay the most apmir'd
Exemplar left us, is alas expired.
O that some chambering Jezebel that toils
In search of Philters, Cullices, and Oils,
To polish off the skin, and cock the blood,
Between him, and the dart of death had stood;
Or some ignoble soothing Polype, who
Can fit his foot still to the present shoe,
How grossly patched; or death for him had met
Some purple churl, or hideous monster, set
Within the scorners chair; these are the thorns,
The Bulls of Bashan, that with tyrannous horns,
So daily charg us; if decorting these,
We would have sung his dart, hung it with Bays,
And Garlands; but alas the wicked, still
Enlarge their lines; increase their households, till
They be like flocks of sheep; are fully fed
With milk and marrow; Jubal, and his seed,
Ingrosse the Lute, the Harp, they shine as stars
Of the first magnitude: O what deferres
Vnevitable justice? where alas,
In what untrodden rigid wilderness,
What rough * Cerauniau hills, or sea unknown, Certain hills of Epirus much
torn with thunder.

Is all the thunder spent, there should be none,
For such a base, licentious, execrable?
But softly swift, how with this wicked rabble
Art thou perverted thus? I, hollow hoe;
And wherefore wretched Adam, runn'st thou so
Stiff-necked a rebellion? dare thou cope
With him, to whom the Nations but a drop
Are of a Bucket? shall what grass but grows
Upon the house top, and with which who mowes
Fills not his hand, yet quarrel the decree,
Of him that spans the heavens, and shuts the Sea
Within his fist? shall weak inferior clay,
Prescribe the freedom of the Potter? nay
Of the Creator? Likewise what if here,
The wicked often thrive, and houses rear
Among their desolate places, till the measure
Of sin be crying full, that they may treasure
Wrath for the day of wrath? why but a while
Attend the sequel, and behold they toil
In dark, and slippery ways; thou shall report
Their bliss a hearth of thorns, whose shine is short,
Whose crackling empty; or but in compare
Like to some upland Torrent; and thus are
The sudden brooks of desert Arabie,
As soon again exhaled, fainting the dry
Approaching Caravans. Retract I say;
For though perhaps they bravely bustle may,
And branch it here a while; yet when the morn,
The resurrection comes, to precious corn,
They shall be chafe and tares; then shall our high
Gustavus* and such other zelots, fly See the Wisdom of Solomon, chapter 3.
verse 7.

To and again, and pass as smartly through,
As sparks among the stubble; then to marrow
With burning Seraphins, to be decor'd
With glorious palms, and crowns, o have the Lord,
O bliss without a bothome! --
Fame. Here again
Our Calasaster swallowed in the sheene,
Eternal glories, then to be revealed;
Is so become extatically sealed
In silence up, so passionately lies
Oppressed and ravished; that it shall suffice,
If leaving him, I rather now declaime
The woeful The word imports an upright and sincere person.
Degen heart; for though at This was Wallensteins Castle in Moravia.
Znaim,
Imprisoned rigorously, his grief has yet
Such a Cathedral voice, as at the grate
I hear him cry, --
Degen*heart. How are we now forlorn
Beyond a comforter? how must I mourn
Like a sad Harp, or loudly howling shalme,
For his interment? he that tore the palm
From all their glorious chiefs, our strength, our stay,
Our royal Sweden gone? be this a day
Of dread, of breaking down, of crying out
To hills, and mountains; Who shall prosecute
For any temper now? the rigid ( shall,)
The tyrrannous ( must,) will now demolish all
Our Aequilibrium. Now let The Brandenbourgs chief city.
Berlin roar,
And crudle all her faces milk, with store,
Of brackish water-flouds; and thou so toiled
Obtrected Or Segodunum, a famous Mart town of Germany, watered with the
Peg^itz.
Norinberge, anoint the shield,
Enrage thy Counter-scarp with Demi-Lun's,
With sulphrous horn-works; then even he that runs
May read thy peril The Sa^o^^ chief City.
Dresden, therefore call
For Cement, Engineers, new make thy wall
Of toughest Millstones; then invenome it
With fiery The cocks of pieces, so named of their serpentine crookedness^^
Serpentins, with infinite
Both Drakes, and Colverins; see how he lays
For novell Levies, traversing the ways
Like a swift Dromedary; How recreuts
His schattered train again, with bloody suites
Of Bohemians and Moravians.
Quad's, and Crabbats; now the rendez-vous
Is made at Two passes between Prague and Saxony.
Luitmaritz; now Gallas shows
Us all his angry teeth, marching the van,
As far as The second pass.
Ausig; while that counterpaine
Of Caesar's fury, that immense, renoun'd.
Prodigious Walstein, so named of his Dukall City, situate between Bohemia and
L^satia.
Frid lander, begirt aroun'd
With Rodo-monds, Such gentlemen of companies, as receive extraordinary pay.
Apointees, Reformad's,
The Spanish do extol their Cyds, as we our King Arthur or Guy of Waowick.
Cyds Such as are preferred to double pays.
Duplats, Such as are both born and bred up in the wars.
Epigons, and other blades,
Boasting their chain's, their leases, double pays;
Their Belts, their medalls, and the tortious ways
Of levying them, while this superlative
Dictator seconds him; and then so drive
Does A Holsteiner, Field* Marshall to Walstein.
Hulke up with the reere, as must infer
A crimson deluge; beat thy breast and roar,
Unhappy A City in the Palatinate.
Creutz-nach, now the noble blood
Of valarous Craven and others, whilome shed
Among thy breaches, issued was in vain;
Will like the morning dew, be soon again
Evaporated, leaving thee forlornn
To thy late Iron furnace; mourn, o mourn
Thou hopeful Miser The chief Castle in Lypsi^^.
Pleysenbourge, be don'd
With ashes still, and many a weltring wound
In stead of beauty; tush, his Cuyrassiers
Will quaffe up Two rivers in Saxony.
Elve and Elster. --
Fame. Here with tears
While eke our Degen-heart is suffocate;
Nor his huge Iron voice articulate,
But thickly rivited with many a yell,
A sigh, a sob, that hacks and mangles all
He says to Nonsense; I must lightly fleck
From hence again, declining him, to speak
The mighty thoughts of The flowerdeluce.
Iris; lo her head
As tough and masculinely helmeted,
As e're Minerva's; and like her she hands
A threatening spear; nor cravenly descends
By Swedens expiration to go less,
And leave her wing; but roundly does profess
The side of Justice; Ganimedes bird
Must render an aecount, for having stirred
The coals so furiously; restore a throng
Of glorious pennage, practically wrong
From the pacifick The Halcion.
Authe, The Redbreast.
Silvia sweet,
The Dove, the Alias Bird of Paradise; or as the word Manucodiat. signifies in
the Moluccos language, the bird of God.
Manucodiat, with a flight
Of others as deplum'd. --
Iris. Do do, recall
Quoth this Virago, (gnashing therewithal
Her angry teeth,) I, do but reckon up
The times of yore, and many a dismal stoup
Has this indomitable aerie made,
By many a Titian Vulture, many a glead,
My breast dilacerating; on revenge,
Hang out the bloody sur-coat; help us change
Our Pikes, to stings implacable; I come,
Anoint their heads, with fell An herb used to poison arrow heads and darts.
Dorichneum;
And then make ready there, advance the shot;
So so, now charge him home; pour all your hot
And hissing lead into his bosom; were
But Swedens Obit to be reckoned for;
Why yet the dearest souls, and essences,
Of manyfold Re-publiques, Cities, Princes,
And mighty Monarchs, in his bosom met
Concentrically; made it their retreat,
Their general subter-fuge; come then, arise
Thou drad Adastria, draw thy blood shot eyes
Upon this rigorous brood. --
Fame. But here the late
Impetuous lumber, does importunate
Me deaf again; so like a multitude
Of many raging waters, every loud,
Each shriller accent drowning; that my verse,
Must now become the second time, a fail
Of mines, of postures, of dilacerate hair,
Hangs wringing, plaudits; many a passionate pair
Of dissentaneous hands, promiscuously
Clapping and wringing. Now must the supply
Be merely visibles; convitious mowes,
Breasts beaten, gaudy capers; --
Chorus. At our woes,
Lo there a sort of Drablers, of Of a Bidet, a small Nag opon which such
horse-mens boys use to follow their Masters.
Bedees,
Cast up their caps, and leap, as if the breese,
The twinging breese, here likewise had employed
Their little Launcets; then within the wide,
The roomthy tarrasse opposite, behold
A pravity of monstrous, manyfold,
Crabats and Courtesans, so likewise set
Upon the merry pin, and over-heat
With heady draughts, with brimmers overflowed,
That wildly vapouring into scuffles, blood, c Bishop of Wortsbourg, and Duke
of Franconia, driven out of his Country by the King of Sweden.

And mutual slaughter; they reflect again
The drunken Lapithes, and Centaur's, slain
At Hypodamiaes wedding; Yonder look
How passionate (b) Hasfelt bustles, up to stoke
Whole forests into Bone-fire; which as fast
The A country bordering upon the River Main, divided into several Earldoms.
Weteraws sad several Princes, have
To quench out with their tears. Nor these alone
Dissolve so much, but see where Bogislaus, then Duke of Stetin and Pome^e^.
Pomeren,
And eke the John Albert* then Duke of Mechlinbourges.
Mechlinbourger, and even swarms
Of Lords, and Roytelets, are paying storms
To Swedens Obit; there behold again,
A rablement of shavelings tridentine,
(Or we may call it Legion else as well,
For they are many,) there ( I say,) withal
The gods of their Pantheon, high and low;
Even all their Mametry, their Trinkets; how
In a triumphant superstitious file,
(As pleyted as a hedge of thorns the while,
And as extending,) how they roame about,
(May we but guess by posture,) shrilling out
Jo to mighty Walstein, who good man,
While our Adolphus dyed a Laureat, ran
Indeed most resolutely. Here aloft
A most stupendous pile, whose aerie shaft,
May play with One of the Canary Islands, in height unpaparalel'd.
Tenerif, for pike, and place;
Lo The Emperors chief Counselor, Duke of Cruman.
Eggenbourg, in a Prospective-glasse,
Tooting at Lord chancellor of Sweden.
Oxenstern: then have I found
To lee-ward somewhat, A Lieu-tenant colonel under the Swede, who running to
the enemy, was employed by Tilly and the Jesuits to murder him.
Quint and Ate wound
In The Jesuits personated by Laines.
Lainez arms; and now they part, and run
Gesticulating wildly up and down,
Like Dear before a tempest; now embrace,
And newly hug each other; now they dress
Their heads with Laurel, now they posting are
Their many mandats up, for curious fare,
For Pageants, Bone-fires, Counduits running wine,
Garment of Trophe-work, and every sign,
Of an immeasur'd joye; to balance which,
(And hail thou happy season ushering such
A temper in,) mine eye has likewise spied
Where in Campania One of the just pretenders to the Dukedom of Saxony,
extorted from his Ancestors by Charles the 5.
Weymer does divide
His conquering gross, now being in the van,
Now in the reere; and on a A kind of extraordinary Iennet, bred upon the
Pirenean mountain.
Lavedan
As Volteger as ever (c( Balius was,
As ever The horses of Ac^illes.
Zanthus; how from place to place
He nimbly flies, demonstrating right hands
Sent him from Feild-Marshall under the Duke of Saxony.
Anheim; which so countermands
The deaff'ning hurley, with a pang of hope
Becalming some; so roughly swallowing up
Some other in distrust, and sudden fear;
That farewell Mutes and Visions, now mine ear
Distinguishes again; and of the low
Dejected residue, condoling so,
So miser-made at Swedens expiration,
Nor to be comforted; does with the passion
Of Quasi Ware, or Waer-mond verum os. Tom Tell-troth.
Pharamond present us, such an odd,
A Mister wight, so blunt an Antipode
To ruffling mischief; that behold his face
All rigge, and furrow; and his limbs alas
So tenter'd out, and torn, with rods, with racks,
Strapadoes, and the like, my bosom aches,
And trembles at it; nay, though Pasher late
Has rent him Sparrow-mouth'd with gagging, yet
He still so lashes out, so renders truth
In all her ^akednes, that full of ruth;
Phar. Is then, quoth he, our mightiest Sweden dead?
On vengeance, on, or if thy feet be lead,
Yet have thou Iron hands; ye bloody crew,
And of incestuous A great fly of four wings, and among several vices, being
an Em^lem of over hot marriages, such as the Austri^ Princes use.
Hanit^ns; it is you,
It Is you that did it; if we may prevent
Th'insidious brewing brothers, Captain of a horse-troop. A joint conspirator
with Quint, for the murder of Gustavus.
Baptist, Quint;
Why yet fine force shall butcher him. O say,
How being The surname of the Austrian Emperors. See Verstig^.
Stock by surname, do thou play
The Storke thus in thy practice? is it not
To hallow stocks and stones? thy thigh shall rot
For this adultery; even it whelks away,
And dwindles hence already, day by day
Growing more dry, and barren; only sin
So Wyer-drawes it out, our masculine,
Our antler sins, prolong thee thus a while,
As an expedient crucible, to boil,
To calcinate us; and has now betrayed
Our dearest Sweden; Sin I say has played
This woeful Pageant, lo the flocks upon
Our many several hills, are lately grown
So course and nauseous, that we must be fed
Or with exotic simples, or with kid
Dressed in the mothers milk; nay many a meal
Imployes the grayest Amber; But o tell
Thou soft Sir Lecker-beet, is then the Mars
Incompt and rugged, with his A na^^ ^s Catgrave has it, succeding from the
strength and valor of the old Earl of Ang^l^s^^*
Taille-fers,
Be these so mainly ^^mbr'd? or may these
A Peleus shield from hot Hypolites,
And her obsequious grins? why then go seek
For Sol in Tenarus, or snow where thick
Two of the Cylops.
Pirackmon, tawny Brontes, forge their hot
Tempestuous Thunderbolts: No no, complot
We temperance rather; let the cook, declined
To such a Mors in Olla, who can find
Unnatural births, luxurious A French dish compounded of several ingredients
minced together.
Haohes out,
As Anah did his Mules; let him be brought
At length upon the weights, and voyded hence,
Where Who watered his garden herbs with wine and honey.
Aristoxenus at such expense
His Lettice waters, or Popea bright,
And Cleopa^ra, quaffe their exquisite,
Their sumptuous Unions; I, we howl and roar,
At Swedens death, but let us sin no more,
Our sin has slain him; and indeed is wrought
To such an awlesse Belial, every draught
Commits a several health; we look the wine
For Caprials, and for Babies; then decline
Our Virgin vows, with let Lyaus swell
As Jordan does in harvest; when if well
Observing the success, it is full of flawes;
Of babbling, wrath, of wounds without a cause,
Of Paliardise; and to bring up the reere
The drought after drunkenness, the afterthirst.
Eluchus turning, with a brand of fire
Invades the That part of the palate in which the taste remains.
Cepheline; Full happy thou
Great Ah'suerus, and could we but plough
Once with thy Heyfer; if our sanctions were
Like those of Medes, and Persians; to deter,
To sear, to lance, to lop off, this would teach
Us Hester also, where we now but reach
To sensual The word signifies drinking.
Vasti; but our Laws neglect,
As Struthions do their eggs, or to be sucked
By Foxes, Wolves, or trodden day by day,
Among the feet of swine; I, let me say,
Thrice happy Sweden, maugre all the rage
Of our licentious Mars; who kept the sage
Temperate feasts, and void of excess.
Nephalia so precisely, clenching such
Examples in us. --
Fame. Hitherto the speech
Of Pharamond distinct enough, and plain,
Was now cut off, abruptly drowned again,
By loud and squeling Claudia; one who late
As stupidly benumbed, as muffled sat,
As merkest midnight, or the quondam sire
Of dying Ephigenia; but with ire,
Her veil and precious tresses, (or be bold
To call them braydes, and bendelets of gold,)
Now passionately rending, she replies,
Claud. It Is true indeed, he has of all our eyes
The comfort, the Collirium, even the breath
Of all our nostrils; so the sons of Heth
Oppugning, as might even applause infer
Super-superlative: but then, O where
The requisite return, and what the fruit
Of his travel? all his resolute
Assaults, and Sudden inroads and incursions.
Alagarads? 'Buchadnezar
The Babylonian, had for conquering Tire,
An Egypt given him, thou my dearest drad,
Not a A donative of studed buskins given to soldiers.
Clavarium, how exagited
For truth, and justice; with the daily tort
Of Sang-reall, Arbutus, Male-effort,
How sore afflicted; Nay with urges more,
When being trump, why yet cut off before
The game were consummate; impelled away
From such a door of hope, to be the prey
Of death and darkness; so deserted is
The splendid, the mellisluous A river of Seithia, contaminated by the influx
of a bitter riller.
Hypanis,
To Vultures inqui^ations; tufted all
With Negromantick herbs; and by the gaul,
The perbreak of Exampus, putrified
From all his noblesse; thus I say decry'd,
And like a thread of silver, rippl'd our,
Among the puzzels, the portents, about
Inclement Caucasus, O flow my tears,
Deep calls to deep, and the most candid ears,
Are deaf with water-spouts; I such as at
The last grand Session, shall with heads elate,
Judge Men, and Angels; jeered as refuse are,
Outed these terrene Chattels, to the bar
Of tyranny convented often, and slain
All the day long; alas the while, in vain (wash
They cleanse their hands, their hearts they bootlesse
With innocence; --
Pharam, But how it is thou rash
Distempered woman, here quoth Pharamond,
(Raising his voice again, how lately drowned,
Above her cla^tering sharps;) thou wretch as lame,
In thy deport, thy patience, as thy name;
O how is it I say, thou do so roar,
So wildly kick like a rebellious Core
Against the pricks? up up thou Libbard, up,
Reform thy freckled hide; if Fullers soap,
(Some call it eke Cym^lian earth,) if this
Wash not eff^ually, take Herbe-a-gra^e,
In peni^tiall te^res infusing it,
And it is enough abstersive; makes as white
As garden-Lilli^ Why the righteous here,
Must weather many a bitter storm, and bear
The parching heat, the burden of the day;
Like Balsome-trees, and Larches, must display
Their worth among their wounds; Look as the brave
East-Indie-man, transpierces many a wave
That Bandog-like assayles him; nor declines
His great intendment, for the torrid lines
Malevolence, or doubling such extent
Of many a fore-land, many a prominent,
And tedious cape; till up at length he bear
With Taprobane, or Java, taking there
His precious lading in; such must they be
Here under sail: And in this worldly sea
If Serens tempt thee, these with upward fair,
Are downward fish, an interdicted pair,
A wicked miscelane; If perhaps withstood
By tyrannous Whales, who tumble up the flood,
And boil it like a Cauldron; or else runs
Thy course, through Burning seavers of Ca^.
Calentures, The stormy North-east wind, Acts 27. 24.
Eur^^lidons,
Or barking Scylla's, yet if knowledge steer,
Zeal whistle in thy sails, thou snugly bear
Shall up despite of al; invictly stem
The strongest setting tides; and leaving them,
With the so tedious cape of hope, behind
At length to lee-ward; for a terrene Ind,
A place of fading merchandise, be freight
With matchless bliss, with an exceeding weight
Of endless glory: And our royal Swede
Exemplifies it, by the triple head
Of Geryon, with his infinitely more,
And as outrageous hands, as heretofore
Briareus boasted of, though long beset;
Yet bearing up into the very gate,
Of al his foes; till lastly from a cloud
Of radiant victories, and trophies, strow'd
Along the world; his spirit curry'd up
To that divine. --
Fame. But here the catadup
Of noise again so passes all belief,
Chorus. That lo Cleoritus to blaze griese,
Stent^r his joy; lo how they swel, and stare,
And with their straining shoot as red, as are
The cheeks of Bacchanals; Nay further eke,
See Bulbus-head the Boar, how Heyfer-like
He wildly gambols, often howting out
His brutish jollity the while no doubt,
In that same savage note, by woodmen used
Among their Dear, but al in a confused
Obstreperous medley swallowed; Yonder then,
(For I must slent of this same cha'me again,
With mutes, and vision,) see where Two Sycophants in chief favor with the
Emperor Ferdinand.
Cremsmunster,
And Trautmanstorfe, (in nature rigider,
More Giant then in name;) see how they buz,
And croak in Caesar's ear, proscribing thus,
Innumerous innocents; And still so thwart,
So crosly run the Dice, I must impart
Upon another coast, the Turtle true,
Fair Basilissa, weltering in a dew
Of briny tears; even all her beauteous face,
Besprent with water-gauls; and now alas,
Which irks me deeply, lo she groans and grieves
Herself into a swound; Now rede-viu's
In ghastly manner, newly sinkes away,
Is daw'd again; woe worth the dismal day
That I must leave her thus, for now that old
Sexaginary (lately so befooled,
To batter down his blood,) with many a band
Chops-in between us; now they make a stand,
And At first an Engenier under Wallstein, after by degrees a colonel.
Farenbach, with other Leaders, join
In Phirrick rounds; now with the Mattachine
In armor jove it; now that fly of court,
Prodigious First a follower of the count of Hanaw, after employed to levy
C^sa^s confiscations.
Ossa, tickling at the sport,
In a deep eglett, of Corinthian Brass,
Health's it to Caesar --
Fame. But to touch and pass,
To certify by sips, and transiently,
Being my sole design; here passing by
These lusty Lameches, and their gaudy scene;
Chorus. See yonder also, near the mantling Rhe^e,
How while Zelotes, goes about to stave
The Heydlebourgers tun, as but a wave
In our late shipwreck; see how Zuffenbeck
The trouper, charges him with many a steek;
While Grossendorst his brother, interimly
Lies sucking at the spiget; next mine eye
(No longer trading with so coorse a pair;)
Among enumerous others, far and near
Pressing for notice, singled has the bright
Illustrious Clari-dame; and while a cite
Of abler pens, will yet supinely sleep,
Fly silly Muse, can thou not fly? then creep
To do her service; this the royal Queen,
Not broking up a momentany shine,
From Iewellers, and druggests, which at night
Must be put off again; her red and white,
Her Jewels are so rich, so paragon,
So deeply set, that doubly they renown
Her to be radiant, as without, within;
And like the robe, on both sides full of fine
Discoulour'd needle work; so quondam voted
To Jabins Sisera; yet to be noted
With a black cole, such is the partial world,
That while innumerous others, wear the purl'd
Sweet buds of Roses, out alas her head
With woeful Willough, Yew, and Cypress sad,
Is tyraniz'd; I such the sober state
Of flesh and blood, that al disconsolate,
See how she folds her arms; now looks to heaven,
As crying Lord alas, how was he given
A prey into their teeth? now with a hand
Exactly chambleted, and porselain'd
With white and blew, her pen she does imploie,
To melt (...) drad, her dearest Angli-roy,
At the Ma^-^eu^; yet now again forbeares,
Because the paper suggish is with tearrs,
And swallows al impression; now she goes
To yonder Temple, with religious vows
That she may deprecate our further harm,
And close behind her, many a woeful swarm
Of One of the conclusions of Lipsich was that both Calvinists and Luther^, to
take away those distinctions kindling so much hatred should jointly be thus
named.
Evangelicals; Now makes a stand,
From several draughts, presented here to (...) hand,
Choosing his Ce^otaphiam. --
Fame. I should still
Enlarg me thus, and royallize my q^il
With more of her; but as Celestial news
Here interposes, may perhaps excuse
My self a while; for yonder massy cloud,
Giving such fire, (so doubtless) full of loud,
And bellowing Meteors; lo how from between
The darksome pleyts thereof, a Cherubin
Now gently stoops, with healing on his wings,
To poor Panaretus, by several pangs,
And rigid passions, hewn so lately down
Into the daze of death. The hideous swoon,
Now in a clammy deal of mist and gum,
Was setting both his eyes; an Icye cream,
Remissely floating over all his face,
Implacably protended; froze the pace
His pulse so long had run, and every wheel
Within him, now began to fur, and feel
An earthy dullness; when behold (I say,)
The starry leech, has with a fragrant May,
This sad December outed; new has wound
His pulse, and all his Organs up, as sound,
As strong, as high, as ever; So the snake,
His slough, his heckle moults, his ancient beak,
The royal Eagle. After whose recover,
Lo how the glorious post does backward hover,
In boughts, and wind-laces; nay with a point
Now made again, into the fable tent,
From whence his stooping; has entirely dashed
All our clamitants; and all abashed,
Lo how they trembling stand, and full of fire,
Shot (as it seems) from many a sulfurous tire
Of the Celestial Cannon; Which in fine
Or being cloyed, or moulted else again
To their first principles; about mine ear,
Insist (I say,) our Redevivus here,
One coming from the dead, may presuppose
The noblest demonstrations; On with those
Thy scattered Elegiacks, do, proceed;
No Dog now moves his tongue, the broken reed,
The poor Panaretus, in such a glade,
So whist a silence, doubtless may persuade
Incomparable Rights, and Exequies,
To Swedens hearse. And hark, how loud he cries;
How lamentably loud! --
Panar. Alas for him,
Who like a brave Alcydes, could esteem
It all his bliss, to roame about the world,
Confounding Monsters, buffeting the curld
Presumptuous brows of Tyrants; Why but search
His general conduct, his victorious march;
And when at Two Islands in the Baltrek Sea, near to Stralesundt.
Usedoome, Rugen, (two of those
Prodigions quarrels, that Aegeon chose
Of yore to shoot at heaven,) when there he drew
His active heat, General of the Imperial forces in Pomerland at the King of
Swedens arrival.
Torquato Conty flew
(Enduring not the test,) to sudden air;
Nay, daring Papenheym, Hnlke, Altringer
So great a Master both of Pike and pen,
Nay tyrannous Tscherclaes, Gallas, Wallensteine
That great Dictator, shining all how bright,
Yet as inferior Planets, lost their light
At Swedens Heliack rising. All their ways
Were deep and furious, as the north-west Seas,
And full of grisly shapes; of Morses, Whales,
Grim Unicorns with Adamantine scales;
And horrid Gram-pusses: yet our August
Adolphus, knew to baffle their so vast
Insidious heat, their knittest practices
To ravell out; Or wherefore name I these?
Since from our present ages height, survey
But that behind thee; search but far away,
Where all the hills, and steeple-tops, are clad
With bluish Land-schap; but where Elis stood,
(Even at the furthest the other end of time,)
Or Troy, or Sparta; and behold their prime
High-writ Heroes, came no nearer to
His celsitude, then rough-hewen models do
Their Archetip's; then does the Belgic card
A Lion fierce, or Italy compared
With a neat timber'd leg. And this the Chief,
Whose late decease, (what have I said? come grief,
Come desolation, come,) even whose decease,
Has deeply drenched us in the wretchedness
Of many waters; now the bread of tears
Must be our daily food; our sauce, the jeares
And taunts of them without. Alas alas,
What gloomy tropes, what lamentable dress
Of several figures, may declaime our low
Precipitate condition? Now, o now,
Let squalid Pisces, and Aquarius reign;
And all the racks conjoyntly drive amain,
From south, and south-south-east; making the clung;
The toughest seasoned timber, the most strong,
And rankest Marble; or else further yet,
Even flint, and Iron-stone, dissolve and sweat,
Be full of drops and tears; a complement
Yet poor and flat, of far inferior hint
To the diaster; out alas my head,
My heart, my heart, why even the sovereign Swede,
The covering See the Epist. Dedicatory.
HELD, the Lion of the North,
That quintessence of Kings, is battered forth
His wondrous conduct. Let the Trumpet rend
It self with ghastly groans; the Drum descend,
And languish from his mettel'd ruff, and roll,
To a dead march; --
Fame. I, quoth the heavenly soul,
The dear Puella Caelestis.
Amalaswentha by him set,
Nor longer keeping silence. --
Amal, Let, o let,
Our Volies so consolidately dressed
With Muskitads, with many a boisterous breast
Of Colverin, and Cannon, at the stresse
That hills and regions tremble, thoroughly press
How dear we held him; so condensly choke
The sky with pillars, curles, and clouds of smoke,
That by producing thunder, may with vast
Outrageous cracks, and roarings, on the last
Stretch our obsequious farewell, to the slain,
Vnparalel'd, undaunted, --
Fame. I and then
Quoth our P^naretus, as passionately
Here piecing with her. --
Panar. I, and then quoth he, b Of this hill see fol. 54.

Ye (a) Phytelburgen echoes, near distraught
With the prodigious noise; so tenter-out
Your clamorous voices, bounding it in gross
Up to the Graian Alps, that also those
Your susters there, may with their mighty throats,
Transport it over to the hollow grots,
And brows of A hill in Thracia, six miles high.
Hemus; and so taking post
By shady A hill in Thesaly.
Pelion, to the forked crest
Of widely sung Olympus; being still
Thus dictated, I say, from hill to hill;
Our wondrous vollies, at the length may seize
Extended Taurus, that Metropolis
Of resonancies; and in savage dens,
Deep foggy Cisterns, hollow woods, and glins;
Among unhaunted mossie Rifts, and Rocks,
And ragged precipices; even where flocks,
Nay worlds of shrill promiscuous eccho's, may
So farther thicken, reboat, and bray,
The hideous din; that like a torrent fierce,
Still rushing on, the spacious universe,
From Inde to frozen Thuly, with sonore,
And vast expressions, never known before,
Solemnize an interment so repleat,
With hideous consequents. --
Amal. Even a defeat
Replies Amalaswenth', so grimly checking,
Nay Mating Millions; Look as at the breaking
Of some extended broach, or beetle-brow,
From hoary Caucasus; observe but how
While headlong often grasing here and there,
It rends and furrows up, both bush, and bryer;
Both branch and blade, imbarking multitudes
In the Mal-heur; thus omniously boades
Our Swedens expiration; thus, o thus,
In gulphes of grief, as broad as bottomless,
Implunging infinites. O that the womb
Had smothered me before my birth, in dumb
And silent darkness; now the glorious face
Of our design, shall dwindle in disgrace,
And gather blackness. Come come, let us fly
My dear Panaretus; me thinks I see
The Relics of our butchered Saints; as thrown
And exprobately scambl'd up and down,
As chips at cutting wood. --
Fame, With fell affright,
The Roses in her face, now Lilly white
Began to languish, and she startled up
Distractedly; her anker-hold, her hope
Now drove amain; when lo Panaretus
In sweet and precious compellations, thus
Rejoynes with her anew: --
Panar. Bur tell me then,
Shall such a man as I, turn back again
Leaving the Plough; shall we that reckoned are
For beams, and pillars, of the Militar,
And Orthodoxall Church, ignobly swerve,
Moulder, and leave it thus? why but observe,
And he that sowes in rivolets of tears,
Shall after reap in joy; who weeping bears
His precious seed, and thus in season out,
Shall doubtless come again, and with the shout
Of those in harvest, bring with him his sheaves;
Retract, retract I say, o how it grieves
Me for thy fear, thy fall; collect thy self*
And let us bravely fink both sirt, and shelf,
Impatience pre-supposing; steeple-deep
In the springtide of zeal. --
Fame. Here 'gan she weep,
And chatter like a Crane, hiding her head
In a black Cypress Wimple; while the sad
Panaretus, pitching his eyes a'spar
Upon the ground, does intr'imly prefer
A Seane of silence; giving so much line
To recollection, and the discipline,
Of sundry second thoughts; that as the fruit,
The sequel, of this intermitted mute
Parenthesis, from her dejected stoup,
See now at retrive, how she heighthens up,
Gathers, and grows again; her beamy brow
Late in a Cypress Lantern muffled, now
Shines as of yore; and every principle
Of holiness, e're-while within her soul,
Remissely drooping; rowses now again,
And like a Giant wheu refreshed with wine,
In her so strongly races, reigns so clear;
That even become as brave and bold, as e're
The wife of Or Deb^ra^, see Iugd. 4. 4.
Lapydoth, her fiery zeal
Thus vents it self. -- One bound up in Seare-cloth, like the staff of a
torch, and in other such materials, stifned with wax, and fired at the bottom
with brush and dry twigs: in Latin Sarmenta.

Amal. O how do we reveal
Our sexes many weaknesses, and wounds;
Yet so the good Samaritan infunds
His sovereign Wine, and Oil; that now, go to,
Bring forth the rods, the beasts, the wheels, I do;
Now sear, and cut, and kill; let me be made
A lighted torch, a Sarmentarian sad,
At Rome night-revells; do do, string your whips
With Scorpions, Asps, or somewhat that out strips
Their venom far; I, bring the fury-full
Busirian horses, the Per^llan Bull,
Or exquisiter torments, yet my trust,
My treasure there is laid, where neither rust,
Nor moth, nor theife, nor tyrant,
Panar. Glorious dame,
Virago-royall: the diviner flame
That on thee so much fortitude confers,
Establish it relentlesse, as the bars
Of an imperial Palace; never time
More pressing then the present, of so grim,
Precipitate condition; And awake
Thou right hand of the Lord, up up, and take
Thy former strength again; why do not thou
Turn Moab to thy wash-pot? cast thy shoe
Out over Edom? Fast their Princes make
In links of Iron; and their Nobles break
Like to the Po^trs vessel* Up I ^ay,
And bare thine arm again, as in the day
Of z^^ and Or^^, o^ of those that had
Their punishment at En^or, and were made
Like dung upon the earth; Was it not thou?
Of yore by whom the H^^sits, even a few
Derided silly Hu^ in the B^ signifies a Goo^^.
Geese, (though in their head
But a blind ziska; baffled so the spread
Presumptuous Eagle, and her several young,
How sharp their poun^^s* and another strong
Assertion of thy valiance, was it not
Thy dexterous managing our pike, and shot,
That when the spanish Charles, was lately grown
So high and supercilious, melted down
His pertinacy, worsting him to fly
In rain, and darkness, precipitiously
Among the ragged mountains? take o take
Thy former strength again, awake awake,
And buske thy self to battle; thou alone
Maugre his furious brand, have lately slain
The giant Count of Tylle Lieut. General to the Duke of ^^varia.
Tscherclaes; and 'twas thou that did
That Rodomont the The Ducall title of Walstein.
Fridlander, amidst
His iron men defeat; o show thy power,
Thou art our fort, our moat, our countermure,
Our total confidence; --
Fame. But halloe, here
The deaff'ning tempest, does again so rear
It self, in monstrous pillars interwound;
A thousand Drums ( d) pirading, might be drowned c A setting the watch, an
uniting of many companies into an entire gross.

And swallowed in it; I, such the noise, so fell,
As tozes all the Welkin, makes it boil,
Like Ointment in a pot; What shall I say,
Alas my wings so palpably decay,
So fiercely ruffled are, and ravel'd out,
In the combustion, that I much misdoubt
Some cross Catastrophe; and by fine force
If beaten from my pitch, shall but disperse,
For a redundant, Elephantine book,
These petty fragments; o, the furious shock,
The horrible disgust! Farewell, farewell;
My perspectives, my wings, are with so fell
Distraction tugged and wearied; all my dress,
So puzzled is, and shattered, with the stresse
Of many furious Typhons; that unfit
To weather out the work, I here submit:
Descending back, to prompt the bustling brothers,
Nat' Butter, Gallo-belgicus, and others.
Annae-Dicata, OR, A miscelaine of some different cansonets, dedicated to the
memory of my deceased, very Dear Wife, ANNA TOOK, of Beer

Loves labor lost.
ALas how often by some Rillets side,
With heavy bosom have I trod the Meads,
And finding them with grass and Christial beads
So trimly clustered, thus began to chide:
Ye want nor dew to fledge your verdant quills,
Nor western wind to fan the Summers heat:
Shoots not the Soil from yon superior hills,
To make your clovers fragrant, and complete?
With store of sovereign blooms are ye not dressed,
And studded thick? or does not many a Swan,
And many a Nayad, that even ravish can
With precious modulations, speak you blessed?
But then what makes such store of Willough here?
Why foster ye this badge of discontent?
Me thinks you should some nobler Pendant wear,
The Palm, fat Olive, or the Laurel Gent':
I say, since happy, and so highly blessed,
Me thinks ye should converse with plants of grace;
And like a Lady tricking up her face,
With Pearls and Rubies be, not pebles dressed.
Fie, fie, dismiss this Livery forlorn,
Confine it to some craggy mountain top,
Or barren Desert, where it may be worn
With more propriety; or since my hope
In Seas of sad despair is tossed and torn,
And daily drencht with many a rigid billow,
Pass it to me; give me your woeful VVillough.
The Redundant Lover.
Dear, since we parted, never did I see
A beauteous Summer fly, or fancy pyed,
Or garden-bed, or Plume, or Picture, dyed
With daint^er colors, but I thought on thee.
I never heard a more melodious note,
Attained a delicater touch, or ought
Of better worth; but 'twas a present quote
Of thy perfection, thou were in my thought.
Nay since familiar to remember things
By contraryes, by black, white; Saints, by Devils:
To this end have I even made use of evils;
And to my mind each loathsome object brings
Thy purity; dearest my loves intention,
Makes every thing that is, to make thy mention.
Of the Common Law.
THE Law, like Esop, in exterior show Of the Common Law.

Is harsh and homely; but each man inclined
Laboriously to sift it, till he know
With what delight, the inner side is lined;
Will vouch it pleasing is, was Esops mind:
It Is sweet, but does in rugged phrases dwell,
It Is like a Pearl, hid in an Oyster-shell.
The Pious Turtles.
DId Heaven but gently to my wish reply,
Lo thus would we converse my lovely dear;
I say thus would we live while being here;
And when to part from hence, thus would we dye.
Upon some shady, sandy, higher ground,
Where the sweet birds should warbling music give,
And at whose foot some pittering Rillet wound,
Like Baucis and Philemo^ would we live.
Our clothing should be warm, and new, and neat,
Not costly, nor too curious; and our diet,
Though plentiful and good, yet free from riot;
Nor adding thirst to drink, nor lust to meat.
No viperous envy, nor ambitious dreams,
No care to pay some griping Landlord rent,
No clamerous wealth, of many ploughes and team^,
Should interrupt the calm of our content.
Our handy labor should be sole addressed
To the well husbanding of Hops, and Bees:
Or to some Orchard, where the fruitful trees
Strove which should yield the most, and which the best.
Nay borne by faith upon her lofty wings,
We would beyond this under earth endeavor,
Conversing with divine invisible things;
Living and loving so, we might live ever;
And when death came at length, to play his prize;
Depart in peace, closing each others eyes.
Love and Counsel
THou youthful art, and fair; well clad, and fed,
And flattered too no doubt: yet dear be sure,
That these inducements make thee not secure;
For with thy birth, thy death was also bred.
Thy birth infers thy bu^iall; all the space
A mortal does above the ground converse,
He does but climb his execution place;
It Is but a lingering passage to his hearse.
Observe a skull, out at whose rotten ports
The worms hang down, and in a hundred year,
Such as that is, shall thou and I appear;
Cold, darkness, silence, must our sole consorts,
And the raw worms our richest earings be,
Which I entreat remember well, and me.
The Heavenly Climax.
MY lovely dearest, when I but survay
The curious building of thy house of clay,
The music of it, and contend the while,
Who it is that dwells in such a precious pile;
I find a soul so nobly there discoursing;
Distributing so virtually her powers,
That straight it leads me to that Lord of ours;
Such strange invisible mysteries enforcing:
And I conclude, if on the center base,
Such goodness, such perfection he discloses,
How is the circle then adorned, the place
Where he upon his heavenly throne reposes?
Or how is he himself both good, and great,
That when they were not, gave all these a making;
That being, gives them order; nor forsaking
His Creatures, keeps both it and them complete.
And then in contemplation of so vast
A world of wonders, here again I rouse
My spirit near confounded, and in haste,
Falling full lowly prostrate, pay my vows.
Of Friends and Friendship.
AS Dice run most by paires, and shun excess*
So few friends love best, when more, love less.
Friendship like Gold, too thin when beaten forth,
Becomes less active, weakens in the worth.
As Dice though white, their foul spots cannot lack:
So friends, in friends, must wink at faults though black.
They must again nor slye Bar-cater-treyes,
Nor Fullomes be, to win thy wicked ways;
But fairly run, be quadrat, and sincere,
And still the same; swayed nor by hope, nor fear.
As Sice-ace throw'n are friends still as before,
So friends though rich, must still love friends though poor;
This world to no such certainty advances,
But there may come a cast may chang their chances;
They must conclude their state here like the Dice,
Where now the Sice is Ace, now Ace the Sice:
And thus the deadliest Drug, and justly hated,
May yet turn cordial, if but calcinated,
Custom discarded.
WE are at play, and Gamesters till our grave^
Our Saints, and Sabaths, are like Queens an
The rest with Martha, do but many things: ( Kings
Only our Wakes, and Markets, play the knaves.
Time is the pack, our days are several cards,
And Custom a groome-porter void of shame,
A reverend hoary Rook (forsooth) awards,
That his Tradition must command our game.
Custom (I say) more gray by far than wise,
Thus cheats us in our play my lovely dear:
But let us cautive be at length, and bear
Room of this current, crossing common guise.
Let us at length our Sabaths so dispend,
That piercing farther then the formal skin
Of shifting suits, and Linen; they contend
To be Religious, glorious eke within.
At length our mirth so manage, and employ,
That as each earthly fire with swift ascent,
Moves to his upper proper Element:
This also may relate to heavenly joy.
Let not our balance, not our bargains, know
Or knave, or false five-finger; to divine
Of wealth by these attained, it melts like snow:
Leaving the place all dirt, where it has lain.
Let us each card, even every common day,
So cautively dispose, that all our weeks,
Abound with sacred Murnivalls and Gleeks;
So dearest we shall purchase by our play
And though convicious custom, seeks to cheat,
And slily rook it, win both game and set.
Of Affliction.
THe Cross is both a step dame, and a mother;
Some men it kills, and some again it cures:
Like fire it some consumes, it purges other;
Full often ill, and well full often enures.
A righteous man that does affliction meet,
Moulds into his foil, gives fairer fire;
Makes it his rise, his wing to help him higher;
So Spices when most beaten, are most sweet.
Again, the ruffling height of weaker souls,
It tempers sweetly; cuts the comb of pride,
That else would soon be perking; only fools
Are still the same in many a Mortar brayed:
And by such iron pestles, as will grind
Them small at length, as dust before the wind.
Funeral Tears.
I Had my the other half, and 'twas as white
As Miniver, or Snow, before it light
Upon the ground; so neat in every part,
And then withal charessing so my heart,
That now I neither envied Crassus gold,
Nor Cossus garlands; with so wanyfold
Importancies enabling me, that now
I had a pair of hearts, my hands but two,
Were multiplied to four, likewise my feet,
Such Alter-Idems turning; of so knit
Commist a fellow-feeling, no disease,
Could either single toe, or fingar seize,
But all were sufferers. Then could I vant
Of likewise doubly five concomitant,
As brisk, and active senses; nay my soul
So doubled was, and in a word, even all
My trim at large, that now I could discourse,
Urge pro and con, communicate, converse,
All with my double self; nor knew the fell
Extent of solitude. Even strange to tell,
I now so clung an Individium was,
So fix at home, and yet so bivious
At the same time, and far abroad; that now,
While ranging with my hounds, or with my plough,
In the circumference; yet was I still
At home upon my center; could be while
At The ^^me of my Mansion house.
Popes, likewise at Paris. To proceed,
So beneficial was my being tied
In Hymen's rosy bands, that now my hope
Was propagation, and the rearing up
A Tree of such Descendents; so repleat
With commendable fruit, as should relate
My Name beyond mine Vrne. Lo this the trance,
The whilome portion, did so high advance,
Damask and dress my cup; thus was I clad,
In gold and sca^let. but now sit full sad
Upon the Dunghill; death implacable,
Has with the sorrows of unhappy sable
So roughly hampered me; that my recruits,
Conspicuous increments, and double suits,
Being deducted; npw I dwindled am
To poor again, and single; to become
Half under ground; where rest thy self in peace,
My dearest the other part; o rest, and cease
From all thy terrene labors, with a guard
Of blessed Angels, keeping watch and ward,
About thee constantly; and when my pulse
(So wound up in the womb, by that excelse
Celestial Architect,) the tale has run
Of minutes here in charge; has fully spun
Of Clothoes Distaffe; be my relics laid,
So near to thine, that withered when, and dried,
From moist and viscuous; even our crumbling dust,
May blend promiscuously: till when the just
Shine as the Firmament, and having turned
Many to righteousness, are as (...),
As glorious as the stars; we rise anew,
(By that omnipotence that can subdue
All things unto it self) as heretofore,
And ere our love dissever'd; rendering store
Of humble and eternal praise, to him
That sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb.
A MEDITATION UPON The Decease of those truly Noble LORDS under-named.
So so, let Babel, Edom, shoot like those
In Harvest at our loss* with mocks and mowes,
Tell it in Gath; thus adding deep, to deep,
Wormwood to bitterness; yet God will keep
His darling from the Dog, can out of stones
Raise Abraham children. he that interpones
So for his Church, though Dorcet, Hamilton,
Southampton, Oxford, and Belfast, be gone
The way of flesh and blood, will sooner yet
His covenant with day and night forget,
The sail to Sion; not the squallidest
Sea Monsters, but they gently draw the breast^,
Suckling their young; or if a mother can
Forget her child, yet God is love in grain;
Will vindicate his Turtle-Dov^, nay cover
Her wings with silver, and her feathers over
With yellow Gold. Nor Babell be so perk,
At some thus of the Temples carved work,
For sin deducted us; we but with rods,
Thou shall be whipped with Scorpions; and in Gods
Right hand there is a cup, the dregs whereof
Shall be thy portion; Ahabs Ivory roof,
And even the Ezekiel 27. 11.
Tyrean Turrets, built so high,
That Eagles at a lower random fly,
And the Goliah's there in Sentinel,
Are lessened even to (a) Gammadims; must feel
His line of vengeance, who could so divide
Our Succoth, meet our Schechem: and o ride
On prosperously, thou fairer far then men;
Girding thy sword thus, for thy right hand, then
Shall teach thee terrible things; shall thresh the horns
Of our fierce Bullocks, rabbid Unicorns,
Like Wheat of Madmanah. Ride on, ride on,
Strengthening the feeble knees, and every bone,
That thou have broken; still they shake the head,
Cry so so would we have it, eat like bread
Thy people up; and then the late decease
Of these heroic Lords, diruted has
As many of our Bars, has made our breach
More desperate; o be gracious then, and reach
Thy sovereign flaggons; let no clouds return
After the rain; and for the stakes out-worn
Thus in the service of thy Tabeenacle,
Distribute thousands; Bless, o bless the tackle
Of thy poor laboring Ark, and crown her toil,
With Arrarat, and her high places; while
Our mighty Hunters, despicably melt
Like fat of Lambs, or be like water spilt,
Nor to be gathered up again; else will
Thine enemies blaspheme, upbrayding still
The promise of his coming; I, and say
To day shall jove it, as did yesterday,
And in far greater measure; bow thine ear,
Thou good and glorious Cherub-rider, hear,
And answer us; how long? how long o Lord?
O bare thine arm again, and draw thy sword.
A RELATION Of the Tempest dispersing us in the Bay of BISCAY, at our
unfortunate Voyage toward Cales Males, An. 1625.
THe general hemisphere was thick, was all
In sullen ash color; when straight a shoale
Of ominous Pork-pisces, drove through the fleet:
And the fierce Ruffin Boreas, swore it meet,
Each sail should strike; owning the Atlantic main
Likewife in sovereignty: then issued rain,
The wind grew ^st'rous, sea began to roar
Like a lug'd monster, to disclose a sour
Outrageous surface; and where other nights,
The mantling billow shone but Chrysolites;
But sole with spangs and gliding lights, enchas'd
The gentler wave: now as an army vast,
About us quartered lay, our general ken
Was full of horrid fire, the fretfull brine,
Upon a thousand mountains, far and near,
Like burning Becons hung; and every where
So much combustion, that benevolent
A Poetical Sea-nymph, so named, a placandis fluctihus.
Cymodoce, for very angu^sh, rent
Her seagreen hair; nor any Sea-calves.
Phoce wild, ^ Vide fol.

No savadgest (b) Amphibium, but impelled
With horror, fled a shore: no boisterous Whale,
Incorrigible A horrible fish, enemy to the Whale, so called, as Mi^sheu says,
ab Orcadibus insulis ubi maxim vivunt.
Orke, or other fell
(a) Phiontides; but now they shot for dread
Into the bottom owse. O who may read
What various bedlamry, what worlds of woe,
A storm imposes; to the deep below e Such creatures as nature has made
deadly euemies each to other.

Our ships were thrown, and then again, so soon
So high, as if the same Seamen call the place where a ship rides or sails,
her bitth.
Birth with the Moon
To have, or glorious Jasons ship, after made a constellation.
Argo. But observe
In earthquakes, how the strongest buildings swerve,
Totter, cast firebrarnds, and all their loose
Vtensils, round promiseuously; lo thus
Did our poor Fleet so The Sea-term for reeling and swaying up and down.
feel on, that throughout
The decks all stowage, with our selves to boot,
From side to side in medley flew: and even
So was the great Anne Royal likewise driven
Amid the frantic waves, to roll and reele,
And toss, and tumble up her mighty keele,
That parcel of her Two pieces of Ordinance broke loose in her* Gun-room, but
by intershocking, and so poysing each other, remounted without further danger.
brazen bandogs, broke
Through all their ties; and but with mutual shock,
Poysing each other; like the Vipers young,
(Turned into paricids,) had split her strong
And massy ribs. Nor could the rest but mourn
Like infortunities; our long-boats, torn
From their big The Rops where with they were towed; perhaps derived from
Hauri^, or else rather named Halsers, and isluing from Halen in Dutch to draw.
Hawsers, rudely bandied were
By waves, and monsters; for the Little vessels which attend as pages upon the
greater ^^^p^ and perhap^ so named, because better making use of any wind* and
catching it to their advantage
Catches there,
Some could Sea-mewes, make a shift to live
In this combustion: othersome, declive
And broken ways not brooking, over-wrought,
And fiercely swalowd were. our We borrow this from the Nether ands, where
itim orts as much as Scapha, a ship-boat a Canowe; but use it improperly for a
Horse-boat
Prams distraught,
Cuff'd up and down, and racked with several seas
Both fore The Sea-phrase for before and after the mast.
and aft'; were driven to lose, and leaze
Their lading, with the wilder Hypotams.
Nay yet more fatal, opening al her seams,
The poor long-Robert foundered was, gave over,
Sunk in the weathers stresse: and now what more
Can These three Cadtains wreswallow'd in her.
Fisher, Hacket, Gerling, but attend
While the sea yields her dead? that I transcend
Expense of A ship is then in her trim, when furnished, with all other requisits
proportionable to her burden.
trim, and shipping, lo this storm
How grown, yet wrought a further; and the worm
Of conscience startled so, that who while-ere
With all his canvase out, could snugly bear
Up an ill-boading course, now springs his ^n the starboord laguage, falls from
his course.
luffe;
Cries guiliy Lord, and pardon; coats of buffe,
H^gh tempered corslets, are too weak to ward
The worm of conscience; and how galliard
Luxurio lately was, yet now he lowes
His sail close to the board; *now humbly throws
Off Liviaes hair, and his Corinna's ring,
To leeward over, wisely husbanding
Oil to his lamp; now as the righteous dye,
Likewise will he. so horrid was and high,
This spiritual The sudden and furions tempests about the West Indies are thus
named.
Fura-cane; that on his lees,
Though fell I was informed of one amongst us, so perplexed wiih the storm,
that he voluntarily acknowledged himself guilty of particide.
Basianus for a time may freeze,
And seem to settle; here he turns again
Thick, and bemudder'd; like the clamorous maine,
Casting up stones and dirt: his faeces boil
Up now for vent, making him perbrake vile
Prodigious sins. This was the storm, thus great,
Thus ruthlesse, double thus, nor to be beat
Out, but in many an hour; thus went we down
To sea in ships, had business upon
Great waters, saw the wonders of the deep;
And thus again, though Baal perhaps may sleep,
Or seriously be talking, nor discern
His distant contumacious; yet we learn
That God is omni-present, has his way
Even in the while-wind, in the furious sea;
In even the toughest conscience: and how sure
A Jonas in the cradle of secure
Apostasy be lulled, though even his bed
Of the most curious thistle-down be made,
Or that of silver Swans; yet if the fair
Tindaride, shall with a civil war
Imbroyle the shrouds; and This kind of blaze skipping by night among the
tackling, is in French Furole; coming single, i^ was thought to be castor, and
a dangerous Omen; when double, castor and Pollux, badge of Saint Paul's ship.
Acts 28. 11. and very auspicious* if there sallied a third light, this was held
to be Hellen, as fatal as ever, and prognosticating extremity of weather; the
first two are now named S. Nicholas and S. Hermes.
Hellen chasing thence
Her brothers of beningner influence,
Vnkennels all the winter winds, and billows;
Mauger the softest lullabies, and pillowes,
He wakes; and finds his cradle now at last,
Far worse then that, upon the topling mast.
THE Hedgehog combatant, presented, and applied.
WHen I survay (poor wretch) thy several soes, Though he be in his round
posture, and with all his Pipes charged; yet (as Topsall relates it) The Fox
finding some little accesle about his face, licks him there, till with the
flattery he opens himself, and then se^ses him.

Me thinks it does pathetic'ly disclose
Mine own Militia; for with open Mart,
As man pursues thee, as the Fox with Art,
Allayes thy martial fury, falsely licks
Thy life away; and Serpent also seeks
It as implacably: Lo thus conspire
Both Ammon, Ameleck, and those of Tire.
The world, the Flesh, and that prodigous great
Red Dragon, with his tail that can defeat
The very Stars; so these I say concur
To slay my silly soul: were it a war,
Though with some such as hungry Lions wage,
And evening Wolves, or all whose Quivers rage
Like open Sepulchers; there might be yet
Some hope perhaps, some little planke to set
Me safe even after shipwreck: But to grapple,
And intershock am I with him, whose apple
Defeated Eve her self; I daily cope
With many a horrid squadron, many a troop
Of fierce and fiery Darts, that charge me home,
And often through: Alas wretch that I am!
Where shall I seek for succor? who can stave
This roaring rabble off? o help, and save,
Thou God of Battles; else am I but built
Upon the silly sand, but water spilt.
Of Drunkenness.
AS Willoughs noted so for tippling Trees,
Are barren, and but badges of disgrace;
As Fennes and Marshes, yield but nipping flies,
But venomous fogges, and reptil's, bad and base:
Lo thus the boundless Independent shot,
Begets as sundry forms, and often as vile;
As Phoebus does, when with embraces hot,
He beds the moist salacious mud of Nyle.
It changes some to Struthions, and as those
Forget their eggs, their actions so do these;
Demanding when they wake, how came the blows,
What have we done, they should our weapons seize?
Some men it does to mimick anticks fool;
Change some to subtle Foxes, that employ
Their cups as Crucibles, wherein to boil,
To sublimate a skill, to cosen by.
Some for obstreperous Geese it does design.
Fills some with such Saltpeter, that disputing
Of but some hair, or Mathematicke line,
They take immediate fire, with blood confuting.
Some to such honey-suckles sweet it turns,
With often vows, that about every wight
They twine themselves. And some with lust so burns,
They deem each dirtie cloud, a I^uo bright.
Nay, yet again, and further, some it fuddles,
To senseless Conduits, only fit to piss,
And to be pissed against: To Monsters, puddles,
And Statues many, quadrat but for this.
Lo, Pythagore; lo here the transmigration,
Thou might have dreamt of, for with brutish souls
It thus imbroyles us: Oaks of most elation,
With many blows fall; Reason so with bowls.
Up then ye base Borachioes, call excess,
But an insideous Circe, but presaging
A brutish transformation, even no less
Then in the soul it self, and thus engaging
Her everlasting bliss: Up keep a dyot;
Does ought kill soul and body both? yes, riot.
The Widows Warning.
BE wise, and take no churlish Clown,
Nor blend with flocks, thy Thistle-down
Choose not for outside, shun each lover
But golden Ludgate-like, in cover.
The Ruffin that can swear and swell,
And covenant with death and hell,
Prefer not: nor the Fox that preyes
In covert, and in broken ways.
Choose not for wealth, where other things
But passant are; yet this has wings.
Nor any piece of Bombaste choose,
That with his Place, and Title sues;
Taking herein the greater care,
Because they now are chapmans ware.
Take not a Husband by report;
Examine first his head, his heart,
His Conscience, pierce him to the Lees;
Mark how each joint of his agrees,
And jumps with thine; for if they vary,
The Priest that does your bodies marry,
But glewes a Potsheard. In a word,
If thou can marrow with a Bird
Of thine own feather, one whose wars
Spiritual be, whose aim is stars;
Whose neatly timber'd limbs are lined,
With as polite, as rich a mind:
This is the wight, and haste thee Jane,
To yield him back his Rib again.
An Epitaph of Mris Prudence Meredith, a good soul, in a defective body.
IN an uneasy room her soul was pent,
And had (while here) a hard imprisonment
Within the Body; nor could Prudens, but
Rejoice to leave her little crumpled knot
Of flesh and blood, that narrow jayle of hers;
For such a relaxation, as inferrs
Likewise at last, another kind of new
Spiritual Body, beautified with true,
With precious Liniaments; and of privation,
Of hunger, sickness, death, and mutulation
Impassible; I say she could not choose
In faith and reason, but avouch her wooes
Now at an end; But chearely leave her breath;
And thus had Meredith, a merry death.
A farewell to the Wars.
Disloyal flesh and blood, how has the Sun
Both his direct, and oblique hitching course,
Full often through the heavenly girdle run,
Since our so plighted love, that naught could force,
Or puzzle it; and do thou now deceive me?
Now at the Qu, the clinke of honor leave me?
Our Mars, in rust and darkness lately shut,
Yet now upon the glorious wings of Fame,
Pitches his Tent; Our bravest spirits, put
Now for the Goal of honor; to be lame
And crasie now, while medalls, double pays,
Victorious Belts, and Crowns, shall others raise,
Is this the troth of friends? but then again,
What chimicall extraction, reach of Art,
May limit nature? and with such a train
Of weaknings, does our age it self impart;
Such Pal^ies, Cramps, Ciaticks, and Catars,
It baffles action, wars even with the wars.
Submit we then, the Moon her empty lap
Again enlightens, and our Winter trees
Have yet another rising of the sap;
But man when once declining, by degrees,
By peece-meale dru^ken, droop, and dwindle must,
Till he be crumbled to his fatal dust.
The first tooth that he draws, denounces him
For past his best, and not a sinew strained,
Or ligament, or humor out of trim,
But so produces age; that lastly main'd
In all his structure, warping in his ties,
And several nails, he druckens hence, and dies.
Submit we then I say, the Corslet quitting,
For a retired Sedentary course:
Now not the Pike, the Pen is rather fitting;
This alludes to the French Proverb, Quiter le plume pur dor^ir sur le dure.
The feathers, not the ground; you brood of Mars
On still and thrive, while thus the mouldering stayers
Of age, advise and lead me to my prayers.
FINIS.
OF PRAYER
THE most pathetick richest language, chosen
To hang in ears of Emperors, and Kings,
Is but a tinkling Cymball; does but cosen
The fancy for a while, and then has wings:
Prayer heaped up, and over does reply,
When other words, but drop, and droop, and dye:
All other words retayle but Saffron ware,
Are of an impotent, a clamorous sound;
But doe-littles, but petty Chapmen are,
And Petty-foggers: Whereas Prayer is found
The Staple-Merchant, prosecuting even
A Trade in gross, by wholesale, and for heaven.
It Is of such efficac'e, and with such store
Of Sacred pertinacy wrastles so,
Like zealous Jacob, that it gives not over,
But being blessed; without it lets not go:
Prayer faith, faith Christ, Christ heaven to us demises,
And thus the Climax of our joys arises.
Prayer forces all the peremptory chains
Of nature, all her gates, how Marble hard;
Can raise the dead, make Iron swim, detaines
The Sun himself: and like a Giant cheered
With Wine, though pressing on; has made him stay,
A never known before, a double day.
Who then will happy live, and blessed expire,
Both soul, and body, Temple-like imployes;
His Altar is his Heart, his Zeal the Fire;
His Soul the Priest, and Prayer the Sacrifice:
Nor is it Bullocks having horns and hooves;
But calvelings of the Lips, that God approves.
Up therefore Reader, let thy spirit feast
It self with often Prayer; submissely fall,
And like a Dauiel, thrice a day at least,
Thus sat thy soul; or rather like a Paul,
Be praying always; it is celestial meat:
Up therefore Reader, therefore up and eat.
ANOTHER.
Look as a Beggar by the highways side,
Some little child does in her bosom take,
Hoping though she her self may be denied,
Yet to get something for the Infants sake;
And as Themistocles, when having done
Admetus much displeasure, many harms;
Sought not for grace, but having first his Son,
His only Son, infolded in his arms:
So when thou prayest, bring but thy Jesus by thee,
This Babe, this Son; and God will nere deny thee.
PARERGON.
AND now my little Book, my little Birth,
I know not how thou came into my womb;
Some other agent surely brought thee forth,
Between thy knees; or else thy ( * Or the Secundine, wherein the child is
wrapped while in the womb.
Shilo) some
A kind of Sepulchral stone, in short time consuming the body enclosed.
Sartophagus had turned, and to thy tomb.
If ought within thee, be reputed worth
The name of square; yet I am but a This differs from a square by having the
angles of it indirect: when the side angles are less extended than the rest,
and still shorte^, it is a fulfill, or splindle.
Rhombe,
But a poor fusill; and must waive the Bays:
Giving to Heaven; to God alone the praise.
G. T.
FINIS.

