AN ENCOMIASTCK, OR, ELEGIACK ENVMERATION Of the Noble ACHIEVEMENTS, and
Unparalled SERVICES, done at LAND and SEA, BY THAT TRULY HONORABLE GENERAL,
ROBERT BLAKE Esquire Late one of his HIGHNES'S GENERALS at Sea; who after nine
years Indefatigable SERVICE in that high Employment, Exchanged this Earthly
TABERNACLE, for an Eternal HOUSE, Not made with hands, Blessedly dying in the
Lord, in Plymouth Sound, September the seventh, 1657. AGED 59.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, 1658.

AN ENCOMIASTICK, OR, Elegiack Enumeration of the Noble Atcheivements, and
unparalled SERVICES, done at Land and Sea, by that truly Honorable GENERAL.
ROBERT BLAKE, Esquire
REnowned Blake, what Trumpet may be found,
That can thy matchless Praises duly sound?
Or what Seraphick Pen, that can set forth,
In fitting measures, thy transcendent Worth?
And justly warble forth, in saddest strains,
Thy death, and loss thereby the Land sustaines?
Is that Sidneian spirit, with his dust,
Extinct? or for this mournful Subject must
Heroic Spencer, and that sweet Divine
Dubartas, raised be from their resting Shryne?
Thy signal unexampled Acts to sing;
Of which the whole World does already ring;
Which if in order we must needs recount,
Our mean unpolisht Quill they far surmount,
That to thy merit we shall in debt remain,
So great a sum not able to attain:
Leaving a Richer pen the same to pay,
Whilst in the Common stock our Mite we lay.
When first Bellona did fair Albion greet
With dreadful Larums in the open street,
And when that high and Roman-like dispute
Of the Militia, did in field recruit
Two Armies, t'wixt the late unhappy King
And Parliament, from whence as from a spring,
Ran Seas of blood throughout this Isle, which had
Drowned all, but that Jehovah it forbad.
Commissions of Array are issued out,
Which does disturb the trembling land throughout
Blake now stands up without delay or fear,
Against the Tyrannick Levies does appear;
And with those noble Patriots of the West,
A Captain of stout Foot, himself addressed
With their associate Troops to march and face
The Royal forces, who with nimble pace
Quitting the field, to Sherborne do retreat,
That ancient Castle, Digbies stately Seat:
From thence are forced with tedious March to fly,
To the Cornubian Mountains strong and high,
And there divided, some away do post,
Through swelling Severn, to the Cambrian Coast
And fenced Hills of Wales, for shelter where
The old Britains by the Romans chased were.
So after many signal proofs shown forth,
Of his Heroic prowess and true Worth,
At Bodmyn, Bristoll, and at Launsdown fight,
And at Bridgewater (where he first saw Light)
Though by just Providence, and Heavens Decree,
We were denied a Conquest yet to see,
And Royal Charles had subjugate the West,
And two full Winters, had the same possessed.
He now arriveth to the Council great,
Thereof a Member, to consult and treat,
Of State-concernments (where sometimes did vote
His grave Progenitors, there to promote
The common good) and so with great Applause,
Amongst other Worthies, he that public cause,
Twixt Prince and People then in high Debate,
Is called with dint of Sword to vindicate.
And speedily on Neptunes Chariot sent,
Commander of a valiant Regiment,
Raised by stout Popham of Illustrious Rank,
And timely landing on the Western Bank.
I.
LYme to relieve, that old Maritime Seat
By faithful Celey kept, with hazard great,
Near gasping, as beleagur'd strongly by
A Rhenish Princes Army strong and high,
Formed of all Nations, who like ravenous Bears,
Thirst after English blood, whilst he prepares
Himself for Sallies, and through help divine
The bold Assailants slaies like herds of Swine:
Prince Maurice still recruits, still is repel'd
With loss of thousands, and at last compelled
To quit the Leagure with his Princely Train,
Not daring fiery Lyme to face again.
II.
HE having now paid to Jehovah high,
His vows and thanks for this first Victory,
In triumph hence does march, bent to set free,
The Neighboring places that in thraldom be,
(Assisted by stout Pie from Essex sent,
That Peer renowned, in Arms so eminent)
To that strong Castle founded by King Ine,
Of Saxon Race, seated as it were on Rhyne,
Or rather Eden sweet, a land so blessed,
Called vulgarly, The Garden of the West.
And herein yet more happy, that brave Blake,
His first breath in this fertile soil did take,
Against this strong hold, called Taunton, that fair town
(By highborn Stawell kept) he sits down,
Soon forcing the Besieged to submit
To his Conditions: They forthwith do quit
A Princely Garrison, stored plenteously
With all Provisions, here he worthily
Is now ordained Governor; but he,
As born to high atcheivements, will not be
Embas't with rest or sloth, but prudently
Foresees approaching storms; for suddenly
Great Forces under Wyndham are drawn out,
This growing Garrison to quell and rout;
Whilst with few men, but by him spirited,
And by his Fortitude and Wisdom led,
With sallies strong, the potent Foe he plies,
That with great loss, and greater shame he flies.
III.
YEt here the Royal Party will not rest,
But fresh alarums do him still infest,
On sudden, lo, a formidable Host
Commanded by the Cheiftains, and the most
Stout Greenfeild, Goring, Hopton, breathing out,
Naught else but fire and sword the camp throughout
Here might you hear the Irish Tories thunder,
More hideous threats then Cannon, that asunder
The Castle seemed to rend: Lo like a flood,
Great multitudes have broke the Line, now blood
Is like to dye fair Tone, or rather make
New Rivers in the streets, all lies at stake;
Women and Children, naught but ghastly death,
Beholding, and half dead, do gasp for breath.
Yet here great wonders wrought by those
Tauntonian Blades, the overflowing foes
Are bravely checked, and stopped at a Bay,
And forced to fight at pistol shot, by day
And night, from house to house, until the Foe
Repulst, such fury could not undergo:
Now are made good the words sometimes he spoke,
By inches they their bloody way should make,
And yet poor Souls, have lost their way at last,
As into darkness and confusion cast.
And when that Goring sent to him in scorn
A tatterd drum, (best suting their forlorn
Condition) for exchange of prisners, he
Them kindly treats, and quickly sets them free,
And like himself, or like that Greekish Prince,
The falling foe with kindness does convince:
This one exchange does to the other add,
Returns the Nuntio with new raiment cladd.
Yea to their great astonishment, upon
Their taking of a neighboring Garrison,
Insulting proudly with great threats and jeers,
The Churches bells he ringeth in their ears,
And thereby quickly checks their pride and rage,
Of their ensuing fall a sad presage.
Redoubted Welden lo, that man of Kent,
With seasonable succor hither sent,
From the hills appears: the harrast foe again
Does raise his seidge, and fairly leaves his slain
By thousands to their Mother Earth, to feed
The hungry worms, which looked before indeed
For other flesh, whilst mercy with strong hands
Out of the raging fire, pulls us as brands.
IV.
THe Kingly forces never rest nor cease,
From their implacate Wrath, which does increase,
Still hotly thirsting for the blood of those,
Who merely in their own defense arose
Fresh Armies now are levied, to pull down
The haughty courage of this sturdy Town,
By a third sidge more dreadful then the rest,
Which kindles flames of valor in the breast
Of this stout Hector, made for dangers great,
Like that great Greek that did Darius beat.
Here Goring chief Commander, vows to lay
His bones, and not retreat or march away,
Till that proud Castle were reduced, just then
When Naseby batrell wavering stood, and when
He straightly summond was by royal call,
To aid his King on that day vertical.
The gallant Governor well knowing all
These passages, together he does call
His Captains, cheares his warlike boys, who like
Lions fall on, and with amazement strike
The Royalists, whose stout heart will not yield,
Till mastered by a stouter in the field.
Here now that joyful sound of Naseby fight
Was heard, like sweetest music for delight,
After sad thunder-cracks let England sing
Still that appealing victory, and bring
Fresh Laurells to adorn that glorious field,
Whilst to the Almighty we due praises yield.
Now noble Fairfax does victoriously,
March to releeve the Western parts, that lie
Oppressed; the same at once releives, and meets
Another Conquest in brave Taunton streets,
Achieved by Blake, who solemn Thanks ordaines,
Unto the highest, who for ever reigns.
V.
ANd now to march forthwith he does prepare
To Dunster, that strong towering castle, where
The wasting pestilence of late did rage,
Which God was pleased on his approach to assuage,
The foes great obstinacy did him move,
To spring a Mine: the lofty walls above
Mount in the Air, some dead, some living are,
In those great heaps blown up, the fruits of War,
At length dear Blake to thee they did resign,
This Castle, by rendition now made thine.
Through Heavens fair aspect now, auspicious Peace,
Begins to spring, and flagrant arms to cease;
To that great Senate, he from bloody fights
Returns, there to assert the peoples rights,
And he that was a warrior stout of late,
Does now consult of arduous things of State;
Well hoping in the end the sword to see,
Into a pruning hook might turned be.
VI.
BUt lo, sad Rumors from the British Main,
Our Fleet revolted is, which does a train
Of troubles new, and great combustions breed;
For our great sins, a just vindictive meed:
Now this brave Senator must once again,
Harness himself, more honor yet to gain
For his great merit elected General,
And as the first fruits of this public call,
Those Princely pirates from Kingsale does rout,
Rupert and Maurice both, two Princes stout;
From thence he to the Herculean straights does chase
These German Exiles, who from place to place
Pursued. Within the Hetrurian seas (which do
The worlds terrestrial Globe divide in two)
Are forced with their winged fleet to fly
Unto the Caribean Isles, to lie
At mercy of the deep, and on that coast,
The greatest part of those great Ships, yea most
Of those seduc't souls, with Prince Maurice sink,
As lead in mighty waters, (sad to think)
VII.
HE now for Yagus banks does streer his fleet,
And with his thundering squadrons Lisbon greet,
Which did the English so much wrong of late,
And for it must account unto the State;
Mean while those rich Brasilian Ships arrive,
Which with nine others, outward bound do strive
Him to escapein vain, near all made prize
By his successful fleet, who like a wise,
As well as gallant Captain, by his care,
For this great spoil, a Convoy does prepare,
With this mellifluous Trophy from Brasill,
Which with its sweetness did all England fill,
In triumph homewards he his course does bend,
Where public service does him still attend,
Yea to his praise, this may recorded be,
That as the end of wars is peace, so he
(After full reparation by them made
To the English) did restore both peace and trade.
VIII.
A Famous Island, and of great import
To England, startled with the loud report
Of his amazing Actions, trembling stands:
To this strong Isle begirt with Rocks and Sands,
He sails, and Greenvil summons, (that stout Knight
Then chief Commander there) the State to right
By his surrender, or he must be sure
The fury of his valiant arm endure.
Whilst Trump then hovering with his Fleet, in vain
Solicits with vast sums the same to gain:
At length upon Blakes sight he does retreat,
Or rather fly by this Commander great,
Now S^illy is reduced to the State,
And joy of English Merchants, who of late
Could not for fear of this new Dunkirk trade,
So rich and high, by warlike plundrings made.
IX.
IMpregnate Dunkirk, once our friend, but now
Our foe, if noble, will with homage bow
To him, as twere once holding in his hands
The scales of France and Spain on either Sands,
As Umpire, he decides and weighes the town,
Freely to Spain, for Englands great renown,
Though that Ledean Marquess did him treat*
And him carrest in vain with presents great;
Yet not without a rich and glorious prize
As unto them, so to himself, whose wise
And brave couduct, six warlike Ships did seize,
No less then Princes style we two of these;
Great Neptune with his triple Scepter dread,
Princess Maria eke with crowned head,
All captive led by this great Admiral,
Which did the conquered French so much appall.
X.
NOr can we Jersey Isle in silence pass,
So near an hostile Coast that seated was,
And by a mighty Monarch then protected,
From his black storms, yet was by him subjected;
Which France beholding, from her lofty strand,
At such portentous acts, does trembling stand,
And seeing Holland since in humble wise
Strike to our Flag, her Peace of England buys.
XI.
HE yet engaged is in more dreadful fights,
Which all the World, on every cost affrights,
New fires of war betwitx two protestant
And neighbor Nations kindled are, which want
Not Romes fomenters, which the British, French,
And the Batavian sea's, could hardly quench,
That thunder striking, and Dutch Admiral,
Which Scilly late did court, that Hanniball,
With fair pretexts, attempteth to surprise
Our Royal Downs, a sore unto his eyes.
Our watchful Scipio, now in the great James,
By him made greater, soon appears and tames
The Belgic Lion, with his roaring whelps,
Though three to one, the Lord of Hosts still helps
Such as on him in just appeals depend,
And to that righteous Judge their cause commend.
XII.
OUr new made foe hence beaten now we see;
Whose fate pursues them humbled more to be,
The boundless love of trade, transports on post
These famous Merchants to the Orcadian coast,
To force our Calidonian fishes there,
Of whose bones, as they bruit, first founded were
The vvalls of Amsterdam, that Magazine
On Texel Bancks, which to their Fleet has been.
He with his Eagle fleet soon them pursues,
Their numerous men of war sinks and subdues,
The Busses takes, the one his Justice feels,
The other tastes his mercy, hence he wheels
His winged frigots, when our ancient right
He had restored by his unconquered might,
And so with shoutings homeward sails, where lo
More dismal actions he must undergo.
XIII.
ANd shall we Portland name, ah Portland fight,
Where mortal wound first seized this noble Wight?
Yet to his glory, where behold the high
And mighty States brought low, he gallantly
Triumphing sails through seas of Belgic blood,
Though wounded, whilst the Sun eclipsed stood,
Through that black storm, and that tempestuous fight
Three winters days, (like a continual night)
Which lasted, whilst that he the day to gain,
Does in his grisly wounds on deck remain,
As in triumphall chair, would not retire
For his more speedy cure, but is on fire,
And thereby with new courage does inflame
His English Trojans, to their lasting fame,
But terror of the foe, who now orethrown
Post homewards, there this fatal blow to moan:
But stay my Muse, here noble Monck we must
And gallant Dean, salute with honor just,
His brave compeers, whose gallantry shown here,
Posterity in leaves of Fame may hear.
XIV.
ANd after some small intervall of rest,
Scarce cured, he buckles for the last contest
Against the Dutch, though much impaired by
His martial hurts, received formerly;
Inducing him to say, he was more fit,
For some sick Hospital, then brave Dewit
And valiant Trump to fight, yet he again
With mind above his strength, and not in vain
Takes Neptunes field, and on the Flemish flood,
Releives brave D^an and Monck, engaged in blood,
Whose valiant Acts, and high atcheivements then
In that sharp fight, deserve a golden p^n:
The English Standard then by Blake displaid
In Lawreat Essex, finds the foe dismayed.
Here now in sight of both the Nations, you
Great earthquakes on each shore, might sadly view,
Made by those horrid thunders which did quell
Their Navy, where their chiefest Pillar fell,
With whose dear blood the greatest victory
Was gained by our Fleet, for that hereby
Twixt ancient friends is wrought a lasting peace,
For mutual Commerce, and their joys increase:
His former wish he now fullfill'd does see,
So often by him mentioned, that as he
The Tragic prologue of this war has seen,
So might a happy period, which has been
Accomplished in his eyes: Let Spain and Rome
Hence read with grief and rage their fatal doom.
XV.
ANd now we see the seat of ghastly war,
Removed from home to foreign countries far
Unto a wrathful foe inveterate,
Whose Character in bloody lines bear Date
From Eighty eight; and so unwearied Blake
Plowes up the Southern seas, his way to make,
And in those boistrous floods, to him well known
Before proud Cadiz strand, as on his own,
One Winter full did ride, which Drake did never,
Nor Hawkins, or brave Forbisher endeavor,
Nor yet the hardy Dutch, (whose proper seat
And Element, is in the Waters great)
Did ere assay; though all the World abroad,
And both the Indies, be their common Road.
XVI.
PRoud Malega, how was thy roaring mouth
Muzled by him the terror of the south,
When thy strong mould was seized, thy thundering guns
Speekt up, and all the town affrighted runs,
Thy warlike fleet, though scaping storms and winds
Abroad, no harbor in thy Harbor finds;
But are destroyed all in thy smoking Bay,
Unto his fiery Engines made a prey.
XVII.
HOw suddenly does Vigo now bemoan
The like disaster with a howling tone?
When Vulcan, Mars, and Neptune all conspire
Her Merchants and her men of War by fire
And sword to spoil: Whilst he does leave the Port
And Ships, all flaming in prodigious sort.
XVIII.
YEa Tunis that old pun^ick City quakes,
And at great distance strong Allarum takes,
As though the Roman Legions on their shore,
Appeared: the Turks are summond to restore
Our English goods and captives but refuse,
And therefore must expect no other news
Then Cannon peals, whilst he does seize their port,
And charge the Infidels up to their Fort.
Twelve stately ships of war, behold in flames
Consuming are, whereby he quickly tames,
Their Cham-like spirit by his unconquered power,
Whilst raging fires the Vessels do devour.
The poor Mahometans do trembling fly,
From their strong Holds to Mountains that were nigh
Whence like so many fiends of blackest hue,
(With scaring horrid faces) they migh view,
In those sulphurous fiery streams below,
A new Gehenna, to their greater woe.
A day so dark the Ottomanian feared
A fall, and the horned Moon in blood appeared,
That old Republic, and brave Virgin City,
Nere ravished yet by Warlike foe, though pity
So Romanized, that Virago stout,
Which at Lepanto fight the Turks did rout,
Fair Venice now with shouts does gratulate
The English Affrican, who now in state
From his late Conquest saileth by their shore,
Where loudest trumpets sound, where cannons rore
(Leading his ransomed ones the Christian slaves
From Turkish yoke, rescued as from their graves)
As if triumphant Caesar were in fight,
Returning now from the Pharsalian sight.
He leaving these poor Caitiffs to lament
This doleful loss, for more Exploits is bent.
XVIII.
BUt where was now the Iberian God, that should
Protect those Galleons huge so fraught with gold?
That the Peruvian mines exhaust were near,
The golden age again seemed to appear:
Was Baal journying then, or else asleep,
So great a treasure could no better keep?
Or did that Babylonish Prince now hope
To be installed fifth Monarck by the Pope?
And build a new Escuriall for so high
A Majesty? Lo all triumphantly,
In streams of Spanish blood near Cadiz sands,
Does flow into those still victorious hands
Of him and noble Mountague, his dear
Colleague, now honored to convoy and steer
This Princely Prize, and treasure so immense
Bound for the Elisian Thames, designed from thence
A Present, only for a Sovereign meet,
A Conqueror of Kings, whom now we greet,
A greater then that Macedonian Prince,
Or any Hero, that has ere been since;
For he did mostly barbarous foes defeat,
This the most civil, warlike, truly great,
With greatest joy uniting Nations three,
By threefold cord, not ever like to be
Dissolved, never yet so firm in any age,
One Law, one Faith, one Blood; which may presage
Fair Halcyon days, our British Annalls may
Cromwell the great, well style him from this day,
The midland seas, which many years him knevv,
And Tribute to him paid, bids now adieu,
To this European Ajax; never again
The like to see, while Sun and Moon remain.
XIX.
THe Islands falsely called fortunate,
Do trembling gaze, at their approaching fate,
And where is a Homer now, that fully may
His last stupendous act to life pourtray?
A Theme as noble, as the Trojan story,
Which filld all pens and ages with its glory.
He now against this scarlet whore of Rome,
As born to execute the written doom,
And as inspired (from all fear exempt)
The grand Canarian cross he does attempt,
Which had the Indian Mines some few days past,
Near drained, and now possessed those treasures vast:
Twice eight great warlike ships he does assail,
And up unto the Castle* walls does sail,
All that great fleet, those mighty Galleons he
With golden Argos burns (sad to see)
In those huge Bonfires made a Sacrifice
Unto the Bachanalian God: Whose eyes
Dim waxed to behold the Ocean wide
By those Aetnean fires almost dried,
To see such flames and unheard thunders hear
That Sancta Cruz, and all the Isle did fear
On that black day the world would be dissolved,
And in another Chaos be involved.
The Dolphins by those flashy clattrings scared,
From their own proper Region are debarred,
And forced to fall into a watery hell,
Their sad exile, there to bewail and tell.
The frighted foot which from the lined strand,
Saw seas of blood, now will no longer stand,
But from those fenced walls and bulwarks strong,
To lofty Tenariff did run, among
The craggy rocks and caves, themselves to hide,
Such blasting storms not able to abide.
What ailed thee great mountain and proud peeke,
That shelter for thy self thou now did seek?
Who to thy forlorn fugitives should be
A Sanctuary, when they fled to thee.
Why did thou quake, skie-daring mount, so high
That into Heaven thou presum'st to pry?
From the Creation, seeming to be fixed,
Above the middle Region, and there mixed
Amongst the stars, from fiery Meteors free,
Or did thou fear, that now fulfilled should be
That sacred Prophecy? that by the power
Of faith removed, the Seas should thee devour?
Those Indian silver Mines, and wealth so vast,
For Spanish Craesus hither sent, are fast
In durance kept, and like to perish here,
Made useless to their Masters, or in fear
Of English Frigots, that perhaps may seize
Those golden heaps, if they appear on seas.
XX.
HEnce fully fraught with glory, now he steeres
His course for Sally (where he soon appears)
That little Egypt, and most doleful Cell,
Which held some of our English Israel
In bonds; he makes there a noble peace,
And freely does the Christian slaves release,
Whence gone, he takes another glorious spoil,
Still providence on his designs does smile.
XXI.
A Little army of Canarian Dons,
From th Indies come, he takes, now in bonds
Attending this great Victor to perform
Their Obsequies to him in solemn form,
Who, after thousand storms, to which enured
He was, and noble wounds by him endurd,
Of which he languisht, now returned in peace
To English port, did there alas decease,
Yet gloriously, where he did sacrifice,
For us his dearest blood, deaths greatest prize,
When many hundreds he had taken of late,
Now to a Royal Chapel brought in State,
For his devotion ye'rst to him well known,
Amongst the Kings interred, and near to one,
That Prince of peace, which joined in Hymen's band
The two divided houses of our Land.
If now some British Plutarck kindly pressed
With love of virtue sparkling in his breast,
Should in historick style limme out this brave
And English Aristides, and from grave,
Redeem his memory, for his Renown,
This one thing more, (his worthy Gests to crown)
May added be, the glory of them all,
That during those long VVarres, wherein the fall
Of thousands he beheld, as many rise
To fortunes high, (true valors meed and prize)
Yet he post poning with heroic zeal,
His private interest to the public weal,
Himself would not advance by those vast spoils,
Still him attending from those bloody broiles,
(Though millions seized by his conduct so skilled
In arms and Counsel, the English Coffers filled)
Who with his native portion well content,
For his dear countries good, was gladly spent.
What Marble Pile, what Monument for thee,
Great Britains shield, Spains scourge, now raised shall be?
That may our English Heroes animate,
Thy matchles worth (brave Blake) to emulate;
And to succeeding times, eternize may
Thy name, and thee entitle from this day
A Saint devout, for learning Socrates,
A Cato just, for valor Hercules.
ANd thou great Oliver, thy sword gird on,
Ride forth and prosper, Truths great Champion,
Against that Romish beast, Jehovah send
Such Leaders still, thy high designs to attend:
That so that glorious work advanced so far,
Against proud Babel, by a holy war,
May under thy conduct yet farther thrive,
And to perfection in the end arrive,
Yea crowned with this Epinicion be
Great Babylon is fallen, and that by thee.
FINIS.

