THE TORY-POETS: A SATYR.

-- nunquam ne reponam?
Vexatus toties rauci Thesiede Codri.
Juven. Sat. 1. LONDON, Printed by R. Johnson. MDCLXXXII.

THE EPISTLE TO THE TORIES.
I Could find no fitter Persons to Dedicate this Poem to then your selves, and
that for several reasons; First because you account your selves men of Parts,
and Judges of Wit; and indeed (to keep the World in its usual Course) we will
yield you to be so; for in all ages some Fools have had preferment, mad Men
have been Judges, and Knaves have been Honorable: To talk Bawdy; whore, Lie,
etc. are your natural accomplishments; but those more solid endowments that
beautify a rational Creature, viz. Learning; and Exercise of right Reason, are
of little value to you, who can speak Nonscence by Patent, Slander by
Prerogative, and Lie by Commission: Judge of Wit then as much as you please,
since none but Fools and Knaves will be guided by your judgment: For it is well
enough known, that your Wit is as thin as your Skulls, and your Skulls as thin
as your Estates; and that thin enough all know. Take a Tory from a Pot of Ale,
and he is out of his Element; and when his Catalogue of Oaths in his common
place-Book are ended, he is as indisposed and unfit for any kind of Company, as
the Asses Mouth was for Food when it had been eating of Thistles. Another
reason may be, because it treats chiefly of your Champions, the Pillars of your
faction, the supporters of that great Mass of Knavish Politics that keeps
alive the Good Old Tory Cause; but I think (if you are no better Poets then you
are Politicians, and no better Statesmen then Divines) the late joint
endeavors of the Stage and Pulpit, will prove very ineffectual to the
accomplishment of your designs! a lack a day! what pity it is so much Labor
and Divine sweat should be spent for just nothing! that ever the zealous
Preacher should screw up his jaws, thump his Pulpit, and Divinely rail at Forty
one, and it have no other effect, then to serve instead of a pleasing murmur to
loll the drowsy females asleep, whilst all his Congregation of half-drunk
Bullies are devoutly snoaring in their Pews. But what damned incorrigible
wretches are these Whiggs, they are not moved at the least with the numberless
Satirical Epilogues and Prologues, that are roared out on the Stage:
Notwithstanding we have Plays stuffed as full of Burlesques upon the Ignoramus
Juries, the Salamanca Doctor, etc. as a Courtier is of Nonsenc and Knavery;
these headstrong wretches keep on their way, though the Whelps bark their guts
out* if they call them Rogues, Rebels, and Traitors, they turn a deaf ear to
all their clamours, and answer them (as wise men do fools) with silence. But
the final Catastrophe of our divisions will prove who were the Rebels; when
Plots shall be unravelled, and Court intrigues exposed to the view of the
world; when the private Machinations of indigent Clocks-combs shall be made
manifest, and truth shall once more appear on the Stage; then I doubt those
persons, who now go under the Name of Loyallists, will be as obscure as their
Knavery is now public. But all are Traitors now that speak against Arbitrary
Government; if they see their privileges, their rights, their liberties going
to be taken from them, they must hold their peace and sit down like contented
asses, and bear what burdens the Courtiers and a few small Statesmen will lay
on their Shoulders; and this must be born with Patience, and let the burden
gall our Shoulders nev^r so much, we are Rebels if we but so much as winch
under it; if a man hear bad Counsel given (which is the poison of Government)
he must hold his peace, and see those liberties left him free by his Ancestors
taken from him and his Posterity; he must contentedly see the Throne enslaved,
the Nobility Vassals, and the Commonalty lackey after a company of Arbitrary
Debauches, and if he show his dislike of it, he is a Rebel. But when the fatal
Dagger is about to pierce my sovereigns Breast, am I Rebel if I stop the blow?
Am I a Traitor if I discover the Designs and Plots of our Enemies against the
Government and my Prince? But you shall hear what even Mr. Bays himself speaks
of Arbitrary Government and those that, are the Supporters of it in his Spanish
Friar. page 61. Should not a lingering Fevour be removed;
Because it long has raged within my Blood?
Do I Rebel when I would thrust it out?
What, shall I think the World was made for one,
And men are born for Kings as Beasts for Men;
Not for Protection but to be devoured?
Mark those who dote on Arbitrary Power,
And you shall find'm either hot brained Youth
Or needy Bankrupts, servile in their greatness,
And Slaves to some, to Lord it over the rest.
O Baseness! to support a Tyrant Throne,
And crush your freeborn Brethren of the World:
Nay, to become a part of Usurpation;
To Espouse the Tyrants person and his crimes,
And, on a Tyrant, get a race of Tyrants
To be your Countries curse in after Ages.


Now if Mr. Bays dares go so far, I hope I (who have always an aversion to
wooden Shoos, and to be reckoned in the number of French Camels) may call them
Traitors, Rebels, Betrayers of their Country, egregious Knaves, and infamous
Scoundrels: But suppose (which Heaven grant may never come to pass) there
should be such a thing as Rebellion in England, we should then see how those
Gouty-Leg'd Devils, called Courtiers, would tilt at the R^bels; Then the awful
presence of Majesty must d^f^nd its self, while those Ingrates that have been
nourished by its favor do leave it succurless; for who are cherishers of such
a Faction but despicable pusillanimous wretch^s, Natural Cowards, that cannot
endure the Fatigues of a long and tedious Campaign, whether Honor calls forth
the Hero? But (as Mr. Bays says) they are needy Bankrupts, and tempted by
preferment; what wont such Whores-Birds do? How powerful are the Charms of
enticing Gold? Ah, what a Heavenly refreshment are a few Guinies to a decayed
Gentleman! even as delicious as the reverend Doctors Comfortable Importance is
to a languishing Divine. It Is only want, that makes a Loyal Tory, and so many
Mercinary Scriblers; and pray how long does their Loyalty last? even just as
long as their Coat and their Money; when the one is thread bare and the other
spent, and by their Loyalty they are in no hopes of procuring another, then for
a little cash they will cut the Throat of the best Lord in the Land, Whigg or
Tory, it is all one; men that are like to be Shipwrackt upon the Rock of Hunger
are desperate, but now none are His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, but such who are
daily drunk with drinking his Health, (though they cheat the Vintner for it)
and that never so well done, as when it is set of with the best flowrish in
their Rhetoric, a fashionable Dam me. But now I could heartily wish I had some
of Mr. Bays his confidence, that I might speak in the praise of my own Poem, as
he does of his, indeed a rotten Post covered with Brass goes through all
weathers, but I am no fond fool of my own Issue; I shall even speak not one
word in its commendation, but let it shift for praise in the World as it is
Brethren have done before it. I cannot expect any Tory should speak in its
praise, since it treats most of Fools and Knaves and then it is impossible they
should read it, but they must read their own Characters. Or how can I expect
any fvaour in the world, when the incomparable Absalom Senior was so spoken
against? but by whom was he spoken against, by whom, why by the nonsencical
Observator, and the thrice stupid Heraclitus; but I write not to please these
Idiots, if I please the best I have my end, and one smile of theirs is able to
weigh down all the others frowns.

THE TORY-POETS: A SATYR.
HAppy are they in Amorous Fields, that Rove
And Sing no other Songs then those of love;
Whose Verses treat of naught but careless case,
And in their Sonnets only strive to please:
Nature at first to men never arts did give,
But all untaught knew only how to live;
That word called Faction in a sullen Mood
Did hide its Face, or 'twas not understood:
But fleering fate does various Faces show,
And seasons change: and why mai'nt Mortals too?
To Fame or Infamy all men are born
And he is an Ass let us slip the lucky turn.
But who to power by Fate were never designed,
And yet endued with ambitious Mind
Will Natures precept break, and Gods wont own
Will ransack Temples, pull the Alters down,
Slander the Subject, and abuse the Crown.
So to our Plague a Factious Party's come,
The infantry of old Rebellious Rome,
And 'cause the Whelps for Hells intrigues should bawl,
The Devil came and dubbed them Tories all;
A party in the dismal Book of doom
Was damned e're made for all their sins to come.
This numerous Progeny does fill our Thames
As Frogs and Toads abound in Nilus streams,
And just like those the same effect they bring;
They Crawl from thence to Chambers of our King;
That was a single plague on Egypts men,
But this on us may vye with all their Ten:
This party first by close designs did rise,
By Plots, by Shams, and other forgeries,
'Til by immortal lies, immortal made
Sweetly sat down in Royal favors shade,
Where they their canting dirges sit and sing,
And every Puny Tory is a King.
Their Plot found out and dying 'gan to fail,
Oaths would not do; and shams would not prevail:
Now for a Cordial all begin to strive,
To fetch their dying Plot again to life:
Their former Evidences were dull tools,
And all their subtle Jesuits were but fools,
But next to the keen Wits they do address,
And they must Charm it up again in Verse.
The first they do Petition 's Mr. Bays,
So much extolled by Fools and vulgar Praise;
By lewd lascivious Verses, bawdy Rhymes,
Dubbed the sweet singing Poet of the times;
He the black Paths of Sin had traveled over
And found out Vices all unknown before,
To sins once hid in shades of gloomy Night,
He gave new Luster and reduced to Light.
His Muse was prostitute upon the Stage,
And 's Wife was Prostitute to all the age:
The Wife is Rich although the Husband Poor,
And he not honest, and she is a Whore,
An ill, deformed, senceless earthly load,
And he the Monster of the Muses road;
His shapeless Body hangs an hundred ways
The Poet looks just like a heap of Plays;
You shall not find through all the buzzing Town
So Ungentile, Unmannerly a Clown:
Though ugly, yet he vents a pleasing strain
For Nature never made a thing in vain.
If not for Priest, for Statesman he may do;
Bless us! are Poets Politicians too?
Or are the Muses mad and in their Heat
Send out their Poets Officers of State?
Or are the Lawyers Drunk and think it fit
That reason yield to that lewd thing, a Wit?
But private factious Plotters never heed
If their designs go on, who do the deed:
So engine Bays, the Tory-Plot to save
He first turns Fool, and then commences Knave:
But yet (methinks) I hear him e're he choose
In private p^rley with his Fustian Muse,
Base Muse! he says, with impudence can sing?
In scornful lines can thou revile a King?
With inky Clouds of lies, can thou obscure
An Hero's Glory infinitely pure?
Can thou call Politicians Fops and Fools?
Can ridicule the Arts of learned Schools?
Can dress up folly in a Garb so fit
That amongst Madmen it may pass for wit?
His Muse accustomed to such tricks as these
Gave her consent by holding of her Peace.
But he replied, --
Base abject slave to any of the Town
Who e're but Fops and Fools gave thee renown?
Can thou abuse that youthful Hero's fame,
That wide as the vast World has spread his name?
When he from Mastricht warlike Trophies bore,
Vollies of Praises echoed on the Shore;
Then every Brave his Offering did prepare
And Sacrifices to this God of War,
Then Io Peans by our Swains were sung,
And Peals of Triumph through our Cities rung;
But now his honor 's fullied and forgot
And all his Glory poisoned with a Plot,
Here hold, ingrate, recall his love to thee,
When fleg'd with Guynies he did let thee fly,
Impt with his favor thou did dare the brave
And every other Poet was thy Slave;
Think! with indulgent Grace it is he has been
The only Patron of thy Maximin;
Where then thine accents lies or did thou feign,
And only complement to draw in Coin;
So when to Damn was in her graces power,
She kindly smiled on the Indian Emperor.
Though dressed in silly Fustion he did go
In ugglier Clothes then e're at Monico;
So basely scratcht by thy corroding Pen,
The Indians would scarce know their Prince again,
Poor Montezuma in no hands secure
Creeps to her Alcove for a perfect cure,
There having Scanned the sense of every line
She hugged the nasty Indian 'cause 'twas thine
Then cheering up he ended the dispute;
Muses like Monarchs still are absolute;
Tempted by Gold, he lets his Satyr fly,
And swears that all within its Tallons dye;
He Huffs, and Struts, and Cocks an hundred ways
And damns the Whiggs 'cause they did damn his Plays
So raging once 'twas thought himself he would stabbed
'Cause Rochester Baptized him Poet Squab
And he had don't but that he would vowed before
After Rose-alley drubs he would never use weapon more,
When Coin is spent he sooths the beset Cit;
And lives on his old stock his mother wit;
Rubs up his rusty Muse and looks as big
As Crow in Gutter or ten penny Pig.
A Commonwealth he cries up to day,
To morrow Preaches Arbitrary sway;
Lampoons the Pringe, praises a Tyrants Laws
And gives Lust and Zeal the same applause;
And in one Breath, so quick his fancies be
He can speak Treason, and fart Loyalty;
From such fleet wills kind Heaven deliver me!
Read but his Plays and what else e're he writ
You Will find but little Judgment and less Wit;
If he dull Ravenscroft by chance excel
Thanks to old Nokes that humors it so well;
Thanks to the Scenes and Music for his Wit
Thanks to the Whores lie squeeking in the Pit.
That Bullies cannot hear, yet praise the Fact
And bravely Clap the Actor not the Act.
Shadwel and Settle are both Fools to Bays,
They have no bawdy Prologues to their Plays;
These silly Villains under a pretense
Of wit, deceive us and like men write sense.
Alas! says Bays, what are your Wies to me?
Chapman's a sad dull Rogue at Comedy;
Shirley's an Ass to write at such a rate
But I excel the whole Triumverate:
In all my worthy Plays show if you can
Such a rough Character as Solomon;
But though I have no Plot, and Verse be rough,
I say it is Wit, and that sure is enough.
The Laurel makes a Wit; a Brave, the Sword;
And all are wise men at a Council board;
S -- le's a Coward, 'cause fool Ut -- y fought him,
And Mul -- ve is a Wit because I taught him.
So Hectors Bays 'til one would think 'twas fit.
That none but Fools should write or judge of Wit;
His pigmie wit, and little infant sense
Rightly defined is naught but impudence;
His lines are weak, though of lewd Catches full
And naught is strong about him but his Scull
The brave defensive head piece of a Fool.
Of all mean Hackney Jades, I Would never use
This Mercenary party coulor'd Muse;
Who e're beholds he strait must needs confess
She Is clad at once in home and foreign dress.
Read Dry -- ns plays, and read Cornille's too,
You Will swear the Frenchman speaks good English now,
Amongst borrowed Sense some airy flashes drop,
To please the feeble Females and the Fop,
So soft and gentle flourishes do move,
The weak admiring Maid, and fire Love;
Quickens the dizzy Soul with Love beset,
And tamely draws it to the Golden Net,
Stupid it lies, and senceless of its pain*
And kindly kisses the bewitching Chain;
Cupid's the God; and Love is all the Song
The blessed Elysium of the sportful young,
But eased of this so kind, so grateful pain,
And brought unto it is former sense again,
The glimmering Lamp in luster once so bright,
Looks like the Torches of eternal night,
The amorous paths with sweets enchanted strown,
Looks like A^cyna when her paint was gone:
That wit upon the Stage cried up to day,
To morrow in the Closet's thrown away;
Wit, tho with glory it may chance to rise,
And mounting seem to kiss the very skies,
Yet if above the bounds of Sense it get,
It is all wind, and is no longer wit:
But Bays in all his wit is stanch and sound,
Tho in it all there is no proportion found;
But what he speaks or writes, or does amiss,
It is all wit; but why? because it is his;
It Is wit in him, if he all Sense oppose,
'Twas wit in D'avenant too to lose his Nose,
If so, then Bays is D'avenants wisest Son,
After so many claps to keep his on.
But who but Fools would praise dull Ot -- is strains,
Composed with little wit and lesser pains;
Whose fiery face does dart as hot a ray,
As the fierce warmer of a Summers day,
Whose very looks would drive the Fiends away.
He may so painted with the juice of Vines,
Turn his Invectives to the praise of Wines;
Love is a pitteous God, and Honor's grown,
To such a height it is almost unknown;
Immortal beauty drowned in quiet lies,
And spends all its charms on its owners Eyes;
But Wine does now the Poets breast inspire,
Wine, that does kindle all our youthful fire
Wine; that makes O^ -- y write and Fools admire,
His Verse of Wine stinks worse than bawdy Punk
For he never writes a Verse but when he is drunk;
Sure thou wast drunk, when in Pindarick strain,
Against Libels did thy dull Muse complain:
But why did term it Satyr? Satyr tart
And piercing Verse, that wounds unto the heart;
But thou got dully drunk ore a Pint Pot,
Forget's thy Subject like a drunken Sot,
And 'stead of Satyr did unto the praise
Of those that beat the Dutch a Poem raise;
The drowzy, heavy Hollander as well
May chant his Poems, and his Fortunes tell,
Their Fleet as good, their men as strong as ours,
The difference lies but in the Governors,
Theirs only win by Guns, by Ships, by might,
Ours grew Politicians in the fight;
And with their tricks at Land did them perplex,
By building awful Sconces on their decks,
Environed round with sturdy Cable stood,
Defying bullets still maintained the fight;
Thy brains immured with a thick Scull as good,
As bravely do this bravest act recite:
As Castlemain the Victory does rehearse
In falsest Prose, thou do confirm in Verse:
So when 'twas in Dispute in lowest shades,
(where the foiled Seaman in new Rivers wades)
Who justly should the warlike Trophies bear,
Whether the English or the Hollander.
Some Ships of ours did merely out of spite
Dive down to prove it was our lawful right.
Kind hearted Ot -- y, that does Garlands give
To beaten Seamen, while thy self do greive
Languish and Pine and no man will allow
Naught; but a wreath of Hemp t'adorn thy brow
Ah! but with bawdy Plays and Prologues lewd
Thou have the art to please the multitude;
The claping rabble that on your third days
Come to extol and clap your silly Plays,
Worse then a Sodoms Farce or Smithfield Droll,
Nothing so Beastly, Baudy, or so dull:
If Ignoramus Iuries once be named
(That thredbare Subject on the Stage so famed)
It Is tossed about with Claps and praiseful knocks
'Til't bound from Knaves in Pit, to Fools in Box.
Such stupid humors now the Gallants seize
Women and Boys may write and yet may please.
Poetess Afra thought she 's damned to day
To morrow will put up another Play;
And Ot -- y must be Pimp to set her off,
Lest the enraged Bully scoul and scoff,
And hiss, and laugh, and give not such applause
To the City-heresie as the good Old Cause.
You're baulkt worse there then at a City Feast
To part with stolen half-Crown for -- no jest;
Sham treats you may have paid for over and over,
But who e're paid for a Sham-Play before?
Tories are just, and give the Devil his due,
Will Not damn a Poets Play, because it is new,
Because it treasts of Whiggs and tells fine stories
To please the monkey Courtiers little Tories
Tells how the Whiggs with might and force repair
To build damned stony Castles in the air
From whence the Court Hobgoblings they will slay
With Guns invented since full many a day;
How by their necromantick arts they raise
Fortyfied Cetadels in all by-ways,
Millions of Soldiers lodge in hives like Bees,
And many millions more in hollow trees,
Where for a fit occasion they do wait
To break the pocky Courtiers maggot-pate;
The Poet by such Tales gets coin for Writing
And makes the Coward Tory think of Fighting,
For fear of which he stoutly falls to sh --
It Is well for you, ye Poets of the Stage?
You live in so nonsensical an Age,
When every Pun is Termed a lucky hit,
The happy product of a Tories Wit;
Base awkard Age! accursed by Destiny
When wit does cease and Piety does die,
Your Zeal is cold, your Frolicks all are mad,
Nay your Debauches sottishly as bad:
The former age, that vices all pursued,
Connived at Sins and wickedly ran lewd,
Tho drowned in-lewdness, and their Pastimes had
As much of Lust, they wittily were mad.
Did but Ben. Johnson know how Follies rise
Swell and look big, how Poets do despise
The lawful charms of wit, and spend their days
In bawdy Prologues and licentious Plays,
He Would bid adieu to the Elysian Field,
Gay with the splendor that the Muses yield,
And to the dusky world again repair,
To suck the thicker blasts of earthly air,
He Would leave his softer Rhymes, and would dispense
A hoarser sound, he would Satirist commence
And try to lash the Idiots into Sense.
Such Vices now amongst the Poets Reign,
The very Fops do of their Faults complain:
Dead POETS Ashes in their Tombs do grieve,
And to rebuke their crimes do seem to live.
Spencers old bones about do toss and turn
With Indignation kicks his rusty Urn.
When by great Cowly's Tomb the Ladies walk
And of the modern Poesy do talk,
His stately Urn does bow its drooping Head,
And modest blushes ore the Marble spread,
As if ashamed of his Posterity,
A base, degenerate, sottish Progeny.
D -- fey comes next in Verse ten thousand strong,
A Devilish Poet for a bawdy Song;
Begot when lecherous Planets ruled the skies,
And Madam Venus bright did tyranize:
When Civil Wars produced a monstrous Birth,
And dismal Discord triumphed ore the Earth;
For pray, what vice achieved by Cains cursed Stem,
Or deadly Sin, that is not found in him;
As Toads spue poison he does Libels vent,
Of Villainy the very Excrement;
A brave Court mixture; for he is at once,
A Debauchee, Buffoon, a Knave, a Dunce,
Here hold my Muse! the Task's too hard for thee,
To bow so low, even below Infamy:
Thou never yet to write with dirt had skill,
Or from a Dunghill tookst a stinking quill;
Of three base silly Poets thou haft sung,
A minute on their borders is too long,
Retire unto thy pleasant former lays,
While these like peevish asps keep on their ways;
And briskly bear unto the Elysian Shades,
One Ounce of Brains in three great Loggerheads.
Desist I say! while some old Bard relate,
Their baser facts, and of their actions prate.
Let Fop the Courtier, Negroe paint the Moor,
The Fool, the Fiddler, and the Bawd, the Whore.
Like Vice Reformers weary of the pain,
Of Lashing still and yet they lash in vain,
My Muse the Court will leave, contemn the Stage,
A long Farewell to so profane an Age:
Debaucht to Lust, to Avarice and Pride,
Who'de be condemned to Court or City Pews,
Be damned to nonsense and the stink of Stews;
To wait for Pensions who would take delight,
And be at last but a shamed Favorite,
Who'de purchase Favor by perfidious Oaths,
Or pawn his Conscience for to buy him clothes,
And when at brightest shine but like the light
Of Ignis fatuus in a misty night,
Caught with the Glory of the spangl'd skies,
Starts up from earth and in a moment dies.
When oh immortal woods! Shall I be made
The Joyous Tenant of your happy shade,
Where Envy and Ambition are kept down,
And harmless Innocence does wear the Crown;
Where heads of sturdy Oaks do courtly bow,
And stooping Pines do make their Honors too;
Where gladsom Poets with the Muses sing,
While all the beauteous Nymphs dance in a ring;
Where all alike enjoy the Rural sport,
Free from those painted Cares, that do attend a Court.
FINIS.

