THE INGRATITUDE OF A Commonwealth: Or, the FALL of Laius Martius Loriolanus.

As IT IS ACTED AT THE Theater - Royal. By N. Tate.

-- Honoratum si forte reponis Achillem,
Impiger, Iracundus, Inexorabilis, Acer,
Jura neget sibi nata, nihil non arroget Armis.
Hor. LONDON, Printed by L. M. for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black-Bull in
Cornhill. 1682.

TO The Right Honorable CHARL'S Lord Herbert, Eldest Son to the Marquess of
Worcester, etc.
My Lord,

YOur Lordship's favor for Learning in General, has encouraged me to beg your
Patronage of the following Sheets, which contain a remarkable piece of Roman
History, though formed into Play. I have yet another Plea for Pardon, since I
impose not on your Lordship's Protection a work merely of my own Compiling;
having in this Adventure Launcht out in Shakespeare's Bottom. Much of what is
offered here, is Fruit that grew in the Richness of his Soil; and what ever the
Superstructure prove, it was my good fortune to build upon a Rock. Upon a clofe
view of this Story, there appeared in some Passages, no small Resemblance with
the busy Faction of our own time. And I confess, I chose rather to set the
Parallel nearer to Sight, than to throw it off at further Distance. Yet there
are none that can apply any Part (as Satyr) on themselves, whose Designs and
Practices are not of the same Cast. What offense to any good Subject in
Stygmatizing on the Stage, those Troublers of the State, that out of private
Interest or Malice, Seduce the Multitude to Ingratitude, against Persons that
are not only placed in Rightful Power above them; but also the Heroes and
Defenders of their Country.

Where is the harm of le^ting the People see what Miseries Common Wealths have
been involved in, by a blind Compliance with their popular Misleaders: Nor may
it be altogether amiss, to give these Projecters themselves, examples how
wretched their dependence is on the uncertain Crowd. Faction is a Monster that
often makes the slaughter 'twas designed for; and as often turns its fury on
those that hatched it. The Moral therefore of these Scenes being to Recommend
Submission and Adherence to Established Lawful Power, which in a word, is
Loyalty; They have so far a natural Claim to your Lordship's Acceptance: This
Virtue seeming Inheritance in Your Lordship, and derived from your Ancestors
with Your Blood. We cannot cast an Eye on the sufferings of His late Majesty,
but we find in broad Letters, the Allegiance and Services of Your Lordship's
most honorable Grandfather, who stopped at no Expense of Blood or Fortunes on
His behalf; nor was Providence wanting to Crown his Singular worth with a
Signal Glory.

When Civil Discord through the Realm had Reigned,
And English Swords with English Blood were Stained,
When out of Zeal Religion was expelled,
And Men for Conscience against their Prince Rebelled,
The Best of Princes -- When the Power Divine,
(On Purposes too deep for Reason's Line)
Gave Rebell-Arms Success, and seemed to bring
Distress at once upon our Saint and King.
Not Jesse's Son seemed better formed to Reign,
Nor were his Worthies of a Nobler Strein!
But what Relief can bravest Valor lend,
When Heroes, not with Foes, but Fate Contend?
The Age's Crimes for no less Curse did Call,
And it is Decreed the Royal Cause must Fall!
Of Conquest thus by Destiny Bereft,
Our blasted War has yet one Garland Left.
Alone the Foes united Strength to Fight,
And Strike the last Famed Blow for Royal Right.
This Honor to the Noble Worcester Fell,
Who, always Brave, Himself did now Excel,
His Friends, his Troops, his Ragland Castle (the Man quess of Worcester's Seat
the last Garrison held out for the KING.
House, his Citadel!
Here, though reduced to last Extremes He Lies,
His cheerful Cannon still the Foe Defies;
The more Distres't, the more his Virtue Shines,
His Courage Rising as his Strength Declines:
Often from Unequal Force he Guards his Walls,
Often in fierce Sallyes on the Leaguer Falls.
Thus while Expired the other Members Lie,
Worc'ster Stirs Last the Heart of Loyalty.
Pardon my Lord this Start, for the Subject is scarce to be thought on without
Transport. Nor has the same Fidelity to the Crown been wanting to complete the
Character of the present Marquess of Worcester; whose Eminent Virtues have
rendered him an Ornament both of our Court and Age. What Expectations then the
World conceives of Your Lordship is easily imagined, and what Instances of
Noblest Qualifications Your Lordship has already given, the World needs no
Information: Besides the Goodness of Your Lordship's Temper, and the Justice of
your Principles; your Acquaintance with Books, and Judgment in Affairs, so far
transcend Your Years, as would secure me from Flattery, though I should Launch
into a Panegyric. But I come to beg Protection, not to give Praise; My
greatest Ambition being to Subscribe my Self,

Your Lordships most Obedient humble Servant, N. Tate.

PROLOGUE
Written by Sir George Raynsford.
OUr Author does with modesty submit,
To all the Loyal Critics of the Pit;
Not to the Wit-dissenters of the Age,
Who in a Civil War do still Engage,
The ancient fundamental Laws of the Stage:
Such who have common Places got, by stealth,
From the Sedition of Wits Commonwealth.
From Kings presented, They may well detract,
Who will not suffer Kings Themselves to Act.
Yet he presumes we may be safe to Day,
Since Shakespeare gave Foundation to the Play:
It Is Altered -- and his sacred Ghost appeased;
I wish you All as easily were Pleased:
He only ventures to make Gold from Oar,
And turn to Money, what lay dead before.
But now I spy Tyrannick Judges here;
What pity it is so Fair, and so Severe!
Fine Lady Critics -- on whose fragrant Breath,
Depends the Plays long Life, or sudden Death.
From them the Poet must receive his Doom,
Just as Affairs succeed with them at Home:
We hope the Paraquit and Squirrel's well,
Else we are Damned to the very Pit of Hell.
Sir John is kind -- and nothing goes Amiss,
Else we shall have a scurvy Night of this!
If we should here present a Husband, cross,
And the Revenge neglected by his Spouse,
'Twere Death in us -- nay some of 'em would Rage,
Because he is not made Cuckold on the Stage:
But who shall be that happy Undertaker,
Since each would strive to be that Cuckold-maker?
THE PERSONS.
Aius Martius Coriolanus, Cominius, [Consul. Menenius, A blunt old Soldier,
and Friend to Coriolanus. Brutus, Sicinius, Two Tribunes of the People,
Factious, and Enemies to Coriolanus. Tullus Ausidius, [General of the Volsces.
Nigridius, A Villain; discarded by Caius Martius, and received by Ausidius.
Volumnia, [Mother to Caius Martius. Virgilia, [His Wife. Young Martius, [His
Child. ^aleria, An affected, talkative, fantastical Lady. Citizens, Senators,
Soldiers, Messengers, Servants.
SCENE, The Cities of Rome and Corioles.

The Ingratitude OF A Commonwealth.
ACT THE FIRST.
Scene, The City Rome.
Enter A Company of Mutinous Citizens, with Slaves, Clubs, and other Weapons. 1
Cit. BEfore we Proceed any further, hear me Speak.

All. Speak, speak.

1 Cit. Let me hear Silence then: And shall I speak all your Minds before you
take the Trouble to think what you would have?


All. Speak, speak.

1 Cit. You are all Resolved rather to Dye than Starve.

All. Resolved, resolved.

1 Cit. First you know Caius Martius is Chief Enemy to the People.


All. We know it, we know it.

1 Cit. Let us kill him, and we'll have Corn at our own Price.
Is It a Verdict?

All. He Is Dead, he is dead.

2 Cit. One Word good Citizens.

1 Cit. Good Citizens; we are Accounted poor Citizens, the Patricians good:
what Surfeits them, would Relieve us: Let'um feel our Swords, that take away
the Use of our Knives; not that I mean any Harm Neighbors; for the Gods know I
speak this in Hunger for Bread, and not in Thirst for Revenge.


2 Cit. Would we Proceed only against Cains Martins?

1 Cit. Against him only, together with all the Rest.

2 Cit. Consider what Services he has done for his Country.

1 Cit. We have paid him with our Thanks for it; but he is Proud, and hates the
Commonalty; we'll Pay him for that Shout here too: You say he did Famously to
Please his Country; I say he did it to Please his Mother, as great a Hector as
himself. What Shouts are these? Why? There now is the Blessing of good Example.
The other side of the City is Risen too: Come, let us make Have, or they will Run
away with the Capitol before we overtake 'em.


All. Away, away, away.

Enter Menenius. 1 Cit. Soft, Who comes here? Oh! it is Menenius Agrippa, one
that Loves the People, and always Employed me to Work for him.


2 Cit. Well, He Is indifferent Honest.

Men. What Work's in Hand my Country men? where go you with those Staves and
Clubs? The Matter, speak I beseech you?


1 Cit. Our Business is not unknown to the Senate, they might have smelt us
this Fortnight; they say, poor Suitors have strong Breaths, they shall find we
have strong Arms too.


Men. Why Masters, my good Friends, my honest Neighbors,
Will you undo your selves?

1 Cit. Nay, if that be all, we are undone already.

Men. I tell you Friends, the good Patricians have
For all your Wants, most charitable Care:
But for this Dearth, the Gods (not They) have made it:
You are Transported by your Misery,
To Slander those that Care for you like Fathers.

1 Cit. Care for us? Yes, by shutting up the Storehouses, and suffering us to
Famish: If the Wars Eat us not up, they will; and there is the Care they bear
for us.


Men. Now must you, or Confess your selves Malicious;
Or be Accused of Folly: Shall I tell you
A pretty Tale? It may be, you have heard it,
But since it serves the present Purpose --

1 Cit. Well, we'll hear it Sir; but think not to fob us off with a Tale: but
an't please you Deliver.


Men. There was a Time --

2 Cit. Good, There was a Time; a very good Beginning: all your good Stories
begin with, There was a Time.


Men. When all the Body's Members
Rebelled against the Belly, and Accused it
For being Unactive, Idle, never bearing
Like Labor with the Rest, whilst the other Parts
Did See, and Hear, Devise, Instruct, Walk, Feel,
Yet this dull Gulf gorged all the Food; to which
The Belly Answered --

1 Cit. Well, What said the Belly?

Men. Why Sir? I tell you with a kind of Smile:
For look you, I may make the Belly Smile,
As well as Speak: It Tauntingly replied
To the Discontented Members, the Mutinous Parts.

1 Cit. Well, What was its Answer?

2. Cit. He had best see to it, that it be a good One.

Men. Patience good Friends,
Your most grave Belly was Deliberate,
Not Rash like his Accusers: and thus Answered,
True is it my incorporate Friends (quoth he)
That I do first Receive the general Food
You Live upon, and it is most fit;
Because I am the Storehouse and the Shop
Of the whole Body: but if you do remember,
I send it through the Rivers of your Blood,
Even to the Heart, and every Nerve and Vein,
From me receive their Strength; though all at once;
Pray Mark me Sirs --

All. Well Sir, we do.

Men. Though all at once (says he) cannot
See what I do Deliver out to Each;
Yet I can make up my Account, that all
Do Back from me, receive the Flower of All,
And leave me but the Bran: What say you to it?

All. Nay Sir, What say You to it? Come.

Men. The Senator's of Rome are this good Belly,
And you the Factious parts; Digest things rightly,
Touching the Commonweal, and you shall find,
No public Benefit which you receive,
But it Proceeds from them, not from your felves:
What do you think of this? And what think you?
You the great Toe of this Assembly?

1 Cit. I the great Toe! Why the great Toe?

Men. For that being one of the Lowest, Basest, Poorest;
Of this most Wise Rebellion thou go Fore-most:
Thou Rascal, that art worst in Blood, the Ringleader:
But make you ready your stiff Bats and Clubs.
Rome, and her Rats are at the point of Battle.
Hail Noble Martius.

Enter Caius Martius. Mart. What is the Matter you Dissentious Rogues,
You Scabs, Bred from the Itch of your own Opinion?

1 Cit. I, we had ever your good Word.

Mart. He that will give good Words to thee will Flatter
Beneath a Bawd; What would you have you Curs?
That like not Peace nor War; the one Affrights you,
The other makes you Factious: he that Trusts you;
Where he should find you Lions, finds you Hares;
You are Virtues Contrary; who deserves Greatness,
Deserves your Hate; and your Affections are
A Sick-mans Appetite, which desires that most,
That would increase his Evil; who Depends
Upon your Favors, Swims with Finns of Lead:
With every Minute you do change a Mind,
And call him Noble, that was now your Hate;
Him Vile, that was your Garland: What Is the Matter,
That in these several Places of the City,
You Cry against the Noble Senate, who
Under the Gods keep you in Awe; who else
Like Beasts of Prey, would Feed on one another.
What Is their seeking?

Men. For Corn at their own Rates, with which they say,
The City is well Stored.

Mart. They say! Hang 'em;
They Will sit by the Fire, and take on 'em to know
What Is done in the Capitol: They say there is Grain enough;
Would the Nobility lay aside their Patience,
And let me use my Sword, I Would make a Quarry
With Thousands of these Quartered Slaves, as high
As their own Capitol.

Men. Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack Discretion,
Yet they are passing Cowardly; but I pray you,
What says the other Troop?

Mart. Burn 'em, the Herd are Scattered;
They said they were a Hungry, Sighed forth Proverbs,
That Hunger broke Stone-Walls, that Dogs must Eat,
That Meat was made for Mouths, that the Gods sent not
Corn for the Rich Men only; with these Shreds
They Vented their Complaints; which being Answered,
And a Petition Granted them, A strange one
To break the Heart of Power: they threw their Caps up;
As they would Hang 'em on the Horns of the Moon.

Men. What Is Granted 'em?

Mart. Four Tribunes (to Defend their vulgar Wisdoms)
Of their own Choosing; Brutus, Cornicius, Sicinius, Bethellsus:
The Rabble should have first Unrooft the City,
'Ere so prevailed with me; it will in time
Confound the Senate: Get you Home you Fragments.

Enter Decius. Dec. Most Noble Martius,
The Senate makes you here next Substitute
To our General Comminius, in the Place
Of Lartius, for the present Wars
Against the Volsces.

Men. A Charge that you have Sighed for;
Yet still you seem Disturbed.

Mart. My Task is with their City, whilst Cominius
Engages their Field-Forces.

Men. What of that?

Mart. Tullus Aufidius, there is to be found,
My Rival once, still most inveterate Foe:
Were half to half the World Engaged, and He
Upon my Party, I Would Revolt, to make
My Wars only with him: He is a Lion
That I am Proud to Hunt: Menenius, Thou
Shall see me once more Strike at Tullus Face.
What, Art thou stiff? Stand'st out?

Men. No Caius Martius,
I Will Lean upon one Crutch, and Fight with to'ther,
'Ere Lag behind this Business.

Mart. One Word my Fellow-Citizens.

1 Cit. No good I warrant it.

Mart. You shall have Corn enough, on Martius Word you shall.

1 Cit. Why? Look you there now, I always said we were
Mistaken in this Man.

All. A Martius, a Martius, etc.

1 Cit. As how, most Noble Martius?

Mart. Lartius is Dead, and I Am Employed by the Senate
To Storm the Volsces City; there is Store
Of Richest Grain: Follow me, All is yours.
[Here the Citizens Steal away severally. See now, if these vile Rats dare go
to know
The Enemies Garners: Here comes Two of their Tribunes.
Let us Bequeath 'em this Infected Ground.
Come, let us to Horse.

Men. Will you not Home first, and take short Leave
Of your Dear Wife, and Honored Mother?

Mart. My Charge is speedy, Women's Farewel's Tedious:
Stay thou Menenius to perform for me
That Office; I Will away upon the Spur,
And Reach my Troops'ere the Sun Wash his Steeds.

[Exit. Men. The Gods Preserve you.

As they go off, the Tribunes, Scicinius, and Brutus meet them, they pass by
(Disdaining) each other. Sic. Was ever Man so Proud as is this Martius?

Bru. He has no Equal.

Sic. When we were Chosen Tribunes for the People,
What Indignation Sparkled from his Eyes?

Bru. Success in the present Wars, will swell his Spirits,
Above his Mothers Haughtiness, which he
Retains, as she had Nursed him with her Blood.

Sic. Hark, hark! The Peoples Murmurs are not ceast,
Tho much they Build on their New Tribunes Power.
Come, let us hasten to Apply our Selves,
And Work upon their Fury e're it Cools.

[Exeunt. SCENE II. A Palace.
Enter Volumnia and Virginia. Vol. Prithee Vergilia spare those feeble Tears,
Which I must Blame in any that belongs
To Caius Martius, tho his Tender Babe,
That had no other Language; Learn of me
That blessed the Absence, gave my Lord his Honor,
More than the calm Peace, that gave me his Love.
This Martius, this thy Loved, Lamented Husband,
When of my Widdow'd Years, the only Son;
When Tender-Body'd, and so Fresh a Bloom
Adorned his Cheek, as drew and sixth all Eyes,
When at a Kings Entreaty, the Fond Mother,
Not Half an Hour would Sell him from her Sight;
I Weighing then, how Honor would become
So promising an Excellence, dismissed him,
To seek out Danger, where he might find Fame.
To a Cruel War I sent him, where he Flesht
His Youthful Sword; and to my Arms returned,
Laden with bloody Bays: I tell thee Daughter,
I sprung not with more Joy, to find my Pains,
Had to the World Restored his Father's Image:
Then first to find him, March his Fathers Fame.

Virg. But had he Died in the Adventure?

Vol. Then --
His Glory should have been my Darling Son:
Now by Minerva, had the Indulgent Gods
Blessed me with Twenty Sons, as much Beloved
As my brave Martius; I had rather Lose them All
In Chase of Glory, and their Country's Cause,
Than One, in the Surfeit of voluptuous Peace.

Virg. Excuse my Tenderness, that Wishes still
For Peace and Martius: What Is this Monster Country,
That must be Fed with my Dear Martius Blood?
If this Unnatural Mother still must prey
On her own Offspring, let her take her Rabble;
The Vermin-Crowd my Martius so Abhors.*

Enter A Servant. Serve. Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to Visit you.

Virg. Let me Retire from her Impertinence;
A heavier Burden than the Grief I bear.

Vol. Not now Virginia, she will divert you: Oh!
Methinks I hither Hear thy Husbands Drum;
See him Dismount Aufidius; all the Volsces
Wide Shunning him, as Children from a Tiger:
Methinks I see him Frown, and hear him Call,
Come on ye Cowards; you were got in Fear,
Tho you were Born in Rome: His bloody Brow --

Virg. His bloody Brow? The Gods Defend! -- No Blood.

Vol. Away Fond Girl; it more becomes a Man,
Then Gold his Arms; the Breasts of Hecula,
When she gave Suck to Hector, looked not Lovelier,
Than Hectors Forehead, when besmeared with Blood.
Go, Bring Valeria in.

Virg. Heavens Bless my Lord from fierce Aufidius.

Vol. No more such Folly,
He Will Strike Aufidius Head below his Knee,
And Tread upon his Neck.

Enter Valeria, Gawdtly and Fantastically Dressed, followed by Six or Seven
Pages. Val. Morrow Ladies, good Morrow.

Vol. I am glad to see your Ladyship.

Val. Your Ladyships most Eternal -- Well, you are the most manifest
Housekeepers! Come, you do your Beauties wrong, the Suburra wrong, the Forum
wrong, the Cirque, the whole Youth of Rome.


Vol. We leave that Triumph Madam to your Sovereign Charms.

Val. And do I look Sovereignly Madam? Indeed I think my Enemies will Grant me
That; but I bear not upon it: I am Ambitious only of the Graces of the Mind, the
Intellectuals, and despise those vain Allurements of Dress and Face -- but do I
look Sovereignly Madam?


Vol. Most Irresistably!

Val. And what my Dear, Eternally in Tears?
[ To Virgilia. Come, I must have you Read Philosophy; better Live in Apathy,
as the Stoics say, then have such tender Sense of Things: -- pray Madam, what
does your Ladyship think of the Stoics.


[ To Vol. Vol. As of the Noblest Sect.

Val. Come, I must have you Forth with me: I have some Nineteen Visits to make,
and all of 'em old Debts upon my Honor: Well, I Will Swear there is an
intolerable deal of Patience required to common Civility: Because an
impertinent Lady comes and teazes me three Hours at my House to Day, therefore
I must go to be teazed three more at her House to Morrow; I Swear it is most
Unreasonable. How I wish my self at Athens again! We had no such Doings at
Athens; no idle Chat of Tires and Fans, but of Secrets in Nature, and stiff
Points of Philosophy -- but Rome at Rome; Come, come away.


Virg. By no means Madam, I Will not out of Doors.

Val. O you Confine your self most Unreasonably; your Thoughts now are with
your Lord at Corioles; trouble not your self, I shall give you Intelligence of
his Affairs; I have it always an Hour before the Senate: Well, Intelligence is
a fine thing! It costs me the Gods know what in Foreign Correspondence from
Sicily, Sardinia, Rhetia, Aquitain, Crete, Cyprus, Lydia, Ephesus, Dalmatia,
Thrace, Pontus; the Hetrusci make no Motion, but by my Advice: Nay, our own
General Cominius, is glad to keep Touch with me: Not an Officer of Note in the
Camp, but sends me News or Love. Come hither Page -- look Madam, pray Madam
observe, this is my last Days Post, and the lightest Packet has come this two
Months; Fie, fie, up with them, I am ashamed on it.


Vol. But does your Ladyship Answer all These?

Val. Some of 'em I never peruse, and those are your Gallantry Epistles: I know
all those Hands with half an Eye; there is Titus Decius, Cajus Proculus, Marcus
Flavius, Publius Cotta; Albinus, Sesinna, Graculus, Phocus, Linus, Tucca,
Rufus, Faesula; with a Legion more, that are All unsealed in the Fire! I Swear
I am a cruel Creature! But it is my Way Madam.


Virg. Eternal Torturer! -- By your Leave Madam.

Val. Nay, I am just upon the Wing too; my Chair there, What? No Attendance in
this World? Well, of all things in Nature, I love Dispatch; and yet I Swear I
could stay with your Ladyships Eternally -- but your Ladyships will Excuse me
upon Business; not but that I Would leave any Thing for your Ladyships Company --
your Ladyships will pardon my Have, for I Swear I am in Have most inordinately.


[Exit. SCENE III.
Coriolanus and Decius before the Walls of Corioles. Mart. HOw far off Lie
these Armies?

Dec. Scarce half a League.

Mart. Then we shall hear their Larum, and they ours.
Now Fire-Ey'd Mars make us but quick in Work,
That we with reeking Swords may March from hence
To Help our Fielded Friends; Come Blow the Blast.
A Parley, the Senators Appear on the Walls. Tullus Aufidius, Is he within the
Walls?

Sen. No, nor a Man that Fears you less than he.
Hark how our Drums call forth our Youths; our Gates
With yet seem shut, we have but pinned with Rushes;
They Will open of themselves: Hark, to the Field,
There is Aufidius; list what Work he makes
Amongst your broken Army.

Mart. Oh they are at it!
Their Noise be our Instruction; Ladders hoe!
They Fear us not, but Issue from their City.
Now Plant your Shields before your Hearts, and Fight
With Hearts more Proof than Shields. Advance brave Decius,
They Disdain us much beyond our Thoughts,
Which makes me Sweat with Rage: Come on my Fellows,
He that retires, I Will take him for a Volsce,
And he shall Feel my Sword.
Alarm; The Romans beat back to their Trenches, Re-enter Martius Cursing. All
the Contagion of the South light on you,
You shames of Rome, now Botches, Boyls, and Plagues
Crust you all over, that you may be Abhorred,
Further than seen; you Souls of Daws and Geese,
That bear the Shapes of Men; how have you run
From Slaves, that Apes would beat, Pluto and Hell?
All hurt behind, Backs red, and Faces pale,
Mend, and Charge Home,
Or by the Fires of Heaven, I Will leave the Foe,
And make my Wars on you; look to it; come on.
[Alarum again. So, now the Gates are Open, now prove good Seconds,
It Is for the Followers Fortune, not the Flyers:
Mark me, and do the like.

[ Martius, with a few follows them to the Gates, and is shut in. 1 Sol. Fool
hardiness? not I.

2 Sol. Nor I.

1 Sol. See, they, they have shut 'em in.

All. To the Pot, I warrant 'em.

Alarm continues, Re-enter Martius with his Party, as having Forced their Way
through the City; his Followers with Spoils. 1 Romans This will I Carry to Rome.

2 Romans And I This.

3 Romans A Murrain on it, I took This for Silver.

Mart. See here these Pismires, that do Prize their Labors
At a cracked Dram, Cush'ons, Leaden Spoons;
Old Scraps of Iron, Doublets, that Hangmen would
Bury with those that Wore 'em; these vile Slaves,
E're yet the Fight be done, Pack up; down with them,
And Hark what Noise the General makes; let us to Him,
There is the Man of my Souls Hate, Aufidius
Peircing our Romans; Valiant Decius, take
Convenient Numbers to make Good the City,
Whilst I with those that have the Spirit, will Have
To Help Comminius.

Dec. You Bleed apace My Lord;
Your Exercise has been too Violent,
For a Second Course of Fight.

Mart. Sir, Praise me not;
My Work has yet not Warmed me; Fare you well:
The Blood I Drop, is rather Physical,
Than Dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
Will I Appear, and Dare him to my Sword.

[Exit. Severally. SCENE Changes to a Camp or Field, an Alarm.
Cominius and Aufidius, are seen Engaging each Other, with their Parties:
Cominius is Beaten off; Martius with his Soldiers Enters Hastily on the other
Side. Mart. Turn, turn Aufidius, this Way lies your Game:
I Will Fight with None but Thee; for I do Hate Thee
Worse, than a Promise breaker.

Auf. No Hate lost;
Not Africa Breeds a Serpent I Abhor,
More than thy Fame and Thee: Here fix thy Foot.

Mart. Let the first Starter Dye the other's Slave,
And the Gods Toom him after.

Auf. If I Fly Martius, holloo me like a Hare.

Mart. Within these three Hours Tullus,
I Fought within the Walls of your Corioles,
And made what Work I Pleased; it is not my Blood,
Thou see me Smeared with, it is thy Dearest Kindred's.
Take That to Work thy Fury to the Height;
For I would have thee Warm.

Auf. Were Thou the Hector
That was the Whip of thy feigned Progeny,
Thou should not Pass this Munite.

Alarm: They Fight off; after which, a Retreat Sounded: Re-enter Martius and
Cominius, at several Doors. Com. Come to my Arms most Noble Martius,
If I should tell thee over this thy days Work,
Thou Wilt not believe thy Deeds; but I Will Report 'em,
Where Senators shall mingle Smiles with Tears;
Where Ladies shall Express a fearful Joy:
Where the Dull Tribunes that do Hate thy Honors,
Shall Cry against their Hearts, we Thank the Gods,
That Rome has such a Soldier.

Mart. Beseech ye Sir no more:
My Mother that has Privilege to Extol
Her Blood; when She does Praise me, Grieves me.

Com. You shall not be the Grave of your Deserts;
For Rome must know the Value of Her Own:
'Twere a Concealment worse than Sacrilege.
Therefore, before our Army you must Hear me.

Mart. I have some VVounds upon me, and they Smart,
To Hear themselves Remembered.

Com. Of all the fiery Steeds, and goodliest Treasure,
We have taken from the City and the Field,
We Offer you the Tenth, to be taken forth,
Before the Common Distribution;
Choose for thy self.

Mart. I Thank my General,
But cannot make my Heart Consent, to take
A Bribe to pay my Sword; I do Refuse it,
And stand upon my common Share, with Those
That Joined with me in Fight.
A Flowrish, All Wave their Swords, and Cry Martius, Martius. May these same
Instruments which you Profane,
Never Sound more; when Drums and Trumpets shall
In The Field turn Flatterers, then let Courts be Honest:
No more I say.

Com. You are Unjust to your own Merits Martius,
And we must see 'em Righted; be it therefore known
To all the World, that Caius Martius
Wears this War's Garland; and in Token of it,
My Warlike Steed (known to the Camp) I give Him,
With all his Golden Trappings; and henceforth,
For what He did before Corioles, call Him,
With all the Applause of our Victorious Camp,
Caius Martius Coriolanus.

Trumpets, Drums, and Shouts again. Mart I will go Wash, and then you shall
Perceive,
Whether I Blush or no.

Com. So to our Tent,
Where 'ere we do Repose us, we will Write
To Rome of our Success; you Attalus
Must to Corioles back with our Commands.

Mart. The Gods begin to Mock me, I
That now Refused most Princely Gifts, am Bound
To Beg of my Lord General.

Com. Speak and Take.

Mart. I sometime Lay here in Corioles.
At a poor Old Man's House, he used me Kindly;
In The Fight I saw him Prisoner, he Cried to me:
But then Ausidius was within my View,
And Rage over came my Pity: I Beseech you
To give my poor Ost Freedom.

Com. Noble still:
Were he the Butcher of my Son, he should
Be Free, as is the Wind.

Cor. I Will Find him out.
Now let us Sacrifice to the Gods, and Pray
For many Rival Days, to This on Rome;
Then Yield our Pious Rites, to our Slain Friends;
That done, to general Mirth our Legions Sound,
Our Labored Brows with Bays, and Myrtle Crowned,
And make with Genial Wine, our emptied Veins Abound.

[Exeunt. ACT the Second.
FLOURISH.
Enter Coriolanus in Triumph, met by the Nobility and Commons of Rome. Cor. NO
more of This, it does Offend my Ears;
No More I Pray.

Com. Look Sir, your Wife and Honored Mother.

Enter Volumnia, and Virgilia. Cor. Oh Madam! By the Event I know you have
Petitioned All the Gods on my Behalf;
And next the Gods, I pay you thus my Duty.

Vol. Nay my good Soldier Rise,
My Valiant Caius, Worthy Coriolanus;
Not Thee this Pomp, but Thou Adorn'st thy Triumph:
What now Virgilia?

Cor. Oh my tender Dove!
My gentle Silence hail; What Means this Dew?
Would thou have Laughed, had I come Coffined Home,
That Weep'st to see me Triumph: Ah! My Love,
Such Eyes the Widows in Corioles Wear,
And Mothers that Lack Sons.

Virg. Ah my Dear Lord, What Means that Dismal Scarf?
My Joy lies folded There!

Vol. I know not where to Turn;
Oh! Welcome General, most Welcome All:
Now from this Starry Seat, Quirinus Smiles.

Men. Ten Thousand Wellcomes; welcome All:
A Curse begin at very Roots on's Heart,
That is not Glad to See you; yet have we
Some base Repiners at this Joy; No matter,
We call a Nettle but a Nettle, and
The Faults of Fools but Folly.

Cor. The same Menenius ever.

Com. Blunt and Honest, Lead.

Cor. Your Hand and Yours:
Yet 'ere in our own House, I shade my Head,
The good Patricians must be Waited on;
I had rather be Their Servant in my Way,
Than Rule with them in Theirs.

Com. On to the Capitol.

[Exeunt. Manent Tribunes. Bru. All Tongues speak of Him, and the feeble Sights
Are Spectacled to see Him: Prattling Nurses,
Into a Rupture let their Infants Cry,
Chatting of Him; the dowdy Maukin pins
Her Lockrum on, and clambers Walls to View him:
Stalls, Gall'ries, Windows, All are Smothered up,
Leads Filled, and Ridges Horsed: The Reverend Falmens
Amongst the Crowd, Press for a Vulgar Station,
As at the Approach of some Descended God,
He cannot Temperat'ly bear his Honors;
But will himself Destroy what he has VVon.

Sic. There Rests our Hope,
Doubt not the Commoners, for whom we stand,
Upon their ancient Malice will forget,
On the least Cause, his most Applauded Service.

Bru. I heard him Swear, were he to Stand for Consul,
He never would Appear in the Market place,
In the vile Garment of Humility;
And showing (as the Custom is) his VVounds
To the People, nor would Beg their stinking Breaths.

Sic. It was his Word:
I Wish no Better, than to have him hold
That Purpose.

Bru. We must Suggest to the People, in what Hatred
He still has Held 'em: That to his Power, he would
Have made 'em Mules, and Silenc't Us, their Pleaders;
That he Esteems no better of 'em, than
As Cammels of the War, that have their Provender
For bearing Burdens, Blows for Sinking under 'em.

Sic. This (as you say) Suggested
At some Time, when his soaring Insolence
Shall Fret the People, which will surely happen,
If he be put upon it; and That Is as easy,
As to set Dogs at Sheep; he bears the Fire
To kindle their dry Stubble, and the Blaze
Shall Darken him for Ever.

Bru. His Power, or Ours, must Sleep: Away to the Capitol.

[Exeunt. Scene Opening, shows the Senate sitting in the Capitol; Coriolanus in
a White Robe, as Candidate for the Consulship. 1 Sen. Sit Coriolanus, never
Blush to Hear
What You have Nobly done.

Cor. Your Honors Pardon,
I had rather have my Wounds to Heal again,
Than Hear say, how I got 'em.

Bru. I Hope my Lord, my Words have not Displac't you.

Cor. No Sir; yet often,
When Blows have made me stay, I have Fled from Words:
You did not Flatter me;
Therefore could not Displease me; but Your People,
I Love 'em as they Weigh --

[Exit. Com. The Deeds of Coriolanus, Honored Fathers,
Should not be Feebly spoke; and Breath would Fail me
To tell the Half: If Valor be with Romans,
The Chiefest Virtue, Martius has no Equal:
When Tarquin first made Head; at Sixteen Years,
He Fought for Rome's Dear Freedom, and Bestri'd
An'ore pressed Roman, in the Consul's Sight;
Slew Three Opposers, Tarquin's self Encountered,
And Struck Him on his Knee; in that Days Toil,
When He might Act a Woman in the Scene,
He proved Best Man of the Field; and for his Service,
Was Crowned before the Camp: Grown up to Strength,
The Matchless Youth, proved yet more Wondrous Man;
And in the Brunt of Seventeen Battles since
Monopoliz'd the Garland; for this last,
Before, and in, Corioles:
I cannot Speak him Home; He stopped the Flyers,
And by his Rare Example made the Coward,
Turn Terror into Sport; his Sword, Death's Stamp,
Where it did Fall, it took from Face to Foot:
He was a Thing of Blood; almost alone
He Forced Corioles, came Aidless off,
And Leading, Waiting Death, from Town to Camp:
He Gave no Respight to his Panting Breast,
Till we could Call both Field and City Ours.

1 Sen. We Yield him Worthy of the Consulship:
Summon Him in.

Com. Be pleased to Hear
What yet Exceeds all this; Our Spoils He Slighted,
And Looked on the Seized Treasures, as they were
The common Muck of the World; he Covets less,
Than Misery it self would give, Rewards
His Deeds with doing 'em, Accounts 'em only
As Pledges of more Services to come.

1 Sen. Summon Him in.

Enter Coriolanus Men. The Senate Coriolanus are well Pleased
To make Thee Consul.

Cor. I owe 'em still my Life and Services.

Men. It now Remains, that you Bespeak the People.

Cor. I do Beseech your Honors
Let me o're-Leap that Custom, for I cannot
Put on the Gown, stand Public, and Entreat 'em
For my Wounds sake, to give their Suffrages;
Please you that I may pass this Ceremony.

Bru. The Custom may in no wise be infringed.

Sic. The Peoples Liberties Depend upon it,
And no particular must be Dispenc't with.

Men. We do Solicit from your Spleens no Favor,
Put 'em not to it, my Lord, but stoop to the Custom,
And take to you, as your Predecessors have,
This Dear-bought Honor, with the usual Forms.

Cor. It is a Part, that I shall Blush in Acting;
Methinks the People well might spare this Method;
Better Constrained to do it.

Sic. Mark you That?

Cor. To Brag to 'em, that I did Thus and Thus,
Show 'em unaking Scars, which I should Hide,
As if I had Received 'em for the Hire
Of their vile Breath!

Men. Pray do not stand upon it.

1 Sen. Tribunes by You, we Recommend to the People,
Our Noble Choice, and to our worthy Consul,
We Wish all Joy and Honor. Call the Lictors,
And Bid the Fasces move.

[Exeunt. Sic. You see how he intends to Treat the Commons.

Bru. May they perceive's Intent; He Will Beg of 'em,
As if he did Contemn, what he Requested,
And Scorn the Givers.

Sic. We'll Inform 'em so;
Let Us Hasten to the Forum, where I know,
They Wait Us with Impatience.

[Exeunt. SCENE the Street.
Enter the Citizens in vast Number. 1 Cit. Well Neighbors, for once (if he
Require our Voices) we ought not to Deny him.


2 Cit. We may Sir, if we will.

1 Cit. I Grant you, we have a Power in our selves to do it; but it is such a
Power, as we have no Power to do: For if he show us his Wounds, we are likewise
to show our Feeling of those Wounds; so if he tells us his Noble Deeds, we must
also tell him our Noble Acceptance of 'em: Ingratitude is Monstrous, and for
the Multitude to be Ungrateful, were to make a Monster of the Multitude, of
which, we being Members, should bring our selves to be Monstrous Members.


2 Cit. Right; so, when we stood up once about the Corn, he himself stuck not
to Call us the Many-headed Multitude.


1 Cit. We have been called so of Many. Well, we are All Resolved (the greater
Part of Us) to give him our Voices. If he Loved the People, there never was a
Worthier Man; therefore, he shall have your Voices?


All. All, all, all,

1 Cit. But look you, to my Knowledge he Hates the People,
And therefore you All Deny him your Voices?

All. All, all, all, etc.

Enter Coriolanus, in the Robe of Humility, Menenius with him. 1 Cit. Look,
here he comes in the Robe of Humility: Mark his Behavior; Observe me
Neighbors, we are not to Advance altogether; but to come to him where he
stands, by One's, by Two's, and by Three's; then is he to make his Request by
Particulars, wherein every one of us has a single Honor, in giving Him our own
Voices, with our own Tongues; therefore follow me, and I Will show you the Trick
on it.


All. Content, content.

Men. Oh! Sir, you are not Right in this, you know
The Worthyest Men have don't.

Cor. What must I say? I pray Sir? Plague upon it,
I cannot bring my Tongue to such Tune:
Look Sir, my Wounds
I got 'em in my Countries Service, when
Some Certain of your Brethren Roared, and Ran
From the Noise of our own Drums.

Men. O Gods! You must not speak of this,
You must Desire 'em Sir, to Think upon you.

Cor. Think on me? Hang 'em,
I would they would Forget me, like their Prayers.

Men. You will Mar All; I Will leave you;
Beseech you speak to 'em in the Mildest manner.

Cor. Hell! Bid 'em Wash their Faces,
And keep their Teeth Clean: so, here comes a Brace;
You know the Cause Sir of my standing here.

1 Cit. We do Sir; therefore Desire you tell us what brought you hither.


Cor. My own Desert.

2 Cit. Your own Desert!

Cor. But not my own Desire.

3 Cit. How! Not your own Desire.

Cor. No Sir,
It never yet was my Desire to Trouble
The Poor with Begging.

1 Cit. You must think Sir, if we give you any thing, it is in
Hope to Gain by you.

Cor. Well, Then your Price of the Consulship?

1 Cit. The Price is, to Ask it Kindly.

Cor. Then Kind Sir, let me have it, I have Wounds to show,
Which shall be yours in Private: Your good Voice Sir,
What say You?

2 Cit. You have it Worthy Sir.

Cor. A Match Sir; so, There Is in All, two Worthy Voices
Begged; I have your Alms, Adieu.

Enter Two more. Cor. Pray now, If it may stand with the Tune of your good
Voices, that I may be Consul? I have here the Customary
Gown.

3 Cit. You have Deserved Nobly of your Country, and you have not Deserved
Nobly.


Cor. Your Enigma?

3 Cit. You have been a Scourge to Her Enemies, and a Rod to Her Friends: You
Hate the People.


Cor. You should Account me the more Virtuous for it,
That I have not been Common in my Love.
Therefore let me be Consul.

4 Cit. Well, We Hope to find you our Friend yet; and therefore give you our
Voices.


Cor. Agreed Sir, better it is to Dye, to Starve,
Than Beg the Hire, for which we first did Serve:
This Imposition is by Custom laid;
Must Custom then in All things be Obeyed?
The Dust on Antique Time, would lie Unswept,
And Mountains Error, be too highly Heapt
For Truth to ore-peer; rather than Fool it so,
Let the High Office, and the Honor go
To one could bear This -- yet am I half through.
Here come more Judges.
Two more come forward. Your Voices; for your Voices have I Fought;
Watch't for your Voices; for your Voices bear,
Of Wounds Two Dozen Odd: have for your Voices
Done many Things, some more, some less;
Your Voices then: Indeed I would be Consul.

5 Cit. The Truth is, You have Behaved your self, as I should have done in the
same Place; and therefore you shall have my Voice, as I would Expect it my self.


6 Cit. Heaven Bless our Noble Consul.

[Exeunt. Cor. Precious Voters.

Enter Menenius, with Brutus and Sicinius. Men. You have stood your Limitation,
and the Tribunes
Endue you with the Peoples Choice.
It now remains, that in Robes of Honor,
You Wait upon the Senate.

Cor. Is this done?

Sic. The Custom of Request you have Discharged;
The People do Admit you, and are Summoned
To Meet Anon upon your Approbation.

Cor. Where? at the Senate House.

Bru. There Coriolanus.

Cor. Then I may Shift these Garments?

Sic. You may Sir.

Cor. Good, then I Will Know my self again,
And have to the Capitol.

Men. I Will bear you Company; will you along.

Sic. We stay here to Dismiss the People.
[ Ex. Cor. Men. He has it now, and by his Looks, Methinks
It Is Warm at's Heart.

Bru. With a Proud Heart, He Wore his humble Weeds:
Will you Dismiss the Crow'd.

Enter the Plebeians. Sic. How now my Masters, have you Chose this Man.

1 Cit. He has our Voices Sir.

Bru. We Pray the Gods He may Deserve your Kindness.

1 Cit. The Gods, and We, are Agreed about that Matter already:
You say He Is Proud. I say He called me Sir, and Carried himself
Like a most Civil Gentleman.

2 Cit. To my Thinking, he Flouted us downright.

1 Cit. It is his kind of Speech, he has a Scurvy handsome Way with him, that is
the Truth on it.


Sic. He showed You too, his Marks of Merit, Wounds
Received for's Country.

1 Cit. He did so; I remember All, as well as the Wart on my
Nose.

2 All. No, no, no Man saw 'em.

1 Cit. Right, now I Remember better, I saw never a One of 'em: The Gods send
he have Any, I say: he said he Wounds for us, I think some Eight or Ten Douzen;
and Waving his Hand thus in Scorn, I would be Consul, says he, and Custom will
not let me, but by your Voices; I have need at present of your Voices;
therefore let me have your Voices: which when we Granted, I Thank you for'em
(quoth he) and now you have left your Voices, I have no further with you. And
he is the dullest Rogue in Rome, that could not find This to be mere Mockery.


Bru. Why then were you so Stupid not to see it;
Or seeing it, so Senseless to Approve Him?

Sic. Could you not have told him,
As we had Taught you; That when he had no Power,
But was a petty Servant to the State:
He was your Enemy, and ever spoke against
The Liberties and Charters, that you bear
In The Commonwealth; and being now Arrived
To a Place of Power and Sway, if he should still
Maligna'ntly Remain your Foe;
Your Voices would be Curses to your selves.

1 Cit. I, so I told 'em, but their Hearts were as Hard as their
Forehead.

Bru. Thus to have said, as you were Fore-instructed,
Had Touched his Spirit, and Tried his Inclination:
Had either Forced from him a gracious Promise,
Which you might afterward have Held him to,
Or else it would have Galled his surly Nature:
And to such angry Mood Enraged him, that
You might have took Advantage of his Passion,
And passed him Unelected.

1 Cit. I Told 'em that too. Well, He Is not Confirmed, and we may Deny him yet.

2 Cit. And will Deny him:
I have Five Hundred Voters of that Sound.

1 Cit. I, Twice Five Hundred, with their Friends to Back'em.

Bru. Get you Hence Instantly, and tell those Friends,
They have Chose a Consul that will take from 'em
Their Liberties; make 'em of no more Voice
Than Dogs, that often are for Barking beaten,
Yet only Kept to Bark.

Sic. Assemble therefore on a safer Judgment,
And All Revoke your Ignorant Election;
Enforce his Pride to show his Hate; Forget not
With what Contempt he Wore the Custom'd Robe:
And Lastly, Lay the Fault on us your Tribunes.

Bru. I, Spare us not,
Say any thing whereby you may Revoke your sudden Choice;
And then, as soon as you have Drawn your Number,
Repair to the Capitol.

All. We will so.

1 Cit. And rather then Fail, we'll Swear every Man of us, we never gave him
our Consent. Away, away.

[Exeunt. Bru. Let 'em go on;
This Mutiny were better put in Hazard,
Than Run a greater, and more certain Mischief:
If (as he surely will) he fall in Rage
With their Refusal, we'll be close at Hand,
To watch the Advantage his blind Fury yields;
And from his own Spleen, work a Snare to Hold him.

[Exeunt. ACT the Third.
Coriolanus in the Consuls Robes, Cominius, Menenius, with the Nobles; Met by
the Tribunes, Sicinius, and Brutus, and the Plebeians. Sic. BAck, pass no
further.

Cor. Ha! What Is That?

Bru. It will be Dangerous to go on; no Further.

Cor. What makes this Change?

Com. Has he not past the Nobles, and the Commons?

Bru. Cominius, No.

Cor. Have I had Childrens Voices?

Men. Tribunes give way.

Sic. The People are incensed against him.

Cor. Are these your Herd?
Must these have Voices? That can yield 'em now,
And straight Disclaim their Tongues! What are your Offices?
You are their Mouths, Why Rule you not their Teeth?
Have you not set 'em On?

Men. Be Calm, be calm.

Cor. It is a purposed business, a mere Plot
To Curb the Power of the Nobility:
Bear it, and Live with such as cannot Rule,
And never will be Ruled.

Bru. Called not a Plot;
The People say you Mocked 'em, and of late,
When Corn was given 'em Gratis, you Repined.

Cor. Was not this known before.

Sic. Not to 'em All.

Cor. Have you Informed 'em since? Fire! Plagues! This Practice
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this Usage; I must tell you Friends,
In Suffering this, we Nourish against the Senate
Sedition and Rebellion; thus They are Thank't
For what they have, given to Beggars.

Sic. You speak o'th People, as you were a God
To Punish, not a Man of their Infirmity.

Bru. It were most fit we let the People know it.

Men. What, what? It Is but his Choler.

Cor. Choler.
Were I as Patient as the Midnight Sleep,
By Jove 'twou'd be my Mind.

Sic. It is a Mind that shall retain it is Venom,
Not Poison any Further.

Cor. Shall Retain;
Hear you this Triton of the Minews, mark you
His absolute Shall?

Com. Well; On to the Marketplace.

Cor. Whoever gave that Council, to give out
The Corn of the Storehouse Gratis, Fed Sedition,
And the State's Ruin.

Bru. Why should the People give
One that speaks thus their Voice.

Cor. I Will give my Reasons,
More Worthy than their Voices: Pressed to the War,
They would not pass their Gates; this kind of Service
Did not deserve Corn Gratis; being in the War,
Their only Valor was in Mutiny,
In Faction only Bold; Nobles pluck out at once,
The Multitudinous Tongue, nor let 'em lick
The Sweet that is their Poison.

Sic. He has said enough.

Bru. He has spoken like a Traitor, and shall Answer
As Traitors do.

Cor. Misereant, Despite o'rewhelm thee;
What should the People do with these Bald Tribunes,
That make 'em fail their Duty to the Bench?
Let what is fit take Place, and Throw their Power to the Dust.

Bru. Manifest Treason!
The Ediles Hoa! Let him be Apprehended.

Cor. Away old Goat.

All. We'll be his Surety.

Cor. Hence rotten Thing, or I shall shake thy Bones
Out of thy Garments.

Sic. Help Citizens.

Men. On both sides more Respect.

Bru. Here Is He would take Away your Liberties.

All. Down with him, down with him.

Cor. Hark how the whole Kennel Echo to the Cry
Of this old Brace of Curs! A Poaching pair
Of Vermin, Fed by the Prey, that others Toil for;
Spawn of Sedition, and the Spawners of it.

Bru. Whom means the Lunatic?

Cor. You, Faction-Mongers,
That wear your formal Beards, and Plotting Heads,
By the Valor of the Men you Persecute;
Canting Caballers, that in smoaky Cells,
Amongst Crop-ear'd Mechanics, wast the Night
In Villainous Harrangues against the State.
There may Your Worship's Pride be seen to embrace
A smutty Tinker, and in ecstasy
Of Treason, shake a Cobbler be the Wax't Thumb.

Sic. Or let Us stand to Our Authority,
Or let Us lose it; We do here Pronounce
Upon the Peoples Power, this Martius
Worthy of present Death.

Bru. Therefore lay Hold on him,
Bear him to the Tarpeian Rock, from whence,
Into Destruction cast him: Ediles Seize him.

Cor. No, I Will Dye here;
There Is some among you have beheld me Fight:
Come, Try upon your Selves.

All. Down with him.

[The Nobles draw their Swords. Men. Help Martius, Help.

The Tribunes, the Ediles, and People, are Beat off. Com. Stand fast, We have
as many Friends as Enemies.

Cor. Oh! would 't were put to That!

Men. The God's forbid;
Beseech you Noble Sir, Home to your House,
Leave Us to Cure this Breach.

Com. Come Sir, I will along with you.

Cor. On fair Ground, I would beat a Legion of 'em.

Com. But now it is Odds beyond Arithmetic;
Will you from hence before the Tags return?

Men. Pray you be gone;
I ll try whether my old Wit be in Request,
With those that have but little.

Com. Nay, Come away.

[ Exit. Coriolanus, and Cominius. Men. Oh! He has Marred his Fortune;
He would not Flatter Neptune for his Trident,
Nor Jove for his Power to Thunder.

Sen. I would they were a Bed.

[Shout of the Citizens within. Men. I would they were in the Tiber.

Re-enter Sicinius, and Brutus, with the Rabble. Sic. Where is this Viper?
That would Depopulate the City, and
Be every Man himself?

Bru. He has resisted Law,
And therefore Law shall scorn him further Trial.

1 Cit. We'll give him to Understand, that our Noble Tribunes, are the Peoples
Mouths, and we their Hands.


Men. Sir, Sir, --

Sic. Menenius, you have helped
To make this Rescue.

Men. Hear me Speak,
As I do know the Consuls Worthyness,
So I can name his Faults.

Bru. What Consul?

Men. The Consul Coriolanus.

All. No, no, no, he is no Consul.

Men. If by the Tribunes leave, and yours good Citizens,
I may be Heard --

Sic. Speak briefly then,
For know, We have Decreed his certain Death,
He Dies to Night.

Men. Now the Good Gods forbid.

Bru. He Is a Disease that must be Cut away.

Men. O! He Is a Limb that has but a Disease,
Mortal to Cut it off, to Cure it easy:
What has he done to Rome, that is Worthy Death;
Most of his Blood is for his Country Shed,
And what is left, to lose it by his Country --

Sic. Wide from the Business:
When he did Love his Country, It Honored Him.

Bru. Therefore we'll hear no more:
Pursue him to his House, and pluck him thence,
Lest his Infection being of Catching nature,
Spread further.

Men. Yet one word more: Beseech ye proceed by Process,
Lest Parties (as he is beloved) break out,
And Sack Great Rome with Romans.

Sic. If it were so? --

Bru. What do you Talk,
Have we not had a Taste of his Obedience;
Our Ediles Struck, our Selves Resisted? Come --

Men. Consider Sirs, He has been Bred in Wars
Since he could Draw a Sword, and is ill-school'd
In soothing Language; Meal and Bran together,
He Throws without Distinction; give me leave,
I Will go to him, and bring him to you in Peace,
Where he shall Answer by a lawful Form
Upon his utmost Peril.

Senate. Noble Tribunes,
It is the Worthier way, the other Course
will prove too Bloody, and the End of it,
Unknown to the Beginning.

Bru. Menenius, then be you the Peoples Officer.
Masters lay down your Weapons.

Sic. Go not Home.

Bru. Meet at the Forum, we'll Attend you there,
Where, if you bring not Martius, we'll proceed
In our first Way.

[Exit. Tribunes and People. Men. I Will 'gage my Life upon it,
Let me desire your Company, we must bring Him,
Or Worse will follow.

[Exit. Enter Volumnia, met by Valeria, passing by in a Chair. Val. Hold, hold,
set me down -- I Swear Madam, I had almost overseen my good Fortune, and past
by your Ladyship.


Vol. Your Ladyships most humble Servant.

Val. And upon my Honor, Madam, my Have is so Violent, and Affairs so
Important, that nothing, but the Sight of your Ladyship, should have Stop me:
Well, I hear my Lord Coriolanus continues Obstinate; I Love an Obstinate Man
most inordinately! Does your Ladyship know, Madam, that I am the greatest
Rabble-Hater of my Sex? I think 'em the common Nuisance of the World; there is
no Thought, no Science, no Eloquence, no Breeding amongst 'em; and therefore
your Ladyship must know, They are my Aversion: For, as to all these
Particulars, and to every one of 'em, the Envy of the World must Grant -- and
your Ladyship knows, the World is most Malicious -- I say, the Envy of the
World must Grant -- O Jupiter! What was, I saying, Madam?


Vol. I Beg your Ladyships Pardon, that --

Val. Then Madam, there is such Mystery in my Dress! the Wits see Poetry in it,
the Soldiers Spirit and Courage, the Mathematicians describe the Spheres in it,
and your Geographers, the Terra Incognita: ^^d yet your Ladyship sees it is as
plain as Nature; no Trim, no Ornament: There Is my Lady Galatea, such a
fantastical, fulsome Figure, all Curls and Feathers! And besides Madam, she is
such an Eternal Talker! Her Tongue's the perpetual Motion, and she affects such
hard Words, such an obdurate Phrase, that she exposes her self a public
Ludibry to the Universe.


Vol. Nay, now Valeria --

[Here one of the Pages Whisper Valeria. Val. How Is that? Titus Decius, Cajus
Proculus, Marcus Flavius, Publius Cotta; All to Wait on me since I came Forth?
Are they not all Banished Men? Have I not Refused, incontinently, to see 'em
these three Days together; nay, though they came upon State Affairs: O the
Impudence of Mankind! I Swear, a Lady had need look to her Circumstances!
Well, I Will to Athens again, incontinently! Boy, tell 'em I shall return at Six
precisely -- I Swear, Madam, this Love's my Aversion of all things in the
World; and yet for the speculative part, I presume, I understand it most
Unmeasurably: Trust me, I could Write the Art of Love.


Vol. Think you so Madam?

Val. As thus; Sometimes to seem, inordinately, Jealous of them; sometimes to
make them, inordinately, Jealous of me: to seem Merry when I am Sad; Sad when
I am Merry; to Rail at the Dress that becomes me best, and Swear I put it on in
Contradiction to Them.


Vol. Indeed Madam?

Val. O Jupiter! How insensibly the Time runs, whilst your Ladyship is
Discoursing; I could hear your Ladyship Discourse all Day -- but this Business
is the most uncivil Thing -- but your Ladyship, and I, shall take a Time: Your
Ladyship will excuse my Have; for I Swear, I am in Have most inordinately.


[Exit. Enter to Volumnia, Coriolanus, Menenius, Cominius, with the Rest of the
Nobles. Cor. Let 'em pull All upon my Head, present me
Death on the Wheel, or at wild Horses Heels;
Or Pile Ten Hills on the Tarpejan Rock:
Thus will I bear my self, nor bate a Grain
Of my firm Temper.

Vol. Come, be Milder.

Cor. From whence this Change? For Madam, You were wont
To call the Slaves, Things made to sit Bare-headed
In the Assembly, and to Yawn and Wonder,
When any One of my high Rank stood up
To speak of Peace or War.
Why do You Wish me Milder? would You have me
False to my Nature; rather say, I Play
The Man I am.

Vol. O Coriolanus!
I would have had you put your Power well on,
'Ere you had Worn it out.

Men. Come, You have been too Rough;
You must Return and Mend it:
There Is no Remedy,
Unless You Will see the City laid in Ashes.

Cor. What must I do?

Men. Return to the Tribunes.

Cor. Well, What then? what then?

Men. Repent what You have Spoke.

Cor. To them? I cannot do it to the Gods.

Vol. You are too Absolute,
If it be Honor in Your Wars, to seem
The Thing You are not, for Your Countries Good:
Why is it less in Peace, when the whole State
Is set at equal Hazard? This feigned Compliance
No more Dishonours You, than to Take in
A Town with gentle Words, that sets you else
At Chance, and is at best the Price of Blood;
I would Dissemble with my Nature, where
My Fortunes, and my Friends were both at Stake;
I speak the Voice of All, and am in This,
Your Wife, Your Son, the Senators, and Nobles;
And in a Word, the Life, and Fate of Rome.

Men. O most Divinely Urged.

Vol. I Pray go to 'em
With mild Behavior; for in such a Business,
Action is Eloquence; and the Eyes of the Vulgar,
More Learned than their Ears: Or say to 'em,
Thou art their Soldier, and being Bred in Battles,
Have not the Soft way, which you do Confess,
Were fit for Thee to Use, as Them to Claim.

Men. This but Performed, in the manner, she has spoke,
Their Hearts are Yours; nay, You shall have their Knees.

Enter Cominius. Com. I Have been in the Market Place, and Sir it is necessary
You make Strong Party to Defend your Self,
Or with fair Language Calm 'em; All Is on Fire.

Vol. He Must, and Will.

Cor. Well, I Comply,
Yet were there but this single Frame to Lose;
This Mould of Martius, They to Dust should Grind it,
And Throw't against the Wind, to the Marketplace.
You have put me to a Part, that I shall never
Discharge to the Life.

Com. Come, come, we'll Prompt You.

Cor. Away my Disposition, and possess me,
Some Ev'nuchs Spirit; and the Virgin Voice,
That Lulls the Babe Asleep; -- I will not do it,
Lest I desist to Honor my own Truth;
And by my Bodies Action, Teach my Mind,
A most inherent Baseness.

Vol. At thy Choice then:
To beg of Thee, is more below my Honor,
Than Thou of them: I stand prepared for Death,
With Heart as fix as Thine: Destruction come,
And let Rome's Founder, and the groaning Spirits
Of all Her Guardians Dead,
Affright the Elements to see their City,
With Her own Hands let all Her Vital's Blood:
The Care of Heaven, and Fate expire in Flames,
Whilst with a dreadful Joy Her Foes look on;
And with insulting Smiles Aufidius cries,
Corioles Ruins sped him with one Name,
Rome give him now Another.

Cor. Oh my Mother!
Forgive my stubborn Frame! Look, I am going;
Chide me no more: Oh! You shall see me play
The very Mountebank; Return beloved
Of all the Trades in Rome: I Will return Conful,
Or never trust to what my Tongue can do
In The way of Flattery further.

Vol. Do your Will.

[Exit. Com. The Tribunes do Attend you, Arm your self
To Answer Mildly; for they are prepared
With grievous Accusations. See, they are come
To seek us out.

Cor. Let 'em Accuse me by Invention, I
Will Answer in my Honor.

Men. I, but Mildly.

Cor. Well, Mildly be it then, Mildly.

Enter Tribunes and Rabble. Sic. Draw near my Fellow Citizens.

Edile. List to your Tribunes: Peace.

Cor. First hear me speak.

Both Trib. Well, say -- Peace hoa!

Cor. Shall I be Charged no further, than this present?
Must all determine here?

Bru. You must Submit to the Peoples Voices,
Allow their Officers, be content to suffer
Such lawful Censure for your Faults, as shall
Be proved upon you.

Cor. I am Content.

Men. Lo, Citizens, he says he is Content.

Cor. What is the Matter,
That being past for Consul with full Voice,
I am so dishonored, that the very Hour
You take it off again?

Sic. Answer to us.

Cor. Say then, it is true, I ought so.

Sic. We Charge you, that you have Contrived to take
From Rome, all Office, strove to wind your self
Into a Power Tyrannical;
For which, you are a Traitor to the People.

Cor. How? Traitor!

Men. Nay, patiently: your Promise.

Cor. The Fires in the lowest Hell, fold in their People,
Call me their Traitor: Thou injurious Tribune,
Were Legions by thee, I would say, thou Lie,
With Voice as free as I do Pray the Gods.

Bru. Mark you this; People.

All. To the Rock, to the Rock with him.

Sic. We need not put new Matter to his Charge;
What you have seen him do, and heard him speak;
Beating your Officers, Cursing your Selves,
Opposing Law with Blows; and last, defying
The Power that was to Try him: this deserves
The extremest Death.

Bru. But since he has Served well for Rome --

Cor. What, do you talk of Service?

Bru. I speak of it that know it.

Cor. You?

Men. Is this the Promise that you made?

Cor. Vex me no more:
Let 'em pronounce the steep Tarpeian Death,
Vagabond Exile, Fleaing; doomed to Linger:
But with a Grain a Day, I would not buy
Their Mercy at the Price of one fair Word.

Sic. I say, his Service to the State being weighed,
With hostile Practices committed since:
^th' Name of the People, and the Tribunes Power,
We Banish him for ever from our City;
In pain of Death from the Tarpeian Rock,
No more to enter through the Gates of Rome:
In The Peoples Name, I say, it shall be so.

All. It shall be so, it shall be so; Away with him, He Is a banished Man, Out
with him.


Com. Hear me my Masters, and my common Friends.

Sic. He Is Sentenced; no more Hearing. He is Banished,
As Enemy to the People, and his Country.

All. It Is so, it is so; it shall be so, etc.

Cor. You common Cry of Curs, whose Breath I hate,
More than the rotten Fens, whose Love I prize,
As the Dead Carcasses of unburied Men,
That do corrupt my Air. I Banish you:
Remain you here with cursed Uncertainty;
Let every feeble Rumor shake your Hearts,
Have still the Power to Banish your Defenders,
Till you are left a Prey to some vile Nation,
That Won you without Blows; Poison each other;
Devour each other; Commerce cease amongst you;
Rob one another: nothing you can Steal,
but Thieves do lose it: Whirlwinds sack your Town,
And Citizens, and City, make one Rubbish.
Thus with the Gods, I turn my Back upon you;
And swift Confusion swallow you.

[Exit. with his Friends. Sic. There went the Peoples Enemy.
They All Shout, and throw up their Caps. Go see him out at Gates, and follow
him,
As he has followed you; with all Despite,
Give him diserv'd Vexation: Let a Guard
Attend us through the City.

All. Ay, ay, let us see him out at Gates: the Gods preserve our noble Tribunes;
Away, away.


[Exit. Coriolanus, Volumnia, Virgilia, Menenius, Cominius, with the Nobility
of Rome. Cor. Come, leave your Fears, a brief Farewell, and Part:
The Beast with many Heads Butts me away:
Nay Mother, Where is now your wonted Courage?
You have been used to say, Extremities
Were the Distinguishers of Noble Spirits;
That common Changes, common Men could bear;
That when the Sea was Calm, the slightest Boats,
Could with the Proudest, cut the smooth faced Flood;
That Strength and Management was for the Storm:
Thus you were wont to Arm me, with such precepts,
As made invincible the Heart that learned 'em.

Vol. The spotted Pestilence strike every Street,
And purple Slaughter triumph through the City;
Death block up every Door, and Graves be wanting;
The noisy Trades be hushed, and Traffic cease;
Assemblies be no more: Owls, Ravens, Vultures,
With Nests obscene, their desolate Buildings fill,
And Beasts of Prey their ancient Seats regain.

Cor. No more, the Life of Rome's not worth this Mourning;
I shall be Loved, when I am lack't -- nay Mother,
Resume that Spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the Wife of Hercules,
Six of his Labors you would have Born, and Saved
Your Husband so much Sweat.

Vol. My firstborn Son,
I call the Gods to Witness for my Temper,
That hitherto thy Dangers were my Joy,
Whilst for the Service of thy Country born;
But now thou have no Country to Defend,
I feel the Woman's Tenderness return;
The Mothers Fondness, and her panting Fears.

Virg. My injured Lord, What Course will thou pursue,
Exposed to more Distress, and threatening Dangers,
Than ever yet befell a Banished Man:
From her Confederate, Cities, Rome Excludes thee;
And in Rome's Service, thou have made all others,
Thy Foes implacable?

Cor. The Gods that Warn me from these Seats, Choose for me.
Where is my little Life? Pray let me see him,
Leave him a hasty Blessing, and Away.
Young Martius brought in; Coriolanus take him in his Arms. Oh! How I Grutch
ungrateful Rome this Treasure!
Make much of him Virgilia, I shall live
To Train him up in War, and he shall Choose
Some Country to Defend, and make his own:
My Absence in some Part he shall Supply;
And with his innocent Prattling, chide thy Sights,
When thou shall Wake, and Miss me from thy Bed.

Boy, Sir, Shall not I go with you? my Grandmother has
Promised me a Sword.

Cor. My pretty Life, I Will Visit thee again;
Take, take him hence, he raises in my Breast
A Tenderness that is most Unseasonable:
And Loathness to Depart -- take him away.

Boy, Then in truly Sir, I Will learn to Ride,
And come to you.

Cor. Away, the little Thief has stole my Temper,
And filled my Eye lids with unmanly Dew:
Once more Farewell to All.

Men. Permit us Sir,
To Wait you to the City Gates, so far
The Cruelty of the People does Allow.

Cor. By Jove, and Fire-Ey'd Mars, not one Step further:
This Race of Pilgrimage is all my own.
I know not what presage has struck my Breast;
But Oh! Methinks I see Destruction teem,
And waiting for my Absence, to Discharge
The battering Storm on this perfidious City:
So when the murmering Wind, from out his Nest,
Jove's Royal Bird to the open Region calls;
Aloft he Mounts, and then the Tempest Falls.

[Exit. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT the Fourth.
SCENE, The City of Corioles.
Enter Coriolanus, Disguised in mean Habit. Cor. A Goodly City this Corioles!
City,
'Twas I that did Transform thy Joyful Wives,
To Mourning Widows; many a Darling Heir
Of these fair Palaces, have I Cut off
In The wretched Parents sight; then know me not.
Here is Aufidious Court, I Will enter in;
Perhaps he Kills me; then he does fair Justice;
But if he give me Scope, I Will do his Country Service.

[Exit. The Inside of the Palace; Music Plays; Servants pass hastily over the
Stage. 1 Serve. Wine, Wine, Wine! No Ears amongst us? I think our
Fellows are all Asleep.

2 Serve. Cotus, Where Is Cotus? my Master Calls for him, Cotus.

[Exit. Re-enter Coriolanus. Cor. A sumptuous House! The Feast smells well; but
I appear not like a Guest.


1 Serve. How now! What have we here? What would you have Friend? Whence come
you? here is no place for you: Pray find the way to the Door.


Cor. I have deserved no better Entertainment
From this Corioles.

Enter the Second Servant. 2 Serve. Whence come you Sir? What, has the Porter no
Eyes in his Head? to let such Companions in: pray get you out.


Cor. Away.

2 Serve. Away? get you away.

Cor. Thou art Troublesome.

[Trips him up. 2 Serve. Are you so brisk? Well, I Will have you ordered anon.

[Exit. Enter Aufidius with Servants. Auf. Where is this Follow?

2 Serve. Here my Lord, I had Cudgelled him like a Dog, but for disturbing the
Lords within.


Auf. Whence come Thou? what would have? thy Name,
Why speak thou not? thy Name I say?

Cor. A Name unmusical to Volscian Ears,
And Tullus harsh to thine.

Auf. Speak, Who thou art?
Thou have a grim Appearance, and thy Face
Bears a Command in it; though they Tackle's Torn,
Thou show a noble Vessel: speak thy Name.

Cor. Prepare thy Brow to frown; know thou me yet?

Auf. I know the not; speak.

Cor. My name is Caius Martius, who have done
To all the Volsces; Thee particularly,
Most rueful Mischief; take, to Witness this,
My Surname Coriolanus: All my Dangers,
My painful Service, and expense of Blood,
Shed for my thankless Country, are requited
But with that Surname, only that remains;
The Peoples Envy has devoured the Rest:
Who with insulting Breath, and infamous Shouts,
Have Chas't me from their City; now this extremity
Has brought me to thy Court; not out of hope,
(Mistake me not) to Save my Life; for if
I had feared Death; of all Men in the World,
I had avoided Thee: but in mere Rage,
To be Revenged of those my Banishers:
For I will Fight against ungrateful Rome, with all the Spleen
Of the remorsless Fiends: This I avow,
Believe me if thou will; if not; know Tullus,
I am of Life most weary, and present
My Throat to thee, and to thy ancient Malice;
Which not to Cut, would show thee but a Fool;
Since I have ever born thee, feellest Hatred,
Drawn Tuns of Blood from thy dear Countries Breast;
And cannot Live, but to thy Shame, unless
It be to do Thee Service.

Auf. Oh Martius, Martius!
Each word thou have spoke, has weeded from my Heart,
A Root of ancient Envy: Oh! If Jupiter,
From you curled Clouds, should Thunder forth this Story,
I Would not believe him more, than Noble Martius.
Let me embrace that Body, against which,
My pointed Lance a hundred times has splinter'd:
Thus do I clasp the Anvile of my Sword,
And here Contest as hotly with thy Love,
As e're I did in Battle with thy Valor.

Cor. Why this is somewhat.

Auf. Son of Mars I tell thee,
We have a Power on foot, and I had purpose,
Once more to Hew thy Target to thy Glove,
Or lose this Arm for it; Thou have beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have might'ly since,
Dreamt of Encounters 'twixt my self and thee;
We have been down together in my Sleep,
Unbuckling Helms, grasping each others Throats,
And walked half Dead with Nothing: Worthy Martius,
Had we no Quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou thence art Banished, me would Muster All,
From Twelve to Seventy Years, and pouring War
Into the Bowels of thy ungrateful City,
Like a swollen Flood wast All: Come, Enter with me,
And take our wondering Senators by the Hands,
Assembled here to take their Leaves of me,
Who stand prepared against your Teritories;
Though not for Rome it self.

Cor. You bless me Gods.

Auf. You here are Absolute; if you will have
The Leading of your own Revenges; take
The half of my Commission, and resolve
Whether to beat against the Gates of Rome,
Or first Afflict 'em in remoter Parts:
But come, let me present you to our Nobles,
That will confirm my words: A thousand Welcomes,
And more a Friend, than e're an Enemy:
Yet Martius that was Much.

[Exeunt. 1 Serve. Here Is a strange Alteration!

2 Serve. By this Hand I thought to have Cudgelled him, and yet my mind gave me,
his Clothes belied him.


1 Serve. What an Arm he has? Why, he turned me about between a Finger and a
Thumb, as a Man would set up a Top.


2 Serve. Nay, I knew by his Face there was something in him; he had Sir, a kind
of Face methought -- I cannot tell how to term it.


1 Serve. He had so; such a looking, as it were -- that, that you call your --
what 'de ye called -- well, would I were Hanged but I thought there was more in
him than I could Think: He is, simply, the rarest Man in the World.


Enter a Third Servant. 3 Serve. O Lads! Slaves! Well, I would not be a Roman of
all Nations, I had as live be a condemned Man.


1 Serve. The Matter?

3 Serve. Why, here is he that was wont to Thwack our General -- Caius Martius.


2 Serve. How? Thwack our General.

3 Serve. No, I do not directly say Thwack him, but he was always enough for him.


1 Serve. Come, we are Fellows and Friends, he was ever too hard for him, I have
heard him say so himself.


2 Serve. He was too hard for him, indefinitely, the last Engagement; he Scotcht
and Notcht him like any Carbanado.


3 Serve. Why, he is so made on yonder within, as if he was Son and Heir to Mars;
set at the upper end of the Table; no Question asked him by any of our Senators,
but they stand Bald before him: My Lord himself makes a very Mistress of him.
The short of the Business is, Our General is cut in the Middle; but the one Half
of what he was Yesterday; for the other has half his Commission by the Grant of
the whole Table; which by the way, has something sowr'd our Master's
Countenance: The upshot of all is, that this strange Guest has Sworn to stub
the Gates of Rome, and Mow All down before him.


1 Serve. And he is as like to do it as any Man; for look you Sir, he has as many
Friends as Enemies; which Friends Sir, as it were, durst not (look you Sir)
show themselves (as we say) his Friends whilst he was in Derectitude.


2 Serve. Derectitude, What Is that?

1 Serve. Why? that is (do you conceive me Sir) Directitude but when they shall
see his Crest up again, and the Man in Blood, they will out of their Buroughs
like Conies after Rain.


2 Serve. But when goes this forward?

3 Serve. Why to Morrow, to Day, this Minute, you shall hear the Drum struck up
this Afternoon; it is as it were, a part of their Feast, and to be Executed
before they wipe their Lips.


2 Serve. Why then we shall have a stirring World again.

3 Serve. Right; I hate this moldy Peace; it is good for nothing but to rust
Iron, and increase Tailors; it is a getter of more Bastard Children, than War's
a Destroyer of 'em.


2 Serve. Away, here comes our General with a Frown in his
Forehead, and our Termegent Controller, Nigridius with him.

3 Serve. He is ever the Harbinger to Mischief; his former Command was under
Caius Martius, who entrusted him with the Custody of Corioles, which he fairly
gives up to Aufidius; at a close Revenge he never fails; yet he that Lives to
see him Hanged, may Dye before the Year's out: And there is Prophecy without
Conjuring.


[Exeunt. Enter Aufidius and Nigridius. Nigr. What Circe Sir, has wrought you
to this Change:
By Hell I rather should have thought to have seen,
Serpents with Doves embract, than this Agreement;
Call but to Mind your Mornings Wiser Thoughts:
Where is that fiery Resolution vanished?
Have you, My Lord, forgot your Mornings Vow?
It seemed the Voice of Fate.

Auf. Nigridius, No,
The Accents still are fresh upon my Mind;
I Swore, and called the Elements to Witness,
If I, and Caius Martius met once more,
That teeming Hour, Corioles or Rome,
I^ him or me should Perish.

Nigr. Such a Sound,
And Uttered, with so stern a Brow, shot Terror,
And to our View, Confessed a flaming Mars;
But now (forgive me Sir) you seem reduced
To Less, than Man, the Shadow of your self:
What Witchcraft drew your Mind to this Alliance
With him, whose only Genius of the World,
Had Power to Vie with yours?

Auf. He bears himself more Proudly,
Even to my Person, than I thought he would,
When late I did embrace him; but his Nature
In that is no Changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be Amended.

Nigr. Yet I wish
You had not took this joint Commission with him;
But either born the Action all your self,
Or left it whole to him.

Auf. I understand Thee --
But spare to Fret a Lion in the Toil.

Nigr. The Palsy Senate lay their Fears aside,
And rest on his Protection as a Gods:
Your Soldiers use him as their Grace before Meat;
Their Talk at Table, and their Thanks when done:
What Estimation shall your Foes take for you,
When you are lost, and darkn'd to your own:
Hark in what Notes the very Rabble greet him.

[Shout here. Auf. Death! Hell! This Infamy enflames my Breast,
Makes Emulation higher boil than ever;
I Will sink Corioles, but I Will yet break with him;
And wreck the State, rather than want a Quarrel.

[Exeunt. Brutus at one Door, Menenius at the other. Bru. We stood to it in good
time -- here comes Menenius;
O! He is grown of late most Courteous: Hail Sir,
Your Coriolanus is not much Mist you see,
But with his Friends; the Commonwealth stands still,
And so would do, were he more Angry at it.

Men. Come, all is well, and might have been much better --

Bru Where is he, hear you?

Men. Nay, I hear Nothing.

Bru. He was a worthy Officer in the War;
But Insolent, Ambitious, and Affecting
A single Sway.

Men. I think not so.

Enter Scicinius hastily, with the Rabble, crying, Gods Save our Noble
Tribunes, etc. Bru. The Matter Brother: Whom bring you there?

Sic. This Slave, whom I am sending to Correction,
Reports, The Volsces, with two several Powers,
Are entered on the Roman Territories;
And wast with Sword and Fire, what lies before.
This he Reports, set on by envious Parties,
To Fright the Peoples Quiet.

1 Cit. Ay, I Will be sworn he has set me in terrible Twittering,
My Heart beats still.

Men. It Is Fierce Aufidius,
Who hearing of our Martius Banishment,
Thrusts forth his Horns again, that were shut in,
Whilst Martius stood for Rome.

Bru. Go see the Villain Whipped.

Men. First reason with him.

Sic. Let him be Lasht before the Peoples Eyes.

1 Cit. I, I, Whip him; such another Fright upon me, would make my Wife
Miscarry.


Enter another Messenger. Mes. Have, have my Lords, you are sent for to the
Senate,
A fearful Army led by Caius Martius,
Assisted by Aufidius, Spoils our Territories,
Consumes with Arms and Fire, what lies before 'em.

1 Cit. How! Caius Martius coming; All Dead Men, Dead! dead! dead!


Men. O you have made good work: What News my Lord?

Enter Senator. Mes. Cominius, on the Spur, is gone to meet,
And pacify the raging Martius.

Men. 'Twill be impossible.

Mes. The Senate thinks so;
He Leads the Volsces like their God, a Being
Made by some other Deity than Nature,
That forms Man better.

Men. You have made precious work;
You, and your Apron Men, that stood so much
Upon the Voice of Occupation, and
The Breath of Garlic eaters.

All Cit. Ay, we shall be Occupy'd with a Vengeance.

Men. He Will shake your Rome about your Ears,
As Hercules did shake down Mellow Fruit.

Both Trib. But is this true Sir?

Sen. You Will dissolve to Gelly,
Before you find it otherwise; the Cities
That were Allied to Rome, Revolt each Minute.

1 Cit. Undone, undone, we are all undone, unless the Noble
Man have Mercy.

Sen. And who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do it for shame, and you
Deserve such pity of him, as the Woolf
Does from the Sheapherd: for his Friends, if they
Should say, be good to Rome, he will censure 'em
As Enemies to him.

Men. True, were he putting to my House, the Brand
That should Consume it; I could not say Cease.
Your Curs here from the City Hooted him:
But Oh! I fear you will Roar him in again.

Enter all the rest of the Citizens with a confused Cry, and Lamentation. Sen.
Look, here comes the whole Kennel: You are they
That made the Air unwholesome, with
The casting up your greasy Caps, and Hooting
At Coriolanus Banishment: now he is coming
To pay you for your bellowing; it is no matter
If he could Burn us All into one Coal;
We have deserved it.

All. The Gods be gracious to Us, we hear fearful News.

1 Cit. For my own part, when I said Banish him, I said 'twas pity.


2 Cit. And so did I; and to say Truth, so did All of Us: Well, we did, that we
did, for the Best; and though we willingly consented to his Banishment, yet it
was against our Wills.


1 Cit. I, I, I ever said we were in the Wrong.

All. I, and so did we All.

Enter Cominius. 2 Cit. Let me see what his Face says to us: Alack! alack,
Dead, dead, dead! All dead Men.


Sen. Welcome my Lord, What Influence had your Intercession
With enraged Coriolanus.

Com. Nothing: He would not seem to know me.

Men. Hear you that?

Com. Yet once he called me by my Name;
I urged our old Acquaintance, and the Drops
That we have Bled together, but in vain: Coriolanus
He would not answer to; forbad all Names;
He was a kind of Nothing; Titleless,
Till he had forged him a Name of the Fire,
In burning Rome.

All Cit. Alack! alack! etc.

Com. I minded him how Royal 'twas to Pardon,
When it was least Expected; he replied,
It was a forced Submission of a State,
To one they had abused, and still would do so.

Men. Very well,

Com. I tried at last to Waken his Regard,
For his own private Friends his answer was,
He could not stay to cull 'em in a Pile
Of noisome musty Chaff.

1 Cit. How? Chaff? What, does he make no more of us but Chaff? And will he
burn his Mother and Wife, rather than not make Tinder of us? The Gods be
gracious to us.


Bru. Now good Menenius, if you Love your Country,
Or Pity Her Distress, become Her Pleader;
Your powerful Tongue may be of force to stop him,
More than the instant Army we can Raise.

Men. No, I Will not meddle.

Sic. Pray go to him.

Men. What should I do?

Bru. Only make trial what your Love can work
For Rome, with Martius.

All Cit. Kneeling Beseech you most Noble Menenius.

Men. Well, I will under-take't, and think he will hear me,
Though much discouraged with Cominius Treatment;
Yet I will prove him with my ablest Speed.

1 Cit. The Gods preserve you Sir, Commend my hearty Affections to him; and if
it stand with his good liking, we'll hang up our Tribunes, and send him them
for a Token.


Com. He Will never hear him;
I tell you, he sits Throned in Gold, his Eye
All Red, as 'twou'd Burn Rome; his Injury
The Jayler to his Pity; I kneeled to him,
'Twas very faintly he said Rise; dismissed me
Thus with his speechless Hand; what he resolved,
He sent in Writing after me, and that
Most Fatal. Therefore curse your Crime, and Perish.

[Exit. 1 Cit. Some comfort yet, that we have these Vipers to Carbinado; Come
Neighbors, we'll see them smoke before us. Away, away with 'em.


Exeunt. Haling and Dragging off the Tribunes. Scene Opening, shows Coriolanus
seated in State, in a rich Pavilion, his Guards and Soldiers with lighted
Torches, as ready to set Fire on Rome; Petitioners as from the City offer him
Papers, which he scornfully throws by: At length Menenius comes forward, and
speaks to him: Aufidius with Nigridius, making Remarks on 'em. Men. Now may the
Gods in hourly Council sit,
For thy Prosperity, and Love Thee,
As thy old Father Menenius does:
O Son! my Son, What Fury sways thy Breast?
Thou art preparing Fire for us; look here,
Here Is Water for the Flames:
Most hardly was I wrought to come to Thee;
But being assured none but my self could move Thee;
I come, blown out from Rome with gales of Sighs.

Cor. Away.

Men. How?

Cor. No words Friend: Mother, Wife, or Child, I know not;
I Am not my own, but servanted to others;
Mine was the Injury, but the Remission
Lies not with me, but in the Voisces Breast;
And Rome must stand to them for their Account.
That we were Friends, forgetfulness must blot,
E're lawless Pity move: Therefore be gone,
My Ears against your Prayers are stronger, than
Your Gates against my Arms: Yet 'cause I Loved Thee,
Take this with thee; I Writ it for thy Sake,
And meant to have sent it: Another word, Menenius,
I must not hear Thee speak: This Man, Aufidius,
Was my best Loved in Rome; yet thou beholdst --

Auf. You bear a constant Temper.

Cor. His Love to me,
Was much beyond the Kindness of a Father;
And I returned him more than filial Duty;
Their latest Refuge was to send him to me.

Auf. You are two Rigorous.

Nigr. Fasten but that upon him, and you Gain
The Point we wish.

Cor. Now plant our Fires against the Gates of Rome:
Bid all Trumpets Sound;
They shall have Music to their flaming City.

As they Advance with their Lights, Enter from the other side, Volumnia,
Virgilia, and Young Martius, with the rest of the Roman Ladies all in Mourning.
Cor. Look there, my Mother, Wife, and little Darling,
Are come to Meet our Triumph on its way,
And be Spectators of our keen Revenge,
On this ungrateful Town.

Virg. My dearest Lord!

Vol. My Firstborn only Son.

Cor. Life of my Life, Fly to me? O a Kiss,
Long as my Exile, Sweet as my Revenge;
And thou my Turtle, Nest Thee in my Heart:
(To the Boy) Forgive me Gods, that any dearest Transport,
Should make my charmed Sense, unsaluted, leave
The Noblest Mother -- sink my Knee in Earth,
Of deepest Duty more Impression show,
Than that of common Sons.

Nigr. Observe you this?

Cor. What means this Silence? What, these sable Weeds?
This Troop of Stars beset with darkest Night:
O Mother, Wife! Two deeply you have took
My Banishment, and I must chide your Sorrow.
This Sadness for my Absence, showed Despair
Of Injured Martius Virtue, called in Question,
The Justice of the Gods for my Revenge;
Virgilia speak, speak Mother; at your Feet
Behold a kneeling Conqueror: Answer to me.

Vol. Rise Martius, up, Coriolanus rise;
Whilst with no softer Cushion than these Flints;
I Kneel to thee, and with this new Submission,
Show Duty as mistaken all this while,
Between the Son and Parent.

Cor. What Is this? Your Knees to me?
Then let the Pibbles of the Hungry Beach,
Change Station with the Stars; the Mutinous Winds,
Snatch Mountain-Oaks, and hurl 'em at the Sun;
Let all Impossibilities have Being,
And Nature fall as Giddy with the Round.

Vol. My Fire-Ey'd Warrior, Do you know this Lady?

Cor. The Noble Sister of Publicola,
The Moon of Rome, Chaste as the frozen Snow,
That hangs on Diana's Temple.

Vol. And this divine Epitome of yours;
This little Martius whom full Time shall ripen
Into your perfect self.

Cor. The God of Battles,
With the Consent of favoring Jove inspire
Thy Thoughts with Nobleness; that thou may prove,
The Wars proud Standard fixed in Tides of Blood;
Like a tall Sea-mark over the dashing Waves,
And saving those that view Thee.

Vol. Your Knee Sirrah,
Even He, your Wife, these Ladies, and my Self,
Are humble Suitors --

Cor. Oh my boding Heart!

Vol. This Liv'ry was not for your Absence worn;
So dear we knew your safety to the Gods:
But now put on as funeral Robes, and Mourning
For our expiring Rome. O spare thy Country,
And do not Murder Nature.

Cor. Witness for me
You conquering Host, and Thou my valiant Partner;
What Tenderness and Duty I have shown
These Ladies, whilst they did converse with me
As Wife and Mother: but since they exceed
The Bounds of Kindred, and encroach upon
Affairs of State, I as the Volsces General,
Support their Dignity, and take my Pomp;
[Ascends his Throne. Yet Nature shall to any suit, unlock
Our yielding Ear, that does not tend to Save
The Roman State, and Barring our Revenge;
In that particular, I shall forget
All enter-course of Blood;
Standing as Man were Author of himself,
And knew no other Kin.

Vol. No more, no more;
You have said you will not grant us any thing,
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already -- yet we'll speak.

Cor. Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we
Hear naught from Rome in private -- your request:
What seeks that lovely Tempter, whose Dove's Eyes
Could make the Gods forsworn -- but shake not me?

Virg. Think with your self my once indulgent Lord,
How more unhappy than all living Women,
Are we come hither, since thy sight, that should
Make our Eyes flow with Joy, strikes Terror through us;
Forcing the Mother, Wife, and Child, to see
The Son, the Husband, and the Father, tearing
His Countries Bowels with unnatural Rage,
Whilst frighted Destiny disowns the Deed,
And Hell is struck with Horror.

Vol. Thou debarr'st us
Even of our Prayr's to the Gods, and to this Hour,
No Wretchedness was e're denied that help:
How shall we ask the Death of Rome, or thee,
Opposed in fatal War; and one must fall?
Most wretched Martius, thou bleed'st every way;
For know it is sworn betwixt thy Wife and me,
In that cursed hour that Thou despoilst our City,
Thou tread'st upon thy Mother's Earth.

Virg. And mine; and this sweet smiling Flower.

Boy. He shall not tread on me, I Will run away till I am bigger:
But then I Will Fight.

Cor. Not to be struck with Woman's tenderness,
Requires, nor Child's, nor Woman's Face to see.
I have sat too long.

[Descends.] Virg. Nay, go not from us thus:
If it were so, that our Request did tend
To Save the Romans, thereby to Destroy
The Volsces, whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As Poys'ners of your Honor: No, our suit
Is but to Reconcile 'em, that the Volsces
May say, This Mercy we have shown the Romans;
This we received, whilst either Party gives
The Praise to Thee, and bless thy Memory,
For making this dear Peace.

Vol. Thou know my Son,
The event of War's uncertain; but it is certain,
That if thou Conquer Rome, the Benefit
That thou shall reap from thence, is such a Name,
As always shall be mentioned with a Curse:
Thy Chronicle writ thus; The Man was Noble,
But with his last performance stained his Glory,
And left his Roll of Fame, but one foul Blot.
Pause, and reply to this.

Cor. Why chills my Blood?
Like a dull Actor now have I forgot
My Part, and stop even to a full Disgrace:
Away Affection; break ye Bonds of Nature;
In me it is virtuous to be obstinate:
Bid our Drums strike.

Vol. Speak Daughter; Boy, speak thou;
Perhaps thy childishness may move him more,
Than all our Reasons: Never was there Man,
So much to an indulgent Mother bound,
Yet all neglected. Here he sees me begging;
Say my request's unjust, and spurn me back:
But if it be not so -- he turns away.
Down Ladies, let us shame him with our Knees;
He bears more service for his Countries Foes,
Than Pity for our Prayers: Down, and finish;
This is our last; so will we back to Rome,
And dye in the common Slaughter -- Nay, behold
This Boy, that cannot tell what he would have;
Yet Kneels, and with up lifted Hands,
Becomes a pleader for his Country too:
Remorsless still -- Then give us our Dispatch;
We'll speak no more, till Rome be all on Fire.
Then joining Curses with the Crowd, expire.

Cor. O Mother-Goddess, dread Volumnia, turn:
What have you done? Behold the Heavens divide,
And Gods look down on this amazing Scene!
O Mother Goddess, Heaven-born Advocate;
A happy Victory you have gained for Rome,
Though dangerous for your Son. But let it come
Aufidius, though we press not on the War,
We'll frame convenient Peace. Now tell me Warriors,
If you were in my stand, Would you have heard
A Mother less, or granted less, Aufidius?

Auf. I was moved too.

Cor. I dare be sworn you were:
What Peace you will make, advise me; for my part,
I Will not to Rome, but back with you. Lead on,
Sound all our Trumpets -- Ladies you deserve
To have a Temple built you: All Romes Legions,
With their Confed'rate Arms, could never have stood
My sworn Revenge, and turned this Tide of Blood.

The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT the Fifth.
SCENE Rome.
Enter Cominius, and the Nobles leading Volumnia, Virgilia, and young Martius,
with the rest of the Ladies and Attendants, the Citizens shouting. Com. THis
Honor Ladies, might make Juno proud,
To Vol. and Virg. To think whilst you receive The Applause of Rome,
Your Martius triumphs at Corioles:
Corioles, that once has had the Honor
To make Rome tremble.

Enter Valeria. Val. Servant Ladies, your Servant; your Ladyships are most
happily returned: What misfortune had I to be indisposed at such a season:
'Twas the most uncivil Sickness! I swear I had rather have Died at another time!
O the Arguments that I could have used upon this occasion with my Lord
Coriolanus! I could have urged the most invincible Arguments: I would have
talked Greek to him rather than fail; nay, I would have taxt his Breeding in
the business; flatly telling him, he was an uncivil Person to refuse me; and
had never seen Athens.


Vol. Indeed our Conquest was most difficult.

Val. Why Madam, don't I know him? He Is the dearest obstinate Man! Which I
confess in a Vulgar Person, were most inordinately, unsufferable; but in him it
looks so Grand, Heroic, and August, that no Era, Catalogue, Chronicle,
Register, or Annals of Time can ever -- Save me Juno; what, my little Soldier
here too!


[Runs to young Martius. Vol. He was a silent Pleader in our Cause.

Val. I warrant, he loves a Drum better than his Lesson; his Father's own Son:
I swear Madam, I looked on him on Wednesday last -- right, 'twas Wednesday
precisely, (the same time that Madam Pontia told the most egregious Story of a
certain Senators Daughter, which we all swore Seoresy to: pray Madam put me in
mind to tell it presently) I say, I looked at him a whole Hour together; he has
such a fixed, confirmed, severe, austere, Countenance, I warrant -- I saw him
run after a gilded Butterfly; and when he had caught it, he let it go again;
then after it again, and over and over he comes; and whether his Fall enrang'd
him or no, or how 'twas, he did so set his Teeth, and tear it! O Jupiter, How
he Mammockt it!


Virg. One of his Father's Moods.

Val. And I swear Madam, it is the greatest Comfort in nature to have 'em take
after their Ancestors; for when they degenerate, they do as it were recede,
decline, imminnish; which your Ladyship knows in effect amounts to a -- My Lord
Cominius! Your Lordships most humble Servant, I beg your Lordships Pardon most
inordinately.


Com. Madam your Ladyship makes --

Val. I grant you my Lord, your Friendship with him went far in the Business;
pretty Madam Flavia and I, were both of that Opinion.


Com. Your Ladyship too highly --

Val. I hold with you there too my Lord, she is the wittiest Creature when she is
disposed to Talk; but she has too much of my Failing, always silent in Company,
which gives occasion, most inordinately, to the censorious World; insomuch,
that a modest Person must incontinently, and to the outmost -- though your
forward Ladies by reason of a particular -- Oh Jupiter! What was I saying my
Lord?


Com. Even what --

Val. Your Lordship's right again; want of exercising my Tongue, oft-times
confounds my Notion --


[Page Whispers her. Page. Your rival Servants Madam, Flavius and Proculus,
wait for your Ladyships return.


[Enter a Messenger with Letters to Virgilia. Val. Soft -- six Senators, say
thou, staying for me at my House! Some urgent Affair; better I swear be
Ignorant of State-matters than suffer this eternal Trouble: This it is to
Learned and Traveled! I say it is the most insipid Thing not to be Learned and
Traveled! I would not for the World but be disturbed at all Hours upon
Affairs: My Chair there; O Jupiter, no Attendance in this World -- your
Lordship will excuse me on consideration -- and your Ladyships: Your Lordships
most humble Servant; your Servant Ladies; your most humble Servant.


Exit. Verg. O my boding fear!
[Shewing the Letter. Amidst this general Joy begins our Sorrow;
This Mourning we put on for Rome, must now
Become the Dress of our own private sorrow.

Com. What mean those doleful Accents?

Virg. False Nigridius,
(Disbanded for his Villainy by Martius)
Is busy for Revenge; and hourly plots
Against his precious Life: The industry
Of good Menenius sends this information;
Whilst Martius, confident in Innocence,
Is obstinately blind to all his dangers;
Though in the Walls of an offended City,
Whose Streets yet mourn the Slaughter he has made.

Vol. The Gods provide us then more noble Work,
To give our Virtues, yet a brighter Ray:
Come my Virgilia; with our ablest speed,
We will betake us to Corioles.

Com. Consider Madam, what the event may be;
Your Aid uncertain, but your Danger sure.

Virg. Needful Suspicion, necessary Caution,
He reckons only better terms for fear;
His Life is therefore any Villains Prize:
And he that dares not face a waking Env'nuch,
May kill a sleeping Giant.

Boy. Shall not I go too? My Father promised to teach me to Fight: I would fain
learn; and if any body hurts him, I Will kill their Boys now; and them, when I am
bigger.


Vol. Hear'st thou Virgilia? All thy Martius Fire
Lies shrouded in this little Frame, and shall
With Time, break forth into as full a Blaze:
O we delay our Enterprise too long,
And seem ungrateful to the indulgent Powers,
That have decreed our Names, the immortal Glory,
To Save Rome first, and then Coriolanus.

Com. The Gods, whose Temples you preserved, protect you.

Exeunt. Enter Aufidius, and Nigridius. Nigr. Compose this Fury, and recall
your Reason.

Auf. Preach Patience to the Winds, bid Tempests Sleep.
The golden Opportunity is lost,
And I could curse my self as heartily
As ever I did Martius: O Nigridius,
I am a lazy Trifler, and unworthy
To be possessed of the Beauty that I Love,
Or be revenged upon the Man I hate:
Why forced I not my passage to his Heart?
Then pampered in the Banquet of his Blood,
Flown hot, as flame born Pluto, to the Rape;
And quenched the Fevour in Virgilia's Arms.

Nigr. Give over this Frenzy.

Auf. Now each Minute wrecks me,
With the Remembrance of my former Pangs,
Which War had almost hush't, and Blood washed out
Her Dove-like Sorrow, when she begged for Rome,
(With Eyes Tear-charg'd, yet sparkling through the Dew,
Whilst charming Pity dimpled each soft Cheek)
Called back the Scene of my expecting Youth
When with vain promises of Joys to come,
I waked the Night, and watch't the Stars away;
So was I wrapped anew in the dazzling Dream;
Believed her yet unwed; believed my self
The happy Youth designed to Reap her Sweets;
To Lock the tender Beauty in my Arms;
Blushing, yet Granting; Trembling, and yet Embracing.
I shall go Mad with the Imagination.

Nigr. Wake, wake my Lord from this fantastic Maze,
Return her Scorn upon your Rival's head,
And make at least a Mistress of Revenge:
Even now he makes his Entrance at our Gates;
Presuming with a smooth and specious Tale,
To Acquit himself before the credulous People.

Enter an Officer of Aufidious Party. Off. Our Lords of the City, Noble Tullus,
Are met in Council at your Palace, where
They crave your Presence, having Summoned thither
Your Partner Caius Martius, to give in
The Account of his Proceedings in this War;
And to Answer at his Peril all Miscarriage.

Auf. Go, tell 'em I Will attend 'em instantly;
Deliver 'em this Paper, the Contents
Of what I have to Charge on Martius,
And shall make good to his Face.

[Ex. Officer. Nigr. Now Sir, How fares it with you?

Auf. As with a Man by his own Alms empoyson'd.

Nigr. You hold your last Resolve.

Auf. I cannot tell;
We must proceed in it, as we find the People.

Nigr. The People will remain uncertain, whilst
You stand Competitors; but eithers fall,
Leaves the other Heir to All.

Auf. I raised him, pawned my Honor for his Truth,
Whilst the sly Flatterer seduced my Friends,
Softning his Nature, never known before:
So base a Grain of Cynick obstinacy:
Banished from Rome, I furnished him with Power;
Made him joint Partner with me, gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, took some Pride
To do my self this wrong, till at the last,
I seemed his Follower, not his Patron.

Nigr. True,
Our Army wondered at it, and at last,
When he had carried Rome, and that we looked
For no less Spoil, than Glory --

Auf. O there is it!
For which my Sinews shall be stretched upon him.

Nigr. Your Native-Town you entered like a Pilgrim,
And had no welcome Home; whilst he returned,
Tortring the Air with Noise; and patient Fools,
Whose Children he had Slaughtered; tore their Throats,
With shouting his Applause.

Auf. Wreck me no more,
His Tryumphs sleep this Day; then shall thou see,
Thy Tullus Glories bloom a second Spring:
I shall be yet the Wonder of the Crowd,
When this Controller of my Fate is gone:
It Is Odds our Senate doom him; but if not,
I Will have my Party planted near -- thy News.

Enter the Officer. Off. My Lord, the Council have perused your Paper,
And summon your Appearance instantly.
What will surprise you more: I met even now
Volumnia with Virgilia, and young Martius,
Just entered our Corioles,
And hastily enquiring for your Palace;
Menenius at that instant passing by.

Auf. Thou tell me Wonders, but I know thy Truth.
Nigridius, help me now to play this Game,
And draw at once our Net over the whole Covey:
They have not yet seen Martius.

Off. No, -- Menenius offering to Conduct 'em to him,
They grew divided in their Resolutions;
Virgilia held it best to seek out you,
Presuming on her former Power with you;
But what they did determine on --

Auf. No more.
Nigridius, take our Guard along with you,
Whilst I attend the Council; Seize 'em All,
Before they can attain to speak with Martius;
Dispose 'em privately within our Palace;
Virgilia by her self; you know my drift:
For soon as I Have secured my Rivals Life,
All stained in the Husbands Blood, I Will Force the Wife.

[Exeunt. SCENE, A Palace.
The Lords of Corioles, as set in Council. 1 Lord. Let Justice, Lords, reward
his Services,
Far as his Conduct shall be worthy found:
It Is not unknown what Deeds he has performed,
Since first he had the Leading of our Powers;
Molesting hourly Romes confed'rate Cities;
Restoring our lost Fields made rich with Blood;
Our burdened Soldiers groaned beneath the Spoil:
Yet -- there to make a Hault in's Action,
Where most his Resolution was required;
To flinch our Service at the Gates of Rome,
And make a Treaty where he should have Stormed;
Admits of no excuse, and I propose it
To your impartial Censures -- See he comes.

Enter Coriolanus; Aufidius on the other side. Cor. Hail Lords, I am returned
your Soldier;
No more infected with my Countries Love,
Than when I parted hence: be pleased to know,
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage Led your War,
Even to the Gates of Rome; our Spoils brought home,
Ten times over pay the Charges of the Action:
The Peace which with the Romans we have made,
Brings no less honor to Corioles,
Than shame to Rome. Behold their Consul's Hand,
With the Patricians, and the Seal of the Senate
To Composition, such as never was gained
By proudest Conqueror from the pettyest State:
Peruse it, and approve my Services.

Auf. Ha! that again: Lords, heard you what he said?

Cor. I say, I Will have my Services approved.

Auf. Wrong not so much your Patience Lords, to Read
That fabulous Commentary, but forthwith
Give Sentence on his most apparent --

Cor. Ha!
May I believe my Sense? Down swelling Heart,
Thou were my Partner, Tullus; but take heed,
No more I say, and thank me for this warning.

Auf. O Vanity!

Cor. I say let me be Calm.

Auf. Out Blast -- Read not the Paper, Lords,
But tell the Traitor --

Cor. Traitor!

Auf. That, Martius.

Cor. Martius?

Auf. I, Martius, Caius Martius, Do thou think,
I Will grace thee with thy Robbery, thy stolen Name --
Coriolanus in Corioles.
Most awful Lords of the State, perfidiously
He has betrayed your Business, and given up,
(For certain drops of Dew) your City Rome;
I say your City to his Wife and Mother,
Breaking his Oath of Service; called no Council
Of War on This; but at his Nurses Tears,
He whin'd and roared away your Victory:
For a few Tears, sold all our Blood and Labor,
Whilst Pages blush't at him, and Men of heart,
Looked wondering at each other.

Cor. Hear'st thou Mars!

Auf. Name not the fiery God, thou Boy of Tears.

Cor. Scorpions and Basilisks!

All Lords. Silence on your Lives.

Cor. Measureless Liar, thou have made my Heart,
Too big for what contains it: Boy? Oh Slave!
Carrion-breed, creeping Infect: Lords your Pardon;
It Is the first time I e're was forced to Brawl,
But your grave Judgment will consent with me,
To give this Fiend the Lie: Nay, his own Brawn,
That wears my Stripes, his Vassal Body, that
Must bear my Beatings with it to the Grave --
Cut me to pieces Volsces, Pound, Calcine me,
And throw my Dust to the Wind; yet when yo've done;
If you have Writ your Annals true, it is there,
There Registered to all Posterity,
That, as an Eagle in a Dove-coat, so
Was Martius Slaught'ring in Corioles.

Auf. Dye Insolent.

Stamps with his Foot, the Conspirators Enter, and help him to wound Martius,
who kills some, and hurts Aufidius. The Lords rise, and come forward. 1 Lord.
Guards, Guards, secure 'em both.
Tread not upon him; off:
O Tullus, thou have done a deed, at which,
Valor will Weep.

Auf. Pray give me hearing,

[A confused Noise heard from abroad. 2 Lord. Hark what Confusion storms
without.

Enter Nigridius hastily. Nigr. Have, have my Lords, disperse to every Quarter,
Our City's up in Arms, Aufidius Legions
Opposed by those were led by Caius Martius.
Prepare for dreadful Battle in our Streets,
Unless your speedy presence quell their Fury.

1 Lord. Disperse my Lords, each to a several Quarter,
With your best skill, to quench these threatening Flames.

[Exeunt Lords severally. Nigr. Cursed chance! Why bought you your Revenge so
dear?

Auf. There Is Blood upon thee.

Nigr. Blood long Thirsted for.

[The Noise continues' Cor. It Is just you Gods, to give my Death this Pomp;
It Is fit, that when Coriolanus Dies,
Corioles shall fall their Sacrifice;
Even thou my Bond-slave follow'st in the Triumph;
Have then, and wait me to the nether World.

Auf. No, I have yet a pleasant Scene to Act;
My Bliss; but Fiend, thy Hell; bring in Virgilia.

Cor. Virgilia?

Auf. Yes, she is here, here in the Palace;
Out of her Roman Virtue come to seek you,
And spy those dangers out, which you were blind to;
Thou Wilt not believe thy Foe, but hark, she comes;
I charge thee Dye not yet, till thou have seen
Our Scene of Pleasures; to thy Face I Will Force her;
Glut my last Minuits with a double Riot;
And in Revenges Sweets and Loves, Expire.
Virgilia brought in Wounded. In Blood? Nigridius look! Behold a sight,
Would turn the Gorgon-Snakes -- my Rage is gone,
And I am touched with Sorrow -- my faint Nerves
Refuse my Weight, and hasty Death invades
At every Pore -- Oh Dark! dark! O, O.

[Dies. Virg. Betray me not thou sluggish Blood, stream faster,
I, now the stubborn Heart resigns, and takes
The proud Destroyer to her inmost Courts.

Cor. O Heaven!

Virg. It Is near, for that was Martius Voice;
My Eyes are dim; but that dear Sound again;
O where, my dear Lord? Speak!

Cor. If I do wake,
And that bright dismal Object be Virgilia,
Tell me what Sacrilegious Hand has stained,
The whitest Innocence that Heaven e're formed:
What Rage could hurt a Gentleness like thine,
Whose tender Soul could weep
Over dying Roses, and at Blossoms fall?
Tell me thou Turtle, ruffled in a Storm;
What chance seduced thee to these Caves of Slaughter?
What means that purple Dew upon thy Breast?

Virg. My Noble Martius, it is a Roman Wound,
Given by Virgilia's Hand, that rather chose
To sink this Vessel in a Sea of Blood,
Than suffer its chaste Treasure, to become
The unhallowed Pirates Prize; but Oh the Gods,
The indulgent Gods have lodged it in thy Bosoms!
The Port, and Harbor of eternal Calms:
O Seal with thy dear Hand these dying Eyes;
To these cold Cheeks lay thine; and to thy Breast
Take my unspotted Soul, in this last Sigh.

[Dyes. Cor. Make way ye Stars, a nobler Brightness comes:
Ariadne shall to thee resign her Crown;
Yet my Virgilia mount not to thy Merit,
But grace the Orb thy Martius shall attain:
My Grief talks Idly -- Cold my Love? She Is gone;
And on her Cheeks a scattered Purple smiles,
Like streaks of Sunshine from a setting Day:
But Oh my Heart! My Fears expire not here!
Volumnia, and my little darling Boy;
Where are they? Some kind God descend to inform me.

Nigr. Trouble not Heaven for your Intelligence.

Cor. Nigridius here? Then Heaven indeed is distant!

Nigr. With silent Transport, Martius, I have stood
To see thy Pangs; to have hastened on thy Death,
Had been too poor Revenge; remember Martius,
The Stripes, and foul disgrace thou laid'st upon me,
When once I bear Commission under thee:
Thou made me pass the Fork before my Soldiers,
Discarded, Branded, Hooted from the Camp.

Cor. I do remember thy unequalled Villainy:
Had exemplary Punishment.

Nigr. That day
Thou drew'st this Blood from thy own Vitals, Martius:
It Is thy young Boys, whom I this Hour have Mangled,
Gash't, Racked, Distorted.

Cor. O this Tale of Horror,
Would rouse the sleeping Father from his Grave!
Yet Strength forsakes me for the dear Revenge.
Well, Cerberus, How then did thou dispose him?
Did eat him?

Nigr. Having killed your old Menenius,
Offering his feeble Vengeance, straight I threw
The Tortured Brat, with Limbs all broke (yet living
In quickest Sense of Pain) I say, I threw him
Into Volumnia's Arms, who still retained
Her Roman Temper; till with bitter Language,
And most insulting, added to her Sufferings;
I roused her silent Grief, to loud Disorder;
Then left her to the Tempest of her Fury,
To Act my Part, and be her own Tormenter.

Cor. Convultions! Fevers! blewest Pestilence!
Sleep on Virgilia, Wake not to a Story,
Whose Horror would exceed the Force of Death,
And turn thee into Stone.

Enter Volumnia Distracted, with young Martius under her Arm. Vol. Soft, soft;
steal but the Watch word whilst they Sleep,
And we pass Free.

Cor. Furies! The Fiend spoke Truth.
O my poor Boy! Most wretched Mother, Oh!

Vol. Strike, strike your Torches, bid the Stars descend!
We wander in the Dark.
Hark! Boreas musters up his roaring Crew;
My Wings, and I Will among 'em; wreath my Head
With flaming Meteors; load my Arm with Thunder;
Which as I nimbly cut my cloudy Way,
I Will hurl on the ungrateful Earth, and laugh
To hear the Mortals Yelling.

Nigr. Mark you this?

Vol. I, there is the Hesperian Dragon, I must pass him,
Before I reach the golden Bough; there Cerberus,
'Gorge thy cursed Maw with that, and cease thy Barking;
It Is a delicious Morsel.

Cor. Earth and Heaven!.
Is this Volumnia? Martius awful Mother,
And Romes Minerva.

Boy. Dear Sir speak to my Grand Mother,
Perhaps she will answer you.

Vol. Ha! What a merry World is this Elysium!
See how the youthful Sheepherds trip to the Pipe,
And fat Silenus waddles in the Round.
Beware thy Horns, Pan, Cupid's with their Bow-strings
Have tied 'em fast to the Tree! Ah, ha! ha! ha!
What Is that? -- a Summons to me from the Gods?
Back Mercury, and tell 'em I Will appear.
All Heaven shall know how much I have been wronged:
They tore my little Martius from my Arms;
Broke all his innocent Limbs before my Face.
Indeed I never did deserve this usage;
For I was always Kind and Charitable;
For Virtue famed; and as I do remember,
'Twas I saved Rome, preserved ten thousand Infants,
From being Massacred like my poor Boy!
How? Juno dead! The Thunderer then is mine,
And I Will have more than Juno's privilege:
See how the Ether smoaks, the Christaline
Falls clatt'ring down! This giddy Phaeton
Will set the World on Fire! Down with him Jove:
Will thou not Bolt him? -- Then I Will Act thy Part,
Force from thy slothful Hand the flaming Dart;
And thus I strike my Thunder through his Heart.

Snatches a Partizan from the foremost of the Guards, and strikes Nigridius
through, as she runs off. Cor. There struck the Gods.

Boy. Look where my Mother sleeps, pray wake her Sir;
I have heard my Nurse speak of a dying Child,
And fancy it is now just so with me;
I fain would hear my Mother bless me first.

Cor. My pretty Innocence, she does not sleep.

Boy. Perhaps then I have done some Fault, makes her
Not speak to me.

Cor. O Gods! may this be born!

Boy. I fain would clasp you too; but when I try
To lift my Arms up to your Neck,
There Is something holds 'em.

Cor. Thy Torturers my Boy have crippled 'em,
And gash't thy pretty Cheeks.

Boy. I know you Loved 'em;
But truly 'twas no fault of mine; they did it
Because I would not cry; and I have heard
My Grandmother say, a Roman General's Son:
Should never cry.

Cor. O Nature! A true Breed!

Boy. It Is grown all Dark o'th sudden, and we sink
I know not whether; good Sir hold me fast.

[Dies. Cor. Fast as the Arms of Death: Now come my Pangs,
The chilling Damp prevails upon my Heart.
Thus, as the Inhabitant of some sacked Town,
The Flames grown near, and Foe hard pressing on,
In have lays hold on his most precious Store:
Then to some peaceful Country takes his Flight:
So, grasping in each Arm my Treasure, I
Pleased with the Prize, to Deaths calm Region Fly.

[Dies. FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoken by Valeria.

WHat? No Attendance in this World? -- make way:
Where are our noisy Bussying Critics? They
That heard no Scene, and Yet damn all the Play!
Run down by Masks; to their old Shift they flee,
And Rail at us, for want of Repertee!
Well Gentlemen, how e're you doom to Night,
Methinks this Company's a blessed sight,
And shows the Realm's disorder coming Right.
As we Thrive, with the Public it does pass:
The Playhouse is the Nation's Weather-Glass;
Where like to the Quicksilver the Audience, still
As the State goes, is found to Ebb or Fill.
Shall I Inform you one thing Gallants? We
In our Vocation with the Saints agree:
For as their Holders-forth, their Flock enchant,
So we our Audience charm with Noise and Rant:
It Is thus we Please; and I dare take my Oath,
That Decency and Sense, would Break us Both.

