A Brief account of SOME EXPRESSIONS IN Saint ATHANASIVS HIS CREED: For the
satisfaction of those who think themselves thereby obliged, to believe all
things therein contained to be absolutely necessary to SALVATION.

OXONIENSIS ACADEMIA


OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Tho. Robinson,
1663.

A brief account of some Expressions in ATHANASIUS his Creed, etc.
FOrasmuch as many who are sufficiently convinced of the truth, are yet
unsatisfi'd as to the absolute necessity of beleiving, all the Articles of the
Athanasian Creed (which yet several passages therein seem but too dogmatically
to impose); Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he
hold the Catholic Faith. Which Faith except every one do keep whole and
undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly etc. again; it is
necessary to everlasting salvation that he also believe rightly in the
incarnation etc. This is the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe
faithfully he cannot be saved.
I thought I might do a piece of acceptable service to endeavor to remove that
scruple, and thereby engage them the more readily to conform to the Liturgy of
our Church. In prosecution of which design though I might take another course,
by demonstrating that most things in it are absolutely necessary to salvation;
yet I shall choose rather to show, that our Church does not propose that Creed
to us as such, because that will be abundantly satisfactory to all those who
are convinced of the truths it contains. Now this I shall do in these three
assertions, 1. That our Church does not require an explicit belief of all the
Articles of that Creed, as absolutely necessary to Salvation. 2. That it does
not require such a belief of all things contained in the Apostles Creed,
though that be more simple, and received by all that profess themselves
Christians. 3. And lastly, that the Articles of our Church give sufficient
testimony to my opinion, and to both the former assertions, upon which it is
chiefly built.


And first of all, that our Church does not require an explicit belief of all
the Articles of Athanasius his Creed as absolutely necessary to Salvation, is
evident from her forms of Baptizing both infants and adult persons. For she
there admits both sorts to baptism (and consequently to the hopes of
Salvation) upon the profession of the Apostles Creed, which is not so explicit
as that of Athanasius. The strength of which argument will more fully appear,
if we consider the opinion the Church of England has of Baptism, which is
that it renders the baptized person a Seeing now dearly beloved brethren that
this Child or these Persons are regenerate and grafted into the body of Christ's
Church. Form of Baptizing Infants and those of riper years.


Child of God (and where the force of it is not voided by actual sin) an It is
certain by Gods Word that Children which are baptized dying before they commit
actual sin are undoubtedly saved Rubr. of Public Baptism, etc.
undoubted Heir of Heaven. For if it admits even adult persons to the
participation of that Baptism (which it acknowledges to make them the
Children of God, and Heirs of Eternal Glory) and that too upon their
profession of their belief of the Apostles Creed; then does it not require an
explicit belief of Athanasius his, as absolutely necessary to Salvation. For
as it is certain, that the Apostles Creed is not so explicit as that of
Athanasius; so is it no less, that no adult person can be a Child of God and
an Heir of Heaven, without believing all those things that are absolutely
necessary to Salvation. Let it therefore remain as an undoubted truth, that
our Church does not require an explicit belief of all the Articles of
Athanasius his Creed as absolutely necessary to Salvation. But

Secondly, Neither does she require such a belief of all things in the
Apostles Creed, though that be the more simple and received by all that
profess themselves Christians; the Church of England proposing it not in all
and every Article as absolutely necessary to be believed, but as the Condition
of that Communion into which she admits us upon the profession of it. For

1. She requires not any such assent in the forementioned forms of Baptism,
as will be evident to any that shall consult them. 2. If she thought all those
Articles absolutely necessary to be believed, she could not make any
distinction between them as to the necessity of believing them; because there
can be none in those Articles which are absolutely necessary to be believed:
But the Church makes such a distinction between the several Articles of the
Apostles Creed, calling some principal and others not: The Minor is evident
from the Church-Catechisme, where after the recitation of the Articles of the
Apostles Creed, she there demands of the Catechumen what he does chiefly learn
in the Articles of his belief. And the Answer that is returned is no other
than this, First I learn to believe in God the Father who has made me and all
the world. Secondly in God the Son who has redeemed me and all mankind.
Thirdly in God the Holy Ghost who sanctifies me and all the elect people of
God.
3ly, She allows of several interpretations of some Articles, and those too
quite different from one another, and cannot therefore be supposed, to propose
all the Articles as absolutely necessary to be believed. For that which is
such, must bear the same sense to all persons, because all men have the same
concernments in what is absolutely necessary to be believed: But those Articles
which may be received with different interpretations, cannot bear the same
sense to all persons, and cannot therefore be thought to be proposed as
absolutely necessary to be believed. I instance in the Article of Christ's
descent into Hell, which it is notorious the Church of England allows men to
receive in several senses; the most Considerable members thereof having
delivered different interpretations; and that too without any censure from the
Church for so doing. Thus the late Learned Dr Hammond in his Practical
Catechism understands by Christ's descent into Hell, his continuance for some
time in the state of the dead, and Dr Pearson his descending into the common
receptacle of departed Souls: whilst others understand it of his descent into
hell properly so called, either to triumph over infernal spirits as some, or
as others for other reasons; and yet all of them agreeably enough with the
third Article of our Church, which only makes his descent into hell distinct
from his death and burial. I conclude then that Christ's descent into hell, is
not proposed to us to be believed as absolutely necessary to salvation; for if
it were, it cannot be thought the Church would allow of so many
interpretations, and receive those into her communion who accept the Article in
any one. 4ly, and lastly, There are many things in the Creed, which are but
circumstances of the Articles; as Christ's suffering under Pontius Pilate, and
rising the third day. For though those circumstances are set down so clearly in
Scripture, that no man can doubt of them, and the belief of them may be
therefore exacted of us as the condition of our communion; yet can they not be
thought to be absolutely necessary to be believed. Because the not-believing of
what is such, must necessarily damn us, which I suppose no man yet did ever
affirm of the not believing those circumstances; provided the person not
believing them, did believe the Articles themselves, and was utterly
unacquainted with those circumstances through no fault of his at all. It Is
true, it is hard to suppose any such ignorance among Christians; but the
supposition however is not impossible, and for ought I know there may have bin
such ignorance in the late licentious times, when the Apostles Creed was turned
out of the Church, and the Scripture seldom read in the Assemblies. The
circumstances then of the Articles are not absolutely necessary to be believed;
and no man can think, this or any other Church ever proposed them as such:
especially if he consider, that the Papists themselves are not so great
imposers, and accept their weak disciples upon an implicit faith of their
determinations.
III.
The third and last thing, upon which I ground my opinion, is the express
words of one of the 39 Articles. For in the eighth of those 39, it is delivered
in express terms, that the three Creeds of the Church ought therefore
thoroughly to be believed, because they may be proved by most certain warrant
of Holy Scripture; laying the necessity of our thoroughly believing them, not
upon the absolute necessity of the things therein contained, but upon the
certain warrant they have from the Holy Scripture. But so is it necessary for
me to believe that there was such a man as Solomon, and that he did sometime
determine a nice case between two harlots in Judea, because there is certain
warrant both for the one and the other in Holy Scripture; and yet no man did
ever affirm, that a man could not be saved without believing them. The
difference between such truths, and those that are absolutely necessary to
salvation is this: without a positive belief of the latter it is impossible to
be saved, whilst the not believing, yea the disbelieving of the former cannot
prejudice me at all; unless I have bin either slothful in the enquiry after
truth, or have refused to give up my assent to it after it has been duly
proposed to me. Do I then say that the three Creeds contain no other truths,
than what I may be ignorant of without the loss of eternal glory? Far be it
from me so to affirm; for I believe the most things in each of them are
absolutely necessary to salvation, such as I account the simple doctrine of the
Trinity, the death and resurrection of Christ etc; But this I say, that there
are somethings in those Creeds, which are not absolutely necessary to
salvation; and that our Church is so tender even in those Articles it presses
upon the Clergy, that it does not distinguish between fundamentalls and others,
but recommends the creeds in the gross to be received by all her children,
without acknowledging any other necessity of the belief of the whole, than
what arises from the certain warrant they have in the word of God, and a due
proposal of them to the understanding. The only thing that can be objected
against the precedent discourse is, the forementioned passages in several
places of Athanasius his Creed, which seem to make the whole of that nature,
that a man cannot be saved without believing it. But to this I answer,

1. That those passages are no part of the Creed it self, and that it cannot
be thought, our Church intended to burden us with them, after so great
evidence as I have produced to the contrary: It may more rationally be
believed, that allowing the whole doctrine therein contained to be of very
great importance, she was unwilling to put it in other terms than in those it
had been transmitted to her, especially having sufficiently fortified us
against the harshnesse of the expressions.

2. That most things in the Creed are absolutely necessary to be believed, and
that the rest are so too after a due proposal to the understanding; which few
men can say has been wanting in this Church of ours, where the Scriptures,
wherein they are not obscurely contained, have been so duly read and
explicated. I will conclude this brief discourse with a passage of Dr
Hammonds, and I do it the rather because he is known to have been one of this
Churches greatest Champions. It is in his Treatise of Fundamentalls. c. 10.
Sect. 3. As for the censures annexed to the Athanasian Creed, 1. in the
beginning [ that except a man keep the Catholic Faith (of which this is set
down, not as the entire form, but an explication or interpretation of some
parts of it) whole and undefiled, he shall doubtless perish everlastingly]
2ly, In the middle [he that will be saved must thus think] and [ it is
necessary to everlasting Salvation that he also believe rightly in the
Incarnation etc.] And 3ly, in the end [this is the Catholic Faith, which
except a man believe faithfully he cannot be sav'd] I suppose they must be
interpreted by their opposition to those Heresies that had invaded the Church,
and which were acts of carnality in them that broached, and maintained them,
against the Apostolic Doctrine, and contradictory to that foundation which had
bin resolved on, as necessary to bring the world to the obedience of Christ,
and were therefore to be anathematized after this manner and with detestation
branded and banished out of the Church; Not that it was hereby defined to be a
damnable sin, to fail in the understanding, or believing the full matter of
any of those explications, before they were propounded, and when it might more
reasonably be deemed not to be any fault of the will, to which this were
imputable.

Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace and
things wherewith one may edify another.
FINIS.

