Sad and Deplorable NEVVES FROM New England. Poetically Related by an
Inhabitant there, and Newly sent over to a Merchant in LONDON.

BEING A TRUE NARRATIVE OF NEW-ENGLANDS Lamentable Estate at present,
Occasioned by many un-heard of Cruelties, Practiced upon the Persons and
Estates of its United Colonies, without Respect of Sex, Age or Quality of
Persons by the barbarous Heathen thereof.

depiction of scene of David and Goliath With Allowance


LONDON, Printed for H. J. Anno Dom. 1676.

THE PROLOGUE.
THE times wherein old Pompion was a Saint,
When men fared hardly yet without complaint
On vilest Cates; the dainty Indian Maize
Was eat with Clamp shells out of wooden Trayes
Under thatcht Hutts without the cry of Rent,
And the best Sauce to every Dish, Content.
When Flesh was food, and hairy skins made coats,
And Men as well as Birds had chirping Notes.
When Cimnels were accounted Noble Blood,
Among the tribes of common herbage food.
Of Ceres bounty formed was many knack,
Enough to fill poor Robins Almanac.
These golden times (too fortunate to hold)
Were quickly sinned away for love of gold.
'Twas then among the bushes, not the street,
If one in place did an inferior meet,
Good Morrow Brother; Is there ought you want?
Take freely of me what I have, you ha'nt.
Plain Tom and Dick would pass as current now,
As ever since, Your Servant Sir, and bow.
Deep skirted doublets, Puritanick capes,
(Which now would render men like upright Apes)
Was comelier wear our wiser Fathers thought,
Then the cast fashions from all Europe brought.
'Twas in those days an honest Grace would hold
Till an hot Puddin grew at heart a cold.
And men had better stomachs to Religion,
Then I to Capon, Turkey cock or Pigeon.
When honest Sisters met to pray, not prate
About their own, and not their Neighbors state.
During Plain-Dealings Reign, that worthy Stud
Of the Ancient Planters Race before the Flood.
These Times were good, Merchants cared not a rush
For other fare then Jonakin and Mush.
Although men fared and lodged very hard,
Yet Innocence was better then a Guard.
New Englands Beauties, which still seemed to me
Illustrious in their own simplicity.
'Twas ere the Neighboring Virgin-land had broke
The Hogsheads of her worse then hellish smoke.
'Twas ere the Islands sent their Presents in,
Which but to use was counted next to sin.
'Twas ere a Barge had made so rich a freight
As Chocolate, dust Gold and bits of Eight.
Ere Wines from France and Moscovadoe too,
Without the which the drink will scarcely do.
From Western Isles, ere fruits and delicacies,
Did rot Maids teeth, and spoil their handsome faces*
Or ere these times did chance, the noise of War
Was from our towns and hearts removed far.
No Bugbear Comets in the Crystal Air,
To drive our Christian Planters to despair.
No sooner Pagan malice peeped forth,
But Valor snib'd it; then were men of worth
Who by their Prayers slew thousands, Angel like,
Their weapons are unseen with which they strike.
Then had the Churches rest, as yet the coals
Were covered up in most contentious souls.
Freeness in Judgment, Union in Affection,
Dear Love, sound Truth, they were our grand Protection;
These were the Twins which in our Councels sat,
These gave Prognostics of our future fate;
If these be longer-liv'd our hopes increase,
These wars will usher in a longer Peace:
But if New Englands love die in its youth
The Grave will open next for blessed Truth*
This Theme is out of date, the Peaceful Hours
When Castles needed not but pleasant Bowers.
Nor ink but blood and tears now serve the turn
To draw the figure of New Englands Urn.
New Englands hour of passion is at hand,
No power except Divine can it withstand;
Scarce has her Glass of fifty years run out,
But her old prosperous Steeds turn heads about,
Tracking themselves back to their poor beginnings,
To fear and fare upon their fruits of sinnings:
So that the Mirror of the Christian world
Lies burnt to heaps in part, her Streamers furled
Grief reigns, joys flee, and dismal fears surprise,
Not dastard spirits only, but the wise.
Thus have the fairest hopes deceived the eye
Of the big swollen Expectant standing by.
Thus the proud Ship after a little turn
Sinks into Neptunes arms to find its Urn.
Thus has the Heir to many thousands born
Been in an instant from the Mother torn.
Even thus thine Infant-cheeks begin to pale.
And thy supporters, through great losses, fail.
This is the Prologue to thy future woe
The Epilogue no Mortal yet can know.
Sad and Deplorable News from New England.
IN Seventy Five the Critic of our years
Commenced our war with Philip and his Peers.
Whither the Sun in Leo had inspired
A feav'rish heat, and Pagan spirits fired?
Whither some Rom^sh Agent hatched the plot?
Or whither they themselves? appears not.
Whither our Infant-thrivings did invite?
Or whither to our Lands pretended right?
Is hard to say; but Indian spirits need
No grounds but Lust to make a Christian bleed.
And here, methinks, I see this greazy Lout
With all his Pagan slaves coil'd round about,
Assuming all the Majesty his throne
Of rotten stump, or of the rugged stone
Could yield; casting some bacon-rine-like looks,
Enough to fright a Student from his books,
Thus treat his Peers, and next to them his Commons,
Kennel'd together all without a summons.
My friends, our Fathers were not half so wise
As we our selves who see with younger eyes:
They sell our Land to English Men, who teach
Our Nation also fast to pray and preach.
Of all our country they enjoy the best,
And quickly they intend to have the rest.
This no wunnegin so big matchit law
Which our old fathers fathers never saw.
These English make, and we must keep them too,
Which is too hard for them or us to do.
We drink we so big whipped, but English they
Go sneep, no more, or else a little pay.
Me meddle Squaw me hanged, our fathers kept
What Squaws they would whether they wak't or slept
Now if you will fight I Will get you English coats,
And wine to drink out of their Captains throats:
The richest Merchants houses shall be ours,
We'll lie no more on mats or dwell in bowers.
We'll have their silken wives, take they our Squaws,
They shall be whipped by virtue of our Laws:
If ere we strike, it is now before they swell
To greater swarms then we know to quell.
This my Resolve, let neighboring Sachems know,
And every one that has Club, Gun or Bow,
This was assented to, and for a close
He strok't his smutty beard, and cursed his foes.
This counsel lightning like their tribes invade,
And something like a muster's quickly made,
A ragged regiment, a naked swarm,
Whom hopes of booty does with courage arm,
Set forth with bloody hearts, the first they meet
Of men or beasts, they butcher at their feet.
They round our skirts* they pare, they fleece, they kill,
And to our bordering towns do what they will.
Poor Hovills (better far then Caesar's Court
In the experience of the meaner sort)
Receive from them their doom next execution;
By flames reduced to horror and confusion:
Here might be seen the smoking funeral Piles
Of wildred towns pitched distant many miles.
Here might be seen the infant from the breast
Snatched by a pagan hand to lasting rest:
The mother Rachel-like shrieks out my child,
She wrings her hands and raves as she were wild.
The brutish wolves suppress her anxious moan
By crueltyes more deadly of her own.
Will she or nill the chastest turtle must
Taste of the pangs of their unbridled lust.
From farms to farms, from towns to towns they post
They strip, they bind, they ravish, flea and roast.
The beasts which wont their masters crib to know,
Over the ashes of their shelters low.
What the inexorable flames do spare
More cruel Heathen lug away for fare.
These tidings ebbing from the outward parts,
Makes Tradesmen cast aside their wonted Arts
And study Arms: the craving Merchants plot
Not to augment but keep what they have got.
And every soul which has but common sense
Thinks it the time to make a just defense.
Alarm every where resound in streets,
From West sad tidings with the Eastern meets.
Our common Fathers in their Councels close
A martial treaty with the Pagan Foes;
All Answers center here, that Fire and Sword
Must make their Sachem universal Lord.
This arms the English with a resolution
To give the vapouring Scab a Retribution.
Heavens they consult by Prayer, the best design
A furious foe to quell or undermine.
RESOLVED that from the Massachusetts bands
Be pressed on service some Herculean hands;
And certainly he well deserved a jerk,
That slipped the Collar from so good a work.
Some Volunteers, some by compulsion go,
To range the hideous Forest for a foe.
The tender Mother now is all bowels grown,
Clings to her son as if they would melt in one.
Wives clasp about their Husbands as the Vine,
Hugs the fair Elm while tears burst out like Wine.
The new sprung love in many a Virgin-heart
Swells to a Mountain when the Lovers part.
Nephews and Kindred turn all springs of tears,
Their hearts are so surpised with pannick fears:
But doleful shrieks of captives summon Forth
Our walking Castles, men of noted worth,
Made all of life, each Captain was a Mars,
His name too strong to stand on wat'rish verse:
Due praise I leave to some Poetic hand,
Whose Pen and Wits are better at command.
Methinks I see the Trojan-Horse burst open,
And such rush forth as might with Giants cope:
These first the Natives treachery felt, too fierce
For any but eye witness to rehearse.
Yet sundry times in places where they came
Upon the Indian skins they carved their name.
The trees stood Sentinels, and bullets flew
From every bush (a shelter for their crew)
Hence came our wounds and deaths from every side,
While sculking enemies squat undescri'd,
That every stump shot like a Musquetier,
And Bows with Arrows every tree did bear.
The Swamps were Courts of Guard, thither retired
The straggling blew-Coats when their Guns were fired
In dark Meanders, and these winding Groves,
Where Bears and Panthers with their Monarch moves.
These far more cruel slily hidden lay,
Expecting English men to move that way.
One Party lets them slip, the other greets
Them with the next thing to their winding sheets;
Most fall, the rest thus startled back return,
And from their bypast foes receive an urn.
Here fell a Captain, to be named with tears,
Who for his Courage left not many Peers,
With many more who scarce a number left
To tell how treacherously they were bereft.
This flusht the Pagan-courage, now they think
The victory theirs, not lacking meat or drink.
The ranging Wolves find here and there a prey,
And having filled their paunch they run away
By their Hosts light, the thanks which they return
Is to lead Captives, and their Taverns burn.
Many whose thrift had stored for after-use
Sustain their wicked plunder and abuse.
Poor people spying an unwonted light,
Fearing a Martyrdom, in sudden fright
Leap to the door to fly, but all in vain,
They are surrounded with a Pagan train;
Their first salute is death, which if they shun,
Some are condemned the Gauntelet to run;
Death would a mercy prove to such as those
Who feel the rigor of such hellish foes.
Posts daily on their Pegase^^ Steeds,
Bring sad Reports of worse then Nero's deeds;
Such brutish Murders as would paper stain,
Not to be heard in a Domitians Reign.
The Field which Nature hid is common laid,
And Mothers Bodies ripped for lack of aid.
The secret Cabinets which Nature meant
To hide her Masterpiece is open rent;
The half-form'd Infant there receives a death
Before it sees the light, or draw its breath;
Many hot welcomes from the Natives arms,
Hid in their sculking holes, many alarms
Our brethren had, and weary weary trants,
Sometimes in melting heats and pinching wants:
Sometimes the Clouds with sympathizing tears,
Ready to burst, discharged about their ears;
Sometimes on craggy hills, anon in bogs
And miry swamps better befitting hogs,
And after tedious Marches, little boast
Is to be heard of stewed, or baked, or roast,
Their b^ds are Hurdles, open house they keep
Through shady boughs the sta^s upon them peep;
Their Crystal drink drawn from the Mothers breast
Disposes not to mirth, but sleep and rest.
Thus many days and weeks some months run out
To find and quell the vagabonding Rout,
Who like Enchanted Castles fair appear,
But all is vanished if you come but near;
Just so we might the Pagan Archers track
With towns and Merchandise upon their back;
And thousands in the South who settled down,
To all the Points and Winds are quickly blown.
At many Meetings of their fleeting crew,
From whom, like hail, arrows and bullets flew:
The English courage with whole swarms dispute,
Hundreds they hack in pieces in pursuit.
Sed haud impune, English sides do feel,
As well as tawny skins, the lead and steel;
And some such gallant Sparks by bullets fell,
As might have cursed the Powder back to Hell:
Had only Swords these Skirmishes decided
All Pagan Sculls had been long since divided.
The lingering War out-lives the Summer-Sun,
Who hence departs hoping it might be done
Ere his Return at Spring; but ah, he will find
The Sword still drawn, men of unchanged mind.
Cold Winter now nibbles at hands and toes
And shrewdly pinches both our friends and foes.
Fierce Boreas whips the Pagan tribe together,
Advising them to fit for Foes and Weather:
The Axe which late had tasted Christian blood,
Now sets its steely teeth to feast on wood.
The forests suffer now, by weight constrained
To kiss the Earth with soldiers lately brained.
The lofty Oaks and Ash do wag their head
To see so many of their Neighbors dead;
Their fallen Carcasses are carried thence
To stand our Enemies in their defense.
Their Myrmidous enclosed with clefts of Trees,
Are busy like the Ants or nimble Bees:
And first they limber Poles fix in the ground,
In figure of the Heavens unequal ^ all round
They draw their Arras-mats, and skins of beasts,
And under these the E^ves do make their Nests.
Rome took more time to grow then twice six hours,
But half that time will serve for Indian bowers.
A City shall be reared in one days space
As shall an hundred Englishmen outface.
In several Precincts there swarms unite,
Rather to keep a Winter-Guard then fight;
A them and dismal Swamp some Scout had found
Whose bosom was a spot of rising ground,
Hedged up with mighty Oaks, Maples and Ashes,
Nursed up with springs, quick bogs, and miry plashes,
A Place which Nature coined on very nonce
For tigers, not for Men to be a Sconce.
'Twas here these Monsters, shaped and faced like men,
Took up their Rendezvous and b^umal den,
Deeming the depth of snow, hail, frost and ice,
Would make our Infantry more tame and wise,
Then by forsaking beds and loving Wives,
Merely for Indian skins to hazard lives:
These hopes had something calmed the boiling passion
Of this in^orrigible warlike Nation.
During this short Parenthesis of Peace
Our forces found, but left him not at ease.
Here English valor most illustrious shone,
Finding their numbers ten times ten to one.
A shower of leaden Hail our Capt^ins feel,
Which made the bravest Blades among us reel.
Like to some Ant-hill newly spurned abroad,
Where each takes heels and bears away his load:
Instead of Plate and Jewels Indian Trayes,
With baskets up they snatch, and run their ways.
Sundry the Flames arrest, and some the blade,
By bullets heaps on heaps of Indians laid.
The Flames like lightning in their narrow streets,
Dart in the face of every one it meets.
Here might be heard an hideous Indian cry,
O^ wounded ones who in the Wigwams fry.
H^d we been Cannibals, here might we feast
On brave Westphalia Gammons ready dressed.
The tawny Hue is Ethiopick made
Of such, on whom Vulcan his clutches laid.
Their fate was sudden, our advantage great
To give them once for all a grand defeat;
But tedious travel had so crampt our Toes,
It was too hard a task to chase the foes.
Distinctness in the numbers of the slain,
Or the account of Pagans which remain,
Are both uncertain, losses of our own
Are too too sadly felt, too sadly known.
War digs a common Grave for friends and foes,
Captains in with the private soldier throws.
Six of our Leaders in the first assault,
Crave readmission to their Mothers Vault,
Who had they fell in ancient Homers days,
Had been enrolled with Hecatombs of praise.
As Clouds dispersed, the Natives Troops divide,
And like the Streams along the thickets glide.
Some breathing time we had, and short God knows,
But new alarums from recruited foes
Bounce at our ears, the mountain clouds of smoke
From martyred towns the Heavens for aid invoke;
Churches, Barns, Houses, with most ponderous things
Made volatile, fly over the Land with wings.
Hundreds of Cattle now they sacrifice
For aerie spirits up to gormandize;
And to the Molech of their Hellish guts,
Which craves the flesh in gross, their Ale in Butts.
Lancaster, Mendon, Medfield, wildred Groton,
With many Villages by me not thought on,
Die in their youth by Fire that useful foe,
Which this grand Cheat the world will overflow.
The wandering Priest to every one he meets
Preaches his Churches Funeral in the streets.
Sheep from their Fold are frighted. Keepers too
Put to their trumps not knowing what to do.
This Monster War has hatched a beauteous Dove
In dogged hearts, of most unfeigned love;
Fraternal love, the livery of a Saint
Being come in fashion, though by sad constraint;
Which if it thrive and prosper with us long
Will make New England forty thousand strong.
But off the Table Hand, let this suffice
As the Abridgement of our miseries.
If Mildew Famine, Sword, and Fired Towns,
If Slaughter, Captivating, Deaths and Wounds,
If daily Whippings once Reform our Ways,
These all will issue in our Fathers Praise;
If otherwise, the Sword must never rest
Till all New-Englands Glory it divest.
FINIS.

