THE Woman's Glory. A TREATISE, ASSERTING The due Honor of that SEX, AND
Directing wherein that Honor consists.

Dedicated to the young Princess, Elizabeth her Highness.

By Samuel Torshel.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamie, at the three golden Lions near the
Royal Exchange. 1645.

To the Excellent Princess, a Lady of great hopes and Expectation Princess
ELIZABETH Her Highness.
MADAM,
FOr the Honor, and for a public testimony of your more then ordinary
Pregnancie and Capableness in so young and tender years, I have now dedicated
to your Name, what I prepared especially for your use, and for the service of
your growing virtues. Read over again, what you heard, and in part noted with
your own Pen. Strive to answer your hopeful beginnings, that you may rise to
be the glory of Princesses. This shall be a Record for after years, what you
were at nine years of age, that hereafter it may praise your increase, or
admonish you, if it be otherwise. However it shall remain as a witness of the
faithfulness of

Your Highness's most humble Servant. SAM. TORSHE^.

To the Reader.
YOu will please to understand, that the occasion of this Treatise was a
Sermon, or Exhortation, which I made at Whitehall, the 28. of December last,
which day we kept in remembrance of the birth of Princess Elizabeth, second
daughter to our King; If custom, and the due respect we owe to the branches of
the Royal Family had not prevailed with us, yet the great hopes and the very
blossoms of virtue and other excellent parts in this Princess would have
commanded from us all this Respect. I have now somewhat enlarged what I then
spoke, and have sitted it into a Treatise. My main end in it, is only to
advance the work that is properly in my hand, to bring in some, if it may be,
and to build them up in Faith and Holiness. The Lord sanctify all means to
this purpose, and Crown every endeavor with success: I have purposely
labored a familiar plainness, as aiming at benefit, not delight. And I shall
desire of all that shall read it, to bring serious thoughts, and free from
prejudice or lightness.

The Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1. Women capable of the highest improvements. They were made after the
Image of God The Sout the same. Their bodies as organicall. The whole Sex
unduty reproached. page 1 Chap. 2. Some Instances of eminency in women. 1.
Wisdom. Policy. Deliberation. Secrecy. 2. Learning. p. 16. Chapter 3. The
Letters touching this argument, between And. River, and A. Maria a Schurma. p
34 Chap. 4. Other Instances of women's eminencies. 3. Constancy. 4. Courage. 5.
Ability to govern. 6. Piety and Religion. page 74 Chap. 5. Soul glory is
chiefest. What Soul glory or Inward beauty is page 95 Chapter 6. Modesty proper
to women. Modesty of carriage, Of language. A ceasure of lewd books. p. 110
Chap. 7. The former grace commended. Modesty in Attire. page 128 Chap 8.
Humility, a Grace of great Ornament. Women's Subjection. The question, whether
women may be Teachers. page 142 Chap. 9. The Excellency of Wisdom. The
usefuln^sse of i^ The Maximet of Wisdom. p. 102 Chap. 10. Stence a great proof
of Wisdom. The hatefulness of Dissimulation. p. 182 Chap. 11. The beauty of
holiness. The rule of Devotion. A serious exhortation to the realing of the
Scripture. p. 195 Chap. 12. The Maxims of Piety. The Conclusion. p. 218
THE Woman's Glory.
CHAP. I. Women capable of the highest improvements. They were made after the
Image of God. The Soul the same. Their bodies as organicall. The whole Sex
unduly reproached.
I Will not detain the Candid Reader in the Porch, but let him in without
ceremony into the Points, which I have undertaken, which are these two.

1. That Women are capable of the highest improvements, and the greatest glory
to which man may be advanced.

2. That their highest improvement is that of the Soul, and their greatest
glory is Soul-glory.

I know the Subject that I have now entertained, may become the discourse of
light and vain wits; but let them know that these Points are held forth in the
Sacred Scriptures, where we have the Councels and mind of God; and I shall so
speak of them, as may become both the severe Majesty of Truth, and the
seriousness of my own Calling and Office.

1. That women are capable of the highest improvements, and the greatest glory
to which man may be advanced.

I might call in the testimonies of the wisest of the Heathens concerning this;
among others I remember Plutarch one of the most learned of the Grecians, upon
the death of the excellent Leontide, discoursed with his friend of the equal
virtue of man and woman, and doubts not if he might compare lives with lives,
and actions with actions, to make it to appear, that as Sappho's verses were
equal with Anacreon's, so Semiramis was as magnificent as Sesostris, Queen
Tanaquilla as politic as King Servius, and Porcia as full of courage as
Brutus. But though I will not refuse the light that is brought in by such
authors, and the examples upon record in their Stories, because much of the
workmanship and power of God is seen even in them. Yet I will principally build
upon Scripture Grounds and Examples.

Moses from whom we receive the first and original truths, tells us that woman
as well as man was created after the Image of God. Genesis 1.27.
God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him, male
and female created he them. What the Image of God is, and what the difference
(if there be any) is between Image and Similitude, I am not disputing; this is
it only for which I have alleged Moses, that woman has the same prerogative
of creation with man. If man were endowed (as he was) with a spiritual,
rational, free, willing, immortal Soul: so was woman. If there were (as there
was) a rectitude in man, so that there was in his mind a right knowledge of
Gods nature, will, and works; and in his will, appetites, motions, and
actions, a sweet Conformity and agreement with God: So there was in woman. If
man were put (as he was) into a state of dominion and happiness: so was woman.
Let Divines agree it among themselves, whether all this, or more then this,
were meant by the Image of God, whatsoever they shall estate upon man, the
woman will also challenge by that authentic Text. By which Text also we must
be guided in our interpretation of St Paul in some passages of his in the
eleventh Chap. of the first Epist. to the Corinths. He says, ver. 3. That the
head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man. Which he
speaks not putting a difference in their creation, but of that subordination
which was afterward instituted, when God said to Eve, Genesis 3.16.
Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. And in regard
of this Subjection he says further, v. 7. That man is the image and glory of
God, but the woman is the glory of the man, for the man is not of the woman,
but the woman of the man; neither was the man created for the woman, but the
woman for the man. It Is true that from the beginning, the woman was subjected,
as in order of time she was created after man: and being intended to be an
helper, she shines most, when she does most observe that Ordinance of
Subjection, for then she is the glory of the man, according to the instance of
the prudent woman that Solomon speaks of, Prove. 31.11, 23.
In whom the heart of her husband does safely trust; and she being modest and
industrious, Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits among the
Elders of the Land. Yet she loses not her first Right, of which the Apostle
being tender, adds in the eleventh verse, Nevertheless neither is the man
without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. Both were
made by the same hand, and after the same Idea: so most do understand that
phrase, In the Lord, which interpretation secures the point for which Moses was
alleged. But if we take it as others do, that by the Lord is meant, The Lord
Christ, the point will receive an improvement, That as man and woman were
equal in Creation, so there is no difference between them in state of Grace.
Which truth, whether it be held forth in this place or not, I will not contend;
for elsewhere we have it delivered without controversy, that there is neither
male nor female, no preferring of one sex before the other, Gal. 3.28
but all one in Christ Jesus.

The Soul knows no difference of Sex, as neither do the Angels, and
therefore it is that some learned men are of opinion, that after the
Resurrection in the state of glory, there will be no more any distinction of
male and female, because Christ has said, Matthew. 22.30. We shall then be as
the Angels of God in heaven. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. That the
body being sown (in the grave) in corruption, in dishonor, in weakness,
shall be raised in incorruption, in glory, in power. The commerce of Sexes, was
of necessity because of corruption and change by mortality. But the body that
shall be raised, in difference from the natural body, is called A Spiritual
body. The Soul then knowing no subordination because of Sex, as for the rest,
the body of woman is made organicall, like that of man's, as to the Soul, so
that there is nothing that puts a bar to the Souls operations. There dwell in
them the same Desires and Breathings, and they are endowed with the same
faculties and powers. They are heirs together with men of the grace of life. 1
Pet. 3.7.
They have the same right of Adoption, and are under the same benefit of
purchase, and therefore are gifted by the same sanctifying Spirit.

I know that many of the Ancients have spoken much to the lessening and the
reproach of the whole Sex; as that they are weak in Council Arist. polit. lib
1.
, wanting in courage (...). Hypocrat Aphor. 7. c. 24. Plin. not. Hist. l. 7. c,
17.
, extreme and inordinate in their affections, mutable and uncertain in their
wills, unfit to rule and manage affairs. And accordingly not only the Parthians
and Thracians accounted them and used them as slaves, but the Greeks despised
Homer calls the Achaians, Achaides, because they gav^ the rule to women.
them, and the Civil Romans made Laws in prejudice of their reputation,
which were some of them afterward inserted into the Edicts of the Christian
Emperors; Some calling the Government of women a prevarication of nature; Some
laws appointing to them Tutors and Guardians, though when of grown age, yea,
even to widows.

But notwithstanding all this prejudice, the point that I have propounded,
remains good upon those Scriptures that I have alleged: But we shall need no
other proof of the point, then to produce some instances of women, who have
been rarely accomplished, and full of glory. For the rule is, What is, may be.
If some of the Sex have been so, the Proposition is firm, That the Sex is
capable, and may be so.

CHAP. II. Some Instances of eminencies in Women. 1. Wisdom. Policy.
Deliberation. Secrecy. 2. Learning.
WHat eminency is thereto be named in men, which we have not discerned
sometimes to shine even in women?

1. Is it wisdom, discretion, and policy? The wisest of men has observed it,
and spoken in their favor, in that proverb, Pro. 11.16. A gracious woman
retains honor: and strong men retain riches. As mighty men by violence, and
oppression become masters of great wealth, so women that are meek and
gracious, by a more powerful and surer claim, become the mistresses of
reputation, and have a prevailing and over-comming wisdom, that entitles them,
Ladies of Honor. It was the character which the holy ghost has given to
Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.3.
That she was a woman of good understanding and of a beautiful countenance.
And her story all along, makes good the first part of that character. Her
husband was a sullen churlish rich fool, and had poorly and unadvisedly
thrown himself into a quarrel with David, a Prince at that time discontented,
and in Arms. The Servants knowing Nabal to be incapable of found advice, for
he was such a son of Belial, that a man could not speak to him; one of them
therefore acquaints their Lady with the business. She presently apprehends the
danger, and prevents it. She commands some of the family to attend her, and
with a rich present in her hand, meets David now on the way toward Nabals
house with a purpose to destroy it. She knows so well how to frame her
deportment and her language, that she softens the enraged soldier, and
overcomes him who never knew what it was to be overcome. If one would learn
the skill of insinuation, he need not learn any other posture then hers, as
soon as she sees David, 1 Samuel 25.27, 24.
she hasts, rather to throw her self off from her saddle, then to alight, and
falls on her face, and bows her self to the ground before him, and falls at
his feet. And what her behavior had spoken, She speaks over again with such
words as might well have bin penned by one of the greatest Masters of policy
and wit. And that Woman has a name of wisdom, though we know her by no other
name, who is mentioned in the history of King David's wars. The town of Abel
where this woman dwelt, had foolishly taken part with Seditious Sheba, and
entertained him that was the very head of the Rebellion. Joab the Kings
General lays seige to the Town, and was likely to take it by storming. Then
cried this wise woman out of the city, Hear, 2 Samuel 10.16.
hear, say I pray you unto Ioab, come near hither, that I may speak with
thee. And having obtained a parlee, se how she proceeds and prevails. I am one
of them (says she) that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: Thou seek to
destroy a city and mother in Israel: Why will thou swallow up the Inheritance
of the Lord? When the General had told her upon what terms he would raise the
seige: She undertakes to persuade with the Inhabitants, and does so: for
presently they threw the head of Sheba the Rebel, over the wall, and the
General is satisfied and retreats. Plutarch has given us a parallel to this,
of the wisdom of the Celticke women, who when their Country was fallen,
through misunderstanding and differences, into a Civil war, would not rest,
or give over their mediation, till Arms were laid down, and peace was settled
thorough all their Cities and Families, which was so great a service to their
Country, and so acceptable, that it grew to a custom among them, to call and
admit their women to Council. And in the league which long after they made
with Hannibal, this was one Article, which for the strangeness and fame of it,
I will record: If the Celtans have any matter of complaint against the
Carthaginians, the Carthaginian Commanders in Spain shall judge of it: But if
the Carthaginians have any thing to object against the Celtans, it shall be
brought before the Celtan women.

The Policy of Stratageme is reckoned to the family of wisdom. See what an
Engine that great man Ioab used to bring about the Court Design to have the
popular young Prince Absalom brought back from his banishment. 2 Samuel 14.
He subornes a woman of Tekoah, who needed not much instruction, but acts it
with such closeness and seeming passion, that David though a wise and
discerning Prince, had much a-doe to find out the cunning; and when he found
it, yet she so carried on the business, even beyond her instructions, that she
fully brought about the mind of the King.

And if either Deliberation or Secrecy be necessary to wisdom, we find even
these Qualities (which many think most unlikely to be found) in women. When
Manoah was surprised, and thorough present consternation gave himself for a
dead and lost man, because he had seen an Angel; his wife recovers her self
and him out of that distemper, and deliberately reasons that with which her
husband was confounded, Judge. 13.23.
If (says she) the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a
burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us
all these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these.

And as for Secrecy, (of the want of which we do ordinarily accuse them)
behold the carriage of two women recorded in Scripture. Rahab, who not only hid
Joshua's spies in her house, Josh. 2.
but also locked up their great business safely in her breast: and though she
were necessarily to communicate the thing to diverse friends, she does manage it
with so much privacie and silence, that nothing was discovered, but she and all
her friends, were saved in the common calamity of her Country. That other is,
that woman of Bahurim, who preserved Jonathan and Ahimaaz whom David sent to
gather up intelligence at Jerusalem. And I might add as a parallel, Epicharia
in the Roman story, from whose breast, no threats nor tortures could force a
secret that lay there concerning a conspiracy against Nero.

2. Is it Learning that gives eminency to men? In this also, women have a full
share. The Ancients who delivered almost all things in Mythologies and Fables,
intended this when they made Minerva an Inventresse and Patroness of Learning,
as well as Apollo the Inventor and Patron. And as for Instances, they are
plentiful under this head. In the Scripture, we have Huldah the Prophetess, ^
Ki. 22.^4
who dwelt in the College, with whom those prime Statesmen, Hilkiah, Ahikam,
Achbor, Shaphan, and Asahiah, thought it no disparagement to consult. And can
we judge other of Priscilla then that she was learned, being able to instruct
more perfectly that rare young man Apollos, Act. 18.24 (...). He zych. vor tit.
(...).
a man eloquent, (or as Hezychias paraphraseth it, A man learned in History,)
and mighty in the Scripture? But besides those that have their names in sacred
Record, other Histories both Ecclesiastical and Secular, ancient and modern,
are plentiful in Examples. Aspatia instructed Pericles, who of a great
Soldier was one of the best Orators that has been bred in Greece. Pamphilia
wrote many books of History, which when they were extant were much esteemed.
Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi was such a Mistress of Eloquence, that
Cicero admired some of her Letters. Athenais the daughter of a mean father,
was yet thought worthy to be the wife of one of the Christian Emperors for her
Wit and Learning. Eudoxia the Empress of Theodosius the younger, wrote learned
Poems, and especially one very singular one concerning our Savior Jesus
Christ. Gregory of Nazianzen speaks very high things of his sister Gorgonia.
And so does Hierome of diverse excellent Roman Ladies. Neither have latter
times wanted such ornaments. Olympia Fulvia Morata, an Italian by birth, not
long after the Reformation upon the preaching of Luther, besides her exquisite
knowledge in the Latin and Greek tongues, attained to the happiness of
knowing Christ, and leaving her Country for Conscience sake, marrying into
Germany, she gave her self with much success to the study of the Holy
Scriptures. Of our own, among many others that might be remembered, I will only
name, The Lady Jane Gray (unhappy only in being forced for a while to wear a
Crown) a Lady who beside the Latin and Greek, had this advantage beyond
Morata, that she knew the Hebrew also, and was thereby enabled to satisfy her
self in both the Originals.

But in stead of more examples in this kind, I will produce that great Ornament
of the Netherlands, Anna Maria van Schurman, pleading and disputing the truth
of what I have now propounded, with that Learned and Reverend Divine, Andreas
Rivet, that from a Woman's Pen, ye may have an Apology for tho learned Pen's
of Women.

CHAP. III. The Letters touching this argument between Andreas Rivet, and Anna
Maria a Schurman.
FOr the confirmation of the point in hand, and for the honor of that Maiden
Pen, I will translate into our own tongue for the use of our English women, so
much of that learned Letter as concerns this present argument, which that
renowned Virgin, Anne Marie Schurma^ of Vtrecht wrote in Latin, to the
Reverend and famous French Divine, Andrew Rivet, then at Leyden, which Doctor
Beverwick a learned Physician of Dort has communicated together with a
Dissertation upon the same subject by the same Lady.

D. Rivet by a Letter dated from Leyden the Kalends of March, 1632. having
received some French Verses of Schurmans which he presented to the Princess of
Arts and Literature, Princess Elizabeth Sister to the Illustrious Prince
Palatine, from whose learned judgment they had received approbation, and
having given the Noble Schurman her due praise, he lets fall these words, That
her abilities were a proose to the present times and to posterity, that if
many women do not the like, it is not out of defect of wit or judgment, but
because they will not apply their minds to them, or cannot by reason of other
lower assaires; neither is it expedient that many should choose this kind of
life, only it is sufficient if some called to it by a special instinct, do
shine forth.

Upon these last words she takes hold, and in a Letter dated at Vtrecht, the
eighth of the Ides of March, 1638. after some other Salutations and Complements
in the beginning, she thus writes:

Reverend Sir,
YOur letters heretofore written unto me, gave me occasion to doubt what your
opinion is in whole concerning this thing, in which after you have spoken many
things lovingly and honorably (as you use to do of me and my studies) thus
you write: Neither happily may it be expedient that many choose this kind of
life; it is sufficient if some, called to it by a special instinct, do
sometimes shine forth. I easily assent, if here we mean such women as have the
care of families, or others that are necessarily employed that way; but I am
hardly drawn to that opinion, if it be meant of maid's endowed with wit, and of
generous education, many of which this age of ours brings forth. The great
admiration of Sciences or the equity of common right, inforceth me that I
cannot endure, that that which in the opinion of every one is most worthy,
should be rarely found in our Sex. For whereas wisdom is so great an ornament
of humane kind, so that by right it belongs to all and every one, (so far as
it agrees to every ones condition,) I see not why this Attire, the most
handsome of all others, should not be fit for a Virgin, in whom we allow a care
to dress and adorn her self. Neither is there any cause why the State should
be jealous of this: for the glory of the learned Order no way darkens the
luster of Magistrates. Yea, contrarily, all agree in this, that that State must
at length be most flourishing, that shall have many subjects, obedient to
wisdom, as well as to the Laws. Besides, neither Virtue, nor the learned
Rank it self, shall have their due honor or dignity, unless the greater
part of people be such, as are able not only blindly to admire, but by a true
estimation to discern the honor and splendor of Learning. But lest I stay
too long in the Porch, I enter upon the state of the controversy, which being
rightly laid, the whole truth will clearly appear. The principal Question
therefore is, Whether the study of Learning and Arts, be fit for a Virgin,
especially in these times. They are no light Arguments that persuade me, to
favor the Affirmative part. For that I may begin with the Civil Law, I
remember I once read in Vlpian, That women are not to meddle with civil or
public offices. But with what equity this law was made, I will not now much
inquire, this at least I think may be clearly proved from thence, that the
leisure in which we live is allowed and lawful. For hence we have much
freedom of time, and quietness which is a friend to the Muses, but chiefly
when by a special kind of Prerogative, we are not tied up by necessary
occasions, nor engaged upon domestical cares and businesses. But yet truly
this large and empty space of life, where it is spent loosly and negligently,
where it is not laid out upon somewhat that is good, it becomes an
opportutunitie for all vices. Basil notably, (...), Idleness is the fountain
of mischiefs. And that we may avoid this Charibdis, shall the mind by little
and little grow soft, and turned into the similitude of that idleness and
sloth in which it lies? What therefore is to be done? Behold, Seneca a sublime
teacher opens a way between the rocks. When (says he) they only are at leisure
(that is, do best enjoy their leisure) who are at leisure for wisdom, they
only live, for they do not only look to their own time well, but make
benefit of all other ages. For we must not seek leisure from the worthiest
employments, but improve our leisure in them: so our calmer freedom in
privacie, will make our time neither wearisome nor tedious unto us. For there
are two things, (as Cicero says) which make others dull, but sharpen a wise
man, namely leisure and solitariness. But some use to object, that it is a
sufficient study for women, to handle the Distaffe and the Needle. I confess
many think so, and the inveterate ill opinion of our times is every where for
them. But we walk not by this Lesbian Rule, yielding to Reason, rather then to
custom. For by what right, I pray, are these things fallen to our lot? By a
Divine right, or Humane? They shall never prove, that those limits are either
fatal, or prescribed from Heaven to us, by that to lay a restraint upon us.
For if we fetch witness from Antiquity, both the Examples of all ages, and
also the authority of the greatest men, will evince the contrary; as that
most noble ornament of the Gornaces has showed no less pleasantly then
learnedly in his little book, which he has entitled, The Equality of men and
women. L'egalite des homines, and des femines.
But lest, as they say, I do what has been done before, I forbear these
things: I shall content my self plainly to show, that greater matters do not
only become us, but also in this manner of life are expected from us. For
neither will more generous inclinations endure to be curbed within such narrow
bounds, nor will sharp and high wits suffer themselves to be kept under
always below their natural disposition. Truly, if these severe Laws should
be of force, I should not much wonder at it, if some women should sometimes be
carried away with the inticements of pleasures, out of their contempt of this
low employment. Besides, then we could have no hope left here, of any honor,
any dignity, any reward of virtue, by which such souls as are not degenerate
are wont chiefly to be encouraged, to endeavor after things praiseworthy. In
vain do we boast our Nobility bilitie which we received of our Ancestors, if
presently a slothful obscurity do cloud it. Hence it is, that he that reads
History, shall often in the longest tract of time discern no more the
monuments of our Sex, then the path of a Ship passing through the Sea. But,
they will say, Whence should you have glory? Whence immortal fame? Do ye
expect it from your leisure? Why not? But I mean from leisure brightned with
the light of learning. For it becomes us to grow famous under the presidencie,
not so much of the Armed, as the gowned Pallas. Moreover, where true
Phylosophie has seated her self in the Throne of our understanding, no door
will ever stand open to the vain or wandering motions of an unconstant mind:
which also Erasmus the notable Patron of all polite Learning has observed
expressly, where he speaks of the Education of Sir Thomas More's daughters, in
these words: Nothing (says he) does so wholly fill the breast of a Damsel,
as study. For how shall we not easily scorn the Pageantrie of this world, the
specious authority of examples, and the poor vanities of the times, when from
the high turret of wisdom we look down upon these earthly things. Further,
whereas it is no less the duty, then the happiness of all, to strive after
the perfection of our primitive Original, (from which there is none of us but
have fallen) we must labor, that his Image, who is the Light and the Truth,
may begin more and more to shine in the highest palace of our mind. And
although I deny not here, that Theology (which is that which chiefly perfects
the understanding) does all; yet I know not how, but me thinks they seem not
enough to observe the Majesty of so great a Queen, who would have her go
abroad alone and unattended. For when we look into the volumne of natural
things, who sees not how the parts of both these Sciences do agree among
themselves with a beautiful harmony? How much help, how much light, the one
brings to the other? Nor ought this much to trouble us, that some shut up this
study into so narrow a room, thinking it does not much concern us, Whether
this frame of the world grew together of moat's? Whether it struggled forth out
of a rude Chaos? Whether some Bodies enjoy an heavenly nature, others a
terrene? Whether the upper frame of the world be whirled about, and whether
they be not giddy, who contend that not the heavens, but the earth turns round?
Whether the Sun setting be plunged into the Ocean? Whether the Antipodes also
have its light? Whether the Earth be of a square figure or round? Finally,
Whether the Horizon terminate the whole world, or only our sight? If that which
is vulgarly spoken to our reproach were to be heeded, they would make us to
frustrate God the Creator of all his end, who brought us into this Theater to
behold, know, and magnify his most beautiful works. For nature was not such
a Stepdame unto us, that she would forbid us the sight of her: else, why would
she bestow that upon us, which the Philosopher affirms is planted in all men,
namely, The desire of knowing? Why would she give us an erect Stature, unless
we should lift up our eyes and our minds also, unto the contemplation of her
self? We should be Stocks, and not of humane kind; Strangers, not inhabitants
of this world, if we could not bring our mind raised, and as it were inslamed
with divine love, to so beautiful, so glorious things, in which the Majesty
of the eternal Godhead shines forth. Neither may we think that we have done
our duty, if we only sometimes look at these things as it were in our passing
by. For so we see them, not that we may know them, for hereby we show that we
do not see, what we have no desire to know further. There is nothing under our
eye, more admirable then man, nothing more beautiful then the dwelling place
of the Soul: but how little is that which is judged of only by the skin, or
the outward form? How miserably may we blush at those so excellent Hymns of
Ethnicks, in which, while they curiously pry into Nature, and by prying
approach nearer to the first cause of all things, even they every where are
wont to sing forth the praises of the high Workman. Further, as often as we apply
our selves to follow that bright Star of holy Scripture, who will deny but we
may be obliged by so many Examples of holy men, who from hence have taken
occasion to praise their God, to the return of the same thankfulness?

But, not to say any thing now in general of the study of Histories, which now
adays is almost only followed in Nurseries, and in the Courts of great men,
only by the way we will inquire, whether the knowledge of Public Affairs may
befit every private person? I should easily grant indeed, that it conferres
directly to practice, and the use of the Republike: yet because of the Theorie,
and the peculiar fruits which thence redound to every one, we think none are to
neglect it. The holy Scriptures go before us here, and not only go before us,
but lead us by the hand. There the Orders of times are knit together by the
Periods of the Monarchies; There both the Originals, and decays of greatest
nations, are either described, or foretold; and it is no wonder, seeing the
mavelous judgments of God, which it is fit we should duly observe, appear
in a more eminent matter, and seeing these universals cannot fall out within
the age of one man, if God would have this study to be laid to heart by all.
Shall not the contemplation of this admirable Government strike up our harpes
also; upon which the Kingly Psalmist wholly fastening his mind, never leaves
crying out; (...) How great are thy works, O Lord, thy thoughts are very deep?

It may be some will here object, This is no other then to commend a monasticke
life, or to make speculation only our whole duty. But so reason seems to
require, that first we should look at our selves, for so much as concerns our
own happiness; and then to our neighbor. For in vain shall he have leisure
to attend upon others, who was never yet rightly at leisure for himself. In
vain does he endeavor to help others by Counsel or fact, who cannot help
himself. In vain shall he pretend to civil conversation, or to the bond of
that more sublime administration of Christians, that is a stranger at home. I
pray, what rashness would it be, to think to build that whole aeconomie of
moral virtues, upon ignorance, or the vulgar opinions: Yea for the most part
unles by some chance the examples of all ages do show, that no one did ever
happily sacrifice to so great Dieties, unles he came furnished with great and
solid learning. For that is it which prepares, disposes, and makes us fit to
do well, and lifts up our minds to the attempts of famous exploit's.

Again nothing is more profitable for a virgin, nothing more necessary, then
to discern what is filthy and what is honest, what hurtful and what harmeles,
what is fitting and what uncomelie. But how much knowledge of things, how great
a dexterity of judging does that stand in need of? Seeing therefore this sort
of prudence may not be learned of our selves, neither were it safe, we must
therefore have recourse to history, (...), to dress as it were by the glass
framing the life after the virtues of others. We, I say, who when any blemish
is upon us, though but by a wrong suspicion, can never be reconciled again to
reputation: therefore maidens ought to be careful, not only to decline evil
after they have rushed upon us, but also specially to prevent them lest they
do so.

Lastly, that I may now in silence pass by, the Arts and Sciences
isntrumental (as they call them,) which being principals do necessarily
follow their Queen as handmayds, I cannot but I must needs touch in a word how
much we ought to delight in many tongues, cheifely if they be attained for
use, not for ostentation. For Tongues are the faithful keepers, yea the
Interpreters of those things which wise Antiquity has left unto us: which
where it speaks to us in its own Idiome, it leaves in our mind a genuine
image of it self, and with a certain mavelous grace and pleasantness
affects our sense, which we not without reason complain is wanting in all
translations, yea though the very best. But if I would discourse to you, how
pleasant it is, and how fruitful, to draw forth, explicate, and prove heavenly
doctrine from the very fountains, it were no other then what is said in the
proverb, (...), To lend light to the Sun.

But that I may make an end, I will here produce one example, which always is
in my thoughts. One example I say, of the Incomparable Princess, Jane Gray, to
whom no nation, no age (let me speak it with the good leave of all) will yield
her equal. Michael Angel a Florentine who fully and pathetically describes the
history of her life and death, in that conference which she had with Fecknam
the messenger of her approaching death, has observed these things among others:
that she despising those gifts, (which yet were rare ones that God had given
her,) and her nobility of blood, and beauty of her shape, and flourishing
youth, whereby she might have procured glory and favor to her self in this
world; She pronounced with great courage, that nothing was so acceptable to her
in her whole life, as that she had the knowledge of the three learned tongues
as they call them. Now if the pleasure or delight, which we may have from that
in this life, may come under the name of true felicity, she confessed she had
it in the study of good letters, and specially of the holy Scriptures. And
though many do greatly dispraise these studies in a woman, yet she her self
because of the great solace of mind, which she had thence received, and still
felt within her, did account their opinion to be unreasonable. Behold Swanlike
notes, brought forth, not under the shade of schools, but under the last act
of a most glorious Martyrdom, which I pray who would not reverence as an
oracle. These things concerning no light matters, I have not doubted to prattle
unto you, being confident of the indulgence of your fatherly love toward me.
But I break off, lest I might seem willing to say all that could be said, or
that I were altogether unmindfull of your affairs. Farewell, father, dear to
me in many respects, and vouchsafe in my name to salute your beloved wife,
Vtrecht 8. Id. of Wholly at your command, March 1638. Anna Maria a Schurman.

I have thought fit to do this honor to this Honorable and Learned Maid, as
to translate and transcribe so much of hers touching the Argugument in hand. I
have taken the liberty, though precisely to observe her Conceits, yet to vary
the Elegancies of her Latin Style, into such a Phrase as is most natural to
our English, and I hope without any wrong to her, whom I much honor for her
Pen.


CHAP. IIII. Other Instances of women's eminencies. 3. Constancy. 4. Courage.
5. Ability to govern. 6. Piety and Religion.
THat I may pursue this point a little, I will take notice of a few other
particulars.

3. Constancy and Resolution is accounted a manlike virtue; and it is charged
upon the other whole Sex that they are inconstant and mutable. The Emperors
Dioclesian and Maximinian in a public Instrument call Women's wills Momentanie.
But to the contrary, how famous was Ruth even for her Constancy, who
notwithstanding all assaults against it, resolved that nothing but death should
separate her from her husbands mother? Ruth 1.16, 17.
Entreat me not (said she to Naomi) to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee; for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will
lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God: where thou dyest,
will I die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so to me and more also, if
ought but death part thee and me. She was not as Jacob said of his son
Reuben, Genesis ^^.4
Unstable as water, and therefore he could not excel; but she strengthened her
self, as the Original Phrase is, or as our Interpreters have rendered the
Text, She was steadfastly minded. And if I should mention the constant
Resolution of many women-martyrs, in the Primitive Persecutions, or only of
that time of trial that was here in Queen Mary's days, I should easily make
up a full history. Yea, Queen Mary's own sister, as she was an Example of her
cruelty, so she was a rare Pattern of this virtue, who as her word was, Semper
eadem, She answered it to the full in her course of life, as Sir Robert Nanton
takes notice of it in his Preface before his Translation of Cambdens Elizabeth,
where he compares her with, and much preferres her to K. Henry of France, for
this very grace.

4. Whereas Valor and Courage have been almost appropriated to man. Histories
are not wanting in the mention of even an Heroical Courage in some women. Jael
the wife of Heber had the honor to rid away a great tyrant from the earth;
Judge. 4.21
so that both the war was called by her name, In the days of Iael (says the
Text) the high ways were unoccupted, Judge. 5.6.
and the travelers walked thorough bywayes. And Deborah sings the renown of
her exploit: Judge 5.24, 25, 26, 27.
Blessed above women shall Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall
she be above women in the Tent: he asked water, and she gave him milk, she
brought forth butter in a lordly dish: she put her hand to the nail, and her
right hand to the workmans hammer: and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she
smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his Temple. At
her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down, at her feet he bowed, he fell where he
bowed, there he fell down dead. An Heroicke act, set out in an Heroic
strain. And that woman of Thebez, mentioned also in the History of the
Judges, seems to have been more valiant, and to have ventured more dangerously
then the men that were enclosed with her in the Tower, who when nothing but
threats and flames were before her, had the courage to cast a piece of a
millstone upon Abimelech's head. Judge. 9.53
But I most admire Queen Hesther, who forgetting her softness and delicacie,
resolved to serve her people, though her self should perish in the attempt. I
will go in unto the King, (says she) which is not according to the law, and
if I perish, I perish. Out of other Stories, I will add but one. When the
Melians under the conduct of young Nymphaeus to disburthen their own Country
too full of Inhabitants, seeking an habitation elsewhere, were for a while
entertained by the Carians, they had been likely to have found their tombs
there by a treachery, which was covered under the fair pretext of an
Invitation to a banquet. The Melians having some intelligence of the plot,
returning answer that their custom was never to feast without the company of
their wives, they accordingly come themselves unarmed, (to avoid suspicion,)
but all their women with swords hid under their Gowns, (to provide for their
safety.) About the middle of the feast, the word being given by the Carians,
they endeavored to execute their treachery, but instantly every one of the
Melian women delivers her sword to her husband, whereby they bravely acquitted
themselves, and afterward had leisure to admire the undauntednesse of the
women, who undisturbed through weakness or fear, were Actors as well as
Spectators of that exploit. It would be too much to produce the many examples
of their generous actions, whether for the preservation of their Countries, or
for the love of their husbands, or for the maintenance of the Religion of
their Ancestors. It appears then, that men have no reason to challenge
Courage, as if it were alone tied to their Sex.

5. There is yet another virtue whereof men do boast, which is, The Ability
to govern, and to Manage Public Affairs. Truly, that (...) or Feminine-Rule
has not only had enemies of late, but even the ancient Times and Laws have
been but too injurious to them. The Parthians and Thracians while they remained
Barbarous, used their women as Slaves. And the old Nations that were accounted
Civil, dealt with them little better. Because the Achaians gave them the
liberty of ruling, therefore Homer disdainfully used to call them in his
verses, not Achaians but Achaides. And it fell from the Pen of the wise
Plutarch, That it is a Praevarication of nature, to be governed of women. The
Athenians stinted them, how far they should meddle. And the Roman Laws
appointed Tutors and Curators, not only in unripe years, but even in
widow-hood. But all this prejudice against them among Heathen Authors, perhaps
would not be much weighed; if there were not some that pretended the Scripture
to say the same thing: for there are that urge that of the Prophet Isaiah,
Isai. 3.12.
As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. We
grant, that many times women were great mischiefs to the Jews, as we see in
the times of Iezabel, Maacah, and Athaliah: But it cannot be that the Spirit of
God does simply condemn their Government, seeing it has given testimony
concerning Deborah, that she was so able for public management, that the Text
says, Judge. 4.4.
She judged Israel, and, The children of Israel came up to her for judgment. I
might give Pulcheria as a parallel, famous in the Ecclesiastical Historians,
who preserved the Empire while her brother lived, and after his death governed
it with great Prudence, calling Marcian to her assistance. But we that are of
the English Nation, need no proof of this, whilst the memory remains of that
Queen of her Subjects hearts, I mean, and every body knows I mean Queen
Elizabeth, of whom we have the testimony of an enemy, even Pope Sixtus
Quintus, who though plotting against her life, yet admired her, and was wont to
say, that Elizabeth of England, and Henry the fourth of France, were able to
rule the whole world.

6. Hitherto, in all the particulars mentioned, men have boasted, but there is
one, the maine, in which they have scarce so much as pretended to outstrip
them; and that is the highest improvement and glory, namely piety and
Religion, unto which they have somewhat the greater advantage in regard that
their Affections are ordinarily more lively and stirring. As Christ spoke, the
text tells us, ^uk. 11.17.
a certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed
is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. As he was led
to be crucified, the women wept. And when he was nailed upon the cross, there
were three Mary's and but one John at the foot of it. But my business is not
to prefer them before men, but only to give them their due value; that if we
read grace and holiness in the lives of men, we may also take notice of holy
and devout women, as the Scripture in diverse places calls them, The Sarahs who
were believers, the Mary's who were humble and mortifyed, the Elizabeth's who
walked in all the Commandments of God blameles, the Dorcasses who were
fruitful in works of charity and love, The Priscilla's who were heavenly and
rich in discourse, The Bathsheba's, the Lois's, and Eunice's who were careful
in instructing their children in the knowledge of God, and in a word, the
Lydia's whose hearts God has opened.

I have a multitude of examples in my view, but I will not name many. When the
Prophet Elisha often passed thorough Shunem, A great woman there not only
entertained him, but motioned to her husband the continuance, Behold now (says
she) I perceive that this is an holy man of God, ^ King. 4.9, 10.
let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall, and let us set for him
there a bed, and a table and a stool, and a candlestick. She was not only in
her own soul affected, but is an instrument to work upon her husband.
According to that which the Apostle Peter tells us, that there may be such
sweetness and holiness of conversation, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2
that men who obey not the word, may be won by the conversation of their wives,
while they behold their chaste conversation joined with fear. I observe also
concerning the woman of Shunem, whom I named, that she never omitted the times
and opportunities of Divine worship; that speech of her husbands to her, when
she desired to go to the Prophet, ^ King. 4.23.
Wherefore will thou go to day? It is neither new moon nor Sabbath: Implies,
that she never used to omit those public days. And like to this, it seems to
me that in Paul's time, the women were more frequent in prayer then men in the
city of Philippi; Act. 16.13.
On the Sabbath (says St Luke) we went out of the city by a river side, where
prayer was wont to be made and we sat down, and spoke unto the women which
resorted thither. Yea their serviceablenesse in religion is not to be omitted,
St Paul speaks of women which labored with him in the Gospel. Phil. 4.3.
And what might not be said of particular graces, it might be easy to produce
many instances out of Scripture, and to fit them with other Histories; but I
forbear, as intending chiefly to speak to the next point.

CHAP. V. Soul glory is chiefest. What Soul glory or Inward beauty is.
I have more briefly passed thorough the first point, which though it be true,
and the Truth of it necessary to be known, yet may be abused by some weak
spirits to Selfe-slatterie. It is a glass into which if some do look, it may
be they may be proud. But the other glass that I am now to hold forth, I would
invite All to look into, and often, for I hope it will not be without profit.
The point as I propounded it in the beginning, is

II. That the highest improvement, is that of the Soul, and the greatest glory
of women is Soul-glory.

It was an inward and spiritual glory that did commend the daughter of the
King of Egypt, according to the expression of that holy man, whosoever he was,
in King Solomon's Court, who at the time of the marriage celebration, composed a
song which he fitted upon Shoshannim, those six-stringed instruments of music,
which David the late King had brought into the Quire, and raised his heart to
the contemplation of the sweet and heavenly Mystery of the Union betwixt our
Lord Jesus Christ and his Church. This was his maine design, but his
groundwork, was the Praises of that incomparable Pair, King Solomon and
Pharaohs daughter, and he has set forth those Praises with such High, and yet
apt Expressions, that he has showed himself, (who ere he were) a master in
his faculty. And no doubt both the Subjects of his Pen, were very
praiseworthy, as for Solomon we know who he was; and the Lady though the
daughter of a stranger, yet most probably was a Proselyte, and not only
converted from Gentilisme to the true Profession of Religion then, but subdued
powerfully and effectually to grace and holiness, which seems to be the
reason of that expression, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings daughter is all glorious
within. I know there are some that do thus interpret it, That she was not
only dressed in Gold of Ophir, and in raiment of Needle-worke, when she showed
her self abroad, and appeared in the eye of Solomon's people, but also was
richly clothed with wrought gold, when she sat within the house, to entertain
the King. But I am most inclined to receive another interpretation, That as she
had a goodly and beautiful presence, so she had a richer and a fairer soul,
because I suppose Solomon's wise choice, would be of an excellent woman. A
Princess no doubt of all inward accomplishments, of which her Sex was
capable. It is not then so much a comely feature, or a graceful deportment, as
the Qualification of the mind, a right frame of Spirit: Without this, beauty
it self is uncomely, according to that of the same Solomon, Prove. 11.22. As a
Jewel of gold (Nezem, the Hebrew word is used both for an eare-ring, and
Nose-Iewell, it is the same word, Isa. 3.21. The Nose-Iewell in use among the
Jewish women, was tied with a string upon the forehead, and so hung down to
the Nose:) As a Jewel of gold (says he) in a swines snout, so is a fair
woman, which is without discretion. The sense of the Proverb is plain: As it
were a very ridiculous object to behold a dirtie Swine, with Diamonds or
Pearls dangling at the ears, and a Pendant or Nose-Iewell hanging on the
brow, tumbling it self into the next puddle, or rooting in a filthy steaming
dunghill; even such a sight, and altogether as uncomely, is a woman of a
pleasant shape, but otherwise ignorant, rude, and wanton. And as for Ornaments,
they do not add any value to the person, nor can they commend one to God, for
hear what the Apostle says, speaking unto women chaste and holy, Your
adorning, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
let it not be that outward, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or
of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which
is in the sight of God of great price. The painted Iezabel was a wretched
woman, as King Iehu calls her, 2 Ki. 9.30
though she were a Kings daughter. She was vile in Gods eyes, and in man's. She
thought her self fine, when she had painted her self, and looked out at the
window, but was indeed loathsome, as wanting this Soul-glory.

Let us then enquire, what Soul-glory, or inward beauty is.

Every son and daughter of Adam, are naturally vile and filthy. We were all
polluted in our blood, Ezekiel. 16.6
and might justly have been cast out to the loathing of our persons in the day
that we were borne. Psalm. 51.
King David acknowledges this and therefore cries out for washing, purging,
cleansing. Our parents were infected with Leprosy, and we are their unclean
issue; Job 14.4.
for, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, says Job. And his
friend Eliphaz notably confirms it, Job 15.14, 15, 16.
What is man (says he) that he should be clean? and he which is borne of a
woman, that he should be righteous? Behold, the heavens are not clean in Gods
sight: How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity
like water? Where is then the Remedy? or how come any to be clean? The
Apostle has opened this Mystery, writing to the Corinthians, where he speaks
of those that lie in their sins, 1 Cor. 6.11.
And such (says he) were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God.

There is a double cleanness. 1. A washing from the guilt of sin; This is to
be Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, who is that fountain opened for
sin and for uncleanenesse, as the Prophet Zacherie speaks, Zach. 13.1. where
he uses two words to import both actual and original guiltines, the one is
hhattaath, Sin, the other is, Niddah, separation for uncleanenesse, alluding
to the time of the woman's Separation upon the bringing forth of any child. This
was the Design of Christ's coming into the world, and giving himself for the
Church, that he might cleanse it, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
and present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish. And thus being
justified by Christ's taking our guilt upon him, 1 Ioh, 1.7.
by his blood we are cleansed from all sin, standing clear and acquitted at
the Tribunal (as if we had never been unclean by guilt) fully and perfectly.
But, 2. There is a washing also from the pollution and filth of sin, being
sanctified by the Spirit of our God. And this is it that I am now principally
upon. This is the Renewing of the whole man, or according to S Paul's
expression, A learning of Christ; which he afterward particularly declares to
be, Ephesians. 4.20, 22, 23.
The putting off, concerning the former conversation, the old man which is
corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts, and a being renewed in the spirit
of the mind, a putting on of the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. This is the proper work of Gods holy and
Sanctifying Spirit, given unto all, to whom the Son is given. The gifts and
graces of this Spirit are many, and very various, I will not now discourse of
all, but only of the graces of conversation, nor of all of them, for it would
require a large and diligent Treating. And therefore, whereas I might commend
many Jewels fit for their luster to deck out an holy Soul, I shall only for
the present make up one Jewel, of four precious Iemm's, fit to be set upon the
breast, or rather into the heart of a Princess or greatest Lady or other
woman, where only the Spirit of God the most skillful workman can dispose it.

The four Graces of Conversation which I am commending are these; 1. Modesty.
2. Humility. 3. Discretion. 4. Piety.


CHAP. VI. Modesty proper to women. Modesty of carriage. Of language. A
censure of lewd books.
I. Modesty. This is one of the most natural and most useful Tables of the
mind, wherein one may presently read, what is printed in the whole volume. It
is as proper in the opinion of some, to the woman's Sex, as flying to a bird,
swimming to a fish, beauty to a flower. Certainly a good heart looks out
thorough modest eyes, and gives an answer to any that asks, who is within?
with modest words; and dwells not at the sign of the bush or red lattice, or
painted post. A glorious soul is above dresses, and despises such as have no
higher, or other thoughts, then what concern their gorget and their hair. The
calme-constant-watchfull-modest-composed-disposition, is surely the most
excellent temper, and the most useful, for this governes the heart, and makes
one fit and able to entertain those pleasures, by which others are lost and
undone. Such an one may pledge even Circe in her cup, and yet not be
transformed: for such an one will only slip, but not drink deep of pleasures
lawful. This preserves in tune, and keeps the scale of affections even. This
teaches a denying and preventing behavior toward tentations. It Is much better
then the Philosophers wool, to stop the car with. It is the best guardian both
of the eye and ear. But let me descend to particulars.

1. Let the carriage and behavior be modest. Genesis 24, 64.
Rebekah put on the veil, when Abraham's servant told her, that the man whom
they saw coming toward them, was his masters son, to whom she was intended in
marriage. Contrarily, the woman with the attire of an harlot of whom Solomon
speaks, Pro. 7.13.
met a young man and kissed him, and with an impudent face she spoke unto him.
She was A confident as we may say, in the known sense of that word; for whereas
all wise and good men, have accounted blushing, to be the Table of virtue in
women, She (as the original Text expresses it) did strengthen her face, as if
she resolved to forget the blush, and to banish away the color of shame.

I profess against courtship, and I know that I know little of Behavior, yet
this I know that the Holy Ghost does call the modest behavior, neat: for so
the original word signifies, in that place, (...).
1 Timothy 3.2. implying that such a one who is modest, is of a clean or neat
behavior. Princesses and great women have their teachers of behavior; This is
not the work of Preachers, only where the Scripture is before us concerning
Behavior, we may commend it, and direct it; and according to the Scriptures
by which all must be Judged, we say, That the most modest, is the most neat,
and most-becomming carriage. Then, what are they that speak with their feet, as
Solomon's phrase is, or according to the character, that the Prophet Isaiah
gives them, That walk with stretched sorth necks, Isa. 3.16.
and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, making a thinkling with
their feet. How would that Court-prophet (for so he was) have described some
strange creatures that we sometimes see, practicing the affected Shrug, and
acting, or the strutting, or the dancing, or the sliding, or the swimming
posture; with what earnestness, with what indignation, would he have spoken
against these wantons? But I forbear enlargement in this matter, as having no
delight to be long in the company of such light and childish spirits, objects
at which wise men laugh, and good men mourn.

2. Let the language be modest. That rule of the Apostle concerns both men and
women, though now I in special apply it unto women, Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto
the hearers, and grieve not the holy Spirit of God. Unsavorie and profane
speech grieves the holy Ghost, and holy men; and is altogether unbefitting
those that profess Godliness: for so the same Apostle in the next Chapter; As
for uncleanness let it not be once named among you, Ephesians. 5.3, 4
as becomes Saints, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,
which are not convenient. Ye shall observe in the reading of the Scripture,
that the holy Penmen of it, (...).
deliver themselves in a clean and covered language, when they have occasion to
speak of things less comely. And the Lord says, he will take the names of
Baalim out of the mouths of his people. Hos. 2.17.
Oh that the words of uncleanness and vanity were taken out of our mouths.
Even Aristotle in his Politiques, would have all obsceneness of words to be
banished by a Law, because when people take a liberty to speak ill, they
learn to do ill. He would therefore have such as are young, neither to speak
or hear any thing that is foul, and if any be found faulty, to be punished
with stripes, or some note of infamy. Oh that Christians would consider this
passage of an heathen, and be ashamed. There are many that cannot be pleasant,
but they must be obscene, and their discourse (if they have any) is at the best
frothy, but for the most part, wanton. But they say, their tongues are their
own, and who is Lord over them, or who shall control them? Truly they do
confess themselves to be the children of Belial, and out of their own mouths
do condemn themselves of madness, in the judgment of the great Apostle, who
when Festus charged him to be mad thorough too much learning, frees himself by
this argument; Act. 26.^5. (...).
I speak the words of truth and soberness, or, the words of a sound mind.
Surely then by that rule, Their minds are not sound, whose words are not sober.
As a prevention of this, I would advise all to do with their loose and
poisonous Pamphlets, and all other bad books, as those Converts of Ephesus did
with their books of Curious Arts, bring them forth and burn them. I know one
that had read many of these toys, that took upon himself this revenge: a
friend of his coming into his chamber, took down from off a shelfe a
play-book, who reading a little was taken with it, and desired to borrow it:
after a while he comes to borrow another; the owner being sensible of his own
hurt, and grieved to see his friend infected, uses this Remedy; You
complained (said he) when you came in of cold; I will make you a better sire.
And presently (whatsoever his friend could do to the contrary to hinder him)
he takes down a whole shelfe of such like books and burns them before him.
This (says he) I have done to punish my self, and to preserve you. O that I
could persuade our Ladies and Gentlewomen, and all others that mis-spend their
precious leasures to do the like. Away with your Amadis of Gaul, your
Palmerins, your Mirror of Knighthood, with the etc. all of them such trash as
is scarce worth the ink of two lines wherein they are named: Away with your
Tragedies, and Comedies, and Masks, and Pastorals, and whatsoever other names
they have, that soften the spirit, and take away your savor of heavenly
matters: A way with your Spenser, your Ariosto, your dear Arcadia too, if
these do steal away your hearts and time from Scripture-study and Meditation.
I have heard that that Incomparable Sir Philip Sidney, a man worthy of all the
honor that is done him, for his Elegancie of Language, and well and proper
contriving of his Story, died with, Ingenio peri^ miser, often in his mouth,
complaining of his wit, that he had left no better monument of it, or of his
spare hours. We are easily fashioned into what we read much, and with
delight, as our bodies take the qualities of such meat which we ordinarily feed
upon. We lose the repugnancie we have against, and the detestation of evil; by
often reading evil and wanton things. This was the reason why the brave
Lacedaemonians would not allow the Stage, and why Ancient Christians (many of
the Fathers) were so vehement against the Cirque and the Theater. I am sure we
had need to urge this point, upon such as live delicately and at ease, of whom
we may complain, as Strato the Philosopher did, that Menedemus of the Sect of
Epicurus had more Scholars then he, because he read Lectures of
voluptuousness. So many Ladies are far more acquainted with their Romance's,
then with the Sacred History; and keep no books usually by them, but
Love-stories and plays. I could not forbear this digression, to pass the
present censure. The directive and hortatory part, I shall have a better place
for afterward under the last head, concerning Piety.

CHAP. VII. The former grace commended. Modesty in Attire.
3. LEt the garments and Attire bemodest. I know concerning whom I speak, and
what need there is to speak fully and sharply to this point. The contrary is
a sin of long continuance, and therefore deeply rooted. We have a full story
of the Jewish women's vanity, in the third chapter of Isaiah, a place that has
often been the theme of Pulpits. Yet after that time of the Prophet, they
sin more, we learn by the Prophet Ezekiel, that they took up fashions from
the Babylonians, Ezekiel. 23.11.
She doted (says he, speaking of Israel under the name of Aholah) upon the
Assyrians her neighbors, clothed most gorgeously. They imitated fashions in
portraicture. ver. 14, 15
She saw men pourtraied in the wall, the Images of the Caldeans pourtraied with
virmilion, girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon
their heads. And some do interpret the 16. verse of that chapter; as if they
had their leigers at Babylon to give them Intelligence of the new devises. As
we have heard of some practices like it, men sent and kept in France, Italy,
and elsewhere, to be the factors of Braverie, to be ready to send over the
Dresses. The consultation that was had in the ridiculous Senate which
Heliogabulus granted to his mother and the Roman women, was only upon this
subject. And there are some (no doubt) that consult with as much care and
earnestnes about a dress, as if A new government were to be framed and
molded; and are more troubled, if the handkercheife sit not neately, or an
hair be amiss, then that the whole state be ruined, and though peace, and
religion, and all be lost. I am not so strict about fashions, as to condemn
all that are new, I think as there is a necessity to speak the language of
the time, that we may be understood, and not to affect Old Saxon, or old
English words when they are grown out of use; so it is fit that our wearing be
like that of others, lest we be noted for affectation of Singularity. I have
spoken to ^^is, in The Hypo citte Discovered. l. 1. chap. 7
I know no rule that binds us to the observation of the habits of old times,
for what times must we be measured by; by that reason we must rise higher and
higher, till we come to Adams time, and clothe our selves with skins. I would
only have the law of modesty and grace in the heart, to give the direction in
this point, wherein if wantonness, and too excessive costlinesse be avoided,
all is observed that is necessary. Wantonness in apparel, seems to be that
Strangeness, which the Prophet Zephanie speaks of, Zeph. 1.8.
and which by him the Lord threatens to punish. And it is one kind of
punishment, that it robs women of their Reputation. Claudia the Vestall though
she were innocent, yet was suspected because of her attire. Seneca was an
heathen, yet he saw it worthy to be condemned in some women in his time, who
wore such garments as yet in a manner they were naked thorough them. Excessive
Costlinesse also has been condemned both by natural, and Christian light. The
ancient Divines were much against it. We can hardly believe almost what
Tertullian has reported of some, Vno lino decies sestertium inseritur: that
some women wore, A thousand thoufand Sesterces (which if I have computed
rightly, by comparing the old Roman, to our English money, is, seven thousand
eight hundred and twelve pound, eight shillings) upon one string. But Hierome
also gives in evidence to the same purpose, Vno silo villarum insunt pretia,
that some wore the prises of diverse Lordships in one chain. By which we
understand another passage of Tertullians, Saltus and insulas tenera cervix
fert. Truly, such things do no way befit women professing godliness, as the
Apostle speaks, for those that profess godliness must resolve to suffer for
it, if God call them to it, but as Tertullian gravely, I fear (says he) those
necks hung with pearl, will not be sit to lie upon a block, to receive the
sword of persecution. Oh let those Ladies, those brave ones consider, they
profess a crucified Savior, and serve not a God crowned with Roses and
Pearls.

But I insist not much upon this, there is one thing only that I cannot think
of without indignation; nor speak of, but with passion, that is, of Love-spots
and Painting. Oh the earnest and holy zeal of the Ancients against this. I
would rather speak in their words, then mine own. Tertullian bitterly, he
calls painted women, Ancillas Diaboli, The Devils wayting-women; and urges that
it is neither agreeable to the Creation nor the Resurrection. I remember I once
made use of, and alluded to a Similitude of Cyprians, in the presence of some
great women of quality; Suppose one should come into the Kings gallerie, and
daube some other colors over a picture that the King had hung there, being the
work of an excellent Artist, would not the King be much displeased at it. You
are Gods own workmanship, do ye despise his hand, that ye presume to alter
it, and pretend to mend it. Hierome directing Laeta how to bring up her
daughter, tells her of a woman that was graviter percussa, the heavy hand of
God was upon her, because she suffered her daughter to paint; and he calls such,
The Violators of the Temple of Christ, and he loades it with much infamy, that
it is, The inflamer of young men, The fomentation of lusts, The discovery of
an unchaste mind. Yea, the Fathers do generally speak in that manner; When the
case was put to Augustine by his friend Possidonius, he determines it to be an
Adulterous fallacy. And Ambrose goes so far, that he says it is worse then
Adultery, and he gives reasons for it. I am loath to speak so fully, but yet
I profess my self a very enemy unto it, and so I do to spotting, upon the
same grounds.

But to leave these Pageants, I return to my modest woman, I allow her a
lawful difference of apparel, according to the difference of her quality and
estate. Only I would have them to consider, that they are to give honor to
their Clothes, and not their clothes to them. Let them despise and renounce the
vanities of their Sex; and as the Jewish women gave up their looking-glasses
to Gods service, Exodus 30.
so let them give up their niceness and braverie for heaven. Elias neglected
his Mantle when he went up in the fiery Chariot, so where the mind is raised to
an heavenly ambition, there will not be so many thoughts of outward decking.
Remember only, 1. That sin brought in Clothes. 2. That Clothes are a Monument
of our shame. 3. That the best ornament is that of the inner man. Say not then,
This with Lace will do well; but this or this will do well with Discretion,
Modesty, and Grace.

CHAP. VIII. Humility, a Grace of great Ornament. Woman's Subjection. The
question, whether women may be Teachers.
II. HVmility. This is the sweetest of Graces. The fittest for great
Personages. Those stars that are highest seem least. The sea is not bigger,
though many rivers empty themselves into it, and it keeps the same taste and
temper, though an abundance of fresh water be poured into it out of the clouds.
It becomes those upon whose Birth and beauty, both riches and honors are
heaped, to be still the same, neither swollen nor freshed. This grace that
makes you low in your own eyes, sets you high in the sight of God. For so says
the Apostle expressly, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3 4.
is in the sight of God of great price. It is the most attractive, the most
winning grace. Thus Hester gained upon Ahasuerus, and Abigail upon David. But
the greatest women lose themselves by pride. Iezabel by her arrogancy made her
self contemptible: her own servants threw her out of the window, and she was
eaten of dogs. Let great ones consider, they were made of the same flesh, and
shall be resolved into the same dust, the Philosopher could not discern any
difference in a charnalhouse between the sculls of Kings and beggars; but that
which is of most weight, is that they shall answer before the same Eternal
Judge, at the same tribunal. Boast not of extraction, it is not Birth but new
birth that shall be availeable. Be not poisoned with flatteries. She that is
extolled in verses, may be loathsome before God. Be not proud of cloths, it may
be all the worth is in the outside. A porter may as well be proud of his load.
The walls of a chamber that is covered with rich hangings, are in the same
condition with the back and shoulders of a bravely-decked fool. Challenge not
the eyes of every beholder, as if it were their duty to do obeisance to your
beauty, for beauty is but clay well colored. As for riches and honors; a
sneaking player might as well be proud of the part he bears upon the Stage.
You will be undrest in the Tyring house of the grave, and lay all these off.
Set before your eyes the great examples of Humility. Ruth the daughter of the
King of Moab, if we may receive the general opinion of the Rabbis, or if that
be not so probable, yet one that we may well suppose to have bin of good
quality in her own country as being wife of Mahlon the elder brother, of the
family of Prince Naasson, yet she accounts her self scarce equal to one of
the maid servants in the house of Boaz. Ruth 2.13.
And Abigail speaks the like language, 1 Samuel 25.41.
Behold (says she to David) let thine handmaid be a servant, to wash the feet
of the Servants of my Lord. Elizabeth though the elder woman, and the better
for outward quality, yet challenged not respects and visits from Mary, but was
even confounded with it as too great a weight of honor, that Mary vouchsafed to
come to see her, Luke 1, 42.
Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? And as
for Mary her self, when the Angel had told her things sufficient to have
overwhelmed a weak spirit unable to bear and digest honor, She returns, Luke
1.38.
Behold the handmaid of the Lord. Consider with what earnestness the Apostle
presses this duty; Ephesians 4.1, ^.
I the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekeness, Col. 3.12.
with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love. And in another place, put
on (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humblenes of mind, meekness, longsuffering, forbearing one another. These are
the garments that sit best upon Gods chosen people, such as are holy, and
beloved of God;

1. The bowels of mercy. Dorcas is most famous for the coats which she made
for widows.

2. Kindness. This is the exercise of that compassion which is in the bowels.
If the heart be open, the hands will not be shut.

3. But that which I alleged this place for, is, Humbleness of mind. A grace
hardly attained unto, Many (says Augustine,) can more easily give all they have
to the poor, then themselves become poor in spirit. Nay, oftentimes pride
takes her rising out of works of charity. But the more difficult it is, it is
the more needful. Needful even in afflictions that we murmurre not, nor fret,
nor swell against God: but especially needful for such as abound or have any
eminency, that God be not forgotten, and that others be not despised. It Is a
rare thing to be above others and not to scorn them.

Consider, 1. What ever we have, we have it of God, not of our selves.

2. That the good we have is little in respect of that we want.

3. The more good we have received, the more strict will be our account.

4. Christ in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt, and so was perfectly good,
was lowly and humble.

5. Lowliness is Christ's image, and pride a principal part of the Devils.

6. Pride is the stain of all graces, and the defacer of every good work. One
that does ill and is humbled is more acceptable, then one that does good and is
proud.

7. Gods gracious eye is upon an humble heart, but he casts a terrible eye upon
such as are proud.

Besides this in the general, there are only two Texts of Scripture which I
would commend to women, as particularly concerning them in this point. The one
is about their acknowledgement of their subordination to man. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.
Wives (says St Peter) be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey
not the Word, they also may without the word, be won by the conversation of the
wives, while they behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear: (that
is, with a loving and careful fear and reverence of your husband.) Thus holy
women in old time were, ver. 5, 6.
being in subjection unto their own husbands, even as Sarah obeyed Abraham
calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well, and are not
afraid with any amazement. As excellent as the woman-Sexe is, yet it is in
subjection to man. Even Sarah the mother of Believers, from whom Kings and
Nations came, called her husband Lord. The wife is also Lady, for so did Sarah
signify, but she is so to the family, not to her husband. Their Ornament, as
the Apostle says, that which best becomes them, is to be subject, and to
preserve and contain themselves quiet, indisturbed, and unpassionate not
hurried with sudden and inordinate affection, as an horse not well managed that
is apt to start at every thing. This I take to be the proper meaning of the
Greek word (...) in the Text, which our Interpreters have translated,
Amazement. The other place, 1 Cor. 14 ^4, 35.
is that of Paul to the Corinthians, Let your women keep silence in the
Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded
to be under obedience: as also says the Law. And if they will learn any
thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to
speak in the Church. It seems there was some disorder in Corinth, and that
their women took upon them to speak and teach publicly. This the Apostle
restrains. Which he does upon these three grounds; 1. Because of their
subjection by an original law. Genesis 3.16. That is the ground which he urges
in this place. But elsewhere in his writings, he uses others also. 2. Because
the woman was created after Adam, and for him, 1 Timothy 2.13. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9. 3.
Because the woman was first deceived, 1 Timothy 2.12. and 14. But the Question
will be, what women the Apostle speaks of: for it was prophesied of the
Gospel Times, That God would pour his Spirit upon all flesh, and that our sons
and daughters should prophecy. Joel 2.28.
And we read that Philip had four daughters which did prophecy; which seems
to some, to be meant, not of an extraordinary Spirit of Revelation and
Prediction only, (as most Interpreters do put off this place) but of the
interpretation of the Scripture. And the rather, because St Paul gives a rule
concerning the covering of the woman's head, when she is praying or prophesying,
1 Cor. 11.5. And in another place he speaks of Aged women, that they must be
Teachers of good things. This has therefore divided the Ancient Divines (for it
is not a new Question:) Chrysostom thinking that married wives are only
forbidden to speak in the Church; but Tertullian applies it unto all women,
even Virgins and Widows too, because of the universal subjection of their
Sex. The comparing of the places satisfies me; First that is to be laid as an
unmovable stone in the foundation, That it is against Gods Ordinance, against
Church Order and Modesty, for women publicly to preach. This ground will hold,
for the words of the Apostle are express, and will admit of no evasion.
Secondly, There may be some extraordinary cases, that will not admit of a
general rule. Thirdly, women may and must privately and familiarly exhort
others. Fourthly, where men are not present, women may speak; I mean, though
others besides the maids and children of their own family be present. There are
some prints and footsteps of the allowance of this in the Ancient Churches.
They may also privately admonish men, and reprove them. But in the exercise of
all these Privileges, let them have respect to the Law of Humility, without
which they will never do any thing becommingly. It Is a grace of such
necessity and beauty, that we cannot too much commend it. I have twice
praised it, The Hypocrite Discovered. l. 1. cha. 18. Help to Christian
Fellowship. chap. 7.
and especially for one use of it, that it disposes and frames the spirit, to
the maintaining of Christian Fellowship, a duty much neglected, and the more
through the want of this grace of Conversation. I might also commend it, from
the advantage that might be made of it. It is the Usher of honor. Solomon has
said it, Prove. 15.33. and again he repeates it, Cha. 18.12. That whereas before
destruction the heart is haughty, Before honor is Humility. Nay, riches and
safety also attend upon it. As it is in another of his Proverbs. By humility
and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life.

CHAP. IX. The Excellency of Wisdom. The usefulness of it. The Maxims of
Wisdom.
III. Wisdom and Discretion. This grace of Conversation is so necessary, that
without it, beauty is without pleasantness, according to that which I noted
before out of Solomon. Prove. 11.22.
As a Jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman which is without
discretion. Yet there are many, that have lived to many years, and have
learned no skill but only to dress themselves, and to talk wantonly. None
ever are complete, unless they be brought up in the School of Discretion. A
School, which as the report goes, that wise man the old Lord Burleigh said he
could not find, when being in one of the Universities, they had showed him all
the public Schools. It is to be had from God, and to be learnt out of the
book of God, for so says the Apostle, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you
richly in all wisdom. Col. 3.16.
And therefore he writes to the same Colossians; We cease not to pray for you,
Col. 1.9.
and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his (Gods) will,
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the
Lord, unto all pleasing. The knowledge of Gods will, instructs in all kind of
wisdom, to that end that we may walk (for we must walk in Col. 4.5.
wisdom) as becomes us before God, and with the good acceptance of men. And
this highest wisdom, God grants only unto those, upon whom he bestows his
Son Christ; as St Paul speaks in another Epistle, Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 8.
God has made us accepted in the beloved, in whom we have Redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace,
wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence. It is a great
advancement to Learning, to know what Authors are best to be studied; and as
they said concerning Christ, Whence has this man, this wisdom? So, would we
not be glad to know what politiques, Solomon studied, or what authors he read.
Himself tells us, Pro. 15.33
The fear of God, is the Instruction of wisdom. And to the same sense his
father, King David, Psalm. 111.10.
had said, The fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom. This is that wisdom,
the excellency whereof I would set forth, that it may be desirable. We are all
apt to desire silver and gold, for we know the price of them, and therefore we
search out the Veins of them, and dig for them into the bowels of the earth,
even into the paths which no foul knows, and which the vultures eye has not
seen. Icb. 28, 12, 13, etc.
But where shall wisdom be found? Man knows not the price thereof. Job
tells us somewhat, but he cannot tell us the full value. It cannot be gotten
for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof. It cannot be
valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Sapphire. The Gold
and the Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it, shall not be for
Jewels of fine Gold. All these expressions are short, these things are not
worth naming, they may not so much as be brought in nomination, when there is
speech of the election of wisdom. for so Job goes on. No mention shall be
made of Coral or of Pearls; for the price of wisdom is above Rubies. The
Topaz of Aethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure
Gold. Solomon was a great searcher after rarities, but never met with any thing
like this to take up his whole contentment. He calls all other things folly:
and concludes after a weary curiosity, Eccl. 2.13.
I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light excels darkness.
And therefore no wonder, both that he begged it before all things, when God
gave him his choice, and also directs all to choose it. Wisdom is the
principal thing, therefore get wisdom; Prove. 4.7.
and with all thy getting, get understanding. It Is a bargain that will make
every one rich. She is a Lady that will advance all her kindred: for there is a
family of this name, as our Savior intimates, where he speaks of the
Children of wisdom. Boast not of other blood, or origination; But, say unto
wisdom, Prove. 7.4.
Thou art my sister, and call understanding thy kinswoman. What shall I say to
Ladies, and generally to women, Would ye have Beauty? If it be true that the
Kingly Preacher says of men, A man's wisdom makes his face to shine. Eccl 8.1.
It is true also of women, that wisdom will make them beautiful and lovely.
Neither is the usefulness of wisdom, less then the excellency of it. It is
the Compass without which the Architect cannot do any thing. It is the
magnetic needle without which there can be no Navigation. It carries the light
before us, for want of which all that walk in the dark must needs stumble and
fall.

I will not insist upon the difference that the School makes, between wisdom,
and Prudence. I am speaking of them only in a Popular way; It is that which
directs the Hic and Nunc, it Orders us in particular Cases. It is that which
deliberates upon any thing, that is proposed, it examines all the Circumstances
of a design, that nothing be done rashly, but so that a good account may be
given of the doing of any thing, if it be called for. It gives a good grace to
every posture. Every passion or inordinate affection disguiseth. Malice has a
sullen and down-look which dissembling can hardly hide; Anger appears upon the
knitted brow; Desire discovers it self in the eye; but Prudence keeps in all
these that would gad abroad into the visage to tell what news within. But a
special use of it is, that it corrects the ridiculousness of affectation and
artificialnesse. There is nothing more vain then a forced art of seeming wise,
when laughter, speech, gesture, and every thing is con'd and studied. This is
slavishnesse, not wisdom. Wisdom leads on all actions with a kind of
nativenesse and honest freedom. The others that have all their words out of
the Dictionarie, and their gestures from the glass, are always in fear, and
if they happen to be out, (like formal Preachers that have got a Set of strong
lines into their memory) they can hardly recover themselves, but talk Nonsense
and gibbrish. Shall I offer at the description of this prudence; It is a grace
teaching the heart a decorum in religious and civil Conversation, as having
deliberated, and knowing what our Persons or Conditions will bear, or are fit
to refuse, whereby we may carry our selves right also in the use of things
indifferent, without excess or defect, and in the use of Christian Policy
with pure and undisturbed Consciences.

It were to write another book to give the particular advises of wisdom. Take
things shortly, and as they come, it may be without method.

1. Make memory a storehouse. The reason is, because we cannot ordinarily,
easily, be wise without others wisdom.

2. Study men and affairs. Know the complexion of affairs.

3. Be willing to learn of such as are faithful and that drive no trade or
interesse.

4. Stand behind the picture, and hear what they say that pass by.

5. Despise not a Cobbler in what he says concerning the shoe.

6. Believe not others flatteries against your own knowledge.

7. Believe you may have imperfections.

8. Take heed of passion which discoulers all things.

9. Run not down a steep bank; consider whether you may stay, when you have
a mind to stay, or are out of breath.

10. Know that Self-conceit puts out ones eyes.

11. Before ye set out, discover whether there be any ambushments.

12. Consider how much better it is to knit then blossom.

13. Make not too much haste, lest ye outrun the business. Speed is an
entangler, and haste is slow.

14. Esteem Honesty to be the first and fundamental part of wisdom.

15. Never account an unequal, wavering, ambulatorie humor of complying, to
be either honesty or wisdom. Such as look at the Times are honest sometimes
only by Accident, and as it hits.

16. Honesty is a free, generous, uniforme, resolved walking according to
right Principles, whatere others think of it.

17. Account the miserable wavering honesty of Formalists, to be a pedanticall
folly.

18. Resolve upon some Mark, at which all you do may have a constant aim.
Fools only live at random.

19. Think not of sticking arrows in the clouds. Attempt not what may not be
attained.

20. Think not of banishing desires and pleasures, but of governing them.

21. Be moderate and equal in adversities and prosperity. Distrust your
strength most in prosperity.

22. Be not peremptory, but rather accustom your selves to the old form of
Ita videtur; So it seems to me, rather then to say, So it is.

23. Tremble not at a scoff. It Is weakness to leave virtue, because others
like it not.

24. Be pertinent in speech, rather then large.

25. Penetrate into the spirits and dispositions of such, as you choose for
acquaintance of trust.

26. Give not value to things according to the Market-price. The people
sometimes cry up worthless things, and undervalue rich.

27. Believe not the crowd. Credit one that has his eyes, rather then an
hundred blind men.

28. Prefer Eternity before this moment.

29. Lose not that you hold, for a shadow that you see of greater.

30. Live so, as not to be ashamed to live longer.

I might be plentiful; but I take off my hand. In stead of all these Maxims,
the Law of wisdom would serve. The Story is, that a King of France, one day
required of a great Counselor, an ancient Statesman, that he should set down
some rules of wisdom and state: he undertook it, and in a large sheet of
Paper, wrote only Modus in great letters, and wrapping it up, delivered it into
the hand of the King, implying that if he could observe Temper, it would be
instead of all particular directions. So for the frame of conversation, I would
only write, Discretion.

CHAP. X. Silence a great proof of wisdom. The hatefulness of Dissimulation.
THere is one particular concerning wisdom in women, that I may not forget,
that is Silence. It was one of the Qualities which the wise Socrates required
in his scholars; and the old Romans erected Altars to it. It is a rare
ornament, especially of Knowing women, when they have the skill, not to speak
all that might be spoken; and to understand, that discretion as it is more
difficult so it is better then Eloquence. Some have thought Silence, to be to
speech, as Shadow is to a picture, without which it cannot be well set off; and
as the Rests are to Music, which make it to be much more relishing and sweet.
They cannot be wise that talk much, for hearing is the learning Sense, and
they will not have the patience to hear much. The Apstle, St James in that
same Chapter where he had said, Jam. 1.19.
If any of you lack wisdom, ask it of God; soon after gives this rule, Be
swift to hear, slow to speak, Implying surely, That indeed God gives wisdom,
but ordinarily by the means of others tongues. But least I seem to disarme
them, and envy them the use of their best weapon; it shall suffice that I have
only named this particular, I will forbear to enlarge it.

I have only one thing put in by way of Caution, concerning wisdom, that under
that name, there be not a learning of Dissimulation. It is so disguised, and
looks so like to wisdom, that one may easily be deceived. There are some that
do not mistake, but profess and are not ashamed to profess, that they go to
this School. We know what Prince it was that said, he would have his son
learn no more Latin then that, He that knows not how to dissemble knows not
how to live. Many blame his speech, but yet they practice upon his principle.
They study vailing and disguising of their thoughts. We meet some of these
dark lanthorns sometimes, they will give one leave almost to come near them,
by the light they hold forth; and we think we know where to find them, by the
demonstrations and profers they make; but presently they turn the dark side,
and we loose them, and cannot find out their designs. This makes conversation
so unsafe, and so difficult, for if dissembling had no more faces then one; as
truth has, we should be in better terms then we are; for whatsoever a liar or
dissembler should say or do, we would take it in a quite contrary sense. But
this opposite of Truth, has many-many faces, It Is a strange art, that words
which were invented to express and clear the thought, are now put to another
contrary service, handsomely to hide them. I confess that in evil and snaring
times, Innocence may have need of a masque, for it may be a folly to show an
open heart among many ambushments. We are not bound to speak or reveal all
truths at all times. But take heed of craving Aid for Security of falsehood.
Honesty is better then craft. Some Naturalists have told us of a strange fish,
The Vranoscope, that has but one eye, and that is upward, directly on the top
of the head, but with that one eye she keeps her self from all dashings and
crushes against the rocks, and sees all the approaches of dangers. One eye, if
it be toward Heaven, is much better and surer, then two of the quickest sights
of such as have all of the serpent, and nothing at all of the Dove. We have
seen many of the most subtle dissemblers, entangle themselves into ruin, and
brush themselves upon rocks hidden from them, before they were aware. And
certainly it is a thing full of unquiet fears, and it cannot be but painful,
to live under a canopie. There is the greatest pleasure in the freedom of
Sincere honesty.

But it may be said, surely I am speaking to men, to Politicians all this
while, not to women. Nay, I have not forgotten the Subject of my discourse. The
Sin which I am making odious, is thought to be very natural to women. But I
am very angry with those authors, that have given a kind of allowance, unto
Princes, and unto women to counterfeit. I think it is not sound doctrine in
policy and morallity, I am sure it is stark naught in Divinity. If people
knew thoroughly the evil of lying, they would pursue it with fire and sword,
till they had banished it out of the world. There is not in any thing a greater
contrariety to God, for it is contrary not only to his will, but to his very
nature, for he is Truth it self, and the Scripture says, He cannot lie, for
then he should deny himself. Job 8.44.
The Devil is said to be the father of it. He taught it first to Eve, and he
still cherishes it, as the surest pillar of his dark kingdom. God hates it,
yea, he hates it with a loathing. Pro. 12.21.
Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord. It is a sin against the good of
humane Society: for truth is the foundation of justice, and justice of peace.
Dark people do all the mischief. But for remedy. 1. Consider your dignity.
There is a saying in better authors then those I blamed even now, That the
simple word of a Prince should be of as great force, as the eath of a private
man. Let Ladies and great women; yea, all women have it in their thoughts, that
they were made after the Image of God, which is truth. It will not become those
smooth foreheads, to have rough, and shaddowy, and clouded intentions. What
says St Paul? Col. 3.9, 10.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him. 2. Consider, That a deceiver forfeits
reputation. You shall bind all always to mistrust, never to believe you. 3.
Consider, That treachery is in some respect beyond Atheism. It is worse to
own God, and yet to mock him, then not to acknowledge him; for this is, to
give a Testimony of the contempt of God, and of the fearing of men before him.
It Is base, to be a Coward to men, and stout to God. But I have dealt so fully
with this sin, in The Hypocrite Discovered, that I now forbear to enlarge
any farther upon this point.

CHAP. XI. The beauty of holiness. The Rule of Devotion. A serious
exhortation to the Reading of the Scripture.
IV. Piety and Religiousnesse. This is of all others the most Orient and full
of brightness. They say that Jewels steeped in Honey have more luster; so all
accomplishments are made more beautiful by Piety. Otherwise though a woman
were so made up, that as another Pandora, she had all moral graces and
perfections bestowed upon her, yet she would be wretched and unworthy without
this. If one had a Cabinet made all of pure gold, enameled and enchased, set
about every where with Diamonds and large Pearls on the outside, and that the
curiosity and exquisiteness of the workmanship, should exceed the richness of
the matter; would not every body think the owner of this Cabinet worse then
mad, that should sill it with dirt and filth, or put it to no other use, then
to keep nasty rags, or little sticks and strawes. Such are those excellent
pieces that are of a goodly outward frame, of winning behavior, of seeming
modesty, sweet in conversation, wise and learned in discourse, but within
prosane, irreligious, and without any savor of Godliness. Zech. 15.7. 1 Chr.
16.19. Isal. 50.2.
Holiness is Beauty. The true worship of God is called so, by the Prophet
Zachary, and by David: yea, the Perfection of Beauty. The Apostle has
witnessed it of Gospel Ordinances, 1 Cor. 3.9. that the Ministration of
Righteousness exceeds in glory. And he tells us, in the eighteenth verse, that
one cannot be conversant in those Ordinances, but he shall receive a luster
from them; that as Moses being with God, and seeing God, came away with a
shining face; So we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord. God himself is glorious in holiness, as the Israelites
sang it unto his praise, when they came forth of Egypt. Ex. 15.11.
And the Apostle tells us, that the Graces which are the Daughters of Gods
Spirit, are lovely. Phil. 4.8.
Whatsoever things are lovely, (says he) if there be any virtue, think on
these things. We many times commend a curious piece in Picture, it draws and
entices a distinguishing eye. But as Plato said, if Virtue could be drawn,
every one would love it: so if it were possible to shadow out the true
Lincaments of Holiness to the eye, who would not be ravished with delight? I
confess I do extraordinarily love a Picture, when it is done by a good hand.
But me thinks none can come near, A Mary alone in Meditation, A Magdalene
weeping, A Lydia attending with much earnestness to the Word. Oh imagine but
the Beauty, of the Tecla's, the Marcella's, the Paula's, the Eustochium's, the
Fabiola's, the Eudoxia's, eminent, and famous in their generations for Piety.
Some think Religious Circumspection makes bad and dark faces. Dissembling
formalitie will indeed oft-times study a disguised sowrenesse; but Godliness,
though it will be the Mistress of the looks and dress, and make all composed
and sober, yet it does nothing to scare one away, or to affright any from
following the same virtues.

The Bodies Beauty compared with the Souls, is as if one should equal a Torch
to the Sun. The body is but as the green Moss on the side of a Rock, the
Soul is the Diamond that sparkles within it. Oh that the principal care were
for the setting forth and preserving this Beauty. It was a Law that
Constantine made, that none should erect any Marbles, or Columns, or other
rarities of Antiquity, in the Suburbs, or Country villages; because he
intended that the City of Constantinople should be full of Ornaments, and the
rich Storehouse of those collections. What then do they deserve, that forget
and forsake, and rob the inward City, the Soul; to bestow their Jewels upon
their ears, their foreheads, their breasts, which are but only the Souls
suburbs? What strange creatures are they, that dress up the handmaids, and
suffer the Mistress to go in rags?

This is it then, that I have reserved to the last place to commend. That there
may be a special endeavor of Holiness, 1 Pet. 3.11
A holy Conversation, as Peter calls it; Jam. 3.13.
A good Conversation, as James; Psa. 50.23
A Conversation ordered aright; as David expresses it. But in other
Scriptures, Genesis 5.24.1^.1. Luke 1.6.
it is said to be a walking with God. It must be according to Gods will and
Councels. For otherwise Devotion is subject to many illusions. Nothing is more
counterfeited or disfigured then Religion. As the Lacedaemonians dressed up
their Gods, after the fashion of the City: so many make up a Religion after
their own humor. I have much wondered to hear of the strange and odd
apprehensions of Religion, in some great personages; who had found out a way of
joining God and pleasures together. And had made it almost all one, to serve
God, and entertain themselves at a Masque. Augustine tells us of Marcellina,
that she hung Christ's picture, and the picture of Pythagor as together. And we
have heard of some popish Ladies, that have had the same curiosities about
their Disciplining whips, as about their fannes, their praying beads as rich as
their neck-laces and bracelets, and their Crucifixes made into Jewels. Judge
whether this be not rather a courting of pleasure, then the worshipping of God.
And it was much like this that we were come unto; when the great business of
Religion, was only to have a Chapel or Closet, decked with Pictures, Plate,
rich Cushions and Clothes. And the worship, but only the varying of the
pleasures of the Dining-roome, into another name. Or to instance in another
particular, Shall we think it to be enough to have Bibles of all volumnes,
larger, and for the Pocket, neatly bound up, and trimmed, richly clasped or
strung, and seldom or never to look into them? Oh, in stead of pomp, study
inward Sanctification. Approve your selves to God, like some Rivers that run
under ground, and steal from the eyes of the world. They are the most
excellent spirits that bear much fruit, but make not much noise.

Holiness is the end of our election, Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.15.
God has chosen us that we should be holy. We serve an holy God, Therefore
says S Peter, As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation. No service is acceptable unles it be holy. Romans 12.1
I beseech you that ye present a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto
God. We are called to an holy calling. Ye are an holy nation, 1 Pet. 2.9
that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light. Holiness is the sum of Christ's doctrine.
Ye know the Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 4.3, 4.
for this is the will of God, even your Sanctification. None but the holy can
have confidence in prayer. Heb. 10.2^
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. There can be no hope of Heaven
maintained without holiness. Every one that has this hope in him, Joh. 3.3.
purifyeth himself, even as God is pure.

This holiness must be according to Gods holy word. We may not be Voluntaries
in Humility. Mantius who was commander in chief in the Roman Army, put his
son to death, though he got a notable victory, because he did it beyond
commission. We may not presume against Gods prescribed order. Kings appoint the
manner of their own service. God is Lord, we must look to the law of his
house. If we take any other liberty, there will be much uncettaintie and
change. Do all things as near as may be, by a warrant from the word. Let me
therefore seriously commend in the first place, the constant and diligent
Reading of the Holy Scriptures. Let women herein bestow their happy leasures.
They may do it. Let no popish envy deprive you of this fair privilege. I
intend this Treatise for the hands of such whom I suppose to be cleared
sufficiently in this controversy, and that know their own right, and with
what injuriousnes the Papists have endeavored to shut up the Bible from them.
Believe not their politic and envious cavills. They say it is not convenient
or decent for women to read some passages, which may occasion evil and light
thoughts, As the story of Lot, and that of Leah striving for Jacobs bed, and
some others which these blasphemers are wont to instance in. But Hierom
thought, that Laeta's daughter though a Virgin might safely and profitablie
read even those places. And if their be any relation of facts dishonest and
uncomely, there is besides enough to repress any dishonest motions that may
arise upon such occasion. And if the argument were good, then not only women,
but men also the best and most learned should be forbidden to read, for they
may also have the temptations of unholy thoughts. They say again, that many
places are too hard for women to understand. But there are other places, plain
and easy. And if the Scriptures were not to be read at all; because all cannot
be understood by women, then none may read them, for no man can perhaps
understand all that he reads. But let us turn the Argument, If the Scriptures
be hard to be understood, let us therefore read them the oftener, and with more
attention. They say besides, there is much danger of error. Ah how unlike these
Romish spirits are, to the Ancient holy Divines. Their endeavor was to heap
up the benefits, but the business of these men, is to load the Scriptures with
reproaches and disgraces. It Is a shreud presumption against them that they are
unsound. They had a rich trade, as long as they could keep the Bible claspt. In
these latter times they have bin forced much against their wills, to permit the
reading, in some places, like Adrian the Emperor, who set some Countries at
liberty, because he was unable to hold them in subjection.

But to leave these factors of darkness and hell; oh be exhorted, to walk in
the steps of the holy ancient Christians. Eusebius tells us concerning
Pamphilus the Martyr, of his liberality, and among other things, that he was
wont to bestow Bibles and other good books upon poor women a most commendable
Alms, and which he would not have bestowed, had he thought it unfit for women
to read. It appears by Gregory of Nazienzen's praises of his sister
Gorgonia, that though she were a married woman, she found much time for
reading. Hierome giving advises to Laeta how to institute her daughter, directs
her in a course, first to read the Psalms, then the Proverbs, then
Ecclesiastes, then the Evangelists, the Acts, the Epistles, and after these the
Prophets, the Five books of Moses, and the Historical books; and leaves it
to the mother to instruct her, or in cafe she were absent, to the Aunt. He
praises Marcella, that he never came to her, but she was asking him somewhat
about the Scriptures; and tells us, that if himself had any doubt, he would
ask her Judgment. In the Epitaph which he wrote upon Paula, he says she had
the Bible in her memory. One other passage I cannot omit of Hieroms, whereby
it may appear that he would not have women omit any part of the whole Bible,
for he finds some fault with Algasia, when she sent some questions to him, only
about the Gospells, and the Apostles writings, that he feared she was not
acquainted with the Old Testament. I will content my self to have propounded
these ancient examples, I might also instance in modern, I have in particular
taken notice of one notable pattern, namely Magdalen the wife of D. Pareus of
Heidleberg, in my Exercitation upon Malachy, Chap. 14. v. 14. where by
Digression I have spoken somewhat to this point.

CHAP. XII. The Maxims of Piety. The Conclusion.
HAving put the Bible into your hands, with a persuasion to sit down to read
it, I might forbear to give any further direction, because there you will find
all that is necessary, neither do I intend to write an Institution of
Christian women. I shall therefore only give some brief Adviso's, as they
offer themselves, it may be without any precise order or method.

1. Do all things in Religion by rule; nothing by venture, hit or miss.

2. Let not your rule be vox populi, but verbum Dei, not the opinion of the
Times, but the unerring Truth.

3. Do not bend the rule, and then measure by it. Bring your Actions to that,
and not that to your actions.

4. If the case be hard, advise. The truth sometimes lies deep, you will need
help to draw it up.

Particularly:

1. Learn to know God. Be not at a doubt whether Baal be he. You must know the
landlord to whom your rent is to be paid.

2. Frame in your hearts, the highest and holiest apprehensions of him.

3. Believe him, hope in him, fe are him, love him, obey him, joy in him, count
it an honor to be his servant.

4. Keep an account, and a watch over the thoughts. Say not Thoughts are free,
Know that they defile one. 5. Banish vain, disordered, profane, wanton, proud,
malicious thoughts.

6. Season and fill the thoughts with holy meditations. If they be reve^gefull,
think how meek Christ was, If they be censorious, think thus, Ah how bad am
I my self.

7. The Imagination is a great thorough-fare: keep out bad, at least let them
not lodge with you; but go on as Vagrants, lest otherwise you be under the
Statute and a penalty.

8. Get governed and bridled Affections. Let them never run out, unles you be
sure they are right. Say, Anger is too good for injuries; and sorrow too good
for any thing but sin; and love too good for lusts or money; and hope too good
for earth, or any thing below Heaven.

9. Converse much with God. Let those that are carnal and unacquainted with
God, entertain themselves with the Stage or with the Market. Be higher then
those delights, and those gains.

10. Live by faith. Let others, that know not this name of the Lord, shuffle in
the world, look to, and provide for themselves.

11. Believe Gods Protection, and deliverie if in misery. Fret not. Think how
wise God is, and how tender.

12. Wait upon God for Grace, the strength, perfecting, and continuance of it.

13. Set God before you in all the turns and accidents of business and life.
Say, God sees me.

14. Correspond with God in an ordinary and daily walking with him. Make
Religion your business.

15. Awake with God. The world will not suffer some to sleep; they say, Oh I
must up about such a matter; Say thou, I have my God to serve.

16. Examine Conscience diligently, faithfully, and frequently: Put not out
that Candle, but rather light up more.

17. Seek Gods face often for pardon and grace.

18. Renew Covenant daily.

19. Finish every day with humbling the Soul.

20. In extraordinary occasions be affected as the Church is.

21. Get Public spirits. Such as are worldly, are narrow, and slight, and
poor; They only attend their own business, how to live and eat, how to grow
rich, how to marry their children. Be larger and higher then these.

22. Converse holily in the world. Be afraid of a light, vain, frothy spirit.

23. Be holy in relations: as a wife, daughter, serva^t, friend, or Companion.

24. Be choice of Company, and useful in it.

25. Season all liberties and lawful Recreations with Grace. Choose to play
with such, with whom ye may also pray.

26. Be much in Public Worship. Consider, It Is a blessing to any place, to
have the conveniencie of Assembling.

27. Come awefully before God, when you come to his worship. Consider, That God
is in Heaven, and thou upon earth.

28. Make have, stay not for the other pin. Let your cloths sit loose, rather
then your soul, when you come before God in public.

29. Pray with the Congregation, joining in the same spirit.

30. Keep up the esteem of prayer which God has put upon it. Account that God
gives you the Key of all his Cabinets, when he gives you the spirit of prayer.

31. Beware of Atheism, of lip-labor, of bead-prayer, come to God by Christ by
a Promise, in the sense of wants, and in Faith.

32. Sing Gods Praises with understanding, and spiritual cheerfulness.

33. Hear the Word of God, as the Word of God; with silence, humility, faith,
subjection.

34. Care especially for that in a Sermon, that does the Soul good. Listen not
for Conceits, or the new notions.

35. Take notice of that which concerns your own condition, and be not too
busy to mark who else is hit.

36. Know that the Lords Table has the best refreshments, and that Christ's
Provisions are most wholesome.

37. Learn to discern the Lords body. They eat nothing but bread, that want
Faith.

38. Though ye be not worthy, yet have a care to behave your selves worthily at
Christ's Table.

39. Keep public Fasts, and public Thanks-givings with public spirits.

40. Study Communion with Saints. Neglect not to do, or to receive good in
Company.

41. Lay out Gifts and Graces for the mutual service of each others Faith.

42. Endeavor Mortisication. Study God more, and the creature less.

43. Read often, and with judgment. Read not a Chapter only for noveltie; or
where the Book falls open, as if ye happened upon the Bible by chance.

44. Refer what ye read to head's. Some have much house-hold-stuffe, but not
placed in any order, and so no use of it.

45. Read the less, so that ye understand it; rather then much as a mere
task. They that limpe in the way, go on more then such as run out of the way.

46. Read with Prayer. Pray in Reading, as well as before. The Spirit of God
then will tell you his own meaning.

47. Meditate. This meat cannot digest unless it remain in the Stomach.

48. Seek Christ in his Word. Seek the mind of Christ.

49. Read with Diligence and Constancy. It may be the Silver-veine will not
be found at first.

50. In the whole course be Eaven; with an universal respect to all the
Commandments.

But it is time, to take off my hand from this Table. And it may be it were
best to leave this as an unfinished Piece, for I confess I am not able to make
such a draught as I would. I have done to my own satisfaction, if the colors
of Holiness be most fresh; for I intended to make the woman that is Religious,
more lovely, then she that is modest, or humble, or wise. Those are high
Praises, but this the highest. Those daughters have done virtuously, but this
excels them All. In a word, That woman is most excellent, who is most Holy.

FINIS.

