The Poor Man's Relief.
HAving sent abroad a Paper, signifying, That I desire the Poor as well as the
Rich might have the benefit of that Talent which God had given me: which was
the scope of that Message to the Parishes of this County binding my self by
Public Engagement, to acquit the sincerity of my proposal herein, by
registring all the undertakings which providence in this nature should send
unto me. I found presently those different effects this general prescript
wrought upon men's humors, many approving it, by attestation of subscription:
Others approving the thing, but doubting of the probability of having it
effected. For removing of improbabilities (as well as I am able) is the sum
of this Relation.

In a public work all the Instruments must be answerable to their parts, or
otherwise the design will fail in the doing.

1. The Abillity, Honesty, and Faithfulness of the Physician. 2. The liberal
and willing Contribution of the Benefactors. 3. The Care and Diligence of the
Chyrurgeon and Apothecary.
These are the parts, if any of them fail, the work is impaired.

1. To the first, I shall acquaint you with the Objections of mine own Heart;
when I discovered, that Providence did require I should put forward the motion
for supply of the Poor, and settling (if it were possible) an honorable
Maintenance for Physicians. The first Objection was, That I could not speak
herein, but 'twould savor of Self-love, and Covetousness, which I had most
cause to abhor of any thing. This was removed, by freely acquainting a
Christian Magistrate, how God had dealt with me in cure of this Gangoreen,
which corrupts the welfare of common good. The next Objection, was the sad
reflection of my distemper and weakness of bodily and Spiritual strength,
that 'twas not probable I should manage such public affairs answerable to
my promise and expectation of the County. To this, I thus concluded, That
having learned by experience, how much discouragement had wronged the free
mercy of God, who delights to make his power known by effecting great works
with most despicable and improbable Agents, I durst not give way to such
thoughts, but to prosecute it so far, as I found his assistance therein: And if
it please him to enable me so long, as that I may moddell this undertaking in
such a method, that an other may as well execute it as my self; When so much
is done, then shall my Conscience in discharge of my duty, be at quiet.
Wherefore I declare, That this proposal is presented upon no other resolution
then this, namely, if God please to continue my life and understanding but one
Year or two, I hope, through his blessing, to acquit men's expectations of the
good that will acrew by it; and to let them see, by Publishing my prescripts,
and annexing the observations, what effect they have had over men's infirmities
and bodily distempers, and rating every such Prescript as equally to their cost
of making, as may be: That then I desire to cease and execute it no further,
having work enough at home. But only to recommend your charitable
Contributions to Dr. Edward Wilson, and Mr. William Tonstall, to whom God
has given gifts of mind, and health of body proportionable for so great a
work.

2. To the second, It Is in your hands to look to it, you may find some
motives following, that will let you see (besides what your own Consciences
will dictate when you are upon your sick Bedds, and feel the comfort or want
of Physicians help) That it is Gods will, You love your Neighbor as your selves.

3. To the third, For the care and diligence of the Chyrurgeon, by nominating
the man we shall employ (his demeanor has been such already) that I hope it is
enough to satisfy you herein, Mr. Thomas Cooper the younger.

For the care of the other, I shall undertake for them, so long as I meddle in
this business; And then, experience of their accounts will confirm your
approbation of them.

These things premised, you may see likelihood enough for a constant settlement
of your Charity: and that the work is distributed amongst five persons, two
Physicians to give advice, the other three to attend and administer it, which
they may mutually prosecute without distinction of Surgery, or servant
Apothecary; for as our Surgeon with assistant advice, may knowingly and safely
give such Physic as we shall direct; so the other two, having seen the
experience of our practice, may be useful to help (following the direction of
the Surgeon and Physician) the poor people in any bodily infirmity.

This, I hope, may serve to assure you, That (if plentiful contribution be not
wanting) there is probable means enough to do the Country, both poor and rich,
much good. And that you may know how little my hand is in this design, I shall
relate to you, how I neither begun, nor prosecuted it otherwise, then
providence directed, my Conscience urging me thereunto.

It was my occasional Discourse to a Magistrate of this County, touching the
benefits of having an honorable standing maintenance for approved Physicians
in this County, and the many sad evils which was daily contracted by the
neglect hereof, and at how easy a charge it may be accomplished. plished. To
instance the benefits. First, The succor of the Poor, whose cries were loud,
that there was none to help them, but they must live miserably, or dye
desperately, in adventring their bodies into the bands of such as had no
promise of Gods assistance and blessing to practice Physic, being un-called
and un-fitted thereunto. And though this evil has troubled the Commonwealth,
as appears by the Laws made against it, yet could it never be prevented
otherwise, then thus, by propounding to them, how they may have advise of
Physicians and Physic for nothing.

Secondly, The good and safety of all; For, whereas it is generally believed,
after once any has made use of a Physician, and God has blessed the means
with Success; that Party may with more security, rely upon the same Physicians
advise, then upon a strangers, who knows not by experience the disposition of
the party to Physic, but only by probable arguments. Now supposing the
Country Physicians, which had most of the practice, were obliged to Register
all men's cases as they were presented to them, freely writing the perticulers
of their Medicines, then may both Patient and Physician that comes after him,
know better how to proceed, when next occasion is offered.

Thirdly, The advance of Knowledge, he being engaged within the limit of the
first three Years, to Write a Book of the Body of Physic, which may be
supposed the Sum of all his Reading and Study, which being still kept, might
further his Successors. And if in his practice, he meet with any particular
secret, he likewise should note that for the same end.

Fourthly, The Glory of God. We say, take away the Cause, and the Effect
cease; this is an undeniable Principle, yet ordinarily it is contradicted in
the Physicians and Patients practice: For the Cause, Principal, Antecedant,
Concomitant, and sine qua non, is Sin, and that in every Disease, this
therefore in right Method should first be removed, but it is last thought upon.
How would God bless the preceedings of the Physician, and Sanctify the
sickness of the Patient, if that order were made, That none (if necessity did
non prohibit) should expect a Physicians assistance, before the Minister have
Visited him, except the sick party he a Recusant?

To sum up all, Whatsoever evil were desired to be removed, or good done
that laid in the power of the Physician, he being the Countries Servant, might
have such Rules prescribed by the ablest of the Benefactors, that he should not
transgress to the prejudice of either soul or body.

And although all this were approved of, yet little hopes appeared, that these
wasting times should make up so considerable a sum, as this business
required: Therefore I presented to the Justices (whom I took to be the
Physicians, depured of God for relief of the poor) motives of consideration in
behalse of the indigent people, that they would but consider how many sad
events in one Year happens, for want of those remedies which were (by Gods
Ordinance) as necessary to preserve life in time of infirmity, as Meat and
Drink in time of health.

This motion (though approved) yet could not be granted, because the Law
allowed of no Assessement for relief of this nature. Failing here, I resolved
to try the Friends God had given me, and see if they would make contribution,
which might be in answer hereunto. And from all that I mentioned it unto, I
received such encouragement through their Liberallity, that I was induced to
move it to the rest of the Country, that all might have notice, and no man
might be excluded that desired to join assistance to this work of Charity.

Wherefore I judge it my part to propound these two Cases.

1 I wish (unless they resolve to settle a maintenance standing for County
Physicians) that I may have the liberty (without the ill will or censure of any
man) to signify to those my Relations, who have no jealousy of my proposal,
That I may have what contribution they please for the poor Yearly, and I shall
saithfully disburse it upon those whom they please to recommend to my care, in
cases of Physic and Surgery: And they will see Yearly what account I
shall be able to give them, wishing from my heart, that all other Physicians
would do the like to their Relations, that so the work may be better
distributed amongst us.

2. If they do resolve to settle a standing allowance as is expressed, I shall
give them my best furtherance and assistance in it, Thus;

First, I consider the charge of Money, That it will be necessary to indent
with one Surgeon at the least, binding our selves to pay him twenty pounds
per Annum, during the time of this Contribution, for his care and pains in
cases of Chyrurgery, which we shall recommend to him, giving him our assistance
and advice herein; and defraying all his charge that is expended about it.

In like manner it is necossary, That we indent with an Apothecary, allowing
him accordingly for making up our prescriptions, and distributing them without
payment.

It is also necessary, That an other be indented with for attending those
preparations which are done by the Art of Chimistry; and least people may
conceive this to be needless: I desire to let them know, that it is absolutely
necessary and convenient, because none ever practiced Physic, but he found
continual use of such Medicines, though he thought it a point of discretion to
cover his practicing of them from the know ledge of the Patient, which is
generally affrighted with the name of a Mineral, because the unskilful
practice of many, has occasioned this misprision of Chemistry. If I be not
believed herein, let any Graduate Artist charge me with a Lie. Besides (to
those that know me, I speak) unless the Lord had signally instructed me in
some thing of this Art, and witnessed his approbation therein, with
concurrances of his blessing, I should (since the time I knew my self) never
have dared to harbor one hours studdy in these matters, wherein I had failed
so much in expense of time and money formerly: I will not say more herein, then
may be satisfactory to the Contributors, that the hopeful improvement of those
scraps, which I have gathered hic and ubique, I shall bequeath into good hands
for their use.

Again, it is necessary that so much be allotted for provisions of Diet and
Lodging, during the Cure of such, whose Malladies require daily attendance here
in Town.

It is convenient, that there be a Library of Physic Books, and a small
Annual sum for enlarging the same.

These are the Charges, as appurtenances to the maine Disbursements of
Medicines and, Maintenance of Physicians.

The Account which we have engaged to Register consists of two parts. First,
The Account of the Money Received, and how it is Expended: it is done in this
Form.

Contribution of each Parish. The whole sum of Contribution.
The Disbursements.
For Medicines, as appears by the Apothecaries Bills To such a sick person.
Paid for Lodging and Diet of such a sick person for (...) Days Paid for
Chyrurgeons, and Messengers, for Charges of Houses and themselves in their
Visits. Paid for Printing, Writing, and sending Letters, and for the
Collection. Remaining in our hands for our pains and advice to be lessened, or
augmented, as the Contributors every Year shall think fit --
For this is our desire mainely, that Moneys be not wanting for necessary
charges of Physic, and attending it. And for our advice, we referr it to the
County, when they see what we have done, which will deserve more one Year,
then another.

The second Part is the Account of Gods blessing on our Endeavors toward the
Poor.

If this Account be without fraud made legible to all men's capacities; then the
mouths of false fears and jealousies are stopped: which that they may be, I
desire the Information in the behalf of any poor creature, be in this Form.

A. B. Inhabitant of C. about the Age of (...) Years; such a Day was in this
manner afflicted, contracted as is supposed, by occasion of (...), or not: who
was formerly of sound Health, or otherwise inclineable to such a Distemper. It
continued after such manner, till this time (...) This is the Water, we refer
him to your Care under God, and we promise for him you shall have an Account
what Effect those Means shall produce, which you direct.

This I judge requisite, leaft the Country fashion be observed, in sending
their Urine without further Information; supposing we shall know enough
thereby, how, safely to Administer Advice in all Cases.

After the Information is Registated, the Advice of the Physician I promise to
Register.

It is judged, That the Information Signed by A. B does manifest a putrid
Fevor, wherefore let there be Administered after Bleeding, First, A preparitory
Potion; A Vomit the next Day; And then a Cordial sweat, as they are known by
their Names in the Pharmacopaea Dunelmensis. The Effects whereof, as it has
pleased God to dispose, may be Read in the Catalogue of the returns sent from
the poor Patients, to be Collected together in one Book.

So when the Information is Viewed, the Judgment and Advice upon it; the
Prescriptions to the Apothecary, how they answer the Advice, and the Returns
what Effect such advice has produced, I hope I have acquitted the Engagement.

For the Remote Parts, as Darneton Ward, least distance of Place make this
Proposal less Effectual in their behalf; I do promise to leave a Chest of
Medicines, and employ one thereabout, who shall carefully prosecute the intent
of our Design, with less trouble then coming to Durham, except in cases of
difficulty.

This also I wish may be known, That two Months about Midsummer, being a
Season, but in extreme cases, unfit to move the humors in the Body, I shall
attend my Duty at the Well on Gaterly Moore, adjacent to this County.

This Water is of the Nature of Sweet Spawes, which partakes of Vitrioll; the
Spaw at Knaisborough a little exceeds it in this property, and therefore is
more effectual for Gravel in the Kidneys: but for Diseases of the Female Sex,
proceeding from the Spleen and Matrix; as also for Worms, and all other
Diseases, none excepted (with due care of Physic taken.) This Water has the
pre-eminence, (to my judgment and experience) of others in the North Parts;
the Reason from hence is, That it partakes of the Tin and Lead: the former
Metal is approved to be of use in Men's Bodies next to Gold; from the latter,
it has properties which are known to Physicians, and therefore is not safe
for Women Conceived to meddle with it. I wish this necessary Caveat be not
abused to sin

I hope the Country may be now satisfied, That if there be no want on their
Parts of Charity, the Poor shall not suffer in loss of Health or Life, so
far as my Care and Endeavor can prevent. And seeing the only ground and
bothome of this undertaking (next to the approbation of God) is the good will
and opinion of the Contributors, having no fear at all, that they by exceeding
their Contribution with Messages of Patients, have purpose to impoverish me in
my Actings for the Poor: Wherefore as I hope to be Instrumentally helpful to
them, let no Man forbear to send to us in their behalf when there shall be
need. These things premised, I desire it may be Published as follows.

THese are to signify, That George Tonstall, and William Tonstall Residing in
Durham, have undertaken to supply any Poor Person, being an Inhabitant of this
County, that shall be any way infirm, with Advice and Physic according to
their best Skill, in all Cases wherein Physic or Surgery is required
(except in the case of common Plague) without any charge to them, from the
first of April 1655. And they desire, that such Gentlemen, Freeholders, and
others, who think sit to Contribute in this Charitable Proposal, toward the
Discharge of the Physic, and necessary Charge hereof, to subscribe their
Names, and the Sum they will freely Yearly give, to be returned to us. And
that they will Yearly Pay such Sums to the respective Ministers of the
several Parishes, for our Use: the one moiety on the first of May; and the
other moiety on the five and twentieth of December: And they do Engage to
Register their proceedings, to that end the said Contributers may receive
Account Yearly how they discharge their Trust herein. Provided such Poor
Person Inhabitant as aforesaid, that shall apply themselves unto the said
George and William Tonstall, do procure and send a Note or Certificate from
any It is denied when convenience will permit, that one of them be a Minister.
three of the said Contributers, that they are of such as are intended within
this Charitable Proposal.

The only design next, in prosecution hereof is, to frame a Dispensatory in
such a Method, that if any Person can but have true advice what kind of
Remedies is needful for them to use, then shall it be sufficient direction to
mine Apothecary what to give him, without prescribing such and such things in
particular. And this, I hope, will be a beneficial work, because men
prophessing Physic, seldom differ in Judgment concerning what is to be done,
and after what manner. The Logical rules of Art lead men together thus far:
but with what shall our intentions be performed, here lies the Dispute? For it
is natural, that he that has made his practice with such Receipts, will not
yield to alter them upon another commending his. This knot will be loosed,
when the Dispensatory is Viewed, with Observations how they took effect;
Physicians then may judge of them. I wish them so much comfort, as a willing
heart, to adjoyne their Receips hereto: And when all is approved on, none need
differ in using them.

An Abstract of the Poor Man's Panacaea, or Pharmacopaea Dunelmensis.

The Rational Method of Cure, is performed by Indication. And the subject of
Indidication, is either 1. Causa Materialis. Antecedent. Continent.
2. Pars affecta. 3. Symptomata.


1. Blood. 2. Humors. 3. Worms. 4. Stone and Gravel, 5. Wind. 6. Malign
Vapors.


External accidents Thorns. Splinters. Dirt and gravel, etc.


1. Blood has its Evacuation by Lances, Leeches, etc.

2. Humors are divided ordinarily into Choler. Phlegm. Melancholy. Water.


These have their proper Evacuatories Evacuatories in General are Vomits.
Purges. Salivation. Sweats. Diuretics. Blistering. Fomentation.
which are either Internal Drink. Cordial Electuries. and Powders.
External Bath. Fuming.

in Particular, Errhina. Apophlegmatismi. Tussilagogs, etc.



Evacuatories by Stool are either in form of Pills. Electuaries. Potions.
Powders.


As Reason sees cause to vary.

Homogeniall to the temperament, and Humidum radicale. This Humidum radicale,
consists in the influentiall heat of the Heart (which communicates its life
and vigor to the whole Body) and the innate heat of every Part or Member.

These helps are Aliments. Medicaments.


Medicaments are such as we call, Cephalicks, Pectoralls, Cordialls,
Stomachicks, Spleniticks, Hepaticks, Renall, and Matricall; these are peculiar
to the noble parts of the Body, which respect the innate heat of each
particular part, with a sweet spirit agreeable to the Vitalls: The variation of
this Indication is only in respect of the temperament in hot Distempers. cold
Distempers.


3. Symptoms. These are such Effects as follow the Disease, and have for their
Indication their contraries.

The common Symptom, is pain; its contrary is Anodine.

The other Symptoms are divided, in respect of Spitits. Blood and Humors.


1. Spirits, as Want of Sense. Want of Motion. Watchfulness. Drowsinesse.


2. Blood, and Humors.

These are divided in respect of their Qualities First. Second.
Motion.


1. First Qualities are Heat. Cold. Moisture. Dryness.


2. Second Qualities are Thinness. Clamminesse. Grossness.


Motion, proceeding from the Head. the Stomach. the Belly. the Liver. the
Kidneyes. the Matrix.


Thus the material Cause, which is the maine opponent, is discovered; the part
affected strengthened, and the Symptoms removed; which comprehend the whole
Method of Cure belonging to the Physician.

Now follows Surgery, which is a Method performed by manual operation
upon the Body. The parts whereof are either Similare. Organicall.


1. Similare are Bones. Nerves. Veins and Arteries. Membrans. Flesh.


2. Organicall are Head. Palate. Ears. Eyes. Nose, etc.


Infirmities belonging to these Parts, are either Tumors. Ulcers. Wounds.
Imposthumes. Contusions. Gangrenes.


1. Tumors are Phlegmon. Erisipilas. Oedema. Schirrus. Flatulent. Scrophular.
Wens.
2. Ulcers are Simple. These require only Consolidation. Compound. These are
Mild, these are Plain. sinnuous are Callons, as the Fistula without callosity

Malignant, and corroding,

these are Herpes. Phagedaina. Noema. Cancer. Leprosy.
3. Wounds. 4. Imposthums. 5. Contusions. 6. Gangrens, vary according to the
division of the Parts.
The Remedies answerable to all Indications in Physic and Chyrurgery, shall
(God willing) be fitly Composed and Annexed to every branch of Indication,
expressed in this Abstract. Therefore when the Pharmacopaea Dunelmensis is
Compiled, you may see our business is little more, then to give advice.

This Commodity also will arise, That if the Contribution will amount to no
more then will find the Poor with all Medicines necessary for Physic or
Chyrurgery; then may they have Advice gratis from any Artist, having such
Remedies for their use in all Cases, as shall be Published.

FINIS.

