Jesuits Assassins: OR THE POPISH PLOT Further Declared, And demonstrated in
their Murderous Practices and Principles. THE FIRST PART. CONTAINING, I. A
Catalogue of our English Popish Assassins, swarming in all places, especially
in the City of London. II. The History of the Mohammedan old Man of the
Mountains and his Assassins; and a comparison of him and them with the Pope and
his Emissaries, in Doctrine and Practice. III. The Mysterious Secret of the
Chamber of Meditations amongst the Jesuits. IV. The Examinations and
Depositions of Lund, and others, about the Assasins and Assassinations now
practiced, or endeavored by the Popish Emissaries, against his Majesty, his
Nobles, and other his Protestant Subjects. V. The Earl of Salisbury's Answer to
scandalous Papers, wherein he was threatened to be assassinated by the
Confederates of the Gunpowder Traitors. VI. Proposals to Authority, for the
better Extirpation of this Bloody Order.


With Reflections and Observations upon the several Relations. All Extracted
out of Dr. TONG's Papers, written at his first discovery of this Plot to his
Majesty, and since in part augmented for Public Satisfaction.

LONDON: Printed by J. Darby, to be sold by the Booksellers. 1680.

A Catalogue of the Persons Assassinated, Attempted, or Designed upon by the
Roman Assassins, and of those Assassins themselves, so far as they are known.
Assassinated, or suspected to be made away.
SIr Edmond-Bury Godfry. The Lancashire Witness sent up to testify of Arms
found there. The Body exposed in Westminster-Abby. The Lord Arch-Bp of York's
Chaplain.
Attempted.
The Shropshire Justice. The Yorkshire Witness in Tuttle-street. Macedo a
Portuguese-Convert, several times assaulted, and twice shipped out of the
Kingdom. Dr. Saul, Dr. Luzancy, Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Tompkins, Mr. Baron, Mr.
Arnold, and his Friend, Mr. Wren.
Designed upon by Name.
The King's Majesty. Rupert, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Cumberland.
The Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; particularly, James,
Duke of Monmouth. George, Duke of Buckingham. James, Duke of Ormond. Thomas,
Earl of Ossory. Anthony, Earl of Shaftsbury. James, Earl of Salisbury. Arthur,
Earl of Essex.
George, Earl of Hallifax. Herbert, Lord Bishop of Hereford. Mr. Matthew Pool.
Dr. Stillingfleet. Mr. William Hutchinson, alias Berry, a Secular Priest. Dr.
Ezerel Tongue. 1. For the discovery of the Jesuits Morals; And, 2. of their Plot
to his Majesty. All the principal leading Gentlemen of England, mentioned in
the List taken with Green, and the April Traitors executed at Tyburn, 1666. or
in the black Bill.
Principal Inciters and Procures of Assassins and Assassinations.
All Jesuits.
Thomas White, alias Whitebread, Provincial of the English Jesuits. Thimbleby,
alias Ashby, Rector of St. Omers. Harcourt, Rector of London. Ireland, Fenwick,
Keins, Gavan, Ewers, Gerald, Kelly.
Other Favorers and Abettors.
Edward Coleman Esquire Dr. Fogarty, Patrick Plunket titular Primate of Ireland.
Handkinson, sometimes Manciple or Steward to the Savoy Benedictine Monks.
Anthony the Portuguese, Servant to the Q. Confessor.
Assassins.
-- Benedictine Monk who stabbed the Duke of Soubize, and sheltered himself in
Sommerset-House; seen by Mr. Oats in the Savoy, but left there with the rest,
and Marsh in particular, for want of Authority to take him. Conyers, another
Benedictine of the Savoy, and his Associates, Keins, Prichard, Welsh, Kelly,
Lefaire, alias Feure, Gerald, Thomas Pickering, John Grove, alias Honest
William, Robert Green, Henry Berry, Lawrence Hill, Philibert Vernat, Levison,
Dethick, Conscious and Associates with Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry's Murderers.
Messenger, sometimes Master of the Horse to the Lord Arundel, Attendant on Dr.
Sheldon, Almoner to the Duchess of York. Lang. Trial, p. 8. Sir George Wak. p.
20. Anderton the Benedictine, associated with Conyers.
Assassines who were to intexicate the Lord Shaftsbury's Coachman.
Matteson, a Barber, behind Gray's Inn. Bradshaw, an Upholsterer, in
Queens-street. Humphrey Adamson, a Watch-maker, near Turn-stile, Holborn.
Benedict Prosser, a Silver-smith, in Silver-street in Southampton-Buildings.
These were the four Assassins accused by Prance, see his Book. Many stout and
hardy Staffordshire Assassins, whose Names are not known, chosen by Ewers,
according to Whitebread's Direction; and the like in all Counties, many
hundreds, as Mr. Dugdale believes. Karne, Wilson, Broghil, Levalian, the four
Irish Russians. Fogarties four Assassins not yet named: And Flemin the 9th of
the Irish Ruffians; This Flemin was a Tory, that trusted so confidently to his
personal Strength and Activity, as audaciously to refuse (after he had bin
proclaimed, for many Villainies done by him) the favor of Transportation into
any Foreign Country, graciously offered him, for the ease of those Parts he
infested with his Robberies, etc. He was at length shot by some Troopers who
pursued him; in his Pocket Papers were found, which entitled him to a chief
place in this Red List. Dr. Fogarty Assassin or Poisoner. Sir George Wakeman a
Poisoner. The Yorkshire Assassins, accused by Baldron and others; see the
Intelligence for City and Country, relating Sir Thomas Gascoin's Trial, not yet
published. The 3 Assassins who assaulted Justice Arnold. It is verily believed,
they are some hundreds in all, who in their turns were to attend this execrable
Service. To instance, Conyers at Windsor ten days, and then to remove to L. B.
House. Mr. Dugdale, after his term over, was to go to Standon, the Lord
Aston's, to avoid suspicion, easily raised, by the too long continuance of
strange unknown Faces at Court. Here we may add the many thousands French, and
others, listed and armed for the general Massacre in the London Fire, etc.
Memor. Gerald and Kelley drew in Prance, persuading him it was no sin, p. 64.
Hist. Plot. Gavan and Ewres drew in Dugdale, by the example of Garnet and his
Miracles, and of some Scripture Example. Plunket, alias Cock, Popish
Archbishop and Primate of Ireland, encouraged Flemin by great Rewards, etc.
Here may be justly added Groves his Companions, the three Irish Incendiarles,
who assisted him in burning and plundring Southwark, in which work he furfeited
himself, and had double pay for his double-diligence; Strange late Provincial
of the Jesuits, Barton, Penington. David Nich. Keimash the Dominican, who
lately died in Newgate, and all their Assistants, above fourscore French and
Irish Incendiaries, who burnt and plundered the City of London; and namely, *
Marten Debamet, Fringemaker, the Frenchman, who fired his own Lodging,
apprehended in the Fact, and delivered to the Guards at Bridewell, by Mr. N.
who is living to attest it. The two Peter's who fired their own Lodgings upon
Snow hill, having first removed all their Goods, save the Pallat they lay on;
apprehended by Mr. C. then one of the Guards, but rescued by his Fellows, and
dismissed. With these also the Guards themselves, and Romish Pensioners, who
dismissed them to proceed in their burning and plundering, are justly to be
accounted as ready for any mischief; and particularly that Captain that refused
Mr. Middleton to remove his own Goods with his own Cart, telling him, That that
Cart which carried away one Load of his Goods, deserved to be burnt; which
could tend to nothing but to mutiny the Citizens, that they might have a
pretense to execute upon them their designed Massacre. Dav. Nich. Blundell the
Jesuits Catechist, substituted into Mr. Oats his room, for firing Wapping, and
the Suburbs on that side the River, who did fire the Houses at Limehouse-hole,
the 18th of September. 1678. twelve days after Mr. Oats had made Affidavit of it,
before Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry, and given his Majesty notice of their purpose in
his Information. Harcourt, and the other Jesuits who employed Mr. Bedloe, and
viewed the Tower, Bridg-houses, and other on the River, in order to the
application of their Fireballs, etc. Stubs, Gifford, Molrain, who set Eliz.
Oxley to fire Mr. Birdans House. The Jesuits and their Assistants, who were to
begin the Fire at the Temple, and carry it down to the Savoy. The Convent of
the Benedictine Monks at the Savoy, who were to carry the Fire on to
Charing Cross. They who set on, and helped M. Clark to fire her Master, Mr.
De-la Noys House near London-Bridg; and the other Maid formerly employed in the
like Villainy; and the Boy at the Minories. * Memorand. This Martin de Hamet, or
Andrew Summers, (for both those Names were found in his Indenture) was an
Indenture-Covenant Servant, to Claud Lant of the Parish of St. Leonard
Shoreditch, a French Fringe-maker; and for better convenience to carry on the
Fire, and to get Arms to be used in the Massacre, in case the French, then
aboard their Fleet, had landed, and the the King thereupon bin assassinated,
had taken a Lodging in Robin-Hoods Court in Shoe-lane, with the then Turn-spit
of one of the Inns of Court; and firing his own Chamber, locked up his Door,
and was taken going away with the Key, and his Indentures in his Pocket; and
had entered himself in Captain Burton's Company of the Auxiliaries in Shoe-lane.
The like may be presumed of many more of these Incendiaries. This Memorandum is
more especially commended to the Officers of the Trained-Bands and Auxiliaries
of London; because a very wise Man, and principal Counselor to one of the
German Princes, has, in a Book he published in French, affirmed, That there
are many such French Papists in the City of London, who in time of danger would
turn to their Enemies and fight against them; and now only wait for the King's
Death, or other opportunity to finish what they begun and designed against
their Houses and Lives, by Fire and Massacre in the Year 1666. Dr. Tongue has
the Original Indenture, and Witnesses to prove this whole Matter, to be
produced when called for by Authority. See Instances of the like Fires,
Massacres, and Robberies, acted by Jesuits, and other Papists, in other Cities,
in time of Peace, in the Doctor's Demonstration of the Fire-Plot, or the
Jesuits Incendiaries at the end of that part. The Assassins that assailed
Justice Arnold, Mr. Tomkins, Mr. Baron, and others, may be here added when
known.
Sir EDMOND-BURY GODFREY.
ANAGRAM.
I find Murdered by Rogues. Orrory. True Justice by false Rogues Murdered I
find,
They seek in vain Heavens Righteous Eye to blind.
Dogged by Furies in Murder. Dogged by Murderin' Furies. By Rogues, Rome's
Furies, dogged, Murdered, you Die,
Your Name, their shame, shall live Immortally.
Died by Rome's rude Finger. Rome in Saints Blood still her rude Finger dies,
Mother of Murders, Lies, Idolatries.
Me dy' unburied! Dog-Friars! Whom Cruel Dogs devour, unburied, lie
In Ditches, emblems of Friars Cruelty.
Dun by Romes rigid fury. Rome 's riged fury unbid. Rome's rigid fury unbid, on
Murder flies,
And in Saints Blood her Scarlet double dies.
Died by Romes revenged fury. Rome revenged by Fury's died. Rom' died by
revenged Fury's. Revenge, Revenge, Furies do Furies call,
Thy Death is Romes death, and thy Fall Romes fall.
E. T.
EDWARD COLEMAN.
Anagram.
Lo a damned Crew. Anonymus. This Proto-Traytor, and a damned Crew
That follows, Lo Heavens Vengeance does pursue.
Oe mad, and Cruel. Whose Confession, King, Kingdom, Life, all three,
Might save, dies mute, Oe mad and Cruel he.
E. T.
The Publishers Preface to the following Relation of the Mohammedan Assassins,
and their Comparison with the Roman.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to take notice that this following History of the Mohammedan
Assassins, and their Parallel with the Papal, was most of it inserted in Dr. E.
Tong's Royal Martyr, as Appendix thereunto: For in the Treatise written partly
about the Year 1672, and partly about the time of his Majesty's gracious
Declaration for Indulgence, he endeavored to discover and prevent, if
possible, in some measure the Horrid Plots ever since the Reformation, and more
especially in the Reign of our Royal Martyr Charles the First, carried on
against the Royal Family, and still continued until this day, for the ruin and
destruction of our Religion, and therewith of our Laws, Liberties, and
Proprieties, therein necessarily involved; and charged the Roman Emissaries to
have designed all along since the Reformation, the Traitorous Parricide of our
Protestant Princes, and namely, of King Charles the First, as well as King
James, and Queen Elizabeth, and therein endeavored to fortify the Testimony of
the Reverend Dr. Moulin against them in that particular, discountenanced by
many, and so sedulously suppressed by others, that when he endeavored to
promote an Edition of it about the time of the London Fire, he found it very
difficult to obtain a Copy whereby it might be reprinted. And to the better
awakening Public Authority to such a Discovery and Prevention as he intended,
He judged it convenient to set out this Parallel of our Modern Papal, with
their Ancestors, the more Ancient Mohammedan Assassins. The Mohammedan cannot be
denied the honor of the firstborn of the Devil, the Murderer from the
beginning in this Tribe of Regicides, though I find one of them envy him the
Title, and allow him only to be an Ape of the Pope and Jesuits: But that these
younger Brethren, and Successors from Rome, have far out-gone him in Principles
and Practices, cannot be denied, as will be more clearly made out, when Dr.
Oats shall be at leisure to perfect his Narrative of what he has collected of
their Practices in this kind from their own Archieves; by which it will appear,
to admiration, most true, what John prophesied of that bloody City, That all
the Blood of God's Martyrs is found in her; who has not only publicly struck
at the Crowned Heads of all the Defenders of our Faith, but incessantly persued
and sought to intercept all our budding Hopes, such as were those we conceived
of Edward the Sixth, and Prince Henry. There thou will find that hardly any of
our Royal Line has hitherto escaped their Heads, or bin unattempted by them,
if they came near the Succession, or gave hopes of zeal for our Religion.

This Discourse now seasonably, as I hope, committed to the Press, is in
particular designed to stir up our Parliament, to provide more strict and
effectual Means for preventing the like Attempts for the future, as in duty
they are obliged, and to propose to our Princes, the generous Example of the
Noble Allon, that they may diligently apply their Power and Authority, to
suppress, extinguish, and revenge this shame to Humanity, Christianity,
Morality, and Policy, as well as Religion, from the face of the Earth. That
Blessing and Success with which it pleased God to promote the Doctor's weak
Endeavors in this kind, in his former Writings, encourages him to proceed,
notwithstanding the Envy, Malice, and many other great Discouragements he finds
himself hereby daily more and more exposed to. His Royal Martyr was, if not the
only nor chief, yet not the least Incentive to Mr. Oates's Adventure amongst
them; who in the presence of a Learned and Famous Divine, did call God to
witness, That he went not into their Society to change his Religion, but to
discover, if he could, this detestable Plot, of which he had some Hints from
others, and found more fully laid out, and by Historical Observations on the
Sufferings of Charles the First from the Romanists, endeavored to be made out
and demonstrated to public view in the Doctor's said Book. And as this was
some motive to send him abroad, so the Doctor's Translation of the Jesuits
Morals, (to be further dispersed and promoted by a Satirical Index prepared for
that purpose, and intended to be published with the third and best part of
those Morals not yet printed) was a principal means whereby that happy
Intelligencer got seasonable liberty to return and discover this Plot: for they
who had kept him so close during his abode in London, in attendance on their
Consultations in the Month of April and May, (that he by Providence only found
Testimony of his being here) did watch and keep him so strictly at their
College at St. Omers, till June 1678, that thereon they most confidently built
their lately disproved Assertion, That he never stirred thence: So that he had
no other hopes left him of escaping their hands, than by deceiving their
Malice, and undertaking to poison, or otherwise destroy, the Author of those
Books whose Name he concealed as unknown unto him; nor did their impotent
Malice, which prompted them to such a barbarity, suffer him to return to his
Native Country on that Errand, till they had laden his Soul and Conscience
with an Oath to poison, or otherwise destroy him, sealed with their abominable
Sacrament of the Mass; by which they thought themselves infallibly assured,
either to destroy the Doctor's Life, or his Soul. God of his infinite Mercy to
his Majesty, these Churches and Kingdoms, has thus far preserved us; If
henceforth either by our own froward Contentions, or negligent Spirits, we
frustrate the opportunity he has opened for our escape, and attend not after
Gratitude to God, Loyalty to our Prince, and mutual Charity and Toleration, the
means of preserving and uniting God's Servants, and his Majesty's true Lieges;
(so many as are found amongst us, in that Bond of Christ's Perfection and
Strength) and to such provision and execution of good Laws, as may utterly
exterminate and extinguish this cursed order of barbarous bloody Popish
Regicides, Assassins, Spies, and Incendiaries, our second Error will be
certainly worse than the first, and we shall justly provoke God, by tempting
him, through neglect of Means, so unexpectedly offered us, to give us up to
that folly which is the immediate forerunner of a certain ruin; which God of
his unexpressable undeserved Mercy prevent. Amen.

As for the Doctor, he does boldly protest, Liberavi animam meam, that he has,
by constant attendance on Parliament, according to his Station, for many Years,
offered certain and infallible Means, for the execution of all good Laws,
wisely contrived by our Ancestors, for the Glory of God, Honor and Safety of
our King and Kingdom, and defeated in a great part by negligence in their
degenerate Posterity.

The Assassins.
WE have it from good Authority, Mat. Paris, p. 83. Hen. Spelman, Glossarium,
Assasins.
(says a Modern Historian, whose Authors are in the Margin, as he quotes them)
that there was formerly a Sect amongst the Turks, called Assasini, (whence we
say to Assasinate) They lived in the Mountains of Phaenicia toward Tire. Their
Government and chiefest Laws were these:

Their Governor, or Master, was not Hereditary, but Elective.

He, under the notion of Humility, as if he would be only the Servant of
Servants, refused all lofty Titles, being only called, The Old Man of the
Mountains.

He was honored and worshipped as Vicar of Mahomet, and so their Father and
Prophet.

They pretended to be such exact observers of their Turkish and Mohammedan Laws,
that all others seemed but as mere Cheats, or Nonconformists in respect of them.

They were led with that blind Obedience, that they never questioned their
Master's Commands, were the Action never so dangerous, difficult, or wicked;
and they never left off till it was finished.

Any Prince whom they either hated, or thought to be no Friend to them, or
their Party, upon the least hint they would murder, though they were sure to
suffer for it.

Whosoever murdered a Prince that was not of their Religion, they believed him
to have the second Place, next to Mahomet, in Paradise.

For they also believe that the Old Man, their Head and Prophet, could also
dispose of Paradise.

It Is said that this Sect was long ago destroyed by the Tartars; and whether
any who call themselves Christians have espoused their Tenants, I shall not
say. Thus far my Author.

Marcus Paulus Venetus, in his first Book of the Eastern Regions, Chap. 27.
gives us this Relation of the Mohammedan Cutthroats, whom they called Assasins.
A Certain petty Lord of those Countries, commonly called The Old Man of the
Mountains, a Mohammedan, joined unto him a number of Cutthroats, whom they
vulgarly called Assasins, and by their untameable boldness, killed whom he
pleased, so that in a short time he became a terror to all. Now, he brought
that about by this Imposture. There was in that Country a certain most pleasant
Valley, encompassed round with very high Mountains; within which he planted a
very great and pleasant Garden, replenished with odoriferous Flowers, sweet
Fruits, and other delightful Herbs. He built also in that Garden certain
extraordinary Palaces, wonderfully adorned with Pictures, and spared nothing
that might be for ornament unto them. Neither was there wanting to that Garden,
and those Palaces, diverse running Streams flowing with Water, Honey, Wine, and
Milk; nor diverse Instruments of Artificial Music, with mellodious Tunes and
Songs; Dancings, Vaultings, Wrestlings; rich Garments, and wonderful provision
of all delightful Things; not to stand in enumerating other carnal and fleshly
Pleasures, (for so this modest Author passes over all the other sensual Lusts,
rather than Pleasures, wherewith the brutish Fancy of that Impostor Mahomet,
did accommodate both his Laws, and Paradise it self, unto his rude and
barbarous Disciples). All which certain young Men, there placed by him, did
enjoy, according as they best liked; neither had they any other Imploiment,
than to live and enjoy that happy Life, giving no place to any Grief. There was
also a very strong Castle purposely erected in the entrance of this Garden,
kept and strengthened with a diligent Guard. The Ingress and Egress of this
Garden lay through this Castle.

This Old Man, whose Name was Aloadin, kept also certain young and valiant Men,
of bold and undaunted Spirit, whom he did train up to this very purpose, that
they might execute that detestable design which he had formed in his Mind. He
took care to have them instructed in the wicked Law of Mahomet; with promises
to such as observe and keep it, of all carnal Pleasures in the Life to come.
And that he might make them more obedient to him, and to undertake any thing he
pleased, at the peril of their Lives. He, at his pleasure, caused them, or some
of them, to have a certain Drink given them; by which they being intoxicated,
became senseless, and oppressed with heavy and deep sleep: In the mean time they
were brought into that Garden, who, their sleep being over, when they saw
themselves converse and live amongst such great pleasures, they also thought
themselves to be caught up into the Paradise of God, to live with Mahomet their
Lawgiver, and to enjoy those Delights which he promised them; to say no more,
they rejoiced that they were delivered out of the miseries of the World, and
now did live another and blessed Life. But after they had, for a few days, bin
made acquainted with these Pleasures, the Old Man gave again, to such as he
pleased, to drink of the aforesaid intoxicating Drink, and brought them, being
thereby made senseless, back again out of that Paradise. They then, when come to
themselves, remembering what and how great Pleasures they had for a little time
enjoyed, grieved above measure, and were made exceeding sad, That they were not
allowed the perpetual enjoyment of those Delights; and were willing to undergo
Death it self, so they might always lead that life they had only a little
tasted. Then the Tyrant, who feigned himself to be a Prophet of God, said unto
them, Hear me, and be not sad, If you be ready to undergo Death without fear,
when it shall be inflicted on you for your Obedience unto me, I declare, and
promise you, That you shall be made partakers of those Joys which you saw only
for a season. So these wretched Men, accounting Death as Gain, there could be
nothing so hard enjoined them, which they would not willingly undergo to attain
this blessed Life. This Tyrant therefore abused the said Men to the committing
of innumerable Murders, because they prostituting their temporal Lives,
contemned Death it self; and did, at the command of that Tyrant, make such
havoc and destruction all about in that Country, that they were formidable to
all Men, and no Man durst resist their madness; so it came to pass, that many
Countries and powerful Persons became tributary to that Tyrant.

CHAP. 29.
But in the Year of our Lord 1262, Allan, King of the Tartars, with a mighty
Army besieged the Castle of this Tyrant, desirous to exterminate so great a
Danger out of those Parts where he lived; and after three Years took him, with
all his Assassins, for Victuals failed them, and utterly destroyed the Place,
and killed the Men.

Some Mohammedan Writers do say, That the Siege continued above thirty Years,
and that they were compelled to surrender, not for want of Victuals, but of
Clothing.

Haitho the Armenian, who was present in the Tartarian Army, tells us who this
Allan was; and that albeit he made his Conquests of Persia, and the Neighbor
Countries in a few Years, yet the Assassins held out in a long Siege. His words
in his 24th Chapter of his Eastern History are these:

Haolon (Marcus Paulus Venetus calls him Allan) Brother to Mango Can, took all
those Countries, (in the Empire of Persia and its Confines) until he came to
the Country of the Assassins. Now these Assassins are Infidels that have
neither Law nor Faith, but only so as their Prince and Lord instructed them,
who was called Sexmontius (or perhaps Senex de Montibus, the Old Man of the
Mountains, (as Marcus Paulus Venetus) or, Lord of the Six Mountains) at whose
pleasure and command they did freely and readily give up themselves to Death.
For the aforesaid Assassins, had a certain invincible Fort, called Tigado;
which Fort, or Castle, was provided of all Necessaries, and so strong, that it
could not be assaulted on any side. Haolon therefore commanded a certain
Captain of those Tartars, who were the Guard of the Kingdom of Persia, which he
had subdued, sent thither by him, to take ten thousand of them, and with them
to besiege that Castle, and by no means to depart from it till he had taken it.
Thence it came to pass that those Tartars continued in that Siege Summer and
Winter for the space of 27 Years. And so at length the Assassins were compelled
to surrender their Fortress, only for want of Clothing, and not for want of
Victuals, or any other Cause.

The Application of this Story, I shall leave to the ingenuity of the Reader,
after he has read and farther considered this, with the foregoing brief
Description of this Mohammedan Sect, and their Order, as I find them described
in another Writer, and premised them for that purpose, and compared them with
the words of a Father of the Society of Jesus, very little varied: For whereas
he speaking of I know not what Mohammedan Tartars, and their Mufti, or Prince,
affirms, that he did in all things apishly imitate the Church of Rome, in
Matters of Piety, I must here affirm, That as the Court of Rome, and their
Disciples, do too Diabolically, in too many things, imitate this Mohammedan
Tyrant in Matters of Idolatry; So that of the Pope and his Assassins, the
murdering Society of Cutthroat Jesuits, the Old Gentleman of the Seven
Mountains, and his Life-Guards, I may well say, Like Lips, like Letters; like
Prince, like People; like Mistress, like Gallants; Ruffian Cutthroat Bravoes
to vindicate the Quarrels of the Scarlet bloody-minded Whore. The Devil who
held the whole World subjected unto his Tyranny (by the fear of Death, and
Terror of the Sword) before our Savior came, and destroyed his Works, seeks
now to recover those Parts of his Dominions that are revolted from him by Fire
and Sword. So the Mohammedan and Popish Tyrants reign, and propagate their
Kingdoms by the Sword, and their Religions too.

Neque enim alia his virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. The Pope as he is a
Chimera, made up of several brutish Powers and Parts, so his Chimerical
Kingdom, part Civil, part Ecclesiastical, part Spiritual, wars upon his
Adversaries by Weapons of all these sorts at once, with the Sword of his
Assassin Monks and Jesuits, Bishops, Archbishops, and all Missionaries, sworn
Foes to all his Enemies at his Altars (as Hanibal of old by his Father against
Rome) before he send them thence, against their Lives: With these also, and
other Instruments, against their Policy, and with his Spiritual Engines, Lies
in Hypocrisy, lying Wonders, counterfeit Piety, and the like, against their
Souls and Spirituals. But let no Man be deceived by them, the Devil is never
more a Devil, than when transformed into the sacred appearance of an Angel of
Light; nor his Ministers less, but more Ministers of Satan, for pretending and
appearing as Ministers of Christ. By these Works they may be known; The Roman
Wolf, for all his Sheeps Clothing, is easily discerned by us, by his devouring
Teeth, and bloody Chaps, from a Shepherd. The Dragon in the Revelation, who
though he had the Lamb's Voice and Horns, had the Dragon's beastly and dreadful
Shape, devouring Mouth, and formidable Claws, could not possibly be mistaken
for Christ's Vicar by any, but who had first given up their Faith to lying
Legends; Reason, to his seducing Orators; and Sense, to his juggling Impostors,
to be led by their Noses into his Mouth. A strange Religion in the mean time
that is, which requires for its first Principle, that ye unman your self,
renounce Sense and Reason, not in Matters of Faith, but in those which are most
properly by God and Nature subjected and objected to them. And that they may
worship Stocks, first transform themselves into Blocks. This Roman Circe, to
the end that she may keep Men in Vassalage, under her filthy Lusts of Pride,
Ambition and Tyranny, to serve her in those her unsatiable Passions, turns all
her Lovers into every Brutal and Feral Shape and Nature, the farthest she can
possible from that of Humane and Rational: Some she indulges with Wine and
Women, till they be transformed to Swine and Dogs; some she transports with the
fury of her Love, into ravenous and devouring Wolves, Bears, and Lions. Such
were the Powder-Traytors, and the Assassins we speak of. And here follows one
of her Spells, whereby she practices to make those prodigious Metamorphoses
which are hardly to be believed by any who have not bin sad Spectacles, or
Spectators at least of her Sorceries.

In this, as in a Mirror, we may partly see how ouR brave English Spirits of
the noblest Families (such as Sir Everard Digby appears to have bin by his
Letters) are transported by them to such Ecstasies of horrid Zeal, as to blow up
whole Kingdoms, Kings, and Royal Families, with their Parliaments, at once; and
think such a Design to be the best of Causes, and the most glorious Undertaking
that ever animated Heroic Breasts; and to esteem Kings, Princes, Nobles, and
all the choice Gentry of their Native Country, whereof many were their nearest
Relations and Allies, as so many Vermin not worthy the least pity, not worth
the saving. And I think, on this occasion, it will not be improper for me to
record, Julius Caesar Vaninus, a Noble Spaniard, and Doctor of both their Laws,
the Civil and Canon, amongst our Powder-Traytors, who is so far from denying,
that he glories and boasts of it, not doubting to compare himself for it with,
and assume to himself the same fervor of sacred Zeal and Charity, which at
once animates and illustrates the most Holy Martyrs. His words which I have
inserted in the Margent, with the Title and Edition of his Book, which he wrote
some ten Years before, namely, the Year after the Powder Treason, sounds thus.

I the very least Novice of the Church Militant, being the last Year appointed
and sent to London, to be there exercised in the Christian Prize-Games,
labored in that place of Exercise 49 days, in cutting of Stones, (he meant the
Walls under the Parliament House); I was kindled and flamed with that desire of
shedding my Blood for the defense of the Authority of the Catholic Church,
that no greater nor better Gift, from God Almighty, could have be fallen me; So
that I was judged, by the Testimony of my own, and the Conscience of my
Fraternity, who were exercised with me in the same Vault and Theater, if not
Superior, at least not to have bin Inferior to any Martyr.

Amphitheatrum aeternae providentiae Lugduni 1615. Exercitatione 19. p. 115,
116. Martyrii virtus quae in charitate consistit a confessore aliquando
perfectior quam a Martyr possidetur. Quis enim inficias eat, si non
illustriori pari saltim Martyrii virtute charitateque praeditum fuisse D. Jo.
Evangelistam, atque ex Martyribus aliquem? Ego sane vel minimus Militantis
Ecclesiae Tyro, cum Anno praeterito Londini ad agonem Christianum destinatus
essem, adeoque 49 diebus in latomtis tanquam Palestra quadam exercerer ea eram
pro Catholicae Ecclesiae Authoritate defensanda effundendi sanguinis desiderio
accensus and inflammatus, ut mihi a Deo immortalivel majus donum vel melius
contingere nullo modo potuisset, ita quidem si non superiorem, inferiorem certe
nullo martyr propriae Conscientiae Testimonium me judicavit and confratrum,
qui mecum in eadem erant Xsto and Theatro, fortissimi and digni sane qui tale
Deo spectaculum, exhiberent. Id. Ibid Exercitatione VIII. p. 71. He intimates
his Country and Nobility. And he concludes with great applause to himself, and
his Comrogue Roman Missionaries, the traiterous Underminers of the said Palace,
as who for their Zeal and Valor, were Spectacles worthy of the Observation,
not only of Angels and Men, (as St. Paul speaks in honor of the Holy Apostles)
but the respect of the holy Eye of God himself, (he means in the act of blowing
up K. and Parliament.)

But here I must certify the Reader, to the Glory of the Justice and Purity of
that Heavenly Eye, which still watches over our Kings and Kingdoms, with a
most sweet and merciful Providence, and pursues such prodigious Traitors with
condign Severity and Vengeance; that albeit this Noble Spanish Doctor escaped
both the Hand and Eye of Royal Justice in England, (whose diligence ought for
ever to be commended as exemplary to all Posterity) yet did he not escape from,
but was pursued by the Eye and Hand of Divine Justice, to a most dreadful,
shameful, untimely Death, by the Authority of the Church, for which he was so
ambitious to shed his Blood, and was burnt alive as an unparalled Heretic,
and died a professed Martyr, beyond all example; not in confirmation, as I said
before of the Authority of Rome, and her Errors, against the truth of Religion,
Policy, and Morality, with the Powder Traitors, as he deserved and desired;
but, which is horrid to be spoken, gave up his Life in the Flames, a Testimony
and Witness against all Religion, and God himself; an obstinate and execrable
Heretic and Atheist, being given up by God to that reprobate Sense, whereby
ill Men, Seducers and Seduced, are justly suffered to fall into Temptations
above their strength, (from which the humble and pentient are by his Grace, in
Answer to their daily Prayers, delivered) whereby they inevitably grow worse
and worse, till having filled up the measure of their Sins, they draw on
themselves proportionable Judgments. And in these, whether we respect Sin and
Punishment, and this Spiritual or Temporal, no Person, Place, or Age, has
furnished us with any Example parallel to this Powder-Traytor Julius Caesar
Vaninus; nor which ought to strike more terror into the minds of the Seduced
Followers of the Modern Impostors, for he, I say, their Disciple, and who
praises them above all Societies of the World, as appears in his own words in
the Margent; Julius Caesar Vaninus, in Epist. ad Lectorem, p. 2. Cencidunt,
inquam, and possum feruntur Haereses, quia Militantis Ecclesiae fortissimi
heroes ii, quos e Societate Jesu ducimus, ad illas profligandas excindendasque
omnes ammi and corporis adhibent Machinationes. Bella arma fulmen illud
Christianae Militiae, Bellarminus R. Card. Meritissimus minatus est, etc.
Valentia vero, Becanus, Ducaeus, Suarez, aliique complures ejusdem Sanctissimae
Religionis Commilitones quoties pro Gatholica Fide quam gloriosis adversus
Haereses quam periculosis demicationibus decertarunt? Quam ipsos Adversarios
cruentarunt, quam profligarunt? Itque ego haec gravissimis aliis persuasus
Argumentis, caeteros quidem variarum Religionum ordines quo vitae integritate,
qua disciplinorum cognitione, qua denique virtutum omnium excellentia exornatos
elegantissime and gravissime stabilitos, ipsam vero Jesu Societatem pietatis
and eruditionis parentem atque altricem, Romanae Ecclesiae and splendori
fuisse, and ornamento, ipsamque Dei immortalis munere tanquam Romanae Ecclesiae
Palladium, caeterarum Religionum Columen, totius Universitatis Anchoram
Hominibus esse concessum, etc.
he only of all Mankind died obstinately, and gloried in being a Martyr for
Atheism, and a professed enemy of God, and all Religion; so brought about by
God's Justice, that we and the whole World might see, in this dreadful
Instance, whither the desperate Principles of the Roman Emissaries lead their
Disciples and Profelytes when left to themselves. As for Father Parsons, who in
his old Age boasted publicly, in the Jesuits College at Rome, as our Spanish
Doctor here, That he had wrought in the Powder-Mine at London, And all the rest
who escaped God's just revenging Hand in this World, let them stand for (...),
demonstrative Tokens and Evidences unto us, as the Apostle teaches us, 2 Thessalonians.
1.5. of the impartial Judgment to come, wherein all Men shall stand before
Christ's Tribunal, and there receive righteous Judgment, according to what they
have done in the Flesh, whether it be good or evil.

Here follows one of the Charms, or Exorcisms, by which our Countrymen, this
noble Spanish Doctor, and such other audacious Spirits, as they find most fit
for their horrid Designs, are in their Chambers of Meditation, and other
Recesses of Darkness, conjured up gradually to that prodigious Fury, as to
think that in bloody Assassinations of Kings and Princes, and merciless blowing
up of Kingdoms, they do acceptable Service to God, and merit everlasting Life.

A Secret Mystery of the Jesuits, delivered in French to a lover of the
Reformed Religion, shortly after the murder of Henry the 4th, late King of
France.
WHen they persuaded any Man to murder his King or Prince; after that this poor
and unfortunate Man is entered into their The Chamber of Meditations, by which
the Jesuits prepare, fit, and train up their Assassins, to these Mysteries, is
thus shortly described, in a French Treatise printed 1602; whose Title is, La
Franc et veritable Discourse, etc. written to dissuade Henry the 4th of France,
from restoring the banished Jesuits into France, in his 37 page, in these words.

Chastell, who attempted to kill Hen. 4. of France, asked by the said Senators,
if he had ever bin in the Chamber of Meditations, into which the Jesuits bring
the most grievous Sinners; in which Chamber they set before them, and cause
them to behold the hideous portratures and shapes of Devils of sundry most
terrible Figures, under a color of reducing them to a better course of Life;
but indeed andetruth, to disorder and distract their Minds, in such manner,
that they may be able, by such Admonitions and Advice as they give them, to
atchieve or undertake some great Design. He answered them, That he had bin
often in that Chamber of Meditations. So they call it, but it might better and
more truly be styled, The School of Fury and Madness.


Chamber of Meditation and Prayer, this hellish Brood bring forth a Knife,
wound up in a

Chastel enquis (by more than three hundred Senators of the Parliament of
Paris, a Cloud of sufficient Witnesses) S' if n'avoit pas esse en la Chamber
des Meditations, on les Jesuits intrediusoient les plus grands pecheurs, qui
voyoint en icelle Chamber les pourtraits de plusieurs diables de diverses
figures espouvantables sous coleur de les reduire en meillieure me, pours
esbranler leurs esprits, and les pousser par tells admonitions a fair quelque
grand cas. A dit quilavoit este souvent en cette Chamber, etc.

Scarf, in an Ivory Sheath, covered with an Agnus Dei, written round about with
perfumed Characters; and when they draw out the said Knife, they cast certain
drops of Holy Water upon it, and then they hang upon the Haft of the Knife five
or six blessed Corals, which betokens that the Man shall deliver so many
blessed Souls out of Purgatory, as he shall give thrusts with the Knife: When
they deliver the Knife into the Murderers Hands, they speak these words: Chosen
and Elect Child of God, go forth like unto Jeptha; the Sword of Sampson; the
Sword wherewith David did cut off the Head of Goliath; the Sword of Gideon; the
Sword wherewith Judith did cut off the Head of Holofernes; the Sword of the
Maccabees; and the Sword wherewith Peter did cut off Malucha 's Ear; the Sword
of Pope Julius the 2d, wherewith he conquered Imole, Fayence, Friuli, Bologne,
and diverse others: Go forth, and be of active Courage, God strengthen thy Arm.
This done, they fall down on their Knees, and the chiefest of them conjurath on
this manner; Come Chirubims, come Seraphims, Thrones that rule; come the
fortunate and blessed Angels, Angels of Love, and fill this Holy Vessel with
Eternal Glory, and bring him presently the Crown of the Virgin Mary, of the
Patriarchs, and of the Mattyrs, for he is no longer ours. And then they say, O
powerful and invincible God, who have revealed unto him in his Prayers and
Meditations, that he must kill a Tyrant Heretic, to set the Crown upon the
Head of a Catholic King, being disposed and persuaded to this Murder by us,
strengthen his Sinews, and multiply his Strength, that he may fulfill thy Will;
give him a privy earnest (Token), whereby he may escape from them that would
lay bands upon him; give him Wings, that the Spies of the Barbarous may not
overtake his Sanctified Members; dart forth thy fiery Beams into his Soul, that
thereby his Body may be encouraged boldly to press through all Difficulties
without fear.

Having ended this Conjuration, they lead him before an Altar, where they show
him in a Picture, how the Angel took up Jaques Clement Jacobine, presenting him
before the Throne of God, and saying, Lord, behold thy own Arm; behold thy
Revenge, and the Executioner of thy Justice; and all the Saints stand up and
give him room. All this being done, no Man may speak with this Man but four
Jesuits, who when they come to him, say, That he appears to them as having
some Divine Nature and Godhead; and that they are so stricken and moved with
the brightness thereof, that they kiss his Hands and his Feet, accounting him
no longer a Man; and they make a show, as if they did half envy him his good
Fortune and Glory which he possesses already, fetching a deep sigh, and saying
unto him, I would that God had chosen me in this place, for then I should be
assured to go directly to Paradise, and not into Purgatory.

To the Reader of the following Informations and Depositions.
LEt no Man flatter himself, as if Rome were ashamed, or had left off the
exercise of those her Impious Frauds in our days, because these Works of
Darkness are not practiced in the Face of the Sun, or Men were grown more wise
and virtuous in this Age than the former. The following Paper (not to speak of
what is in every Mouth) testifies, That as they never want Encouragements, so
they can never want Instruments for the most horrid and cruel Assassinations of
Kings and Nobles, as well as inferior Persons, who with them are of no better
esteem than Dogs, or most noisome Vermin, when they oppose their infatiable
Lusts, which they call Religion, or cover with pretenses of Piety.

If any Man be offended with what I have smartly written, and endeavored to
expose to public scorn and hate of the Doctrines and Practices of the Jesuits,
abominable to God and Man, as some Translations of that kind have bin denied
public License and Light, as they well deserved, had they aimed at any other
end than that of public Justice, which allows the most detestable Practices to
be spoken out in the audience of all the People. If any be offended, I say, I
would be bold to add one word to them, which is this, That all those Villainies
of Cruelty, Assassination, and the Gunpowder Blow it self, had it taken effect;
the poison of King James, if true; the Martyrdom of Charles the First; the
Massacre of Ireland; the intended Poisoning or Assassination of his Majesty
Charles the Second, whom God preserve; and with him the Massacre of hundreds of
thousands of his Innocent Subjects, illustrated by London Flames, cannot be so
justly laid by Man to them, nor can nor will be so severely required by God at
the last day, at the hands of these Roman Missionaries, and their Disciples,
the sworn Legionaries, and Spies of the Popes, and Court of Rome, to whom they
are obliged as Subjects, by all Ties Sacred and Humane, of Religion, Love,
Gratitude, Glory, and hope of Salvation; as to them, who contrary to Oaths,
Law, Justice, and Interest of their Country, admit, harbor, entertain, plead
for, favor, and shelter them, and discourage the Informers and Prosecutors,
whom Zeal to public Good has pressed to discover and pursue them, at the
extreme peril of their Lives. Let the Case be put for Spies sent into any
Enemy's Country, by any Prince, if they came as Spies, and so deserve Death,
much more those that know and receive them.

I'ts no less, than a common Proverb, Receivers make Thieves; and in our case
make Assassins, Traitors, Murderers, Poisoners, and Incendiaries.

Here the Doctor concludes with the protestation of his Innocence, That he is
ready to tender an Act of Parliament, which will put all the good Laws of
England into infallible Execution, to the Glory of God, Preservation of the
King, Kingdom, Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and that whatever Laws are
henceforth made without such Provisions, as are necessary to their infallible
Execution, are but mockeries of God in his Concern, and gross abuses of the
Country in their Interests and Trust.

This Paper coming seasonably to my hand, to prove by what particular Law, our
Modern Poisoners, Assassins, Incendiaries, Plunderers, Regicides, etc. are
authorized with a good Conscience to attempt so many horrid Villainies, and
protest, at their Death, their Babe-like Innocence, I thought it would be
acceptable to the Reader, to find it recorded here, in the Sorbon Doctor's own
words, as I found it printed, in his Expostulation opposed to the Jesuits
printed Thesis, defended in their Claromontane College at Paris.

Valerian Flavigny has these words in the Book and Page quoted in the Margent.
Perhaps this place might require me to draw hither many other Decrees and
Statutes of the Inquisition -- such as those which may be read in many places
of the approved Decretals [or Book of the Secrets] of the Inquisition,
published at Venice by Marcus Antonius Zalterius, especially in the 472, 675,
676, namely.

That it is lawful for every Man by his own private (or proper) Authority, to
take captive, strip, and also to kill Heretics.

That all Persons who are held bound to any Person whatsoever (not excepting
Kings) in what kind of Obligation soever, are then wholly freed from it, when
they to whom they are obliged, fall into any manifest Heresy.

That Heretics, from the day they become Criminal, lose all Right and and
Power (or Dominion) of retaining or disposing of all their Goods.

That all help and benefit of Laws is denied them; and that every legal Act is
forbidden them.

He to whom an Heretic has entrusted any thing, is not obliged to restore his
trust to him.

That a Catholic Wife is not obliged not to defraud her Husband, because by
the Husbands Heresy the Wife is free from that Duty, and so on the other hand;
neither yet is the Bond of Matrimony thereby dissolved.

That all Vassals whatsoever are by the Letter of the Law (of right) freed from
all Obligation, though confirmed by the Religious Bond of an Oath, by which
they were engaged to their Lords. Children are in their own disposal, and freed
from all Duty to their Parents, so soon as they become Heretics.

So testifies the Catholic Doctor of the Laws of the Roman Court of
Inquisition.

Expostulatio adversus Thesin Claromontanam, Valeriani de Flavigni Doctoris, ac
Socii Sorbonensis, Sacrarum Hebraicarum Literarum, Professoris Regii in Regio
Franc. Collegio Professorum Regiorum Decani. Page 9. Forsitan postularet iste
locus, ut plura alia Inquisitionis Decreta, aut Statuta huc adveherem -- qualia
sunt illa, quae passim in Decretorio Inquisitorum approbato, and Venetiis apud
Marcum Antonium Zalterium edito legi possunt, ac presertim 472, 675, 676,
videlicet.

Licere propria Authoritate Haereticos capere, spoliare ac etiam interficere.

Omnes qui aliquo Obligationis genere aliquibus tenentur adstricti, tunc
liberari penitus cum illi quibus obligati erant in Haeresin incidunt
manifestam.

Haereticos a die commissi criminis amittere dominium omnium bonorum.

Haereticis omne Legum auxilium, and beneficium denegatum esse, omnemque actum
legitimum interdictum.

Eum apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuit, non teneri rem depositam Haeretico
restituere.

Uxorem Catholicam, and e converso, viro Haeretico debitum reddere non
obligari, quia per Haeresin viri ab hoc debito liberata est; neque tamen
dissolutum esse Matrimonii vinculum.

Quoscunque vasallos, omni Obligatione etiam juramenti Religione munita, quo
dominis suis tenebantur adstricti ipso jure liberatos esse. Filios Haereticorum
effici sui juris quam primum eorum parents incidunt in Haeresin.

And so on the other side, Kings and Parents are not bound to them by parity of
Law.

And here, because my ingenious Romanist shall not object against this
Testimony, as he does against the King's Evidence, that we bring only Saying
and Swearing against these monsters of Men and Opinions, and no Reasons, I will
give him two Arguments to prove these Doctrines to be true and necessary Points
of their Faith.

And the first Reason is, Because the most Holy Popes, and Infallible General
Councils, confirmed and established these Doctrines, who confirmed and
established their Faith, of the real substantial Presence of the Body and Blood
of Christ, over and besides all its Graces, Virtues, Powers, and Merits, to the
faithful Receiver, by their incomprehensible Transubstantiation, against as
clear Light of Sense in this, as of Morality utterly extinguished in that. So
that they who leave the Jesuits in the Doctrine of Poisoning and Murdering
Kings, cannot continue in the Communion of their Church-Mass, by the Authority
of Pope or Council: Nor can the evasion help that it was ordered, but not
defined; for if fallible in Practice, which is directed by Judgment, who can
secure us that Judgment is Infallible, where Practice is Heretical?

My second Argument is a Demonstration, in which the infallible Pen of St. Paul
gives the Major, That all is the Churches, and the Pope's Infallible Chair the
Minor, The Pope, and those in his Communion, is the only Church, therefore all
is theirs: and we are beholden to them that they have not long since (according
to the Law of the Holy Inquisition) seized all we have; to be sure they owe us
nothing to whom we owe our very Lives; and therefore we as vainly expect they
should owe or afford us one Grain of so precious a Truth, as an ingenuous
confession of the present Plot, which were to contribute greatly to our
Delivery, Life and Peace, the Plague and Ruin of their Cause.

And here we may see what quarter we are to expect from all those supercilious
Factions, who Unchurch all Christians who symbolize not with them in all their
Ceremonies, and fiercely Excommunicate them, as Lutherans do the Calvenists at
this day. That I may say nothing of our Opinionists, who found Dominion in
Grace, and run from Rome in the Fool's Circle, till they overtake and out-go it.

Postscript or Marginal Note to Flavigni.
N.B. That Green, Berry, and Hill, having so good Authority (without Warrant
from any General, or other Superior Commissioned from the Pope) by the legal
Decree of the Holy Inquisition, to kill what Heretics they pleased; for them
to acknowledge themselves Guilty, had bin to renounce their Holy Pope, and Holy
Inquisition, which were to renounce God and Christ, and leave the Church
Headless, and condemn Holy Garnet, and all the Red-letter'd Saints, who
consecrated themselves by the Slaughter and Massacres they have made of more
Protestants within this two hundred Years, than are now any where alive; and
killed and burnt more in two Protestant King's Reigns, than in all their Popish
Predecessors; and especially they had blasphemed their French and Irish
Massacres, and English London-Fire, those renowned Proofs of Roman Zeal and
Religion.

The Examination of John Lund of Iver, in the County of Bucks, taken upon Oath
before me Henry Coventry Esquire one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of
State, this 2d day of January 1678. Who being duly Sworn, and Examined, says:
THat upon Tuesday, the last day of December last, about six of the Clock of
the same in the Evening, this Examinant being abroad to look after some
Wood-stealers, he saw seven or eight Men on Horseback coming from Iver-Heath
toward Iver-Town; and three or four of them parted and went the way toward
Rickmansworth, and the other four came down the Land near which this Examinant
stood.

One of them having occasion to Untruss, he alighted, and another held his
Horse, and commanded the other two to go forward, who, as this Examinant
supposes, were their Servants.

This Examinant says, That he was on the other side the Hedge, and very nigh
this Person who alighted, and heard the one say to the other, How are things
like to go? The other answered, Well enough, for as for that Inquisitive Dog
Shaftsbury, and that Dog Essex, and another whose Name this Examinant did not
perfectly hear, but it was Holle, or All, or some such sound, their Business
should be done. The one asked, Which way? The other answered, One Mac -- who
was a clever stout Fellow, and had courage, would do it in Women's Apparel. The
other asked again, Are you sure he will do it? Yes, said he, he will; but if he
will not, there are a thousand will do it for the same Encouragement. And this
Examinant further says, That he heard one of the said Persons say to the
other, Do not fear, nor be discouraged, for we will send their Souls to the
Devil for a New Years Gift: And then they mounted, and went forwards to a Place
where the ways parted; and two of them went toward Kingston, and the other two
toward Windsor. One of these Persons who had this Discourse under the Hedge,
had a black Cap on his Head, and the other a Hat; all the Horses were dark
colored, and two of the Persons had Waste-belts on, and one of them had a
laced Livery, as near as this Examinant could perceive. And further this
Examinant says not.

Taken before me this 2d day of January, 1678. John Lund.
HENRY COVENTRY.

This Deposition of so fresh a Date, is so full an evidence of that Diabolical
Murdering Spirit, still reigning in these Roman Emissaries and Conspirators,
that I shall not need to produce any other of that Cloud of Witnesses; who with
Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry's Blood continually cry to our King, Lords, and Commons,
for Vengeance; not so much on the poor deluded Accessaries and Instruments
acted, as upon the Principals, and Actors, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and Priests,
whereof there is not one sent hither who has not some Episcopal Jurisdiction,
and consequently who is not a sworn Enemy to our King, Kingdoms, and Religion.
If by the equity of Moses Law, he who let a wild Ox go loose, who had formerly
goared others, was to answer with the price of his own Life the mischief done
by such ungoverned Brutes: I leave it to God to judge betwixt this People and
their Superiors, and to determine, after so many thousands of Innocents flain
in our former Confusions in all the three Kingdoms, ralsed or promoted by these
Incendiaries, at whose hands that Blood shall be required, which by any neglect
of theirs, in not trying up and exterminating these Furies, may again destain
and pollute this Land.

These following Propositions, to prevent Assassins, have bin perused and
approved, as not unworthy of public consideration.

Da veniam subitis non displicuisse meretur,
Festinat Lector qui placuisse tibi.
Pardon kind Reader what you cannot commend.
This haste to please deserves not to offend.
Other Depositions and Informations, farther discovering the Jesuital Assassins
and Assassinations.
Mr. Oates's Narrative,
JUne 13.76. Tho. Whitebread in his Chamber, told the Rector of St. Omers, That
a Minister of the Church of England (he meaning Dr. Tongue) had scandalously and
basely put out the Jesuits Morals in English, and had endeavored villanously
to render them odious to the People; and asked the said Rector, Whether he
thought the Deponent, Mr. Oats, might possibly know him? and the Rector not
knowing, called the Deponent, (who stood at the Provincial's Chamber Door and
heard these words) and when the Deponent came into the Chamber of the said
Provincial Whitebread, he asked him, If he knew the Author of the Jesuits
Morals? The Deponent answered, His Person, but could not well remember his
Name. Whitebread then demanded, Whether he would undertake to Poison or
Assassinate the said Author? which the said Deponent undertook to do, having
fifty pounds Reward promised him by the said Provincial, and was appointed to
return for England. --

At the said time the Provincial said in his Chamber, That he and the Society
of London would procure Dr. Stillingfleet to be knocked in the Head, and Master
Pool the Author of Synopsis Criticorum, for writing some things against them.
Numb. 30.

July 78, Richard Ashby came to London, with Instructions from Whitebread, in
which was an Item, with a Memorandum, for the procuring the Assassination of
the Right Reverend Father in God, Herbert, Lord Bishop of Hereford; for that
the said Bishop had bin educated in the Popish Religion, and was fallen, and
they were resolved not to pity, nor spare any Apostate from the Roman Faith.
Ashby also said, That Times being now ready to change, they would be ready to
give, not only Apostates, but also those Heretics that had obstinately opposed
the proceedings of the Society, and their Agents in propagating the Faith, and
Interest of the Church of Rome, a just Reward for their Apostasy, and infamous
Obstinacy; and though the Parliament have taken away the Act for burning
Heretics, they should not escape the vengeance of Catholics, Numb. 33.

August 9. 1678. Bazil Langworth, and others of the Society, did offer ten
pounds to the Deponent (Mr. Oats) to kill Berry, formerly a Jesuit, now a
Secular Priest, because he had written, and was about to print, some sheets of
Paper in vindication of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and in it
persuaded Roman Catholics to a more charitable compliance with Protestants.
And urged the Deponent, If he durst not do it himself, to procure some other to
do it; assuring the Deponent, that whosoever did it, and were questioned for
it, he should have a Pardon. Numb. 47.

Mr. Bedloe, page 42. April 75. at Paris, at a Consultation, two French Abbots,
and several English Monks, discoursed about carrying on the Plot, to subvert
the Government of England; to destroy the King, and the Lords of the Council,
the King was principally to be destroyed, and the Government subverted, as well
as the Protestant Religion. Coleman's Trial.

Mr. Bedloe (Ireland's Trial) page 44, 45. August 78. About the same time there
was a discourse of a Design to kill several Noble Men, and the particular Parts
assigned to every one; Knight was to kill the Earl of Shaftsbury; Pritchard the
Duke of Buckingham; Oneal the Earl of Ossory; Obrian the Duke of Ormond.

I will conclude these Informations, with an Account borrowed from our
ingenious Countryman, a zealous Assertor of the Church, though not of the
Court of Rome, nor their Jesuitical Parasites, Braves and Cutthroats, where
you may see how these Artists imitate the Warlike Laconian Education of their
Youth, making, by the severity of their Collegiat Institution, the Sacred War,
to which they send their Missionaries, a pleasure rather than a toil, as all
they know who have had Education amongst them.

Baronius in his Roman Martyrologie (so writes this Modern Wit) says, That the
Holy Priests, as Innocent Lambs fatted in the Sacred Cloisters, by the Holy
Society of Jesus, with divine Instructions for Martyrdom, (a Sacrifice
acceptable to God) and the Sacred Colleges at Rome and Rhemes, have bin put to
Death, because they preached in England the Doctrine of the Holy Romish Church.
[1. King-killing, as above, in the Laws of the Holy Inquisition.] I wish he had
not said it, in regard they are Envoys of the Society of Jesus, because they
are accused to be liberal enough of other Men's Blood, [he means the Missioners
and other Orders]; and therefore, though it be a commendable thing to meet
Martyrdom, I would not have them guilty of sending People merely upon that
Errand, [when there is no need for it]. Then, to breed them up as Victims to
God, looks as if we sacrificed them our selves, and smells a little of
Baal-Peor. Then the word Cloister sounds like a Prison, as if we kept them in
Franks, or Styes, to force them to keep their Oaths, [he means, of returning as
Traitors to their Countries] and upon this the Heretics would be upon our
Bones, and say of the God to whom we Sacrifice them; That it must be some God
of this Age, or World, or else some God of the Earth, [i. Pope]; for that the
God of Heaven requires now no more Sacrifices at all, nor never did those of
Humane Blood. But that which spoils all is the word Fatted, Greased, or
Anointed. A. B. Valgrand sent me to Lipsius Saturnals, l. 1. c. 14. for the
meaning of it. There I found the term was proper to the Gladiators, who were
picked out of the condemned Prisoners, or miserable Slaves, and afterward
maintained in their Sacred, or rather Execrable Seminaries, to the end they
might purchase or pay for their Fat by their Death. Qui dabit immundae venalia
fata saginae, Propertius. They weary them out of their Colleges and Chambers of
Meditation, etc.

To furnish such as these, the sharp-witted Prosecutors have provided, and set
up at Rhemes, Rome, Doway, Madrid, and Valladolid, Colleges of young English;
who as Marcus Navarrus writes, in his third Book of Councils, by an established
Papal Constitution, are bound to swear, [before they taste any of the Popes
Bounty in their Colleges] That after so many Years they shall return into
England to publish what they have learnt, [i. Assassination, King-killing, and
City-burning, as at this day] (I add, and they at the entrance, forswear their
Allegiance also); what good has come of this, Cardinal Bellarmine tells us in
his Apology for Seminaries.

N. B. To justify our Laws against Roman Emissaries, that before they are made
Priests, they are guilty of accumulated Treasons.

First, It is Felony for any Protestant to go out of this Kingdom without his
Majesty's leave, much more for such a mischievous end as to be trained up in
such desperate Principles in the Popish Seminaries, as are there Professed,
Preached, and Taught, to the utter subversion of all true Piety to God,
Allegiance to Prince; Morality, Civility, or Fidelity to Mankind.

2. They renounce their Allegiance at their first entrance into such
Seminaries, which were first Instituted to teach a Foreign Allegiance to a
Spanish Heir, against Queen Elizabeth, this is High Treason.

3. They swear to perpetuate this their treasonable Renunciation, by an
uncessant activity in Treason in their return to England, before they can
receive any benefit of their Renunciation: This intent of Treason, were
Treason, though it should never be reduced into Act here in England, whither it
is Treason for them to come with such Traitorous Intention.

4. At and before their Ordination, their Bishops and Priests, who in England
have Episcopal Jurisdiction, swear to be Enemies to all the Pope's Enemies, and
to seek their utter ruin and destruction. I hope Priesthood, by its indelible
Character, does not blot out, but augment all the Oaths and Obligations to
Treason, in consideration whereof it was, and without which it cannot be given.

5. All Priests who are of any Regular Orders, are obliged by their Oaths, to
obey the Pope (if not with Blind, as Jesuits) at least with Canonical
Obedience; and it appears above, and elsewhere, by the Canon of the Holy
Inquisition, and the Letter of the Pope's Law, that they ought to molest us
Heretics by all manner of means, Fire, Assassination, Regicides, false Plots,
News, etc. of which we have lately lamentable experience, till by mere
vexation, we be driven, as thousands are daily out of other Countries, to
wander destitute, afflicted, and tormented, in Exile; or to forsake our
Religion, and Laws, and live Slaves with our Prince, under the Tyranny of the
Pope and Devil.

FINIS.

