Annae-dicata, OR, A miscelaine of some different cansonets, dedicated to the
memory of my deceased, very dear Wife, ANNA TOOK of Beer.

The Willough-wearer.
ALas! how often by some Rillets side,
With heavy bosom have I trod the Meads,
And since they were with grass and Crystal beads
So trimly clustered, thus began to chide:
Ye want nor dew to fledg your verdant quills,
Nor Western-wind to fan the Summers heat:
Shoots not the Soil from you superior hills,
To make your clovers fragrant, and complete?
With store of sovereign blooms are ye not dressed,
And studded thick? or does not many a Swan,
And the Sweet Nayades, that ravish can
With precious modulations, speak you blessed?
But then what makes such store of Willough here?
Why foster ye this badge of discontent?
Me thinks you should some nobler Pendant wear,
The Palm, fat Olive, or the Laurel Gent:
I say, since happy, and so highly blessed,
Me thinks ye should converse with plants of grace;
And like a Lady tricking up her face,
With Pearls and Rubies be, not pebles dressed.
Fie, fie, dismiss this Livery forlorn,
Confine it to some craggy mountain top,
Or barren Desert, where it may be worn
With more propriety; or since my hope
In Seas of sad despair is tossed and torn,
And daily drencht with many a rigid billow,
Pass it to me; give me your woeful Willough.
The Redundant Lover.
DEar, since we parted, never did I see
A beauteous Summer fly, or fancy pyed,
Or garden-bed, or Plume, or Picture, dyed
With daintier colors, but I thought on thee.
I never heard a more melodious note,
Attained a delicater touch, or ought
Of better worth; but 'twas a present quote
Of thy perfection, thou were in my thought.
Nay since familiar to remember things
By contraries, by black, white; Saints, by Devils:
To this end have I even made use of evils;
And to my mind each loathsome object brings
Thy purity; dearest my loves intention,
Makes every thing that is, to make thy mention.
The Commune bonum.
THE Law, like Esop, in exterior show
Is harsh and homely; but each man inclined
Laboriously to sift it, till he know
With what delight, the inner side is lined;
Will vouch it pleasing, as was Esops mind;
It Is sweet, but does in rugged phrases dwell,
It Is like a Pearl, hid in an Oyster-shell.
The Pious Turtles.
DId Heaven but gently to my wish reply,
Lo thus would we converse my lovely dear;
I say thus would we live while being here;
And when to part from hence, thus would we die.
Upon some shady, sandy, higher ground,
Where the sweet birds should warbling music give
And at whose foot some pittering Rillet wound,
Like Baucis and Philemon would we live.
Our clothing should be warm, and new and neat,
Not costly nor too curious; and our diet,
Though plentiful and good; yet free from riot,
Not adding thirst to drink, nor lust to meat.
No viperous envy, nor ambitious dreams,
No care to pay some griping Landlord Rent,
No clamorous wealth, of many ploughs and teames,
Should interrupt the calm of our content.
Our handy labor should be sole addressed
To the well husbanding of Hops, and Bees:
Or to some Orchard, where the fruitful trees
Strove which should yield the most, and which the best.
Nay born by faith upon her lofty wings,
We would beyond this under earth endeavor,
Conversing with divine invisible things;
So living, loving so, we might live ever;
And when death came at length, to play his prize,
Depart in peace, closing each others eyes.
Love in good sadness.
THou youthful art, and fair; well clad, and fed
And flattered too no doubt: yet dear be sure,
That these inducements make thee not secure;
For with thy birth, thy death was also bred.
Thy birth infers thy burial; all the space
A mortal does above the ground converse,
He does but climb his execution place;
It Is but a lingering passage to his hearse.
Observe a skull, out at whose rotten ports
The worms hang down, and in an hundred year,
Such as that is, shall thou and I appear;
Cold, darkness, silence, must our sole consorts,
And the raw worms our richest earrings be,
Which I entreat remember well, and me.
The holy Climax.
MY lovely dearest, when I but survay
The curious building of thy house of clay,
The music of it, and contend the while,
Who it is that dwells in such a precious pile;
I find a soul so nobly there discoursing;
Distributing so vertually her powers,
That straight it leads me to that Lord of ours;
Such strange invisible mysteries enforcing:
And I conclude, if on the center base,
Such goodness such perfection he discloses,
How is the circle then adorned, the place
Where he upon his heavenly throne reposes?
Or how is he himself both good, and great,
That when they were not, gave all these a making?
That being, gives them order; nor forsaking
His Creatures, keeps both it and them complete.
And then in contemplation of so vast
A world of wonders here again I rouse
My spirit near confounded, and in have,
Falling full lowly prostrate, pay my vows.
A Cordial of Vipers.
AS Dice run most by paires, and shun excess,
So fewest friends love best when more love less.
The stream of friendship coming once to leak
At many Sluices shallow grows and weak.
As Dice though white, their fowl spots cannot lack
So friends in friends must bear with faults though black.
Sparing to cut, to fear, but in extremes,
Even lenatively making moats of beams,
They must not hollow-harted fulloms be,
Nor base Bar-cater-treyes; but quadratly
Run in the game of friendship, be sincere
Above the brunt of either hope or fear.
As Sice ace throw'n are friends still as before,
So friends though rich, must still love friends though poor;
This world to no such certainty advances,
But their may come a cast may change their chances
They must conclude their state here like the Dice,
Where now the Sice is Ace, now Ace the Sice:
And thus the deadliest Drug, and justly hated,
May ye tturn cordial, if but calcinated.
Honey of Hellebore.
WE are at play, and Gamesters till our graves;
Our Saints and Sabbaths, are like Queens and Kings,
The rest with Martha, do but many things:
Only our Wakes, and Markets, play the Knaves.
Time is the Pack, our days are several Cards,
And Custom a Groom-porter void of shame,
Does with his carnal moth-eaten regards,
Often overruled and undivine our game.
Custom (full often I say) more gray then wise,
Thus cheats us in our play, my lovely dear:
But let us cautive be at length, and bear
Room of this current, crossing common guise.
Let us at length our Sabbath so dispend,
That piercing farther then the formal skin
Of shifting suits, and Linen; we contend
They be Religious, glorious eke within.
At length our mirth so manage, and employ,
That as inferior flames with swift ascent,
Move to their high superior Element:
This also may relate to heavenly joy.
Let not our balance, nor our bargains, know
Or knave or false five finger; to divine
Of wealth by these attained, it melts like snow:
Leaving the place all dirt, where it has lain.
Let us so cribage out so well defeat
Cros-cards and idle doelittles, that neither
Impeding it we win both game and set,
A treasure heaped and thrust and shook together
Let us each Card even every common day
So graciously dispose, that all our weeks
Embroidered be with murnivalls and gleeks.
Nay such a treasure from our pious play
Resulted be, that Ophir in compare,
And proud Peru, but toys and trifles are.
The Cross a culisse.
THe Cross is both a Step dame and a Mother,
Some men it kills, and some again, it cures;
Like fire it some destroys, refines some other,
Full often ill, and well full often enurs;
The righteous man that into trouble comes,
Moulds it into his foyl, gives fairer fire,
Makes it his rise, his wing to help him higher;
Like spice is beaten thus into perfumes.
And then the ruffling height of weaker souls
It tempers sweetly, cuts the comb of pride
That else would soon be perking; only fools
Will still be so though miserably brayde
In many a mortar; and at length declined
As sadly small, as dust before the wind.
A Funeral Farewell.
I Had my the other half, and 'twas as white
As Miniver, or Snow, before it light
Upon the ground; so neat in every part,
And then withal charessing so my heart,
That now I neither envie'd Crassus gold
Nor Cossus garlands; with so manifold
Importancies enabling me, that now
I had a pair of hearts, my hands but two,
Were multiplied to four, likewise my feet,
Such Alter-Idems turning of so knit
Commist a fellow-feeling, no disease,
Could either single toe, or finger seize,
But all were sufferers. Then could I vant
Of likewise doubly five concomitant,
As brisk, and active senses; nay my soul
So doubled was, and in a word, even all
My trim at large, that now I could discourse,
Urge pro and con, communicate, converse,
All with my double self; nor knew the fell
Extent of solitude. Even strange to tell,
I now so clung an Individuum was,
So fixed at home, and yet so bivious
At the same time, and far abroad; that now,
While ranging with my hounds, or with my plough
In the circumference; yet was I still
At home upon my center; could be while
At The name of my Mansion house.
Popes, likewise at Paris. To proceed,
So beneficial was my being tied
In Hymen's rosy bands, that now my hope
Was propagation, and the rearing up
A Tree of such Descendants; so repleat
With commendable fruit, as should relate
My Name beyond mine Urne. Lo this the trance,
The whilome treasure did so much advance
And damask my condition but alas
So withers worldly growth like Summers grass,
That now again my diminution cries
For even a thousand pair of weeping eyes,
To paraphrase it; now my late recruits
Conspicuous increments, and double suits
Being deprived, alas! I dwindled am
To poor again and single, to become
Half under ground; where rest thy self in peace
My dearest the other part; o rest, and cease
From all thy terrene labors, with a guard
Of blessed Angels, keeping watch and ward,
About thee constantly; and when my pulse
(So wound up in the womb, by that excelse
Celestial Architect,) the tale has run
Of minutes here in charge; has fully spun
Off Clotho's Distaffe; be my relics laid
So near to thine, that withered when, and dried,
From moist and viscuous; even our crumbling dust,
May blend promiscuously: till when the just
Shine as the Firmament, and having turned
Many to righteousness, are as adorned,
As glorious as the stars; we rise anew,
(By that omnipotence that can subdue
All things unto it self) we newly rise
Of old relations, former terrene ties,
So void and inscient; that our all in all
Be wholly swallowed, ravished full and whole,
With the beatick vision; retributing
Habitual praises, allelujahs shouting,
To that immensly gracious God of Heaven,
Who maugre six Leviathans and seven,
With even a world of thick, and stormy weather,
Could freely, safely stear, and bring us thither.
A Key to the Hedgehog Combatant; and my Motto Militia Mea Multiplex.
WHen I survay (poor wretch) thy several foes,
Me thinks it does pathetickly disclose
Mine own Militia; for with opon Mart,
As man pursues thee, as the Though he be in his ^ound posture, and with all
his Pikes changed; yet (as Topsall relates it) The Fox finding some little
access about his face, lick^ him there, till with the flattery he opens
himself, and then he seises him.
Fox with Art,
Allayes thy martial fury, falsely licks
Thy life a way; and Serpent also seeks
It is as implacably: Lo thus conspire
Both Ammon Amelek, and those of Tire.
The World, the Flesh, and (out alas) the great
Red Dragon, with his tail that can defeat
The very stars, so these I say concur,
To slay my silly soul: were it a war,
Though with some such as hungry Lions wage,
And evening Wolves, of all those quivers rage,
Like open Sepulchers; there might be yet
Some hope, some little plank a shore to set
Even after ship wrack, but when thus to grapple
With that prodigious fiend whose mortal apple
Defeated Eve her self. To daily cope
With many a horrid squadron many a troop
Of fierce and fiery darts, that charge me home,
And often through; alas wretch that I am!
Where shall I seek for succor? who can stave
This roaring rabble off? o help, and save,
Thou God of Battails; else am I but built
Upon the sily sand, but water spilt.
The Leveller.
THe sordid fly that does so basely sing,
And on the dunghill feed, with Pyes, and Crows,
Will yet soon after banquet with a King,
Bib on his cup; play with the beard, the nose,
Of Craessus, as of Codrus; levelling
Princes with Pawnes Mirabolanes with slowes,
Alas alas the while, King by thy leave,
All worldly pomp is flyblown, poor, and will deceive
Alas the neatest foot that ever came
In the most supercilious royal shoe,
By the black ox is often trodden lame
Nay trodden off; then Pompey bid adieu
To longer playing in the dangerous flame
Of terrene gaieties, but aiming now
The glorious kingdom that will never fade,
Tophet was else for Kings and towering Keysars made.
The Borachioes.
AS Willoughs noted so for tippling Trees,
Are barren, and but badges of disgrace;
As Fennes and Marshes, yield but nipping flies,
But venomous fogges, and reptil's bad, and base:
Lo thus the boundless Independent shot,
Beggars as sundry forms, and often as vile;
As Phoebus does, when with embraces hot,
He beds the moist salacious mud of Nile.
It changes some to Struthions, and as those:
Forget their eggs, their actions so do these;
Demanding when they wake, how came the blows,
What have we done, they should our weapons seize.
Some men it does to mimick anticks fool;
Change some to subtle Foxes that employ
Their cups as Crucibles, wherein to boil,
And sublimate a skill, to cosen by.
Some for obstreperous Geese it does design,
Fills some with such Saltpeter, that disputing
Or but some hair, or Mathematick line,
They take immediate fire, with blood confuting.
Some to such honey-suckles sweet it turns,
With often vows, that about every wight
They twine themselves. And some with lust so burns
They deem each dirty cloud a Juno bright.
Nay, yet again, and further, some it fuddles,
To senseless Conduits, only fit to piss,
And to be pist against: To monsters, puddles
And Statues many, quadrat but for this.
Lo, Pythagore; lo here the transmigration,
Thou might have dreamt of, for with brutish soul.
It thus imbroyles us: Oaks of most elation,
With many blows fall; Reason so with bowls.
Up then ye base Borachioes, call excess,
But an infidious Circe, but presaging
A brutish transformation, even no less
Then of the soul it self, and thus engaging
Her everlasting bliss: up keep a dyot;
Does ought kill soul and body both? yes riot.
A Divine Meditation UPON The Decease of those Noble LORDS under-named.
SO so, let Babel, Edom, shoot like those
In Harvest at our loss; with mocks and Mowes,
Tell it in Gath; thus adding deep, to deep,
Worm wood to bitterness; yet God will keep
His darling from the Dog, can out of stones
Raise Abraham children, he that interpones
So for his Church, though Dorset, Hamilton,
Southampton, Oxford, and Belfast, be gone
The way of flesh and blood, will sooner yet
His covenant with day and night forget,
Then fail to Sion; not the squalidest
Sea Monsters, but they gently draw the breast,
Suckling their young; or if a mother can
Forget her child, yet God is love in grain;
Will vindicat his Turtle-Dove, nay cover
Her wings with Silver, and her feathers over
With yellow Gold. Nor Babell be so perk,
At some thus of the temples carved work,
For sin deducted us; we but with rods,
Thou shall be whipped with Scorpions; and in Gods
Right hand there is a cup, the dregs whereof
Shall be thy portion; Ahabs Ivory roof,
And lo the Tirian Turrets, built so high,
That Eagles at a lower random fly,
Nay even the giants there in Sentinel,
Are lessened into Ezekiel 27. 11.
Gammadims; must feel
His line of vengeance, who could so divide
Out Succoth, meet out Schechem: and o ride
On prosperiously, thou fairer far then men;
Girding thy sword thus, for thy right hand then
Shall teach thee terrible things; shall thresh the horns
Of our fierce Bullocks, rabbid Unicorns,
Like wheat of Madmanah, Ride on, ride on,
Strengthening the feeble knees, and every bone,
That thou have broken; still they shake the head,
Cry so so would we have it, eat like bread
Thy people up; and then the late decease
Of these heroic Lords, diruted has
As many of our Bars, has made our breach
More desperate; o be gracious then, and reach
Thy sovereign flagons; let no clouds return
After the rain; and for stakes-out worn
Thus in the service of thy Tabernacle
Distribute thousands; bless, o bless the tackle
Of thy poor laboring Ark, and crown her toil
With Ararat and her high places, while
Our mighty hunters despicably melt
Like fat of Lambs, or be like water spilt,
Nor to be gathered up again; else will
Thine enemies blaspheme, upbraiding still
The promise of his coming; I and say
To day shall Jove it as did yesterday,
And in far greater measure: bow thy ear
Thou good and glorious Cherub-rider, hear
And answer us, How long? how long o Lord?
O bare thine arm again, o draw thy sword.
The fatal Progress.
HOw blessed is the man that well bethinks
Him of his progress here, can nominate it
A weary chain of time, his steps the links
And make his death the jewel hanging at it;
No step but does him fatally diminish,
And brings him a link nearer to his dust,
Time will that chain of his, that progress finish,
Deducting him by link and link at last
To stench and ashes; if we chance to start
Some old old Tritavus whose iron strength
Tugs it with time, and toughly does support
Him Nestors age, his progress yet at length
Has such a bottom link as rakes him up.
We have our bounders, thus far we may reach,
But go no further, here we faint and stop
Like the Sea billows on the level beach.
O then be wise be wise, since heaven I say
Has magisterially prescribed and voted
The tale of all our days and hours nay
The beatings of our pulses summed and toted;
Prepare prepare be wise, refining so
The links the paces of thy terrene race
As may by chimicall contaction know
To deaurat each other, and so dress
Up death it self, the Pendant that from Cruel,
It may become thy dear and precious jewel
A brief Epitaph Paid to the Merit of my learned kinsman Mr. JOHN GREAVES,
deceased the 7h of October 1652.
THe man though truly quadrat yet with all
(Strange to relate) complealty sphericall:
By such a noble heat engaged
For skill and parts, as pilgrimag'd
Him even to Constantinople is thus named in the Eastern Countries.
Stambols mighty Port,
Thence bringing us the Turkish Court;
And then to great and glorious Cayer,
Exhibiting the Mummies there,
And other wonders; This is he
Here under sleeping: Should there be
Some Marble richly wrought and gilt
In consequence upon him built?
Tush! keep it rather for some wight
Of meaner principles, of light
Inferior Actings, and that under bids:
His Monument is made of Of these he has left us a very punctual des^ription.
PYRAMIDS.
The Widows warning
BE wise, and take no churlish Clown;
Nor blend with flocks thy Thistle-down
Choose not for outside, shun each lover
But golden Ludgate like in cover.
The Ruffian that can swear and swell,
And covenant with death and hell,
Prefer not: nor the Fox that preyes
In covert and in broken ways.
Choose not for wealth, where other things
But passant are; yet this has wings.
Nor any piece of Bombast choose,
That with his Place and Title sues;
Taking herein the greater care,
Because they now are chapmans ware.
Take not an husband by report;
Examine first his head, his heart,
His Conscience pierce him to the Lees;
Mark how each joint of his agrees,
And jumps with thine; for if they vary,
The Priest that does your bodies marry,
But glewes a Potsheard. In a word,
If thou can marrow with a Bird
Of thine own feather, one whose wars
Spiritual be, whose aim is stars;
Whose neatly timber'd limbs are lined,
With as polite, as rich a mind:
This is the VVight, and have thee Jane
To render him his rib again.
The Tearless Epitaph of Mrs. Prudence Meredith, a good soul in adefective body.
IN an uneasy room her soul was pent,
And had while here, a hard imprisonment
Within the body, nor could Prudence, but
Rejoice to leave her little crumpled knot
Of flesh and blood, that narrow Goal of hers,
For such a relaxation, as infers
Eternal blessedness as hopes a new
Resurgent corpse, proportionably true
In every lineament, and of privation,
Of sorrow, sickness, death and mutulation
Impassible: I say she could not choose
In faith and reason, but avouch her woes
Thus at an end, but cheerly leave her breath;
And thus had Meredith, a merry death.
OF PRAYER.
THE most pathetick richest language, chosen
To hang in ears of Emperors and Kings,
Is but a tinkling Cimball, does but cosen.
The fancy for a while, and then has wings:
Prayer heaped up, and over does, reply,
When other words, but drop, and droop, and die:
All other words retail but Saffron ware,
Are of an impotent, a clamorus sound;
But Doe-littles, but petty Chapmen are,
And Petty-foggers: Whereas Prayer is found;
The Staple Merchant, prosecuting even
A Trade in gross, by wholesale, and for heaven.
It Is of such efficac'e, and with such store
Of sacred pertinacie wrastles so,
Like zealous Jacob, that it gives not over:
But being blessed, without it lets not go.
Prayer faith, faith Christ, Christ heaven to us demises
And thus the Climax of our joy arises.
Who then will happy live, and blessed expire,
Both soul and body Temple-like imployes
His Alter is his Heart, his Zeal the Fire;
His soul the Priest, and Prayer the Sacrifice:
Nor is it Bullocks having horns and hooves;
But of the Lips, the heart, that God approves.
Up therefore Reader, let thy spirit feast
It self with often Prayer; submissly fall,
And like a Daniel, thrice a day at least,
Thus feed thy soul; or rather like a Paul,
Be praying always; it is celestial meat:
Up therefore Reader, therefore up and eat.
A Second of the Same.
LOok as a Beggar by the highways side,
Some little child does in her bosom take,
Hopeing though she her self may be denied,
Yet to get something for the Infants sake;
And as Themistocles, when having done
Admetus much displeasure, many harms;
Sought not for grace, but having first his Son,
His only Son infoulded in his arms:
So when thou prayest, bring but thy Jesus by thee
This Babe, this Son; and God will never deny thee.
FINIS.

