A DISCOURSE On 2 Cor. III. 6. Who also has made us Able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: For the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives Life.

BY Samuel Comlyns, M. A. Minister of the Gospel in Marleborough.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the Lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1699.

THE DEDICATION, To my Well-beloved Friends in Christ, Mr. Stephen Lock, Mr.
William Smith, Mr. John Isgar, and other Christian Friends living in Gospert,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
IT is near Thirty years ago that I was first Acquainted with some of you, and
Conversant among you, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, I am now
drawing toward the Confines of Time, and the Borders of Eternity: I was
therefore willing to Dedicate this Discourse of Christ's Testament to you, as a
Grateful Acknowledgment of your Kindness to me, and as a Token and Pledge of
that Real Love that I bare toward you. The Testament of Christ is the most
Noble, and Sweet Subject that your Minds can be Conversant about, and your
Affections feed on that which was contrived from Eternity, may well be Matter
of Contemplation in time, and of Admiration to Eternity. This Testament was
drawn in the Mind, and Counsel of God before the Foundations of the World, and
has been since Written in the Blood, and established by the Death of the Son
of God: In it there are the most precious, and inestimable Legacies Bequeathed.
God gives himself as a Father and Portion, Jesus Christ gives himself as a
Husband, and the Spirit is given as a Sanctifier and Comforter; and Christians
are caused to inherit the Church, and Heaven, that once were desolate
Heritages, as to them, though the Testator be alive again, yet this does not
lessen our Portion, or worst our Estate, Isa. 4.8. as the Death of Christ does
Purchase, so the Life of Christ is powerful to conveigh, and bestow his
Legacies. Christ has passed through the most hard and difficult part of his
Work, Romans 5.10. he died to reconcile us, that he may live, and save us; and
may sit in Heaven and Enrich us, and perfect whatever concerns our Happiness.
Consider these following particulars, in Relation to the Testament of Christ.

1. The Wisdom of God shines in this, that such a way should be found out to
set God's House in Order, and to dispose of the most Rich, and Great Estate;
all ways of Communicating Good to the Creature seemed to be shut up, and
obstructed by the Guilt of Sin. God's Treasury was Locked, his Fountain Sealed,
his giving Hand Bound: but Christ died for the Redemption of Transgressions,
Heb. 9.15. to buy off those sins that would separate between God and us, that
would hinder good things from us, and sink us down into the Bottomless Pit, and
shut us up in the Eternal Prison. The Conveyance therefore of a Rich Estate, to
Guilty, Beggarly, Bankrupt Creatures, through the Death, and Testament of
Christ, is the bare contrivance of Infinite Wisdom. In the Lord's Supper, the
Seal of Christ's Testament, his Blood is set forth, as Purchasing us to be a
peculiar People, Acts 20.10.41.15. and his Flesh is set forth as Bread, to
strengthen and enable us to perform our Duty toward our Savior. By
Redemption, we are obliged to be First Fruits to God and the Lamb, Rev. 14.4.
and, by Regeneration, we are fitted to be First Fruits, James 1.18. that is, to
consecrate and devote our selves to God and Christ, and to live to them.

2. Consider the Admirable Righteousness of God that appears in this Testament
that Jesus Christ purchased, what he Bequeathed: he is a Priest of good things,
Heb. 9.1. that is, he Merited, he procured them by his Death. Good things do
not come to us, as a Gift from Christ Living, but as a Legacy from Christ
Dying. It is now just with God to forgive the sins of Believers, John 1.9. It
might have been just with God to punish and destroy; but now, through the Death
of Christ, it is just for God to Forgive. Grace may now Reign, through
Righteousness, to Eternal Life, Romans 5. last. And they that receive an
Abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall Reign in Life, Romans
5.17. Jesus Christ does not, as other Testators by Death, leave the Inheritance
empty, but Purchases a Right for us, to enter upon the Inheritance, and to
possess and enjoy it.

3. Consider the wonderful Grace of God, and Christ, that is manifested in this
Testament.

1. That Christ should Constitute us as his Heirs, then he might have Executed
us as Malefactors.

2. That when the Threatenings were in force for our Death, that Jesus should
die to put the Promises in force for our Life; that he should cease to live for
a time, that we might live eternally.

3. That he should make a Testament to enrich us with Spiritual and Eternal
Blessings, when we had, by sin, forfeited our Lives, and deserved to be stripped
of all Temporal Comforts and Enjoyments.

4. That Jesus Christ should become poor to enrich us, 2 Cor. 8.9. He became
poor, that we by his Poverty might be made Rich. Jesus Christ had no House to
put his Head in, he lived on what others Ministered to him, Matthew. 8.20. Luke
8.3. He was robbed of his good Name, and censured as a Blasphemer of God, and
Condemned as an Usurper, and Enemy to Caesar; they stripped him of his Garments,
and did not cease afflicting him, till every drop of Strength was gone out of
his Body, and every spark of Life was quenched, and he became a weak cold
Carcass. Christ was thus emptied to fill us, and stooped so low to lift us up
to Glory.

5. What the Law of God requires, as a Duty, by Christ it is Bequeathed as a
Legacy, and bestowed as a pure Gift: What is required of the Heirs of Promise
is purchased for them, by the Blood of the Testator, and wrought in them by the
Spirit of Promise. They are changed from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. last. The Holy Ghost does excite, actuate, and draw forth
Grace: This North and South Wind, blowing on Christ's Garden, does cause the
Spices of it flow forth, Cant. 4. last. If Duties were required to be performed
by our Free Will, and Natural Strength, the New Covenant would not differ from
the Covenant of Works. The First Promise was a most Free and preventing
Promise, and, in it, undertakes to break the League and Amity that was between
the Woman and the Serpent, and to kindle Enmity between them and their Seed,
Genesis 3.15. And this Free Promise was to be apprehended by Faith only: God does
not say, Do, and your Souls shall live; but hear, that is, Believe, and your
Souls shall live, Isa. 55.3. The Promise does not run thus, I will be your
God, if you will be my People: but, I will be their God, and they shall be my
People, Joel 31.33. Christ takes it upon himself, to fetch back, and bring home
straying Sheep, and, to cause them ( Isa. 29.19. though deaf, and dead, John
5.25.) to hear his voice, John 10.16. We cannot sincerely enter into Covenant
with God, till God, in a great measure, has executed his Covenant in us;
whence Miracles of Grace is to be wrought on us, that Gifts of Grace might be
received by us; Till we have new hearts and spirits given to us, we shall but
flatter God, and lie to him in all our seeming Service, Psalm. 79.36, 37. Hos.
last. It is bad to lie to God in all our Confessions of Sin, and Petitions for
Grace, and Mercy. We must not therefore stay in the Exacting Letter of the Law,
but have Recourse to the Living Testament of Christ. The Law says, be Holy,
Deuteronomy. 20.7. But it is Christ that Sanctifies, Heb. 2.11. and as an everlasting
Father, does propagate and derive a new Divine Nature to us, Isa. 9.6. 2 Pet.
1.4. We are bid to Love God, but it is Christ that Circumcises the Heart, 2
Col. 11. To Love God, he cuts off the Unclean and Filthy Foreskin of Sinful
Self-love, and Baptizes with his Spirit as with Fire. Deuteronomy. 30.6. to inflame
our hearts with Love toward, and zeal for God, Matthew. 3.11. We are charged to
acquaint our selves with God, Job 22.21. but the Promise must help us here. All
Zions Children shall be Taught of God, and shall all know me, from the greatest
to the least, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.39. He that has heard, and learned of the
Father, comes to Christ, John 6.44, 45. We are enjoined to keep God's Precepts
diligently, Psalm. 119.4. but God has promised to Write his Laws in our hearts,
Jer. 31.33. We ought to live to, and walk with God, yet it is by virtue of his
Spirit put into us, and causing of us to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his
Commandments, Ezekiel. 36.27. All the Earth is called on to Fear God, Psalm. 33.8.
but, that we may do it, God must put his Fear into our hearts, Jer. 32.40. We
ought to Repent, but it will never be, except God does take away the heart of
Stone, and give a heart of Flesh, Mark 1.15. Ezekiel. 36.26. Faith it self is
comprised in, and given by Christ's Testament to know God and Christ, contains
Faith in it, Jer. 31.34.17. John 3. By his Knowledge, that is, by Believing on
him, Christ Justifies many, Isa. 53. Chap. 11.

4. Consider the Excellent, and Glorious Power, that executes this Testament, 2
Cor. 4.7. Ephesians. 1.19. God says he will be our God, and we shall be his
People, Jer. 3.33. God cannot be our God, if Idols are not cast out; if Enemies
are not dethroned, if Rivals, and Competitors, are not put from their nearness
to, and intimacy with the Heart; and this the mighty Power, the glorious arm of
God only can effect: And we can never be Gods People, if our blindness be not
cured, our enmity conquered, if our Minds be not renewed, and our Wills
inclined to choose God for our chief good and only portion: Christ knocks, and
it is he that must open the door, Rev. 3.20. Acts 16.14. It is he that calls,
Isa, 55.5. And must enable us to Echo to his call, to say we are the Lords,
Isa. 48.5. and that he is our God, Zech. 13. last.

5. Consider the consolation that may be drawn from this Testament, that we are
so safe, that there is no condemnation to us, Romans 8.1. because Gods sword has
awaked against Christ, Zech. 13.7. Our debt was exacted of him, our Curse was
executed on him, and that spiritual things are made so sure to us by Christ's
death that is past, and by his Testament that is confirmed and made
irrevocable; that there can be no detracting from its free Promises, or adding
barder and heavier terms to it, Gal. 3.15. There is no disanulling, or adding
to it: God promises to pour Waters on him that is thirsty, and floods on the
dry ground, Isa. 44.3, 4. The Heavenly Husbandman will improve and enrich dry
and barren ground. If the overflowing of Nilus makes Egypt fruitful, therefore
we read of the Harvest of the Kiezr, Isa. 23.3.4. that Harvest that is caused
by the River; much more can the Spirit, as the River of God, make us fruitful.

3. I would exhort you to make sure your own concern, in an Interest in this
Testament of Jesus Christ; be is risen from the dead to woo and espouse Souls
to himself, Romans 7.4. If you be joined to the suerty of the Testament, and be
Married to the Testator, all the Riches of this Testament shall be yours. God
with Christ gives all things, Romans 8.32. Echo to Christ's call, and open at his
knock; let in the Heir of all things, and he will bring in his Righteousness,
his Riches, his fullness with him: Christ will come in and order our Thoughts,
our Wills, Affections, and subdue all to himself, Isa. 9.7. Psalm. 47.3. Christ
will execute justice, and Judgment, Jer. 23.5. he will execute justice: He will
do God right, in raising up fallen, bringing back straying alienate sinners to
God, Isa. 49.56. And he will execute judgment in destroying Satan, and his
works, Heb. 2.15. 1 John 3.8. Though there were many Creatures in the Earth,
yet Adam was counted to be alone till a Woman was made for him to set his love
on: So though you have abundance of Creature enjoyments, yet count your selves
to be alone till you Know, Love and Marry Jesus Christ.

3. Express your gratitude, and thankfulness to God and Christ for this
Testament, Paul says, Brethren we are debtors, Romans 8.12. Never were any such
great debtors, as believers are to God and Christ; you were Reconciled when
Enemies, justified when Ungodly, Romans 5.2. Romans 4.4. Righteousness has looked
down from Heaven, Psalm. 55.11. And Bread has been rained down from Heaven,
when it should have sprung up and grown out of the Earth: How wonderful is it
that Enmity should be slain, Isa. 61.1. Isa. 49.9. Isa. 49.24. Ephesians. 2.16. and
yet Enemies be spared and reconciled? That Sin should be condemned, Romans 8.3.
yet Sinners be pardoned, Col. 2.13. That Christ came to destroy Satan's work
only, John 1.38. but to heal, revive and set at liberty those that were the
workmanship of God; he releases Prisoners, and delivers those that were lawful
Captives, Heb. 2.18. Romans 8.2. They are turned from the power of Satan to God,
and made free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. Children of wrath might
have been made Vessels of wrath; have been filled up with Gods fury, and have
been dashed to pieces by that Rod of Iron that is in Christ's hand. In the Law,
if a Husband was Arrested for debt, his Wife and Children might be sold to pay
the debt, Matthew. 15.25. and to free the Husband and Father: But what Grace is
this, that Christ who is the Everlasting Father and Husband of the Church,
should be sold to pay our debts? As Eve was hid in Adam, and by a Divine Power,
Isa. 9.6. 2. Cor. 11.2. brought forth out of him, so the Church was hid in
Christ, formed and drawn out of Christ, cast into the deep sleep of death,
Ezekiel. 47.11. John 19.34. O rejoice in Christ's Testament, glory in his Riches,
Triumph in his Salvation, that when sin reigns over most unto death, grace
should reign over you through the Righteousness of Christ unto Eternal life.

2 Cor. III. 6. Who also has made us Able Ministers of the New Testament, not
of the Letter, but of the Spirit: For the Letter Kills, but the Spirit gives
Life.


IN the words, 1. we have a Subject spoken of, and that is the New Testament,
as it is distinguished from the Old Testament, which was not the Covenant of
Works, but the Covenant of Grace, wrapped up in Types, and Figures, more darkly
Administered, Galat. 3.18. 2. The Apostle insists on this New Testament, and
commends it, that it is Spirit and not Letter, 1 John 17. that is, the Holy
Ghost does eminently, and signally manifest himself in this New Testament
Dispensation. It is Filled, it is Enriched, it is Ennacted by the Holy Ghost;
he does so breath in it, and works it, that it may well be called Spirit, and
not Letter. The Gospel is not a mere Literal Doctrine, or Command, but mightily
animated by the Spirit; if it were only Letter, it would kill us frail and weak
Greatures, exacting Duty, And requiring Obedience of us, that are Impotent, yea
dead Creatures; but it is Spirit, and so it gives Life. The Holy Ghost
enlightens Blind Minds, softens Hard Hearts, and Quickens Dead Souls. The
effectual Workings of the Spirit, are called, the Law of the Spirit, and this
Law of the Spirit of Life is said to make free from the Law of sin and death,
Romans 8.2. This is a Law that is all Power, and consists wholly in Execution. 3.
The Apostle informs us of the Honor and Dignity of Gospel-Officers, for they
are Ministers of this New Testament. 4. The Apostle glorifies God, and
instructs us, how it is that Officers do become able Ministers of this New
Testament. It is God that made Paul, and others, Able Ministers of the New
Testament: The words afford us Three Doctrines. 1st. That there is a New
Testament. 2dly, That Gospel Officers are Ministers of this New Testament.
3dly, That it is God that does make Men able Ministers of the New Testament. 1.
Doctrine, that there is a New Testament. We may observe and admire the Wisdom
of God, that first there was a Promise, then a Covenant, then a Testament; this
last the best, and most Noble Edition of the Covenant of Grace; this is called
the New Testament, to distinguish it from the Old Testament. First, The Old
Testament was made with one Nation, in the day that the Lord took Israel by the
hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; but it is God's design, by Christ,
and the New Testament, to gather together into one all the Children of God that
are scattered abroad, John 6.52. Christ Preaches now not only to the Jews
that were nigh, but also to the Gentiles that were afar off, Ephesians. 2.17. 2.
The First Testament had Moses for a Mediator, Gal. 5.19. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, 1 John 17. Jesus is the
Madiator of the New Testament, Heb. 9.15. The Old Testament was accompanied
with Figures, and Shadows of things to come, 2 Col. 17. The Law had a shadow of
good things to come, and not the very Image of the Things, that is, Christ
himself; and the very Live Image of Spiritual things, were not then exhibited:
Righteousness was not yet brought, Atonement was not yet made, the Fountain was
not yet opened for sin and uncleanness: The Law and Prophets Prophesied till
John, Matthew. 1.13. they spoke of Christ, and foretold the Glorious things of
the Gospel, as yet to come; but now the Kingdom of God is clearly discovered,
and is Preached as come, Luke 7.16.

I ourthly. The Old Testament, and the Ceremonial Law made nothing perfect,
Heb. 7.19. but did introduce the Hope of a better Priest, and of a more Noble
Sacrifice; but Christ, by one Offering, has perfected for ever them that are
Sanctified: On the day of Atonement there was a remembrance of all the Sins
committed that year, which did show the weakness and imperfection of those
Sacrifices, in that there was a Remembrance again made of Sins. But in this the
Excellency and Perfection of Christ's Sacrifice appears, in that it did purge
and put away Sin; and God on the account of it made that Promise, Your Sins and
Iniquities I will Remember no more, Heb. 10.17, 18.

Fifthly. The Old Testament was confirmed by the Blood of Beasts; Moses killed
Sacrifices and took the Blood of them, and sprinkled it on the People; saying,
behold the Blood of the Covenant that God has made with you: But the New
Testament was confirmed with better Blood. Christ's Blood is the Blood of
Sprinkling, and the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 12.24. Heb. 13.20.

Sixthly. The Old Testament was weak and faulty; it did not, it could not purge
Conscience by the Blood of Brutish Sacrifices; neither could it introduce the
Law of God into the Soul, and write it in the Heart; but the New Testament is
strong and powerful, it makes those that were barren to bear and rejoice, Isa.
54.1. And by it the Law of God is writ in the Heart, and put into the inward
parts, and the Soul is Renewed and Transformed, to walk with, and live to God.

7thly. The Old Testament waxed old, and did vanish away, but the New Testament
remains, abides and is Everlasting, Heb. 13.20. the Blood of Christ is still
fresh, and therefore his Testament is still new. He offered one Sacrifice for
Sins for ever, Heb. 10.12. His Sacrifice is of an Everlasting Virtue, and the
way made by it to the true Holy of Holies is living, and still new, Heb. 10.19.
and the Covenant, and Testament built on this Everlasting Sacrifice, must need
be Everlasting. This is God's last speaking to the World, and it shall never
give place to any other Covenant, Heb. 7.1. This is a better Covenant, or
Testament, established on better Promises, than the Covenant of Works was, Heb.
8.6. yea, the Promises of the New Testament are clearer, and exhibit more
grace, than the Promises of the Old Testament. The Old Covenant is compared to,
and set forth by Hagar, that was a young Woman, and had Natural Strength to
conceive, and bare a Son, Gal. 4.24, 25. with Isa. 54.1. but the New Testament
is set forth by Sarah that was barren, and was made fruitful by a supernatural
power, Acts 1.11. The Promises of the Law do respect the strength that God
first put into Man, and are built on the obedience to be performed by this
strength; but the New Testament is built on a Spiritual and Supernatural
strength put into the Soul by the Holy Ghost.

For the opening, and Explication of this New Testament I shall insist on these
several particulars. First, Who is the Testator? Answer, This must needs be he,
that by his Death, does confirm, and establish the Testament, and this is
proper to the Son of God, he is the only Mediator of the New Testament. He
procured it, and gave force to it by his Sufferings and Death, Luke 22.29.
Christ speaks of himself as bequeathing, and acting as a Testator, (...), I
bequeath, I dispose unto you a Kingdom. Budaeus, in his Comnentary on the Greek
Tongue, does confess and acknowledge; that this is Verbum Testamentale, a word
commonly used by the Grecians in making their Wills. The Father is said to
dispose a Kingdom to the Son, the Son to us. The Father has made Christ heir
of all things, Heb. 1.2. He has given him a Name above every Name, that at the
Name of Jesus every knee should bow. But in this God has an eye, and a respect
to the Humiliation, and Sufferings, and Death of Christ, because he became
obedient to the Death of the Cross; therefore God has exalted and glorified
him. The Death of Christ seems to be the ground of the Fathers legacy to
Christ, and of all that Jesus Christ bequeathes and disposes to us.

Secondly, In a Testament there must be an Estate to be disposed of, and the
Testator must have propriety, and be interested in this Estate. else he cannot
dispose it: Christ says, All things that the Father has are mine, John 16.15.
Therefore Christ has good right to dispose of them. Testators do dispose of
two sorts of things, Money and Goods, and Houses and Lands; the Graces Christ
bestows may be compared to Money, and Goods: The Glory he bequeathes, is set
forth by an Eternal House, 2 Cor. 5.1. with Heb. 9.15. and an Everlasting
Inheritance.

First. Jesus Christ bequeathes Grace, and a new Nature: A new Heart will I
give unto you, a new Spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel. 36.26.31. I will put
my Law into your inward parts, and write it in your hearts, Jer. 33. The Law is
put deep into the Soul, and it is written for Perpetuity, never to be blotted
out, and it is diffused through the Soul; it spreads into the understanding,
and it is rooted and prevails in the Will. The Soul is poor, blind, dead, and
all its Faculties are perverted and disorderly; without this new Heart, without
the Law of God written in the Mind, and Will: How full, large and comprehensive
is Christ's Testament? It does not only make Heirs, but also raises up Children,
which no other Testament does or can do. True Believers are Children of the
Promise, Romans 9.8. Isaac was born of the free and powerful Promise of God: This
was the word of Promise, At this time I will come and Sarah shall have a Son,
Romans 9.9. God would make an effectual visit, he would put forth his Power in an
excellent and extraordinary way, and so Sarah should conceive (though barren)
and Isaac, though old be born. So God comes to Souls dead in sins and Trespasses,
he beams in light, and breathes in life, and so they are Regenerated and born
to God: The Covenant of Grace, the Testament of Christ is Sarah, a Mother, of
which we are born; and as there are Children of Promise, that derive Grace and
a new Nature from the Promise, so there are Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6.17.19.
That do inherit the Kingdom, and Eternal Glory, by virtue of the free Promise.
God is said to Promise the Kingdom, and to Promise Eternal Life, Jam. 2.5. Tit.
1.2. Here are the Riches and fullness of this Testament, that Christians are
Children of the Promise, and so partake of Grace, and are Heirs of the Promise,
and so do inherit the Kingdom of Glory.

Thirdly. Where there is a Testament there must be Legatees and Heirs; Jesus
Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, that those that are called may
receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. The Civil Law gives
this description of an Heir, that he is vocatus ad hereditatem; one that is
called to the Inheritance by the Testament of a dead Man, Vid pacium: If Christ
had not died as a Testator, there would have been no Inheritance to be enjoyed,
and there would have been no call to a Heavenly House and Possession. How many
are there in the World that were never called at all, and others are not
effectually called; the Jews at this day, are like such as the Civil Law calls
Abdicati, such as for Provocations given are disinherited; the Gentile Heathen
World are like such as the Civil Law calls Praeteriti, such as are passed by,
and slipped over, but such may come in for a share in the Fathers Goods, and lay
claim to his Inheritance; the blind desolate Heathen World shall be called, and
converted, The desolate Cities shall be inhabited, Isa. 54.3. And the desolate
Heritages shall be inherited, Isa. 49.8. For the clearer explication of things
I shall show, 1. Who are the Heirs. 2. What they are Heirs of. 3. How they
became Heirs. 1. Who are Heirs? I Answer, The Sons, the Children of God; there
are some that are predistinated to the Adoption of Children, Ephesians. 1.5. Christ
is to gather together into one, that is, into one Kingdom, City, Family, Body,
the Children of God that are scattered abroad, John 11.52. These Sons, these
Children shall be Heirs, the Inheritance is limited and restrained unto them;
to sit on the right and on the left hand of Christ in his Kingdom is not his to
give, but to whom it is prepared of his Father, Matthew. 20.21.23. That
supplement, but it shall be given to them, should be wholly left out, and the
words be thus rendered, To sit at my right hand and my left is not mine to give,
but to those for whom it is prepared of my Father. Christ would give places in
his Kingdom, but he was limited by the decree of the Father; to give to those
he had predistinated to the Adoption of Children, and so had prepared the
Inheritance and Kingdom for them.

2. What are Christ's People Heirs of? I Answer, 1. Of the Kingdom, Tit. 2.5. 2.
Of the World, Romans 4.13. 1. They are Heirs of the Kingdom, they shall have a
Mansion in God's House, John 14.2, 3. They shall have a Lot and Inheritance in
the Heavenly Kingdom, in Emmanuels Land and Country, Dan. 12. last. Col. 1.12.
They shall sit in the Throne with Christ, and Reign in Life for evermore, Rev.
3.21. Romans 5.17. 2. They are Heirs of the World. God gave Abraham the Land of
Canaan by Promise, and this was a pledge and earnest of all Earthly Portions,
and Possessions given to Believers by God's free grace, and bounty. Wicked Men
may be Possessors of, and dwellers in the World, but it is Believers that are
Heirs of the World, and have a Spiritual Right and Title to it. Godliness has
the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come, Tim. 1.4.8.
He has given meat to them that fear him: He will ever be mindful of his
Covenant, Psalm. 111.5. The Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness is our chief
good, and true Happiness; the main of Gods Covenant is wrapped up in this, Matthew.
6.33. yet Earthly and outward things are Promised as an advantage, these shall
be added to God's Children to supply their wants. The Children of Israel had
need of a Passage to Canaan, the Country that God had given them, Moses sent to
Sihon to desire a passage through his Country unto Canaan, Deuteronomy. 2.26, 27, 28,
30. but he refused to let Israel pass through his Land, so God gave him up to
Israel to be destroyed. Thus the People of God must have some Footing in, and
Possession of the World, as it is a passage to the Heavenly Canaan, that is
their proper Country, Heb. 11.15, 16.

3. How do Christians become Heirs? I answer, By being effectually called. None
but such shall partake of the Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. When Christ does
not only seek after straying Souls, but does apprehend them, Phil. 3.12. Paul
says he was apprehended of Christ. When the Lord of Glory does not only knock
but open the Heart, Rev. 3.20. Acts 16.14. When the call of God is accompanied
with gifts, Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of God are without Repentance;
when God so calls, that he gives an understanding to know him, 1 John 5.20. and
gives a Heart to love and fear him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 32.39. When God bestows a
new Heart, and a new Spirit, then is the call effectual, Ezekiel. 36.26.

Fourthly. Where there is a Testament, there must be a Sanction, Confirmation
and Establishment of it, Heb. 9.15. Where there is a Testament, there must of
necessity be the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.16.17. The Civil Law says as
long as a Man lives, voluntas est perambulatoria, it is mutable, and
changeable, but the Death of a Testator fixes things, and gives force to his
Will, confirms and establishes all his Legacies: How sweet are these words,
where there is a Testament, there must be the Death of the Testator? The Law
speaks at another rate, where there is a Crime, the Criminal must be punished:
Where there is a Transgression, the threatening must be put in force, the Curse
must be executed, the Transgressor must be cut off, but here is a New Testament
established by the Blood of Jesus Christ; This is my Blood of the New
Testament, Matthew. 26.28. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, 1 Cor.
11.25. Jeremiah did speak of God's making a New Covenant, or Testament, Jer.
31.31. but there is no mention made, or discovery given of the Blood, that this
New Covenant was to be confirmed by; but the Gospel teaches us what the Blood
is, by which the New Testament is established: God did put the threatenings,
and Curse of the Law in force by cutting off Christ, Zech. 13.7. Isa. 53.8.
That he might put the Promises in force, fulfill them to us, and bestow the
Eternal Inheritance on us. Who could have imagined, or thought of such a thing,
that the death of Sinners should be prevented, and the death of a Testator
should succeed, and be in the place of their Sufferings and death.

Fifthly. Where there is a Testament, there must be an effectual way to execute
it. We read of the sure Mercies of David, that is of Christ, as the next Verse
does plainly evidence, that it is Christ that is spoken of, for he is said to
be given as a Witness, as a Leader, and Commander to the People, Isa. 55.3, 4.
This is observable, that all the Riches, Blessings, and Benefits of the
Covenant are Christ's Mercies: He is a Priest of good things, Heb. 9.11. he
purchases, he procures them; and it is he also that distributes, and gives them
out. In Isaiah there is only mention made of the sure Mereies of David, but in
the Acts, Acts 13.34. it is thus expressed; I will give you the sure Mercies of
David: and this Promise is grounded on the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is
now no more to return to Corruption, Acts 13.33, 34. As Christ died as a
Testator, so he rose again to be the Executor of his own Testament; he is not
alive to Violate, or Disanul, but to fulfill his Testament. So we are said to be
saved by his Life, Romans 5.10. Heb. 7.25. Jesus Christ discharges all his
Offices, by executing of his Testament.

1. Jesus Christ executes his Prophetical Office, No Man has seen God, but the
only begotten that is in the Bosom of the Father has declared him to us, 1
John 18. Luke 1.7, 8. Isa. 9.6. Mal. 3. last. He is the Day spring from on
high, the Wonderful Counselor, the Messenger of the Covenant; he Preached
Righteousness, and declared God's Faithfulness, and Salvation, Psalm. 40.9, 10.

2. Jesus Christ executes his Priestly Office, in Sprinkling his Blood, as
clean Water, to Purify from Uncleanness, and to Wash Men from their Sins,
Ezekiel. 36.28. Rev. 1.5, 6. And Jesus, as Priest, Intercedes that his Legacies
may be bestowed; and his Blood cries for the Execution of his Testament, Heb.
7.25. He ever lives to make Intercession. John 17.19.24. Heb. 12.24.

3. Jesus Christ, as King, executes his Office, he writes his Doctrine and Laws
in the hearts of his Subjects, and gives them new hearts, Jer. 31.33. Ezra
36.56.

1. Use. This may inform us of the wonderful Grace of God, that there should be
a New Testament. Did Fallen Man ever imagine, or conceive such a thing, that
Christ's Goods should be Dispensed, and his Inheritance be derived to, and
settled on Sinful Creatures by a Testament Ratified by his own Blood, and Death.
1. We deserved to be stripped, and deprived of all External and Temporal
Enjoyments, that the Wine Press, and the Corn-floor should not feed us, Hos.
9.2. That God should return, and take away his Corn, Wool, and Flax from us,
Hos. 2.9. and that the things that God has given us, shall pass away from us,
Jer. 8.13. God might, by the Execution of his Threatenings, have impoverished
and destroyed us; and what Grace is this, that he should make a Testament to
save, and enrich us.

2. The Covenant of Works does exact perfect and perpetual Obedience: it
requires the full Debt, without any abatement, of us poor Insolvent Creatures,
and threatens us with Eternal Punishment, and Perdition, for any defect,
failure, or default in our Obedience? And what Grace is this, that a New
Testament should be made, that forgives the Guilty, and gives to the Poor? The
Law was given by Moses; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.17.

3. Consider how dear it cost Jesus Christ to be a Testator. 1. He was obliged
to put on our Humane Nature, that he might have a Body to offer up, a Life to
lay down, Blood to shed, a Soul to pour out to the Death. 2. Jesus Christ must
be a Surety, Heb. 7.22. or else he could not have been a Testator: he must bear
our sins, pay our Debt, discharge our Ransom; he must buy and purchase all good
things for us, else he could not bequeath them to us. We were such Criminals,
such guilty Creatures, that Jesus Christ could not live, and give any good to
us, or bestow any Spiritual Blessing on us, but he must die to bequeath
Legacies; all Spiritual Good Things must come swiming to us in the Blood of
Jesus Christ. 3. That Jesus Christ should empty himself to fill us, impoverish
himself to enrich us. You know (says Paul) The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet, for our sakes, he became poor, that we, through
his Poverty, might be Rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9. The Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Heir
of all things, was in a meaner and lower condition than Birds and Foxes. The
Birds of the Air have Nests, and Foxes have Holes, but the Son of Man has not
where to lay his Head, Luke 9.58. The Curse took hold of him, that the Blessing
might flow to us. Death came to him, that Life might be derived to us.

4. Consider how sweet, comfortable and refreshing Christ's Testament is.

1. In a Covenant there are Two Parties obliging themselves to each other; but,
in a Testament there is but one Party Bequeathing, and that is Christ.

2. Covenants are Vacated, and Disanulled by the Death of one, or both of the
Confederates, but a Testament is not disanulled, but established by the Death
of Christ. We are Heirs, in Reversion, and Heirs, in Possession, by our own
Death.

3. A Testament is irrevocable, because it is built on something past, and that
cannot be undone: Jesus Christ has died, and this gives eternal force to his
Testament. The Benefits, and Legacies of Christ's Testament come to us in a
Righteous way, what he Bequeathes he Purchases, and there is a powerful and
effectual way to execute Christ's Testament. The Holy Ghost fulfills the
Promises, and bestows the Legacies of this Testament. Men are Taught, and do
know God as the true God, and their God; they are drawn, and do choose God for
their God, and Portion, and do sincerely become a Peculiar People to him, and
they are caused to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Judgments and Commands.

2d. Use of Exhortation, 1. Branch. O seek to have Benefit by Christ's
Testament, to be his Legatees, yea his Heirs! O be not contented with a short
Reprieve, and with mere Patience and Forbearance; Do not satisfy your selves
with some present Alms of Mercy, and Temporary Relief, but seek a Rich, and
lasting Portion, an Eternal Inheritance: Let not this quiet you, that you are
Stewards of Temporal Things, but make sure you shall be Heirs of an
everlasting Salvation and Kingdom. Do not only catch at God's Riches, in
Earthly things, Psalm. 10.24.3. but lay hold of the Riches of Christ for
Eternity, Ephesians. 8. O prize and secure your Interest in this Testament, for, 1.
It mainly and principally respects the Soul, and Eternity: The Soul shall find
rest, Matthew. 11.28. Isa. 55.2. of it self, in fatness, and obtain Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.9. 2. This is a Comprehensive Testament, here is Grace given, and Glory
bequeathed, 1. Galat. 6. 2 These. 2.14.

3. Here are the greatest, most precious, and Invaluable Legacies bestowed; God
gives himself as our God, Father, and Portion, Jer. 31.33. and Jesus Christ
bestows himself, as a Head, Husband, and Savior, 2 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.23.

That you may have benefit by this New Testament, I would Counsel and Advise
these Two things, 1. O be Married to Jesus Christ the Testator, Romans 7.4. as
Adam awaked out of his deep sleep to Marry Eve, so Christ is awaked, and Risen
from the Dead to Marry poor Souls, and to settle his Riches, and Inheritance
on them. 2. Cry, and seek for the Spirit, Luke 12.2.13. he is the Faithful, and
Powerful Executor of Christ's Testament; he can open blind Eyes, break hard
Hearts, quicken dead Souls.

2d. Branch of the Use of Exhortation. O be Grateful, be Thankful to the
Testator, that has established this New Testament; give your selves to Christ,
2 Cor. 5.5. and serve him, Psalm. 22.30. Yield your selves to God, as those that
are alive from the dead, Romans 13. Offer your selves to God as living
Sacrifices, Romans 12. Turn to Christ, Acts 11.21. Run to Christ, Isa. 55.15.
Live to him, 2 Cor. 5.15.54. Be his Portion, and Possession, Isa. 53.12. Psalm.
2.8. Be First Fruits to God, and the Lamb, as those that are obliged to it by
Redemption, and as those that are enabled thereunto by Regeneration. We are
Redeemed to be First Fruits, we are Begotten to be First Fruits, Rev. 14.4.
James 1.18.

2d. Doctrine. Gospel Officers are Ministers of the New Testament; this is
their Honor, and Glory, that they are sent forth into the World with the Word,
and glad Tidings of Reconciliation in their Mouths, and the Testament of the
Son of God in their Hands. 1. They are to reveal to the World this Great
Secret, this deep, and wonderful Mystery, that the Son of God has set his
House in Order, and made his last Will and Testament. The World is an utter
stranger to this Supernatural Truth, the Church only knows it, and is
acquainted with it, Psalm. 25.14. This is spoken of as a great Mercy, that God
will Reveal this Secret, and show his Covenant unto any. 2. Christ's Officers
are to open, explain, and expound this Testament; it is so Rich, Full, and
Comprehensive, that Ministers may Study. Meditate, Contemplate on it all their
days, and Preach it throughout their whole Life. This is the Eminent and Noble
Employment of Ministers to Preach to the World the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, 2 Cant. 3. 2 Cor. 2.14. They are to give forth the Savor of Christ's
Ointments, to pour out his Name as Ointment; to shed abroad the sweet savor of
the Knowledge of God, and Christ, in every place; to bear Christ's Name before
the World, Acts 9.15. The Church is compared to a Company of Horses in Pharaohs
Chariot; as by her Officers she draws Christ's Spiritual Chariot, and him
sitting in it through the World, 1 Cant. 9. with 3 Cant. 9, 10. 3. They are to
urge, and press on Men to lay hold of this Covenant, of this Testament of the
Son of Cod: As it is eminent Grace in God to show us this Covenant, Psalm.
25.14. so it is our main, and most important duty to lay hold on this Covenant,
on this Testament, Isa. 56.4.6. We have nothing to relieve our Fainting and
Famishing Souls, we have nothing to bear up our sinking Spirits, but the
Testament of Christ.

1. Here is a most clear Revelation of Spiritual and Eternal things, Life and
Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. The way to the
Holiest of all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was
yet standing, the Veil stood, and continued before the most Holy Place,
notwithstanding all the Sacrifices of the Law: but, when Christ died, the Veil
of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom, and we have boldness to
enter into the Holiest, even into Heaven it self, by the Blood of Christ. The
invisible World is more discovered.

2. This Covenant and Testament is ordered in all things, 2 Samuel 23.5. it is so
wisely ordered, as that it meets with all our Objections, and may silence them:
It meets with our doubts and fears, and may banish them: It meets with all our
wants, and supplies them. It is so ordered that there is a Legacy suited to all
the Noble, and Principal faculties of our Souls. 1. God Promises concerning his
Elect People, that they shall all know him from the greatest to the least, Isa.
31.34. Here is a Legacy of Light, and Knowledge to the understanding. 2. God
promises Pardon, that he will be merciful to Unrighteousness, and will remember
Sins and Iniquities no more, in the same Text. Here is a Legacy to the
Conscience: It is Pardon that does quite Conscience, and establish its peace.

3. There is a further Legacy, that God will write his Law in the Heart, and
put it into the inward parts; this is a precious and noble Legacy to the Will,
to renew, bias and rectify it.

3. This Testament has the strongest confirmation: Of old God gave his Oath to
show the immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6.17, 19. That the Heirs of Promise
might have strong Consolations, but now the Son of God has bled, and his
Testament is established by his own death, Heb. ^.15.

4. What can we look for, if we are not interested in this Testament? A day of
Wrath, Vengeance and Destruction will be our portion. We shall be stripped, and
deprived of all Good, and be loaded and burdened with all Evil: We shall be
felled down as barren Trees for the Fire, be vinnowed as chaff out of the Floor
into the Furnace, and be silled up as Vessels of Wrath.

1. Use. Of Information: This shows us how Excellent, and Honorable the Office
of Christ's Ministers is, that they are employed, and conversant about the
Testament of the Son of God; that they are to open its Fullness, Explain and
discover its Riches, and to urge and press Men to lay hold of it. They are to
warn Men of their danger out of Christ, and to press Men to fly into the City
of Refuge, and sit down under the shadow of Christ, and so to flee from the
wrath to come. They are to beseech Men through the Mediator, to be Reconciled
to God, and to woo Men to be Espoused to Christ, 2 Col. 13. They are to set
forth the free Grace of God in forgiving giving all Trespasses, and in giving
liberally and largely, according to his Divine Power he gives all things, that
appertain to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 13. Romans 8.32. And freely with Christ
gives all things also.

2. Use. If Gospel-officers are Ministers of the New Testament, this may
Reprove such as call themselves, and would be accounted Ministers of the New
Testament, yet only Preach and press Moral Duties, and build up a Natural
Religion, but seldom, or very little, touch on the great Principles, and Truths
of the Gospel, as if there were no Testator, or New Testament: They urge Duty,
but they little themselves understand, and therefore are very unable to Reveal
to others, How Men shall recover Life, and Righteousness, attain Power and
Strength, and to partake of the Eternal Inheritance? They Treat of the New
Covenant, as if it were only a Mistress to command Work, and not as a Mother to
give Life and Strength: As if Christ was little more than a Political Head to
make Laws, and exact Obedience to them, and not a Natural Head to give Life,
and influences to his Members to enablthem to obey.

3. Use. Are Christ's Officers Ministers of the New Testament? Then, 1. This
should encourage Ministers to Preach, and People also to Hear.

1. This should encourage Ministers to Preach; the Gospel cannot be wholly
Preached in vain: Jesus Christ must have Sons to bear up his Name, Psalm. 72.17.
and Heirs to possess his Goods, and Inheritance: He that sowed in Tears, must
reap in Joy, he must see his seed, and the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied. God's Promises to Christ must be fulfilled, and executed, that he
shall have the Heathen for his Inheritance, the utmost parts of the Earth for
his Possession. God's great Servant must receive a great and glorious Reward
for his Work: All King's must fall down before him, as Worshippers, all Nations
must serve him, Psalm. 72.10, 11. When Ministers Preach the Gospel, the Hand of
the Lord is with them, Acts 11.21. to open hearts, to break the Rock in pieces,
to draw Men to Christ, to subdue them to his Kingdom, and Government. As Christ
speaks in, so he works with his Ministers when they Preach, Christ ingrafts the
Word, 2 Cor. 13.3. with Mark 16. last. Jam. 1.21. And when they Teach, the
Spirit writes an Epistle, and powerfully impresses the Doctrine of the Gospel
on Men's Souls, the Wilderness must be manured, and Sowed: The Meal of Men must
be Levened, Christ will come forth as a deliverer and turn. Men from
Ungodliness, Romans 11.26. He will Circumcise the Heart to love him, and Baptize
with the Spirit, make Men free from the Law of Sin and Death, 2 Col. 11. Matthew.
3.9. Romans 8.2. Psalm. 110.3. and render them a willing People in the day of his
Power, Isa. 9.6. He will beget a Holy seed as an Everlasting Father, and
quicken Souls dead in Sins, and Trespasses, as he is the Resurrection and the
Life.

2. This should persuade, and encourage Men to hear, and listen to the
Ministers of the New Testament: It is very necessary, that Men should b^
rescned, and delivered from the Covenant o^ Works, from a killing Letter, and a
Ministry o^ Condemnation. O listen to the Ministers of the New Testament, lay
hold of it; do not mak^ light of all that Christ has purchased and bequeathed:
Do not continue Spiritually poor, o^ be shut out of the Kingdom, and come short
of the Glory of God. Do not satisfy your selves wit^ momentary Enjoyments till
you are driven out (...) this Earth, and turned into Hell. Attend on the
dispensation of the Gospel, it is clothed and an^mated with the Spirit; this is
a Seed so powerful, that is changes the Soul: It is a writing tha^ alters the
Table, and turns a Heart of Stone in^^ a Heart of Flesh, 2 Cor. 3.3. The Gospel
is (...) Glass that changes the Spectators, and transform^ them into the
glorious Image of God, 2 Cor. (...) last. The Holy Ghost is as a Tongue of fire
o^ them, so that they do not speak cold words, b^^ they throw Coals into the
bosoms of Sinners, an^ cast chains of light and love about Souls, Cant. 6, 7.
Isa. 45.14. They sow, but God makes t^^ Seed to take root and grow, 2 Cor. 3.6,
7. Min^sters do call Sinners to come out of their Prison but Christ opens the
door, Acts 16.14. They b^ Sinners to rise and come out of their Graves, Ep^
5.1. but it is Christ that breathes Life into the^ Though Christ's Ministers are
many times poo^ yet they make many Rich, 2 Cor. 6.10. Th^^ are Deacons of
Christ's Testament: They a^^ hands by which Jesus Christ gives forth his Alms
and distributes Spiritual Gifts. O come and hear the Gospel, this may be the
day of your Visitation. A new Leaven may be laid in your Meal, and a new Bias
may be put on your Wills, for over to incline your Hearts toward God: That
word may be ingrafted, that may better and ennoble your stock, and enable it to
bring forth ^ruit to God. The Lord Jesus may speak that with a strong hand to
thy Soul, that Man speaks (...) with a weak hand to thy Ear. God says to Hoses
that he would stand on the Rock, and he should smite it, and it should give
forth Water, ^^od. 17.6. If God had not been there Moses ^ould rather have
struck Fire out of the Rock, ^^an have drawn out Water from it: But because God
stood on the Rock it did cleave, and ^^eld Water abundantly when Moses smote
it. (...) this my encourage Ministers to smite the Rocky ^^arts of men with the
Rod of the Word; that God, that Christ will be there to cleave the Rock, ^^d to
turn the Flint into a Fountain of Water, (...). 114. last. God's hand goes
along with his ^^sign, Isa. 49.22. When Christ Curcified is reached, then God
lifts up a standard and disslays an Ensign; and this cannot be in vain, for
^hen God so lifts up his hand to the Gentiles, that they presently bring Zions
Sons in their arms, and carry her daughters on their shoulders, that ^hey may
be joined with, and to the Church. Christ by the Gospel opens blind Eyes, Isa.
42.7. ^sal. 110.3. Psalm. 47.3. And by this Rod of ^is strength he subdues
disobedient, and Rebellious souls: While Ministers do open the Riches of
Christ's Testament, he opens the understanding of Men to perceive, and discern,
the Fullness, and Glory of this Testament, Luke 24.45. Christ takes away the
vail from the Heart, unstops the deaf Ear, and takes away the Heart of stone.
Though Ministers may seem but poor contemptable men, yet they bring Treasure in
Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. There is a hidden Treasure, and a Pearl of price
to be found in the dispensation of the Gospel. Christ executes his Testament,
and dispenses the Treasures of his Grace, by the Preaching of the word of Life,
and of the Gospel of Salvation: The Gospel is the Arm of the Lord, and the
Ministration of the Spirit, and of Power, so that the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and the deaf shall hearken to the word of Life, Isa. 53.1.
John 5.25. Isa. 29.18.

3d. Doctrine. It is God that makes Men able Ministers of the New Testament.

1st. God the Father fits Men to be Laborers, and thrusts them forth
notwithstanding all difficulties, and discouragements into his Harvest: It is
not every one that is fit to pluck secure Sinners out of the fire, and compel
them to come unto the Feast, Judes Epistle 23. Luke 14.23. It is God the Father
that must qualify for this noble and hard work.

2dly. The Son of God makes able Ministers of the New Testament, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
He gave Gifts to Men, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers:
Christ gave them from Heaven, when he ascended up on high, and poured down the
Spirit from on high, Psalm. 68.18. with Isa. 32.15. By the Holy Ghost he
furnished them with Light, Life, Zeal for the discharge of their Office.

3dly. The Holy Ghost gives the inward call, and fits Men with Gifts and Graces
for the fulfilling of their Ministry: The Holy Ghost is said to make overseers
of the Church, Acts 20, 28.

1. Question. Wherein does this ability to be Ministers of the New Testament
consist? What is requisite furniture to make Men able Ministers.

Answer. 1. They must have the word of Knowledge, and of Wisdom, 2 Cor. 12.8.
The word of Knowledge is a skill to open, explain and vindicate the great
Principles of the Gospel, the very Foundations of our Holy Religion. And the
word of Wisdom seems to signify an ability, and dexterity to apply the word
suitable to the various Conditions, and Exigences of Souls; to divide and apply
it aright, that every Hearer may have his proper portion.

2. This ability consists much in Spiritual Experience of the Power of the Word
on their own Souls, and Consciences. When Ministers themselves taste that the
Lord is gracious to them, 1 Pet. 2.3. that he has Reconciled them to himself,
2 Cor. 5.18. when they have been cast down, and raised up: When they have been
wounded and healed: When they have tasted the bitterness of Sin, and the
sweetness of the Grace of Christ. Paul, when Christ called him from Heaven, was
three days blind, and did neither Eat or Drink; during this time Paul seems to
be under great anguish and anxiety of mind, for his former Enmity to Christ,
and Persecuting of his Church; at this time Saul did know the Terror of the
Lord, how Terrible God would be to him if he did not faithfully Preach the
Gospel, and how Terrible the Lord would be to others, if they did not listen to
it, Embrace and Receive it.

3. This ability consists in love to Christ; the Love of Christ constrains us
because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead: The
Apostle had a Spiritual mind, and did rightly judge of things, that if Christ
died for us all, then we were all Spiritually dead, else we needed not that
Christ should die for us; yea, if Christ died for us all, then this was as
effectual for our Redemption and deliverance, as if we had all died, yea, we
all died in him, and with him. O how should this heighten affection to, and
inflame Love toward Christ. How should Ministers bestir themselves to gain
Souls to Christ, that has so much obliged them.

4. This ability consists much in tender compassions, and pity to perishing
Souls. Christ awakens the pity of his Disciples when he bids them to go to the
lost Sheep of the House of Israel, Matthew. 10.6. Jeremiah says, if the Jews
would not hear him, his Soul should weep in secret places, his Eyes should run
down with Tears, Jer. 13.17. Paul served God with many Tears, and ceased not
night and day to warn the Ephesians with Tears, Acts 20.19, 31. He tells the
Philippians with with Tears, that there were some among them, that were Enemies
to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. And he wrote a Letter to the Corinthians
with many Tears, 2 Cor. 2.9.

5. This ability consists in great Self-denial, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very
gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the
less I be loved: I (if I am offered on the service, and Sacrifice of your Faith
I therein rejoice, (...) If my blood be poured out as a Drink Offering to
promote the Service, and Sacrifice of your Faith,) do therein Rejoice. There is
a great deal of difference between Lamps and Stars; Lamps must have Oil to feed
them, else they will go out; but faithful Ministers are compared to Stars, Rev.
2.1. These will shine, though they have no supplies, or contributions from
below. The World is very ungrateful to Christ's laborious Servants, and afford
them but a slender, and starving Maintenance, yet they do not cease to Preach,
and shine to the World.

6. This ability consists in their being certain, and fully assured of the
Doctrine they Preach: They have known surely, that I came out from thee, and
they have believed that thou did send me. We believe, and are sure, that thou
art that Christ the Son of the Living God, John 6.68, 69. Our Gospel (says
Paul) came to you in much assurance, as ye know what manner of Men we were
among you for your sake. Paul did evidence by his fervent Preaching, and his
importunate pleading with them, that he was fully assured of the Truth,
Excellency and Importance of the Gospel.

7. The ability of Ministers consists in their boldness and courage to suffer,
and Patience in sufferings, 1 These. 2.2. Paul says, after we had suffered
before, and were shamefully entreated at Philippi, we were bold in our God to
speak unto you the Gospel of God with much contention. The Rulers and Elders of
the Jews saw the boldness of Peter and John; was not this high courage, and
strong boldness that the Apostles should divide the World, and take every own
his share of it, to manure for God, to conquer for Christ, to build a House,
and Temple of God upon, 2 Cor. 10.13, 4.15. The Apostle speaks of this measure,
and (...), the measure of the Rule, that God had divided unto us; and that he
did not stretch himself beyond his measure, 2 Cor. 10.14. and that he did not
boast of things without or beyond his measure: This was strange boldness, to
divide the World, and to seize and take every one his Lot and share to subdue
the Nations to God. And the Patience of the Apostles was invincible, in all
their Tribulations they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for his name sake, Acts 5.41. Paul rejoiced if he was offered on the Service
and Sacrifice of the Philippians Faith, Phil. 2.17. Bonds and Afflictions did
not move Paul, neither did he account his life dear unto himself, that he might
finish his course with Joy, and the Ministry that he had received of the Lord
Jesus to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, Acts 20.24. I am ready not
only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 21.13. Paul and others did glory in Tribulations.

8. Ministers are able when they take care of themselves and of their own
Souls. Paul says to the Elders of Ephesus, take heed to your selves, and to
the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, Acts 20.28.

Gospel-officers are said not only to have eyes before, that is, to look to
God, and behind to look after the Flock committed to them, Rev. 4.6. but they
are also said to have eyes within, Rev. 5.8. to look to themselves, and to
watch over their own Souls. The Apostle Paul was so circumspect, and exact that
he could call God to Witness as to his private actions, and the principles of
them, and he could call men to Witness as to his public Actions and
Conversation. God is witness, and ye also, how Holily, justly and unblameably
we behaved our selves among you that believe, 1 These. 2.10.

9. Ministers should be diligent, and laborious. Being affectionately desirous
of you, we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only,
but also our own Souls, because ye were dear to us, as you know; how we
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you (as a Father does his
Children,) 1 These. 2.8. I kept back nothing that was profitable to you, but
have showed you, and have taught you publicly from house to house by the space
of three years I ceased not to warn every one night, and day with Tears, Acts
20.20.31. 2 Timothy 4.2. Luke 14.23. They should be instant, and pressing on Souls
in Season, and out of Season, and compel guests to come into Christ feast. They
should labor to bring Sacrifices to the Spiritual Temple, Isa. 66.20. And to
present a beautiful Bride to the Son of God, 2 Cor. 11.2. 1 Col. last.

10. A door of Utterance is requisite to make an Able Minister of the New
Testament. Paul desires the Prayers of the Ephesians, that Utterance might be
given to him, that he might open his Mouth boldly, to make known the Mystery of
the Gospel: Again, he begs Prayers of the Colossians, that God would open to
him a door of Utterance: To speak the Mystery of Christ, Ministers must not
only be large Cisterns, to hold a great deal of the Spiritual Waters of the
Sanctuary; but also be fit Pipes to conveigh the Spiritual Waters unto others.

Use of Exhortation. If God makes men able Ministers of the New Testament, we
should lift up our Eyes, and Souls to God, and earnestly beg him to fulfill his
Promise to us, that he will give Pastors according to his own heart, to feed
his Flock with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. Sue to Christ to give
Gifts from Heaven, such as become a Glorified Savior to bestow, even Officers
filled with the Gifts, and Graces of the Holy Ghost. Seek for such Ministers as
Apollos was.

1. He was Instructed in the way of the Lord, Acts 18.25. He was not Rude,
Ignorant, or Unskilful in the Word of Righteousness; but was well Taught the
way in which God comes to us, and the way by which we are to come to God, and
enjoy Communion with him.

2. He was Fervent in Spirit. It is this Holy fire, that must burn, and shed
abroad the sweet savor of the Knowledge of God. And this is wonderful, that
Christ's Ministers should overcome, and Triumph, by spreading abroad the Sweet
Savor of the Knowledge of God, that they should conquer by a Perfume.

3. Apollos Taught diligently the Doctrine of Christ; he pleaded for God, and
wooed for Christ; he was not slothful, and negligent. How earnest is the Sun in
running of its Race? How swift are the Stars in their daily motions, to give
Light to the World, even so should Ministers be. The promoting of the Kingdom
of God is much carried on by a skilful, able, and powerful Ministry, that is
not only Light, but also Fire, such as will be, not only Shining, but Burning
Lights, 2 Cor. 4.6. God must shine into their hearts, to enable them to give
forth the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God to others, Matthew. 3.11.
this will make Ministers shining Lights: And it is also Requisite, and
Necessary, that Christ should Baptize his Officers with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire, and this will render them Burning Lights. They are the best Ministers
that Preach what they have Tasted and Experienced. Christ, in the 7th of St.
John, v. 38th, says, He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of Living Waters. This phrase, out of his Belly, is to be observed, he
that has drank of Christ's Spiritual Waters, out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of Living Waters; that which has satisfied and delighted him, shall
flow out to the Refreshment of others. O how earnest, and importunate, should
Christians be at the Throne of Grace, that God would furnish the Church with a
skilful and active Ministry. Aaron was to have Golden Bells, and Pomegranates
on the Hem of his Garment round about, Exodus 28.33, 24, 35. The Pomegranates
might point at the Sweet Savor of Christ's Death and Sacrifice. And this was
to be sounded out by the Apostles Preaching, as Golden Bells. Justin Martyr
does apply these Bells to the Apostles, and Gospel Ministers, in his Dialogue
with Tryphis the Jew. These do depend on the Garment of Christ, as High Priest
of the Church. They are, by Preaching, to sound out the Sufferings, and Death
of Christ, to the World. Solomon made a Molten Sea, that contained a great
quantity of Water, and it was put upon Twelve Oxen, three of which looked to
each of the Quarters of the World: And this Sea seems to point out the Blood of
Christ, and its abundant Merit; and the Twelve Apostles, as so many Spiritual
Oxen, were to bare, and carry this Sea of Blood into the several parts of the
World, by the Preaching of the Gospel, that Souls might be washed in this
Spiritual Sea, the Great Trumpet was to be blown, Isa. 27. last. the Spiritual
Jubilee was to be Proclaimed, and, Who should do this but the Ministers of the
Gospel? Christ was to be lifted up, Isa. 49.22. Isa. 11.10. Isa. 53.1. 2 Cor.
2.14. as a Standard, and to stand, as an Ensign, to draw perishing sinners
together to seek Righteousness, and Salvation in him. A Report was to be made
of Jesus Christ, the sweet Savor of his Knowledge was to be shed abroad; And
who are fit Spiritual Incense-Pans, or Vessels to bear the Name of Christ
before the World, but the Ministers of the New Testament. Though these are but
as little Children in the Eye of the World, because of mean Quality, and
Degree, as to their outward State; yet such Little Children shall be enabled by
the Power of God to Lead Herds of those that have been Lions, Tigers, and
Bears, but now become Tame, and Gentle Creatures, Isa. 1.6, 7. They are to
Reclaim Men from their Savage, Cruel, Barbarous Nature, and Manners, and to
Reduce them to the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ. They are to Hew Sinners
out of the Common Quarry they are in, to Fish and draw them out of the Dead
Sea, Ezekiel. 17.10, 11. to cut them out of the Wild Olive, not to be Burnt, but
to be Grafted; they are to out the Navel of Sinners, Ezekiel. 16.4. and to
separate them from Old Adam. They are to beget Men in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15. they
are to Ingraft Men into Christ, and to Espouse them to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.
They are to encourage the Dejected and Disconsolate. In this sense the Breasts
of the Church are as the Clusters of the Vine, they contain excellent Wine of
Consolation, Isa. 66.11. Souls may suck, and be satisfied with the Breasts of
her Consolation, Cant. 7.8. They are to strengthen the weak hands, to confirm
the Feeble Knees; to say to them, that are of a fearful heart, be strong, and
fear not, Isa. 35.3, 4. They are to Feed, Strengthen, and Nourish Souls. The
Breasts of the Church are as Towers, Cant. 8.10. The same Hebrew Word is used
to fignifie a Pulpit, (...), Migdal. The Pulpits of Ministers are the Churches
Breasts, whereby Souls are Fed and Nourished. Not only their Lips, but their
Souls must Preach. Therefore it is put in the Feminine Gender, Cokeleth,
Eccles. 1.1. So Psalm. 68.11. They that Publish it, is also put in the Feminine
Gender, to intimate, it is Souls that must Preach. There is need of a Mighty
Power to work in Ministers, that they may Pray Fervently, Preach and Exhort
Zealously, 1 Col. last. Have large and capacious Souls, that may have room for
all the concerns of the Church, and be suitably affected with the Burdens.
Temptations, Afflictions, Soul-Troubles, and Distresses of every particular
Christian, to Watch over the Members of the Church, to care for them, to
Instruct, Warn, Reprove, to deny themselves, to spend, and be spent for Christ:
O what a Presence, Assistance, and Powerful Influence of the Spirit does this
Require; to fit, and enable Ministers for the full Discharge of their Office: O
therefore wrestle with God, cry mightily to him, to Raise up such Able
Ministers of the New Testament, that may be filled with the Spirit, and Preach
in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. And be earnest to
rescue Souls from the Power of Darkness, and to Translate them into the Kingdom
of God's dear Son. That they may be Pens in the Hand of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.3.
to Write the Doctrine of the Gospel in the Minds and Hearts of Men, that their
Mouths may be a Sword in the hand of the Spirit, to wound the Old Man to
Death, Ephesians. 6.17. Jer. 23.29. And that the Word they Preach, may be a Hammer
in the Hand of the Spirit, to break the Rocky Hearts of Men in Pieces; and, as
a Fire to burn up the Dross of Men, and inflame their Souls with Love to, and
Zeal for God.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three-Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel.
THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Displa^ of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatoral Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement and
Supereminent Advancement.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto God's Elect, being the second Part of Gospel Redemption.

The Divine Conduct or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated; all the Methods of Providence in our course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized, or a New Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian.

A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisy,
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

A Token for Mourners, or Boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

Husbandry spiritualized; or the Heavenly use of Earthly Things. All these Nine
by Mr. John Flavell.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects; by the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.
Folio.

Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of foreknowing Things to come.

Of Charity in reference to other Men's sins.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no we
truly Love God.

A calm and sober Enquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

A Sermon preached on the late Day of Thank^giving, December. 2. 1697. To which
is persix^ Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the King^ All these Eleven by
Mr. John How.

The Good of Early Obedience, or the Ad^vantage of bearing the Yoke of Christ
betime^ Octavo.

The Almost Christian, or the false Professo^ Tried and Cast. Duodecimo.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptat^on. Duodecimo.

The Vision of the Wheels seen by the Prophet Ezechiel. Quarto.

A Sermon of Unity, or Two Sticks made one Quarto. All Five by Matthew. Mead,
Pastor of Church of Christ at Stepney.

Discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazaru^ Octavo.

Three last Sermons of Mr. Cruso; To which (...) added a Sermon on November. 5.
1697. Octav^ Both by Tim. Cruso, M. A.

His Funeral Sermon, preached by Matthew. Mea^ Quarto.

The Life and Death of Mr. Philip Henry, Mini^ster of the Gospel at Whitchurch,
in Shorpshire, wh^ died June 24. 1696 Recommended by Dr. Bates.

David Jones's Sermon in Ember-Week, preache^ before the University of Oxford.

The Qualifications requisite, toward the R^ceiving a Divine Revelation. A
Sermon preac^ed in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, Janua^^ the 2d. 1699.
Being the First, for this Year, (...) the Lecture, Founded by the Honorable
Robe^ Boil, Esquire; By Samuel Bradford, M. A. Rector (...) St. Mary le Bow.


