THE LEGEND OF BRITA-MART: OR A Paraphrase upon our provisionall British
Discipline. Inditing it of many several distempers, and prescribing to the
Cure.

Presented DIALOGUE-wise, between Mickle-Worth the PATRIOT, Peny-Wise the
WORLDLING, and Mille-Toyle the SOLDIER.

The Scene being GRAYES-INNE Walks.

The AUTHOR G. T.

London printed by T. B. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, my very good LORD, WILLIAM Earl of SALISBURY, One of
the LORDS of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council, and Knight of the
most Noble Order of the GARTER.
WHereas the manage of a real war, is now familiarly every man's Tract, the
premises unconsulted, and our provisional Musters and Militia still left at
large, without any Paraphrase: my near and usual privitie with them both thus
imposing; I have here propounded for some such temper, as might render each to
be fair and flourishing: Neither can it be presented with more propriety,
then to the masterwheele, from whose course and influence, my subordinate
motion has succeeded. And may your Lordship deigne it a favorable regard; I
dare be bold (how defective perhaps in several particulars) it shall yet
induce so much discourse, and contemplation, as by hammering out infallible
rules, may requisitely mature both. Finally, your gracious acceptance, of so
mean a piece; will, beyond the many favors formerly collated, still lay a
further obligation, upon

Your Lordships ever bounden Servant, GEORGE TOOK.

To the Reader.
MVst I give many thanks, if he please to take me fairly, neither are all the
subsequents, itended so for principles and infallible; but as in some of them I
dare be confident: There is yet another sort, only to provoke our serious
Critics, pro and con, till the perfection may be rightly stated. And by
presenting this Model, by endeavoring to raise a bridge, where thou have so
long gone through the water, me thinks should rather ingratiate, then any whit
disaffect or run into construction. O but the Soldier has like his pike, been
here so plain enough, speaking out so loud and roundly, that it must needs be
the kindler of much heat, of many dangerous coals; but then again, a light
hand makes a lamentable soar, and the fate of war like that of marriage, is as
uncertain at the first, as afterward unalterable, and withal of such
importance, that I had rather suffer under construction, detraction, and the
calumny of double diligence, then the guilt of a tardie partial information.

G. T.

THE LEGEND OF BRITA-MART.
Mickle-VVorth. HOw dearly does the quick and swee air ingratiate this place
Mille-Toyle: the Northern wind being broken and mittigated by yonder lofty
hills, and Favonius freely strewing it with his delicious buds and aglets?


Mille-Toyle. Why, thence succeeds his appellation, nempe a fovendo, of
brooding and burnishing; and indeed this precinct of The site of Grayes Inn is
originally thus named.
Purpoole is one of his chief Masterpieces; having also the nature, the
perpolitenesse of it both demonstrated in the name, and justified (as you say)
in the remarkable tincture, of these several gemmes and pendants.


Mickle-VVorth. I, I, though our city Flora be familiarly sadded, with a
black cobweb-lawne of smoke and sea-coale; yet is she polished here and
under a serener zenith, the fair complexion of this obvious Rose will instant
it, and behold this Tulip seems also to be lined with so rich a satin, as
imposes an extraordinary estimate.


Penny-VVise. But may then our serious Mickle-worth, be with this garden
hypocrite, this gaudy piece of outside, thus affectionately transported?


Mille-Toyle. Indeed the noblest flowers have both color, smell and taste; thus
the premised Rose, with also the Violet, and Iuli-flower, minister each of them
to the smell, the sight, and the palate; yet while yielding these for such
superlatives, the Tulip also cannot be denied his single share, his positive
beauty.


Mickle-VVorth. True Mille-Toyle, the detraction of others must not stagger our
justice; besides, who can think that nature should prepare so delicate a
lodging, without some proportionable incumbent?


Penny-W. O Sir, excuse me, these supposes hold so little water, that till
further information, I for my own particular, shall rather side with a sage
leaf, or a good pot-herbe.


Mickle-W. Let each one have his due Penny-wise, and then upon comparison and
competition, who but will easily condescend, and prefer profit to pleasure; a
bed of Confound and Milfoile before a border of Daffadilies, or the sweetest
strewing herbs?


Penny-Wise. And these, perhaps are but pharisaicall boasters also; may they
not be rendered by some other names more usual amongst us?


Mickle Worth. These, Sir, are such as will perform beyond their profession;
pay more then they promise: the first (if I be not deceived) is also called
Blind-nettle, All-heale, and then Woundwort, by which name some Masters will
especially celebrate it. The second is so denominated from the Latin, and his
innumerous leafes, being vulgarly Stratiotes, or folium mi^tare as healing all
wounds made with iron.
Yarrow, or Nose-bleed, and the peculiar plant of Mars. These (I say) are no
effeminate delices but truly real: the balm of wounds; the hope, the help of
Soldiers.


Penny-Wise. I conceive you Sir, subscribing likewise to their efficacy; they
may be good leaches for the trespass of an axe, or a since; concerning their
relation to the Soldier, it is here but little and impertinent, his room being
indeed far better then his company.


Mickle-Worth. Yet say (my downright friend) will you then stock up the fence
of our Lands, our lives: oppose the fast-bind fast-finde of our forefathers?
Why let me tell you, that as the natural body, so does the body politic
consist of different humors and complexions, Learning, Mars, and Husbandry,
the chiefest; and these, when in their due poise and affectionately plighted,
render it fair and flourishing: but if falling into partialities, if the
Scholar and Soldier say to the Husbandman, we have no need of thee, or the
Farmer and Lawyer to the Soldier, we have no need of thee; the house is
divided within it self, and cannot long endure.


Mille-T. A grievous curse was it, when God in the fifth of Esaias threatened to
break down the wall of His Vineyard; for what follows in conclusion, but it
must be eaten up? the Boar out of the VVood shall waste it, the Foxes, even
the little Foxes spoil it; and who can with such propriety personate this wall
as the Soldier; since he it is that animats our strongest pieces, which
otherwise are but merely dirt and lumber? Nay, that illustrious Sparta took
him directly in this sense, to such as demanded for her walls: replying with a
gross of martial bodies. And among our modern critics, Hollinshead, sol.
1371.
Mendoza (Spanish leiger here for Philip the second) was likewise of this
opinion; so that considering the facility and open site of our present England,
respecting her want of fastness, of fortification; what other refuge have we
save the Soldiers breast? and how fatal does it protend, when we shall so
much decry him, cut him short, what if I say cut him off? Is then ambition and
the thirst of Empire, now become extinct, or perhaps transplanted far away to
the Antipodes? Are we not daily surrounded with a further access of power, and
more compact then formerly? To speak flat out; must we lie at the devotion of
every hungry pretender, not reposing rather upon our own abilities? whence I
say succeeds this confidence? suppose I call it stupidity.


Penny-VV. Call it what you will Sir; nay howsoever the coals be stirred, yet
must I still persist; and the case is plain, that Ilanders are differently
regulated from the continent: Is not the Sea our moate, nor to be filled up
with A war-word signifying virgulta or fasces, virgarum ramel brush bavin or
the like.
rjis or rubish? And our Armado such a wall as hitherto has been invincible?


Mickle-VV. Thus opinionated were the Suiones in Tacitus; the reason In his
annals fol. 207.
quia subitos hostium incursus prohibet oceanus: yet is this position so
fesable, that how has our own Empress of Islands been often harassed, even
how often totally subverted? I derogate not the seaman, let him be the first,
and a principal piece of our safety; but to hazard all upon this single
string, must be justly subject to construction.


Mille-T. All our enterprises, our overtures, are recommended as they become
less accidental: we say the foot-combatant Edmunds upon Caesar's Commentar.
lib. 5. sol. 175.
has much advantage upon the horseman, because our materials are more compact,
and every rider stands engaged in the defects of his horse: again the sword we
manage (since more entice) is preferred before the harquebuse, an engine
consisting of many subordinate pieces, of spring, stone, powder, touch hole,
etc. each of which must either readyly take his cue, or frustrate execution.
And is our total confidence supplanted then to Sea; where the tide, the
wavering wind, and an innumerable tackle, must either continually go true or
else expose us to become the wages of usurpation and hostility? must our maine
rest be set up, I say, upon such uncertainties? or is it not rather expedient,
when finding our wooden wall so tickle, that our iron one, our infantery be
likewise perfected, an employment requiring the soldier?


Penny-W. Well Sir, but add we then the rocks, the syrts, the difficulties of
our coast; for all these in confederacy, and seconding each other, will prove
a cord so tough, so many foldly twisted, that what invasion availeable to
break it? Nay, there are other allegations also, so pregnant and familiar;
that your joining issue generally withal, will prevent much circuit of speech,
fixing us likewise more attentive.


Mille-T. Concerning this perplexednesse of our frontire, as it has by Vide
Haywards Edward the sixth, sol, 120
foreign circumspection formerly been unridled; thus no doubt but many hollow
friends have from our long peace returned so much experience, that what devious
or weyward English channel, but they can readily decipher; engageing thus our
interior or artificial aides; disputing it with our sorts and importunities
of ordinance; so that how far forth these may secure us, is now become the
point: and upon mature deliberation, we must conclude negatively. For whereas
that daring Monarch, King Henry the eight (having provoked almost all the
Christian world) was very vigilant to perplexe his frontire, by scattering such
bars and bolts among our openest accesses; yet in the nonage of his successor,
the reason of state was otherwise; Haywards Edward the sixth, fol. ^45.
and many of these, rather accounted chargeable then necessary, were again
demolished; because there was no show^e, neither needeed there any cloak. A
further second sort, though not executed thus, by any public process, is yet
within compass of Chap. 34. 13.
Esayahs curse, being left (I say) so to nettles, brambles, even so totally
neglected; that they have lien a long time drawing Scarborough castle in Qu.
Mary's days see Godwins Hereford, sol. 325.
on, and we may justly fear the catastrophe. Concerning such as really
survive, being exempted from this indisposition, yet does martial knowledge
either come by nature, or many an important piece may often cry out with the
Shunamits son, My head, my head. Thus did Haywards Edward the sixth sol. 162.
yet M. Cambden in his Annals cleares him by his peers, condemning Chamberlain
Captain of the Castle.
Calice heretofore, the Lord Wentworth being Governor; and where the
understanding is but subordinate to the will, where Ulysses must observe an
ignorant Polypheme: again, where command and knowledge are distracted into
meum and tuum; where these two properties meet not simul, and semel in eodem
subjecto, nor may suddenly determine in ipso nunc; it presupposes ill, and even
invokes an enemy. To conclude, though like Absolon, they may from the crown of
the head to the soale of the foot, be without any blemish; yet Sir Wall. Raligh
(whose assertion is mill testes) he I say will tell us, In his History of the
world, the fifth Book of the first part sol. 361, and 362.
that the Island of Tercera thus accommodated even in this exquisite trim, was
seized by Saint a Cruce; as likewise Faiall (mauger an obvious parapet, with
all the lead it could malevolently power out) by himself; and Master Edmunds
in our most elaborate tract, even among our Cinque Ports will be yet so
cautious, In his observations upon Caesar's Comment. sol. 155
that an Army of twelve thousand, must here likewise divert the danger; Your
self therefore being arbiter, whether does this infer the necessity of our
train'd-bands, with a proportion of Veterans for their better disciplining?


Penny Wise. And yet why so much confidence before an entire victory? before
every rub removed and levelled: for now the rejoinder is, that we have an
active, an experient body in the Netherlands, which if redemanded, will be of
great incussion; may successefully stand in the gap, and proably dispose of
fortune, repulsing all hostilities.


Mille-Toyle. But then again, the Wise Virgins had not their Oil to fetch,
when the Bridegroom came; then I say there must be transportation, and
considering our modern politics, with their many subtle umbrages of state,
are we sure of a true, an opportune Intelligence? has not a wily Ferdinand
Godwins annals. sol. 10.
pretended France (b) or (as others tell us) a War against the Moors, and
yet taken a contrary course, usurping upon Navarre? Or else go to, it is well
and timely certified; yet again shall we believe, that (as the Poets write of
Ulysses) our Netherlander can also captivate the wind in a bag, employing it
at pleasure; even at Flushing, their nearest and most open Port, does the
shippingly often bedrid, and long and vainly have I wooed the wind to be
propitious; nay we read Daniells chronicle fol. 34. and 35.
that heretofore when King Canutus and Robert the Freise, had from Denmark and
Flanders ramassed 1600 sail wherwithall to invade us, they were thus opposed
two years together, a dash to the design: and as a modern example, our
relieving Calice a far shorter cut, was also thus diverted according to both
Holinshead and Godwin, two sufficient witnesses.


Mickle-W. Thus Mr. Penny-Wise have you met with wedges for all your several
knots, and now will Mille-Toyle conclude, that since our other natural and
artificial abilities are so feisable, of such a Punick troth; whether must we
retreat for succor, or what stone is yet to be turned over, save that of the
selected bands, which will again infer the veterane? These indeed are our
Triarij, our last refuge; by this institution is our triple cord, of the sea,
the shore, and the soldier, fully perfected.


Penny. VV. Neither am I so riged Mickle-Worth, but to retract and be
persuaded, till I meet with better information; only the necessity being thus
dilated, let me now receive the growth and antiquity thereof, with what our
ancestors might determine in this point; reason being then soonest understood,
if well seconded by president.


Mickle-W. A pertinent request, the fullfilling whereof must still bring you
more about; know therefore, that our trained companies of so remarkable
incussion, are likewise very venerable for antiquity, as bearing date even from
our Saxon ancesters: For when King Etheldred had been miserably harassed by
the Dane, nor found otherwise to vindicate his sovereignty, then by some new
untrodden path; the course he pitched upon, was that of Land-rates, and to
charg every Knights fee, Daniels chro. fol. 14. the terms of the Law will have
it a jacke and sadle.
every eight hides of land throughout the Kingdom with a corslet; we may
likewise presuppose both men and discipline proportionable, the complexion of
such a time will bear it; but how long this was continued, and with what
appropriate officers, I determine not: if being the proto-type, the first
model, it might likewise be rough-hewen and momentany; yet in process of
time, our illustrious Henry the second, Daniels chro. fol. 90.
found so directly to settle it, that the like practice was soon after
obtruded upon France and Flanders; nay King Edward the first The Lord Verulams,
Henry the 7. fol. 71
(one of our best Lawgivers) proceeded yet more roundly, assessing it by oath,
and upon inferior values; as also collating experient officers, The Barons
war, and that of Wales had now lasted about 17 years, and being all intestine,
had qualified every one with such knowledge that even a High constable knew how
to be a Mustermaster.
annually to prosecute the execution. I might imbroyle your memory with
several other, both old and latter institutions to this purpose; but to
conclude in a word, this great action of state has descended upon us deeply
consulted, oftentimes revised, and through a succession of many several ages.


Penny-W. Whence, I now become jealous of an engine so remarkable, lest by some
negligence, or mis-construction, it may be rebated from the due efficacy: and
should occasion require, what think you? is it indeed upright, and current in
all the several particulars?


Mickle-W. This you must rather demand of some such party, as punctually has
been skilled in the practice of it; it is your province Mille-Toyle, you no
doubt may clear it with sufficient assurance.


Mille-T. An experience of above two Prentiships might indeed the rather engage
me for this discovery; neither will I be mealy-mouthed, but ingenuously
confess, that though when taken far off, and in the general bullion, we find
it a very stupendous structure; yet upon dissection, and the particulars being
thoroughly weighed, it replies not in allay. But I must forbear, a punctual
scrutinie will both trespass time, and your patience.


Mickle-W. Nay, Mille-Toyle, this daintiness makes us more importunate;
proceed, proceed, you need not fear our gratitude.


Mille-T. Good Sir be satisfied, it is a task not to be undertaken without
much premeditation; and according to that old emblem, who rashly enters the
great end of the Horn, may be squeas'd at the tip, issuing there again but a
poor snake, and with much difficulty.


Mickle W. Tush man, away with this distrustfulnesse, neither can so much
experience be at any time to seek; proceed, proceed I say, in flat English, we
must have no denial.


Mille-T. How, so resolute, nor to be deflected? well then, if my discourse
shall tediously extend it self, yet is it yours, not my own deed. And now to
begin with convenient order, we may generally distinguish our trained bands
into Horse and Foot; your Mounsieur reposes much upon the first, yet is it a
brandling, a more casual body; while Infantery must be yielded for the nave,
the strength of an Army: beside, our English Foot have ever been especially
celebrated; and since our Princes use also within this covert to wait the
chance of War, I must begin with these, preferring the Kings guard; and
considering them by several circumstances, either requisite in the particular
persons, or the general purse: in the persons (whether Officers or Soldiers)
an account must be taken, of quality, residence, number, and discipline.
Concerning matters of purse, they may be concluded into Ammunition, and then
sold or payment; the first of these being so named a digniore, quasi munitio
praeclara, or nutritoria, and among other kind of martial equipage, taken
also for Arms and Powder, two such serious properties, as are likewise to be
weighed and examined with much intention; and after our Infantery thus detected
in these particulars, I must likewise implead our cavalry for a bird of the
same faulty feather. And thus have you tasted the brief analysis of what I
should discourse: the perplexednesse whereof being considered, with how much it
must encroach upon the time, me thinks I might well be spared from any further
enlarging my self.


Mickle-W. Nay, nay, your duty to the public; or I can narrow this again,
with that to your particular employment; both these I say, must impose it
unavoidably; I pray proceed.


Mille-T. Concerning then the circumstance of persons, our Officers are first
to be singled out, and accounted with (as is premised) touching their quality,
residence, number, and discipline; and being now to speak of quality, me
thinks I hear the Mammonist defining it presently by landrates; the
hot-spurre gallant, merely by store of fire and audacity; for as where nature
is redundant, and in her spring-tydes, there ensues a kind of wild irregular
heat, which yet he will entitle to place and government; so has the Devil
lately foysted in, a serious kind of fury, insomuch that your methodicall
duellist, by committing a single combat, does often overtop the meritorious
veterane. But these expositions are both beside the mark; and he that having
an able stock of reputation, and experience, can also regulate his heat by
piety, such a man will neither vitiate our companies in peace, nor forsake
himself and a good cause in War: such an Officer may presume, I say, both of
obedience and a blessing; when one inferior, how pursie, how precipitate
soever, will yet be dallied with and neglected. Or if any one may pronounce my
bolt as wide as quickly shot, I will be yet more confident; and as our
Commanders in Chief are very cautiously selected, were further respect had
also to the quality of their Lievtenants and Ensigns, our Militia would become
more serious, be put forward with more affection, more incussion; and where I
must be just to some presently in esse, and assever their knowledge, their
ability; they would then indeed all be valuable, even all of them be figures.


Mickle-W. That our Officers not raggedly endowed, and rather quadrate in their
several requisites, would indeed promise very largely; but we must consider
where the scene is laid, preferring such as a long settled peace can
administer; howsoever, the caution is well put in, and worth our welcome, as
urging an accurate choice, and that we still be hitching nearer to perfection;
but now for your second particle.


Mille-T. Namely that of non-residents, and let others judge the happiness:
when every country, every county, may rely upon his own materials: well was
it for England, that beginning to reform the Church, she jointly traveled of
another issue; being likewise delivered of her first borne iron ordinance Vide
Henry the eight, in Hollinshead, Anno reg. 35.
a counterbattery to the Romish Canon: and the print of good Qu. Elizabeth, may
be justly listed with a glorious trophy-worke of artillery, since she it was,
who by In Bishop Carletons tract fol. 2.
discovering the Keswicke mines, and calamint stone, reformed it into brass.
Nay, in her time also our powder (before transported out of Germany) was now
wrought at home, the fire engine being fully perfected: It Is of maine
consequence, I say, that every country, every county, have his instruments, his
Officers so within distance, that like the good Centurion, it may readily say,
to this, Go, and he goes; to that Come, and he comes; it argues more
success, readier assurance; when who reposes upon foreign aides, may with
much propinquity be resembled to such a slattering Smith, as often loses his
heat, while he seeks his hammer. In a word, since further fetched, can
neither be had as cheap, nor found as useful; give me leave to prefer our
innate, our directest residents.


Mickle-W. And good leave have you Sir, this error being both familiar, and
then as palpable; but since we have wherewithal to mend it, you may* perhaps,
find it has been of ignorance, not of will. For the tract of number now
successively to be dealt upon, methinks, it should be without exception; and
since we are rather deficient in our Discipline, come we next to this fourth
particle, where directly you must enlarge your self.


Mille-T. Yet soft and fair, my noble Patriot; for even concerning number
also, I find not that Eurithmia, that agreement of parts, which an exquisite
infantery may require: our select bands are I say, of very ponderous irregular
bulk, rather cohorts then According to Polybins a maniple consisted of 120.
and a cohort of 360. three maniples.
maniples; their officers likewise incompetent, each body being indeed a
Polypheme, the soul to it but a disproportionable Pigmie; and what other
sequel, but as tumultuary, slow, and indigent performance? where if they may
be digested less, and animated with requisite officers, each having three or
four sergeants; their being more compactly situate, will argue quicker motion,
execution; their proportionable scantling, readier disquisition information;
and which is a maine piece, they will engage more dependants of quality for the
service.


Mickle-W. Now is this likewise very considerable; but the notorious neglect of
discipline does so much extenuate our other peccancies, that impute it not,
though a preposterous zeal has thus somewhat transported me; and now proceed
good Mille-Toyle, it is now the next, according to your own former resolution.


Mille-T. Lastly therefore do thou glory in thy plume, thy The weapon
distinguishing the Lieutenant, from pertuise, francois, which signifies to bore.
partesan, in the displaying thy colors, in the superfice, the shell of
command? yet be sure to legitimate thy self with the soul of it, with a
support of skill and knowledge: for how dare thou so roundly surrogate a mute
for a vowell, a blank for a prise? I could justly here enlarg my self, as
against a fault unavoidably hindering the success of our Militia; but the
future prevention enforces me rather to propound an Antidote, a Sovereign
mixture both of open shame, and as public reputation; two pathetical motives,
and importunate with any generous spirit: for by reducing our obsolet troops
into Centuries, with also some access of Officers, (before touched upon) what
County so penurious, but even of these alone, will have a body competent enough
for exercise? which being annually convented, two or three days, will even
laugh and sing at the happy success; as not expent in fruitless Properly
snayles, and from their twirling shells, used metaphorically in French for
winding and casting into rings.
Limacons and Pyrrhicke dances; but so methodically husbanded to the best
advantage, that each Leiutenant, Ensign, every Officer shall afterward give a
good account of his sufficiency. Neither is it strange, if the manage of this
affair be committed to his trust, whom improperly we style the Muster-master;
since indeed a threefold respect, of his experience (as having been qualified
in service;) his place, (as of general privity with the whole shire;) and an
injunction of disciplining from above, will thus impose it.


Peny-W. Your proposition must needs be commendable, as striking infallibly the
right string; and all necessary knowledge may thus descend from units to
infinits; nay your primus motor has also been sufficiently pleaded; only
since you quarrel his denomination, let me entreat that insisting somewhat
further, you more precisely yet exhibit him.


Mylle-T. Very willingly Sir, and thus howsoever this Officer has lately been
of so perplexed an estimate and interpretation, he shall at least be
vindicated, perhaps ingratiated again. Some Critics therefore will derive his
obstreperous name from the Belgicke verb monsteren, some from muisteren of the
Flemings, or confine it else to muster-here Teutonickly; neither indeed do
these Etymons import further than sincerely to list an Army, not passing save
warrantable Levies and furniture; nay they will tell us of the Hollands
Commissary, and though his name be large and specious, that yet he is
restrained to the view of Arms and bodies: but then again, is not this in
respect of an universal experience, that vast engine of their Militia being
completed in qualibet part? Upon different circumstances there ensues another
proportion, and every able Patriot, having first accounted with the place, the
time, and other particulars, will prefer such a temper, as may fittingest
comply with his design; insomuch that our British Muster-master must succeed
rather from the Latin monstrare, which signifies as well to teach as to view;
I, we find him here in England responsible both for discipline, and
ammunition; the Character rather of a Sergeant-Major: and who I say so fit for
these pieces, as one qualified in a real War, and able to bestead himself
with the mysteries of his profession? Adding therefore probity of life, and (as
some will argue) clarity of birth; (for the Younger brothers of ancient gentrey.*
Cadets of shires say they are fullest of support and countenance) pardon me,
if I boldly call this that Delphicke Sword, which may accommodate all our
several necessities; that Sun which brightly will enlighten the sphere, the
circle of his Militia; addressing such influence so to particular Officers,
that from thence it shall descend upon our Fileleaders; and as Navigable
streams are by subordinate rivers derived even to petty brooks and rillets,
these again shall dilate it generally, even to the meanest Sentinel. I dare
freely call it a preposterous course, a haste making waste; which some of the
Hollands Sergeants heretofore transported: and to teach by ranks and rings, is
but to slubber up; the termini of a quo and ad quem, can never observe each
other mutually; when by this methodicall, this successive instillation, their
industry shall meet single and undistracted.


Penny-W. I know not Sir how the General may relish this; but so far has it
won upon my particular, that with a necessity of discipline, I must also yield
this officer to be manifoldly qualified.


Mickle-W. I, of several capacities, Penny-wise, that as occasion requires he
may redress and fill up all defects and vacancies; which being thus inserted
by the way, proceed we now again with our propounded method.


Mille-T. And this is to be doing with our Legionaries, our other Soldiers;
concerning therefore the Bulk, the proportion of their companies, enough has
been said already; their residence must be likewise within distance as that of
Officers* But then for the quality of these, it is familiarly so neglected, that
here I must insist a while; and as an introduction not improper, touch also by
the way upon our immitted foreign leavies, which are so preposterous, that
the most sappy crooked piece, will yet make a sufficient soldier; I, in mine
own experience, our imprests have been guilty of some, which like conny-skins
out of season, have been half and quarter ones; might be put two or three to a
man; nay we likewise employ as disastrous minds, as hands, which unhappines has
made Philopolites disgust himself after this manner.

How are we thus securely blinded? how
Befalls it often, that the Camp does now
So rob the Gemones? that jayles dissute
Our Mars so much, with many a black The martial term for a supply, or filling
up, from recreue francou. Deuteronomy. 23. 13.
recruyt,
Disastring him? o tell, are these the men
Will vindicate our Isle, and rear again
Her glorious Crest? Or he that could provide
His Israelites their padle-staffes, to hide
Each purgament; shall such a jealous Lord
Walk in the Camp with these? no, no, reward
Them with your rods, your racks; or trusse them up
Like vermin for determent; it is a Troop
Of other hearts and hands, may presuppose
Successefulnesse; anew regreening those
Our lately yelow Bays --
And indeed the precious stock of our reputation, is by this neglecting
public for private ends, so much decayed and wasted, that even a violent
necessity has put me upon this string: nor let any one calumniate what has been
said, as if I meant like another Maximus, Daniels chro. fol. 5.
by transporting our chiefest strength to disfurnish Britain, leaveing it
incompetently guarded: no, no, my Plea opposes Such a coward as will cut off his
thumb to prevent his service Marcell.
Murcus, Minutius, Gusman; levels only at our doe-littles, rogues, stigmaticks,
and the like: as for others, The Romans enroul'd him not, only holding him sit
for procreation.
Proletarius will pass muster for all his poverty; nay that Sedentarius or
Sellularius an Artificer that works sitting.
Cushin-crusher by some nicer palats how distasted, is yet fit enough for
service; and in especial, our A Soldier made of a Husbandman, and so named of
his mole like furrowing up the earth.
Taupin where conveniently he may be spared, is so beyond compare; that the
chief of these, the best owners, will be maine Timber in the ponderous frame of
our trained bands. our wealthiest Husbandmen are (I say) most suitable for this
maine employment; to repose it upon servants and mechanics were
disportionable, and alas they flit up and down, like empty clouds; are of
inferior spirit and ability, and but uncertain comforters: whereas, if well
weighing this hardy kind of Yeoman, (besides a toughness of temper
extraordinary) his commendable rank argues more discourse, a deeper touch of
reputation; his constant residence, inculcation of discipline; and then an
inheritable revenue, both prohibits him from giving ground, inables him against
many casual asperites, and preposeth better trim, more commendable furniture.


Mickle-W. Concerning this middle people, between Cottagers and Gentlemen, my
Lord of St. Alban In his King Henry the seventh, fol. 74.
has formerly so delivered their institution, multitude and abilities, that the
case is plain enough; and their furniture, their military provision being
equivalent, they may rank with the best Legionaries in Europe; what think you
therefore of this circumstance? I pray be free with us.


Mille-T. This is very opportunely moved, engaging me for the next particle,
our ammunition; which comprises (as has been specified) the general Aequipage
of a Magazin; so that now our Arms shall have an orderly discussion, or I may
call them else our Jewels; for thus does the Prophet Esaias render the same word
in both senses, Chap. 39. v. 2.
which (by the way) may school us to their higher estimate; our Arms or
rather Jewels, are now I say to possess the stage: and I must consider them
according to that old dispartition of defensive and offensive: arraigning some
of these in respect of weakness; others again of their weight. To begin with
Arms defensive, I must here commence my Plea against A copped head piece with
an acorn or such like upon it.
Hufkins, An armor allowing in the breast and faces some few riveted joints
for the wearers ease.
Almayne Rivets, both evidently guilty; and yet a third sort as black in
color, as course and crasie in their constitution: for where our corselet may
be distinguished respectively, as it participates either of the hammer, the
Grindstone, or the file; these (as of the lowest form) are merely beaten, a
dangerous omen; and may be compact of any spaltest Iron, all flawes and
blemishes being dawbed over with an hypocritical varnish: wherefore caveat
emptor they are neither for use, nor ornament; my Vote I say, is only for
russet Arms, a degree higher; and neither despicable* sumptuous, nor impotent;
neither too nice of constitution, nor over-rigid; as testifying with the
hammer, the Grindston also; Those of 24^ participate the rough file only, those
of 28. the bastard file also.
nay somewhat likewise of the file: and more proportionable to the safety, the
celsitude, of our illustrious Britain.


Mickle-W. I can observe how ready you have been to interrupt him Peny-Wise;
the matter of charge without a very pregnant inference is somewhat hard to be
understood: but having probably quit himself, I now distrust not your
reconciliation; tush man, so trivial is this expense in respect of what it
retributes, that we shall but loose a worm to catch a fish.


Peny-W. But this inconstancy, these often alterations are generally clamor'd
Mille-Toyle, and will run you still into further construction: be well
advised therefore, and rather than to broach this profusion, these novelties,
carry a lighter hand; 'twil yield a more remarkable return, reconciling such
as will otherwise be demanding a strict account of all particulars.


Mille-T. Tush tush, as the truth seeks no corners, it likewise fears no
colors; and will then our changing for the better, and with sufficient Cards
for it, run the hazard of so high displeasure? it is true that an inferior
Cottage may be huddled up in haste, but shall we think the like of Rome or
London? is indeed that ponderous structure of our Iron Wall, the work only of a
day or two? why even the most important pieces are at first rough-hewen, and
but ursae partus, nor to be perfected but with much expense experience, and
often licking; to demonstrate which and first in our artillery, (an expression
of near alliance and coming home in paint*) thus the violence of Saltpeter and
brimstone once discovered, and upon some further discourse, a body being also
found for this soul to work in, yet all was but dolium ignivomum, and rude
enough, taken whether in the name of it, or the nature: nay, when hereafter
better polished, and come to be canna a cane, (whence our appellatives of gunne
and cannon,) even then also was our powder susceptile of a third ingredient,
namely the this to maintain and dilate what fire the brimstone gives.
coal. neither did invention shut up Her shop here, but afterward the due
proportion of these became another quaere: and still upon several intervalls,
was it improved, one while with that busy stickler the harquebuse, which (as
La Noe has it) was father likewise to the Pistol: another while with the Both
in respect of strength, for vis unita fortior; of dispacth, for when meal it
falls individually in plump cloying the pipe of any flaske; and of thrist, as
now rolling down the piece more entirely, and with less interception.
kerning of our powder formerly made up in meal; then again with the musket,
so highly boasting of his great incussion; and sundry other specialties might
be likewise interwoven. Now since the perfection has not descended but in these
cancelleirs, in a variety of new editions and improvements; must (I say) our
changing still for the better be so much detracted? and thy eye become wicked,
because mine has been good and single? To rip up antiquity a little further,
and return my hammer upon the nail it self; thus also A coatesleeves and
gorget of mayle. Lo^ico hamata.
the Haubert, and that quondam An ancient armor of many joints and scales,
Goliath in the painted cloth is thus armed: perhaps our quondom Brigandine: in
French pour poins d'escaille.
lorica squammata, how lowdly boasting their innumerous Peers and Palladines,
have long since bin reformed to the German-Rivet; this also becoming refuse and
old iron, our modern corslet is now become the sole truepenny quia corpus
celat, because it covers and defends the body with entire plate. Neither is the
corselet so far from all exception, but still (upon further inquiry) we find
that when being white, it dies with cockering, is quickly burnished out: again
if black, is likewise as base, and withal unsearchable. Whence we may conclude
(as was said before,) that perfection is not chopp'd into suddenly, comes not
at the sowce, or the leap, like a bird, or beast of prey; but after our
Saviors own rule, of first Mat. 4. 28.
the blade, then the ear, then the ripe corn; or like the Pro. 4. 18
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.


Mickle-W. It Is yours enough Mille-Toyle, and though Penny-Wise have perhaps
been somewhat busy; yet since it does so much advantage, giveing the better
mark to your experience, I hope no matter of offense shall here be harp'd
upon, save only our offensive arms; and according to former order, these being
next to pass muster, I pray proceed in it, affording us your further
information.


Mille-T. Why then, for such offensives as trespass likewise in this
weakness, the Musket, such a masterful Engine, as, when complete, cuts far
before the point; at whose presence both sling, dart, and bow are antiquated;
nay, the very Harquebuse feign likewise to quit the field: this Engine
paramount, is yet so palpably full of this imputation, that where none of these
should pass without a sufficient proofe-marke to warrantie; we now familiarly
go less, preferring Jone equally with our Lady; the Black-Smiths mark and a
miscellany of many other, indifferently with the Kings: Here should I therefore
move for some such general distinction (whether by way of Character upon the
This extends from the breech a foott or somewhat more to the moulou^es which is
a ring of little welts, and channels surrounding the barrel.
Chamber of the piece or otherwise; as may suddenly divert all diffidence;
warranting at a cursory glance, (the scanty limit of a muster-master) what
otherwise must be taken up upon trust; and being thoroughly put to it, may
become either a fast friend, or a false. Neither will it be impertinent, that
here I likewise mention the due extent and measure of this trial: we prefer
our own barrells to those of the Netherlands, even The bread of Linburge is
said to be better than bread, the fire hotter than fire, and iron harder than
iron.
those of iron, harder than iron; and our proof should consequently be higher,
a circumstance which I fear we rathet trespass in: Nay, what if it prove
inferior, of a more scanty constitution?


Mickle-W. If this be manifest, and found to hold Water, it concerns us very
much; but here me thinks the Powder-pactor nestling toward you, replies with
tush Sir, not your slegmaticke quantities, but the peter well refined, and as
respectively imbodied; the matter of quality must chiefly govern us: and
herein have we joined issue with the Hollander long since; a verdict passing
for us, and avouching no work to Here at the Bell, is the gunpowder-house.
Southwarke; not by matter of Bulk, but the huffe, the height; by that of
efficacy must it rather be decided, and then.


Mille-T. Yet softly Swift; for notwithstanding any ceremonious paction, and
those familiar vaunts of five, or perhaps In every hundred weight 6. parts
being Peter, to one of brimstone, and one of Cole.
six, one and one* even his own pieces are subject also with intention to
remission; his own powder availes not habitually to prescribe in the three The
mark distinguishing his best powder; and imprinted on the top most hoope of
the barrel.
Crowns, but is often found of an inferior allay: which variety being also
yielded to the Netherlander, what if the comparison have bin between our hawke
and his buzzard? Nay sir, notwithstanding many specious pretenses, yet has his
employment been very full of construction; nor may better be displayed, than
by a Fountain or Conduit-head, distributing it self into the Pipe, and the
wast: at the Pipe first the King, afterward has the Country been to be
served, each at set indifferent rates; which being fully performed, both the
waste and valuation of it, have (as it seems) been his own freely to dispose
of; and that the Merchant, the Chandler and others; should not retayle it for
nothing, has been made sure enough* especially Mars being predominant; for
then with obstreperous notes of the Tower and Navy, has he presently plug'd
up all other issues; the Country chiefly being disclaimed with such obstinacy,
that either the Pipe must be very needy, like the unjust Steward paying but
fifties for hundreds; (whence the quaere will be, whether more passages to the
Wood may give better satisfaction;) or else the pack very busy, kicking down
that milk by conveyance, with which we should be nourished up by contract. Or
again, if these obstructions rather prove artificial, and either imposed to
whet on importunity, and skrew his wast up to the higher rack; or least this
by-way may become observable saepeterendo, to feed else some hidden issue in the
City, where it may thus advantage under a pretense of foreign peter; if I say
it should rather prove some matter of umbrage and artifice, my conclusion must
be of necessity, that a Rome of but one neck, ought to be guarded with all
severity; nor only from Nero's sword, but the squinsie likewise of Demosthenes.


Mickle-W. It Is somewhat that you say Mille-Toyle, and I my self have also
known, when a Country-Officer has danced so much attendance, of many
journeies, with always a nihil upon his request; that necessity has driven him
to the Chandlers at vl. us. per centum: so that there may be some pad in the
straw, requiring a further scrutiny. But leaving this to graver eyes, as also
the circumstance of weakness and levity; come we now to that other extreme
of weight and burden.


Mille-T. Sir, you shall freely dispose of me; only as a corollary to this
point, whereas the Country-story must always certainly be ready, yet with
little and uncertain vent, which presages much expense; why might it not every
fourth or fifth year become utterable at his waste, his pipe repayring us
again with an equal proportion in exchange; the commodity being carefully
stowed, will long continue good and staple, be returned him of sufficient
efficacy, even with the proofemasters re-assurance; and our several Magazins
thus successively reinforced, become politic and perpetual bodies without
any deceasing: or howsoever this suggestion may perhaps be slighted, somewhat
would me thinks be done to this purpose.

And now according to your desire, proceed we with a second sort of arms, as
prejudicial likewise in their excess, and pondor, as the former in
deficiency; and even our Bourganet of such a lofty Comb, (I had almost said
the Burthenet) is often still obtruded like tares among the Wheat: the reason
of war formerly prescribing these, was to prevent the Halberd, a weapon
Teutonically derived of helm, nempe cassida; and bard, which is dolabra;
whence *it came to be Cassi-dolabrum, of hewing and cleaving the Helm: nay, as
Killianus further affirms, it has in times of yore been flatly denominated
Helme-Axe; but our Pike having abolished these, and prevented their ancient
efficacy, we now prefer the This lighter kind of head piece seems to be
derived out of Barbary, from the Moors; as the the former from the
Burgondians; and thus will some derive our Pikes out of Pikardie.
Morian, in weight more temperate; yet of comb enough to frustrate the sword.
In the next place, must I contest a kind of Tassets lately broken over
proportion, and having for it the specious pretexts both of ornament and
safety; Neither may the dear That part of the belly between the ribs and
privy members.
Abdomen, the feeble The inner rimmo of the belly, enclosing the entrails.
Peritonaeum, so repleat with many tender curiosites, be guarded too securely:
nay the thigh has likewise certain little veins so conduceing to generation,
that Jacob's children came out of his thigh; and again of ( a) eleven speeding
places about the body, two of these are couched within Captain Binghams
Tacticks, fol. 22.
the thighs; notwithstanding all which, we must yet be cautiously indulgent,
not too much suppressing activitie; especially with looser pieces, and so
readily to be rejected. Let the belly and appurtenants (a mark as fair as
fesable) be requisitly gaurded; but the danger of these other parts is
prevented much in their tenuitie. 'Twas a fictitious shaft that killed Achilles
so precisely in the heel; and though the Tremeli^ts and L^ius upon Judges 20.
16.
Benjamites (no doubt) were very curious markes-men, yet their hitting at a
hairs breadth is concluded figurative, and hyperbolicall. the slenderness (I
say) and exiguitie of these pieces infer so competent a safety, that
notwithstanding a pair of like mortal muscels in the two arms, our The
arming pieces of the shoulders to the elbowes, named so of Esaule franceis
Pouldrons (as cumbersome and inclining to burden) are irrecoverably
casheir'd: and indeed he that runs a temperate course between the two
extremes, neither touching too palpably, either upon weight or weakness; but
mutually interweaving defense and dexterity together, has a double string to
his bow; misdoubts not in respect of his competent safety; and the rather
fails not, because of his active expedition. But we have yet greater bugs to
deal withal; for so uneven and gowty likewise is the web of our English
musket, that as sometime we may justly suspect it for weakly timber'd: (a
defect already resented) It Is oftentimes again as oppressive and immanageable;
instead of 14l. weight, or thereabout; amounting often to 16. nay sometime to
18l. weight and upwards. Now, if such pills as these and the former, may
perhaps with gayety enough be swallowed, during a city show, or a countries
musters; yet when the strength of horses will in a race at hand complain of
giving weight; what shall we think of a far inferior ability, being to beat it
out upon the hoof, perhaps for many days together, each of them still further
sadding and settling it; and as the string of a stone-bow comes stiffest near
the nut, the last proving always the worst?


Penny-W. Why, that it must either founder beneath the burden; or so reject
it, that the work must be done without the tools.


Mickle-W. And then again, what other consequence, save a prosperous enemy;
and to receive law where we should impose it? but this premonition will I hope,
work with us effectually; and still may you deserve better, as your detection
shall further extend it self.


Mille-T. I might still indeed be doing with other peccancies; our pike does
often over-swell his true Diameter; often may the sword be called a sit-fast,
being familiarly shackled in his own inordinate length; and as some slubbering
farmer may loose a lamb for a little tar; often also do we hazard great
advantages by the want of little pieces, even of worms, scowrers, primingpins,
and the like; but so far better is it rather to mend a gap, then find it; that
my next endeavor shall be to propound some antidote preventing these
enormities; and were their but a breviate of all our several requisits,
prescribing their weight, extention and quality, with infallible painings upon
each transgression; perhaps this exterior part of our Militia, might the sooner
be perfected: nay, let me not speak of the shel alone, since these penalties
might even avail the soul thereof, and comfort up the lame defective pieces,
which have so long so much disabled it. For since the statute though speaking
indeed obstreperously big ad terrorem, is yet calm enough in Among manyfold
misdemeaners, even those of twenty years time, I never knew more then one
estret.
practice, estreating up but now and then some little quillets: and again
enacted very tenderly, with sundry misdemeanors still at large* were our
penalties more general, upon the fail likewise of full arms; upon arms
foul, or borrowed; arms privately transplanted against the muster-roule;
defects unrepayred; late appearance; disobedience to Officers; subornation; and
such others: were, I say, every further offense as yet escaping with indemnity,
prosecuted with a proportionable penalty; and these (a familiar respect given
to information) either dimidiated, or so parcelly derived upon our Militia,
that the soldier In shooting for prizes, quere whether these ensuing Articles
may be proper to be observed.
And 1. That the Soldier shall advance in his ten first postures, and after
having given fire, fall orderly by the right hand into the reere. 2. That he
only make use of his furthest sight and if his face be broken in discharging,
lose his shoot. 3. That he which downs his Cock twice, without giving fire,
fall back into the reere, losing his shoot. 4. That he which omits any one of
the ten postures shall lose for every one, an inch in measuring. 5. That
every musket shall be of the usual boore and barrel, and a match cock. 6.
That every musket be laden with a full charge and a bullet. 7. That a
straight shoot though but of equal distance with a wide one, shall be
preferred before it.
himself might partake of the sweet also with the sour; as of correction
likewise of encouragement; how would such petty casualties avail that
unexperienced body of our musketeers? how I say, might our milice be hence
asisted so with prizes, and a suitable proportion of powder; that our trained
companies be no longer so named ironically, nor our several holy days dispent
emptily in commessations and good-fellowship; but after an humble celebration
of divine duties, in those of military discipline.


Penny-W. Yet take heed Soldier, you may here perhaps go too near the wind,
and rather must these Paynings keep infallibly the higher way of estreat so
lately mentioned: nay, so dangerous is this diversion, that lo, it overcasts
and thickens already, boding some unkindly weather.


Mille-T. No such object Sir I warrant you, or if I must needs suffer for
dealing faithfully with my country and my conscience, well and good, my cross
shall be my crown. And concerning these amerciaments (as has been glaunc'd at
formerly,) they trend not always and irrefragably the same course, being often
imparted likewise to the plaintiff; sometime entirely given the patient, as we
find it upon detaining payment, coat, and conduct money; and are indeed
respectively collated, as they may highest raise the general profit.


Mickle-W. Whence Mille-Toyle, we directly must infer a prosperous
interpretation; bear up therefore cheerely, and still inform us further of your
military mysteries.


Mille-T. After our arms once regulated, the next care will be thy
perservation, Nec minor est virtus quam quaerere. Some therefore will to this
end argue very strongly, that they should be made all common; others again
incline to have them generally private; and a third sort will hault between
these two opinions, rather preferring the modern ho^th-pocth of both. There be
some, I say, that will exprobate our common furniture, as nullius filius; even
so much neglected between Constable Careless, with his successor, and the
soldier; that an iron corselet is yet no robe of durance: whereas, if all be
made private, both the soldier and finder, the propriety and tutelage, meet
familiarly in eodem subjecto, which presupposes better husbandry: nay by making
all our arms common, there must likewise ensue many particular magazins, which
will imply mutiny and rebellion; since by supprizing these, every hagard
Cateline, or scurvy Ket, may lay the foundation of his camp. But now let the
the other ear be turned, and then in answer to the premises, what though some of
inferior quality, though Tray perhaps be commonly both soldier and finder; yet
does this fail as often in quater, and were great incongruity to demand of
siee-cinque, so that the exceptions are more general then the rule. Again
though rebellion may perhaps surprise an unity, a petty magazin or two; yet how
may these contend with infinits, with such an universality ^^ according to that
of 2 Samuel 17. 12. 13.
David's Hushai) shall light upon them if in campania, as the dew falls upon
the grass; if retreated into any city, shall even with ropes draw it into the
river. Nay these siders with community proceed yet further, inditing the rule
of private arms, for so tender and indulgent; that one of these may sometime
be distracted among three, or perhaps four several finders: and then how so
many wheels may readily keep touch, and continually hit it, will be the
business. For example, Sir Silly Scater-good charged with a corselet for his
manor of Melt-apace, being compelled by his diffusion and improvidence, sells
it (that he may raise the greater sum) to the several tenants, as it lies
divided, and in quillets: this they say is now by the common course of
Landrates to be required at many men's hands; and then such a distracted
satisfaction must needs be full of hazard and uncertainty. Now if being
jealous of unhaunted ways, we rather fix upon the present miscellanye, still
preferring a cast of contraries; and our common arms, as a more compact body,
readily to sway, the sudden; those privately disperced, as their unseiesable
seconds, and richer of allay: yet again, (which is a further grievance) the
party preferring this old beaten course, does often become both A carrier or
conveyer of military furniture.
Angarius in respect of personal service; One that imploies both person and
goods in the Princes service.
Perangrius, as performing it with his own arms; and then again,
Ter-angarius, by being also charged toward those that are common; a passage
which some men do very much hunch at: that every horse should have his load is
proportionable; nay, they are contented (if occasion so require) to bear
double; but this treble charge goes much against the hair: yet that old
proverb of many hands make light work; will conclude it for exiguous enough,
and rather one in estimation, than in weight.


Penny-W. For all that Sir, if to find a single arms be so large a stich
already with many men, surely, the least addition will make enough before,
become the heavier.


Mickle-W. True Peny-Wise, but we hope the prompting these heads thus into
dicsourse, may produce a milder, a more acceptable temper.


Mille-T. Well, well, if this be reckoned so harsh a note, and of the sharpest;
yet I must now come to strain a little higher, being also to mediat for sold
or payment; such a maine and master-sinew as has of late bin shrewdly sprung;
and to foment and comfort it again, will be richly worth our labor; since
therefore, who so keeps the 1 Samuel 30. 24, and 25.
stuff must also with Such a soldier as has been ^^^ht with his enemy, so
playing his scholars prize, aliter Bachcalaurius, as deserving the Bays.
Batalaurius divide the spoil; that our trained soldiers, by whose ableness
and reputation, the Wolf (as they say) is so kept from the door; that these
serious treaders of the corn out, should yet be muzzled; nay still more
importunately, that many poor substitutes, having at home several
barking-bellies to satisfy, should yet return with a nihil upon their expense,
must needs be contrary both to charity and justice; neither will I spare yet
again to say, that there is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is
that withholdeth more than is meet, but so much does it tend to poverty; that
although I can affectionatly remember, when our discipline was up, at some good
intention of alacrity, practice, and emulation; yet this stock of happiness
after a tedious dwindling, is now directly dying; our musters are become dull
and heavy, our officers in their edge much rebated, the musketeer
disproportionably and deeper charged then the pike; in fine, whereas the
soldier in close of all (and as the crown of his perseverance) has formerly
been to receive his payment; this metlesome tie being deducted, he likewise
does his work accordingly; often slinking home without either conge,
discipline, or scruple at it: the reason because he has but his labor for his
pains.


Penny-W. Concerning the discipline, which you seem to press so much, some
will reckon it for more indifferent, nor so punctually to be stood upon; that
we have convenient furniture wherewithal to answer all alarums, is granted
necessary; and if an annual account thereof be taken, we cannot at an inch of
time, be navigating many leagues of place, to be fitted both too late, and at
excessiive values: Marry for this matter of exercise, what need so much
festination? it enters now improperly, and before the right cue.


Mille-T. Indeed, were invasion as plain a dealer, as heretofore in the golden
age; nor intended without a harbinger giving defiance, and sufficient warning;
there might be more color for this intimation: but since our modern Mars
knows so cunningly to palliat himself, and his designs; we must way-lay,
and deter him with as much as we can of the foregame; all our other equipage
(as has formerly been insinuated) is but a mass of lumber, only to be
spirited by men and discipline: and notwithstanding such a body, if we stave
off this soul, it induces It was Meddozas argument to whet on invasion in 88.
Hollinshead. 1374,
an undervaluing, which will the sooner instigate hostility; when, if these two
may thoroughly be consolidate, the piece becomes of more opinion, is now
difficult and formidable; nor to be contested, but upon importunate reasons,
and with uncertain expectation.


Penny-W. But say then, will not yet your exercise detract too forceably from
our other occasions? the French will conclude Quiscait mestier* ill est renie.
a good trade for a rich revenue; the Netherlander proceeding yet further, will
have it The dutch proverb is ambache schap, groef, schap,
an Earldome; but content thee Hans, 'twil be a very poor one; if daily
checked so much and interrupted.


Mickle-W. Tush Sir, let not Sellularius, not Sti^^h-ill the tailor object his
shop, nor Coridon be jealous of his plough; since our exercise may so
respectively be conveyed, as to trench materially upon neither: for better
clearing whereof, it ensues necessarily, that after the Quare of our discipline
so newly touched upon; we likewise consider the Quando, the circumstance of
time, in which it may be doing with least noise and exception; then again the
capacity, Quantum, and extent of the same; afterward the Quomodo, the ways
and parties, by which our exercise may bestbe reared and perfected; and lastly
the Quid, namely the milice the discipline it self. For the Quando therefore,
it is bipartite, of a double nature and situation; the first interim distractedly
scattering over al our summer, into such a deal of void and idle room, as may
necessarily require some further employment: The second though of an individual
residence, is yet inferiorly taken up also like the former, but a bag of
counters instead of coin: for who shall generally survay the year, will find
that nature when freely ministering her horn of store, and now luxuriantly
promising the fork, the since, and other furniture of Ceres; imparts withal
such a kind of relaxtion, that then we practice the preachers time of gathering
stones, mending thus two gaps with the same bush; and by cleansing our tilt,
repayring our highways; and now in this time of dust and double days, may we
likewise generally sum up, and regulate our matter of arms; which if done in
dirt (all accounts being taken) will spend a noble, where we should take an
angel; the musters, and even our discipline entire, may be fully repeated (I
say) in this season, without any great clashing upon our business.


Mickle-W. Yet when weighing well such a throng of difficulties, as the view and
laying of arms and persons, with their manifold disputes annexed: likewise a
punctual instillation, first of the several postures, then of all other
knowledge apertient; it is me thinks a world of work, nor to be contracted
into such a little neck of time, as between Easter term, and that of Hillary;
the thing which so confidently you seem to aim at.


Mille-T. Take me but with you Sir, and then our soldier must not here at the
maine of our musters, be taken for an Abecedarius, merely of the lowest form;
but one before and thoroughly instructed; the primary roots and rudiments, being
to be perfited upon the bye, and in the first interim, so lately hynted;
namely, upon our holy, I had almost said hollow days; their number from
Shrov-Munday to Michaelmasse (these two inclusively taken) amounts to
seventeene, and being thus employed, will magnify the whole year with strength
and reputation. Upon these we may descend into paticular postures, and even the
smallest quillets; ascending again as articulately to the several motions and
ways of skirmishing: insomuch that presupposing an aweful hand upon all
defects, both of trime and person, with the reducement of our ponderous
companies into maniples; and then the sonldier in our holy days interim thus
prepared, (all which will prevent both loss of time, and circuit of action) we
shall find also that the Quantum and extent of our Whitson-Vocation lately
questiond, is yet of sufficient capacity, and the cloth becomes large enough
for the Coat. Then for the Quomodo; the means and parties fittest to manage
this affair, and drive the nail home: If the Commissary, Muster-master, or
what you please to call him, having a burdensome extended Province, may
perhaps suffer under it; not being in his single person, susceptible of such a
manifold employment; yet presupposing several centuries (both in respect of
skirmish and dispatch) daily convented to the same Rendevous, why may not the
cure be wrought by deputy? and since we have in every County some such
Pensioners, as receiving good exhibition, may be challenged of proportionable
service: since, I say, we find of these, so many, either not maimed, or not
Soldiers, or perhaps neither; such as fear no poundage, breaking over into
every Pasture, and to the very Teeth of the Statute thus defrauding it; why
should we not rather bring these to the test, and letting all baser mettle
fly, introduce that of legal and preheminent allay, furnishing all our
pensions impartially; and then 10l. per annum (which some of these attain to)
will engage and fasten such, as being quadrate with the statute, may likewise
be so serviceable to the Country, that here a wedge may be provided for every
knot; here the Muster-master be fitted with inferior Officers for our
holy days exercise; here surrogate Lievtenants, expediting the view of Arms
and bodies, his own eye being interimly within distance: here upon any
imprests, we may likewise have conductors, well and ready rigged for
transportation; finally, if at any time we be foreinly attempted, these also,
as martial graduates nor subject to the panick fears of Tom Tyro, will execute
with confidence, imboldning us to put home the speculations we continually are
trained in. Neither must we take a maime in the severe literal sense, and for
a downright, an entire disabling; the Law intends it far otherwise:
insomuch, that a bone taken out of the head, nay, the crooking of a finger; or
breaking the fore-teeth, is of this prejudicial construction; yet who knows
not, but a Soldier may perform effectually, notwithstanding these, nay, many
rigider disasters: the provision therefore of such knowing Oblats These taken
strictly, were such maimed soldiers, as had Monks places assigned for their
maintenance.
will manifoldly bestead us; particularly upon any surcharge, relieve our
exercise both with facility and expedition. After which survey of requisite
circumstances, we now come at length to the Quid, the Milice it self; for this
is likewise full of scarres and blemishes: and among sundry smatterers at
arms, Lieutenant Outappon't having scambled up some floting superficial
pieces, yet begins likewise preposterously at the wrong end, blundering roughly
into the main of his exercise, without any introduction of rudiments; and then
again is his brother Bragadell affectedly taken with a new pedanticall
dialect, such as may best advance his own conundrums, and pirhick daunces,
which forsooth he will blanch of with the name of fair overshooting; but tell
me bonny Bragadell, does not the steed that over-reaches disservice both
himself and his master; and why should thou thus impertinently buz about
the Butt, when to cleave the pin only wins the prize? to speak directly, why
do we not rather impugn these, by provision of some orderly particulars? And
since our Scholars will relate via regia and via militaris, for one and the
same indivisible, thus inferring their mutual interest and dependence; might
it please authority to take so pressing a concernment thoroughly to heart, and
by consulting some old experient commanders, to prescribe such a discipline as
might square best with the quality and situation of our country; and
precisely press it upon our observation, without giving line to the many late
extravagancies; we should both fully be directed in all convenient scruples and
punctualities; and what at first was but violent, artificial, and imposed;
with a continual inculcation of the same important pieces, would at length
become habitual, even a very through-pace. And now, as a corollarie to the
general; since one and the same party, taking him according to this model,
and the constitution of our country, is of such a serious, such a manifold
employment; sometime assistant to the Captain, in his holy days exercise,
commanding in chief himself; sometime descending like a Sergeant to minister
the particular postures; in the view of arms and bodies, becoming a
Muster-master; and the general charge of discipline and ammunition, a
Sergeant-major: in contemplation I say, of all these several and important
faculties to be demanded of the same person; and how much a competent number of
real soldiers may bestead us upon invasion; let me here implead all such, as
either by hook the mony-bagg; or some crooked adulation, intrude upon our
Military places: for so familiarly are the keys even of our frontire, by this
leger-demaine imbezeled; that one of them has lately been at a Lawyers girdle,
and without incurring any Quare impedit; after whom Mars was yet again
prevented, Vortumnus The God of merchandise, Saunders now the bankrout.
practicing with such artifice, that his minister the Merchant, had quickly
fingered it, and his linstock was (no doubt) of as dreadful a fieri facias, as
pertinent a random as his predecessors. I might still proceed in detecting
many more of these castle-creepers, of sufficient inexperience to deliver up
the coast; but the center of our Britain is likewise so strangely culpable,
that I leave the circumference: our Vpland preferments are I say, as familiarly
purloyn'd as the former; the heart it self being often served with thumbs,
instead of fingers; with such as breaking over all bounders, all distinctions;
will blunder into any fortune at any rate; and where Phylagathus does first
examine whether he be in Villicatione sua, and then seek to manage it, both to
the satisfaction of his country and his conscience; if this Captain
Cut-pudding can but with his facility, and implicit obedience, so fasten a
party, that he may strike the revenue, abunde satisfecit officio suo. Here
therefore must I likewise appeal all these deseisors, roundly soliciting (as
we will be true to the good of Britain) that by stripping off their
usurpation, and reducing The first Lawyer that took fee. Amnimus Marcellinus
lib. 30. cap. 5.
Antiphon to his plea, and Ardelio to his shop; the martialist may no longer
droope and dwindle out, but again be comforted in the warmeth, the strength,
the pitch of his appropriate feathers.


Penny-W. How our great clerks and politics may be led, I know not, but with
any plain capacity, your reasons should methinks be prevalent, and hold
enough water.


Mickle-W. Even so much Penny-Wise, that I dare undersigne their approbation.
This officer (according to the former draught) is indeed to quicken many
several wheels, inferring both knowledge, labor, and expense; which should
likewise presuppose all encouragement, all his rights inviolable, setting him
off whith some requisite luster: nay, to raise the point a note higher, our
cavallary (a most important piece) is imposed also upon his care and industry;
concerning which, if Mille-Toyle, you still proceed, discussing also the
particulars, it will more affectionately confirm us yours, still endeare you
farther, into the public acception.


Mille-T. After this of our infantery, it is most true, that I should now come
to the brandling wings; for though those elevated hands of Moses and Elijah,
are indeed the principal horsemen, chariots of Israel; yet the great Lord of
Hosts has also chosen so to work by means and rules, imposed upon our
practice; that a remarkable cavallary may well be counted the door of hope;
which infers the reformation, of our own, in many several particulars; but see
the Sun is now ascended his meridian, and I must dismiss these till some other
time.


Penny-W. Nor improperly; since me-thinkes this piercing air, does eagerly
solicit, what the Butler also now determines of; hark, hark, his empty
vessels sounds it dinner time.


Mickle-W. A motive so considerable, that your Frenchman will as metonymically
profess his food his vivers, as our English will his land his living;
howsoever, could the loss, even of the daintiest meal, give continuance to
our discourse; I should esteem it a rich purchase, and at a cheap rate.


Mille-T. Good Sir pardon me, while I was mine own, I was yours; but for this
afternoon I have past my self to some other friends.

Mickle-W. Come then, Allons, our horse at the next meeting: I, I, your promise
must be paid soldier.


Mille-T. Very willingly Sir; for though among these, there likewise are
manifold eye-sores to be specified; so that with the Prophet, I must still
become a man of contentions; Ier. 15. 10.
yet for the truths sake will I not hold my peace: and indeed me-thinkes the
men might endure a naked examination, as well as their furniture; a
prescription also of articulate postures would put their practice out to
further profit; Then does the disuse of rings and drums prejudicate our
troops, for haggard and unready; but especial since incussion is in our
fire-ginnes chiefly material, I must urge against our pistol bore, as either
defective in height, or else in warrant; for if preferring that moderate rate
of 36 bullets per pound. we run the hazard of authority; if that of 52 not yet
exauthoritated, this again will weaken violence; both in their several
respects are dangerous, and whether we may better transgress with custom, or
with reason, is now become the quaere. Nay, might our horse-musters be
transplanted to the beginning of the year, and enjoined about Easter; they
wonld have more of the Sun and fair weather, wherewithal to hatch our
exercise, to guard and guild our furniture; then would there be more time for
examination, and perfecting of our repaires; then is the stone horse in his
chiefest pride; and the gelding in his toughest ability, neither being so
foggily distempered, as to deflect the training, for fear of being ma^'d, by
being made; and then should we be prepared a part ante, for whatsoever the
year might bring forth; when by deferring the service longer, an early riser
may be before hand, and our poverty come suddenly upon us like one that
travelleth, our want as powerfully as an armed man Prove. 6. 11.
.


Peny-W. Yet concerning this translation of our musters, mee-thinkes we should
not be so variable, and did the time permit, there might very good cards be
urged against it; these new projects are so dangerous, that


Mickle-VV. Tush (...), make not such an idol of antiquity; if the fathers
have eaten sower grapes, yet why should the childrens teeth be set on edge?
Desist, I say, and let his conclusion be rather applied to your own particuar,
hereafter spurring you up into more foresight and providence.


Peny-Wise. In good time Sir, this is a parting blow indeed.


Mickle-W. Applying of it rightly, you shall find it such a balm, as will not
break your head. Souldierfarewell


Mill-T. Adieu noble Sir; to you likewise penie-wise


FINIS.

