The Northern Star: The British Monarchy: OR, The Northern the Fourth Universal
Monarchy; CHARLES II, and his Successors, the Founders of the Northern, Last,
Fourth, and most Happy Monarchy.

BEING A Collection of many choice Ancient and Modern PROPHECIES: Wherein also
the Fates of the Roman, French, and Spanish Monarchies are occasionally set out.

1678. Inclitus exurget factis Princeps.

1678. This Year does a brave Prince up-rouze,
For great Atchievments Glorious.
See the Heart Prophecy below, Chap. x.

A Carolo Carolus Borealibus editus oris,
Siqua fides magno major erit Carolo. Grebner.
Charles, Son of Charles, greater than Charles the Great,
Born North, there sets the Fourth Monarchick Seat.
Et prodesse volunt, and dilectare Prophetae.

The intent of these Prophecies,
Is both to profit and to please.
LONDON, Printed by J. D. and are to be sold by most Booksellers, 1680.

The Publisher's Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Contents of this
Book, and the Authors intents in the present Publication of these Prophecies.
THe Author of this Collection, as is manifest, was a Faithful and a Loyal
Subject of the Kingdom of Great Britain, a Friend to their Friends, and an
Enemy to their Popish Enemies: About the time he Collected these, they in their
Mock Parliament at the White-Horse and Wild-House, had Condemned, and Appointed
his Majesty to Death, according to their Irish Prophecy, Plowed up (by some
Irish Heifer) in a Copper Plate, as they pretend in these words.

Principe magnanimo tellus viduata remansit
Annis bis senis mensibus atque tribus.
Gallica quem peperit, Gazis ubi Regna replevit:
Proh dolor! heu facinus! Fratris ab ense cadit.
And to accelerate this Execution, they hired innumerable Assassins to fulfill
this Prophecy, hoping, if they could then have taken Him off, to have had the
Army then raised, at their command, and reformed to their Minds; to destroy
first our Laws and Liberties, and then our Religion. Their friend Gadbury has,
to sharpen and quicken their Malice, let them understand that this Blow is to
be struck now or never, according to the following Chronogram, by which his
Majesty may be minded to take care of himself.

1679. CaroLe te AngLIa, and heU genUIt sIC GaLLICa Matter,
HeI faCInUs LaesI Jesuits, Monks, Friars, are all Vowed and Sworn Brethren in
this Iniquity. Why are we so slow in our Resolves against them?
fratrIs ab ense rUIs.
Trust not thy Life, dear Prince, to their false word,
Who bare thy Throat to the fierce Jesuits Sword.
It is known, that in the Fire of London, the King was to be Assassinated. And
what hindered them then? since one tried at the Old Bailey for foretelling it,
had nothing done to him? In 1678, all Places full of the News, as by Letters
appeared from Virginia to Poland: then Coniers laid his 100 Pounds of it.
Shortly after their Wild-House Consult, they bargained also for this
Collector's Life. What he then designed, appears in his Dedicatory to the King,
and in the Epistle and Postscript to the Reader. He in his present Publication
intends to provide such Antidote, as is in his Power, to their Traitorous
Prognostications; And to encourage his Majesty's Guards, and all his
Countrymen, vigilantly to oppose their malicious Designs against his Majesty's
Life, which God preserve and continue (as he has hitherto miraculously) to the
good of his People, and ruin of all his Enemies. Amen.

To the Imperial Majesty of CHARLES the Great, of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, King; Lord of Carolina, Virginia, Jamaica, the Isles and Plantations
of the East; Sovereign of both the Seas; Defender of the True, Ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic Faith; Duke of Normandy, etc.
Most High and Mighty Prince,
IT has been the Wisdom of the most Courageous, Powerful, and Happy Kings, to
make use of Oracles and Prophecies, to the advancement of their most glorious
Designs. These sometimes afforded them good Directions, and always gave their
Followers considerable Encouragements. The Examples of all Histories, Sacred
and Profane, and of our Adversaries, commend this Practice to our Imitation,
wherein we are encouraged by many great Advantages which we have over them. The
sacred Oracles are all for us, that our Divines have demonstrated beyond all
Contradiction. Esdras, whom some have recommended as Canonical; Savanarola,
whom our Authors extol to the degree of Martyrdom, and the Roman wise Historian
and learned Philosophers, advance to the eminence of a Saint and Prophet; Tycho
Brahe, Grebner, Baudensis, and other reputed Astrologers, with whom our Modern
Foreign, as well as Domestic Visions and Prophecies consent, do all with one
Voice promise admirable Success to that Northern Prince who Heads the
Protestant League, and Protects their Liberties. That Star from Casiopaea's
glorious Chair, which gave light to all the World, A. C. 1572, to observe the
then newborn English Reformation; those from the Swans Neck and Serpentarius
Foot, which illustrated the Access of your Royal Grandfather to the British
Monarchy, whereof that in Cygnus, An. 1600, ushered it, and that in Ophiuchus,
An. 1604, attended it; All three together give full and undeniable Testimony
that this Honor is reserved to your Crown and Family. And that most refulgent
appearance of the most serene and beauteous Light of Heaven which exhilerated
your Subjects at your happy Birth, as it pointed out your Person to them, so it
gave utterance to their Joys in hopeful Predictions, made all your People
Prophets, and turned their Prayers into Blessings and Prophecies. Nor may your
Imperial Name, your Royal Emblems, Impresa's, Mottoes, or Coyns, be here
forgotten, wherein whilst you own Christ for your Guide and Hope, and his Cross
for your Standard, your Kingdom must needs be the Kingdom of God, and his
Christ. Your George is St. Michael, as your Angel-Gold well interprets it; and
the Dragon, whom he combats and treads under his Horse's Feet, is the Head of
that Kingdom, which opposes Yours, and seeks by the Serpentine snares of his
Tail, more than the open force of his Teeth, to overthrow your Horse and his
Rider. It is the Finger of God, which in that wonderful Agate, which I have
described at the foot of this Book, has distinguished his Kingdom, and the
Princes of our Faith, from the Papacy, and the rest of the World; and thereby
taught us to know who are with him, and who against him. Had you no other just
Call, or cause to gird on your Sword, and go out as another Joshua, Captain of
the Lord's Hosts, against his Enemies, the public Voice of your People, who
are the People of God, sounding so long and loud in your Ears, the Cries and
Groans of the Oppressed through all Europe, applying and appealing to your
Throne, as under God, the only hopeful Protector of their Crowns, Dignities,
Lives and Liberties, bring you an undeniable Commission, if I may not say a
Command from Heaven. Here, if ever, vox Populi, is vox Dei. The Voice of many
Nations, compared to the Roaring of many Waters, is the Voice of God, God in
them; the Voice of Christendom is the Voice of Christ, Christ in them. Go on
then, for He who went out before Joshua and Israel, his, and their
Captain General, is gone out before You, as before him, and before your People
and Kingdom.

They who have begun to shake and fall, shall fall, and be removed before Yours
and your Successors, as they have fallen before the Swords of your Predecessors.

That I have to this purpose at large in this Book, endeavored to proclaim
your Title, plead your Cause; gird on your Arms, encourage your Soldiers and
Confederate's Hearts, open your Subjects Purses, in so sacred an Expedition
from Prophetic Stars, Prodigies, and no less than prodigious Dreams and
Visions. As I am assured, it cannot but be grateful to all your Loyal People,
who would most gladly enlarge your Kingdom at the expense of their Blood and
Treasure; prolong your Life, if it were possible, with a prodigal Effusion of
their own, and give their whole Stock thereof, reserving no Moments unto
themselves, to perpetuate your Reign, in the Breath of whose Nostrils they draw
what Life they now retain of Peace, Joy, Trade, Liberty of Conscience above all
Nations round about them: So, I hope, this small Contribution, collected out of
my slender Stock, will not be unacceptable, thus seasonably presented to your
Royal Hands,

By your Majesty's most Loyal, Affectionate Prostrate Clerk, Servant, Subject,
and sometimes Commissionated Chaplain, E. T.

Ad Regem Carolum Votum.
QUi Leo de Juda est, and flos de Jesse Leones
Protegat, and stores, Carole Magne tuos.
Hobby.

Let Judah's Lion, and flower from Jesses Stem,
Keep Charles's Lions, Flowers and Diadem.
'Twas by a Charles France once the Eagle got,
'Twas by a Charles the Spaniards drove that Lot.
Why may not Britain challenge the next Call,
And by a Charles be made Imperial.
Howel.

A Prophetic Epigram on the Pictures of the late King and Queen in one Table,
by Van-Dyke.
Filius hic magni Jacobi, haec filia Magni
Henrici, soboles dic mihi qualis erit?
Qualis erit? Qualem depinxit Homerus, Achillem
Mart, and consilio Nestora, talis erit.
Son of Great James, Daughter of Great Henry,
Tell me how great shall be their Progeny?
Greater than Homer painted with his Quill,
Achiles in Arms, and Nestor in Council.
Grebner's Prophecy of the Year 1660.
The faithful and true Warrier riding on a white Horse, descends from Heaven
with his Soldiers riding upon white Horses, to fight against the Enemies of his
Church, etc. See the future History of Europe, Page 26.

His Majesty's unparalled happy peaceable Reception, and those peaceable
innocent voluntary Bands mustered to meet and entertain Him at his return, and
following him unto London, a Shadow, Earnest and Pledge of that blessed King,
and a lively demonstration of his Power, shortly expected to appear, in some
like voluntary surprising Confluence of like Noble, Holy, Innocent Troops, when
his Majesty shall be pleased to declare himself for such an Expedition as is
here Predicted.

Aspice venturo laetentur ut omnia seclo.
See all rejoice in the Presage
Of the approaching happy Age.
Da veniam subitis, non displicuisse meretur,
Festinat Caesar qui placuisse tibi.
Pardon, Great Sir, what You cannot commend,
This haste to Please, deserves not to Offend.
An Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Title of the Fourth Monarchy given
to this Book, rather than that of the Fifth Monarchy, so much doted on by some
of our Days.
HIstorians have made their Four Monarchies according to the Rise and Fall of
the Empires of several particular Nations. 1. Assyrians. 2. Persians. 3.
Grecians. 4. Romans. But this is a lame Division, and comes far short of that
Transcendent Metamorphosis of Humane Affairs, which by comparing of Histories,
Observation of new Stars and Comets (with the consideration of the Manners and
Conditions of Men) we may easily perceive must within this few Years (from
1650, says my Author) be brought upon the World. The learned Mathematicians
and Astrologers (who have more thoroughly searched into the secrets of Astrology
and Nature) more rightly place the Four Monarchies according to the four Coasts
of Heaven. 1. The Eastern Monarchy of the Assyrians (some reckon the Persians
into this.) 2. Southern of the Persians and Grecians, bounded within the
Circumference of 3600 miles, or 11 degrees of Latitude. 3. The Western Monarchy
of the Romans. 4. And lastly, The Northern Monarchy (by the Historical Account,
the Fifth) must be of the Northern Lion, who to the amazement of Christendom,
shall arise from the North Sea, and pitch his Tents in the ashes of the Eastern
and Western Monarchies. Anonymus Future History of Europe, 4o. See him, and
Sandivogius's Prophecy below, Chap. 1. and the Philosophical Key, at the end of
this first Part, Chap. ult.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THe Fourth Monarchy, so numbered by the Learned Philosophers, which some, with
the Historians, do rather delight to call the Fifth, gives all Men an hopeful
Expectation that it will Transcend all that are gone before in excellent Purity
of Religion, and Perfection of happy Government. Some Divines have been bold to
entitle the Northern Kings of England, Scotland, Denmark, and Sweden to it, by
applying unto them what is spoken of the Chariots of the Black Horses in
Zachariah vi. 8. and to the Reformation begun by them. These are said by the
Prophet, to have gone out of the Brazen Mountains into the North, and to have
pacified God's Spirit, and settled his Temple in the North Country.

See Michael Rotingius in the Margent, concerning the Reformation, of which
this is the Translation.

Michael Rotingius on Zach. vi. 8.
THe Prophet Zacariah, besides other things, relates also what he saw
concerning the Four Chariots, what came forth from amongst the Brazen
Mountains. These Horses then go out into the whole World, that they may build a
Temple for our Lord Christ, and that He may sit Lord and Christ upon his own
Throne. -- Now this is executed most swiftly, as it were by the ministry of
Horses. But to what Point this whole Affair will at length arrive, the Angel
gives us to understand, when, speaking of the Black Horses which go into the
North, he thus expounds himself, These shall make the Spirit of the Lord to
rest in the Land of the North. By which words, the last Times of the Church,
without doubt, are signified. We see the North most especially designed for
the Seat of the Lord's Spirit by the Angel in the Prophet.

Let any Man (says he) draw an Estimate of this from the beginning made at
this time; the Popish Abominations are in very many places renounced, many have
confuted their Impiety with the testimony of their Blood; the People assemble
in Towns and Villages with true Pastors; they attend to the glad Tidings of the
Gospel; Schools are piously instituted, where besides other good Arts, and
Learning, necessary to instruct Youth in making a sound judgment of Affairs,
the Doctrine of Piety is most exactly taught them, whereby they become at once
very Commendable, and very Serviceable; Private Families are better and more
orderly governed and taught, than the Public Colleges were sometimes in the
Universities. So great is our Felicity, that the Infant and Sucking-Child,
despises the Cockatrice and Addar.

Thus he of the First Fruits of the Reformation, by which we may, as he teaches
us, collect, what the Harvest under the Fourth Monarchy may produce.

Michael Rotingius, in Zach. vi. 8.
REcitat Zacharias Propheta praeter reliqua quae viderit, ctiam de quatuor
Quadrigis quae de medio aereorum montium egrediuntur. -- Excunt Equi in totum
orbem, ut Christo Domino Templum edificent, and ipse Dominus and Sacerdos super
solio suo sedeat. -- Id scilice: administratur per equorum Ministerium
velocissime. Sed tamen, quo tandem haec res tota evasura sit, Angelus per boc
significat, cum de nigris in Aquilonem euntibus sic interpretatur, quod faceunt
Spiritum Dei requiescere in Terram Aquilonis. Quo haud dubie ultima Ecclesiae
tempora significata sunt: Aquitonem vidimus ab Angelo in Propheta maxim
designari pro sede Spiritus Domini. -- Ab his initiis si quis nunc haec
praesentia consideret, cum abominationes Papisticae pluribuus locis abjectae
sunt, plures suo sanguine impietatem istam confutarunt, populi in urbibus and
agris cum veris Pastoribus sunt, Laetum Evangelii nuncium audiunt, Scholae piae
sunt, ubi praeter reliquas Art^s bonas, and res necessarias ad sana de rebus
judicia, Doctrina pietatis exactissima traditur, juventus ornatissima ac
instructissima reditur, Familiae Domesticae melius and rectius instituuntur,
quam olim discentium in Scholis publicis Collegia fuerint. Tanta faelicitas
rerum est ut infans and lactans Regulum and Colubrum nihili faceant.

I must not presume here to the Honor of a Doctor of the Church, or an
Interpreter of the Divine Oracles. I deal indeed with Prophets, Seers, Visions,
and Revelations, but of an inferior Class, such as aspire not to any Place in
the Sacred Canon. Esdras himself, who has had that Reputation with some, is
left out by the Decree of the late Council of Trent, and not without just
Cause; for all the latter Prophecies, which have made the World ring with their
Noise against Rome, are but the Echoes of Esdras, and only give us in his
words, often repeated, the Fall of the Roman Empire; as this Book will show at
large. And I assure my self, that whosoever has any Veneration for Esdras,
cannot lightly despise the other, who are manifestly inspired with the same
Spirit. The Sibylline Prophecies may seem to be of the same Extract; as they
are allowed to be of like Antiquity with Esdras, but they are neither so
Express, nor particular in their Predictions. Of what Spirit soever these
Modern Prophecies were, they are so considerable, that he who by his Arms is
reputed an Overballance to Europe, thinks no scorn to seek in the Ashes of one
of them some Encouragement to his Pretensions. I hope then none will be
offended, if I put these Paper-Bullets in my Countrymens Mouths, for their
better Encouragement and Defense, whilst they are Arming themselves, and
marching out in a Conjuncture more probable to fulfill what yet remains for them
to do, than any of their Adversaries yet had, who have by force sought to
corrupt and draw those Visions to their side. Postellus for France, and others
on the Spanish side, have long since mustered their Prophecies and Arguments,
whilst their Masters on each part were armed with vain hopes to prevail by
them, and fulfill them. I begin with Esdras as the most Ancient, most Reputed,
and from whom it is not hard for any Humane Spirit, that had been well
acquainted with his Text, and considered his words, to prophesy what our Modern
Pretenders have set out with various Amplifications, as the Spirit that
conducted them, did prompt or suggest. And because our Romanists, who look so
big, and with such strange Confidence, against all Natural and Moral Reasons,
as well as all Prophetical Inspirations and Revelations, think to drown all
their Enemies in a deluge of Blood, and to possess a desolated World alone, are
principally concerned; I will give them Esdras, in their own Doway Translation,
and then set down the lesser and more Modern Prophecies in the convenientest
order I can contrive them, the better to show their consent with him, and one
another.

April, 1648.
Postscript, January, 1679.
NB. THat the many late Sham-Prophecies, which the Devil has of late Ages, and
still does more abundantly impose on the World, are only like the
Presbyterian-Plos, his last refuge of Lies, to stop the Ears of those he can
thereby seduce from believing true Plots and Prophecies, under which by God's
just Judgment they are thereby prepared to Suffer.

The Author of the Discourse of the Rise and Power of Parliaments, now come to
my hand, has Page 33. this remarkable Passage. Though I am far from giving
credit to any Prediction, or Prophecy, but these of Holy Writ; yet I cannot but
remember you of that old Latin one, Rex Albus, etc. on which you know our
Wishes taught us to six a pleasing Interpretation. This Hint will bring to your
mind, what perhaps has not been there almost this 30 Years: That, both for his
Innocence and accidental Snow that fell on his Hearse, the late King Charles
was that White King, who for some time was to be the last in England: That
afterward his Son should from beyond the Seas, return to the Possession of his
Crown, and that in his Days, Religion and Laws should be Reformed and Settled
upon the eternal Foundation of Truth and Justice. The fulfilling of this
Prophecy now, will seem as miraculous an effect of Providence, as that of our
Sovereign's Restoration, and will as much eternize the Wisdom of the
Parliament, as the other our Loyalty.

Prosopopoea Britannica. -- Even in every Nation,
Yea, and almost in every Generation,
Some Poets have proved Prophets to foretell
Things future many Years, ere they befell.
And sure the Latins, to imply the same,
To Poets and to Prophets, give one Vates. The most ancient Delphic and
Sibyline Oracles were in Verse.
Name.
A Postscript TO THE READER.
Courteous Friend,
ASsure thy self what ever Spirit dictated these Predictions, whether they be
Crumbs fallen to Dogs, or Fragments of the Prophetic Bread broken by the
Spirit of Christ in the Scriptures, and therefore preserved by Disciples as
well as they could in these homely Baskets, or not, that which they foretell
will certainly (in God's time) by his Hand be effected, by such Persons, and in
such times as he pleases, in whose Power, Instruments, Times and Seasons are
reserved: And therefore the Kingdom shall certainly be restored to his Israel,
and that in the time of these Kings, who gave their Power to the Whore; but
they then shall become Nursing Fathers to his People, hate her, and burn her
Flesh with Fire. They, who have seen the yet smoking Ruins of Alsatia, are
witnesses for Austria, France, and Italy, of what issue these Wars will have,
and what the Fomentors of them may expect at last.

The intent of the worthy Authors and former Publishers of these Prophecies,
was to reprove and admonish the Roman Church and Empire, because of their cruel
Persecutions, and to comfort and encourage the Suffering Church and People
under their Afflictions, by a prospect of God's Justice on their Enemies
certainly Predicted and partly Executed, as an earnest of their Deliverance and
Testimony to the truth of these Prophecies. This is a Mite cast into the same
Treasury, and may serve to whet the Courages of their Armed, and steell the
Patience of their Suffering Friends. What was said of the old Roman Valor, is
much more true of the Christian Patience, Saepe pugna nunquam bello victi:
Though the Valiant Men on both sides, like those twelve that played before Joab
and Abner, fall equally; David's Kingdom, the Kingdom of God's Beloved, shall
grow stronger, and Readiness, the Kingdom of Hell, weaker. And if any think the
Subject too light, I must be content to suffer with Picus, Scaliger,
Bibliander, if their Quotations out of Primitive Fathers help them not, as well
as me, which may be produced hereafter, if this Essay meet not with too much
Discouragement.

These Prophecies were Collected in season, when it was expected, that
according to our Interest, we might have headed the Protestant Party with the
then new raised Forces, and therewith have covered the Roman Empire it self,
now manifestly going to Ruin and falling to Powder, betwixt the mighty Bodies
that press upon it on both sides, as well as by its own internal Divisions in
its Iron and Clay Supporters. They were first thrown together as it were in
Jest, to oppose those Prophecies wherewith the French vainly did tickle and
swell their Ambition with the vast expectations of an unjust, usurped, absolute
Tyranny over the free People of Europe, in which they have mistaken grossly the
Nature of the Monarchy they affect, as well as the Body which must be headed by
it. Had the Collector been serious, he could have confuted them by unanswerable
Arguments out of holy Writ, and showed them that the Fourth Monarchy is the
Kingdom of Christ, whose Commission from his Father is not for his own, who
needs nothing, but for the Public Good and Interest of the Christian World;
his Bliss being to do them good, and his Glory to increase the number of his
Subjects, and their Peace, Wealth, and Godliness. It might have been shown,
that tho the Western great Toe, France, now (and Spain heretofore) may be
formidably swollen in its proportions in the Popish, as the Turkish in the
Mohammedan Antichristian World, yet neither the one nor the other shall ever
come into one Stump Foot, but contrariwise, if Daniel or Ezra be a Prophet,
moult away, break, or be broken to pieces, be ground to Powder, and scattered
by the Wind over the Face of the whole Earth. But we need not heave so weighty
a Maul to kill a Fly, nor are these Prophecies upon second view found so
light; but that they will much overpoise what has or can be said on the other
side, nor perhaps are they now altogether unseasonable, considering with what
Impudence their false Prophets have lately given out their Hellish Oracles
against his Majesty's Life: And with what horrid Malice they seek to engage and
provoke their wicked Instruments to fulfill them.

This was written, as appears by the Date of the Epistle, in the Author's
Manuscript, yet extent, about the time of their execrable Consult at Wild House
(their Mock-Parliament) against his Majesty's Life; who knows but it may now,
Published, serve to repel the Spirits of some of their audacious Instruments,
that they may not grow too Wise and Confident in their own Folly. I hope, I may
be allowed to answer something to them according thereto. First, To their
Astrologer, Briggs the great Mathematician long ago assured us, That the expert
and learned Astrologer, would be able out of any Schemes, to draw Judgments so
contradictory upon well balanced Testimonies, that the common Astrologers
Oracles must be as uncertain from his Art as the Delphick themselves; Nor can
any Man doubt of the uncertainty of Astrologers Predictions, who shall take the
pains to compare the different Calculations of our famed Astrologers; for
instance, of Gadbury and Partridge, in that which they call the Vernal Figure
this Year, or Transit of into. To Gadbury it is at two of the Clock and 50
minutes after Noon, and to Partridge at 5 of the Clock and 14 minutes. Gad.
has the 27th of on the Cusp of the first House, and Part. has 22. The tenth
House, or Mid-heaven, as they call it, is with Gad. 15, with Part. 10; yet
hence they each of them Predict as confidently the Fates of King, Kingdom, and
People, as if they were agreed of the same moment of time and minute of the
Ascendents degree. is with Gad. in the 11th House, with Part. in the middle of
the 10th, intercepted in, as they call it. with Gad. within one degree of the
very cusp of the 9th, with Part. within 4 of the cusp of the 10th. and to Gad.
in the 8th, to Part. in the 7th. And which is much worse, in the 18th, in the
14th House with Gad. and in the o. 29. of in the 3d, to Part. If these Men from
so different Calculations both write true, then Astrology must needs be as
Infallible as his Holiness, who never errs be the Premises by which he judges
never so false, as of late when he condemned the Articles in Jansenius of
Heresy, that neither he nor any Man else could ever find in his Books. But let
us examine our Catholic Almanac, and Presbyterian-Plot-maker, Leo, cor
Leonis, etc. ascends the Horoscope, there he concludes the People of England
high Elevated, Aspiring, Ambitious, Torrent like, Contradicting, Subtle to
compass unreasonable ends, a Spirit of Pride let loose amongst us, and of
Fraud, Hypocrisy, to Entrap, Ensnare, betray Friends, our own party of the same
Feather; Thence he threatens the briskest of the Contriving Tribe, that is in
plain terms, he threatens and would Intimidate the King's and Kingdoms
Evidence, and their Patrons, and all good Patriots, and particularly him who
has for his Horoscope, for his Enemy; by which, if he mean superstititous
Friars, Monks, and Jesuits, he needed not have lifted his Head so high as
Heaven to tell us, That his Converse with them on Earth assured him better, and
it is manifest what his Book drives at. But Partridge, who had no such design
to Intimidate or Abuse the Commons of England from their just Resentment and
Prosecution of the Bloody Traitors, and theirs and their Sovereign's implacable
Enemies, nor to encourage or harden them to their intended Assassinations as G.
had, finds no such Pride or Unreasonableness in them by his Scheme. Nor could
he so easily smell the Treachery of the Birds of the same Feather by the Stars,
as Gadbury by the help of his fellow Presbyterian-Plot-makers, of whose
Treachery to the Birds whose Feathers they pretended to be of his Eyes and
Ears, were daily more faithful Witnesses than any Stars. But in the interim,
his good hopes and affections to those of his own Feather, suffered him not to
suspect that his contriving Tribe would be found out by Providence, and
afterward betrayed by their own [Black-Birds] nor could he find it in the
Heavens. Nec prosunt Domino qui prosunt omnibus arts, Is verified of him, as
of his Master the Author of the old Delphick Oracle, no great honor to the Art
certainly; but I never understood so well that Rule given to the Novices of
this Art, A te and a Scientia. What an Artist knows, or has contrived he may
boldly predict, and where Science cannot advance by lawful means a wicked
Action, if bad Conscience step in, the credit of the Art may so be saved for a
while, but the Artist deserves to perish for the help he has brought to his
goodly Art, by his ungodly Conscience. But to return to our Horoscope and
there, and our Friend thence threatened by Gadbury, who as well as his Master
might have been easily Assassinated, had Gadbury's Art or Honesty been worth
Credit. That which pleases and satisfies me best, is to find in another
Ingress, that his Friend Partridge derives comfort to the same Gentleman (if I
be a good Guesser) from this, that his Horo scope is in and not very far from
Cor Leonis, with which this Vernal Ingress is adorned by Gadbury. A Cordial
reviving his spent Spirits, with news of Reconciliation, and laying aside all
Animosities by an amicable Ray from the Royal Sol in favorable aspect with,
darted unto stationary Jove in. I see where the one seeks Corrosives, the other
finds Cordials. If I should enter into further odious Comparisons of this kind,
I should be infinite: Whilst I write this, a learned Friend tells me, That the
Caroline Tables are much better than those which were in common use before:
This helps to scandalize me farther against Astrology, for it will never go
down with me if the difference be such as I find here, that the Rules made for
the former can be true of the latter; for certainly what ever was Calculated
and Verified before these new Tables were made, would have had another
different signication, had it been judged by the Calculation of these; and how
both Calculations should be Verified and signify the same thing, I cannot
comprehend. Nor believe I, that any Learned Astrologer will undertake to
verefie any Judgments passed by the old Rules on Calculations by the old Tables
upon Schems, erected for the same Ingresses of any Cardinal Points by the new.
I would gladly have done, but a new scruple rises in my Mind, that all Aspects
as Conjunctions (and Transits too) are so diversified by the differences of
these Tables, that I see not that the common Astrologer will be able to
understand applications to favorable Aspects, from the separations so readily
and certainly as the contrariety of such Cases and Significations require he
should; so that I may as well go to the Shepherds Calendar and throw Dice there
to know my Fortune, as to a mere Artist in Astrology; because the first Masters
and Founders of Astrology had never any true Calculations, and consequently
never any substrate certain Matter, whereon to found an Art or Science by
Observation, and it is a chance which Table, or what Aspects my Question may
meet.

Cornelius Agrippa is a competent Judge, who in his youthful Follies, wandered
farther in all curious Arts, than any other perhaps have proceeded since in
their serious Studies; and tells us plainly, That if the Astrologer have not a
Genius to assoil the Amphibole of his Art, he is a mere Ass. And I could give
Instances of learned and serious Men, who solicitous for their own Reputation,
and that of the Art, were inspired with Answers as far above Nature, as
contrary to, or besides their Scheam; and one for instance did direct his
Querent to find his Silver Cup (where he never would have looked for it) in the
head of his Neighbors Wooden Pump: Another by Geomanoy, could not only (...)
be the Person enquired after, but find the Letters of his Name. But to let
other Reasons pass to out our Popish Prophets Combs, that the French Cocks
might not have any cause to Crow over us on our Dung-hills, let them strut as
much as they will on their own; the Courteous Reader shall find here, not only
Astronomy overruling their Astrology, and the general State of Christendom
overbearing Popery, but the Genius of the English Monarchy, with the light of
its Stars that ushered it in, extinguishing the glittering Night-lights of the
Popish Glowworms. And if we would compare by condescending to their Vanity,
Astrology with Astrology, Ballad with Ballad, there are some in this
Collection, that are not inferior to Gadbury, or Nostredamus, in Art or
Enthusiasm.

Licitum est aliena frui insania,
Saepe and Stultus opertuna loquitur.
When Wise and Sober Priests teach naught but Lies,
Children, Fools, Madmen speak true Prophecies.
January, 18. 1679/80.
The Contents of this Book, first designed by the Author (and which he will
still pursue if this Impression be encouraged) were to be distributed into
three Parts, whereof this is only the First.
PART I. COntains a Collection of many Ancient and Modern Prophecies and
Visions, which set out the Nature and Excellency of the Fourth and Last
Monarchy, show that it shall rise in the North; and that the Monarchy of Great
Britain shall be the Head, or Principal Confederate thereof. NB. This
Confederacy was first begun by Henry VIII. A. C. 1539, and after happily
pursued by his Daughter, that Heroin C. V. Elizabeth, who utterly broke the
Spanish Pretenses to the Catholic Monarchy. See the Contents of the Chapters
of this First Part below.
PART II. Shows that neither the French King, nor any of his Roman
Confederates, apart, or together, can erect that Monarchy; that it shall subdue
them, and reform Rome it self; which is partly also (...), but more briefly, in
this First Part new Published, by Arguments Astra^^mical, Astrological,
Natural, Propheoural, and Theological.

PART. III. Gives a larger Exposition of the Prophecy of Esdras (set down and
very briefly interpreted in the First Part) as they are transcribed put of his
Fourth Book, Chap. (...), and xiii. on which all the latter Prophecies herein
(...) seem to be grounded, with an Account of that, the Sibylline, and other
like Apecryphal Prophecies, their Original, Gredit, etc. To which last of all
some Observations are added concerning them, their Agreement and Insagreement
with one another, and with the Prophecies of Scripture and holy Mon of former
and latter Times: Wherein the times limited to the Prophesied Events, are more
especially Considered and Compared.

The Contents of this First Part.
Chap. I. The Text of Esdras's Prophecy out of Esdras IV. Chap. xi, xii, xiii.
in the Doway and English Translations; and a very brief Exposition thereof, by
a nameless Author. Chap. II. Merlins Prophecy of the Lion of the North;
Savanarola's Prophecy, out of the Future History of Europe, by the same
Anonymous Author; The Unicorn, Sandivogius 's Prophecy. Chap. III. Collections
Astrological, and Prophecies selected out of the Nameless Author of the
aforesaid History. Of the Comet, 1678. Buxtorfes Letter, out of Baudensis;
Grebner, Magel, etc. Chap. IV. The Confession of the Rosie-Cross, and Dr.
Bambridge's Astronomical Predictions, compared with those of Magel. Chap. V.
Tho. Pugh's Collection of British Prophecies. John Ursinus 's Testimony of the
Prophecy objected by P. Leo the 10th against Charles the 5th. Chap. VI. Modern
Predictions of Grebner, Cotter, and Drabritius. Chap. VII. Some more Modern and
Domestic Visions and Prophecies. The White Hall Prophecy, Englands
Remembrancer The Prophecy of 83. The French Prophecy. Chap. VIII. Arise Evans
his Predictions. Chap. IX. The History of the Prophetic Agat. Chap. X. The
Heart Prophecy. Chap. XI. William Postellus his Mystical Key. Chap. XII. Some
choice Prophecies about the Authors, and time of Romes destruction. Chap. XIII.
Errata non Corrigenda.
CHAP. I. The Text of Esdras 's Prophecy, out of Esdras ivth Book xi, xii, and
xiii Chapters, in the Doway and English Translations, and a very brief
Exposition thereof, by a nameless Author.
Doway.
Esdras iv. Chap. xi.
1. ANd I saw a Dream, and behold an Eagle came up out of the Sea; which had
twelve wings of Feathers, and three Heads.

2. And I saw, and behold, she spread her Wings into all the Earth, and all the
Winds of Heaven blew upon her, and were gathered together.

3. And I saw, of her Feathers sprang contrary Feathers, and they became little
Wings and small.

4. For her Heads were at rest, and the middle Head was greater than the other
Heads; but she rested with them.

5. And I saw, and beheld the Eagle flew with her Wings, and reigned over the
Earth, and over them that dwelt in it.

6. And I saw, that all things under Heaven were subject to her, and no Man
gainsaid her, no not one of the Creatures that is upon the Earth.

7. And I saw, and behold, the Eagle rose up upon her Tallous, and made a voice
with her Wings, saying,

8. Watch not altogether, sleep every one in his place; and watch according to
time;

9. But let the Heads be preserved to the last.

10. And I saw, and behold, the Voice came not out of her Heads, but from the
midst of her Body.

11. And I numbered her contrary Wings, and beheld they were eight.

12. And I saw, and beheld on the right side rose one Wing, and reigned over
all the Earth.

13. And it came to pass, when it reigned, an end came to it, and the place
thereof appeared not; and the next rose up and reigned, that held much time.

14. And it came to pass when it reigned, and the end of it also came that it
appeared not as the former.

15. And, behold, a Voice was sent forth to it, saying.

16. Hear thou that have held the Earth off a long time; Thus I tell thee,
before thou begin not to appear.

17. None after thee shall hold thy time, no nor the half thereof.

18. And the third lifted up it self and held the Principality, as also the
former, and that also appeared not.

19. And so it chanced to all the other by one and by one to have the
Principality, and again to appear no where.

20. And I saw, and beheld, in time the rest of the Wings were sent upon the
right side, that they also might hold the Principality, and of them there were
that held it; but yet forthwith they appeared not.

21. For some of them also stood up, but they held not the Principality.

22. And I saw, after these things, and behold the twelve Wings, and the two
little Wings appeared not.

23. And nothing remained in the body of the Eagle, but two Heads resting, and
six little Wings.

24. And I saw, and behold, from the six little Wings, two were divided, and
they remained under the Head; that is, on the right side, for four tarried in
their place.

25. And I saw, and behold the under Wings thought to set up themselves, and to
hold the Principalities.

26. And I saw, and behold, one was set up, but forthwith it appeared not.

27. And they that were second, did sooner vanish away than the former.

28. And I saw, and behold, the two that remained thought with themselves, that
they also would Reign.

29. And when they were thinking thereon, behold, one of the resting Heads,
which was the middle one awaked; for this was greater than the other two Heads.

30. And I saw, that the two Heads were complete with themselves.

31. And behold, the Head with them that were with him turned, and did eat the
two under Wings that did think to Reign.

32. And the Head terrified all the Earth, and ruled in it over them that
inhabited the Earth with much Labor, and he that held the Dominion of the
whole World, above all the Kings that were.

33. And I saw, after these things, and behold, the middle Head suddenly
appeared not, as did the Wings.

34. And there remained two Heads which reigned also themselves over the Earth,
and over them that dwelt therein.

35. And I saw, and behold, the Head that was on the right side devoured that
which was on the left.

36. And I heard a Voice saying unto me, Look against thee, and consider what
thou see.

37. And I saw, and behold, as a Lion raised out of the Wood roaring, and I
saw, and he sent out a Man's Voice to the Eagle, and he spoke, saying,

38. Hear thou, and I will speak to thee, and the Highest will say to thee,

39. Is it not thou which have overcome, of the four Beasts which I made to
Reign in my World, and that by them the end of their times might come.

40. And the fourth coming, overcame all the Beasts that were past, and by
Might held the World in much fear, and all the World with much wicked labor,
and he inhabited the Earth so long time with Deceit.

41. And thou have judged the Earth not with Truth.

42. For thou have afflicted the Meek, and troubled them that were Quiet, and
have loved Liars, and have destroyed their Habitations that did fructify, and
have overthrown their Walls that did not hurt thee.

43. And thy wrong continualis ascended even to the Highest, and thy Pride to
the Strong.

44. And the Highest has looked upon the proud Times, and behold they are
ended, and the abominations thereof are accomplished.

45. Therefore thou Eagle, appear no more, and thy horrible Wings, and thy
little Wings most wicked, and thy Heads malignant, and thy Tallons most wicked,
and all thy Body vain.

46. That all the Earth may be refreshed, and may return delivered from thy
violence, and may hope for his Judgment and Mercy that made it.

Esdras iv. Chap. xii.
1. ANd it came to pass while the Lion spoke these words to the Eagle, I saw,

2. And behold, the Head that overcame, and those four Wings appeared not which
passed to him, and were set up to Reign, and their Reign was small and full of
Tumult.

3. And I saw, and behold they appeared not, and all the body of the Eagle was
burnt, and the Earth was afraid exceedingly.

10. This is the interpretation of this Vision:

11. The Eagle which thou saw coming up from the Sea, this is the Kingdom
which was seen in a Vision to Daniel thy Brother. [ Marg. Dan. vii. 7.]

12. But it was not interpreted to him, therefore I do now interpret it to thee.

13. Behold, the day is come, and there shall arise a Kingdom upon Earth, and
the fear shall be more terrible than all the Kingdoms that were before it.

14. And there shall twelve Kings Reign in it one after another.

15. For the second shall begin to Reign, and he shall continue more time than
the rest of the twelve.

16. This is the interpretation of the twelve Wings which thou saw.

17. And the Voice that spoke which thou heardest not coming forth from her
Heads, but from the middle of her Body,

18. This is the interpretation, That after the time of that Kingdom shall rise
no small Contentions, and it shall be in danger to fall; and it shall not fall
then, but shall be Constituted again, according to the beginning thereof;

19. And whereas thou saw the eight under Wings cleaving to the Wings
thereof.

20. This is the interpretation, Eight Kings shall rise in it, whose Times
shall be light, and Years swift, and two of them shall perish.

21. But when the midst time approaches, it shall be kept till a time, when
the time thereof shall begin to approach to be ended, yet two shall be kept to
the end.

22. And whereas thou fawest three Heads resting.

23. This is the interpretation, In her last days the Highest will raise up
three Kingdoms, and will call back many things to them, and they shall rule
over the Earth,

24. And them that dwell in it, with much labor, above all them that were
before them: for this cause they are called the Heads of the Eagle.

25. For these shall be they that shall recapitulate her Impieties, and that
shall accomplish her last things.

26. And whereas thou saw a greater Head not appearing, this is the
interpretation thereof: That one of them shall die upon his Bed, and yet with
Torments.

27. For the two that shall remain, the Sword shall eat them.

28. For the Sword of the one shall devour him that is with him, but yet this
also at the last shall fall by the Sword.

29. And whereas thou saw two under Wings passing over the Head, which is on
the right side;

30. This is the interpretation thereof: These are they whom the Highest has
kept to their end; this is a small Kingdom, and full of trouble.

31. As thou saw the Liou also whom thou saw awaking out of the Wood, and
roaring, and speaking unto the Eagle, and rebuking her and his injustices, by
all his words, as thou have heard.

32. This is the Wind, which the Highest has kept to the end for them, and
their Impieties, and shall rebuke them, and shall cast in their spoils before
them.

33. For he shall set them in Judgment alive, and it shall be when he has
reproved them, then shall he chastise them.

34. For the rest of my People he shall deliver with misery, them that are
saved upon my Borders, and he shall make them joyful till the end shall come,
the Day of Judgment, whereof I have spoken to thee from the beginning.

35. This is the Dream which thou saw, and these be the interpretations.

CHAP. XIII.
1. ANd it came to pass after seven days, and I dreamed a Dream in the Night.

2. And, behold, there arose a Wind from the Sea, that troubled all the Waves
thereof.

3. And, behold, that Man grew strong with thousands of Heaven.

25. These are the interpretations of the Vision, Whereas thou saw a Man
coming from the heart of the Sea.

26. The same is he whom the Highest preserves much time, which by himself
shall deliver his Creature, and he shall dispose them that are left.

29. Behold, the days come, when the Highest shall begin to deliver them that
are upon the Earth.

30. And he shall come in excess of mind upon them that inhabit the Earth.

31. And one shall think to overthrow another: One City another City, one Place
another Place, and Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom.

32. And it shall be when these Things shall come to pass, and the Signs shall
happen, which I showed thee before: And then shall my Son be revealed, whom
thou saw as a Man coming up.

33. And it shall be when all Nations shall hear his Voice: And every one in
his Country shall leave their War that they have toward each other.

34. And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered in one, as willing to come
to overthrow him.

35. But he shall stand upon the top of Mount Sion.

36. And Sion shall come, and it shall be showed to all prepared and builded,
as thou saw the Mountain to be graven without Hands.

39. And whereas thou saw him gather to him, another peaceable Multitude.

40. Those are the ten Tribes.

English
Esdras xi.
1. THen I saw a Dream, and behold there came up from the Sea an Eagle which
had twelve feathered Wings, and three Heads.

2. And I saw, and behold, she spread her Wings over all the Earth, and all the
Winds of the Air blew on her, and gathered themselves.

3. And I beheld, and out of her Feathers grew out other contrary Feathers, and
they became little Feathers and small.

4. But her Heads remained still, and the Head in the midst, was greater than
the other Heads, yet rested it with them.

5. Moreover I saw, that the Eagle flew with her Feathers, and reigned upon the
Earth, and over them that dwell therein.

6. And I saw, that all things under Heaven were subject unto her, and no Man
spoke against her, no not one Creature upon Earth.

7. I saw also, that the Eagle stood upon her Claws, and spoke to her Feathers,
saying,

8. Watch not altogether, sleep every one in his own place, and watch by course.

9. But let the Heads be preserved for the last.

10. Nevertheless I saw, that the Voice went not out of her Heads, but from the
midst of her Body.

11. Then I (...) her country Feathers, and behold, there were eight of them.

12. And I looked, and behold, on the right side there arose one Feather, and
reigned over all the Earth.

13. And when it had reigned, the end of it came, and the place thereof
appeared no more, so the next stood up and reigned, it continued a long time.

14. And when it had reigned, the end of it came also, and as the first, so it
appeared no more.

15. Then there came a Voice unto it, and said,

16. Hear thou that have kept the Earth so long, this I say unto thee, before
thou beginst to appear no more.

17. There shall none after thee attain to thy time, nor to the half thereof.

18. Then arose the third, and reigned as the other before, and it appeared no
more also.

19. So it came to all the others one after another, so that every one reigned,
and then appeared no more.

20. Then I looked, and behold, in process of time, the Feathers that followed
stood upon the right side, that they might rule also, and some of them ruled,
but within a while they appeared no more.

21. For some of them were set up, but ruled not.

22. After this I looked, and the twelve Feathers appeared no more, nor the two
Wings.

23. And there was no more on the Eagle's body but two Heads that rested, and
six Wings.

24. Then saw I also, that two Wings divided themselves from the six, and
remained under the Head that was on the right side, for the four continued in
their place.

25. So, I looked, and behold, the under Wings thought to set up themselves,
and to have the Rule.

26. Then was there one set up, but shortly it appeared no more.

27. And the second was sooner gone than the first.

28. Then I beheld, and lo the two that remained, thought also in themselves to
Reign.

29. And when they so thought, behold, there awaked one of the Heads that was
at rest, which was in the midst, for that was greater than the two.

30. And I saw, that two Heads were joined therewith.

31. And behold, the Head was turned with them that were with it, and did eat
up the under two Wings that would have Reigned.

32. But the Head put the whole Earth in fear, and bear Rule in it, over all
those that dwelt upon Earth with much Labor; and it had the Government of the
World, more than all the Wings that had been.

33. After this, I looked, and beheld the Head that was in the midst suddenly
appeared no more, as did the Wings.

34. But the two Heads remained, which also Ruled likewise upon the Earth, and
over those that dwelt therein.

35. And I beheld, and lo the Head upon the right side devoured it that was
upon the left side.

36. Then I heard a Voice, which said unto me, Look before thee, and consider
the thing that thou see.

37. So I saw, and behold as it were a Lion that roareth, running hastily out
of the Wood; and I saw that he sent out a Man's Voice unto the Eagle, and said,

38. Hear thou, I will talk unto thee, and the most High shall say unto thee,

39. Art not thou that who of the four Beasts remainest, whom I made to Reign
in my World, that by them the end of Times might come.

40. And the fourth is come, and has overcome all the Beasts that were past,
and has power over the World with great fearfulness, and over the whole
compass of the Earth with most wicked Oppression, and that dwells so long
time in all the World with Deceit.

41. For thou have not judged the Earth with Truth.

42. Seeing thou have troubled the Meek, thou have hurt the Peaceable, and thou
have loved the Liars, and destroyed the Dwellings of those that brought forth
fruit, and have cast down the Walls of such as did thee no harm.

43. Therefore is thy wrongful dealing come up unto the most High, and thy
pride unto the Mighty.

44. The most High also has looked upon the proud Times, and behold, they are
ended, and their abominations are fulfilled.

45. Therefore appear no more thou Eagle, nor thy horrible Wings, nor thy
wicked Feathers, nor thy malicious Heads, and thy wicked Claws, nor all thy
vain Body.

46. That all the Earth may be refreshed, and come again as one delivered from
thy Violence, and that she may hope for the Judgment and Mercy of him that made
her.

CHAP. xii.
1. ANd when the Lion spoke these words to the Eagle, I saw,

2. And behold, the Head that had the upper hand appeared no more, neither did
the four Wings appear any more, that came to it, and set up themselves to
Reign, whose Kingdom was small and full of Uproars.

3. And I saw, and behold, they appeared no more, and the whole body of the
Eagle was burnt, so that the Earth was in great fear: Then I awaked out of the
trouble and trance of my Mind, and from the great fear, etc.

10. Then said he unto me, this is he interpretation of this Vision.

11. The Eagle which thou saw come up from the Sea, is the Kingdom which was
seen in the Vision of thy Brother Daniel.

12. But it was not expounded unto him, therefore I declare it unto thee.

13. Behold, the days come, that there shall arise up a Kingdom upon the Earth
and it shall be feared above all Kingdoms that were before it.

14. In it shall twelve Kings Reign one after another.

15. Whereof the second shall begin to Reign, and shall have more time than the
twelve.

16. And this do the twelve Wings signify which thou saw.

17. As for the Voice which thou heardst spoke, and that thou saw not go out
of the Heads, but from the midst of the body thereof, this is the
interpretation:

18. That after the time of that Kingdom, there shall arise great strife, and
it shall be in danger to fall, but it shall not then fall; but it shall be
restored again to its beginning.

19. Concerning the eight under Wings, which thou saw hang under her Wings,
this is the interpretation:

20. In it shall rise eight Kings, whose Times shall be but small, and their
Years swift, and two of them shall perish.

21. But when the mid-time comes, there shall be four kept a time, whilst his
time begins to come, that it may be ended, but two shall be kept to the end.

22. And whereas thou saw three Heads resting, this is the interpretation:

23. In her last days, shall the most High raise up three Kingdoms, and shall
call again many things unto them, and they shall have the Dominion of the Earth,

24. And of those that dwell therein, with much grief above all those that were
before them: therefore they are called the Heads of the Eagle.

25. For they shall accomplish its wickedness, and shall finish its last end.

26. And whereas thou saw that the great Head appeared no more, it signified
that one of them shall die upon his Bed, and yet with pain.

27. For the two that remain, the Sword shall devour them.

28. For the Sword of the one shall devour the other, but at the last he shall
fall by the Sword himself.

29. And whereas thou saw two under Wings that went off toward the Head
which was on the right side, this is the inpretation:

30. These are they whom the most High has preserved for their end, whose
Kingdom is little and full of trouble, as thou saw.

31. And the Lion which thou saw rising up out of the Wood, and roaring and
speaking to the Eagle, and rebuking her for Unrighteousness, with all the words
which thou have heard.

32. This is the Wind which the most High has kept for them, for their
Wickedness unto the end, and he shall reprove them, and cast before them their
Spoils.

33. For he shall set them alive in the Judgment, and shall rebuke them and
correct them.

34. For he shall deliver the residue of my People by Affliction, which are
preserved upon my Borders, and he shall make them joyful until the coming of
the Day of Judgment; whereof I have spoken unto thee from the beginning.

35. This is the Dream that thou saw, and these are the interpretations.

Thus far the Angel Uriel to Esdras.

CHAP. XIII.
1. ANd it came to pass after seven days, I dreamed a Dream by Night:

2. And lo, there arose a Wind from the Sea, that it moved all the Waves
thereof.

3. And I beheld, and lo, that Man waxed strong with the thousands of Heaven.

25. This is the meaning of the Vision; Whereas thou saw a Man coming up
from the midst of the Sea;

26. The same is he whom God the Highest has kept a great season, which by his
own self shall deliver his Creature, and he shall order them that are left
behind.

29. Behold, the days come, when the most High will begin to deliver them that
are upon the Earth.

30. And he shall come to the astonishment of them that dwell on the Earth.

31. And one shall undertake to fight against another; one City against
another, one Place against another, one People against another, and one Realm
against another.

32. And the time shall be when these Things shall come to pass, and the Signs
shall happen which I showed thee before; and then shall my Son be declared,
whom thou saw as a Man ascending.

33. And when all the People hear his Voice, every Man shall in their own Land
leave the Battle they have one against another.

34. And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as thou saw
them willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting.

35. But he shall stand upon the top of the Mount of Sion.

36. And Sion shall come, and shall be showed to all Men, being prepared and
builded, like as thou saw the Hill graven without Hands.

39. And whereas thou saw that he gathered another peaceable Multitude
ununto him.

40. Those are the ten Tribes.

NB. That in the famous Book, by some called the Baby Prophecy, sometimes in
the custody of the Earl of Marlborough, or a Copy of it seen and remembered by
several Persons of Honor yet alive, and for the most part fulfilled in
innumerable Particulars; Generosa Nobilitas non sinet ei fieri malum. The
Nobles and Gentry shall suffer no Wrong to be done to the King nor his Crown.
the present King of England survives the last great Battle. And as here the
end of all those Prophecies, is the Conversion of the Eastern Jews, for their
Habits mistaken for Turks.

I would not any much should trust or fear
Such Prophecies, but when Events appear,
To answer unto that which was foretold,
Wise Men should make what use of them they could;
And so direct their Actions that Hell's Charms,
And Cheating Riddles, may not do them harms.
i. e. By Justice and Mercy toward Men, and Piety to God.
Anonymous future History of Europe. SECT. 11.
. THe two Books of Esdras are thought (and that by none of the least Learned,
St. Augustine, St. Ambrose, Tostatus, Scaliger the Elder, Melancthon, Arias
Montanus, Bucer, and Bibliander) to be Canonical, because of the most eminent
fulfilling of many Predictions in them contained. In the 11th Chapter of the
second of those Books, there is under the Type of an Eagle, a manifest
Prophecy, both of the Roman Heathenish Empire, as likewise of the Papacy, with
her chief Leaguers to this present Time, throughout the whole Chapter. This
Eagle is the Roman Heathenish Empire, her twelve Feathered Wings are the twelve
first Emperors from Julius Caesar to Nerva. The three Heads are the Kingdoms
of France, Spain, and Germany, preordained of God to maintain the power of her
Pride, when all her Wings (her Heathenish and Tyrannical Caesar's) should fail
her. Nevertheless, under her twelve first Caesar's are comprehended in general,
all the Emperors which Reigned in her from Julius Caesar (who first cracked the
strings of her Liberty) to Augustulus Momyllus, (her last Roman Caesar) for the
space of 474 Years. Her eight contrary Feathers, are the eight terrible
Inundations of several Nations, from the North (God's Scourges) which
overwhelmed her fairest Provinces, sunk her State in Blood, and by Fire and
Sword humbled her as low as the Dust she trod on, viz. 1. Alaricus, and his
West Goths. 2. Attilas, and his Huns. 3. Gensericus, and his Vandals. 4.
Odoacer. 5. Theodoricus, and his East Goths. 6. Totilas, and his Spaniards. 7.
Alboinus, and his Longobards (who deposed her Diminutive Gaesar, Augustulus
Momyllus.) 8. And lastly, The intestine Homebred Faction and Conspiracy, which
proved more Pernicious than the rest (as all intestine Diseases are the worst)
which in the Reigns of Otho the Great, Otho the III, and Frederick the II, so
often strove to eradicate the Papal Superiority, and re-edifie her S. P. Q. R.
buried so many Ages ago, out of the Ruins of the City. The Head in the midst,
is the German Empire, begun A. C. 801, on Christmas Day, by Charles the Great,
which though ( v. 32.) it long did, and yet does put the Earth in great fear,
yet v. 33. must vanish in an instant, as did the Wings, and come to naught. The
German Empire thus destroyed, v. 35. The Head on the right side (the Kingdom of
Spain) must devour the Head on the left side, the Kingdom of France. Therefore
it is manifest that the Kingdom of France, though now it flourishes in what
Glory and Magnificence the Earth can afford, must ere long be humbled by the
Power of Spain, with many Discomfitures, and brought to doleful Straits, and
great Perplexities. I my self have observed how that Year (in which the Figures
of the Golden Number were equal to the Figures of the Year of Christ) has ever
proved Fatal to that Monarchy. It was so with them from 1570, to 1576: In all
which seven Years, the Guisian Faction made lamentable Havoc of the Church of
God, and the Kingdom: So shall it be in that Year in which the final Tragedy of
that Kingdom shall be acted, six Years after which France shall be no more. But
when that shall be, no sign of Europe shall remain, nor remembrance where the
Walls of Rome stood.

. 2. The Lion (which ver. 37, and Chap. 12. ver. 31. came roaring out of the
Wood, speaking to the Eagle, and rebuking her for her Wickedness) is the Wind
which the most High God has kept for Rome and her Wickedness, till the end,
even the Lion of the North (of which you shall hear a Prophecy anon, of the
true Merlin) which shall reprove the Roman Empire, and cast before her her
Spoils: he shall set her alive in Judgment, Rebuke and Correct her, and deliver
the rest of God's People from Affliction, which are preserved on his Borders,
and make them joyful to the Day of Judgment.

. 3. In the 13th Chapter, Esdras beholds a Vision of a Man rising out of the
Sea, and devouring the multitude of Fighters that came against him, neither
with Sword, Spear, nor any Instrument of War, but only with the Fire and Storm
that came out of his Mouth; which is Christ the Son of Man, who through a Sea
of Bloody Persecutions and Tribulations, propagated the Gospel over the Earth,
confounding and devouring the multitudinous Pagans and Idolaters, fighting
against Christians, by the invincible force of the Gospel. After a long time of
the obstinate wilfulness of the Western Jews, and fullness of the Gentiles, he
shall call to himself another peaceable Multitude, even the whole Nation of the
Jews, out of Armenia, Tartaria, and the Eastern India, whom God shall defend,
and convert to the Gospel, when he shall destroy all other Nations upon Earth.
These are called the Peaceable People, because after the Conversion of the
Jews, shall come that Ministerial Monarchy of the Church over the whole World,
that peaceable, and still time, when all the Nations of the Earth shall forget
Fighting one against another, Wars shall cease in all the World, and Swords and
Spears shall be beaten into Plow-Shares and Pruning Hooks.

. 4. When the seventh Angel blew his Trumpet, Luther began his Reformation;
then it was when the Multitude stood before the Lamb, and sung the new Song of
Moses, and that nevertheless is but the Vail of the Tabernacle opened in
Heaven, and a great Cloud and Smoke covered that Glory. But it must be 180
Years after, Moses in the Mount) shall be seen at Jerusalem, not in a
Tabernacle, but in that Temple which the Power of God shall make. Then shall,
lastly, the four Beasts, the Elders with all the Angels of Heaven, and all the
Creatures of Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and under the Earth, fall down before the
Throne, and give Glory, Honor, Blessing, and Praise, unto him that sits on
the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever; and the four Beasts shall say, Amen.

Thus far that Anonymus, in his brief Exposition on Esdras.

. 5. If this find kind Acceptance, a fuller and more particular Exposition of
this Prophecy will be Published, which is now Collected out of several learned
Commentators.

If any think it improbable that the middle Head, the Roman Empire, can be
determined and die in Torment, but not by Blood and Conquest, but as it were in
its Bed, as is here foretold, Esdras iv. Chap. 12. ver. 26. On the contrary,
nothing seems to me more probable, than that the German Princes to extricate
themselves from the Troubles the House of Austria have brought on them, first
by Civil Wars, and now by the Emulation that is risen betwixt it and France,
should after this Emperors Death, that they might not offend France, forbear
to choose a King of the Romans, and be thence-forth governed by a Vicar, or the
Diet, Parliament, or Common Council of the Empire. And it is also very
agreeable to Daniel's Prophecy, from whence we may expect, that there will be
daily more and more Breaches made of the Western Empire into smaller Divisions,
but no Coalition into one Head, or Empire, till it be thoroughly Reformed.

Our Author here, as some others, takes it for granted, as the Presumptions of
those Times he lived in gave him confidence to believe, that Spain was the
right Head, and would destroy France the left; whereas the contrary is in our
Times much more probable: To us the matter is not worth disputing, whether
shall first perish, since both must.

CHAP. II. Merlins Prophecy of the Lion of the North.
THe Northern Kingdoms shall be wasted by Reapers; The Southern Principalities
shall end in Dust. -- Cruel Wars shall be scattered by the Winds, their growth
and continuance by Bastards -- All these things shall hardly be accomplished
when a Prince of Royal Stock shall come forth crowned from the Northern Parts,
as to his own People unexpected, but desired by Foraiguers, who because he
shall bear a Rampant Lion, shall therefore be called a Lion. He shall not rest
till after he has called a Synod, and after dissolved it by Threats he shall
advance his Conquering Arms against his Enemies; and by woeful Success, shall
harrass the Territories of Neighbor Princes. He shall exceed Alexander the
Great in Valor, and Cyrus in Success. He shall cross the Seas, and be saluted
Emperor by many Kings; a certain ancient City shall he lay even with the
Ground. In the interim, a warlike powerful Prince from the East shall provoke
him to Battle, against whom the Lion shall march with all his Forces, and
pitching his Camp on this side Euphrates, shall expect him.

. 7. If the Prince shall come over the River, the Lion shall be overcome, but
he shall pass his Army over the River, and give his Enemy a bloody Defeat, and
be Master of all the East. Whilst these things are in Action, diverse Petty
Kings from India, shall break into Syria with mighty Armies, and provided for
Battle, shall wait for the Lion about the Valley of Jehosaphat, where they
shall by him be wholly cut off. Not long after shall the Lion himself decease,
after that with eminent Piety he shall have established the Kingdom of the
Fugitives, ( i. e. Perhaps banished Jews.)

. 8. There was living in King Lucius's days, Merlin the first, a Scot, he is
the true Merlin; if any Prophecies of his could be found, great Credit were to
be given to them. He was a great Friend of King Lucius, and his daily
Companion. Of his there is but one Prophecy extant, which is found in that
Ancient Prophecy of Ninius of Bangor, (who yet lives in MS.) King Lucius, the
first Christian King, but yet unconverted from Paganism, -- to him Merlin
Prophesied, That within less than a Sequi-decumane period of Time (1500 Years)
the Eagle's Head should be cloven in two, one part whereof Agar [ i. the
Agarens, the Turks,] shall burn with Fire, and Japhet [the Northern Nations,
the Isles of the Gentiles] the other, after the grand Revolution of Days, etc.
See The Future History of Europe, Page 49. where you have also the rest of
Merlin's Prophecy at length. Future History of Europe, Page 34.

. 9. Jerome Savanarola was Burnt at Florence, An. Dom. 1498, a Martyr, against
the Corruptions of the Roman Church. He prophesied of Luther's Reformation; of
the Persecutions of the Valtoline, Piedmont, Merindol and Chabriers, and other
places in France; and of the Troubles of the Duke of Mirandula, and of Pope
Julio the II. All which most evidently came to pass. The wise Statesman and
Historian, Philip Comines, has in his Commentaries recorded him for an Holy
Man, and a Prophet.

His Prophecies are extant in the excellent Works of Francis Mirandula. He
prophesied, That being the French King had neglected the Reformation of Italy,
and the Court of Rome, to which that holy Man exhorted him, he should lose all
he had Conquered, but should return in safety, etc. And that in the last Times,
Jews, Turks, and Moors, should be Converted unto Christ; that a Man like Cyrus,
with a numerous Army of true Professors, should come over the Alps and destroy
Rome, and ruinate all the Kingdoms and States of Italy. That grievous Wars,
Blood-sheddings, and Massacres, should arise in the World by a Northern King,
for an happy Reformation, [and consequently to fall upon them who oppose it,]
who should carry the Gospel out of Europe, into a vast and unknown World in the
end of Time. [The English Plantations and Discoveries in the East and West,
give light to this Prophecy, and hopes they may fulfill it.]

. 10. The tenth Figure in a Collection of Prophetic Emblems, (found in some
German Libraries) of about 400 Years standing, Published above 100 Years since,
represents an Unicorn ramping up against a Pope clad in all his Pontifical
Robes, and pushing off from his Head his Triple Crown with the end of his Horn,
and a Friar sitting by upon his Knees.

On this the Publisher thus Discants. Since the Pope is Mighty, needs must
there come one more Puissant, and Mightier than he, that shall lift him out of
his Nest and overcome him; and so shall the Hypocritical Devotions and Devices
of his saveling Priests and Jesuits, not be able to support him.

It is well known, that the Unicorn is the Supporter of Great Britain's Arms,
and that it is peculiar to his Majesty's Family, and that they brought it out
of the North with them.

This Collection was Translated out of a German Author in Edward the 6ths time,
and then Published by Walter Linn, whose Admonition to his Reader in those
ticklish Times, as seasonable for ours, See below at the end of this Book.

. 11. Michael Sandivogius, that most excellent profound Philosopher and adept
Chemist, is by some thought to be still alive, and ready to assist with endless
Treasures, this Northern Monarch, when he shall declare himself, and enter on
his Work; he in his Treatise of Sulphur, Printed at Colon, 1616, now commonly
sold in Shops, has these words of the New Northern Monarchy here inserted.

. 13. Jam illa tempora adveniunt, in quibus aroana multa Naturae revelabuntur.

Jam illa Monarchia quarta Borealis incipere habet. Jam tempora appropinquant,
matter scientiarum veniet; majora elucidabuntur quam in his tribus praeteritis
Monarchiis factum est, quoniam hanc Monarchiam (ut veteres divinarunt)
plantabit Deus per unum ex Principibus omnibus virtutibus ditatum, quem
fortasse nobis jam tempora produxerunt: Habemus enim in hac part Boreali
Principem sapientissimum ac bellicofissimum, quem nullus Monarcharum victoriis
superat, humanitate ac pietate nullus excellit. -- Monarchias Philosophi non
secundum potentiores, sed secundum cardines Mundi, numerant, Imprimis
Orientalem; postea Meridionalem, jam vero Occidentalem habent, and ultimam
Septentrionalem in hac part Boreali expectant. In hac Septentrienali
attractive polari Monarchia, Miserecordia and Verit as obviabunt sibi, Pax and
Justitia osculabuntur se, Veritas de Terra orietur, and Justitia de Coelo
prospiciet, unum Ovile and unus Pastor: Scientiae multae sine invidia; Quod and
ego cum desiderio expecto.

. 12. Now those Times are coming, in which many secrets of Nature shall be
revealed.

Now that fourth Monarchy of the North is about to begin. Now the time is at
hand, the Mother of Sciences will come; greater things shall be discovered than
have been in these three last Monarchies. Because God will plant this Monarchy
(as the Ancients have foretold) by a Prince enriched with all manner of
Virtues, whom happily Time has already brought forth. For we have in this
Northern part a most Wise and Warlike Prince, whom no Monarch does go beyond in
Victories, or excel in Humanity and Piety. This Northern Monarchy God the
Creator of Nature, and all things, will without doubt bring to light greater
secrets in Nature, than in those Times in which Tyrant and Pagan Princes
reigned. But the Philosophers reckon these Monarchies not according to the
number of the more Powerful, but according to the Cardinal, or principal Points
or Quarters of the World. First, The Eastern, after the Southern, now we have
the Western, and expect the last of the North in this Northern Climate. But of
these farther in my Book of Harmony. In this Northern Monarchy, where the Polar
attraction is, Mercy and Truth (as the Psalmist speaks) shall meet together,
Peace and Justice shall kiss each other; Truth shall rise out of the Earth, and
Justice shall look down from Heaven. There shall be one Sheepfold, and one
Shepherd. There shall then be many Arts without Envy; which I also do earnestly
desire and expect. Do thou also, Courteous Reader, call upon, love, and fear
God, read over my Writings diligently, and thou may foretell to thy self good
things. And if thou shall through the favor of God and help of Nature (whom
thou must imitate) arrive to the desired Haven of this Monarchy; then thou
shall see, and say, that all things that I have said to thee are good and true.
So far Sandivogius.

CHAP. III. A Nameless Author of The Future History of Europe, Printed 1650.
Page 9. Sect. IV.
. 14. THe design of this Author in this his Book, appears by many Passages
therein (which I have elsewhere transcribed) to be, to persuade the Parliament
to return to their Obedience to the King and Church. In the place forequoted,
declaring the effects of the Blazing Comet, An. 1618. he says, That as it
appeared 37, or 38 Days, so it showed that for the space of 37, or 38 Years,
from 1618 to 1656. First, Germany, Livonia, Swedland, with other Northern parts
of Europe, then Scotland, England, and Ireland, should feel the terrible
effects thereof in War, etc. Then he proceeds in these words: This Comet was
strengthened by a fearful Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, An. 1616. July 18.
the effects of both which not confined to Germany, etc. were to end in the
Judgments of God upon Europe, for neglecting the Overthrow of Antichrist, Ruin
of Rome, and Annihilation of the Sodomitical Order of the society of Jesus, and
in the Extirpation of all Kingdoms, and free Estates of Papists, adhering to
them, to make way for the Lion of the North to erect his Fifth, [our Fourth]
Monarchy in the Ashes of Germany, wherein shall be established the eternal
Felicity of the Church, by the Conversion of the Jews, and Fullness of the
Gentiles. This he calls in the same Page, the Ministerial, not Personal Reign
of Christ on Earth.

. 15. Page 10. Out of Buxtorfs Letter to Mr. Shirley, Fellow of Trinity
College, dated May 3. 1624. he brings in these words of Baudensis, concerning
the same Comet and Conjunction, according to the Opinion of the Northern
Astrologers.

Behold thou then a Prophecy (if not Apostolical) far beyond Astrological, if I
mistake not. God has arisen, and drawn out his Sword; there shall happen in
these our European Regions, the Slaughter of People, Funerals of Kings,
Subversions of Commonwealths, Mutations of Monarchies, Massacres of Princes,
and Illustrious Commanders, violent proud Councils, Treasons, Rebellions; and
in Northern parts of Europe, War, Sickness, Pestilence. -- Princes cast out of
their Dominions, Fathers banished, Children after a long time restored. -- This
Comet also threatens the terrible Ruin of Rome, and Burnings in all the Cities
of Europe. The Papistical Clergy, and especially the Cardinals, shall be cast
down from their Dignities; the Jesuits shall be every where drawn out to Death;
neither shall the French nor Spaniards have Courage to save their Necks from
the Halters. Futhermore, we discern a Kingdom to arise in the Holy Land, of its
most ancient Inhabitants, which to Christians shall be a Miracle, and to the
World a Terror. And these shall succeed in the Revolution into a new Empire,
under which shall be administered Universal Gladness, Joy, and Delight, to
Mankind (the Wicked being every where taken away). All these things shall be
effected by a certain Northern King, who shall miraculously establish Peace,
Religion, and Security, throughout the whole World. So far Buxtorf, in his
Letter from Baudensis and the Northern Astrologers.

. 16. The same Anonymous, page 12, 13. Paul Grebner of Misnia, was more than an
Inquisitor into the effects of Stars; being questionless endued from above with
a Prophetic Spirit. -- He plainly affirms, that as England was ever a Monarchy
within it self, since it was discovered by the Romans, so shall it in like
manner continue and remain even then, when all other Kingdoms and States in
Europe are swallowed up of the Fourth Monarchy of the Lion of the North. -- And
says, that Grebner never speaks of England in all his famous Manuscripts, but
as the most Warlike and Potent Kingdom of Europe, Page 25. He says ( i.
Baudensis from his Uncle Grebner, as it seems) that the Eclipses happening two
Years before or after 1660, portend the Mutations of all the several States of
Austria, Silesia, Hungary, Holland, France, and Portugal, and that the
Revolution of Times is come, wherein they must give place to the Lion of the
North, whose Scepter shall bruise their Power to nothing, and his Gauntlet lay
their Forces prostrate at his Feet.

. 17. Note well. If all other Kingdoms be swallowed up by this Northern Lion,
save England only, neither France nor Holland being excepted, then without
doubt the English Monarchy will be too much concerned, and too nearly to stand
still, and consequently must be either the Head, or some Confederate Limb of
this Lion at least; and that will yet more clearly appear by the mournful Ditty
(as he calls it) which he puts into Europe's Mouth to sing at that time, which
by its Character seems to be a Fragment of the ancient Sibyline Oracles, for he
tells not whence he or his Author had it.

. 18. Heu mala Progenies! Fatis servata nefandis
Gens, nefandarum Domitrix altrixque ferarum,
Quid fueras, quid sisque vide: Tua prima propago
Bella gerit, Sobolemque petit lues atra secundam.
At Leo terribilis, Borealibus editus oris,
Flammi feram ex * Orco and pelagi plangentibus undis
Educens aciem, pecudes, urbesque, virosque
Sternet, and antiquis Solemn Lunamque movebit
Sedibus; ille etiam patrio jure infima summa
Reddet, and occasum sub Legis mittet inermem.
Thus Englished.
. 19. Alas! ill race, to dismal Fates reserved,
By whom dire Beasts are tamed and preserved,
See what thou were and art: Thy first issue
Inclines to War, Plague does the next subdue.
Thus Sibyl, or what ever other Author Penned this Prophecy, thus far does very
mystically and yet learnedly and aptly depaint to us the City and Empire of
Rome in her Heathen estate, taming and nourishing all sorts of wild Beasts to
be brought forth in their Theaters for their Sport; and above any other Nation
addicted to, and flourishing in Wars, but in her latter declining and
degenerated Christian Estate, subject unto the Pestilential Chair of the Papacy.

But a fierce Lion sprung from the Northern Shore,
Shall bring from deepest * Hell, and Waves that roar,
A blazing Army, he shall Men ore-run,
Cities and Cattle, yea, the Moon and Sun
Remove shall he; and Father like the least,
Make Highest, and give Laws to the weak West.
The word Orcus *, translated Hell, here is properly to be understood of Great
Britain, supposed by the Ancients to be the Fortunate Islands, in whose most
Northern parts Hell was thought to be, as in the most Southern the ever-green
Elizian Fields. And there to those names Thule Scotia Orcades, do manifestly
alude, as the Learned know. Thule in the Phaenecian Tongue, as Scotos in the
Greek, signify Night and Obscurity. See our Historians, Camden, Ailef, etc.

. 20. Thus far our said Anonymus, out of Grebner and Baudensis his Nephew. I
will next transcribe hither Grebner's own words, out of 72, and 73 Banners, and
translate them, only omitting for brevity sake, in the first: Quae animus
meminisse horret. The Predictions of our late Confusions known to be too truly
described by him, and published by others. Banner 72. Per id tempus Rex quidam
Borcalis nomine Carolus, etc. post hunc eleget nullum. Interea unus e stirpe
Caroli in littore Regni Pattis sui cum Gallicis, Suevicis, Danicis,
Hollandicis, Burgundicis, and Germanicis auxilliis stabit, omnes inimicos suos
cruentissimo prelio superabit, and postea Regnum suum felicissime administrabit
eritque Carolo Magno Major. In English: About that time, a certain Northern
King shall marry Mary, etc. after him they Elect none: But in the mean time,
one of Charls's Line shall stand, and with Auxiliary French, Swedish, Danish,
Hollandian, Burgundian, German Forces shall fight a most cruel Battle at the
Shore of his Father's Kingdom, vanquish all his Enemies, and afterward most
happily Govern his Kingdom, and shall be greater than Charles the Great.

. 21. Banner 73. Europae labes and imbecillitas singulorum ejusdem Regnorum
sedem mirabiliter struet quintae Monarchiae quae sub tempus exitii Romani
Imperii ad terrorem totius Mundi ex ruinis Germaniae refulgebit. Haec triennii
spacio caetera Europae Regna aut vi perdomitabit, aut belli metu ad societatem
propellet, quo universalem Ligam and unionem omnium Protestantium efficiet,
etc. In English: The Corruption of Europe, and the Weakness of her several
Kingdoms, shall strangely make way for the Fifth (or Fourth) Monarchy; which
about the time of the fall of the Roman Empire, shall to the Terror of the
whole World, appear and shine out gloriously from the Ruins of Germany. This
shall within three Years, subdue by force the rest of the Kingdoms of Europe,
or for fear of War, shall force them to League with it; whereby it shall bring
all the Protestants into an universal Union and Confederacy, etc. By this
latter Passage, it appears that the great and bloody Victory the Lion of the
North shall attain, by the assistance of French, Swedish, Danish, Hollandian,
Burgundian, German Forces, must be understood to be obtained by the Protestants
of those Parts: And that if he find any to oppose and fight with him in his own
Kingdoms, they can be none but Papists.

. 22. To Grebner and his Nephew Baudensis, I will add one or two Astrological
Testimonies more, which perhaps will be of no less weight, and give greater
satisfaction to our Reader.

The first is Magel, as I find his Manuscript quoted by my Anonymus, Page 55.
in these words. Magel in his Fifth ( i. or Fourth) Monarchy, is most plain.
This Star (says he, which this Year 1572, appeared upon Casiopaea's Chair)
being placed above the whole Elementary Region, did signify the Revolution and
Dominion of a new Empire. Which effects shall not yet be seen in this our Age;
yet are they reserved, for a certain Nation as yet invisible, the Beams of
whose Greatness shall be extended through the whole Verge of Heaven and Earth.

. 23. The Astrologer writes only of that Star which was seen at that time when
he wrote this Manuscript, but William Johnson, a Scholar of the Illustrious
Astronomer, Ticho Brahe, in his lesser Globes dedicated to Maurice Prince of
Nassaw, tells us of this in Casiopaea, and another in the Swans breast.

Of this new Star in Casiopaea, he speaks thus:

Stella nobilis quae insolito prae aliis fulgore, Anno. 1572. per annum and
trientem Circa Casiopaea sedem fuit conspicua. A noble Star, Anno. 1572. for a
whole Year and four Months, was with unusual brightness, conspicuous in the
Chair of Casiopaea.

. 24. Upon that in the Swans Breast, he has these words: Novam illam Stellam
(quae Anno. 1600. primum in pectore Cygni apparuit atque etiamum immota manet)
ex diligenti nostra ad caudae lyrae lucidae observationem Longit. 16.15.
Latitud. Boreal. 55.30. habere comperimus.

I observed (says he) that new Star (which first appeared in the Breast of the
Swan, in the Year 1600, and abides there unmoved unto this day) this Year 1603,
and found its Latitude to be 16.15. Northern Latitude 55.30.

CHAP. IV. The Confession of the Rosy Cross, etc.
. 25. WHoever he was that wrote the Fame and Confession of the Society of the
Rosy Cross, he in the 47th Page of the English Translation, professes to have
the same notion of these Stars, with Magel the Astrologer fore-quoted, and
mentions a third in Serpentarius, over and above the two former. His words
there are these, The Lord sent before certain Messengers, which should testify
his Will, to wit, some new Stars which do appear, and are seen in the Firmament
in Serpentarius and Cygnus, which signify and give themselves to be known to
every one as powerful signacula of great and weighty Matters. [So here are
three Heavenly Messengers, or Witnesses.]

. 26. In the same Book, Page 17. They tell you what those great and and weighty
Matters are, namely, The Lion of the North, and his Monarchy, that is our
Fourth Monarchy, in these Words? They tell you Europe is with Child, and shall
bring forth a strong Child (the Lion of the North) who shall need a great
God-Father's Gift; and there they also express what that Gift is, and promise
it him in these words. -- We do promise more Gold, than both the Indies bring,
etc.

Now if you would know what is the Name of the Godfather, and consequently of
the God-Son, on whom this great Gift will be bestowed, you may learn there also
in that Book, that his Name, which is also the Seal of the said Society, is C.
R. and that all the aforesaid Treasure was laid up by C. R. the Father of the
Rosy Crucian Society, for his God-Son G. R. the Lion of the North.

. 27. To these I will join Dr. John Bainbridg, Astronomy Professor in the
University of Oxon, who concurs in his Opinion with these learned Men, in his
Astronomical Description of the Comet 1618, London 1619. Moral Prognostic. Page
30, 31. he writes thus.

-- Novit Deus omnia Solus,
Quae sunt, quaefuerint, quae mox ventura trahuntur.
God only knows, and none but He,
What is, what was, and what shall be.
. 28. Yet to descend lower than Universalities: That blessed Star, which
conducted the Magi to Christ's poor, but sacred Nursery (of whose Incarnation
and Happiness to Mankind, that Star was an Heavenly Harbinger) does enforce me
often to think, that these many new Stars and Comets, which have been more this
last Century of the World, than in many Ages before, did amongst other things,
signify that glorious Light of the Gospel, which has lately illuminated the
whole World.

About the Preaching of Luther, were at least five Comets in ten Years (so the
Doctor proceeds) after which follows the happy departure of Germany and
England, and many other Northern Parts, from the Spiritual Babylon.

This new Comet does give us hope, that the rest of Christendom before long
will follow, and so at length shall be verified the Prophecy of Sibyl, upon
occasion of these new Stars.

(...). Rome shall become again a Forlorn, or Desert Village, or Sheepcoat.

Before I proceed farther with our Doctors Text, I will insert what I find to
this purpose, Translated by my Lord Napier, in his Discovery of the Revelation,
Page 374. out of the 8th Book of the Sibyline Oracles.

Then ends the World, then comes the latter Light,
Then God shall come to Judge his Folk aright:
But first shall fall on Rome by resistance,
Of God's fierce Wrath, the direful Vengeance.
A woeful Life, a Bloody Time shall be,
Oh People rude! Oh Land of Cruelty!
Thou little lookst, nor do regard aright,
How poor and bear thou first came in the Light,
That to the like again thou should return,
And last before a dreadful Judge shall Mourn.
So Napier. I return to my learned Doctor.
. 29. Did not our Fathers find (says he) the Comet in 1588. to be a sign of
much Happiness to the Persecuted Protestants in England and Germany? Yea, did
not that new star in Casiopaea, 1572, and that remarkable Comet 1577, plainly
from Heaven remonstrate, That howsoever the Evangelical Churches of France, [by
the Massacres there] and the Low Countries [by Fire, Sword, and Halter] must be
for a time grievously afflicted, yet maugre Satan, and all his Hellish Furies,
they should at length Flourish and Triumph over all their cruel Adversaries.
Besides, these Regions of Europe, a blessed Light has in this Age shined to
another World; which did long sit in most fearful Darkness: I mean the East and
west Indies. I am verily persuaded, that the new Star which appeared so long
from September 1604, till January 1606 (about two Years and four Months) in the
foot of Serpentarius, having coincidence with the great Conjunction of the
three superior Planets, and that other so many Years in Cygnus, does promise
being with this present Comet 1618, (conformed) a more clear illustration of
those remote Regions, with the resplendent Light of Salvation.

And a little farther he says, -- These Stars give us hope, that his other
gracious Promise (of the Calling of the Jews, he means, as appears in his
Margent) shall be shortly accomplished. And Jerusalem be trodden down by the
Gentiles, till the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Which certainly (says
the Doctor) shall precede the second Coming of our Blessed Savior; forerunner
whereof, he (Christ) says, shall be signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

To draw nearer Home (continues our Doctor) not by the Rules of Vulgar
Astrology, whose Precepts I esteem no better than (...), Fantastic Dreams,
but directed by these Caelestial Hierogliphicks, in which I may say as the Poet
long ago:

Sapientibus per ambages fata Eloqui,
Fatuis Magistrum prorsus esse inultilem.
The Fates by winding Riddles, Wise Men teach,
In vain to Fools, though never so plain you Preach.
Thus far Dr. Bambridg, who wrote this Treatise at London, and dated it
December ult. 16.8.

. 30. Before I had read these Passages in Dr. Bainbridg (in whose phrase, you
see what the temper of these Times of King James's Reign were) I thought fit to
make some Observations on Magel's words, concerning the Star seen in
Cusiopaea's Chair only, which since I thought better to set down here together,
with what I think remarkable on the other two, and his Comment on them, and the
Ch^^ets.

(...) Observe. 1. First then, when he contrary to all Prognosticators, and
(...) the Event which followed upon the Comet of the Year 1618, predict (...)
but good to be expected from Comets and new Stars, and particularly good
success unto the Gospel, and relief unto the true Professors thereof: It must
here be diligently noted, That the Affairs of the World, and its Kingdoms,
stand on quite different Foundations, and are acted and governed by quite
different Rules and Principles from those of the Kingdom of Christ and the
Gospel. It must not therefore seem Contradictory, if from the same Stars great
Confusions, Distractions, and Destruction be signified to the Kingdoms of the
World, or some of them, and yet quite contrary Settlement, Order, and increase
of Power to the Gospel, the Kingdom of Christ in the same Confusions from the
same Stars; for the things of this World being founded on the fickle Purposes,
Designs, and Counsels of inconstant and mortal Men, all Shakings and
Confusions, do disorder and confound them; but the things of God and true
Religion, depending on more solid Principles, the general Good of Mankind, and
the Glory and Counsel of God, they found Settlement and Establishment by God's
Providence and Blessing, in the most unsettled Times; like those Trees that
gather faster Rooting by stormy Winds.

. 32. Observe. 2. Whatever may be condluded of Astrological Rules, this seems by
our Experience in the effects of the aforesaid Comet to be most certain, that
the time and place of the appearance and motion of Comets, show the place and
time of their expected effects; these new Stars therefore as they are Northern,
must have signification of some Northern Monarchy.

. 33. Observe. 3. It seems at least to Heathens and Unbelievers, who by
Astrology have made a Language of the Stars to themselves, according to which
they guess at, or believe they understand Affairs to come; God in Mercy, or
Judgment, wonderfully condescends to give such Men warnings according to their
Capacities, who heed not his Word, nor the Prophecies of holy Men, which would
therefore be sent in vain unto them. These Warnings therefore he sends them
sometimes by extraordinary Stars, as at Christ's Birth, to the Wise Men of the
East; sometimes by extraordinary Inspirations, as by Balaam; sometimes by
Visions, as to Balaam; sometimes by Astrologers, as in this case of these new
Stars. But here, as I observed above, if Astrologers would conclude by those
they call Malevolent Aspects, etc. that the Affairs of Good, Holy, and Heroic
Princes would be Unsuccessful, they should mightily mistake. For in their
Concerns, in whom God, his Glory and Kingdom is concerned, that is Infallible:

Astra regunt Homines, sed regit Astra Deus.
The Stars some Men command,
But Stars are in God's Hand.
. 34. Observe. 4. From these Considerations, I hope, I may be partly authorized
to conclude, that the Stars in Cassiopaea's Chair, and others forementioned,
so observed by the great Tycho Brahe, and other Astronomers his Scholars, and
Contemporaries and Followers, and by those our Northern Wise Men, so
interpreted as above, may without any great Absurdity, be said to hold some
Analogy to that Star, which appeared to the Wise Men of the East at the time of
our Savior's Birth. That the significator of his Life on Earth was moveable,
these the Precursors of his Reign fixed, because they were to signify that
Kingdom to be Born, Risen again, or Revived in the World, and particularly
according to their Situation in Heaven in these Northern parts of the World,
about the Year 1572, or 1600, which must prevail over the whole World, and
abide till the end of it.

. 35. Observe. 5. I farther commend to Observation, from our learned Doctor and
Astronomer's Discourse: That if Comets and new Stars do so certainly and
precisely operate according to their Place, Appearance, Time and Motion, and
the latter cooperate as more particular causes with the Northern fixed Stars,
as more general causes than the late frequent Comets, and the Commotions they
signify to those that understand, give credit to them, and are under their
Dominion, and not exempt by some special Providence, do also strongly
cooperate to the raising or preparing Matter for the Fourth Monarchy which we
expect, and not the petty designs of the private Ambition of any Prince, King,
or French, or other, how formidable soever they may seem at present, whatsoever
their Confederacy be, or whoever combine with them. Nor need any Christian's
Heart fail because of them, their Leagues, or Unions, or whatever Confusions we
see, feel, or fear to be brought by them, for all these little or greater
Commotions, Shakings, or Concussions of ill founded Powers and Governments,
make way only for the grand Revolution, by which those Things which are well
founded and settled by Divine Decree and Providence, to work together for his
Glory in the common good of Mankind, and Advancement of Christ's Kingdom to
that End, shall be brought about, perfected, settled, and unmoveably
Established. And this, even in their Astrological way, those who give credit
thereto, must be forced to allow, or admit me to conclude, because the
superior new Stars fixed and of longer continuance, more mighty and universal
operation, or signification for Good, must needs prevail over, overruled, and
wear out, and so survive and make use of the Operations of the lesser,
mischievous, weaker, more restrained, and less durable Effects and
Significations: Now such are the Effects, or Significations, according as our
learned Astrologers tell us of the lesser Modern, and less durable Appearances,
Comets, etc. compared with the said new Stars in Cassiopaea, Cygnus, and
Serpentarius, Attendants on this new Monarchy; or, as Postellus fains to call
it, Christ's second Birth, or new Birth of the World, or Renovation and new
Edition of the Gospel. And it is very probable, that he gave the Reformation
that name of Christ's second Birth, and return into the World, in contemplation
of that new Star which was by our Northern Magi, so received and interpreted,
as discovering the Fourth Monarch, and the place of his Birth, to those that
understand Heaven's Language.

. 36. Observe. 6. Seeing then we may conclude, that whatever Commotions and
Revolutions happen in the Christian World, make for the interest of the Fourth
Monarchy, how contrary soever they may for the present appear to it and its
designs; So as that our Doctor tells us upon his Observation, that Comets
themselves, as in Luther's time, and since, are Monitors of Ecclesiastical
Changes, and those for the better, to the greater Liberty and Freedom of
Protestant Churches; and others tell us, they make way for the Fourth Monarchy.
I will therefore here adventure farther, to discover what I have observed,
whereby it may better appear what Church, and what Monarchy was signified and
indicated by these new Stars, to whose Interests all these Commotions must
finally cooperate. And first, as to the Church and Reformation pointed out by
that Star in Cassiopaea's Chair, it is manifest, that it can be no other than
that of the Reformed Protestant of the Church of England, and those that are
protected under it, and subscribe to its Confession; and the Monarchy, as
manifestly appears, to be the British, of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
united in the Person of King James in one Monarch, to which France and the
other Reformed Churches there, as of right they ought, so will in due time be
united; the Transition being much more Natural and Facile from the French to
the English Religion and Liberty, than from the British to the French Dominion.
For upon view of our Church History, I find that the Articles of the Church of
England, being the common Confession of the Reformed Protestants, to which with
very few grains of Allowance, as well Calvinists as Lutherans, may without
scruple indifferently subscribe, were formed in the Convocation at London 1563,
in which the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Alexander Nowel, Dean of Paul's, was
Prolocutor; and the same were in the Year 1571, by Sovereign Authority enacted
and established to be the public Confession of the English Church, in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

. 37. And about the same time a Catechism, agreeable to the same Articles, was
Published, and by Authority enjoined to be taught in Schools, with this Title,
Catechismus brevis Christianae disciplinae summam continens, omnibus
Ludimagistris Authoritate R^^ia commendatus.

Of the Articles, a late Church Historian has these words: The English and
Latin Articles of the Church of England, set forth in Print in the Year of
Christ 1571, when they were first Ratified by Act of Parliament, whose being as
obligatory, bears not date nine Years before from their composition in
Convocation, but hence from their Confirmation in Parliament. So that there was
hardly a Years difference betwixt the publication of the Articles of the
Reformation of the English Church to the World, and the appearance of that Star
in the Chair of Cassiopaea, giving the whole World warning, and the Wise Men
aim to look our for some second glorious discovery of the Gospel.

. 38. And as for the Monarchy of Great Britain, that was yet more Illustrated
by the appearing of two new Stars, the one two or three Years before, and the
other a Year or two after the Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, in
the Person of King James. That which was the Precursor and Harbinger (as it
were) of this Northern Monarchy, was the forementioned Star in the Breast of
the Swan 1600; and that which followed and attended on it, was the Star in the
foot of Ophinchus, in the Year 1604. Nor can I see why any should condemn him
of Presumption, who should from the Analogy of the Star in the East, directing
the Wise Men of those parts to the King of the Jews, our Savior, born about
that time, argue that the use of these may probably be, partly to show to the
Wise of our Times and Parts, when and where the true Reformation and Reforming
Monarchy must rise. For as the Star in the Chair of Cassiopaea, one of the most
glorious in the Heavens, (generally speaking) and amongst the most Glorious,
those of the North, more especially, and the most conspicuous part of that
Constellation; her Chair it self most resplendent, was most proper to signify
the second Edition (as I may say) or new Birth of the Gospel, or second Birth
of Christ, as Postellus would have it; brought into the World by a Virgin
Queen, about the time of that Stars appearance, and then spread newly all over
Europe, as it had been conceived by her Authority some nine Years before. So in
like manner the Star in the Breast of the Swan, and that other in the foot of
Serpentarius, attending at like distance on the Birth of our British Monarchy,
are as apposite to demonstrate it to our Northern Wise Men, that of the Swans
Breast, its time and place, and that in Serpentarius foot, its principal design
and work, namely, the ruin of that Serpentine Brood, which are the present
support and foot of the Roman Court, their Home and Harbor; and Hope, Keeper,
Holder up, and Maintainer of the Serpent and his Kingdom, which he pretends
unto in Heaven, the Temple and Church of God. I say again, That as the Star in
Cassiopaea's Chair, An. 1572, showed where, when, and by whom the second
Edition of the Gospel, or second Birth of Christ's Kingdom was wrought, namely,
here in this Island, by a Virgin Queen; who in the Year 1571, Enacted the true
Reformed Christian Faith. So the Star in the Swans Breast 1600, and
Serpentarius foot 1604, shows what Kingdom and Family must extinguish by the
luster of that Reformation, the Superstitions and Idolatries of Rome, and give
that blow with a Stone, cut out without Hands from the Mountain, on the feet of
the last Supporter of Satan's Kingdom, the Roman Monarchy; being also the
basest and worst constituted of incoherent Iron and Clay, and grind it to Dust,
and disperse the Remnants of it to all the Winds, as Daniel prophesies.

. 39. There being the same reason for us to look out for some new Kingdom in
these Northern parts, to which these Stars were perpendicular, as there was for
those Wise Men in the East, to look for a King born in Judea, by the Star they
saw in the East. Nor does the moveableness of that, and fixedness of these,
make as to our purpose any considerable difference; for it was necessary that
those Eastern Magi, who sought one particular Person, should be guided by a
Star so moveable, that its perpendicular Rays might point out Bethlehem, and
our Blessed Savior's Person to them, that they might bring to him their Gold
and other Treasures: But to discover to our Wise Men in the North, the Kingdom
to which the Honor is reserved in this last and worst Age, to reform the
Religion and Manners of the whole World according to Christ's Rule, both for
Spirituals and Civils, it sufficed that such new Stars did appear unto them
fixed in the Starry Orb, as by their motion therewith might describe a Circle,
wherein at the time of their appearance, that Reformation and Kingdom did first
rise and appear. Now if we enquire what Reformation did appear in the World,
about the time of the appearance of the Star in Cassiopaea's Chair near the
Circle its direct Rays did describe upon the Globe on the Earth, we shall find
that of Queen Elizabeth, and no other. And again, if we seek what Kingdom did
arise about that time the Star first appeared in the Swans Neck, within the
Northern Circle described by its perpendicular Beams, we shall find no other
than the Monarchy of Great Britain, then founded by King James, and transmitted
from him to our present Sovereign Charles the II, the first of English Birth,
who swayed the Scepter. Allowing what those ancient Prophecies here subscribed:

. 40. Bruti Posteritas Albanis associata,
Anglica Regna premet peste, labor, nece
Consurgent Britones Albanae Gentis amici,
Antiquum nomen Insula tota feret,
Ut profert Aquila veteri de Turre loquuta,
Gum Scotis, Britones Regna Paterna gerent.
Long time the British and the Scottish Race,
The English Realm with War, Plague, Toil, deface,
Till a Friend rise to Scots of British Stem,
Then British Scots, their Father's Diadem
Resume, and all the Isles its ancient Name.
Thus did the Eagle from the old Tower proclaim.
. 41. And to cherish our hopes, the Motto's of this Monarchy, and its
Impressures fixed on its Coin, and elsewhere, do happily conspire: Namely, That
Motto of the first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great, our Countryman,
In hoc Signo vinces; referred by the Cross to Christ's Death. And that other of
like import, Duce and Auspice Christo.

That Kingdom prosper, and subdue all must,
Whose Standard Christ's Cross is, Christ guide and trust.
. 42. A King of British Blood, in Cradle Crowned,
With Lion marked, shall join all British Ground.
So Sir William Maurice of North Wales repeated in English, Merlin's Prophecy
of 600 Years standing.

CHAP. V. Thomas Pugh, British Prophecies out of Maxwel 's Prophecies, Sect.
16. Fol. 84. etc.
. 43. ACcording to the Confession of the Italian Jesuit Hieronimus Platus, in
the 2d Book of the Religious Life, and 30th Chapter, England has been more
fertile of Converters of Countries and Nations to the Christian Faith, than any
other Land whatsoever else: So is it not unlikely, but that God will have the
same Country to be more fertile of many Reformers, and other corrupt Churches,
especially that of Rome, than any other Land whatsoever; and to reclaim Rome
and her Daughters from their Abuses and Corruption, and to restore unto them
their Primitive Purity and Integrity, such as it was in the days of Constantine
the Great, Born in Great Britain.

. 44. So Nostradamus predicts, That Rome shall be ruled by the Britanish Head.
In his first Century he says, that the new King that joins the lower and
Northern Countries of Europe, shall be the Instrument of loss to the Church of
Rome. And that the Bishop of Rome, together with his Clergy, except they show
themselves willing to be reformed, shall be made to spit Blood, when the Rose
shall flourish.

He promises in his 5th Century, that of the Trojan Blood, shall spring a
Prince of a doughty Dutch Heart; who shall attain to so high a Degree, that he
shall chase far away the Arabic, or Mohammedan multitudes, and likewise return
to the Church her ancient Eminency and Sincerity.

. 45. Out of the Library of St. Victor, cited by the Abbot of Cluny, it is said,
Abbot Joakim said, That the Red Rose should send forth the sweet Water, that
shall purify and cleanse the Church from her Corruption.

Paracelsus. Amongst the Roses shall spring up one, who shall change the Sandy
Foundation into a Rock.

. 46. Mr. George Maxwel, from Sir George Norroy, King at Arms,

Jessae Rosa sanguis Bruti,
Portat crucem Jesu Christi.
Christ's Cross displayed in England's Standard, shows
From British Blood must spring the Jessean Rose.
. 47. It seems, that from the Rose of England shall proceed or spring the
Reformation, or Purgation of the Church of Rome. Likewise the same City and
Empire received from the same Country, the first Authorized Profession of the
Christian Faith, by the blessed means of Constantine the Great, a Britain born
at York.

Grebner. The Lion having the Rose and Lillies in his Arms, shall utterly
destroy the Pope, so that there shall be none at that time.

. 48. Brithwald, Bishop of Winchester, in the Confessor's time saw in a Vision,
NB. That the Kingdom of the English is the Kingdom of God, and that it is as
well by the gentle sweetness of its Yoke and Government, like that of Christ,
as in other respects. And by this we may understand, how vainly the
Antichristian Enemies pretend a right to it by this Prophecy, and seek by force
to Conquer it from Christ's Kingdom, and to subdue it to their own Tyrany.
Regnum Anglorum est Regnum Dei.

Thus far my Author.

. 49. I shall only as to these Prophecies, on what ground soever they proceed,
add this Observation for the Readers consideration, That God whose Providence,
as is manifest by his Word, is very uniform in his Justice upon the cruel
Enemies of his People, seems to have given warning to Rome, and her
Antichristian Confederates, that as the Northern People raised up by his
Spirit, revenged the Blood of his Primitive Saints spilt by the Roman
persecuting Heathen Empire, on that Red Dragon; so the League of Northern
Christian Princes, who shall in God's time acknowledge his Truth, and defend
their Subjects from the Persecution and Tyranny of the Romanists, shall at
length revenge the Blood of his Modern Saints, much more profusely shed by that
bloody and merciless People, who like the old Heathen Romans, are filled with
all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full
of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters, haters of
God, despightful, proud, Boasters, inventers of evil. Things, disobedient to
Parents, without Understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural Affection,
Implacable, Unmerciful, as that Apple Paul describes them, Romans 1.29, 30, 31.
And which is worse than these Heathens could possibly be charged with, they not
only know the Judgments of God due to such Practices, but seek to color,
palliate, and defend them against his Justice, by Rules and Religious Pretexts;
destroying and making void all principles of Justice, Right, Honesty, and
Morality, as well as Divinity and public Polity, and thereby reduce all
Mankind into an Anarchical Brutish, more than Barbarian irrational unreducible
Confusion, by their Tradition.

. 50. And that the Northern Kings shall be the Executioners of God's Wrath upon
the Whore and false Prophet, the Pope and City of Rome, as they were on the Red
Dragon, the persecuting Roman Empire, has been more than probable by their
Actions; ever since Luther's time they first and still oppose Her, whilst the
more Southerly and Neighbor Princes submit, serve, and protect Her.

POSTSCRIPT.
. 51. JOhn Ursinus, in his Roman Conclave, Printed in London, in 4o. 1600. Page
142. in the Chapter of Charles the 5th, upon the Decease of Maximilian, the
first Emperor of Germany; Charles the 5th, afterward Emperor, and Francis
King of France, were Competitors for the Imperial Diadem; Leo the 10th, then
Pope, in Bar of Charles, pleaded, That Charles by no obscure prediction and
lineamental description of Face and disposition, resembled the Man, foretold in
certain Verses of an ancient Prophet, who arising in the North, should be the
mover of grievous Alterations to fall upon Italy, but especially upon the Roman
Sea.

This Prophecy had some weak Descriptions it seems, of the Person expected from
the North, to make such great Alterations in Italy, and the Roman Sea; and
Charles the 5th, some resemblance of that Person. And my Author by his Note in
the Margent, allowing the Prophecy to be truer than the Pope was aware, thereby
intimates that the Alterations wrought in Charles the Fifths time, had some
agreement to the scope of the Prophecy. But the Reader, if he well consider the
words of the Prophet as here related, may very easily conclude, That Charles
who was rather a Southern than Northern Man, and made no such grievous
Alterations neither in Italy, nor the Roman Sea it self, as the Prophet
foretold, and the Pope feared was not the Man of whom the Prophet spoke; and
that this Prophecy may therefore be very well added upon the Popes Testimony
against his own Sea, to the foregoing, to show that a Northern Prince will rise
and make more grievous Alterations there than those of Charles the Fifths time.
Nor do they fear the Reformation Luther then began in Germany, so much as what
the Northern Monarchy will make in Italy it self.

. 52. Romano Imperio omne malum venit ex Aquilone,
Omne malum nobis ex Babylone venit:
Romanam Ecclesiam omne malum ex Aquilone minatur,
A Roma nostras, ergo caveto malum,
Nostras ferro and ferrum Romanoque viro Vir,
Gedere nescit, sed tu Anglia ab Art cave.
Imprecor arma armis contraria and ignibus Ignes,
Romanique aequos Artibus Artificies.
. 53. By Northern Powers the Roman Empire fell,
To us all Mischief comes, by Rome from Hell:
The Roman Church their Fall from hence presage,
Let our Church then provide against their Rage.
The Northern Men and Iron far excel
Roman. England let not their Craft thee quel:
Their Swords with Swords, and Fires with Fires, I pray
Thou may, and all their Arts with Arts repay.
CHAP. VI. Modern Predictions of Grebner, Cotter, etc.
. 54. HAving, I doubt, wearied the Reader with the former, I shall be brief in
these; I begin with Grebner his Vexillum 52. De sort Leonis Angliae.

Hic Burgandicus Leo deglutitus and absorptus est, and nihil restat horam nisi
Terra vasta, and dispersi populi, quos ego and mei confederati subjugavimus,
and nostris dentibus and gutturibus detinemus, ac mordicus reservamus. Hoc est
opus meum Meorumque, praesidio Divino, etc.

Id. Vexill. 223. Angliae plus ultra.

. 55. Sum Anglicus truculentus Leo, modo rugiens fremens and immane saeviens,
animosu faelix and Victoriosus contra omnes meos hosts; Patriae meae fideliter
auxilio venio and praesidio, ac clementi meae Reginae asporto pretiosum
cimelion, Margaritam dictam Belgicas, Hispanicas ditiones, unde Regina mea
tempore vitae suae certo magnifice and gloriose Triumphat.

. 56. Vexill. 60. In Leonem Luneburgicum. Quae mihi hoc Globo fortunae uti
animoso Germanico exercituum ductore ab Anglis and futuro magno capite seu
summo principe and Manarcha Germaniae pacta decernuntur de his haeres meus
gaudito. Idem excitatio Germaniae, written 1652. Terra Jubila Jubila canta and
exulta quod vidisti exoptatum diem Ruinae and excidii Antichristi, quod ductu
and auspicio faelici Anglorum, Gallorum, Danorum, Germanorum, Scotorum,
Suecorum praesidio dextrae numinis altipotentis fiet. Where the English are
preferred before the French in Romes Ruin, and set in the Head and Front of
the League.

. 57. What he has here foretold of the damage done to the Crown of Spain by
the English, and their Confederates, where he places them in the Front before
the French, was long since fulfilled; of which Dunkirk, and Jamaica, and
Portugal, are sufficient Testimonies. For what he foretold of Queen Elizabeth's
obtaining the Low Countries, We know she held Towns there as long as she lived,
and had she not refused them, the whole Netherlands would have cast themselves
into her Lap, and to her assistance given them. And France it self against
Spain, the first declination of that Monarchy must be attributed; and how
deadly Blows the English have since given it, to their own prejudice, and that
of Christendom, is largely showed by a late Pen in his Paper, entitled, The
World deceived in Oliver Cromwell.

. 58. This indeed Grebner did not foresee, that I can perceive in his Book,
that the Spaniard himself should yield up Flanders, or any part of it to the
English, to be protected against the Enemies of his Crown; and it sounds as
unlikely as what that odd Rhyme imported: Believe this true, when as you see
A Spaniard Protestant to be.


. 59. But I have been either misinformed, or this is not the first time that
Flanders has been offered to the Protection of the English; nor will it need
to fulfill this Prophecy that the English should unjustly detain as Enemies,
what they now protect from the French as Friends. If they can hold the United
Provinces in security under the Prince of Orange, so nearly Allied to the
British Crown, it is enough, and that I think cannot be denied to be fairly
promised in these Predictions.

. 60. Grebner 69 Banner, is thus inscribed in that Family: In comitum Imperii
Liones, cum Principis Gulielmi Uraniae silio Mauricio, felici Heroi socianti se
alicui Daniae de stirpe.

. 61. And subscribed thus, Hoc vexillum de fratribus quoque Uraniae Principis
and little posteris Illustrissimis intelligendum. His words of them are these:
Leones nostri audaces in prima acie fremunt, unde nobis potentia crescit, and
Gloria and Fama augescit.

I know not whether formerly the Family of Orange did Intermarry with any
Descendent from a Daughter of Denmark, as here is intimated; it is sufficiently
known, this Princess was by her Great Grandmother Queen Ann, of that Family.
And if the Prince of Orange, as he here predicts, must lead the Forelorn of the
Northern Army, as he manifestly musters them with the Auxilaries of England,
their growing Estate and Honor must be by their Aid, and so shows who is to be
the Leading Monarch.

. 62. To these, let me add one out of Drabritius, who is otherwise thought
partial too much unto the French, but perhaps his mistake was, that he
attributed that to the French King, which indeed belonged to the King of Great
Britain, who is indubitably right Heir and King of France, and of the Ancient
Royal Line; as is manifest by his Gift of Healing, etc. But of this more
largely in the next Part.

. 63. Anno. 1657. May 31. Page 473. This Enthusiast has these words: Papae
capiti coronam posui testaceum, similemque imponam Hispano, cum delaceravero
Regnum ejus: Cujus partem accipient Augli etiam, fideles mei, quod cogitare nec
ipsi poterant, nec Mundus.

I think nothing could be said more true, than what he here pretends to be
spoken by Christ himself, that the English were and are so far from any desire
to rend the Spanish Monarchy, that their greatest Ambition testified in
Parliament at this Day, is to preserve it; and the World will bear them
Witness, that never any such thoughts entered their Minds. If they hold as
Cautions for their and their own Peace, and that of Christendom, some Ports for
convenience of transmitting Aids to them, it will content them, and fulfill this
Prediction.

Cottor, 1622. Anno. Christi Aug. 12, 13, 15, 16, 17.

. 64. Who this Cotter was, and what some Learned Men have judged of his Visions
and Prophecies, is set down at the end of his 6th Chapter.

Amongst his Visions, in that daied as above, I find these following words,
which manifestly related to Esdras's Lion out of the Wood, and are to me an
Indication, that what Spirit soever did dictate this the foregoing and
following Prophecies, they are for the substance of them only echoes to
Esdras; and indeed, considering what Esdras, the Syhils, some holy Men in
several Ages, former and latter, have predicted according to Scripture
Prophecies, and what I have observed of the state of Europe below, since
Luther's Reformation, it could not be difficult for an humane Spirit
contemplating in some rapture of Meditation, and in some sort out of the Body,
God's Justice, Men's Wickedness, Romes Bloodiness, the Protestants Revolt,
Situation, Resolution, Liberty, Necessity, Weapons, Spiritual, Rational,
natural Success under their Zisca's in Bohemia, Piedmont, Holland, and
elsewhere; the Roman Clergies Rage, Jesuits busy Incitation of States to
Tumults, Ambition of France, Weakness of Spain, to see darkly, and guess at
such Generalities of great Actions, as they for the most part do contain, nor
is it hard to presage the Event of the present Associations with or against
France, on the same Grounds.

. 65. Those words of Cotter, I find thus rendered, out of his own Mother, into
the Latin Tongue,

Leo autem ex Sylva septentrionali audacter p^rsiliet: Quamvis pedibus suis
Lunae insistat, Luna tamen non semper manebit demidiata, sed plenum lumen cito
recipiet^ and ista Luna image est Ecclesiae. Per Leonem Deus Pater redemit sibi
Ecclesiam: Per Leonem Ecclesiae fideli opem and victoriam paraturus est.

But a Lion, says he, shall boldly leap out from a Northern Wood; and though
the Moon, on which his Feet stand, be at present only half full, it shall
quickly attain a full Light. This Moon is the Image of the Church: By a Lion
the Father redeemed a Church to himself; By a Lion he will prepare help and
victory to his faithful Church.

Cotter, 1624. Sept. 24. Page 140.

. 66, 67. Sed Jehova convocat Reges ab Aquilone contra munitissimam Urb^m, etc.
God shall call together the Kings from the North against a most excellently
fortified City.

. 68. Idem, 1622. Aug. 28. Page 35. The White Lion shall seize on a great part
of the City. The Red Lion resembling the Morning Red, shall be assistant to the
Lovers of the Gospel, he shall also seize on a part of the great City. The
least of all, the Azure Innocent Lion, shall be endued with Strength, Glory,
and Forces from God, a Triple Crown with a potent Hand, by the interposition of
the Lion from the East and North.

. 69. Idem, 1923. Apr. 23. Page 39. Those of the South and West are dissipated,
those of the East and North obtain Victory.

. 70. Christiana Ponatovia, has these Visions of the Northern Lious. (See who
she was at the end of the Chap.) 1628. Jan. 17. Page 241. Hah! what is it?
Behold, from the North, these are late Lions. Then the Lions departing from one
another, she said very clearly, God bless them. A wonderful thing! Now they bid
one another farewell. Now they depart, the one this, and the other that way.

. 71. Ead. 1628. Jan. 20. Page 247. The Battle shall endure till few of them
from the North survive.

. 72. Ead. Ib. Page 248. There shall come forth seven Principal Persons, and
many Inferiors, by whom the Northern Armies shall be led. 1628. Jan. 13. Page
224. She names them in this order, Hungarians, Turks, Venetians, Saxons,
Tartars, Swedes, Danes, Hollanders, English, French, etc.

. 73. Drabricius (of whom see below) in his Vision 1653. March 2. Page 355. The
Northern Cloud now arises, whence terrible Thunders shall proceed; for it shall
bring with it the Whale from beyond Sea, upon the Sons of Babylon.

This Whale seems to be the Emblem of some mighty Fleet.

Daniel threatens Antichrist with the Naval Force of his Enemies Ships of Kedar.

. 74. A learned Man's Judgment of these Enthusiasts. Si Prophetiae non sunt
Prodigiae certe maxim vocalia sunt, cum mirifice invicim consentiat; Cotterus,
simplicissimus Idiota; Poniatovia, infans puella; Drabricius, sencx delirus.
Nunquam ita locutus est Homo, nunquam ante ita locutus est Satan, Certe in
Angelum lucis magno judicio, si non misericordia conversus.

If these be not Prophecies, says he, they be wonderful loud crying Prodigies,
So admirable is their consent. Cotter, a most simple Idiot; Poniatovia, a
childish Girl; Drabicius, an old Dotard. Never did any mere Man speak as these,
nor ever any Devil till now. If he be thus turned as into an Angel of Light, it
is in great Wrath, if not for Mercy.

CHAP. VII. Some more Modern and Domestic Visions and Prophecies.
. 75. THere are some pious Souls amongst us, who have seen Visions, and dreamed
Prophetic Dreams of the heroic Actions and Success of our Lion in the East,
as well as Western Empire; but their Modesty has in a great part suppressed
them, and I have no warrant to Publish them imperfect, according to the notices
I have of them. Therefore,

I will conclude these Predictions of the Fourth Monarchy, promised to the
Northern Lion, with a Relation I had from a Learned and Pious Friend, lately
deceased, which was this: That some Months before the death of Oliver Cromwell,
or shortly after; a Servant of his nearly related to him, saw in a Night
Vision, in a Room not unlike the Banqueting House at White Hall, the Crown
Imperial of England on a fair Table, covered with a rich Carpet; to which,
placed at the upper end of the Table, Richard Cromwell approached; but instead
of taking it up in his Hand, and placing it on his Head, as the Spectator
hoped, he put it down from the Table with his Head; upon which, his Father
suddenly drawing aside the Curtain at the upper end of the Room, which covered
him, and the Throne erected there from Observation, reproaching his Son for his
folly, and stamping at him with great Indignation, for losing three Crowns
which he had so fairly, as he said, procured for him, vanished away, and his
Son with him.

Shortly after his Majesty that now is, Charles the II, entered the Room, took
up the Crown, and having placed it on his Head, sat down upon the Throne, to
whom an audable Voice was sent from above, in these words, Do Justice, and show
Mercy, and thou shall Reign till Shiloe come.

This may also serve for an Introduction to those Prophecies, which do favor
not only the North, but the Kingdom of Great Britain, or England, in hopes of
erecting this Fourth Universal Monarchy. See Christiana Ponatovia, who puts the
English before the French.

. 76. I will here take liberty for the Readers refreshment, to Transcribe a few
Lines out of an English Rimer, who has the Reputation with some, both of a
Poet and Prophet, in his Speculum Speculativum, Printed 1660, he says,

There will to thwart your hopes a new Stare blaze
Within the West, that shall the World amaze;
And influences through the Universe
So quickly and prodigiously disperse,
That aided by concurrent Constellations,
It shall have some effects upon all Nations;
And cause such Changes, as shall make a stand
In their Attempts which they have now in hand.
In another Paper, Page 33.

Then from the buried Ox will forth arise
A swarm of thrifty Hony-making Flies,
That shall with Sweetness, and with Plenty store
These Islands from the middle to the Shore;
And spread their floating Hives on all the Seas
'Twixt both the Tropicks to the Antipodes;
To make Preparatives for that which brings
Into one Body, all dispersed things.
For all those Kingdoms, and those Empiries
Throughout the World, which their beginning took
By humane Craft, Fraud, Force, or Tyranny,
Shall pass away and vanish into Smoke:
An Army whereof here is yet little hope
Shall wrest their Scepters from both Turk and Pope.
. 77. In his Vox Pacifica, exhorting the Parliament to restore the King, he
has these Prophetic Lines.

Take likewise heed, you no just means neglect,
Whereby the King may be recalled and won,
God's Honor with your safety to respect,
And do the Duties he has lest undone.
For by rejecting him, how just soever
The Cause may seem, you shall delay that Peace
Which is desired; and make the Quarrels here
With much more difficulty to decrease.
And if your Prudence shall so win him Home,
And he return sincerely to his Charge:
It shall a Blessing to these Isles become,
Your Honor and your Joy it shall enlarge.
And, as Christ's Viceroy, he shall sit upon
A Righteous, and an everlasting Throne.
. 78. For this Isles Constitution's such, the increase
Of Wealth, and Honor, settlement of Peace,
And freedom from Oppression (whatsoever
Some Dream) shall never be enjoyed here
In any Government so perfectly,
As in our English well-pois'd Monarchy.
So the same Author in another place.
I have not this Writers other Pieces at hand, I might otherwise have thence
transcribed more to this purpose, predicting highest Successes and Felicity to
the British Monarchy.

. 79. To the same intent he introduces the Genius of Great Britain, prophesying
the Confusions of the Usurpers and their Destruction; who thus concludes with a
Prophecy of the King's Return, and of the admirable Happiness and Glory of his
Monarchy which shall follow upon his Restoration.

When they with Jars and Janglings have desac'd
Your Triple Building, and themselves nigh worn
Into Contempt, they of one Cup shall taste,
And into their first Elements return.
And out of their Corruption rise there shall,
A true Supreme, acknowledged of all.
In which the Power of all the Five shall be,
With Unity made visible in Three;
Priest, People, Parliament, Prelates, and Peers,
Shall be a while your Emulous Grandees,
Make a confused Pantarchie some Years,
And leave off their distinct Claims by degrees:
And then shall Righteousness ascend the Throne,
Then Faith and Reason shall agree in one;
Then Love, and Peace, and Truth, re-enter shall,
And all the Virtues to their Counsel cail.
Then timely out of all these shall arise
That Kingdom, and that happy Government,
Which is the scope of all those Prophecies,
That future Truths obscurely represent.
But how this will be done, few Men shall see,
For wrought in Clouds and Darkness it will be.
. 80. The Cities Wealth her Poverty shall cause,
The Laws corruption shall reform the Laws,
And Bullocks of the largest Northern breed
Shall fatted be, where now Sheep scarce can feed.
And elsewhere he brings Britains Genius, intimating that on the fall or rising
of our late King, and his Family, the greatest Affairs of Europe were
depending, in these words:

For at the present upon him depends
The fortune of his House, and there withal
Shall many Royal Families.
other either stand or fall.
Whose Fates are yet by very few discerned,
To be in his well-doing much concerned.
Yea, thereupon depends Spain ruined, the European Balance broke thereby.
greater Things,
Than are the Risings and the Falls of Kings.
. 81. He means the Fourth Universal Monarchy, and the Propagation of the Gospel
thereby into all the parts of the World, known, as well as yet unknown and
undiscovered, under which all Wisdom Divine and Humane shall flourish and come
to excellent Perfection.

. 81. When in this Isle observe you shall
The tenth part of great Babel fall,
And Reformation fully made
Of them and their Mysterious Trade,
Who merchandise most holy Things,
Then God to speedy Vengeance brings,
With Gog, with Magog, and the Whore, Amygd. Britan.

The Beast which Nations yet adore.
. 83. To this Poetical Strain, I will add one or two more in Verse, as they
were delivered unto me.

The first, which I received from a Gentleman, who assures me that he knows it
to be of above forty Years standing, and remembers to have heard it long before
he took the Copy of it, is in these words:

1. The Eagle droops, and moults his Wings,
And Fewd shall grow 'twixt Northern Kings.
Holland is threatened, Spain shall pine,
And Blood shall swell the River Rhine.
2. When once the Orange and the Rose
Unite, beware England's old Foes.
3. This done, no more shall monstrous Pride,
Triumphant over Nations ride.
The Miter falls, and scarce shall have,
A mournful Tear, or certain Grave.
4. The Lillies now bewail their loss,
And serve but to adorn the Cross.
5. The Work's begun, but would you see,
The Harvest ripe? join eight and three.
The Northern Star at last appears,
And an all-conquering Banner bears.
6. Howl, howl, ye Merchants! all your deeds
Shall now receive their worthy Meeds.
NB. Babel, Merchants of holy Things; the Beast in the foregoing Prophecy, is
in this, Monstrous Pride, the Roman Mitre, and Merchants. The time in that, is
the Expulsion of their Priests out of Great Britain, once the tenth part of
Babel, in this the Year 1683.

. 84. The second transmitted out of France, in the Year 1668, to the then
Secretary of the Royal Society, I heard repeated by a Noble Lord some Years
since, and were in these words, if my Memory fail not.

Jam propero cursu festinat temporis ordo,
Quo locus, and Franci Majestas prisca Senatus,
Papa, Sacerdotes, Missae, Simulacra, deorum
Delubra, atque omnis superis invisa potestas
Judicio Domini justo sublata peribunt.
Fallor an ista mihi suggessit versibus iisdem,
Angelus, ipse deum testor Geniosque polorum
Me vidisse aliquem aut me vidisse putasse,
Ista Remonstrantem tabula depicta fideli,
Cum matutino premeret me tempore somnus.
The Author is reported to have been a Member, Senator, or Assistant of the
Parliament of Paris.

I have endeavored to render them in English Verse, for their use who
understand not the Original, as follows:

With headlong speed that Juncture does advance,
Wherein the Royal Seat, and State of France,
The Pope, Priests, Masses, Images, Saints, Shrines,
And what with these against Heaven's will combines,
By Divine Justice shall to Ruin fall,
I much mistake, or some Angelical
Spirit; this in these Verses did suggest,
Whilst in my Morning sleep, I took my rest.
I, God to Witness call, and's Heavenly Host
I saw indeed, or at the least supposed
I saw an Angel, who did show to me
In a fair written Table this same Prophecy.
. 85. And here it need not seem strange, that I adjoyn some Visions and
Prophecies of our poor despised British Countryman, Arise Evans: for by
comparing what I have of him at hand with others, I find that neither in
number, clearness, particularness of Visions and Predictions, nor in speed or
certainty of Events predicted, is he in any thing inferior to Merlin, Grebner,
Ponatovia, Savanarola, Drabritius, or any other Ancient or Modern Seer of that
sort. His particular Applications of Scripture, which seem most harsh, and
Prophanations to some, had they been made and polished with the Art and
Industry of a learned Head and Hand, would have amounted to no more than what
the Apostle affirms, That the Jews were our Types; that whatever happened to
them, was for our Instruction and Comfort, both so brought about by God's
Providence, and recorded by his Spirit. So that as there is no Case of
Conscience which is not answered in Scripture, so neither is there any Case of
public distress, whereunto there is not such a Parallel found in Scripture
History, or Prophecy, as may not only give the diligent Enquirer instruction in
what ought to be done by public Societies, or Persons in such Distresses, and
sufficient Consolation in greatest and most desperate Extremities; but a
foresight also, and that certain, of the Event, either to Ruin, or
Deliverance. That such an Idiot as Evans, fell upon, and so shrewly applied
some particular Prophecies to those Times particularly in which he spoke, as it
seems strange; so it shows that he had some Guide more than common, Angel, or
Spirit, or whatever it was. And by the rule he gives to try Spirits and
Prophecies, in his Echo, printed 1653. Page 64, and 65. etc. and Astrological
Predictions, Page 83, 84. I find he gave no farther credit to his own
Predictions, than he could find some pattern for them in Scripture Prophecies
in like Cases. And one of the most shrewd amongst these, we have here inserted,
having the advantage of Rise Evans in Style and Education, pretends no other
authority for his Predictions, than that God does follow the same rule in his
Administration of the public Affairs of England by his Providence at this day,
he had observed, and set down in Scripture for our Instruction in the History
of the Old Testament, which he had found to be so infallible a Rule, that he
doubted not to Predict both to the Rump, and Oliver Cromwell, their speedy
Ruin, and sometimes boldly limited them a short time; as I could evince, had I
his Books at command.

This may serve to invite the Readers patience in his perusal, of what I have
excerped out of Arise Evans, till I come in the other parts to examine more
strictly these Prophets or Prodigies.

. 86. This silly Artisan, having with strange confidence predicted the King's
Death by the hand of his Enemies, and that unavoidable, and set it twice under
his hand in Writing, left one of those Papers in the Chapel at Somerset House,
and delivered another to Secretary Windebank, with his own Hand, when he was
about to Examine him on the first, which he had before in charge against him;
he was put and kept Prisoner in the Gate House three Years, as he had predicted
in August 1635, and being close Prisoner there, had the following Vision, which
he thus describes in his Echo, Page 72.

As I was desiring of God to show me a figure of the Judgment that was to come,
and of the Glory that should follow, I fell into such a Trance, that I seemed
to be in [Merioneth-shire,] where I was brought up at Maisellan Kadderrase, [
Anglice, Arise Charles Church in Field]; And behold, I was with my Elder
Brother by the side of the River [ Dey sunny, i. Sunny day, which comes from a
Fountain called Bishops Well, in a Hill in the North-east, called Kader u
duruse, i. Arise the House of Charles,] and it seemed to me a glorious day; and
about two in the Afternoon, on a sudden my Brother was gone: [This he
interprets to be Christ's departing and absenting himself for a season,] I know
not how, nor where; and as I lifted up my Eyes, the Sun by degrees became dark,
so that the Stars appeared about it. [By appearance of Sun and Stars in
darkness, he understands the destruction of the King and Nobles, Page 73.] At
which darkness, the Sheep did cry, and run to seek shelter, as they use to do
in those parts when a Darkness comes before a Storm, in the holes of the Rocks.
[ Page 74. He calls it Graig wen, i. the White Rock, because its Stones are
white: And the foot of it, Gale ronnw, i. they will give Light, and says, that
over this was the Sun when it became dark upon it; these Sheep he interprets to
be God's People, that adhered to God and the King.] And all the Light of Heaven
was taken away, that it became so dark as Pitch; then appeared by a Mad-man's
House, that lived there when I was a Boy, a great Bon-fire, and People making
Merry about it. [This Mad-mans House was under y Graig goch, i. the Red Rock on
the South side of Sunny-Day River, the Stones thereof are red like Blood; he
interprets it to stand for the South part of England, Page 74. And them at the
Mad-mans House that made themselves a Bon-fire, to signify an adverse Power
set up without God's Approbation, Standing directly opposite on the contrary
side of the Sunny-Day River to Bringrugog, the dry Hill, whence Relief came to
restore the King, i. Scotland, as he shows afterward.] But as I still waited
and looked for some Light above, I espied a little white Cloud breaking forth
in the North-east. [This North-east Hill from whence this glorious Appearance
came, was Kadder u du ruse, i. Arise the House of Charles, the highest Hill in
Britain, and as he supposes in all the World; in which Hill is the ever-running
Bishops Well, whence the Sunny-Day River has its head source, Page 73.] After
that the Sky appeared, and on it the King's Arms, as it is upon Blew in some
Churches, and it rid upon the Heavens very terribly toward the South-west.
[The appearance from the North-east, did signify the King's Rising again, and
coming upon his Enemies from that Coast, Page 73. Now the South-west, against
which the King's Arms rode upon the Heavens so terribly, he interprets Page
74, to be the Red Rock on the South side of the River aforesaid, where the
Bon-fire was kindled; and North, but more Westward; Moil-dunkyra, i. Baal
kindle Fire, and stands for Ireland.] And as the Light appeared, abundance of
Water sprung out of a dry Hill Northward. [ Page 74. He interprets this dry
Hill (from whence he saw the Springs of Water gush out on the North side of the
River Sunny-Day, and opposite to the Southern Red Rock, and House of the
Madman, and Bon-sire, with them that rejoiced at the destruction of the King
and Nobles) by the name of Bringrugog, i. Gogs strong Hill, to be Scotland; for
Gog, says he, is the chief Prince of the Gentiles, quoting Genesis 10.2, 3, 4, 5.
Ezekiel. 38.2, 3, 6. 2 Esdras 13.5, 6, 7.]

. 87. This Vision seen in Aug. 1635. when he was a Prisoner for his Testimony
of God's Justice upon these Kingdoms for their Sins, so long before the Irish
kindled the Fire, or the Scots, or South of England combined against the King;
and when there was no appearance by any humane Sagacity, that the Gold
Streamers (as they were called) under General Monk from Scotland, should
increase to such strength, mingling with the Sunny-Day River, from Bishops Well
i. the Royal Party, as to build what they had overthrown, deserves in my
apprehension, not only to be received as a Voice from Heaven, by what Spirit or
Instrument soever ministered or uttered, but is to me a Pledge and Earnest, that
what has been acted here in Great Britain, the little World, will in God's
time, and probably very shortly, be acted over again, and perfectly fulfilled
on the Stage of Christendom first, and consequently in the Universal World; and
that the Monarchs of Great Britain shall be as remarkable in that grand, as in
this lesser Revolution.

This brief account I am contented to give the Reader of this Vision here, that
I might not too much trespass upon his Patience. I purpose in the following
Discourse, to set down this Vision in the Author's words, and the Exposition
thereof at large, and my Thoughts of it, and a Comparison of it with the other
most remarkable Prophecies here above collected, who have the same Notions of
the North, South, and West, as Evans.

. 88. Another Vision which he saw in the Gate House, whilst he was God's
Witness and Prisoner there, An. 1637. being the third in number, he sets down
Page 76. in these words.

It seemed to me, that I was in a very little white Chamber alone, and as I
looked about me, the Chamber grew bigger and bigger, until at last it became a
great Garden that contained all the World, and I could see no end of it, etc.

Page 77. He interprets this Vision thus:

Now the little Chamber, and the growth of it, signifies the Kingdom of Christ
growing from hence until it contain the World. From hence, i. Great Britain.
His meaning is more plainly set out by him, Page 50, 51. where reproving
England, then a State, for its Sins, he has these Passages:

Their Valor (speaking of the Army) being found so that no Sword could
overcome them, until the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians.
6.17. came against them; to which Sword they suddenly and willingly submit. And
I see by the Word of God, as I have manifestly proved, that we of this State
are the greatest Sinners that ever were; But where Sin abounds, Grace
abounds much more, Romans 5.20, 21. That as Sin has abounded unto Death,
Enmity, and Division amongst us, so now the Grace of Repentance in this state,
and submission unto the Lord's Anointed, [understand him, first to Christ, and
to the King for Christ's sake] might bring us to Love and Union, and to act in
Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by the Power of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ
in us.

And whereas it is said of this State, Dan. viii. 23. That it shall be broken
without hands. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8. And the Lord shall consume it with the Spirit of
his Mouth. (Understand him of what ever is Antichristian in it.) It is only to
show as like sayings, Isa. xi. 4. Dan. xi. 45. what mercy and grace of
Repentance this State shall have offered to them; but Mercy being refused,
Judgment follows to avenge the injury done to Mercy in refusing it, and Mercy
rejoices against Judgment, Jam. ii. 13. It follows,

And ye, Pope, Turk, and Spaniards, that keep out the Word of God, lest it
should discover your Sins, know for a truth, that the same Word shall make a
Breach into your Kingdoms, and destroy you; so that you shall have no cause to
glory at the Fall of the King of England, for he shall be raised far above you.
And therefore the best way for you to escape, is to join your selves with him,
and let the Word of God have free passage amongst you, and reform your Law by
his Law, etc. Page 51.

. 89. Page 77. another Vision that I had, 1650. It seemed to me that I was in
France, and went through all the Cities thereof, until I came to Rome, and when
I came thither, me-thought I was troubled with great Waters; but at last as I
went through the City, a Voice came to me, saying, So far as thou art come, so
far shall one Cromwell come. This he interprets.

That as Joab by David's encouragement, went and smote the Jebusites at
Jerusalem; so some Person commanding under the King, shall go to Rome and smite
the Jesuits. Now as to the name of Cromwell given this General, if it were not
conditional as to that Family, if they had restored the King, and been rewarded
for their pains with the Command of his Army as General, nor belong to some
other Noble Person of that Name [as there is a Lord of that Name derived from
Cromwell, Earl of Essex, so Famous in King Henry the 8ths time, and fatal to
Rome,] it must signify some bold and successful English General, and his Army
such as Cromwell possibly might be General of about the time of this Vision; or
Men of such Spirits or Principles, as they then were. For many times in these
Writers, names of Persons and Families (as Frederick, and Ferdinand for
Example) signify not those Persons themselves, but Frederick the Protestant
party in Germany, and Ferdinand the Popish. See our German Enthusiasts,
Primariae Personae Septentrionalium Duces; Intimating Generals, not Kings, to
Command.

And whatever the name Cromwell here imports, the Passages following transcribed
out of his Voice from Heaven, Printed with his Echo aforesaid 1653, shows that
he did foresee the destruction of Rome by such hands. Page 21. from Amos 9.11,
12. Paralleling the Christian Church of God with us, to that of Israel and
David, he says,

In Ver. 11, 12. Ye have the King's Tabernacle, or Court, set up again, and his
Kingdom enlarged over all the Earth. And 39. You that look for Christ's
Personal Reign here on Earth, know that it shall be in the Kingly Power
established here again when this State is dissolved. You that look for the
Conversion of the Jews, know that the aforesaid King (meaning this present King
Charles the II.) is the means appointed by God to effect it.

CHAP. IX. The History of the Prophetic Agat.
. 90. TO these Prodigious Visions, I may properly enough refer, and here with
them, record the no less miraculous Prophetical and Prodigious Appearances, not
unlike Visions, seen in a Stone of the Agat sort, of an Ash gray color,
drawing toward a Blew, given in for an advantage to his Bargain, as a
Curiosity only of little value, with a parcel of other Stones sold to Eylers of
Hamborough, about the Year 1600, and now, or lately in the possession of Mr.
Martin Eylers, a Person well known, as I am informed, in some Princes Courts in
Germany, Son, Grandchild, or descended from the first Purchaser aforesaid, who
has showed it to many at his Lodgings in Carter-Lane, near Doctors Commons,
and elsewhere in London.

This Stone is of an Oval form, of the breadth of a Silver Twopence, of the
thickness of a Copper Farthing; its ground is Ash color, as has been said;
but it is flecked and dapled as it were on the one side, after the manner of
some Agats, with a whitish Cloud of the exact shape of an Head and Neck, with a
full half-side Face turned toward the right Hand. The Ground is transparent,
when held against the Light, but the Head drawn thereon is not. This Stone
having been long (about 80 Years, as I have said) in this Family of Eylers, and
sometimes set in a Ring, yet nothing was observed in it save that white cloudy
unknown Face, till some Years after the Treaty at Munster; when first the
Pope's Nuncio there, afterward Pope Alexander the 7th, became famously known
in Germany, and all over Europe; he first, and then others, were noted by them
who knew him, and them Personally, and by their Pictures or Medals, to be
exactly represented in this Stone, according to the remarkable features of
their Faces. Yet were not the greater part of them discovered, till about ten
Years ago, and since that time, some yet unknown Faces and Appearances are
discerned therein. Those that are generally known, or have been discerned and
known by Travelers are, 1. The aforesaid large half Face, to be the Image of
Pope Alexander the 7th, with his Head and Neck, wherein all the other Faces on
that side are contained, being made up of some part of his said Head, Face, or
Neck, according as it is differently exposed to the light and transposed, or
viewed, whole, or partly covered. 2. In the side of his Cheek the next largest
Face is seen, being three quarters of the Face of, Leopoldus, the present
Emperor of Germany, whose Features are very remarkable. 3. In the top of the
Popes Head, is the full Head and Face of Lewis the 14th, the present King of
France, holding the Pope's Head in its right Situation, but in the same place
by turning the Pope's Head downwards and Neck upwards. 4. The present Dauphin
of France is seen. 5. Behind in the hinder part of the Pope's half Head, and
elsewhere therein, sundry other Princes are plainly discerned, but drawn so
close one upon another Cheek, as it were Scale upon Scale, that some weak Eyes
cannot discern them distinctly, unless some part of the Pope's Head, which
makes up other Features, be covered. Amongst them John Casimir, King of Poland,
is very remarkable. 6. After him is his Neighbor, the Duke of Muscovy; 7. and
the Emperors of Tartaria, Persia, and others of the remote parts of the World,
partly unknown, as I am informed. 8. The Emperor of Turky's Features, with his
Turbant and an Half Moon thereon, make up the finishing and last lines of the
Pope's Neck; so that the Papacy making as it were the Body, the Turk and the
King of France, are as it were the Poles of this Map of the Worlds Monarchs.

. 91. After the several different Resemblances of so many distinct, known, and
unknown Faces, were found on the Pope's side of this Stone, the Owner was
desirous to try if the other side, which was yet rough and unpolished, would
produce any thing, and gave it unto a Workman; who upon a Mill, such as is used
for polishing of Diamonds, wrought it down so long, till there rose therein the
appearance of an Angel in a long Robe, holding a Flower as it were a Scepter in
his Hand. But this appearance being not white after the manner of the Cloud on
the contrary side, but darker, and the Hand, or some other part of the Angel
unperfect: The Owner and Workman, thinking by farther polishing, to bring this
Angel to better Color, Form, and Perfection, applied it again to the Wheel,
which by two turns only, quite ground out the Image of the Angel, and wholly
frustrated their expectation, and discouraged them from working any farther on
that side, fearing to lose what was (as it seems) hid under that Angel; and now
appeared not shadowed, in a white Cloud, as the Faces on the Pope's side, but
drawn as it were to the Life, in painting Colors; namely, at the two opposite
Oval-ends of the Stone, where the Angel's Head and Feet did appear before, the
Resemblances of Charles the First, and Oliver Cromwell. The Face of King Charles
was of a pale, wan, and not lively Color and hew, but his Features exactly and
perfectly represented, with the Hair of his Face rough, as they Painted him,
who imitated the Pictures drawn of him shortly after his Death, in painting
Colors, and his Neek also bloody red, as if he had been newly Beheaded.

By turning down his Picture on the opposite end of the Oval, appeared the
resemblance of Oliver Cromwell, painted to the Life, with a red flaming Nose and
Countenance, his Head bare, but Armed downwards from his Shoulders, and there
rounded of, no other armed Picture on either side.

The Owner has exposed this Stone to sale at Rome, and elsewhere, but demands
a greater rate than any Chapman thinks reasonable to be given for such a
Curiosity.

It is believed, that if the Owner durst gently rub the Angel side, and polish
it a little more, the Picture of Charles the Second, would appear perfectly
therein, which now is scarce discernable, save only by such excellent Eyes as
have been used to draw Work, or Paint in minuture. Because,

. 92. It happens also in the same manner on the other side, that some Faces are
discerned by good Eyes, which are altogether imperceptible to them of weak
sight. For my part, I rather believe, that if the Angel had not been polished
off, besides these two Images which now appear, as the contrary Poles of the
Protestant Reformed World, other Faces would have been discovered in his Robe,
and other parts of that Image, as probably the King of Sweden, and Denmark, at
least, though the Lutherans in their Persecuting vain, may justly expect to be
devoured themselves in the Babylonian Romish Confusions, whilst they seek to
Devour and Persecute other Protestants more fiercely and intollerably in some
places, than the Papists themselves in Germany, and have by their uncharitable
Vehemence, destroyed in a manner all the Churches of their own Confession in
Lithuania, protected by the Reformed Gentry there, so long as they would own
their friendly Accommodation and Comprehension, whereby they brought them to
partake equally with themselves in the public legally established Liberty,
which is by their froward needless Separation, much weakened and endangered at
this Day.

That neither the Princes, nor States of Italy, nor the King of Spain, nor
Portugal, are seen in the other side of the Stone, may be from this Reason;
That Spain is comprised under the Emperor, in the House of Austria, and Italy
under the Pope, as chief Heads; and the States having no certain Princes, can
have no Representatives in these Maps of the opposite Worlds, neither on the
one side nor the other.

I have proposed my thoughts, let every one Philosophize thereon after his
manner freely, I oblige none to my Conjectures.

. 93. 1. That which is to my present purpose, and I would farther commend to
the Reader's consideration concerning this Stone, its Description and History,
is, That it seems to have been produced either by the immediate Finger of God,
or by his Handmaid Nature, wonderfully and curiously guided by his Providence,
as in the exquisite Needle Work (so the Psalmist's Hebrew has it) of Man's
Body formed in the Womb. We read in History, that King Pyrrhus had a Stone in
which were some Resemblances, which those Times would needs attribute to
Apollo, and the Nine Muses; but the Circumstances considered, this Stone is in
many particulars far more curious and admirable, which I need not specify, the
Reader will easily collect its prerogatives above that of King Pyrrhus, and
from its singular and admirable Properties, be incited not to despise his
Providence whose Finger produced it.

. 94. 2. As I have above noted, that this British Monarchy has by its Mottoes
on its Silver and Gold Coin, current all over the World, proclaimed it self to
be the Kingdom of Christ, by owning his Cross for its Standard, and him under
God, its supreme Hope and Guide; and by the glorious Stars and Language of
Heaven, our Reformation and Kingdoms were proclaimed from the Caestial Court,
and declared to the World to be owned by God as his: So our healing Angel Gold
Coin, and Badges of the Honorable Order of the Garter, representing the Battle
of Michael and the Dragon, (though hid under the title of an unknown St.
George) interprets what Angel it is that has hitherto, though unknown,
protected and fought for, and will hereafter, though invisible, defend, assist,
and promote this British Reformation and Monarchy, against the Plots of Rome,
and force of all Idolatrous Mohammedan and Heathen Tyrannies; namely, that very
Michael, who with his Angels fought against Satan and his Angels, and did at
last prevail to drive him who sat and ruled as God, in God's Heavenly Temple,
the Churches professing God's Name, into the Mohammedan and Heathen World, in
this Generation now shortly coming, as we hope, will partly fulfill that
Prophecy, and also in His appointed time subdue the whole World unto the
Scepter of his Son, the Grace and Peaceable Government of truly most Christian
Princes and Defenders of the Faith of God's Elect.

. 95. 3. That which seems most surprising, that in this Stone, and in Arise
Evans's Prophecy 1650, inserted above, O. Cromwell is allowed as a principal
Agent, and armed, by comparing the Stone and Vision together, receives and
gives much illustration to the predicted successes of our Northern Monarchy;
which as in his Generalship, it gave a great blow to Spain, so may in some his
more just Successors to the command of the British Arms, pass on through France
to Rome.

. 96. 4. From what has been said and observed of this little Stone, thus
curiously wrought and painted without Hands, wherein God by his own Finger, or
that of his Handmaid Nature, has showed his Power and Wisdom, not only
unimitable, but as to the manner of his Working, unconceivable, there being
nothing that I can call to mind to which it is second, or to which it may be
resembled, save the wonderful impressions of Fancy and Memory, wrought by the
Animal Spirits upon the soft substance of the Brain; that and this compared,
altogether incomprehensible in their Combinations, Dispositions, distinct
Order, Production, and regular Eduction, will (I assure my self) to the
Ingenious Readers, excuse my boldness in proposing it to them as an Emblem of
the World and its Contents, and the opposite Parties divided and struggling in
its Bowels (as Esau and Jacob in their Mother's Womb, emblems of these) for the
Birthright, the Supreme Dominion in matters Spiritual and Civil, annexed to the
double portion of the Firstborn in Christ's Family, that is, his Church
Jerusalem above, the Mother of us all, and her Nursing Fathers.

. 97. 5. Lastly, If in a Transient Vision, or Dream in some Prophet's Head, or
in some prodigious Appearance in the Air, there had been exposed to public
view, on one side the Pope, and with him the Emperor French King, and all the
rest of the Mohammedan, Heathenish, and other opposite Powers, known Enemies to
the Protestant Reformation, and Persecutors thereof; and on the contrary part,
in Heaven a glorious Angel, as here in our Stone, and none with him but the
present King of Great Britain, and some one most remarkable British
Captain General completely Armed, the Chief, or only Protectors of that
Reformation, None could have refused me liberty to have interpreted and applied
such a Vision, or Prodigy, as I have done those in this Stone no less
Admirable; I think then I may with more rather than less Reason, expect
favorable Construction, and interpretation of my Application of those
Appearances not transient, but permanent, and to be seen of all at such a time
as this: the vileness and smalness of the Stone not tending to the diminishing,
but advancing our attention and his Honor, who chooses such small and
contemptible things, to teach, yea, to confound the Greatest and most Glorious,
and sends the Foolish to learn Knowledge from Brutes, Insects, and Inanimate
Creatures. Here I can allow Pictures Laymens Books, In est sua gratia parvis.

. 98. On the wonderful Prophetic Stone, brought by Mr. Martin Eylers from
Hambrough, wherein, after it had been about seventy Years kept in his Family,
the small Face formerly unknown, was about twelve Years since discovered to be
that of Pope Alexander the 7th, and under his Figure those of the present King
Lewis the 14th, and Dolphin of France; Leopoldus, Emperor of Germany, John
Casimire, King of Poland, and several Mohammedan, and other Modern Princes, by
those who know them on the one side; and on the other side Charles the 1st, and
Oliver Cromwell alone.

HAd Rome's Impostors, who at their high Mass,
Made airy shades for their blessed Savior's pass,
And be adored, and by their Prelates care,
In circular Letters pedled that false Ware
About their France, known how by subtle Art,
Or Nature's Pencil such forms as these t'impart
To any rich Materials at their will,
Long had the World of Wonders had its fill.
Witness those Bloody Crosses, wherewith these
Stained their Faith more than the Japan Trees.
And that false Spanish Egg, upon whose white,
False Knaves, false Ink, false Sense, false spelled did write,
Through its unstained Shell to justify
The Immaculate Conception of Mary.
Had Rome the skill such Pictures to command,
Such Laymens Books in every Nich should stand,
Their Foes in Hell, damned in Effigy,
Our Princes given to Satan we should see.
We have a surer Word of Prophecy,
We need no teaching Stones to verify,
That our Kings rest under the Almighty Wing
Of Heaven's Protection, and need fear nothing.
No faithful Israel, but a faithless Breed
Of Bastards, call for Signs, and Wonders need.
The faithful Flock only know, hear, rejoice,
In the sweet Accents of Christ's Heavenly Voice.
When to Mad Prophets God does condescend,
To show his Angels Sword, it makes attend,
But converts not: New Stars, Comets, that blaze;
Wonders in Heaven, Stones harder Hearts raise;
Dreams, Visions, Prophecies fulfilled, astonish;
Plagues, Fires, and bloody Swords fright and admonish:
But Lazarus returned, or Hell on Earth,
Cannot prepare that Soul for a new Birth,
Who mingles not the Sacred Word he hears
With Faith. A Prodigy that Man appears
Of Folly, who in the clear shining Sun,
To show the way, lights his dim Torch at Noon;
And would persuade Men follow, against Sense, Eyes,
And Faith, for Gospel Light, Romes Vanities.
Who the Emblems of the Sacred Writ despise,
Less regard Dreams, Visions, or Prophecies.
The Faithless see the evil, and run thereon,
The Faithful see and escape destruction
By the same Notice, even by Scripture Light.
Who see not Michael and the Dragon fight,
Cannot learn how on a dim Agats side,
Heaven from the World its Kingdom does divide
On this Amphisbene, Leviathan;
Whilst the Mogul, Persian, Tartarian,
Thick pil'd like Scales do lie; and here do lurk
The Pole, Russ, and the less and greater Turk,
At opposite Extremes. A Wonder strange,
In one Popes head so many Monarchs range
Themselves, and fight in such diversity,
Against Christ and single Christianity.
Now Austria, now France, Triumphant draws
Unsettled Multitudes to Roman Laws.
A Martyred Prince under a Cherubs Wing
None but Christ's white Bands to his part can bring,
Who by the Eye of Faith discern the Stone,
Cut without Hands, a Spiritual Force alone,
Dividing Britain, Holland, Germany,
Denmark, Sweden and Switze, from Italy,
Spain, Austria, Poland, and the rest at Trent;
Whilst Rome was with its wisest Clerks intent,
To settle its new Creed; to them, nor Ston,
Nor Star, nor Dream, nor Sight, nor Vision,
Are needful. That Finger, which does make here
These mighty Monarchs like small Motes appear,
Which their Seats, Motions, and Designs does bound,
After his Will in the Worlds greater round,
Suffices to direct them, who observe
His Works and Words, so they shall never swerve.
Our Guardian Angel's not withdrawn, he is near,
He does, to prove our Faith, but disappear.
Whilst we our grosser Senses seek to fill,
Our Faith we foil, and our Devotions spill.
Who in the dark pressing their Father's Hand,
Strength and direction thence seek, firmest stand.
If this check the Presumptuous, make-attent
The weak to better Lights, I Have my intent.
Der Wunder-Stein spricht.
. 99. BIn ich nicht, sage mir, ein wunder volles wesen?
Ich bin bey jederman, ein unbekanter stein,
Doch Kenn' ich all welt: Dis kanstu klarlich lesen,
Wixt nur, wie sichs gebuhrt dein Auge fleisig seyn
Ich bin ein kleiner stein, doch ubergros zu nennen^
Pabst Keyser Konige, die Haubter dieser welt
Sich gegen mir verpflicht, erzeigen und erkennen
In them, them leven nach, sle seint in mir, gestelt.
Ich bin in meiner arth vor seht gering zu sehatzen
Doch wan man mit bedacht, mich umb und umb betracht
So bin ich uber Golt und all ding zusetzen;
In mir hat die nature ihr Meister-stuck vol-bracht:
Ich sag' ihr Meister-stuck: was kan sie bessers machen?
Nichts is it in dieser welt, so kunst-und-wondervoll.
Besihe stuck vor stuck von allen ihren sachen
Nicht eines findestu them ich nach geben soll.
Dis is it kein wunderwerck, wan sie was macht volkommen,
und bildet dis und, das durch eine sahmens-kraft;
Hie solche gross hulff, ihr ganzlich war benommen:
Vnd dennoch hat sie mich gemacht nach Bildungspracht
Was da volkommen is it, das wirt nichts umb sich leiden
Es will, es soll, es mus allein und eintzig seyn.
Das einewirt gechwint sich von them andren sheiden
Sie Kommen nimmermehr volkommen uber ein.
Hie kommen uber ein volkommene Gesichter,
Gesichter: Welches viel! die uberal bekant:
In welchen freund und feind dick shacten werckund Lichter,
Zu sammen seint verknuft mit einem schonen band.
Was meinstu? Das da sey die uhrsach diser sachen.
Das sie mit solchem fleiss gezieret diesen stein?
Sie wolte das der stein den often die weisen machen,
Nicht solte uber sie, wie bisher, meister seyn.
These German Verses, made by Johannes Segerus a Weidenfeld, may be thus
rendered into English.
The Wonderful Stone speaks.
. 100. TEll me, am I not Wonderful? A Stone
That know the whole World, yet am known to none.
And this thou here thy self may clearly see,
If, as need is, thy Eye observant be.
I a small Stone oblige and entertain
The Pope, Emp'rours, Kings, who round the whole World Reign.
This they know and acknowledge, whilst that I
Show them to the Life in strange Brachygraphy.
In my kind, I am not much worth, yet may
If well considered, Gold and Pearls outweigh.
Nature in me her Masterpiece did play,
And set her rest, now she can nothing make
To excel me in Art, or Wonder; take
All her Works, them piece by piece attend,
You naught shall find that you may more commend.
What Nature perfect Paints by help of Seed
Is no great wonder, where she most did need
That forming Power, she to Seed nothing owes,
Without its help the rules of Paint out-does
In Minuture. What has perfection,
No mixture brooks, it must be one alone;
That quickly separates, which force has mixed
With perfect things, nor can with them be fixed,
Because not perfectly united. But
Here perfect Faces are with perfect put,
And known to all, do perfectly agree.
In the same place we Friends and Foes do see.
Darkness and Light here are together found,
And not confused in one nice swathing bound.
Tell me, what think may Natures reason be,
With so much diligence to beautify
A Stone? It Is that the wise Philosopher
In's Stone may boast no Mast'ry over her.
CHAP. X. The Heart Prophecy.
. 101. THe Heart Prophecy, quoted in the Title Page, written in Hebrew on
Parchment, and wrapped up in Lead in the form of a Heart, was found under the
Foundation of St. Denis Church in France, by the Sexton of the place, as he
dug for the erecting of a Monument for the Lord Teligni, Anno. Chr. 1616. He
gave it to the Pope's Nuncio, who rewarded him with 200 Dollars. It was
translated into Latin by John Barmarino, Secretary to the Cardinal of Bruges,
who had it from the Nuncio, and presented it to the young King Lewis the 13th.

Obruit Italiam saevo Mars impiuus ense.
Unica sunt Christi Pascua, campus oves.
Totum operit Mundum terror and ira Dei.
Pauci JEHOVAM veruntur.
Inclytus exurgit factis 1661. 1665. 1666. 1667. 1678. 1686. 1693. 1699. 1700.
1710.
Heroes.
Europa tremit, Asiam urget metus.
Generalis Terra motus erit.
Agnoscant omnes Gentes Deum.
Flumina siccentur ubique.
Pastor and Ecclesia unica.
In English thus Translated,
The heat of War does Italy surround.
Christ's Pasture is but one his Sheep and Ground.
God's wrath and terror does the World confound.
They are few who God Reverence.
1661. 1665. 1666. 1667. 1678. 1686. 1693. 1699. 1700. 1710.
A Prince shall rise of Eminence.
Asia does tremble, Europe shake.
Now is a general Earthquake.
All Nations Gods knowledge partake.
Rivers are dried every where.
Pastor and Church only one are.
. 102. Anonymus, Page 35.

NB. I need not specify what Hero it is that rouses himself, and sends out
his Forces to Action this Year, nor how Signally, upon his first Appearance,
Sicily is returned to her Obedience, etc. whilst I am writing this, April 1678.

POSTSCRIPT.
. 103. IF we expound that Line of this Heart Prophecy, which predicts the
Rising up of some Illustrious Prince, in the Year 1678, in these words;
Inclytus exurget factis Princeps.

Which we have rendered thus in English, This Year does a brave Prince up-rouse;
For great Achievements Glorious.
And understand it after the usual manner of interpreting such Prophecies. By
Princes, and their Names, sometime their Families, sometime the Kingdoms and
Dominions they govern, then in this latter sense also, this Prophecy has been
remarkably verified amongst us: For in no Year nor Age, has such a Spirit been
raised in the Representative Body of any Kingdom, or any Reformed Nation, as
has been moved in the Parliament and People of England, on so just, weighty,
and unremoveable grounds against Rome, and all its Agents, Instruments, and
Favorers, nor can it ever be possibly laid, but must necessarily exert its
vigor in great Actions under some Prince, as God shall be pleased to move, or
direct them, against his and their Enemies.

January 1679. The news of our Defensive League concluded with Holland, which
is now come after I had written this Postscript, is a farther Verification of
this Prophecy, and an Introduction to that League which brings on what is
Predicted in the following Lines and Years of this Heart Prophecy.

I conclude with the German Copies, of a sudden happy Year, Page 220. Judicium
de L. in T. consequens diuturni belli beata tempora.

VII. Sperandum est intra istos 14 Annos, ab Anno 1666. i. ad Annum Christi
1680. aedificatum iri novam Hierosolimam reductis in Ecclesiae gremium Gentibus
and populis. Blessed Times will follow after a tedious War.

VII. It is to be hoped that within this 14 Years, computed from the Year 1666.
i. About the Year 1680, the New Jerusalem will be built, and the Gentiles will
be Reduced into the Bosom of the Church.

This the Heart Prophecy resers to 1699.

CHAP. XI. William Postellus his Mystical Key.
. 104. NAture endured 1656 Years, until the Flood.

Scripture (comprising 800 Years of Law intercalate) 1503.

Grace, 1546. Therefore Judgment is at hand for Babel's Ruin, drying up
Euphrates, building New Jerusalem by Spirit and Fire.

R Nature. H Natural. M God. Mundus World. Oriens East Merides. South Occidens
West Aquilo North Year. Spring Summer Autum Winter Man. Child Youth Manhood
Old Age Elements. Earth Water Air Fire. O Law. O Rational. E Father. Patriarch.
Adam Moses Messiah Elihuh Law. Obedience Charity Faith Concord Book. Genesis
Ol. Test. N. Test. Revelation Sense. Literal Moral Alegorical Anagogical T
Gospel M Spiritual N Son Evangelist. Matthew Mark Luke John Cherub. Man Ox Lion
Eagle Mystery. Incarnation Passion Resurrect. Ascension Gifts. Wisdom Justice
Sanctifica. Redemption A Judgment. O Heavenly. S Spirit. Visitation. Earth
Egypt Jerusalem Babel Rivers. Pison Gihon Hidekel Euphrates Faces. Water Moses
Christ Jerusalem Witnesses. Spirit and Water Fire and Water Water and Blood
Spirit and Fire.

By this Key, it appears, that to the Northern Monarchy reserved to the Winter
and Old Age of the World, are attributed by the Wise, the most excellent
powerful Agents, Fire, and Government-Monarchick, therefore called the Kingdom
of God, and his Christ; Law of Love and Peace, Ministry; interpreting the most
hidden Mysteries of Nature by Fire, of Gospel by Revelation; Choicest Gifts,
Successes, Graces and Glories.

CHAP. XII.
. 105. FOr a close, we will here add some other Prophecies, which predict the
Fall of Rome (though they specify not the Hand that must destroy it) to be from
the North.

And first, let the Nun Hildegard speak:

Popes, Cardinals, etc. says she, seek to defend what they possess
unrighteously: First, with their Curse, and shutting up the Heavens: but the
same will not serve, nor shall Men fear it any whit. [Thus much of her Prophecy
is fulfilled at this Day.] After that (she proceeds) they will get them to
their Armor and Weapons, but against the Judgment of God they can do nothing,
for the time is come, etc. We see this fulfilled also in our Days, for God has
both discovered their Policies, and broken all the Powers they have hitherto
brought against us.

. 106. Walter Linn, in the ticklish Times of Edward the 6th's Reign, toward
the support of good Men's Hearts, first translated out of the German Tongue, and
published certain Prophetical Emblems, declaring the beginning and ruin of the
Popish Kingdom; these were Reprinted by John Charlewood, in the Year 1588, (of
a good intent doubtless) to encourage and animate his Countrymen against the
Spanish Invasion; they were of at least 300 Years standing at that time, and
taken at first out of some ancient Libraries, as he relates.

The very first symbolizes with this of Hildigardis, and shall therefore here
accompany it.

I. The first Figure in that Book, is a Pope with his Tripple Crown and Crosier
feeding a devouring Bear with Money, without any regard at all to the Holy
Dove, which sat on his left side. This the German Author expounds thus, by way
of Question and Answer.

Quest. Wherewith does the Pope defend his Church now?

Answ. With worldly Might, and cruel Mercinary People, signified by the Bear,
and not by the Spirit of Christ.

. 107. III. The third Figure represents a Pope on his Knees, admonished by a
Hand out of a bushy Tree, pulled back by a Fox, that lays hold on, and tugs him
by his Monks Hood that hangs down his Back.

The Monks and Jesuits are, as it were; the tail of the Roman Beast, or Papacy,
and are the means by which the Pope and Roman Church are pulled and held back
(as it were) from hearing the good Counsels sent them from Heaven for their
Reformation, attending to his Admonitions, or regarding the workings of his
Hand and Arm bared against them, who thereby render all their Devotions
fruitless and ineffectual, whilst Policy overrules Piety.

. 108. V. In the fifth Figure, the Pope with his Sword thrusts the Holy Lamb
through the Heart. For which the Devil gives him Keys, i. His Papal Power and
Might, the Keys of Hell.

. 109. VI. The sixth represents the Pope in his Robes, with his Crosier and
Keys, and with a Treasure of Ducats, a Serpent and a Cock on his right Hand,
and a Lamb with his Head cut off laid at his feet.

This the German Author thus interprets the Pope, partly by the sense (awful
respect) of his Cross and Keys; and partly by the power of the Devil, and help
of France, utterly subdues the innocent Lambs of Christ's Flock.

. 110. XII. XIII. XIV. A Bear, with Whelps sucking on her, fall on the Pope. A
Fox runs away with his Banner and Keys. And at last he is set naked on the
Ground, and derided by a Clown.

X. The Unicorn pushing down the Pope's Triple Crown, is above. See Chap. II.

. III. Let our Countryman take the next turn, who thus Muses.

That Year in which Rome's long-lived Empery,
Shall from the Day in which it was at height,
Sum up MDCLXV and I,
In order as those Letters here I write.
That Year, that Day, that Hour, will put a Date
To her Usurped Power, reserving neither
Top, Root, or Branch, of that accursed State,
Nor Limb, nor Body, Hand, Horn, Claw, or Feather,
For here are all the Numerals of Rome,
In order as they are in Valuation,
Without Disorder, Want, or Iteration.
Nor shall it longer stand, or sooner fall,
If I mistake not Him who Governs all.
That Kingdom then the Jew did long ago
Mould out according to his erring Brain,
And whereof many zealous Christians too
Unwarrantable Fancies entertain,
That Kingdom whereof now in Types we hear,
Shall to the World essentially appear. So be.
. 112. The next shall be the Latin Prophecy, transmitted to us from Reuchline,
Erasmus, Lipsius, and Jane Dousa the younger, which pretends to tell us the
precise Year of the fall of Turk and P^pe, etc.

Post mill expletos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post Sexcentos ru^sus ab orb datos,
Nonagessimus Octavus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum gaudia multa feret.
Corruet hoc Anno Turcarum invisa propago:
Roma tuum in libris fabula nomen erit.
Omnia tunc Mundi retro ibunt atque deorsum
Imperia, ut Populos Sceptra novella premant,
Utque suum cunctas verbum defundat in oras
Christus, and imperitet nomine ubique suo.
. 113. Thus Englished by my Author.

Six thousand Years from Virgins Birth expired,
Six hundred unto that acquired,
The famous Ninety Eighth Year shall come on,
Full of great Contentation.
This Year the Turkish hateful race shall rue,
Rome for a Fable pass not true.
Then shall be tossed all Kingdoms of the World,
And into a new Kingdom hurld,
That into all Coasts, Christ his Word may spread,
And be alone his Peoples Head.
NB. This harmonizes exactly with the Heart Prophecy. See there the Years 1693,
1699.

. 114. I find a Prophecy transcribed by Paraeus, into his Exposition of the
Revelation, with the following Title, which accords very well with this; and
besides pretends to intimate to us, who that Christian Prince shall be, who
shall Conquer both Pope and Turk, and Reduce the whole World to the Obedience
of Christ.

Obiter in gratiam lectorum (inquit) huc lubet excribere Prophetiam ex
antiquissimo codice M. S. in aedibus praepositi Saleziani reperto, nuper ad me
missam: Cui tribuat quisque quantum vult: certe a presenti oraculo, quantum ad
Romae excidium, non aberrat, sic igitur id habet.

Surget Rex ex Natione illustrissimi Filii (forte Lilii) habens frontem longam,
supercilia alta, Oculos longos, nasumque aquilinum: Is congregabit exercitum
magnum, and omnes Tyrannos Regni sui destruet: Et morte percutiet omnes
fugientes in montibus, and cavernis sese abscondentes a facie ejus. Nam ut
sponsus sponsae ita erit Justitia ei associata. Gum illis usque ad 40 Annos
deducet bellum, subjugando Insulanos, Hispanos and Italos; Romam, and
Florentiam destruet, and igne comburet, poteritque Sal seminari super terram
illam. Supremos Clericos qui sedem Petri invaserunt morte percutiet, eodemque
Anno duplicem Coronam obtinebit. Postremo Mare transiens cum Exercitu magno
intrabit Graeciam, and Rex Graecorum nominabitur. Turcas and Barbaros
subjugabit, faciendo edictum, quicunque Crucifixum non adoraverit morte
morietur. Et non erit qui resistere poterit ei, quia Brachium Sanctum a Domino
semper cum eo erit. Et Dominium Terrae possidebit. His factis, Sanctorum
requies Christianorum vocabitur, etc.

Hactenus Prophetia.

I will here, says he, by the way, in favor of my Reader, transcribe a
Prophecy from a very ancient Manuscript, found in the House of the Provest of
Salez, lately sent unto me. To which every Man may give what Credit he pleases;
certainly it is not much discrepant from this present Oracle, as to what
concerns the destruction of Rome.

It runs thus:

A King shall arise out of the Nation of the most illustrious Son (Lilly)
having a long Forehead, lofty Eyebrows, long Eyes, an Hawk Nose: He shall
draw together a great Army, and shall destroy all the Tyrants of his Kingdom:
And shall slay all those that shall fly from his Face; and hide themselves in
Mountains and Caves. For he shall be Married unto Justice, as the Bridegroom to
the Bride. He shall continue War against them for 40 Years, subduing the
Islanders, Spaniards, and Italians. He shall destroy and burn with Fire Rome
and Florence, and Salt may be sown upon that Land. He shall put to death the
highest Prelates of the Clergy, who have usurped Peter's Seat; the same Year he
shall obtain a double Crown. Lastly, He shall cross the Sea, and enter into
Greece with a mighty Army, and shall be called the King of the Greeks. He shall
subdue the Turks and Barbarians, and put out an Edict, that whosoever will not
worship him who was Crucified, shall die the Death. And none shall be able to
resist him, because an holy Arm from the Lord shall always be with him. And he
shall possess the Dominion of the whole World. After he has achieved these
things, he shall be called the Repose of holy Christians, etc. So this Prophecy.

. 115. I suppose the word Filii, is mistaken for Lilii, both from the Sense,
and from the Context, the Nation of the most Illustrious Son; unless you would
understand it of the Son of God, and so of the Jews, I know not how to
interpret. That the Author meant some King of France, or one that is allied to,
and bears the French Lillies, is manifest; because the Kingdoms he devotes to
destruction, are the known Enemies of France, and to whose Conquest he seems
most propense and adapted. And by the Islands, I understand those of the
Mediterranean, with which it is most probable he may begin to facilitate his
Conquest of Italy after Spain, which he has in his Power already. Here is no
mention of the German Empire, as if that were already Extinct, or the Princes
of it at his Devotion. The English seem to be of his Confederacy, being not
named amongst his Conquests, and too considerable (especially in their Naval
Force) and proper to assist him, to be wholly forgotten, unless united with
him. Thus far the Analogy holds well with our expected Northern Monarchy, but
his forcing the Christian Religion on the Barbarians, by the terrors of
present Death, is not agreeable to that Kingdom of Christ, whose Scepter is
Love, and which must certainly swallow up all other Powers. Nor must I
dissemble, that this Conquerour's War of 40 Years, is not consistent with the
ruin of Turk and Pope, in the Year School, unless the late and former German
Wars must be reckoned into our French Conquest, and he only be here described
who must put the last blow to the Work.

. 116. The most Critical Trial by which the Spirits of our Modern Prophets and
Enthusiasts are best discerned, are the limitations of the Times assigned by
them for fulfilling their Prophecies, in which I find Cotter as the rest
staggering and clashing. For instance, in his Vision of May 10. 1621.

Frederick, (he means the Protestants of Germany, whose Head Frederick Count
Palatine sometime was) shall recover by Aid from the North a great Army. From
the East (he means Turks, Transilvanians, etc.) 6001111 shall come, The first,
second, or third 49, or Jubilee, that is either in the Year 1670, 1719, or
1768, if we must account from the date of his Vision.

. 117. Fredericus recuperabit per auxilium a Septentrione Magnum exercitum. Ab
Orient venient. 6001111. 1o 49. 2o 49. vel 3o 49.

The first of these terms is expired, neither of the two latter accord with the
Prediction fixed on 1688, nor the Heart Prophecy. Times and Seasons are
certainly limited only by the Divine Power to particular Persons, and their
smallest, as well as to Kingdoms, and their greatest Actions. It Is little
better than Atheism, to pretend to open that Cabinet by any Picklock of
Geomancy, Astrology, or the like curious and vain Art. I know who said once,
that one of seven Nativities were not true; and a more learned Artist than he,
much more positively affirmed, that one of a hundred horary Questions, were not
of any certain signification, unless some unseen Power brought and wrought the
Agents and Patients, well chosen and fitted, which they call Radical Questions.
Perhaps some will offer me to try before I censure, which is to me the same
kindness as to direct me try at the Delphick Oracle, whether God will suffer
the Devil first to curse me, and then to execute his Curse upon me, by Persons
as Godless, as they who believe not his Providence, nor just Judgment; who
gives them strong Infatuations, who believe not the Truth, to trust in Lies.

CHAP. XIII.
. 119. NOtwithstanding all that can be said, I expect not to persuade our
Adversaries to desist from their Treasonable Designs against our King, Kingdom,
Religion, and Laws, involving our Liberties.

And as they hope for a Day, so I must not deny, but that our most favorable
Writers do allow them an Hour, and therein a power of Darkning or Eclipsing our
Sun, by the interposition of their Lunary opacous Body. To this therefore I
shall speak a few words, before I dismiss my Reader.

. 120. The nameless Author of the Future History of Europe, Page 30. Answers to
an Objection made against his History, in these words: Though the World must
degenerate more and more in Civility, and Humanity, (as it has done manifestly
ever since he wrote) and Christianity be eclipsed in an higher measure, and the
true Worshippers of God decrease above whatever yet has been done: Though
Protestantism in many Coasts and Countries, shall be totally swallowed up of
Popery and Mahomitanism: More lamentable Wars and fearful Massacres rage
through England, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and all European Monarchies,
than we have yet beheld; and though some of these Kingdoms wholly revolt to
Popery, others be Lukewarm, and at a stand until 1686, yet all these shall but
make way for the final Eradication of the Enemies of the Church, and the
glorious and wonderful Birth and Erection of the Fifth (Fourth) Monarchy
Universal, which shall be brought forth by these Pangs and Sorrows of
Christendom. -- Now Judgment must begin, not at the Temple of Antichrist, but
House of God: And what Blood soever is shed upon the Soil of the Christian
Church, shall be no other than fruitful Showers and warm Seasons, to make the
Field of the Church more pregnant in the production of that glorious Harvest of
Saints, which shall cover the World; so he and our English Seers consent. He
that comes with the Chicken of the Eagle, says one, (i. that Landed with him)
the dreadful Dead Man (his right Character in several respects) Invades and
wastes England with Fire and Sword two Years, he that intro duces Popery, etc.
Arise Evans says, he cannot be Crowned for all that: He saw five young Faces
in the Royal Line succeed one another in an uninterrupted Series, and there are
just so many now alive, C. M. A. J. W. and he of them who overcomes his Popish
Enemies ( England has no other) in a Bloody Battle, Erit Carolo magno major.

. 121. So hitherto there is little encouragement for the Pope's Nuncio to come
amongst us with his Consecrated Banner; he may spill and let out much of our
corrupted Blood, but shall never reach our Heart. See the Archbishop of
Armath's Printed Prophecy.

To be sure no old dotard Pope shall ever be Crowned in England (however
Gadbury and his Stars flatter him) if Arise Evans were a Prophet.

The German Enthusiasticks sing the same Tune with ours.

Cotterus 1621. May 10. Tentatiuncula superveniet ad explorandos Hypocritas,
Id. Mart. 20. Hoc habe pro signo Septentrionales constanter soli Justitiae
adhaesuros, meridionalem a fucatum solemn inducturum soli Justitiae nubeculam
tentationis sed cito transituram prodibit enim Paulo post Sol Justitiae pleno
fulgore. Drab. 1652. Jul. 2. Opus meum promovebo concitatione omnium gentium
adversus invicem ut quidquid mali est and Idolatrici mibique and voluntati meae
contrarii corruat prius and evertatur funditus. When I have set before the
Reader the judgment of a learned and pious Bishop concerning these Predictions,
I will conclude.

Periculosum est, says he, Prophetica tractare negocia: Quia materia haec
humanum excedit captum, super hoc lubricum facile est labi. And again, Omnium
Prophetiarum haec est proprictas ut prius impleantur quam intelligantur. And
from Acts v. 38. Nihil mali invenimus in Homine isto, quod si Spiritus ei
locutus est aut Angelus ne repugnamus Deo.

Lastly, Desino autem argumentis Divina haec esse non humana pugnare. Propriae
id cujusque hominis conscientiae ac circumspectioni, divinaeque illuminationi
committens. Thus the Publisher of these in his last Edition, pretends he dare
not contend, much less dare I; to try is all Men's duty. Irenaeus, l. 2. c. 57.
p. 218. Alil a and praescientiam habent futurorum and Visiones and dictiones
Propheticas, consule ejus commentatorem.

. 122. To fill up this vacant Page, it will not be amiss nor tedious, if I
parle a little with my Reader, about our Modern Prophecies at parting.

Prophecy, in what concerns the Fundamentals in our Religion and saving Faith,
is certainly at an end. The Spirit of Prophecy foretelling Mercies and
Judgments, for Reward and Encouragement of well, and for Punishment of or
Repressing evil doers, is not, as is manifest and undeniable, being plain
matter of Fact, in and by many Revelations fulfilled, fore-known, or foreseen
and testified by many living Witnesses and Records. Some are here inserted,
many more might be produced. Those of the Reverend Archbishop of Armath, of
the Fire of London, and other particulars long since fulfilled, and those yet
to come then most unlikely when foretold, now seem hardly to be avoided, and
need not be here repeated, because notoriously published and known to this
whole Kingdom. I hope it will be no offense, if I add hither one conspiring
wholly with his, which has been thus related to me.

. 123. A Manuscript Book was brought a little before the Fire of London, 1666,
to a Bookseller, by an unknown Person, who desired to have it Printed and
Published, which declared beforehand what came to pass as Predicted in that
Fire. The Bookseller refused to Print it, because it was not Licensed; so the
Author took away his Book with him. In the time of the Fire, this Bookseller
being very busy, saw this Author passing by, and told him, That because he had
so plainly predicted it, he had cause to suspect that his hand was in it. Nay,
replied the strange Author, if I had been accessory to so wicked a purpose, I
would not have offered my Book to Publication, which I wrote for the discovery
and prevention thereof. And added, There will follow a more dreadful execution
by Sword than this by Fire, and after that a Famine, if God deal with us as we
deserve.

. 123. Ambiguous Predictions, like those of the Sybils, and some Delphic
Oracles, without reference to particular Times, Places, Persons, Groundless
Figments, Gipsy-like Prognosticators, Welsh Impostors, Telesen, Panther,
Shipton's Prophecy, and many such like which walk about, disgrace not sober
Predictions and Premonitions, grounded on sound Reason, and agreeable to Divine
Truth.

I will conclude with Walter Linn's Admonition to the Reader, of certain German
Emblem Prophecies, Published by him first in Edward the 6th's ticklish Reign,
and Reprinted seasonably in 1588, for our Protestant Countrymens encouragement,
when the invincible Crusado and Navy invaded us. Whether these, says he, or
such like Prophecies, be of God or no, let the Godly judge. But surely, it is
commonly seen when God will show his Displeasure and Indignation, and intends
to bring to pass some great Act, that all Creatures do prophecy before, and
give Warning, although it help but little. Prophets prophesied the Subversion
of Jerusalem, Christ threatened, the Apostles warned, all availed not. They
heard Voices in the Temple, they saw Signs in the Element, they heard Battles
in the Clouds. Madmen, and such as were out of their Wits did prophecy it
unto them, but all these Signs prevailed not. They were destroyed, because they
despised God's Word. Even so it shall happen to the Papists. Daniel, Zachary,
Christ, Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 4. Peter, 2. Pet. 2. Their own Bishops, Abbots,
Monks, Nuns, Astronomers, long since prophesied it to them; common Rumor,
Proverbs, Visions, Signs, all prevailed nothing; therefore must they be
destroyed, there is no remedy: That which they will not now, they must see to
their Grief at last, when all help is past.

Wherefore let no good Christian grieve himself with them, but rather suffer
and take with Patience, and pray unto God to revenge the Blood of his Saints,
and speedily deliver us from those cruel Tyrants. Thereby shall a Man get a
greater Conquest over them, than by Sword and Armor. God knows well where such
a Titus is, as shall be the destruction of those Arrogant Rabbis; To whom be
all Honor, Praise, Glory, etc. Amen. So this good Man.

John Aurelius Augurelius, in the second Book of his Chrysopaeia, describes and
commends the forementioned admired Agat of King Pyrrhus, ( v.. 93.) whose
Verses on that Subject, I thought not unworthy to be inserted here (rather than
to trouble the Margent there) with their English Translation; not only because
of the likeness of the Subject, but also, lest perhaps any Reader not versed in
the Greek History, should think our Modern Relation the less Credible, because
unparalleled in all former Times. His words are these:

-- Illis (Gemmis) -- nitens distentaque miris
Interdum maculis facies, Jam qualis Achaten
Aeacidae ornarat Musis and Apolline felix.
Vos, Natura Parens, nulla cui motus ab Art
Provenit, O Divae, parva concludere Gemma
Sponte novem voluit, propriisque insignibus omnes
Ornatas; mediumque simul considere Phaebum
Deposito mitem Cornu, citheraque canentem:
His ut testatum signis mortalibus estet
Quo numero, and quali semper praestatis honor.
Vide Theatrum Chemicum. Vol. 3. p. 310.
Gems sometimes have their beauteous Faces spread,
And patcht with wondrous Shapes: Thus dapled
That happy Agat was, in which was shown,
Apollo and Nine Muses, the renown
Of Warlike Pyrrhus. Mother Nature so,
Assisted by no Art, designed to show
In her own work the learned Nine, and there
Made each her proper Character to bear.
In midst of them made disarmed Phoebus sit,
And to his Harp sweetly his Voice to fit:
Thus unto Mortals she joy'd to declare
Both what their Number, and their Titles were:
Happy King Pyrrhus who this Gem possessed,
And they whose Eyes beheld it, thought them blessed.
The Publisher to the Reader.
AFter I had Transcribed this, to meet with their Incredulity, which would, as
I conjecture, seek shelter from the unexampled varieties of the Images, seen in
so small a Stone: I met with another Objection, which I thought fit to obviate
here also, namely, that the Features appropriated in this Relation to several
Persons, as namely to the Turk, Pope, Emperor, and King of England, are only
the Draughts of the beholders Fancies, or imposed upon them by the Relators. To
this I answer: That it is as usual for Persons, who view the best drawn Pieces
of the most excellent Painters, to differ in their Judgments about them, and
some to fancy them to be more, and some to be less, or not at all like the
Original. 2. That as in other Pictures, so much more in these, the curious
Artist verst in Minuture, whose Eyes serve them to work in Draughts to others
unperceptible, are the truest judges. 3. That ordinary Eyes on first view,
without being at all imposed on, have been able to name the Persons
forementioned, without any suggestion from others; and curious Artists,
practiced in Painting, discern many more than others can either see or fancy.
So that, in truth, they who would reprove others of credulous Fancies, who see
the aforesaid Resemblances in this Stone, do discover their own distrustful
Fancies, in contradicting their own and others better Eyes in those Objects, of
which they are the most proper Judges, and whilst with too much caution they
avoid the imputation of Credulity, they lay themselves too open to the censure
of the contrary rude and less tolerable Vice. 4. Some of the Features
aforementioned, are too notorious to be mistaken by those who know them, and
all who see them in this Stone, and concur in opinion of their Resemblance to
one and the same Person (who are not a few) cannot be thought to be led by
fancy to such an agreement, and much less to combine to deceive others. See the
Figures of Alexander the 7th. etc.

Since this, I understand that Mr. Ellers is returned into England, and is at
present in London. If I can by any diligent inquiry come to speak with him, I
will give a more perfect History and Description of his wondrous Agat, and
present the Reader with the Draughts of some of the principal Appearances which
have been lately discovered in France, by some good Eyes there, beyond what
were discerned before in this Stone.

. 126. Quirinus Kuhlman, in his late London Epistle, has some Passages which I
thought fit to set down here, because of the consent I find betwixt them and
the Observations of our learned Astronomer Doctor Banbridg,.30. as above.

In his 41 Page he mentions the Comet of the 19th of November. 1652. (foretold 8
days before by Drabritius) of the self-same day wherein the Orders at Vienna
were signed for a Reformation in Selesia, his Native Country, and which took
its course from the place of Noah's Dove with its Olive Branch, directly to
that where the famous new Star of 1672 appeared. In the same Page is the Solar
Eclipse of the 12th of Aug. 1674, interpreted divinely, as he says, by Stephen
Melish, in his 115 Vision. In his 42 Page he mentions two Comets, one of
December. 1664, which joined it self with another, which appeared about Easter
1665, near the Ears of the Ram, and became the Sun's Companion, beyond what
has been known in any former Age; and another about Easter, 1677, which he
there terms the swift Executor of all the foregoing Stars, Comets, and
Conjunctions, and the introducer of Changes upon the whole World. In the same
Page, Paragraph 96, and 97, he thus discourses: These ordinary and
extraordinary Witnesses, the forerunners of the greatest Alterations, though
they surpass the Wits of Heathen Astrologers, yet do they so clearly attest the
Change of all Kingdoms, that the public and private written and Moral Conceits
of all Men agree in this; That some unheard of Revolution is to be expected.
But, says he, there is no Astrologer of those I have seen, whose Conjectures
have come nearer the Truth, than the Almanack-Writer of Staden, who expressly
compares the two Comets of 64, and 65, to two who gave in their evidence before
a Judge, and the 3d to a public Herald, proclaiming the sentence given in upon
the foregoing Evidence: And therefore declares his opinion, That within 24
Months, ( viz. Id. p. 47. The two Years time of the last Comet expired May
1679, says this Epistler.
before Easter, 1679.) the Work of God will be Manifested, by preparing the
whole Roman and Turkish Empire for quite another War, than is now believed,
which is to last till the next Age, and to run over the greatest part of the
whole World; and that the end of it will be the Propagation of the Gospel in
the East, and the return of the Christian Church to the place of its first rise.

. 127. This may suffice to show the consent of these late Writers, with the
learned Doctor B's. opinion, that whilst Comets, etc. signify great Changes
for the worse, to those parts of the World who are Enemies to the Church of
Christ, they signify the Progress and Advantage of the Christian Faith, and
its true Professors, whose rise is their fall, Et vice versa.

I will add a Passage or two out of Drabritius and Cotter, as I find them
expounded by the same Author, page 74. in which he concludes: That whatsoever
the holy Scripture has foretold concerning the Papal and Turkish State under
the Time, Times, and half a Time of 1176 Years, will according to those Writers
be fully accomplished in the Year 1688, which harmonizes with that Prophecy of
that Year set down above,. 113.

The words of Drabritius in his 395 Revelation, are these: Count the number of
the 70 Weeks from the day of my departure, if thou have understanding, where an
end must be made of Battle and Wars, which are at present; for when they shall
cry out Peace and Security, I will come to execute Judgment, the time, and
times, and half a time drawing to an end. So he.

The Expositor puts the time of Christ's departure to his 37th Year. The rise
of the Dragon 527, ( viz. 70 Weeks after) his two times to begin 897, his half
1607, his end 1787, the end of the 1260 Apocalipt Years, page 74.. 23. our of
the 10th Chap. 40th ver, of Cotterus, he tells us, That the half time of the
Treaders down begins 1260, according to which one time begins 612, two times
948, half a time 1620, which accordingly expires 1788. ( viz. adding 168 to
1620, the Year of our Lord.)

According to another Computation out of Cotterus, Chap. 24. ver. 5. He tells
us the 1176 Years of the two Witnesses, expired 5 Years since 1674, their 1260
Year-days, and Solar Months expressly allotted them in the Revelation, will
according to the same Explication, end 1685. And that in this regard, the first
day begins 435, the 2d, 785, the 3d, 1145, the 4th, 1505. So that both
according to Solar and Lunar Months, the determined time of the Witnesses is
come.

He means that according to one Computation, it came in 1674; and according to
the other it is expected 1685, nor precisely, but within those ten Years, or
about those times.

. 128. His Observation he makes, page 68, and 69, of the different State of the
Reformed and Latheran Charles's from the Papal, to the joy of the Papists, both
Caroli and Carolo, prompts me to conclude, as he does, with hearty Wishes, That
they would unite against their common Enemy, before Extremities compel them.
That so the Prophecy of Carolus a Carolo set above, may be fulfilled in them
jointly, or one of them personally Leagued with the other.

. 129. To fill up this vacant Page, take our British Musers interpretation of
the time of Romes fall, according to his Prediction above. 111. in his own
words, in his Speculum Speculativum, page 128, etc,

I Will add this Coralary by the way,
Whilst on his Horns the Beast is casting Hay:
For, if deceived I am not, our Disease
Chiefly proceeds underhand from these:
And though (a farther-off-removed cause
Pretending) they bescratch as with the Paws
Of other Beasts, it plainly may be seen,
By whom our Troubles have contrived been.
To act the last Scene, which precedes their doom,
They now, new vampt, upon the Stage are come:
And tho that with the King, as if his Friends,
They seem to side, they come for other ends;
Which he not yet discerning, in his Grace
Vouchsafes them a considerable Place.
And of prevailing they already boast,
As if they saw the Lamb and all his Host
Quite overthrown; which me as confident
Has made, that God their proud hope will prevent,
And overthrow Rome's Tyranny outright,
By what they dream shall raise it to its height.
But many Trials must the Saints abide,
And very much their Patience will be tried
Here and elsewhere, before that Act is done,
Which with an Antimask is now Jun. 13.60.
begun.
Our Friends inhabiting beyond the Waters,
And who were of our Tragidies spectators,
Now twenty Years, tho they perceive it not,
Or seem not to perceive it, in that Lot
Which these have cast for us, designed are,
Or in what follows next, to have a share
For Haman's Pur's on foot, not only here,
But likewise almost every other-where,
And these think that to take them by this Gin
With most speed, is with us first to begin.
But there is a Countermine, which will be sprung,
To blow up them and all their Mines e're long.
Six hundred sixty six draws on apace,
And not one day beyond that shall they pass.
It is the number of that Man of Sin,
Whereto his Kingdom has confined been,
By him that cannot Lie. --
In former times this Mystery was dark,
And lay a long time covered like a spark
In Ashes, lest perhaps what at this time
Will comfort us, might have discouraged them
Who lived then: For Men rejoice to hear
The day of their Deliverance is near.
But nothing save Discomfort could they gain,
By knowing that Tyrants so long should Reign.
Herein I cicumstantially perchance
May err somewhat through Human Ignorance:
But as to that which was essentially,
To as intended by this Mystery,
I shall not fail in it; which is to presage,
That Babylon shall fall in this our Age.
Seven Numerals the Roman Empire had,
Whereby of old they Computations made,
And in them was their Destiny foreshown,
Though to themselves perhaps it was unknown.
Those placed singly, as they valued are,
Do truly, though mysteriously, declare,
How long that Empire, with what sprung therefrom
Should last, when to the full height it should come:
For MDCLX with V and I,
Do number up in Chronogramistry,
Years 1666, and that
Will be of Roman Tyranny the date.
-- If you ask when
This number did begin I say even then,
When Rome declined first from her height of Pride,
Which was when Jesus Christ was Crucified.
-- Since Iniquity
Was set up veiled with a Mystery,
As in these later Times, with greater evils
The Saints do grasp. For they contend with Devils
In shapes of Man, in temporal confusions,
Made terrible by Spiritual delusions;
And therefore God allotted unto him,
Who Tyrannizeth now, a shorter time,
And to a certain Day his Reign did fix,
Which ends at 666.
And he who knows on what day it begun,
May know the day on which it will be done;
Which I believe will visibly appear,
In or about the 17000 Year.
And whilst we talk of Righteousness and Peace,
They who concealed their Maliciousness
With fair Deportment, do anew begin
So to declare what they have always bin.
As makes in many Inlets to some fear,
That, till it ends in a Massacre,
No Vengeance will their Projects terminate,
Or set a lasting period to their hate.
A bloodless Massacre here is already,
Begun amongst us, and it will be Bloody,
When you perceive admittance of those Jesuits.
strangers,
Who first began our Plagues, renew our Dangers;
And then they who suppose their persons free,
Will with the rest in equal Perils be:
For boundless lustings Mischiefs will beget,
Which lie within the Womb unbeeded yet,
Where Sin and Death are Twins conceived together,
Though born a little while before each other.
Thus he.

Errata non Corrigenda.
. 130. Ult. For Partiality: Write very little, very necessary, very excusable
amongst ill Neighbors on every side.

My Countryman wants a little new French Confidence, or old honest Spanish
Pride, to set him out.

It is an ill Office not worth the having (in our Days) in which a Man may not
favor his Friends, Relations, and Clients, said the Laconian King.

For Flattery: Write to no Man's hurt, (...).

Qui laudat factum quod non facis, ille monetque
Laudondo, and monitu monstrat agenda pio.
Who 'a noble Act commends, exhorts to do it,
And by his Exhortation leads unto't.
It is not fit to say to Princes, You are Wicked.

Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est.

Nor Wit, nor Manners, Saucinese allow,
We praise them who to please, great Princes know.
For Fanaticism, and Enthusiasim: Write nullum magnum

Ingenium sine mixtura dementiae,
No wonder if great Wits like Madmen write,
Great Men transported, so Act, so Indite.
Ad Gallos.
Odimus Accipitrem quia semper vivit in armis.
Hawks always armed, always ingrate,
Whom all Men fear, all Mankind hate.
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
Whence Pleasure rise, who Profit raise,
Win the Prize and wear the Praise.
Finis Libri Primi.

