ATHEISMUS VAPULANS, OR, A TREATISE AGAINST ATHEISM, Rationally Confuting the
ATHEISTS of these Times.

By WILL. TOWERS, B. D. sometime Student of Christs-Church in Oxon.

Nec cur^^^ Deum quenquam Mortalia credis!

Virgil. At quae est haec summa Delicti, Nolle Agnoscere, quem Ignorare non
Potes! Cypr. De Idol. Vanit.

Psalm. 58.11. Verily, there is a God.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

modern bookplate

TO THE Right Honorable, the Lord NEWPORT, Lord of High Ercall, his singular
good Lord, the Author dedicates the Book and Himself, and implores his
Honorable Protection upon both.
Right Honorable,
SAlveto, quantumque Cupis, quantumque Mereris. Your Lordship may, perhaps,
wonder, to see Me in Print; and you may, above the rest of Honorable
Personages (to some of whom, I am only known de Facie; to others, de Nomine;
to Most, not so much, as that there is such a Creature, in Rerum Natura; and to
your Peculiar Lordship Intimately, quem nosti, tanquam Te, Such has been the
Humility and Graciousness of your Lordship's Stooping Affection) have store of
Reasons for it; your Lordship has known me, a Teneris, to be very far from
Public, or from Private-Great-Commerce; and, had not your Lordship
condescended to take notice of me, when I was Nothing, that by your taking
Notice of me, I might be Something, your Lordship knows, I had still been only
a Contemptible part of that Obscure Crowd, out of which your Extracting
Influences have exhaled me, though not to a Solid Consistency, yet, to Hover
above it, whenever your eminent Lordship is the Center of my Meditations, and
to Relapse into it, whenever I leave off to think of your Lordship: besides
this infirmness of my own Solitary, and Un-conversing Disposition, your
Lordship does know, how Un-furnish'd I am, in the Upper Story of the Man, of
that, which some have well called, in relation to Better Heads, Agapetus.
an Ambulatory Library; and, your Lordship May know, by the Fate of these
times, the Ineluctabile Fatum, and, as to Me, not the One, only, but the

Fati Series, Jo. Secund.
and iniqua Tyrannis Fortunae -- the Upper Story of the House too, is, in part,
Disspoyl'd of, and, in part, not Inhabited by, a Stationary Library; and how
Such a Man should either Write at all, or Presume to affix your
Exactly-Learned, and Critical Name, your Lordship may go on to Wonder, till I
have taken off Both these Astonishments from your Collective Self, qui Unus
mihi instar Theatries, and from my Common Reader (every of which may, in a
Throng, as the Author Himself does, pass, One by one, for a Single Man, and are
not, our Several Selves, what your Lordship is, an Entire Sum) by telling Them,
and Remembering You (who have so much of the Good Caesar in you, to forget
nothing but your own Condescensions, and the Benefits you have done) that, had
I no other Books, but That One Volume of Letters, which I have received from
your Hand, These alone are enough to Create a Genius in Him, who was, before,
as very a Fungus, and Stipes, and Truncus, and Lignum, as my self: Nor is This
to Boast ought in Me, besides that I have been so much Favored, and Taught, by
the Familiar skill of Your Lordship's Pen.

Upon This Stock it is that I dare to write; and must suspect Him to be more
Read in Books, than in Men, who though with as Good Authority, as Great
Distaste, He throws Me and my Name away, does not Judiciously take them up
again, when He Sees, that Your Rays have Enlightened me, and Your Name Supports
me: If He Considers This, He will be favorable to me for your Lordship's sake,
nay, for His very Own, lest Himself might Incurr That Unlearned Name, by which
He calls me, in that He is Wholly Ignorant of your Lordship, that is, of the
Totum, quod est, in re literaria; for, You do not only Instill, and Encourage
Learning, but you Possess it All; As St. Austin said true of Hierome in a
Letter to Cyril, Quae Hieronymus Nescivit, nullus hominum unquam Scivit; So, no
doubt, He had said as true, had He told Cyril, or Any else, Had He, and They,
known nothing at all of what Hierome knew, they had indeed known nothing at
all; let not the Reader Censure too fast, and I will quit His Kindness, and
spare the Application; and I have learnt from that Hierome (who thought it some
Addition to His Fame, that He had G. Nazianzenum and Didimum, in Scripturis
sanctis Catechistas habui. L. 2. Ep. 4.
Nazianzen and Didimus for his Teachers) to acknowledge This the best Stake in
my Reputation, that my Ears, and Eyes, drank Instructions out of your Mouth and
Pen.

We have, yet, (and we bless God for it) in, and of, England, a Nobility, not
only made so, by Both those Bloods, that in their Veins, and the other Wealthy
Purple they were Cradled In, and Born To, but made more Noble yet, by the
Mothers side, the Present Universities, and by their Other Nurses, Sage, and
Learned Authors. But, O! may not After Ages, when Themselves have no Profound,
Greek, All-Languag'd, and All-Matter'd PERPOINT; no Suddenly-Oratorious
SEYMOUR, who, at an Instant, can Hear, and Reply to, the Premeditations of a
Whole University; no Scholastically-Learned SCUDAMORE, who knows More of Good
Distinction, than others do of Bad Division; no Devoutly-Learned HATTON, who
can Write better Piety, than Others can Semble; no Humanely and
Naturally-Learned TRACY, who can teach Morality to the Professor, and
Prescribe to the Doctors themselves, nay to Him of the Chair too; no NEWPORT,
who is, in Himself, All of These, and Loves, and Countenances, in Others, the
very Buds and Sproutings of Any of these; may they not, then, misdoubt, that,
even we also, had them not? they may, but that we well hope, the Stems, and
Derivatives of some of These, will be their Able, and Living Confutations. Your
Lordship has, why I write.

And why upon this Subject, to Prove That God to Be, who is, not only All,
that is Everywhere, but, Principiatively, and Fundamentally, All, that is
Any-where; not only in Simplici Entitate, but, in complexione Propositionis,
as your Lordships, and My, Aristotle has, long fince, distinguished, and, in re
omni Cognoscibili; Besides the Particular reason (as the first Motive and
Ground of this Design, with which the Entrance of this Book will acquaint your
Lordship) the Loud Noise abroad, that there is No God, besides that, which is
Diffused (and As it is Diffused) amongst the People, as well as no Power in the
State, but, Originally in the People (which Opinion, how dangerous and disloyal
it is even to Any Authority, in Any State, if the People have but a Will to
Disobey, I leave to the Prudent Wisdom of those Several Authorities, to
consider) no Power in the Church, even to Ordain Ministers, but Fundamentally
in the People (which Opinion, if not how Destructive it is to all true
Christianity, yet how Promoting it is, to the Sowing of Tares, in Christ's
Field, if the Some People have a Will to Ordain a Schismatick-Minister, and the
Other People an Heretick-Priest, I leave to the Holy Wisdom of my Brethren in
the Same Calling, to Consider) and this, so loud a Noise, that it reached even
to my Remote, and knocked at my Un-inquiring Cell; this unwelcome Noise, which
did first put me in Mind of what Heraclitus said, Aristotel. l. 1. de Part.
Animal. c. 5.
that, In Casulis etiam sunt Dii, and made me so far from disbelieving a God,
because I have but a thin Cottage over my Head, and That Ruinated, and, in
part, Fallen, that I am rather willing to Cry out, Stantia non Poterant Tecta
Probare Deum, Martial.
And to Worship my God the more for his Chastizing of Me; and, then made, me
Weep with Heraclitus, when I heard that Others were Full, and denied God, Prove.
30.9.
and said, Who is the Lord? and then made me Mourn again, that That Observation
of Petrarch should be true, in this Unthankful age, De Remed. Utr. Fort.
Epist. Prae. fat.
in quam nos Deus Reservavit. Qui Damna, Pauperiem, Exilium, Carcerem,
Supplicium, Mortem, and, Pejores Morte, Graves Morbos, aequo animo tulerunt,
Multos vidi; qui Divitias, Honores, Potentiam, Nullum; It, at length, wrought
this Persuasion in me, that, as for the sakes of some of my Countrymen, it is
Wretchedly-Seasonable, not only to Catechize Practically, (as He, H.H. D.D.
who does all things Incomparably, has Incomparably done) nor only
Doctrinally, (as Many) but to prelude That, without which They could not Teach,
nor We Know, and Do as We Ought; and to Compel the Belief and Profession of a
God into the Most Doubtful Man, by the Clear, and Deliberate, Dis-passionate,
Un-interested, and Most Impartial Testimony of His Own Self and Soul: So, the
Mean, Inconsiderable, if not Despicable Condition of the Author, in respect of
this Worlds affluencies, might add some Weight to the Witness-bearing unto the
truth of GOD, in that, shall I say, I own Him not the Less? Nay, in that I
Reverence Him the more, for the Counsel, and Benefit of His very Rod.

My Lord, may I not say, of the GOD and Author of them, as a Late Learned
Author has said of the Difficulty of Scriptures, J. G. in His Ep. to the L.B.
of S.
that, if, while some others, Preach, and Preach, and Preach, and Travel a
Sabbath-daies, and a Week-daies Journey too, to do it, some one do, as well as
he Can, toward the making good of this Groundwork, I think He may be let alone
at least? Ovid. Virgil.
and have Veniam pro Laud; Neither -- Spolia ampla reportans, nor, Spoliatus
Ipse? And may I not wish, that my Brethren, not only in the Profession of
Christianity, but in the Ministerial Function too, would all of them do what
some of my Fathers, and Brethren do, spend their Wits, and Cares, and Pains,
upon Establishing the True Fundamentals, and Raising the True Superstructions,
and Edifications out of them, and upon them? that they would Itinerate and
Sermon Pertinently and Advantagiously, not only to the State (though to the
State also) but, Principally, to the Church, the Kingdom of Christ? that they
would be Apostles (if they are Apostles) that they would be Ministers, not of
Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ? Gal. 1.1. not, but that the Outward
Calling, the Mission from Man, is required also; for, This St. Paul Himself,
(called not by Man, but by Jesus of Nazareth, Whom He Persecuted, Act. 22.8.)
was, Instantly, sent, by the Lord Himself, unto Man, Go into Damascus, and
There it shall be Told thee of All things which are Appointed for Thee to Do,
ver. 10. that they would remember That Apostolical Precept, Be ye not the
Servants of Men? 1 Cor. 7.23. not, but that they are to serve Men also, but,
not, in Opposition To Christ, even when they pretend a Compliance With Christ,
He that is Called, being free, is Christ's Servant, v. 22. and not a Gratuitous
Servant neither, He is Bought with a Price, v. 23. He must Serve Man, but Under
Christ, and Christ Himself More; He must not Serve the Pay of Man (Non Tu,
Pomponi, Martial.
Canae Diserta Tua est) and neglect the Purchase, and Price of Christ; His
Blood, and his Supper, is That Purchase, and Price; These are to be Received
and Distributed by the Ministerial Man; I, and that Often too; not only, Do ye
this, but, Do it often, 1 Cor. 11.25. This is One of the Temptations that our
Sayiour has bade them Pray, Luke 22.40.
that they enter not into, that the Wealth of this World may not be overvalu'd
above the Word, and Sacraments of Christ; not only, not Above the Word (for
some do Press that, in Season; I, and, in very deed, Out of Season too) but,
not above the Sacraments also; for, the Counsel is given, in That very Chapter,
in which the Supper is Instituted; and I am not able to apprehend, how the
Words of Man, though Upon the Word of God, can nourish Faith half so well, as
Those very words of God Himself, Ver. 19.
This is My Body which is Given for You. This for What I do.

And for the Manner How, I think I have good reason for That also, both in the
Dialectical and Pathetical part of it; The Example of Saint Paul is my Warrant,
and His Success my Hope, in that, as He Spoke concerning the Kingdom of God,
so I write concerning God Himself, Act. 19.8.
Disputing and Persuading. I know, Man is altogether Corrupt, in Head and in
Heart, and therefore I use both ways to enlighten Him, not only with a Common
Coal, but with a Torch too, and that of the best-Wrought, and best-Scented Ware
I have; I know, Some Men are more Corrupt in Heart, than in Head, and that,
having Eyes, they Will not perceive, therefore I use the latter way to Convert
them by a Pia Fraus, 2 Cor. 12.16.
and to Catch them with a Holy Craft, and a Gospel- Guile.

In the Disputing part, I make use of those Sincere Ancients who were never
stained with That Modern Imputation, Jo. Sec.
Utilitas Certabat Honesto; who loved Truth more than Expediency, and Counted
Truth it self the Best Expedient; who never Swerved from Universal Truth in all
those three Branches of Vincentius Lyrinensis's Universality, in Time, Place,
and Men, that Truth which was Anciently Believed from the very Beginning of
Time, and Every where, and by Joint Consent, and not an Almanac, or
Ephemerides-Truth, of such a Climate, which, over the Sea, is False; nor a
Politic Truth, Omnia pro Tempore; Nihil pro Veritate. Optatus, lib. 1.
of such a Time, which Was Yesterday, and Will be to Morrow, False; nor a Rich
Truth, of such a Party, which to Day is False, to a Poorer Man; of Those
Ancients, who, though at their Births, and in their Bodies, they were of
Several Distant, and Denominating Countries, yet, in their Minds, and Writings,
were (...), and Taught, not Rome, nor Athens, but the World.

Among These, I make choice of those Arguments, which, in all the Judgment I
have, are, Severally, Concluding; and therefore I may, the rather, hope, by All
of them, from the most Prejudicate Understanding, what I Promise to my Self, by
Any of them, from a Sober Mind, that He would first believe, not only, what
the Secretary of the Holy Ghost, the Author to the Hebrews, Cap. 11. ver. 3.
Cap. 3.8. Primus est Deorum Cultus Deos Credere. Sense. Ep. 95.
but what the Secretary of Nature, Epictetus too, would have him, first
believe, that God Is; (...), (and, at length, that He is, not only, as the
One, a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, but, as the Other, a Revenger
too, against them that seek Him not) (...) (else the (...) will not be (...):)
If One will not Convince this kind of Gainsayer, I would even Shame that
Stubborn, Stomachosum Hominem, with whom I have to deal, into a Confession of
truth by a Cloud (but a very Bright one) of Witnesses.

And, though these Arguments, and More, are Obvious to the Carefull-Learned,
out of Several Authors, yet, because this Sin of Atheism is a Popular Sin, the
Sin of those Ignorant, though Conceited Heads, who Do know as Little of Latin
and Greek, as they Would know of God; and because these Arguments have not,
till now, seen any English Light, I deemed it a piece of Charity to some of my
Erring Countrymen, to set such a Lamp as This, before their Eyes, whereby they
may know Him, Jam. 11.17.
who is the Father of Lights.

And, to take off from your Lordship, and Any Other Learnedly-True Man, the
Tediousness, and Nausea of a Crambe, (for, such it is, and but B is Cocta,
whatever I serve up to your Lordship, out of the Writings, though of the Ablest
Men) I hope I shall not so much Glut Your, and Their Appetite, with my Borrowed
Dishes, as Sharpen them, with a Mess or two of my own Providing; Arguments,
which (if I mistake not, out of that Partiality, which is Common to Mankind)
are of Pregnant behoof, for those who have made us believe they are about
Christning some part of Turkey; and by which, I would gladly pay Use, if not to
Posterity, to the Present Age, for what I have taken up upon Score from the
former; and, yet, not so Credulously upon Score, but that I have Tried their
Metal, with my Own Touchstone.

For the Persuasive part, though Perhaps I do not (what Your Great Lordship
does, Grotius.
Tanti qui Nominis Imples Mensuram) perform my Undertakings, and have not One
Word of Rhetoric in all the Book, besides That of Your Name before it (and
yet, had I been so Happy to have known Your Lordship as much in these days of
Thunder and Astonishment, Cum Cava Fauce Globos Era Tonante Vomuere, as I did
in the former Halcion-daies of Peace and Plenty, (Those themselves being the
very Emblem, as well as the Offspring, of Persuasion, and almost-All
Rhetoric, having of Late taken its flight with Those) I could not choose but
have Learnt to Persuade, much better, by Your Lordship, who are, as absolutely,
Lord of That, as You are of Your Own Lands; nay, as You are, even of Me, for
whom You shall never need to Compound; Sooner than That, I my self may be Rich
enough to Buy back my Own Twentieth Part, though, Hitherto, I know not What it
is in me, that does Offend a Powerful Committee, Asperat and Magnos in Mea
Damna Deos, and makes Them keep me Contentedly-Low, as free from danger of
Another Stroke, as from Un-Envyable, and yet Opposed Preferment, when I could
not fore-apprehend any Reason of my Miscarriage, and have, Since, only
therefore learnt to Judge it fit, and Equitable, because the Wisdom of the
Court denied me; to whose Displeasure I submit, and, more than That, would
Crave their Pardon too, were my Obnoxiousness as Manifest as my Plea; whatever,
else, was my Guilt, I am sure it was not my being Rich, Luke 1.53.
that Caused me to be sent Empty away: But, This Long Parenthesis, is Long
Digression; and yet, Perhaps, it may not Altogether be so, if They will be
Persuaded by it to a future Tenderness: but, to Return) yet, that I ought to
Attempt some Rhetorical Insinuations (how much soever I do Excidere Ausis) so
long as a Man has a Heart, and Will, and Affections, as well as a Head, and
Judgment, and Understanding; As St. Paul was my Copy in the Whole manner of
Prosecution, whose Practice it Was, Act. 18.28.
not only Mightily to Convince, but, Elegantly to Allure too; So He is more
Peculiarly my Pattern, in this Oratorious branch of my method, and with a
Peculiar Appositeness to the very Matter I treat of; witness that (...), that
Short and Sweet, Mining and Prevalent, Yielding and Conquering intercourse
betwixt Him and King Agrippa, (not to be matched by Cicero and Demosthenes,
though Another Caussine should Compare Both Them to Paul, as One has done Him
to Him) King Agrippa, Act. 26. v. 27, 28, 29.
Believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou Believe; Then Agrippa said
unto Paul, Almost thou PERSWADEST me to be a Christian; And Paul said, I would
to God, not only Thou, but also All that Hear me this day, were both Almost,
and Altogether such as I am, EXCEPT THESE BONDS; a little before, He says,
(...), I am Persuaded; Ver. 26.
He might have Changed the Voice, and said, I am Persuading, for He was, even
Then, and by these very Arts, wooing King Agrippa to believe that Christ was
the God; and He, that Denies Christ to be the God, as well as He that Denies
Any God at all, is an Atheist too, in Saint Paul's Account, Without Christ,
Ephesians. 2.12.
and without God in the World; They are Synonima; He puts God and Christ
together, and Separates Him from Both of them, that is an Alien to Either of
them.

Nay, my good Lord, not only St. Mendo. Vim and Potestatem Dicendi, a Spiritu
accipere. Lucian. in Philopat.
Paul, but Your, and His Lord too, who, as He is God, has given to your
Lordship the full Streams, and Channels of Both, and to Me, a Scanter Rivulet,
and some few Drops of Either, Poured from out Your Cistern which Himself has
filled (in that I, who was Sometimes sent a Moderator, and after I had observed
Your Nervous Inferences, went back a Disciple, Is. 50.4.
Taught to Argue, from Your Mouth, as well as to Write, from Your Hand) that
Lord of Ours, who, as he is God, A Diis, and Prudentes, and Fortes, and
LOQUENTES, Nascuntur. Pindarus.
does give the Tongue of the Learned, and, as He was Man, did Practice Both
these kinds of Learning; witness not only His Name, (...), which Signifies
(though more, even Verbum, and Grammar also, yet, as to this present purpose)
Ratio and Oration, Logic and Rhetoric too, but His Disputing with the Doctors,
Luke 2.46. and His Rhetorizing with the Multitudes in his Sermon upon the
Mount; Mat. 5.
What could more inflame their Love of those Patiences and Virtues in the Midst
(Virtue's Own, and Proper Seat) than a Blessedness at large in the Head of
Every of them, and a Peculiar Blessedness in the Close? a Portion in the Entry
of the Verse, and a Certainty, What, and how very Much the Sum shall be, in the
Period of it? Each Verse (which I may call a Purse, or a Coffer rather, a Whole
Shire, or a Wholler Heaven rather) of those eight Beatitudes, is a more
Complete Form, and Exact Unimitable Idea, how to work upon, and regulate the
Passions of Man, than all the Numerously-Erroneous Dictates, which the Heathen
has prescribed in His Volume, de Rhetorica, and the Jesuit in His, de
Eloquentia.

And yet, though All this, and the Entire frame of the Scriptures of God,
abounding with Both of these, do entitle Me to a Shallow and Unequal imitation,
yet, since, not Both These already named, nor all the Florilegia and Spicilegia
besides, will furnish us with Sufficient, either Precepts or Instances, of a
Graceful Well-speaking, and an Un failing Perswasiveness, He will be too blame
that exacts me to any other Statera than that of Pro re nata facundia; and He
will Wound me beyond remedy, that measures my Dear Lord's River by my
Stillicidium; it is true, I acknowledge your Lordship (though This it self is
not your Masterpiece) to be the Skilfull'st Master I know of this Commanding
faculty; and Where would I Love to Learn, but where I might Learn Most? Not,
Enviously, to Commit your Lordship with the Living, Bishop, or Priest, or
Esquire, Hall, or Done, or Howell, but, Componens Manibusque Aeneid. l. 8.
Manus, atque Oribus Ora, to Compare your Pen and Speech (in reference to whom
Virgil wrote that Verse) with the Deceast, with Tully, Horar.
Quem penes arbitrium est, and Jus, and Norma Loquendi, who Himself was a
Cortex to all the rest; and with Self styled Putean, who said of Himself, that
He had learnt sine Cortice nare, that he was, Nullius addictus Jurare in Verba
Magistri; Morat.
with Erasmus, who is wellnigh an aemulous Competitor with Tully's self in
point of Clean Phrase, and Classique Tongue; with Pliny, who reverenced his
Trajan; and with Languet, who Loved and Honored our Sidney, in some degree
near to the Love, and Honor, and Reverence I bear to my Lord; and yet all
these, in all their Epistles, come as Short of yours, as their Valuations of
those whom they would most Extol, come Short of my Esteems of You; who,
amongst the rest of your Skills, have this great Conquering Art, Artem Celare;
and, as Pliny said of Isaeus, L. 2. Ep. 3.
Dicis semper extempore, sed tanquam Diu Scripseris; Multa Lectio in Subitis,
Multa Scriptio Elucet; but then, and for all this, He, who so Odiously imployes
Himself, as to Mete your Lordship's Bushel by my Thimble, notwithstanding I
have already told Him, that the Shreds only are Mine, and the Garment Yours, I
have no other way left to redeem my Lord's Fame (whom, all I write, is, as I
may, to Honor) from such a disproportioned Scandal, than to take my leave of
this Busy-Body-Objector, by telling Him, that, Quintilian's self (though He
could not Choose but Love those Rules which His very Self had made) Prescribes
like One Orator, and Declaims like Another; How much more may I deflect,
(though I Out-Love my Lord, more than He did His Self) not only from the
overreaching Perfection, but from the Mediocrity too, (if any thing be so, in
His Style (as it Lawfully may be in Another Man's, and in an Unbound, Un-feeted
discourse; for, That Inhibition, Non Homines, non Dii, non Concessere Columnae,
Horat.
may only be impleaded against Indifferent Poets) and even That Indifferency
would be My Perfection) which Shines in His very Suddennesses, especially when
I have so long, and so longly-sad a time, Truanted from my Best of Masters? Cum
Magnis Nominibus, etiam Errare, Honestum est: But now, at Length,

I beseech you give me leave to Come Home to you (for, wherever I am, I am
only Tanquam at Home, when I think, and Speak, and Write of You, and only
Then, Really at Home, when I See and Wait on You) and to tell your Lordship,
as, Why I Print, and Why This, so Why, Under Your Wing.

There is, and will be Reason enough for it, so long as I am capable to
Understand What Reason is, and what the Gratitude and Demeanor of an Obliged
Servant Ought to be to a Merciful, and even-Friendly Lord, in such a stiff Age
in which those two Heats, of Anger and Powder, have made the Love of Many to
wax Cold.

To Speak of Your Goodness to me, when it was in Fashion to Be Good, and to Do
Good, This Would, Mores Saeculi Celebrare, and not Tuos; but my
Acknowledgements must be as Singular, as your Lordship's Affections Are; It
might have Satisfied all my Un-meriting Desires, that your Lordship was, Long
Since, Unica nata Meis Requies uberrima Curis; but, in that your Lordship does,
still, Beneficia Beneficiis Cumulare, and, in your very Actions, speak that
piece of Poetry, Aloud, and Unfeignedly, to my Worst Condition, Et, Nuper, Mea
Cura, and Nunc, Mea Cura, this it is, that extorts from me a Publication, not
so much of my Book, as of my Gratitude; it is all that I am able to return to so
much Excess, and Wonder of your Bounty, that Goldsmiths Hall, and I, should
upon one and the same Day Rifle your Bags; that the Thousands paid in There,
could not hinder you, from Raining down a Voluntary Shower of Gold upon Me
also; that You should, After, send Reliefs, and Visits too, to so Mean a
Person, Enough to make me Suspect I had injured my Fortune (and not Fortune,
me) in setting too Light by Her, when the very Ill she did me, had so much of
Advancement in it, as that it made me fit (in your Eyes, as Lowly as my own
Fortune) to be Considered by your Lordship; I Laid them Both Together, the
Reliefs, by your Self, and the Visits, in your Name, by your Chief of Servants,
and Concluded out of those Premises, had I been Less, I could not have Received
more than the One, had I been Greater, You could not have Done more than the
Other, no Otherwise, then, as your Lordship was, After, pleased to Do, to send
your Encouraging Letters also, Sealed with your Own Arms; What could you have
done More, had I been the very Signet upon your Arm? and what can I do Less,
than Testify to the World, how Much I Owe Your Lordship, and, though You did
these Good things, Secretly, Declare, what You did, before all the Israel we
have left, and before the Sun? I am sure, it does not break the Command of our
God Christ, if, when the Alms-Giver did not let his Left Hand know what His
Right Hand Did, Mat. 6.
the Receiver Sounds the Trumpet.

You, my Good Learned Lord, who know All things, (quantum Humana Natura, and
Aetas Tua Capere and Portare possunt) know, (and yet this is no Ill Tidings I
bring, and therefore not liable to That, Nos Cogimur Omnia Scire) that He, who
is Already Noble, is made much more Noble yet, the Less He makes of Himself,
whereas He, that is not Noble at all, does make it Impossible for Him, that He
should be so, by taking upon Him that He is So: I have Experiment enough that
your Lordship is not Sowr'd into One of those, who, instead of Accepting, upon
such Presentations as these, are ready to cry out, Quis Mihi? Quid Tecum?
Proximus Ipse Mihi. Let them Startle at a Dedication, who have not Worth enough
to Challenge it, or have not Paid enough beforehand for it; Both Ways, Your
Lordship is a Freeman of England; and therefore, that I may Stop Your
Lordship's Message to your Steward, give me leave to tell your Lordship, that
This is not a Petition, but an Acquittance;

Non Posco, neque Gratiam, nec Era,
Nec Rubri Spolium Maris, nec Aurum;
Sed Charus magis Ipse sis, vel Aere,
Vel Rubri Spelio Maris, vel Auri.
After all these Confessions, and Acknowledgements, if your Lordship asks me,
Why I Printed a Former Book, and made not You the Patron of it, and Me? I shall
easily obtain your Lordship's Pardon (for You are Vir Priscae Humanitatis) if
I, first, tell you, that I chose no Patron to it, but the Thousand Readers; and
next, that I, therefore, Owned not You, because I dis-own'd my Self; and yet,
Whereas That Book Was so speedily sold off, for want of the Author's Name to
Spoil the Bargain, I thought it a piece of Prudence, when I Hazard the going
off of this Impression, by the Unworthiness of My Name, to do my Self and my
Stationer Right, to make it Sell into Other Men's Hands, by your Lordships
passing good Name, and not to lie upon Our Hands, by Mine.

Let me take my leave of your Lordship, with this Protestation, that I shall
study never to forget the Constancy of your Good Will toward Me in these
Unsteady times, Sive Prememus Humum, sive Prememur Humo, and shall be Always
ready to Press into the Ears of this deaf, froward Age, how much I am (but that
Infinitudes cannot be Reckoned up)

Your Lordship's Infinitely Obliged, and (if it be possible) as Devoted
Servant, WILLIAM TOWERS.

The Names of Authors, and Sententiaries, Ancient and Modern, Christian and
Heathen, whose Books, and Speeches, are, occasionally Mentioned, and purposely
made use of, in the Following Discourses.
1 AELian. 2. Aesop. 3 Agesilaus. 4 Agapetus. 5 Ambrose. 6 Bishop Andrews, in
His MS Notes upon the Common Prayer Book. 7 Anselm. 8 Aquinas. 9 Aristainetus.
10 Aristotle. 11 Aratus. 12 Athanasius. 13 Ausonius. 14 Michael Auguanus. 15
Saint Austin. 16 St. Basil. 17 Doctor Basire. 18 Balduin Casus Conscientiae. 19
Beslarmine. 20. St. Bernard. 21 Beza. 22 Bias. 23 Bion. 24 Caussinus, e Soc.
Jesu. 25 Cato. 26 Caecilius in Cicerone. 27 Caesar. 28 Chilon. 29 Cicero. 30
St. Cyprian. Cyrill. 31 St. Chrysostom. 32 Clemens. 33 Common Prayer Book. 34
Q. Curtius. 35 Demosthenes. 36 Diodorus Siculus. 37 Diogenes Cynicus. 38
Diogenes La^rtius, 39 Dionysius Areopagita. 40 Dr. Done. 41 English College of
Doway. 42 Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions. 43 Epictetus. 44 Epicurus. 45
Epiphanius. 46 Erasmus. 47 Estius. 48 Eucherius. 49 Eusebius. 50 Eustathius. 51
Fagius. 52 Minutius Felix. 53 Firmicus. 54 Dr. Field of the Church. 55 Galen.
56 Joannes Galensis Anglus. 57 John Gregory, late of Christ-Church. 58 Gregory
the Great. 59 Grotius. 60 Godfrey Goodman, Bishop late of Gloucester. 61 Dr.
Hall, when He was the R. R. B. of Exon. since B. of Norwich. 62 Dr. Hammond. 63
Lord Hatton. 64 Heinsius. 65 Heraclitus. 66 Hesiod. 67 Hierocles. 68 St.
Hierome. 69 St. Hilary. 70 Homer. 71 Horace. 72 Jo. Huartus, Hispanus, in His
Examen de Ingeniis. 73 Esquire Howell. 74 Iamblichus. 75 Irenaeus. 76 Julian
Apostate. 77 Justin Martyr. 78 Juvenal. 79 Lactantius. 80 Languetus. 81 Dr.
Laud, Late Archbishop of Canterbury. 82 Levinus Lemnius. 83 Livy. 84 Lucan. 85
Ludovicus Granatensis. 86 Lucretius. 87 Machometus. 88 Macrobius. 89 Manilius.
90 Manual of Godly Prayers. 91 Martial. 92 Peter Martyr. 93 Michael ab Isselt.
94 Picus Mirandula. 95 Greg. Nazianzen. 96 Optatus. 97 Origin. 98 Ortelius. 99
Ovid. 100 Petronius. 101 Petrarch. 102 Philo the Jew. 103 Pindarus. 104
Pisanus. 105 Plato. 106 Plinius Secundus. 107 Pliny the Naturalist. 108
Plutarch. 109 Angelus Politianus. 110 Portugallus Atheus. 111 Primasius. 112
Proclus. 113 Propertius. 114 Prudentius. 115 Putean. 116 Pythagoras. 117
Quintilian. 118 Raimundus de Sabunde. 119 C. Rhodiginus. 120 Rusticus Diaconus.
121 Ruvio. 122 Scaliger. 123 Joannes Secundus. 124 Seneca Phil. 125 Seneca
Trag. 126 Severus. 127 Socinus. 128 Socrates. 129 Solon. 130 Statius. 131
Suarez. The Schoolmen. 132 Tacitus. 133 Tertullian. 134 Theodoret. 135
Theodorus. 136 Tibullus. 137 Trismegistus. 138 Maximus Tyrius. 139 Emanuel
Thesaurus. 140 Theophilus Antiochenus. 141 Theophylact. 142 Valerius Maximus.
143 Varro. 144 Vincentius Lyrinensis. 145 Virgil. 146 Xerxes.
A Table of the Principal Contents.
THE Occasion and Purpose of the Book, in the Introduction. Why the Author
does, in Part, wave Scriptural Proofs, and that upon Scriptural Practice. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. God proved to Be, From the Chain of Causes. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. From
Motion. 11, 12, 13, 14. From the Difference in Entities. 15, 16. From the
Tendency of all things to a Certain End. 17, 18. From the Natural Inclination,
and Desire of Man. 19, 20, 21. From the known Heavens. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
This way of Probation, cleared, By the Practice of the Fathers. 28, 29, 30, 31,
32, 33. Of the Schoolmen. 34. Of the Apostles. 35. Of Job. 36, 37. The
Objection against this truth answered by the Objectors themselves. 38, 39. In
what manner the Author proceeds to Scriptural Proofs, and why he invites the
Naturalist to the search of them. 40. Because of the Confessed Sinfulness of All
Men. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. Because of the Known Displeasure of God against Sin.
46. Because of God's Punishing Sin Eternally. 47. Because there is no Virtue
but from God. 48. Because there is no Meritorious Virtue. 49. Because there is
some Resemblances, of the Father, and Christ, and the Spirit, and of Trinity in
Unity, in the very Heathens. 50, 51. The very Atheist does Confess God. 52. In
his very Denying of him. 53 In the Most Wicked of his Practices. 54. A Caveat
against his Sottish Sin. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. The Atheist's Fear proves
God. 62, 63. The Atheist's Recall, and (si vult Ipse) Recovery. 64. The Recall
of Semi-Atheists. 65, 66, 67, 68. (...). 69. A Persuasion to the Naturalist, to
search Scripture, Because of the Uncertainty amongst Heathens, what Happiness
is. 70, 71. Because of the Certainty, that Happiness Is to be Desired; that,
Nothing is, in Vain, to be Desired; that, in all Natural, Verisimilitude, and
Reason, Scripture is the only Declarer what True Happiness is, and how to be
Acquired. 73, 74, 75, 76. The Author's Apology, again, for these kind of
Reasons. 77, 78, 79. The Natural Reasons why our Scripture is the Word of God.
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96. The
Atheist's final Reclaimer. 97, 98, 99, 100.
In the Second Discourse. Deus Unicus.
THE Fitness and Rationality of it. 1, 2. The Probation; that God is One,
Simplicitate. 3, 4, 5. Singularitate. 6. Universalitate. 7.
The taking off Objection. 8. The Confirmation. 9, 10, 11. Against the
Romanists, who apply the true Worship of the True God, to somewhat else. 12.
Particularly, against English (in all senses) Doway, and Doway- misapplied
Texts. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Texts, sincerely, and, ex abundanti, urged, against
(not Texts, but) Mis-application. 38, 39. In fine, an Accounting Post script to
my Honored Patron, Ego, sub Illius, Ille, and Ego, sub Dei Alis, donec Haec
transeat Calamitas.
Atheismus Vapulans, OR, There is a GOD.
The Introduction.
TO Prove that God Is, (the Theme, and Business, which I am, now, upon, and
about) did it only arise out of a Curiosity in Notional, and Speculative
Knowledge, would be my own Shame, and not a Rebuke to the Apostasy of this Age
and Clime; and I my self, who take upon me (by the help of him who is the
Subject of my Discourse) to endeavor the Conversion of others, should stand in
need to be Converted by another's Pen, from such a Fantastic Employment; but,
since the Undertaking is so far from Humor, that there are, abroad, who need
such a Cure as this, I shall not forbear that, which is useful to Some, for
fear lest a Medice Teipsum might be applied to my self from Others; if all, I
write, were Digression, and Impertinency; if all, to whom I write, would echo
back to that Heavenly Covenant, I will be their God, and they shall be my
People, Thou shall be, thou art our God, I should esteem this Loss of Time and
Pains, to be the most Fortunatus Error I could ever commit, and should more
glory in Confirming my Brethren, than in Converting an Alien; but, since some
cry out, with Pharaoh's blasphemy, Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord? I, and I, and I, know not the Lord, and may compel him (as
he was driven to it by the Obstinacy of That Pharaoh) to prove himself to be
the Lord, by his own most Authoritative, most Infallible bearing witness to
himself, that he is the Lord, three several times in the next Chapter, V.
2.8.29.
to prove his Power, as he did to Pharaoh, by his Judgments against them who
deny his Power, it is necessary for some of us to Preach by a Handwriting
(lest God may do it upon a Wall) such a Fundamental Doctrine as This, the
rather, because such a Wild Separating People (who, if Authority so pleased,
should be almost Compelled into a Congregation, that they might begin at
Christ's Cross, and Learn This a, (for That is the Name of God) this first
Letter in Divinity, that there is a Christ, and a God) do run away from the
Ministerial Vox Viva, lest they should be Converted, and God should heal them:
This it is that makes me run after (with a Bleeding Heart, because of their Dry
Eyes) such Infatuated Perishing Souls, who Void to themselves, whatever God by
Our Ministry, has taught to Others, of Fearing God, Loving God, being
Zealously-Affected to God, and put so much Shame and Dishonor upon our Great
and Good God, as to Deny Him, not only in his Attributes, to be Great and
Good, but in his very Essence, even to Be; the modest Heathen will not keep
pace with them in any of these; even to him, he shall be, not only Deus, but
Optimus, and Maximus too.

Some such there are Abroad; and there are, Abroad too, who impute that there
is, at least, some One such within my own Circuit; whatever Profane Languages
have slipped out of that Unhallowed Mouth, I would fain hope, they never came out
of the Heart too; and yet my Savior has almost made me to despair, and not to
hope so, in that himself has said, Out of the Abundance of the Heart, the
Mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. and has given me Occasion, by the force of his own
Argument, to ask a Question, like his, in the Method, though unlike his, in the
Matter, Ibid.
How can he, being Good, (Good at Heart, how Can he) speak such evil things?

Whether this be, indeed, a Sin of Blasphemy, and Atheism amongst us, or a Sin
of Slander, and Defamation amongst them, I know not; but, since it must be one
of these Sins, and of one of these People, though I am in a great Str^it, yet I
could wish to make Choice of the Lesser Evil, for (though Both of them are
stark naught) it is surely better to Slander and Defame Man, than God; this
only I know, that my present Design is, by the Conversion of him, who is
himself the suspected Adversary, and has given Occasion to the very Servants
of God to speak Reproachfully, to make such a bold Report hereafter, to be but
a very Slander; and by the Conversion of those his Fratres in Malo, in Another
and Another Place, but in the same, and more than the same Iniquity, who are
(...), not so much Suspected by us, as Convicted by themselves, that they are
the Adversaries of God, not to suffer it (quantum in me est) to be any more the
Slander, either of Man or God.

This is One part of the Design, to have Compassion on him, whose Foot has
well-nigh slipped, Jude 22.
and to save him with hope; to Compassionate those, who are not almost, but
altogether Gone out from us, Manifest, that they were not of us, and to save
them by Fear, Pulling them out of that Fire, into which they have thrown
themselves; and it is Another, to Establish, Keep them in the Love of God, who
are, already, and still, Deists, and Christians, that they would earnestly
Contend for the Faith, how eagerly soever some, who neither are Saints, nor
have Faith (not so much Faith as to believe a God) contend against them for it.

For that Conviction, and Conversion-sake of some, and for that Remembrance,
and Establishmentsake of others, I shall divide this Treatise into three parts;
each Part shall be a Treatise by it self, and the two Latter subordinate to the
first.

The first Treatise shall prove that there is a God.

The second, that there is but One Only God. And

The third, that the God of us Christians is He, that One, and that Only God;
first, in that he is a Lord and Ruler over us; secondly, in that he is a Rock
and Defense unto us.

And, though I might take one Text of Scripture, to prove all, and every part
of this (that of David, in his 18 Psalm, and v. 31. For, who is God, save the
Lord? and who is a Rock, save our God! That is the first thing, Presupposed,
and Granted, by David, and, by all those, who are, as David was, 1 Samuel 13.14.
Men after God's own Heart, throughout the Double, the Iterated, the Repeated
Question, in the whole Verse, that, indeed, a God there is; for, when he asks,
Who is a God save -- Who is a Rock save -- a Rock and a God he presumes there
is; and then he, as Equally, and Firmly, though but secondarily, implies, in
those Interrogatories of his, that there is but One, True God; That is
Inferrible out of his Manner of Limitation; for, when he Confines the Excess
and Latitude of the Question, Who is a God -- to -- the Lord Singularly -- Who
is a Rock -- to -- Our God -- Unically, he does Convince, that there is but One
True God, One Only Lord; and, thirdly, he Proves, and Evinces, that Our God is
the One, the Only, the True God, by a twofold Argument; first in that he is
Lord and Ruler over us, Who is God, save the LORD secondly, in that he is a
Rock, and Defense unto us, Who is a ROCK, save our God?) yet, I must acquaint
you with two several Reasons, why I, in part forbear, and, in part, insist, to
do this.

1. I will forbear, because, in my first Treatiso, I am to Prove a God to the
Face and Heart of him, whose Face does Confidently, and whose Heart does
Hypocritically seem to Deny a God; and, to such a One, I must not prove God by
Scriptures, (lest, though perhaps he has not Latin enough to do it, he tell
me, without Mood and Figure, and in plain English, that I do Petere Principium)
but, rather, Scriptures by God.

2. I will forbear, because some of this queazy Age, and Innovating Isle (for,
I am only seen in my own Vanities, and the misbelief of a few of my
Countrymen, who have need to be Reformed out of their very Reformation, as
they Injuriously and Dishonourably call it, to that Authority, under whose
Cloak they pretend it) who account Preached Sermons, in Actu Exercito, to be
the whole Body of Divinity, and the Hearing of them to be all the Practice of
it; who esteem of them, Ex Ore only, to be God's Ordinance, and Edifying, and
Ex Prelo, to be Man's Inventions, and Corrupting, and therefore will not
(though a Wise Man has bade them do it) Buy Truth, and Wisdom, Prove. 23.23.
and Instruction, and Understanding, but account of Sermons, Ore tenus, to be
the Wisdom of God, and Printed Sermons to be the Foolishness of Preaching,
and, therefore, will not Coelum Stultitia hac Petere; no, by no means, Non hac
Itur ad Astra. And yet, though I will rather Although Concio, in Veteri, and
Primitiva Ecclesia Tractatu^ nuncupabatur. Bishop Andrews in MS Notes on
Common Prayer Book. 1.5.11.
Treat, than Sermon to them, I would fain Unbewitch them of such
Mis-perswasions too; when St. Paul bids his Thessalonians, Edify One Another,
would he not have them do it, by that Doctrine, which he Preached unto them? nay
by that very Epistolar Sermon, which he wrote unto them? Is not Comfort an
especial part of Edification? and does he not Exhort them to Comfort one
another with these Words? Chapter 4. v. 18.
these Written Words? Does the Spirit of God go along with them, when they are
delivered to the Ear? and forsake them, when they are Presented to the Eye? how
ill does this suit with that God, whose property is to be Immutable! Himself is
One of those two Immutable things, Heb. 6.18.
and his Oath Another; Is not this kind of deserting That, which he before
allowed of, at least some Variableness, and not None at all? at least a Shadow
of Turning? is that, which was Wholesome Meat from the Pulpit, either Mors, or
Herb-John in Olla, when it has past through the Shop? are Ecclesiastes, and
other Tracts, Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith, Any thing, and Every thing
else, Good, and Saleable in Paper? and only That, which is very Hot in the
Mouth, and esteemed Best of all There, Cold in Operation, and Good for nothing,
when it is Dressed the same way as These? Good God! what Sickly and Unsound
Palats are we to provide for! For their sakes also it is, as well as for that
Atheist's sake, with whom I expostulate, that in the prosecution of what I have
in hand, (in Hand I say, and not upon the Tongue) I shall, in much part,
decline Scriptural Authority, lest That, which is a Treatise in Volume, might
be suspected of so much Jesuitism, as to have changed its Name from that Sermon
which it had been in the Chapel, though the Length, as well as the Tediousness
of it, (for, these two, are, sometimes, as much From the Same, as Idem, cum
faciunt Duo, is not Semper Idem) and the Debility of my own Lungs might
Vindicate it from that Honest Imputation; and yet

3. As well for the Connection and Requiringness of the Matter, as for the
Integrity of those Settled Heads, who love the Word of God, and the sincere
solid Interpretation of it, as their own Souls, I shall, in much part, insist
upon Choice and Pertinent Scriptures, a little in the first and second
Treatise, (and, in doing this, I shall but transcribe the Policy, and leave out
the Infection, of a Ruvio, and a Suarez, (who, in their Logic, and
Metaphysics, talk Much, and Unseasonably, of the H. Eucharist, more to Roman
than Aristotelical Intent and Purpose) excusably enough, because I would, even
at unawares, not only Contest, and Dispute, but Surprise my incurious Reader,
into the belief of a Truth, not English, or Spanish, but owned by Mankind) but,
more in the third, because the other two do presume him to be a Christian but
in Fieri, not fit, at all, for Apostolical strong Meat, and scarce, for Milk,
but, in the third, and in Facto esse, for Both; in the Language of this last
expression I may tell you, that you know your Fare, wish you Fall too, and pray
God to Bless it To you.

The First Treatise. That there is a God.
1 TO tell you that Every word of Scripture does prove this, because, as St.
Paul tells me, 2 Timothy 3.16.
All of it was Inspired by God; nay, to tell you, that those very words, which
the Devil, in Scripture, has spoke, do prove this, because it is God, who has
made them Scripture in that he has vouchsafed to Relate them There, will not
serve my turn, nor suit with that ground of Method, which not I make choice of,
but the Perverseness of Man proposes to me, and compels upon me; if he Fights
with Wood, and Hay, 1 Cor. 3.12.
and Stubble, and I warred with Gold, and Silver, and Precious Stones, I shall
not Componere, but Dilatare his Obstreper as Fauces, for want of a Reply ad
Idem; such a Goliath as this, must have the Neck of his Objection cut off, with
his own, though a Leaden, Sword; the Other, and Better way, would indeed
satisfy Other and Israelited, better and Un-Philistin'd men, to Remember them,
that there is a God, who already believe this Truth, but not to make him Know
that there is a God, who as yet, Denies it, and, doing that, must, by Miserable
Undoing Consequence, Deny this Book to be Made by him, whom himself he Denies
to Be.

2. Therefore, by a Rational Physic against the Pestilence, and Infection of
so Ill an Air, (a Disease more dangerous than that other noisome Pestilence,
Psalm. 91.6.
which walks (as this has done, though, now, it attempts to wast even at
Noonday) in Darkness, for, That does testify a God, though an Angry one,
which This out-braves, Psalm. 65.8.
and the People were afraid of the Tokens of That, as of God's Tokens, whom
This out-dares) and with design, that that Ill Air may not only leave off to
Poison the Air next to it, but begin to Purge it self, I shall first, Convince
the Falsehood, of the Atheists more said and Divulged than Believed opinion, out
of those Principles, which it is impossible for Themselves, as they are what
they profess themselves, Mere Men to Gainsay; and shall Secondly, in Honor to
the Scripture, and the God of them, either Convert Them, who, if they thrust
not themselves without the Pale, thrust the Pale from themselves, or, at least
Confirm those, who are within the Pale, that they may not be seduced to Pluck
One Stake out of it, by a Mixed kind of Natural and Spiri^ual Argument, from the
general manner, and Method and Style, Aim, and sense, and Purpose of the
^criptures, that a God is the Au^hour of them.

3. To apply my self First, to the Quality of the Opponents, Acts 5.3, 4.
whose Hearts Satan has filled, to Lie to the Holy Ghost, not to Lie unto Men,
but unto God; (and is not ^his a Sacrilege in grain, to withhold God from the
People, and beyond That of them, who withheld the Gift of the People from
God?) in Proving that there is a God, out of such Evident and Created
Principles, which Themselves will be no more able to Disprove, than a Dog to
Bite the Moon, at which He Barks; and yet, for the sake of Others, I have
heeded that Counsel of Putean, Comus.
Cavendum est, ne vel Ipso Latratu Mordeat.

4. And did not God Himself, and Moses Himself imply as much, that God might be
known (though no^ in His Simply-Intire essence, eve^ by Scriptures themselves,
or to Angels themselves, for, Nothing bu^ God can thus Comprehensively know
God) at least, in His Existence, and Being, in a more Remote, but Certain and
Infallible though Confused knowledge, eve^ by the Light of Nature? (thoug^
there be more of Resplendency, i^ the Sun, than in a Candle, yet it is as sure,
that we Do See, by a Candle, as by the Sun) When God Himself has told us by
Moses, that I^ the Beginning, Genesis 1.1.
God Created the Heavens, and the Earth, in the very Beginning of the Word of
God, and has not, First, Expressly told us (...), that God Himself Is (for, it
is never to be said He was, of whom there is not Erat, quando non Erat, but in
the same Line and Verse, that He is too; else, Revel. 1.4.8. Exodus 9.14.
His Name, I AM, is brought into suspicion) before that Beginning, but has
left the Heavens, and the Earth, that He Made, to tell us That.

5. And do not the Apostles themselves do the same? and upon the same Ground?
and, perhaps in reference to that very First Verse in ^he Written Book of God,
being ^aught so to do, by the Example of God and Moses, as well as by
Inpiration of God? They do not tell ^s, in Terminis, that God Is, much ^ess do
they attempt (that which They well knew to be a thing Im^ossible) to Prove Him
to Be, a Priori; such a very Proof as this (besides the Arrogance of it, in
taking upon them, to be in greater ^avour with God, and to see deeper into Him,
Exodus 33.23.
than Moses did, who saw Him, but a Posteriori, in His Back Parts) would be but
an Artificial, a more Elaborate, and subtle kind of Denying God; They only tell
us Involvedly, that He is, when they tell us, that They Do, and We should,
Believe in God the Father Almighty; To Believe In Him, He, and They have taught
us in Holy Scriptures, but Credere Deum, to Believe Him to Be, the next Words
after, teach us That, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

6. Now, if Any shall say a fresh, as Galen once did, Omnia Dicit, Nihil
Probat, that Moses does but Say, God did This, and That, Made Heaven and Earth,
He does not Prove it; to Reply to all such (who are themselves as Natural, as
was Galens Study) let me take That Heaven, and That Earth themselves, into my
Discourse, whereby to Prove their Maker; I begin, with Part of That, which God
Made, and, out of which, He Made Us, the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof.
Take the Whole of it, or take it in Pieces, either Way there is a God.

7. All of it, and the Glory of it all, the Vrbes and the Civitates, the
stately Buildings, and the societies of Men, whence were they? the Cities did
not Build themselves; the Russet Coontryman knows as much as this comes to,
that, not Orpheus ^idle Music, but the Hands of Laborious Men have done all
this; but, whence then were Those Men? He in the Woods and Fields, and He in
the Grove of City-Houses, knows that too, that, as some of them have Children,
so All of them have had Parents; but, whence those Parents? they know that too,
that, as some of them Are Grandfathers, so All of them have Had Grandfathers;
but whence, still, came they? from their Forefathers, and Those from a First
of all; As certainly as you cannot tell, Any man alive Shall have a Future
Child (for the same Power, Jer. 22.30.
that said Write ye This Man Childless, may, if He please (for, God, and His
Power, Attribute and Person are Convertible and the same) say, Write ye This
Woman untimely, Is. 37.3.
for, the Children are come to the Birth, and there is no Strength to Bring
forth) so certainly you may know, that there was a First Man of all, that had
no Man at all to his Father -- Orb Novo, Juven. Sat. 6.
Caeloque Recenti,
Vivebant Homines, qui Rupto Robore Nati,
Compositique Luto, Nullos habuere Parents.


Such a First Man there must have been, Quare etiam atque etiam Maternum nomen
adepta Terra tenet Merito, quoniam Genus Ipsa creavit Humanum. Lucret.
or else there must be, (that, which the Philosophers, the mere Natural Men,
(and the best knowing of All mere Natural Men,) call a Progressus in Insinitum,
a Proceeding even to an Infinitude, which, the mere Natural Men do,
Discerningly, and Truly, and Deliberately, Deny to be Possible in Nature; which
very word does signify all, I have already said, an^ preoccupies somewhat more
that (...) have still to say, Natura, quasi Aliunde Nata; As All Propagated
Creatures which, at this day, have a Being in Nature, received it from the
Prae-Being of some of the same kind, so the first Individual, which it self
does partake of Nature, in its Composition, though not in the Efficiency of it,
must needs have its Being Aliunde still, and therefore from That Which Is,
before Nature Was; for, as it is impossible, for the First Man of all, to have
Had a Father (else, He was not the First Man; else, He must be Father to
Himself, in that He was the First, and His Own Child, in that He had such a
Father) as Impossible, as it is for Himself, to Be, at the same Instant and
Point of Time, both Before and After Himself; at the same Instant, both to Be
and Not to Be, which is One Contradiction in it self, and Another Contradiction
to the very First of Principles, in the very Chief of Sciences, Omne, vel Est,
vel Non; for, Metaphyr.
Whoever Makes Any thing, is as much and as Really before that thing which He
makes, as Any of those who Plow their Own Lands, or Plant their own Vines, were
in Being, before those Vines were first Planted, or those Lands Last Plowed, as
a Shoemaker Is, Before the Shoo, He Makes, a Carpenter Is, Before the Plough he
Makes, and a Smith Is, Before the share He makes to that Plough: Now, as a
First Man must have been, and That First Man Cannot have made Himself, so
(though We already know, who That First Man was, Adam, and who made Him, God,
yet, that those who Deny God may be well forced to acknowledge Him, as I am
Ill-forc'd thus to Prove Him) Either it was God, or somewhat Else, that made
That First Man: if Any thing else Besides God, the Question returns, Who made
that somewhat else? so that, at last, of mere and Undeniable Necessity, God
must be (as to our Understanding, as God would be, as from His own Goodness)
the First Maker of All; the First Maker of all, must be God, and nothing else
but God, because whatsoever is in Him, must Necessarily be in God, and
Incommunicably in Any thing else but God; such Properties are these, To have a
Being of Himself, not Depending upon any thing else but Himself; To have such a
Being, of which All else Depend, as well in Produci as in Conservari; To Be
without Beginning; To be Eternal; and these four properties, are proper to God
Quarto Modo, they do Convenire Soli, and semper: And thus He is driven in many
Words, and per Circuitus and Ambages, to Confess God, Who, in One Only word,
Denis Him; nor can His Ignorance, any otherwise be excused, than if we fancy
Him to be (what Erasmus does not say, Any man Was, but only Himself fancies
some One Man so to be) so besottedly Ignorant, as to believe, that Himself was
never Born; This, says that Inventor would be more Pardonable, than to Deny a
God; nay Pace Illius dixerim, This would not Deny a God, but pretend Himself to
be One, a God, and a Christ too, as being a Stone cut out, Dan. 2.34. Deus est
Rerum omniCausa. Arist. Meta. Virg. l. 1.
without Hands.

8. This is that, which they call the Chain of Causes; and as much Evidence as
this, will arise out of any Other Cause, in respect of any Other Effect, when
it is thus driven up to the Head, to that God, who may Article with some Heady
men now, and ask the question of them, Jud. 11.8. Virgil. Ovid.
which Jepthah asked of the Elders of Gilead, shall I be your Head! Jovis omnia
plena; and Jupiter est, quodcunque Vides; you may see God, on Quid est Deus?
quod Vides totum, etc. Senec.
every thing you see; the most Minute, most Contemptible Production in Nature,
is not at all Minute, is not at all Contemptible, in that it is a Demonstrative
Argument, to Prove a Creator, a God; the very Mice, and the very Frogs will do
it, not only when they come upon Gods errand, Exodus 8.2.
to execute His Judgments upon Pharaoh, and by the wonderfulness of the
Judgment, in the Feebleness of the Instrument, had it not been Empowered from
above, to declare a God, whose Name is wonderful, Ps. 9.6.
qui Solus facit Mirabilia, but when they Come of their Own Errand, to Feed
upon the Crumbs from under thy Table, and to Drink the Dew of Heaven from off
Thy Grass, even These, and even Then, will be Arguments and Doctrines, Proofs
and Inferences of a Deity; Not to Dispute whence they have their Being, whether
as some say, the One out of the Dust, and the Other out of the Air; be it from
these, or be it from what else it will, whence had this Dust, and this Air, and
this Anything else, their own Beginning, whereby they Contribute to the
Origination of these? I must not now tell you, out of Scriptures, that the very
Dust, and the very Air, Mat. 8.26.27. John 9.6.
the Winds which Christ Commanded, and the Clay which He bad be Physic, and
Cure the Blind, did testify Christ to be God, and God to be their Maker, by
their Obedience to Him; but I must tell you, out of Nature, that God was the
Maker of That, which, by the Descent, and Continuation of second Causes, became
Frogs, and Mice; for, if Man, the most Excellent of Sublunary Creatures, and as
this self-minded Atheist is apt to believe, the Paramount subsistence amongst
all those which have Any Being, was not able to bring forth Himself, but (as we
have already proved) must needs be beholden to a Superior Power, an Original
Maker, a First Cause, for the Relative, and Dependent Being which He has, much
less could those more Ignoble and Servile Creatures, the Air (which it self He
is, perhaps as ready to Believe not to Be as the God, and for the same Reason,
(which may equally make Him doubt, whether He has a Soul or no) because Both of
them, because all three of them are Invisible) or the Dust of the Earth (that
sluggish Creature, which He disdainfully tramples under His Foot, not
Considering that, That Foot, and the whole Body besides, is, now, but Compacted
Clay, and will, anon, be Viler, more putrified (I must speak modestly) More
Offensive earth than That, and Stand in need of that very earth He Scorned, to
Pellucidum Tegit, Opacum Abscondit.
Cover, and to Hide too, not his Nakedness only, but His very Stench, lest the
Survivers hide their faces at Him) much less could these Senseless, (and
therefore, much more, Unvoluntary) Atoms at first, make themselves, and then
the World, however one (Himself as Unworthy to be Named as His vain opinion to
be Particularly confuted) though he durst not fancy the former, did invent, and
vent the latter, and then why does He deny God in One Word, when he Confesses
Him in two; that it is the First Cause which has derived efficiency into all
of these? it is all one to my Understanding as if he said it were God Himself;
and I could well wish these Natural men would learn one more Principle of
Nature, Frustra Dicitur per plura quod potest Dici per Pauciora, that they
would save some expense of Breath and call Him God in One Sylllable, as well as
in a Periphrasis of Two.

Of Both these Arguments, let me speak two words more in the Persuasive way I
proposed; Persequamur and Flores rerum, Rhodig. l. 1. c. 5.
ut, si nil aliud, Varietatis Jucunditas, and inde, Genius aliquis non absit.

9. To the first Argument, from Parentage. Consider, when your Child, which was
Born of you, does ask You Blessing, That very Child, and the humble
Acknowledging practice of it, does Teach you, (what you should have taught that
very Child) to Crave a Blessing from Him who is your Father in Heaven; Let Him
not be less your Father, because He is Out of your sight, though you are not
out of His, then your own Child is the less your Son, when neither of you see
each Other; you see Him not, Col. 2.21.
you Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, and therefore, Is He not? O do not
un-God Him by such a strange and Answering reason, the very Contrary of which
would Un-God Him! for He were a Body, if He could be Touched, a Sapid Body, if
He could be Tasted, and a Colored Body, if He could be Seen, and therefore,
not a Spirit; and a God, which does neither Eat nor is Eaten, neither Handle,
nor is Handled, any otherwise than in such a Discourse as this; nay amongst all
the Bad ones, let Me tell you, the most seemingly-prevailing Argument, that He
is not, is, that you your self Deny Him, unless That of the Poet be an Argument
against this; Nullos esse Deos, Inane Coelum, Martial. Amantissimus Pater
Filiis, quanquam Ingratis, veram felicitatem optat. P. Martyr.
Affirmat Coelius, probatque quod se Factum, dum Negat hoc, Videt Beatum; and
yet let me once again, send you to School to your own Child, to be Reclaimed by
Him, whom you Begat; It is an Undutifull, and Rebellious Child; but are not
you, still His Father? that very Rod you now take in your Hand tells Him that
you are so; it is a wayward and Denying Child; yet, because it is a Child, and
because yours, you solicit His Obedience to you, with Bribes and Mercery; and
is God the less your Father, the more He Loves you? God forbid; -- Patrio pater
esse Metu probor; Ovid. Met.
I and Patrio Viscere too, His Care, and Fear of, and for you, who care not
for the Lord, unless He Thunders, and are feareless of Him, when he has laid
his Bolt aside, even this, proves Him to be a God, a Father of Mercyes, 2 Cor.
1.3. Psalm. 94.1.
though not, as yet, such a God to whom Vengeance belongs. When you bless
your own Child consider, as, whence it was, from God and you (it is Sol and Homo,
but it is Sol Justitiae, Aristot. Mal. 4.9.
quae generant Hominem; from God, as the chief Agent, from you, as His weak
Instrument, more weak, and useless, and unactive, when He takes you not into
His Hand, and cooperates not with you, than your own lazy Axe, when you take it
not into yours, or when the Head of it falls from the heft of it, ^ Ki. 6.5.
into the Water) so, whence you, and your Forefathers and Their First Father
was, from the Earth, and That, Originally, from those two Extreme-Opposites,
Nothing and God, who, Himself, in Making it, was the Only Agent, and His Power,
and Will, and Love (which are Himself) all the Instrument He used; Consider,
that He made you of Earth, that sedentary, and grovelling, and underfoot
Element, that you should have nothing to boast of, least of all such a vile,
and worse than earthly Opinion (nay, even Worse than Hellish too for, Jam. 2.19.
the Devils also believe a God, though it puts them into an Ague of Trembling
Fits) as if God Himself was such a Nothing against which to Boast; if you are
so stouthearted, that Nothing will make you Fall down and Worship, Let such a
Nothing as This do it; and yet Consider too, that it is He that made you of
that Earth, and therefore, acknowledge Him your Father for Making you, and your
God for Making you so Powerfully, out of That, which but a few days before,
was Nothing; Beg of that Father that Made you, to Bless you; desire of that
God who so Powerfully Made you (what your Re-maker, your Redeemer Christ, has
desired of Him for you) that He would Keep you by His Power, that he would
prosper first, the Work of His Own Hands, Joh. 17.11.
your selves, and then Guide and Succeed Your Handiwork.

10. To the Pursuit of That First; Whatever you see, even the Basest Creature
in the account of Man, be it some Apostolical Man, 2 Cor. 10. v. 10.
who is that Base Creature, whose Presence is Base, as Paul's, and Speech
Contemptible as His, or be it He who accounts Him and His speech and His
Presence so, Act. 28.3.
or be it that very Viper on Paul's Hand, or that Coal of Fire at His Foot;
Look again, and see the Dignity of that Office, and of that Creature, in that
God has made the One, and Ordained the Other; Let not the Heathen be more
quick-sighted than Thou; Juven.
Hic putat esse Deos; if He Himself says Jovis omnia plena, say thou so too,
only, change that Name of His God into the Etymon of that Name, In every thing,
see, and acknowledge One God, Ephesians. 4.6. Psalm. 46.
and Father of All, who is a very present Help in the needful time of trouble;
Disdain not any Thing, much less any Person, which He has Made; thou, who
should see a God, in a Frog and a Mouse, nay in a very Viper, be not thou,
too suspicious to see a Devil, in a Man and a Woman; nay in a very Saint; Tell
the Atheist, who will not see a God in any thing, that thou see a God in
every thing; Wonder at the Atheist, who makes God to be Nothing at all, when
thou, even by Nature, know Him to be what His own Word tells Thee He is, 1
Cor. 15.28.
All in All.

11. Such another Argument is That concerning Motion, which, because it is not
Altogether the Former, but Another, I shall Name, and because it is so like the
Former, and Such, I shall But Name.

12. We see Motion every where; and yet we must know, that every thing is Moved
of somewhat else besides It self; Second Movers there are, or else there is no
Motion at all; the Tongue, that Denies this, let it ly still, if it can, whilst
it Denies this; and yet Second Movers there are not, unless they partake of
Motion from the First of all, so that, at length to avoid a process into
Infinitude, we must at least in our Concessions, Ascend up to a First Mover,
and that is God. Anes. l. 7.
This was Aristotle's Argument, to prove a First Mover, and That Term is
equivalent to a God; and though in His Entrance upon that Discourse, He says,
Corpus Natural, habet, In se, principium Mot us, yet He says not Habet A Se,
the Natural Body has the Principle of Motion, Within it self, it has it not
Of, or From it self. It was that Aristotle, who knew not God at all, by His own
Word, but only by that innate Principle which God had grafted into His Soul,
and by the Book of Creatures, the Verbum non loquentium, which exerted that
innate Principle, and brought it into Act, which blew the Hidden Fire into a
Light Flame, and awakened the discursive Faculty, and Power of Knowing God,
into an Actual Ratiocination, and Argument, and Discovery Of God.

13. Act. 17.28.
I must not, in this case, apply That of S. Paul, In Him (i. e. in God) we
Move, because the Divinity of His Authority is above that Faith, and Capacity,
of Him whom I undertake to Instruct, and of those ( woe is me, that there are
Those, amongst whom we are Constrained to Dwell, or They, suffered to dwell
amongst us!) whom to Confute; and yet, I may too, apply the Words, and leave
out the Paul, as. well as the Saint, because He does not quote God but Man, and
Him not Inspired unless with Poetical heat, Aratus (...) Pythagoras.
when He adds -- As certain of your own Poets Also (as well as we Evangelists,
and Apostles) have said, (...) we are his Of spring too, it is God that Made
us, as well as God that Moves us.

14. And now, tell the Atheist, how much thou admir'st that He will not confess
a God, by the great and speedy Volubility of the liveless Heavens (to the
Circulations of which, we may adapt that of Pliny, The Naturalist.
Inidoneum vel Coeli spectaculum, si tantum Praeterirent, and fit a reason to
it, which was none of His, they were a useless spectacle if they did not
demonstrate a God above them, which whirled them about, as well as fecundate
the earth beneath them) when thou Confessest Him by the lesser and retarded
Motion of every Creeping thing, since it is the first Mover, God, that has
imparted the Gift of Motion to All of these; As the Philosopher rebuked and
silenced Him, by Taking a Turn, and by Gesture, who denied there was any
Motion, so, do thou but Walk, and every step thou takst, does out-pace and
out-Argne Him, who denies there is a God.

15. There is a Third of a distinct kind, but of the same Conviction, the
different Degrees of Entity, of Being, which we observe in the Scale of
Creatures, which does evince Them to be Creatures, and that there is a God, the
Creator of them; we find that there is a lesseness of Entity, a worseness, an
Inferiority of Being in some, and a Greater Entity, a more Excellent, and
Superior kind of Being in Others; Some things have a Being and no Composition,
which, though they are not Compounded themselves, are yet of a Degraded
Quality, because they are Ordained to Serve others as the first Ingredients,
and Principles of their Composition; some things have a Compounded Being, but
no life at all, such, as the Grosser Earth and the Parts of it, Stone and
Metal, etc. These are the Foot of this Ladder, and those Before as the Ground
upon which it stands; (I will not stay to open and Anatomize the Parts of this
unelementall Earth (for it is not, it self One Element, but made up of more)
the several Species of Liveless Beings, the several Differences of them,
according to the more or less worthy Operations of them, to the more Lazyness,
or quicker Activity in Producing their effects; This may be the work of Another
Pen, and of another Coat, and to Another Purpose) the Degree of Being, more
worthy than This, is in those which have Mere Life and no More, the Lowest, the
most Ignoble kind of Life, and nearest of kin to that Earth, within which it
Lives, and is quite Dead when it is, All, Above it, only to Grow and Increase,
and not to have Any Sense at all, as the several kinds of Plants, Flowers,
Herbs, and Trees; for, That which is called Plant-Animal, has but Quid Analogum
Sensui, and does not Sentire; the Being Above That, is that of Beasts, which
have the Advantage of sense, added to the Faculty of Vegetation; the Being
Above these, is that of Man, the Lord of these, who has, besides His sense (or
else He is Beside Himself) Reason and Understanding; and yet this Man too has
one more Created Being Above Him, the Spiritual Being of Angels, and their more
Immediate, and Instantaneous, and Intuitive Reason and Understanding; and must
there not Be, the Stagyrite's Ens Entium, a Being of Beings Above All these,
and from which. All these have their Communicated Beings? the very Difference
of these kinds of Being, the More and Less, that Better and Worse, does
Evidence that there Must; for, Nothing has Less, and Worse of Being, but as it
does more approach to That, which has the Least and Worst of Being, nay to
That, which is Less yet, even to Nothing it self; and nothing has more, and
Better of Being, but in some. Approximtion, and Likeness, and Reference to That
which has (or rather Is) the Most, the Best Being of all, in whom we have our
Being afwell as in whom we Move; Acts 17.28.
and That Chief, that Best, that Universal, that Original, that Essential Being
can be no Less than God; the very Order of these Beings, and the several steps
of this Scale does Evidence as much; for, as there is a Lowest Being, that
Vilest, and most Deprest, the very Center and Element of the Earth, which has a
Being and nothing else; and a Compounded Being of a Body made of Parts, which
is nothing else but Body; and a Being one Step above that, a Body, but yet a
Live, a Veget, a Growing Body, which has Arms, but not of Flesh, and Stomach,
but not above ground; a Being, one step higher yet, a Live and growing Body,
but a Body that has sense too, as well as growth, that can Feel, as well as be
Felt, that can Tangi, and Angi too; and a Being, still one step Higher,
partly-Body, partly-Spirit, Man; and a Being one step Higher yet,
Purely-Spirit, but Created and Depending Spirit, Angel; so there must be, to
make this Scale Perfect ( the Top of which must reach not only to Heaven, Genesis
28.12.
but to God in it) a Supreme, Sovereign, exact, essentially, and
selfly-Spiritual, Independent Being, who is (...) (Nam Veteres Theologi, Caeli.
Rhid. Praefat.
Centri Nomine, Deum esse intelligendum prudentiortbns insinuarunt) Opposite to
the Other extreme, the Center of the Earth the most Deficient, and beggarly
element of Being, nay to the very Nothing, to which the Nobler sorts of Beings
Approach, and Of which, All sorts of Being Partake, as well as a weaker, more
Infirm, and Partial Being, to which the more Ignoble Beigns do Declien; and
That Being must needs be Deum qui non summu^ putet, Rerum imperitum existimo
Caecilius in Cicerone. Philo Jud.
God; so that, even by Natural help, such as this Ladder is, Man might reach up
to the Belief of that Jehovah, who is Fons Essentiae.

16. When thou see, and observest this Difference of Beings, One to partake
more of Entity, and Another, less; One Merely to Be (Est, and Praeterea Nihil)
and Another to Be, and Live; One, to Live, and Grow, and Another to Live, and
have Sense, Virg.
Superatque and Vescitur Auris Aethereis; One to Live Partly Body, and Partly
Spirit, as Thy self does, and Another to Live only Spirit, as an Angel does;
tell that No-man that denis a Being Above all these, which gave a Being to All
of these, that He is not a Man, He has no Reason; He is not a Beast, He has no
Improbum and Vislentum est, Rationem its ascribere, qui Notitia Dei Carent.
Plutarch. in Gryllo. Qui Deos negant, Abjectum Genus Hominum, and sine sensu.
Max. Tyrius Sermon. Deo^esse, omnes sana mente praediti, arbitra^tur. Plutarch.
de Homero.
Sense; He is not a Plant, for He does not Grow, unless it be worse; He is not
so much as a Dead Chip, for there was not a Live Tree, out of which He was Cut;
He is Nothing; Less than That, for, That Nothing is in an Objective Power, and
Can be Produced by the Sovereign Being, and the very Production of it, when it
is In Fieri, nay, the very Capacity to Be Produced, while it is but in Posse
Fieri does Confess a God; worse then That, for That Nothing Cannot Disbelieve.

17. There is a Fourth, Natural, and Invincible Argument of a Deity, that All
these several Beings do Certainly Operate to a Fixed, Designed End and Purpose;
This Concludes, that, not All things, no, not Any thing, is Casual and
Fortuitous, by mere Dull, and Ignorant, Frustraneous and End-less Chance; and
therefore, they are all guided by an Intelligence greater than They, which has
Created them All for their Distinct uses, and That Intelligence must needs be
God.

Whence is it, Jer. 35.7. Domus Antra fuerunt and Densi Feutices, and junctae
Cortice Virgae. Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
that Stones, and Wood, have This End (which Themselves know not that they
Have) that we may not be Rechabites, but Build Houses, make Fires, Dress Meat,
and Live? Whence is it that the Sheep and Oxen, wear their own Hides, and Wool,
till they have worn them fit for Our Use, and then, we wear them After, and yet
they cannot tell, that they are Stewards and Providers for us? whence is it,
that we Live by Air, and yet the Air understands not that we Breath it? or, if
it did, knows not in what secret Caverns to hide all of it from our Nostrils,
but that we do still in spite of its fleetness and Invisibility Haurire, and
Reddere, take hold of it when we List, and bid it Go as Cato came, Ideo Tantum
ut Rediret, Auson.
etiam dum Loquor, Redi? Whence is it that Men make Laws, whereby Man may Live
Innocent, and safe? not safe only Though He be Innocent, but Because He is
Innocent? or who is it, that has taught Man so much Goodness and Protection?
why is it, the Bad Man, who knows He should keep Laws, does yet break them, but
that Himself proposes an Omuis Homo Agit per Intellectum cujus est, ex Five,
Operatio.
End, though a wrong One, to Himself? and whence is it, that the Good Man does
not utterly Perish in the overthrow of those Laws, but that the
God-Intelligence does supply the Defect of Law, and Protect Him, who Pursued a
Right End? Is it not hence, that the very Iniquity of some, does Confirm the
Integrity of Others? All would be Casualty, and Breach, and Destruction, were
there not a God to Over-see and Overpower All, and Nothing is Casualty, and
Breach, and Destruction to the Good Man, because there is (and He knows there
is) such a God; whence is it, that the Ill Man is Never at Home? but may answer
Truly, and in sober sadness, out of His own Window, as the Merry Man in Erasmus
did, Colloq.
Ego non sum Domi? that He Lives and Dies, Amazed, and out of Himself, now
stupify'd, and Anon Terrified in his heart? Fickle and unconstant in Tongue,
how undaunted soever he be in haughty Brow, and Forhead of Brass? and whence is
it, that the Good Man Lives Above, nay upon his miseries, reckons upon them as
the unawares Preferment Bestowd upon him by the very Malice of Man? as the
Purposed Medicinal Gifts, and Counsels, and Instructions of his God? then,
Dies, and Conquers Death, Moriens, Animam abstulit Hosli. Vir. Aeneid. l. 9.
as his Christ did, by Death it self? Dies, with more Joy, and Comfort, and
Triumph, (because it is much deeper than a Face-Joy, and a Comfort Wealthier
than all the Indies can administer, and a Triumph over his very self and all
his Frailtyes) than those, who make him die, and, in Dying Make him Live? Dies
with an unmovable serenity in his Heart and Mind and Conscience? has the Image
and Picture of That serenity, graven and imprinted in the Coutage and
stedfastness of his eyes and Countenance, in the solidity and unrecantingness
of his expressions? and wishes that his very Words were written, nay printed
too in a Book, nay Graven too, and that with an Iron-pen, such words these, Job
19.28. v. 24, 25, 27.
I know that my Redeemer lives, whom these very Eyes of mine shall steadfastly
Behold? whence all this? but because as another Poet of their own has said,
Est Deus in nobis, God, the Influences, and Comforts of God, are in him, and
upon him, and Men may see (if they will not, Maliciously to their own Soul,
Blind the Better ey of their Soul, Reason) in such a Life, and in such a Death,
that there is an Ever-Living, a Never-Dying, an Immortal, a Providentiall God.

18. From the end for which every thing is Made, and to which every thing does
Collime; Ask the Atheist, Wherefore He is Made? and to what End He Denies that
God, for whose Honor He was made? If He can tell Thee neither this, nor that,
believe Him in Nothing else; and if He can tell Thee, believe a God; For, if He
deal plainly with thee, Why He denies a God. His only, and Bosom Reason is
this, that He would not have a God to Punish Him; and such a Reason as this,
does not Deny but Confess God, nor does only Confess God, but Prove Him too.
Whence came this Fear of After Punishment, which stands at the elbow of every
desperately-bad Attempt? but that it was Non solum Innatum sed etiam Animo
Insculptum, esse Deos. Cicero l. 3. de Not. Deorum; and Laertius in vita
Zenonis.
imprinted with indelible Characters into the Soul of Men (who may sooner wash
away His own Soul than wash these signatures out of it) by that God who would
be Known and Acknowledged (when Protected Man Will not do it by due) by Fear of
being Out-Lawd from that Protection, and Providence, by which He Rules and
governes the Whole Great World, and that Proud little-Great World Man, who
thinks Himself to be Bigger, and of more Consideration, than the Whole.

19. Which last Epithetes of Ruling Protection and Governing Providence, casts
me upon a fifth Argument, by which Nature Herself in the Best desires, even of
the Worst of Men, does testify that there is a God Of Nature, a God Above
Nature; And that is, the Natural Inclinations and Propenseness, and
even-Beseechings of Man, to partake in the Blessings of God.

20. That there is such a Natural inclination in Man, in the whole Species,
because in every Individuum of it, will appear most dilucidly and
uncontradictorily, when Any That Man is surpised and beset with a Weight of
Suddenness of Danger and Death, which He would escape, and out of which, He
cannot Extricate Himself by all the Wit of Man, so, that He will even Fail,
rather than Fail, and Mori, ne Moriatur, Mart.
so that He will make Choice of one kind of Death, without any Hic rego, non
Furor est. id.
Fury, or Preposterousness, since His design is not, simply, to avoid Death,
but Comparatively, a worse and more formidable kind of it, so that, to Him, the
less painful Death has some proportion and Analogy to Life it self, in respect
of those fiercer anguishes, which He thus avoyds, and in some sense escapes
Death, by Incurring it: Bring we to such a Test, that most daring Atheist, who
all His Life, Denied God, and see, if His Practice, in that eruption and
Uncounseldness be not somewhat Godly, in defiance of His Opinion! At That
Instant you shall hear Him both Confess God, and Invoke God; Invoke God that He
would not Vicem rependere, and Deny Him also, Matthew. 4.5, 6.
Lege Talionis; Walk up with Him to the Brow of a Hill (suppose it like that
Pinnacle upon which the Devil set our Savior, Himself Tempting One Person of
the Godhead to make Him Deny Another, by Tempting God His Father) where all
the way, He sees nothing else but Hill; at that Instant and on that Top and
Brow of the Hill, do Thou Stand, and suppose Him to Fall, to See nothing, into
which He must Fall, but Pitch, and Brimstone, and Flames of Fire; tell me now,
Did thou not hear him Cry out, with as much Acknowledgment as with horror,
God Bless me! God Protest me! God Deliver me! Such a Cry, when he had not
Leisure to be ill-advis'd by his depraved Corrupted Reason, must needs flow out
of a Natural Inclination to believe, that there is a Supreme Invisible Power,
which is the Preserver of Men; Job 7.2^.
and to Believe such a Preserver, such a Governing and Providentiall Power, is
to believe a God, in whom such a Power does Reside and Dvvell; And, that This
is a True Belief, does follow out of the Convinced Truth of the Natural
Inclination, and the Naturality of the Cry; for Nature herself will bear
witness, that no Inclination and Desire, which proceeds merely and Directly,
firstly and Originally from Her, was ever in vain.

21. And then why does the Atheist Rashly deny him, from whom, at his Most
Need, by an Innate Impulsion, he does Soberly beg Aid? Thou know, that there
is a God; and thou hearst That Denying Man, when He is Ready to Perish, cry
out, God save me; Remember then that Thy God has said (said, and sworn) As I
live, Romans 14.11.
says the Lord, Every Tongue shall Confess to God. Every Tongue, the most
Blasphemous Tongue Shall do it; when you hear such a Tongue Deny God with the
same Oath, with which God has sworn It shall Confess him; when you hear It
swear by the very Name of Him whom it Denies to be, think, that, Matthew. 21.16.
as Christ has said, Out of the Mouth of Babes, and Sucklings, thou have
perfected Praise, so, God has perfected Truth, out of the Mouth of them, who
are but Once Born, and are not Newborn Babes, who, either, have not sucked the
Sincere Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.
or else by a Divellish Assmilation (for, they themselves, are Satan Manifested
in the Flesh, and like Spiders, turn what they feed upon into their vicious
selves) have converted That Milk into Poison: Beseech we God, that, as All
things, even Persecutitions, and Miseryes of All sorts, do work together for
Good, Romans 8.28.
to them that Love God, so All things, even Atheismes and Blasphemies of all
sorts, Believed, and Done, may work together to the Magnifying of God, by all
Saints, so much the more, as He is Vilify'd by a Desperate Few, of this
Untoward Generation.

Thus the whole Earth does attest that God who Bears up the Pillars of it.
Psalm. 75.3.
And the whole Heavens do so too.

22. I must not now rest upon That Text of David, The Heavens Declare the Glory
of God, Psalm. 19.11
and the Firmament shows his handy-worke; I must not stay to Disprove the
God-Confessing, though the Christ-God Denying Socinus, in His Comment upon that
Text, that the Heavens declare the Glory of God, only by a pre-supposition that
God was known to be, before the Heavens were seen, for, That Text Clears it
self (and saves me the labor) God, was not only known Before, but Made known
by them, the Firmament, says David, shows his handywork, shows by the very
Prospect of it self that it self is the handyworke of God; Here, I must not
stay; but, as, to Christiaus, the right Method is, to Prove, and Confirm Any
Truth in Nature, by the Greater Truth of the Word of God, so, to the Atheists,
we must Prove, the very Truth of God himself in his Word, by the lesser Truth,
because more evident to them in Nature; the Good Christian, I know, will Pardon
me, for his sake, Aesop.
who is so Cockish as to Preser One single Grain of Corn, above that Rich
Jewel, which might Purchase to him an entire harvest.

23. And yet, in This (that I may not only dwell upon Nature, or rather, that
whilst I do so, I may show you that I have the Authority of the Ancient Fathers
(who are Patres though Patrati Patres) and of the more Ancient, and Father to
them, the Apostle S. Paul, so to do) I shall confirm that Text, by a Reason of
Theodorets, drawn out of Nature herself, and show, by the Consent of Other
Fathers, that Nature herself does much help us in the Inchoative knowledge of a
God; nay by the Practice of S. Paul himself, who does Countenance such kind of
Arguments as These, by his own example.

24. First then (perhaps in too much Civility of Compliance; but as Austin
said, he would rather speak false Latin, Ossum to Edify, than True Os, not to
be understood; Veritas in dicto.
so I must rather choose to write a Natural Theology, whereby to reclaim an
Atheist, than a Disbelieved supernatural, whereby to leave him still in that
Pit, in which there is no Truth) give me leave, as the Importunity of the
Atheist Compels me, to wave both the Testimony of David, and of Theodoret too,
and to strengthen the Truth of David, with the Reason of Theodoret; When we see
any stately Palace Well Built, it is Impossible for us, but to reflect
presently upon the skill and Contrivance of the Architect and Master Builder,
whose Wit and Industry brought This to pass; To him we refer all the Praise of
the Edifice; what is there more a Palace, more Stately, better Built, than
Heaven? (certainly, none, of the Fools Imaginary Paradises upon Earth) and can
he be less than God, that Raisd such a sumptuous Structure? thou art less than
Man, thou art worse than Devil that think so; Satan himself knew, what a
Powerful God he was, in shaking heaven, as well as in Casting him out of it.

25. Luke 10.^8.
But, though He fell from heaven, like Lightning, Bonum est nob is, esse Hic;
Matthew. 17.4.
I am so in Love with it, that I cannot, on the sudden, let pass the discourse
of Heaven, but, in a Continuation, and Inhancement of that Natural Argument,
must call upon my Reader, by occasion of those heavens above him, Psalm. 2.4.
to acknowledge that God, who sits in the heavens, and to let his Name,
Psalm. 8.1.
be excellent in all the Earth, who has set his Glory above the heavens.

26. In the Motion of them, there is Nihil Temerarium, nihil Fortuitum, nihil
Varium, says the great Orator, L. 2. de Natura D^^ru^.
Nothing Rash, and unadviz'd; nothing Casual, and by mere Chance; nothing
altering and unstable; but a Constancy, and Order in them All; (and yet, were
there not This Constancy, but, That Casualty, Quodest ex his, vel, si omniahaec
sunt, Philosophandum est; sive nos Inexorabili lege, Fata co^stringunt; sive,
Arbiter Vniverst, Deus, Cuncta disponit; sive Casus Res Humanas, sine Ordine,
Impellit, and Jactat, Philosophia nos tue^t debet; Haec adhortabitur, ut Deo
Libenter Pareamus; ut Fortunae Contumaciter Resistamus; haec docebit, ut Deum
sequaris, Feras Casum. Senec. ep. 16. 1 Cor. 14.33
he that was as great a Philosopher as the other an Orator, would Infer God,
and Dispute an Acquiescence in God, even from thence) and therefore he infers
That very Deity, to Regulate them, whom Our S. Paul calls, the God of Order and
of Peace: If the wit of his mere Speculation, could discover and unveile so
much of the Godhead to him, how much more and Better, might he (as he did) have
known That God, by the Sense, and experience of those many Benefits, which
those heavens distill hourly upon us? Why does the Sun so Constantly, and
indefatigably, Travel, but that all we, upon the Globe of the Earth (those who
dwell upon the One Face of it, and those, who upon the Other) might have a
Vicissitudinary Comfort, and Benefit of his Light? that by It, we might See One
Another, See what to do, and how to live? See That Sun it self, and see,
through That, Psalm. 19.6.
to God? Why is nothing hid from the heat thereof, but that the heat of That
Sun, might Inanimate and Quicken Us, and All other Living Creatures For us? So
much it is of that Nature of God, of which, God would have us to be, Gal. 6.9.
Not to be Weary in Well-Doing, that we may Piously Imagine, This it self to
be One Reason, why God does not suffer the Sun, which does so much Good to us,
to Run his own Proper and Natural Course, but to be wheeld about by the Motion
of another, and by another Motion Contrary to his own, lest so Beneficial a
Giant, as the Sun, might be suspected to do that Good he does, willingly, and
knowingly, and thereupon, might be adored, as God: And yet, the Persian Excess
of Religion, (though a Lofty and Damnable Crime) in worshipping the Sun it self
for God, out of a mistaken Gratitude for those Benefits which he receives by
the Influences, but not by the donation of the Sun (which very Benefits
themselves do enough teach him that There Is a God, though they do not teach
him enough, Who that God Is) this Idolatry, in esteeming somewhat else to Be
God, which Is not so, Is more excusable, and will be Less, though Grievously
Punished, than the Atheists defect of Reigion (which is a sin, if not the same,
to be compared with That against the Holy Ghost,) in worshipping No God at all,
and, out of a base Plutarc. in His Book De superstitione, define. Atheism to be
Stupor quidam, Deos non sentientium.
Stupidity, not seeing a Footstep, or Image of God in any thing, though every
thing he sees, is, either, a dim Creatura, est quosi De^ vestiginm. Suarez.
Disput. 2. sect. 2.
Footstep at least, or a Brighter Exemplumque Dei, quisque est i^ Imagine p^vo.
Manil. l. 4. c. ult. Psalm. 14.1. and cur dici^ insipiens, quod non est Deus?
Cur? nisi quia stultus, and Insipiens? Anselm. In cord, non in ore, quiae si
velit Hoc verbis eloqui, stultus esse (sicut est) Publici Assensus Judicio
arguretur? Hilar. in Psalm. 52.
Image of God; since our Schoolmen have told us true, and our own Natural
Reason has approved their doctrine, Imago Dei, in Rationalibus, in Coeteris,
Vestigium; sure Our David did not err, when he tells us what a Fool such an
Atheist is, though he be (which, yet, is the worst, being so, of all) but in
his Heart an Atheist; not only A Fool, but The Fool, no such Fool in the
world as he; and how can he be otherwise, who has no Light of Reason in his
Soul (for want of such a Light as this same, in the Gospel, though Virgins are
called Foolish Ones) or how can he have that Light, Mat. 25.
who, by that, does not See, and Grant, an Image, a Delineation, a Reflection
of the Godhead, in that very Soul of his?

27. Let us leave the Atheist awhile, and put him off to another sheet, and let
us once more return to our own, our more enlightened David, and cry out with
him, Let Heaven and Earth praise the Lord; Ps. 69.34.
let us acknowledge that they do so, by exhibiting Copious Matter of Divine
Praise, to every eye that beholds them; let us apply that of David once again,
and call upon that other Heaven, our Soul within us, Ps. 103.1.
which came from thence ( Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name) and upon that other Earth, our Flesh about us, which was
made of it, that our very Soul may worship Him, and our very Body, all the
outward works of our Lives, testify, to Him, to our Selves, and to the World,
that we Believe him to be; that we Believe in him, according to his Commands
upon us; that we Magnify him, for his Goodness to us.

28. Hitherto I have (with Sadness enough (but that scarce any Sadness can be
enough) that such Times as these force such a Calling as ours to Prove such a
Truth as this) evinced such a Fundamental Truth (without which, there can be no
Truth, as well as no Salvation) that there Is a God, by the Testimony of
Heaven, and Earth, of Man, and of all the Inferior Creatures, and Inferior
Principles resulting from these, which, by some, who have the Shape of Men, and
the Contradiction of -- (there is nothing to Compare them to, but Themselves)
are more Believed, and Betrothed Truths, than that Principle of Principles, as
well as Being of Beings, that there is a God.

29. I go on to Confirm this Truth by Nature, with the Countenance which those
Spiritual Men, the Fathers (who have had an Oa^ in the same Boat) and that more
Spiritual Man, the Apostle St. Paul, (whose Example is my Just Warrant) and the
general sense and purpose of the Scriptures of God (which make Them, and Him,
to be Spiritual Men) do show, to this kind of Argument.

30. In his He^^mer.
(...) (says St. Basil) (...), The whole World (take it in its Latitude, and
full Comprehension, as it is made up of Both Globes) is a School, which does
Instruct and Discipline us in the Knowledge of God; So that, in the sense of
that holy. Father, we have not done amiss, to prove a God, by the Testimony of
the World, the witness-bearing of Heaven and Earth.

31. Facil us credas Prophetiae, Discipulus Naturae, (...) Resur^ect.
says Tertullian; we shall, the more easily, be induced to believe the Old,
and New Testament, the Prophecy, and Gospel, if we have, first, been the
Disciples of Nature, and studied those Lectures which she has read to us, in
this Nether Orb, the World Below; so that, in the sense of that Pious Father,
we are much Excusable, in drawing arguments through the whole Map of the Earth,
to Convince a God; though we cannot choose but be sorry, that Ortelius, who
was, never, till now, fit to be quoted in Divinity, is, now, fit, all over.

32. St. Bernard says, that he had Nullos, aliquando, Magistros, nisi Quercus,
and Fagos, no other Masters, and Tutors in Divinity, for some space of time,
than the Oken, and the Beechen Trees; and yet these Dumb Masters, these
Un-mov'd Tutors, who were not more Ignorant in Themselves, than an occasion of
Knowingness to him (though no Preacher were closed up in the Hollow of the
Trees) even these could Teach him that there is a God; so that, in the sense of
that humble Father, we have un-heretically submitted, to ask Counsel of the
Meanest Creatures, and to Learn ^^e Power of God, from the very Feebleness of
Frogs and Mice.

33. And though Irenaeus (twenty years Elder than the Eldest of these) has
said, Deus, sine Deo, non cognoscitur, that, as we cannot see the Sun, L. 4.
advers. Haer. c. 14. Sicut Oculus Luce nos tantum sua, sed Solu Ipsum Luce
solemn conspicit, Idemque qui Videtur, and Visum facit. Grot. Silv. l. 1.
Eucharist.
but by the * Light of the Sun, so, without God, we cannot Know God: yet that
may be, either Cum Favore understood, that we cannot know God at all, not
Confusedly, not Remotely, by any, by all of the Creatures, unless we see the
Power and VVisdome of God in the Order and Disposition of Every of them; or
else Rigidly, that we cannot Savingly know God, without the more Especial Light
of his own Word and Gospel; and then the Inference will be, that he that does
not know God at all, not so much as by the Creatures, is without God in this
World, (without the Acknowledgement of him, Natura Humana, nec Rationem, nec
Orationem De Diis suscipere potest, sine Diis. Iamblicus, c. 26.
not without the Subsistence by him) He, that does not know God savingly, not
so much as by his Word, shall be without God, in the Other World (without the
Benefit and Mercy of God (unless a Metaphysical Benefit, a mere Notional Mercy,
to Be, though in Torments) not without the Severity and Judgment of God) All
this it argues, but it argues not at all that God Himself Is Not, no more than
we may conclude there is no Wealth in the Womb of the Sea (as, indeed, in
some sense there is not, if it be either Use or Possession, and not a Bare
Being, which does dare esse to Wealth) because we do not know, what Jewels are
bred, or what Gold has been cast away, in the Bowels of the Main.

34. To all these let me add that Axiom of the Schools, Media Perfecta and
quae-Ordinantur, that, as all the Means, which God has ordained, are Complete
and Perfect, to the Production of that Effect for which God ordained them, so
the Chain of Causes, the Scale, the Motion, the End, the Inclination of
Creatures, the whole World, and every part of it, are Jointly, and Severally,
Perfect, and Sufficient Means, whereby to know a God Est quaedam Imperfecta
Perfectio, at sciat Homo, se non esse Perfectum in hac Vita. Primasius in Col.
c. 1. in Fine.
Imperfectly (and let none suspect he stumbles at a Contradiction in the
repugnancy of those two words; for, is there not a Distinction of Aquinas,
Perfectio in Via, and Perfectio in Patria? and is not that, in Via, an
Imperfection, if compared to that, in Patria?) at least that He Is, fince they
were never ordained to reach out to us, any further, and more Clear; Distinct,
and Exact Knowledge of God; though they will not enough speak All the Praises
of the Almighty, yet, even They, will enough stop the Mouth of the Atheist, and
put his Lying Lips to silence, Ps. 31.18.
which speak Derogatory and Blasphemous things, Proudly and Disdainfully,
against the Righteous Judge of all the Earth.

35. And, above all these, let me add, that Paul and Barnabas used the like
Natural Argument, to prove the Invisible God; and, if you weigh the
Circumstances, you cannot choose but Grant', that such an Argument had great
Weight and Power in it, or else you must Condemn those two Great and
Greatly-Illumin'd Doctors, to have been unskilful Divines, 2 Timothy 2.15.
and Workmen that had need to be ashamed, in that they did not Rightly Divide
that very word of Truth, which the God of Truth spoke in Nature her self. The
Occasion which brought them to such a Proof and Conviction of an Eternal,
All-seeing, and Un-seen God, was This; When St. Paul, by a word only, Act.
14.10, V. 8.10.
had Recovered the Impotent Man, who was a Creeple from his Mothers womb, and
so Recovered him, that he Leaped and Walked, the People lift up their Voices,
and said, V. 11.
The Gods are come down to us in the Likeness of Men (This God does some
Miracles, to Show his Omnipotency, and to Prove his Doctrine. Jo. Huart. Examen
de Ingeniis, c. 2.
Miracle was enough to make them Confess One God at least; and, what is there
in Nature, that is not a Miracle, but that it is Ordinary? and yet as Ordinary
as it is, is above the Self-Power of Man to produce) Now, when they were so far
prepared, as to believe that there Is a God, that they might not Honor Men as
Gods, but Believe and Worship the True God, This was the Proof; He is the
Living God, which made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, (and we may Grievingly
apply -- Who, at this present Time, has suffered Some Men in This Nation to
walk Peculiarly in their own ways; (the Atheist's ways are more Peculiarly
than any Man's alive, His own, and therefore I said Some Men --) for whatever
else were the Sins of Nations, whatever else were the Sects of Schismatics,
whatever else were the Societies and Combinations of Men, there Apud nos,
Veritatis Argumentum, Aliquod Omnibus videri, tanquam Deum esse in ter alia,
sic colligimus, quod Omnibus de Numine Opinio Insita est; nec ulla Gens unquam
ade^ extra Leges Moresque projecta, ut non Aliquos Deos credat. Senec. Ep. 118.
Nemo Barbarorum, ad Contemptum Deorum excidit unquam, neque in Dubium Vocant
Illi, sintne Dii, an non sint? and curentne Res Humanas, an non? Aelian. l. 2.
de Var. Histor. c. 31.
never was an Entire Nation, there never was a Characteris'd Sect, there never
was a Professed Society, and Combination of Atheists; so Ridiculous, as well as
so Irrational, it has ever been, and will always be, to Deny a God) and yet,
though God has Permitted some Nations, and Sects, and Societies, to Commit such
Distinguishing Sins, whereby they might be Known, and some Few Atheists,
different from the Guise of the whole World, to be Guilty of a Monstrous and
Dis-own'd, Unconfederated and Unsociable Sin, yet, says St. Paul, God left not
Himself without Witness (to either of them, the Several Whole Bodies, or that
Small Handful of Men) Illud Pr^fecto, quod Precamur, non fieret, nec in Hunc
Furorem, omnes Mortales Concensissent, alloquendo Surda Numina, and Inefficaces
Deos, nisi hoc in Aperto foret, Ipsos Benefacere. Senec. de Benef. l. 4. c. 4.
Deus est, cui Nomen Omne Convenit; Vis Illum Fatum Vocare? Non errabis; Hic
est, ex quo Suspensa sunt omnia, Causa Causarum; Vu Illum Providentiam dicere?
Recte dices; Estenim, cujus Consilio huic Mundo Providetur, ut Inconcussus eat,
and Actus suos explicet; Vis Illum Naturam Votare? Non Peccabis; Est enim, ex
quo Nata sunt Omnia, cujus Spiritu Vivimus. Id. Natural. Quaest. l. 2. c. 45.
in that He did Good; after he had first made the World by his Power, and ever
since Governed it by his Providence, the very Being, and Orderly Being of the
World, was, in St. Paul's account, a Witness-bearing to the God that Made it,
and Keeps it; He goes on, to Instance, in the most Discerned, and
Popularly-Known acts of his Providence, In giving Rain from Heaven, v. 17.
every Globular Drop of which, does, in some faint manner, Resemble and Attest,
that Eternal Circle, which God Himself Is; and the Fructification, the Plenty,
which follows those Drops, does Evidence and Manifest the Goodness and Bounty
of that God; That Is his second Instance, the second Link of that Chain of
Providence, the second Branch of that Accumulative Argument, whereby he proves
a Deity, In giving fruitful Seasons upon Earth, 1 Cor. 15.37.
It may chance of Wheat, or of some other Grain) does Convince a Providential
God against the Atheist, as well as a Raising God to the Christian; and then he
drives his Proof home, to the very Heart and Soul of Man, in that God does, by
these, as the Effect of these, Fill our Hearts with Food and Gladness; more
wise and learned, than the most wise, and most learned of all Christ's
Disciples; for, here, it is not a beseeching, and you are Inexorable if you
grant it not, it is not a persuasion, and you are Unkind if you yield not, it is
not a Counsel, and you are Self-willed if you obey not, nay, it is not bare
Doctrine neither, and you are Ignorant if you believe not, but it is Doctrine,
Argued and proved, powerfully evinced, and even sensibly demonstrated, that
there is a God, and you are maliciously stupid, wilfully Blind, if your
solitary testimony runs-cross to that of all the world besides, that a God
there is.

36. And did not Holy Job teach St. Paul, or rather, did not the Holy Ghost
teach Both of them, that such an Argument as This, was ungain-sayable, that the
Contrary to This was undisputable? so far from being Thetical, and Dogmatical,
Evident Truth, that it was not so much as Hypothetical, and Problematical,
suspicious Truth? when Holy Job proves the validity, and sufficiency of that
Aggregate Universal Argument, by Proving that Universal Argument, by Induction,
by Enumeration of all Particulars, not only that All the World together does
Argue a God, but that every Particle, and Fraction of it, severally, does do as
much (Quaeque Probant strictim singula, Juncta Magis) and does effectually do
it, even in answer to the most Colorable Objection that ever was, against the
Being of God? The Tabernacles of the Robbers Prosper, Job. 12.6.
and they that provoke God are secure. When we name a God we Mean a Duty of
Piety from Man to God; and, to Encourage that Duty, we mean a Reward from God
upon pious Man; we declare what that duty of Piety is, to do that, which is
Conscionably Right, what ever Vir Bonus quod Honesti se facturum putaverit,
faciet, etiam si Laboriosum erit, and Damnosum. Senec. Ep. 76. Ps. 115.16.
wrong befalls us here, for doing it; we declare When that season of Reward Is,
not, always here, in Our World, in that Earth, which God has given to the
Children of Men, but, ever, hereafter, in Gods world, in that Heaven, which is
the Lords, and which he will give to the Children of the most high; and yet,
Ibid. 82.6. Damnum Tu^pi Lucro Proterendo Chil^.
the wrong which befalls, here, to Right and Conscionable Men, is the strongest
Weapon, which the Natural Man (I can scarce call him so, for Nature, which God
made, will never be so Ungrateful, as not to Acknowledge her Maker, which, the
Unnatural Man) takes into his hand, wherewith to War against the very Being of
God, and to beat down the useless, unprofitable, dis-advantagious, nay,
sometimes, the dangerous, Ruinating, Capital Integrity of Man, who, not only,
in Vain, Ps. 73.13. Ps. 35.12.
Cleanses his heart, and washes his hands in Innocence, but, is evilly Rewarded
too for his Good, to the spoiling of his Soul indeed, if such an Opinion as
this, once enter into it.

This, the best of Heathen, the wisest of mere Natural Men, Seneca, Ep. 74.
does confess to have been a great stumbling block, whereby to shake the
honesty of Man, and to overthrow the very being of God; ex Has Deploratione
nascitur, from this deplorable wretchedness, which betides the wisest and best
Men, it is, that Men are so Ungrateful Estimators, and Interpreters of Divine
providence, and Abrogators of Divinity it self.

37. The Adversariness to St. Paul's and Job's Argument, is set down to the
height by Job, and Seneca; let us see what Job and Seneca themselves Reply, to
what themselves, out of worse Mouths than their own, Object. Job goes on, with
shame and indignation, that so falsly-confident and undisturbed an inference
should be made out of so feeble a Ground, that Men should be more Insensible of
a Deity, than the very Beasts, that to them he sends them for better
Information, V. 7.8.
But ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee, speak to the Earth (upon
which those Beasts feed) and It shall Teach Thee; the Beasts are provided for,
and will not that God, which Caters for them, sustain Men? the Beasts, are all
alike, neither better nor worse, and they feed all alike, and shall not Men,
who have a difference in goodness (amongst themselves, as well as a difference in
being from the Beasts) have a diverse Portion? and that diverse Portion
distributed according to the Rules of Equity and Judgment, Mercy and Truth?
Reason it self will tell you, they shall, though not secundum hic and nunc;
any, not only Reason, but (if you will take his word, whose Name is word and
Reason, (...)) the (...) Volatilia will tell you the same, Ask the Fowls of the
Air, Mat. 6.26.
and they shall tell you; They sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
Barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them; from these our Savior proves
that providence more expressly, which Job only intimates; and proves it by such
a Reason, which, is Cognoscible even to Natural Men; and that providence proves
a God and a Father too, a powerful God, and a loving Father, a Heavenly God and
Father. V. 8.
Job goes on; the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee; the parts, and
joints, of which they are compacted and made, the Fins and Scales, with which
they are armed, and dressed, is it not a wise and an infinite power, that made
them, and put them on? Is it not, by providence, that they Live, out of that
Air, which is Causa sine qua Non, without which thou can not Live, and within
the glassy Element, under which, thou can not choose but Die? and is not that
wisdom, and power, and providence, the three Letters, which spell a God to
thee? and are not those Muta Animalia thy Tutours, to teach thee to read a God
in the great Book of Creatures, some scattered leaves of which themselves are?
At length he descends, peremptorily, and Irrefragably to his Conclusion, Who
knows not, (who? it is an Universal challenge, and no Atheist will ever dare
to give in an Answer; He will rather learn one Lesson more, a sober silence,
from those Dumb, and yet Teaching Counselors, Job sends him to School) who
knows not, in all these that the Hand of the Lord has wrought this?

38. And that Conclusion of Job is as a Premise, which makes way for that other
Conclusion of Seneca; Ibid.
since there is a God that made all these, since there is a God, who suffers
Ill (that, which Appears to be Ill) to befall really good Men, Placeat Homini,
quicquid Deo placuit, Let that be acceptable to Man, which Man cannot choose
but see to be pleasing to God, and to be allotted to Man by God, whether the
Lot be fallen to him in a fair Ground, Ps. 16.6.
or whether he has neither part nor Lot in this matter, Acts 8.21.
in any good Ground at all; Let it suffice, for the Child of Abraham by Faith,
and the Brother of Abraham by Adoption, as being Son of the same God who was
Abraham's Father, that he only Inherits that penurious condition of his Father
Abraham, Luke 12.13.
that that only No-Inheritance be divided betwixt his Brother Abraham and him,
in that, Acts 7.5.
God for a while, Gives no Inheritance to either of them, no not so much as to
set their foot on, whilst he has some hopeful assurance, that as God was
Abraham's, so he will, hereafter be his, ^en. 15.1.
exceeding great reward.

39. That other Heathen, who was more Poet, than Philosopher, and less wise,
than witty, into what a Maze, Ovidius in Morte Tibulli.
and Labyrinth, and Intricacy was he brought upon such a Ground as this? Cum
Rapiunt Mala Fata Bonos -- That Is the quarrel he has against God, that Good Men
suffer Ill things and untimely Deaths; upon this occasion, how does he strive
to Hoodwink his reason? and yet, in his own expression elsewhere, Sic certat,
tanquam qui vincere Nollet, for, that reason breaks through the transparent
Veyl which he puts upon it, and, velit nolit, will be his Clue to bring him
back to his right wits again; for, throughout, he does confessingly deny, and
Grants against himself; First, Ignoscite Fasso, He would be Pardoned for what
he says; and, certainly, it is a fault, that needs a pardon; truth though it
cannot always protect, does ever forgive it self; and then -- Solicitor
Nullos esse putare Deos; it is but Solicitor, it is not Vincor; his Passion
stirred, and moved and tempted him, but it did not quite overcome him; and it is
but Solicitor putare, it is not, credere, it moved him scrupulously to doubt,
not infallibly to believe, that there is No God; and, at last, All this is but
a piece of his Poetry, and Invention, 'twas no part of his Atheism and
incredility.

40. From these preparatives and foundations, with the addition of two more
Concessions, one, by the ablest, and the other, by all Natural Men, First, that
all Men are sinners, and Secondly that all Men desire to be happy (for the very
Nerve of Reason, why some few Men deny a God, is, because they would be happy
here; and, because that, which we truly call sin, would be a means to impede
their happinesses since themselves (notwitstanding that Comic truth, Non est
quod nos magis Asiena judices Adulatione perire qu^ Nostra. Senec. de
Tranquillit.
Nemo tam alteri adblanditur, quam quisque sibi) cannot so much flatter
themselves, as to believe that sin and happiness can go, Hand in Hand together,
therefore they take the wise course (the worldly, the helly-wise course) to
deny that there is any sin, upon this foundation, because there is No God; for,
say they, if there were such a thing as sin, it must be a breach of a command
of God, we our selves, and (...). 1 John 3.9.
our God himself, they say, defines it so, Dictum, Factum, vel Concupitum
contra Legem Divinam; and, if there be no God, there is no sin; That Is the next
word in the Atheists Mouth, and that is the very desire of his Heart, that, upon
that score, he may do, fearlesly, what he list; (and, because, this, I know, to
be his profession, I must to reclame him, suit my discourse in an
Immethodicalness, proportionable to his speech and practice) and, if the
foundations be shaken, Ps. 11.3. 139.7.
(nay destroyed) if there be no God, what shall the righteous do? whither shall
they go, to his spirit? or whither shall they fly, 1 Cor. 15.19.
to his presence? If there be hope only in this Life, they are, indeed, of all
Men most miserable; and, if the foundations be destroyed if there be no God,
then there can be no Devil neither, and to what Hell shall the unrighteous go?
If there be Hope, only in this Life, Job 14.7.
if there be no Hope of a Tree, when it is Cut down, that it shall sprout again
(Et Homo est Arbor Inversa; 2 King. 19.30.
in the grave He takes Root downward; There He lies a Mel^owing till the
Resurrection, and shall then, bear fruit upward, sprout above the earth) they
are, of All Men, the most Happy, I and the most Virtuous too, Senec. Trag.
Prosperum scelus Virtus vocetur) from these preparatives, which make way for
it, I shall proceed to the Scripturall Argument, in the manner I proposed.

41. That there is a God in Heaven (eminently, and Enthroned there, but
essentially every where) is, not only One Part of the Righteousness of Man to
Confess, and Another part of His Righteousness to Worship that God, but the
very sinfulness of Man does confess as much, in that, Man is, ex ore Ipsius,
Confessedly sinful; and in that, sin is, by the Natural and Moral knowledge
of Man, a Violation of the Commandments of God.

42. That, which, long since, cost me some pains (but that the delight I took
in it, did defray the Charges of my Industry) after their Vintage and whose
Harvest of Morality, to pick up, in my several walks after them, some
Gleanings and Resemblances of Christianity, dropped from the very heathens, may
perhaps administer delight to the Reader too, when he shall receive all of them
which have a Pertinency to the matter in hand, Bound up in a Sheaf together;
for, believe it, as All is not Gold that glisters, and we have, at this day too
many Leaden, and falsecoin'd, and even-heathenish Christians, how fair and
shining an outside soever they show to the deluded world, 1 John. 5.19.
which is not only in Malitia but In Tenebris positus (and, Then, a Gloworme
can do as much) I and those too, such a kind of Tenebrae as I have somewhere
read of, when Men did Ingenuously Confess that they were Nimia Luce Occoecati,
so, All is not Tares, which grows in a Field situate on the the other side of
Christendom; such humble Confessions as these, if they are not wheat, sure they
are not Cockle Neither.

43. As, That All Men are sinners. Annal. l. 20.
If That of Tacitus, Vitia erunt, Donec homines, does only acknowledge the
perpetuity of Guilt, but not of the Guilt of all Men, (and yet, even in him,
Vitia seems to have the same extent as Homines, and may perhaps not unfitly be
called the Name of Man, as well as of Zoilus, Mar.
Non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed vitium, if thou art homo, thou art Vitium
too) yer That of Propertius will reach Home to, and arrest the most Righteous
Man, as being in arrears by sin, Unicuique Lib. 2. Eleg. 10.
dedit Vitium Natura Creato; and if That does not Impeach Every Man, as Born in
sin; (and yet Vitium seems to have reference to Creato, and to conclude Man a
sinner, as soon as He was Man; what? Psalm. 58.3. Sermon. l. 1. sat. 3.
had He read King David? They go astray as soon as they are Borne) That of
Horace will swathe the whole kind of Man in the Red Mantle of Sin, and that,
from His very Craddle, Vitiis sine nemo Nascitur. Here is the Confession of
Original sin, even by those, who never heard of an Original Adam; and that
without any Romish exception; Nemo; not so much as One Virgin, a single Mary,
unattainted.

And for Actual sin, They are as Copious in their acknowledgments, as we are
in our Transgressions; they not only tell Us, that we had a Beginning of sin
from another, but that we have no end of it in our selves, Quis -- Peccandi
Finem posuit sibi? Quisnam Hominum est, Juven. sat. 13.
quem tu Contentum videris uno Flagitio? Every Man is guilty of Many sins; they
speak it as plainly, as if they had learnt it from S. James, for in Many things
we offend All; and every of those Many, Chapter 3. v. 2.
is a Grievous sin too; Little in the sight of Man, but Mediocribus esse, non
Dii Concessere; -- Old Rome was not so mincing in this point, as New Rome is;
He would believe no sin to be Venial, Tull. Tuse. Quaest. l. 3.
who said Omne Malum, etiam Mediocre, Magnum est.

44. And, as All are sinners, and, notwithstanding the Popes Dispensation
Grievous ones, so, no sin is allowable in any, notwithstanding that Precise
Opinion, that, when two Men commit the same Act, God sees, and detests Murder
in One, and does neither detest nor see so much as the Act in the Other, unless
with eyes which have left off to be pure, and can behold, Hab. 1.13.
but not Chide Iniquity; Peccare, certe, licet nemini; Tull. Par. 2.
it is sin, if thou do it, as well, as if another Man, and thou have as
little leave to offend as he; nay though thou pretendst a very good and holy
end, yet, not only S. Paul forbids Thee to do evil that Good may Come
thereof, but Seneca himself, Romans 3.38.
would fain Indoctrinate Thee out of it, De Ira. l. 1.
Nunquam Virtus vitio adjuvanda est, se contenta; and Reason Thee out of it, Ab
sit hoc a Virtute malum, ut unquam Ratio ad Vitia confugiat; and shame thee out
of it, c. 9. c. 10.
Non pudet virtutes, in Clientelam vitiorum demittere; and abhor thee out of
it, Abominandum Remedii genus est, sanitatem debere morbo; and, if none of
these will do it (what thou can least of all endure) Epictetus will even
Fool. thee out of it; Cap. 12.
he will not suffer thee to think any Color to be Title enough for a
Contradiction, an Impossibility, that That, which is sin in the Deed, should
become Not sin because of the Person, (...), the little great Philosopher
seems, Cap. 19.
in this particular, to be a great, though conceald, Christian, whilst thy self
art but a ittle one, though a Professor.

45. Nor is Man only, by Nature, acknowledged a sinner in those Open Impure and
Unholy acts, which man can take cognizance of, and forbid, and punish by Law,
but in those secret deeds, which no man knows of besides the base and unseen
Committer, in those Thoughts, and wishes, and desires, against which man could
never Frame a Law; for though the nine former Statutes in the Decalogue, are by
some of the Heathens, made Precepts and Laws, though in other words, and one
of them in the very words of Moses, as that of Solon, Non Furaberis, and that
of Diodorus Siculus in the very words of Christ (...), and that Word of Severus
(when He sentenced any to death) which is a Compendium of the second Table, and
is the express and Comprehensive Law of Christ, Mat. 7.12.
Fac, quod vis pati; but That Non Concupisces, is a Law Purely-divine, and yet
even against That guilt, though they could not Sancire Edicta, yet they would,
and did advize and warn against, with That exclamation in Lucan, Heu Quantum
poenae Misero Men's Conscia Donat, Lib. 7.
and with that just terror, and Christian doctrine of a very Juvenal, that the
sin is not the less, because there are not more eyes upon it, prima est haec
ultio (it is prima, Satyr. 13.
it is not sola) quod se Judice nemo Nocens absolvitur; nay, though he has
only purposed to sin, He must answer for That; for He has already sinned in the
very purpose; ( He that looks upon a woman to this end, Matthew. 5.28.
that he may Lust, has not only Lusted, but Adultered too) Has patitur poenas,
peccandi sola volunt as; Nam scelus Intrase Tacitum qui Cogitat Ullum, Eacti
Crimen habet. Not only Tertullian, (that good Christian, and the less a
sinner, for that for Confessing himself to be the more so) would say of himself
that He was Omnium notarum peccator, De poenitentia De se.
that he had sinned all these kinds of sins; or Theodorus (...), but a very
Seneca too, would Paul-like, and Austin-like write his own Confessions in the
most extensive latitude, Ego in profundo omnium vitiorum sum.

46. And, as all men, are by nature, sinners, originally, actually,
intentionally, so, by nature, they know, God to be offended at the sin of man,
and Hell to be Threatened to it.

47. So certain it was with them, that God was displeased at sin, that they
could not invent so much as a Cupidinean God, but, in the same line in which He
is a God, He is told to be Fierce and Angry at the sinful lover, Aristainet.
ep. 10.
(...). How Gracious soever they acknowledge the Eternal Power, yet, their own
sin, they say forces the Bolt from out His Hand, Horat. Carm. l. 1. Od. 3.
Neque per nostrum patimur scelus, Iracunda Jovem ponere Fulmina; which though
it comes a slow (non Ocius Alti In Terras cadit Ira Jovis) yet it comes a sure
pace, Statius Theb. l. 3.
and will Metam Figere, Hit the Right Mark, for it comes from Him, whom Homer
calls (...), and, of whom Statius says -- Sed videt hoc, Theb. l. 5.
videt Ille Deum Regnator, and Ausis, Sera quidem, manet Ira tamen -- And yet,
that none should Courage themselves in Mischief, because, though the Vengeance
of God be Certain, yet it is Tardy, Another of them will dis-hearten Vice by
the Weight of the Punishment, which makes amends to the Justice of God for the
Lateness and Delay, Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
Lento Gradu ad Vindictam sui Divina procedit Ira, Tarditatemque, Supplicii
Gravitate Compensat.

48. And the Punishment too of Un-reconcil'd Sinners, even in Their Black Book,
is no Less than Hell. Not only Punished they must be, those who are Alive in
the Flesh, and Dead in Sin; and Punished they Are, those who are, Both ways,
Dead -- Exercentur Poenis, Virgil. Aenaeid. l. 6.
Veterumque Malorum, Supplicia Expendunt, but they they are Punished in Hell
too, so Undoubtedly, as that he is a very Bold and Saucy Sinner who thinks to
purchase a Mitigation of his Torments, either with Gold, which is altogether
Light in the Balance, or with Counterfeit Holiness, which is but a base Metal
within, and only Colored and Beamed about, like Gold, Audax Ille quidem,
Idem, in Culice.
qui Mitem Cerberon unquam
Credidit, aut Ulli Ditis placabile Numen.
How particular and express, as well as resolved and peremptory, they are in
this Doctrine of Hell! like some good, staid, Primitive Christians, and Unlike
the Modern, Neutral, and Lukewarm Christians! Does Gospel say, that there are
Lower Parts of the Earth? Ephesians. 4.9. Act. 2.27.
that there is a Hell, out of which none but that. Christ Returned, who, Alone,
was Free among the Dead? Ps. 88.5.
Humanity says both This, and That, and says it with a Check to the
Boyishness of those who will be Diffident in One Article of our Creed, Esse
Aliquos Manes, Juven. Sat. 2.
and Subterranea Regna,
Nec Pueri credent, nisi qui nondum Aere Lavantur,
Sed Tu Vera Puta;
And those such Kingdoms which are Irremeable; Senec. in] Morte Claudii.
Avernus est, unde Redire negant Quenquam; does Infallible Scripture say again,
Luke 16.26
is a great Gulf betwixt Hell and Heaven, and no Passage from One to Other?
Honest Heathenism will say again, Noctes, atque Dies, Virgil. Aenaeid. l. 6.
patet Atri Janua Ditis,
Sed Revocar^ Gradum, Superasque Evadere ad Auras;
Hic Labor, hoc Opus est;
And that a Labor, like the washing of a Moor, which is Proverbially called
the Labor in Vain; a Work, like that of Sisiphus, to Role a Stone up Hill,
that it may Role down it self. Does Christ say, Broad is the Way that Leads
unto Destruction, Mat. 7.13, 14.
and strait is the Gate that Leads unto Life, and Few there are that find it?
Ibid.
Virgil says so too -- Facilis Descensus Averni -- and -- Pauci Laeta Arva
tenemus. Mat. 8.12. Ps. 49.19.
Is the Un-Christian Christian's Hell a Place of Utter Darkness? in which he
shall Never see Light? the Un-Christian Heathen's Hell is so too; Scelerata
Jacet Seeds in Nocte profunda
Abdita, Tibull. l. 1. El. 3.
quam Circum Flumina Nigra sonant,
Tum Niger in Porta Serpens
-- and buried and hid from its very self in an Everlasting Darkness, which
has no Communion at all with any Light; Queis nunquam Candente Dies Apparuit
Ortu, Id. lib. 4. Paneg. ad Messal.

Sive supra Terras Phoebus, sive Curreret Infra.
Does Moses tell us, Genesis 3.
that the Devil tempts Man to Sin? Does Peter expound Moses? 1 Pet. 5.8.
and the Saint declare to us the Devil's Design in his Temptation, that by
yielding to his Suggestions, we may Obey our Selves into his Jaws, and he
Devour us? that we our selves may be that Dust, which Moses tells us, Genesis 3.14.
In Piman. Dial. 1.
the Serpent shall eat? and does not Trismegistus tell us the same? Demon, ad
Patranda Scelera Armat Hominem, ut Turpioris Culpae Reus, Aeriori Supplicio sit
Obnoxious.

49. And, since, by their own Confessions, every Sin does Attest a God, whom
That Sin offends, and a Devil, whom God imploys to Chastise that Sin, and a
Hell, in which to Chastise it, Dux Erebi Populos poscebat Crimina Vita, Nil
Hominum miserans', Iratusque omnibus Vmbris.
Impartially, and without Respect of Persons, Have they not, therefore, rightly
charged upon us the Practice of those Attoning Virtues, contrary to those
Provoking Sins? One of them, in that One Verse, which Scaliger commends to be
the very best of all Virgil's Poetry, Discite Justitiam Moniti, Aeneid. l. 6.
and non temnere Dives? And, not only Justice, and Virtue, in Genere, but,
Specifically, 1 Cor. 13.13.
S. Paul's three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity? and do they not
plentifully tell us, that we have all these, and all the other Good we do, from
God? Cicero, l. 1. De Natura Deorum.
Si inest in Hominum genere, Men's, Fides, Virtus, Concordia, unde haec in
Terram, nisi a Superis, defluere potuerunt? They, in whom these Graces shine,
like the Moon at Full, have attained to the Perfection of Virtue; and yet when
they have done that, a very Pindarus will tell them who they are to thank for
it -- Ad summitatem Virtutis pervenerunt, cum Dei autem Favore; and, not only
these Choycest Graces, of Gold, and of Silver, 2 Timothy 2.20.
but every more Feeble Virtue, of Wood also, and of Earth, are Fashioned in us
by a Hand from above, by him whom Isaiah calls our Potter; 64.8.
None at all of them come from our selves, either by Nature, Arist. Eth. l. 2.
c. 1.
Nulla fit Virtus Morum in nobis, Natura, or by Art, Non fit ab Art, Maximus
Tyrius, Sermon. 22.
quod Evadimus Bon^, but All of them by the Gift and Grace of God, Sed potius
Beneficio Jovis, Aristainet. Ep. 13.
(...).

50. And yet, these Virtues, how eagerly soever pursued, and in some intense
degree practiced, since, by the Frailty of Man, they cannot be entirely
practiced, or, if they were so, could merit nothing at that God's hands, who
gave the Virtues, therefore he who is the bright Morning Star, and the very
Sun, amongst the Heathens, when he had done all he could, would expect his
Reward only by Grace and Mercy; and, had he done more than he could, he would
yet have done One thing more, (that which our God and Christ commands us to do,
Luke 17.10
When we have done all those things which are Commanded us) confessed, that he
was an Unprofitable servant; one of these, He confesses, throughout a whole
Book of His, for the Title of it is De Clementia, and, almost, in the very
entry of that Book, Lib. 1. c. 1.
Non est Quisquam cui tam valde innocentia sua placeat, ut non stare in
Conspectu Clementiam paratam humanis erroribus gaudeat; and theother, in His B.
De Ira, Lib. 2. c. 17.
Quis est islequi se profitetur Omnibus Legibus innocentem, ut hoc it a sit,
quam Angusta Innocentia est, ad Legem Bonum esse? to which purpose is it
excellently said by Ausonius (who, though he be wholly Christian in one Copy,
is extremely Heathen in Vbi Castissimum Maronem lasciviis inquinat non suis.
Another, and very little Christian in any else, so that I may well suspect
that one Copy to be Illegitimate, thrust into his Book by the Charity of
another man, and not thrust out of his Head (as the Poet's Minerva. E^yss. 2^
Goddess out of Jupiters) by his own Devotion) Deliquisse Nihil, nunquam
laudem esse putavi.

51. And as they acknowledge God, Jam. 1.17. Plato in Eutryphone c. 47.
to be wrathful against sin, and from whom every Good gift does come, (Nihil
nobis est Bonum, quin Dii Praebeant, the same Dii, whom Homer Stilo Jacobino
calls (...), and whom Jamblicus does singularize into Largitor Bonorum Omnium)
so, do they not, in some manner too acknowledge the Trinity of Persons? the
Father is in every Mouth of them, Aristot. l. de Mundo.
Deus, sine dubio, servator omnium est, and Parens eorum quae in Mundo
Conficiuntur; and not only the Father of all in this World Below, but of all,
in That Above too, the Father which is, Himself, in Heaven, and the Father, of
all them which are There with Him, Virgil. Ae^aid. l. 10.
O Pater, O Hominum, Divumque aeterna Potestas! The Son, is upon the Tongue of
several of them, Aenaid. l. 1.
Nate, meae Vires, mea magna Potentia solus; the Godhead of That Son, Ad te
Confugio and supplex Tua Numina posco; His Birth of a Virgin, Eclog. 4.
Jam Redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna; Aenaeid. 10.
His Cruel Death, and the Salvation of Man by That, Tua haec, Genitor per
Vulnera Servor, Morte Tua Vivo; nay, almost, the very Sacrament of His Body and
Blood too, which is the Seal to Our Faith, and to His Promises; Miraris Hominem
ad Deos Ire? dos any wonder that Man goes up to God? Seneca will tell you a
more wonderful thing, Deus ad hominem venit, Ep. 73.
God Himself, (by His Birth) comes down to Man; imo, quod propius est, In
hominem venit; nay, nearer yet, God (by His Sacrament) comes Into Man; Nulla
sine Deo, Men's Bona est, the Heathen will say, that no man has a Good Soul
within him, unless he has a Good God within that Soul; and the Christian will
say, the Soul of the Best Man, is then at Best, when his Christ is, Thus,
within it; and the Holy Ghost is within the lips of One of them, of Him, whom a
Learned, and right estimatour of All Antiquity, an Author of our own, Done
sermon. p. 362.
calls the Moral Man's Holy Ghost, Seneca, what else did he mean, when he
describes very much of the Gracious and Peculiar office of the Holy Ghost? when
he earnestly desires to know by what Name he might call such an inspiring and
sanctifying power, which makes us to forbear That Ill, which we would do, and
to do that Good, which we would not? Quid est hoc, quod nos, Alio Tendentes
Alio Trahit, and, eo, unde Recedere cupimus, Impellit? quod colluctatur cum
Animo nostro, nec permittit nob is semel velle? which suffers us not to will an
evil thing, Once and only-Once, Once and unalterably? Fluctuamus inter varia
Consilia, the Spirit of God draws One way, and the spirit of Man, another; Man's
spirit is willing to obey God, but man's flesh is weak and will obey it self;
Nihil libere volumus, we have not so much as a Will, ad Bonum, of our selves,
but we have it by an operation and influx from God, it is he that works in
us, both Motum ad Actum and Actum too, Phil. 2.13.
both to Will and to Do, Nihil Absolute, Our will is dependent upon Gods, Nihil
semper, our will here is fluid, and Alterable, and never fixed and unchangeable,
till our state be so in Heaven; Stultitia, inquit, est, cui nihil constat; if
you charge Him, and such His Various and Mutable Condition, Job 4.18.
as God has Charged Hit very Angels with folly, His next words do Darkly and
secretly implore the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost to Unfool Him, All of it, in
epist. 5^.
Sed quomodo, aut quando, nos ab illa revellemus? oportet Manum Aliquis
porrigat, Aliquis Educat; And who is this Aliquis, but the B. Spirit of God?
Thus, severally, both in Human persons Confessing, and in Divine Persons
Confessed, they acknowledge a Holy Trinity; and do they not so together too? what
else does Virgil mean in that Mysterious Clause -- Numero Deus Impare gaudet?
Eclog. 8:
what else do the Platonicks understand in their Tria Principia, (...), and
Iniellectus, and Mundi Anima? by their Bonum, do they not Antedate a Comment
upon that of our Savior, There is none Good, Matthew. 19.17.
but One, i. e. God? by their Intellectus, do they not Understand that Savior
Himself? and are not they the Greeks to whom S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.24. Col.
2.3.
Christ is the Wisdom of God? in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom?
or, is This part of the Gospel hid, quite out, to them that are lost in
Obscure Philophy? by their Anima Mundi, what else could be the thought of their
own Souls, Genesis 1.2.
but that Spirit which Moved upon the Waters, and hatched the whole Creation
into Form and Shape, Light and Life?

52. All this Heap of Heathen Authorities, and the Correspondency betwixt them
and Gospel, agrees, both with the Title, in the head of the Book, and with the
Design in the Heart of the Author, in that every, even the most Removed
quotation does, at least Inclusively, argue a God; Sin, does do it, and Hell,
does do it; Sin proves a God, without the Rebelion against whom sin is not sin;
Hell proves a God, without the wrath of whom, Hell would not be Hell, but only
a Philosophical Fable, or a State-Device; and by the compliance betwixt
Scripture and Thief, I would Recall my Atheist, as S. Paul, His Infidel, to
the searching of Scriptures, and the worshipping a God by them, since their own
Books have some Allusion to the most Abstruse articles of these; He that sees
Men walking like trees, may, in time, see so clearly, as to let Trees be Trees,
and Men Men.

53. Nay, not only Sin at large, be it what sin it will but the largest sin,
which is every sin in semine, This it self, of Denying God, does prove Him to
be, and the adverse Practices of this sinful Denying Man, do, in a secret and
clancular way, acknowledge Him, though with an unwilling Fear; and that,
because This very Man would have some Hopes in the very God whom he denies;
such a principle there is in Him, even in Him also, Psalm. 65.5.
that God is the hope of all the ends of the earth, although That Principle be
much weakened, and That Hope, as to Him, Impaird by his overswaging sin.

54. The very Denying of God does Confess Him, not only in that, Man has not
the power to do this, so much as in a Thought, to say this, so much as in his
Heart, but that Himself had his Heart, and that Heart the Power and Faculty of
Thinking from his God, though himself has Poisond that Innocent heart, which
God gave him, and corrupted that advantageous power and faculty, which God gave
unto his heart, not only in these (for, though this be in it self true (so
true, that no Parcelsus could ever make a Man, and put a live Heart into him,
nor any other, but that Infinite Power, which put that heart into a man could
put that thought into a heart) yet to this affectedly wilful doubter, all this
is but Petitio Petitii) but in that very Reason, (which himself cannot deny to
himself, though he disguise it to his opinions enemy, and his own friend) why
he denies a God, Hierocles c. 10.
because he would not have a God to sentence, and execute, and torture him; why
he denies a God, faintly, but wilily, to this only end, that he may corrupt
others, to speak the same wicked Blasphemy; that, of them, he may learn
Reasons, and Arguments, to strengthen his very weakness, and to confirm his
doubt; to turn his Question -- Is there Knowledge in the most high? Psalm. 73.11.
(and yet, if he be the Most High, there cannot choose but be Knowledge in Him)
into a Doctrinall Negation, that there is no such thing as the Most High, much
less any knowledge at all in him who himself is Not. Have thou ever met with
this Would-be Atheist? has he to Thy Face, denied that there is a God? and
made thy face blush, for want of that Red in His, which is Virtutis Color, in
whom there is not so much as Color Virtutis? Quintil.
Search Him, weigh Him, Dive into Him; This is all he means, he would be taught
by thee to deny a God, if not, by thy Impossible Reason, either by thy
concurrent Testimony, or, at least, by thy unrebuking Patience; something he
has got, if thou abhor him not, if not a new string to his Bow, some wax at
least to make his old string the sleeker, and he will deny God Turpe est contra
Ardenter perversa asserentes nos pro veritate Frigidiores inveniri. Rusticus
Diaconus L. adversus Acephalos. Excede Pietas si modo in nostra Domounquam
fuisti. Atreus apud Senes. in Thyest. Act. 2.
the more, the less Zealously thou do Confess him, and the less stoutly
defend him; If instruction will do no Good upon him, loath him, despise him let
him alone, Let him be alone, and his own solitariness and retirements, and
Tremblings, will be his effectual Instructers, that a God, and an Angry God
there is. For,

55. Mark the practices of such a gainsaying man; as you can never find any
Tincture or Relish of Holiness in all his Words, Actions, and Conversation, who
(like the Fixed honest man, but in wrong Constancy) is so resolved a Devil,
that he will not so much as Hypocrise for Virtues sake, whose very mask he
loathes, and will not take it up, though it lies before him in every street;
so, This you will always find in him that he loves man, only to undo him, and
the Society of man, that That man may Insensibly, be as himself, unsociated,
unacquainted with God; he loves the company of Man, only that he may be his
companion in sin, and the sin which he commonly makes choice of, is the sin of
Riot, and Excess, and Drunkenness; and why all this, but that when he is in
Company he may not have leisure for serious Afflicting Thoughts, and when he is
Alone, he may not be himself, but fall asleep, charmed with those Inconsidering
Fumes, and Wake Another man, till he comes to another Man, and returns to his
stupifying Circulation of excess and drowziness.

56. As this sottish sin is a Gradual and Imperfect, and preparatory Atheism,
in those other sinners, who strive, by this perverse Medicine, to Consopite,
and stifle all the checks and remorses of busy Conscience concerning their
particular heinous sins; so it is a more peculiar Antidote (and yet never any
venom more dangerous then such a formenting remedy, Angelus Politian.
Quis nescit plus esse in Pharmaco, quam in Morbo Periculi?) to cast into a
dead sleep the Schooling conscience of him, who, without this Opinue cannot but
have his eyes open, to see, and condemn his deserved but ungrounded Atheism.

57. Now consider this, all ye who, Ps. 50.22:
in any your several sins, forget God; Consider that every sin, even in the
most upright person, is a partial, but loathed Atheism, and every loved sin, is
a loved Atheism too; Consider, that one Devil tempts you to Chambering and
wantonness, to revelling in Beer and Ale and Wine, that these are another
Devil, a Trinity of Devils to make you renounce God, Mat. 3.9.
and fall down and worship them; These are in some the consequents, and
followers, in others, the signs and forerunners of Bestial, of Diabolical
Atheism.

58. The abundance of those Houses, that trade in this, that sell Iniquity by
the Quart, are at least a suspicion and scandal to any Parish, and that
quarterd iniquity is much more, not only a sin and unholiness (if I speak not
too Favorably, for -- Ebriet as quid non designat? it is never a single sin
but a Volume, and Catalogue, and combination of unholiness) and the Factor for
that sin of sins, that unholiness, that will not suffer any thing at all to be
holy, no not God himself.

59. And yet, as it is often times the Receiver, that makes the Thief, so, it is
not they, that sell, but we, who buy, that make the Alchouses; our frequenting
them (I speak in the name of all England, by imitation of all Holland, who,
though they break the word into two pieces, and leave out the house, yet they
power in the Ale) is the License that sets them up; I excuse not the poor, any
where, who mis-think they have need to do ill, and then, make that need, their
Justice and Magistrate, not to punish but to allow the ill; but I am much more
offended at the wealthier, amongst us, and every where, (in that their, and my
God is offended) whose countenance does fill those Vessels, and whose
unsatiableness does empty them, till we are ready to change conditions with the
poor sinners, and, if not enrich them (for this is such a moth-eaten gain, in
quo vix gaudet Tertius Haeres) yet impoverish our selves, and when that is
done, learn of the other poor ones, and begin where they did, to do ill because
we have need to do so; It cannot be helped, we must do it, and do it without
Control, till our proud sin be above the power of Church or State, Pulpit or
Bench, to Preach or to Vote it down.

60. This is the practice of him that is a beginner, and this will be the
practice of him that is a Proficient in Atheism, to this end, that he may be so
contrary to those, who fear where no fear is, Ps. 53.5.
as to do nothing else, but sensually rejoice, where there is nothing else but
fear; Prove. 19.13.
they courage themselves in mischief, they rejoice to do evil, and delight in
the frowardness of their ways.

61. But, then, as I have named a giddy sickness in this floating British i will,
and told you the danger of that sickness, that it is in some a temptation, and,
in others, a tempting the temptation to deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet.
2.1.
and therefore, reprehended the love and delight in that sickness, which makes
the Disease a death too, it is as true of the Ale-pot, as of any else, Mors in
Olla, 2 Kings 3.30.
(for, what St. Paul says of pleasure, and delicacy at large, is more
emphatically true of this Swinish pleasure, this Miry Cauis immundus vel Amica
Lutosis. Hor. Sermon. l. 3. Ep. 2.
delicacy, this Dog-like Vomiting, He and She, that lives in this frail Glassy
pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6
in this Intoxicating, Murdering Delicacy, is dead whilst he, and she seemed
to live, Dead and Buried too -- Somno Vinoque Sepulti, Virg.
their Bodies are not humane Bodies, but Graves, (...), and (...), and their
Souls are not at all reasonable (unless passively) but rottennesses within
them) so, I would not name the sickness, but that Beasts might recover into
Men, uncharm'd from the transforming draughts of Circe; nor tell the danger,
but that Men might escape it, as a Lord have mercy is set upon some Doors, to
forbid Man an entrance there; nor reprove their love of it, but that they might
learn to loath the sin as much as the Surfeit, this Disgraceful, and Bewitching,
this un-manly and un-Godly sin, as the Spartans taught their Children Sobriety,
by showing them the follies of their drunken servants.

62. Consider therefore, that, as St. Paul says, your Bodies are, in reference
to a Corporal Resurrection, from the Grave, so your Souls also are in reference
to a Spiritual Resurrection from sin, like a Grain of Corn; that Grain of Corn
has seed in it self, and may live and multiply, live, Ps. 65.13.
and live happily, Laugh and sing too, and even shout for joy, if it be sowed
in the Earth, in the Manured Earth, Plowed and Harrow'd; but, if you Sow it in
the Water, it does not only not multiply, but it perishes, it does not only not
laugh and sing, but it weeps, and dies, and comes to nothing, to nothing but
that, which is most like to nothing, to putrefaction; every Soul in this Nation
has seed in it self, and may live, if it will endure, and be the better for,
such Harrowings, and Plowings as these, which dig about it, and cut up the
Weeds, and open the soars of it, and tell that swimming Soul, that it does not
yet live, though it be in a capacity to live, that it may live, and thrive, if
it will it self be the good ground to receive this word of exhortation with
joy, Mat. 13.23.
and to let it take root, that it be not washed away at the next rainy meeting,
to receive it into an honest and good heart, and to keep it there, and let it
never more be washed away; for the watery, the melting soul, the liquid, the
fluid Soul, will as the water it self, take no Impression, no not from the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; the very word of God will not fructify there;
it is true, without moderate drinking, life it self will not endure, as the
earth it self will not bring forth, Job. 2.23. Ps. 65.11. Prove. 3.20
unless God give it the former rain moderately, which falls down in drops; only
this way, will the Clouds drop fatness, when themselves drop down like Dew, but
a Deluge, an Inundation of either, will ruin both; when our Savior Christ was
mercifully minded to forgive a sinful Woman, John 8.6.
'twas the dry Earth he wrote upon; he quickly found the tractableness of that,
he stooped down, V. 8.
and wrote on the GROUND again, but he never graced the unstable waters, (which
David has branded with that comparison, that they reel to and fro, Ps. 107.20
and stagger like a drunken Man) with one word from one of his Fingers; and in
the whole Gospel, we read but of one Man that had the Dropsy, when he was
before our Savior, as the Object of his compassionate cure, he does not
presently heal him, but Questions first, and disputes the Case, (...) is it
possible, or, if it be possible, Luke 14.3
Is it lawful to do it.

63. Fear, I told you, sends the Atheist to the Sign-Priest; Ps. 10.4.
He goes not thither because God is not in all his thoughts, but that God may
not be in any of them; the fear of the superstitious Heathen, that scrupled at
every thing, Fecit Deos, This it was, that made Gods for him; if he feared a
Disease, he would worship even that, that that might not afflict him; rather
then have no God at all, the Ambulatory Gout should be one God, and the
Sedentary stone another, and the sudden fear, the mind-startles, the Soul-Agues
of profane Atheist, do themselves prove the true God to be; How can such a
desperate irreligious Man fear, but at the apprehensions of an eternal, and
implacable, and irresistible power of him, who though he is a Galilaean, is a
Conqueror too, Vicisti Galilac. Julian.
whom his Irreligion does Offend, and Desperateness Provoke, and Imbecility
Arm? and how can such a Desperately Irreligious Man, such a Vaunting Worm,
Apprehend a God at any time, but that he cannot tell how to tear the Impression
of that Deity out of his Soul, which will be acknowledged by the very Heart of
the most Resolved Gainsayer? He may wash, as long as he will, in Abana and
Pharphar, 2 King. 5.12.
Rivers of Damascus (for the Rivers of Israel, the Waters of Jordan, are not
for his turn) and sooner wash his Soul out of his Body, than such a Sculpture
as that, out of his Soul.

64. That he does fear so, and that because of his Sin, because of this
gigantine, and mountainous Sin of his, which involves within it, and is made up
of all other and lesser Sins (as, when you break into its several pieces those
Giants scaling Fabric. you may say, This is Pelion, and that Ossa, and then,
break one of these, you may discover a World of little Hillocks) that he is
afraid of that God, in the Night, and Alone (a Tumult, and Throng, being the
Scene of his Mirth, and solitude of another Tumult and Throng of Disquietness
within himself) whom he defies in the Day, and in the Face of the whole World,
of the Sun and of Men, I stand not in need of the Testimony of Minutius Felix,
Per Quietem, Deos Agnoscimus, quos Impie, per Diem Negamus; I require not the
witness-bearing of that Man, who, to avenge the Cause of his God, has tried
him in the Dark, with a hollow and terrifying Voice, till he has Confessed that
very Un-known Man, to be his Un-known God; I ask him not to satisfy Me, but I
leave him to decide this Question within his own Soul, to answer himself, when
he is alone, and, in the Emblem of his Future Hell, wrapped about with a Thick
Naturalis Tenebrarum metus, in quas addactura Mors creditur, sed cum
persuaseris Ista Fabulas esse, subit Altus Metus; aeque enim Timent, ne apud
Inferos sint, quam an Nusquam. Senec. Ep. 72.
Darkness; Let him then hear the Roef crack, like the Gnashing of the Teeth
there; let him see the Flakes of Lightning ready to scorch out his Eyes, and to
Anticipate to him the Blindness there; Let him hear the Winds, and the Rain,
the Hail, and the Thunder roar, like the Howling and Weeping, Storm and
Tempest, Fire and Brimstone there; Let him then ask himself, Is there not, now,
a God, which Builds up, Job 38.35.
and Pulls down? Is it not a God, that sends Lightnings, and makes them Go?
Can thou do this? and make them say unto thee, Here we are? nay, Can thou
Un-do this? and make them say unto thee, Here we will be no more? Is it not a
God, that Brings the Winds out of his Treasuries? Ps. 135.7.
or can thou, when they are ready to whirl thee away, send them back thither?
Has the Rain a Father? and is not God he? or who has Begotten the Drops of
the Dew besides the Lord? Job 38.28.
The Rain is the Dutiful Child of God; he has commanded it, and it does
assault thee; Can thou command it back, that it should leave off to storm thy
Room? to shatter thy Windows? to shake and Astonish thy very Soul? Is it any
Less than the Lord God, can say, And ye, O great Hailstones, Exek. 13.1^.
shall fall? Or, art thou more Lofty, and God-denying, than Pharaoh was, Exodus
9.28.
who entreated Moses and Aaron to entreat the Lord, that there might be no more
mighty Hail? Credidimus Jovem Regnare. Hor.
-- Coelo Tonante -- Will not the rattling Thunder that tears the Skies, rip
open thy Breast, and tear this Confession out of it, as it did out of thy
Fellow-Heathens, that there is a God which reigns in Heaven? and art thou not
afraid of these Tokens of the Lord, when he thus visits the Earth? Ps. 65.8,
9.
Tell all, or any of these, that there is No God; tell them, if thou dare, that
they are not sent upon God's Errand to thee, to make thee Confess it is God
that sent them; nay, tell thy self, if thou dare, so much as in thy most
recluse and undiscoverable thought, that these Insensible Ministers of God do
not powerfully, and beyond the resisted efficacy of his own Verbal Ordinance,
preach the Divinity it self unto thee; Hold out, now, at this Battery, if thou
can; and, if thou can not, be faithful to thy own Soul, and inform thy
next gainsaying self, how much thou wast, now, even now, taught the Fear of
the Lord? how little thou did dare to deny God now, lest his last
Executioner, the Devil himself, should immediately appear, and prove him to thee
by an Argument as everlasting as the Active and Passive Torment of the Devil
himself, as un-deniable, as it is, now, wretchedly un-deniable, that thou
did, before, deny God, in Tongue, and in Hand, in Profane Voice, and in
Godless Life.

66. Do thou not, now, begin to feel that Principle which thou had hitherto
enslaved, to stir and fetch about, to breath and gasp for Life, that there Is a
God? Ps. 145.9. Joh. 1.3.
a God that is Good to all? a God that made all things? and a God that hates
nothing which he has made? Do thou not, now, confess him? and confess him to
have been good to thee, in sparing such an Enemy so long, that he might
reconcile thee? to have been good to thee, whom he might justly hate, in that
thou had un-made thy self from all that, which God had made thee? in that
thou were a Rebel, instead of a Creature; and a Foe, instead of a Child; and a
Bastard, instead of a Son? Is not he, now, all the Desire and Hope thou have,
who, but a little before, was Nothing at all? As soon as thou beginn'st to know
him, though thou tremblest at thy former Denial, and with Peter, Mat. 26.75
weep'st bitterly, Esto, ego Flagitiosus sum, saltem mecum age paenitentiam.
Hieron. Lib. 2. Ep. 3.
Agens Paenitentians with him, with whom thou had been Flagitiosus, do thou
not admire the inexpressibleness of his Mercy? thou have derided him, in his
Minister; thou have mocked him in his other Servants, and in his own Service;
thou have vilify'd him, in forbearing his House; and vilify'd him more, in
despising him, in setting light by him in his very House, as if thou thy self
were all the God that were present there; and what greater Indignity can be
offered to the Divine Majesty? what Sin can be imagined more than this?
could thou imagine it, thou would surely act it too; and yet, how has
God contrived it, (and what but a God could contrive this?) that there should
yet be probational hopes of Mercy to such a Hellish Sinner? and that Mercy it
self should be Argument and Conviction for it self? Past Mercy, for Future
Mercy? To bring thee down upon the knees of thy Soul, to humble thee at his
Footstool, and to make thy universal, absolute, entire submission and
prostration, acceptable in his sight, and comfortable in thy own, at the same
instant, when he sets before thy Eyes so much horror of Iniquity, that thy
Eyes loath to see it, and the very Order, in which they are set, does confound
thee the more; He sets before thy Eyes too, so much Miracle of Mercy, that thy
Eyes are dazzled with it, that, notwithstanding all that horror of Sin, he has
hitherto Reprieved thee; Confess, and adore, and reverence him now, with
Person, and Life, and Livelihood, with Soul, and Body, and Estate, and will he
not do more, and more spiritual good, for Confessing, and Adoring, and
Reverencing -- Thee, who has already done so much good, in so marvelous a
forbearance, to thee that denyd'st, and scorn'dst, and revil'dst thy God? thou
had begun to neglect him, and he connived at that; thou wentst on, to despise
him, and he still held his peace; thou were perfect in sin, and did even
abjure him, and then he held out his Bow in the Sky, but there was no Arrow in
it, nay his very Bow was a Testimony of his Love -- Ponam Arcum was the Word of
a God at Peace with Man; Genesis 9.13.
do but begin to serve, and love, and fear him, and see if some good Gabriel
does not tell thee, that at the Beginning of thy Conversion, Dan. 9.23.
and Supplication, the Commandment went forth, and that he is sent to show thee
that thou art Greatly Beloved, to Encourage thy Better Beginning, to Reward thy
Wiser Progress, and to Crown thy Holier Perfection.

66. Let me here confess and deplore the sins, the their sins of Priest and
People throughout this Nation, in imitation of That Daniel's Piety, to whom
This Message was sent, whiles he was confessing his sin, Let me pursue and
magnify the Mercy of God, notwithstanding our unrelented perverseness, and
multiplied provocations, Day by Day; and, O, let that Mercy be, what God
designs it should be, an Invitatory Means to recall us from our Obstinacy and
Customariness in sin; and let who will call this Extravagancy and Digression,
it matters not, I am sure his (for he confesses himself soar, and guilty, in
that he is so unwilling to be touched) and mine, and all our digressions, and
Extravagancies, compel me to it.

67. What sins are there, that are not our sins? and yet for all that, what
Mercies are there to the Nations round about us, which we do not partake of?
are not we only a Sodom, and an Egypt here, whilst there is somewhat More,
though not Enough, of Goshen and Israel, upon our Right and Left Hand? and yet,
have we not still the Light of Goshen, though thrust under a Bushel, as if we,
either were, or, if we would, might be, the very Israel of God? What though we
are not professed Atheists? are we not practical Atheists neither? do we not all
of us do as they do? Drink a Health to the Devil (though we do not Complement
him so much as to say we do it) when in overmuch and useless favor, to the
Health of Another, and Another Man, we In Pota est nulla Salute Salus. Ovid.
Nulla, neu Stomachi, neu Mentu.
drink away our own Health, both of House and Guest, Tabernacle and Inmate,
Body and Soul? where is there more Surfeiting and Drunkenness? a Man need not
cross the Seas, and hazard his Life that way, to become a Bad Good Fellow, he
may be Pleasantly-Mad at home, the Canaries, the Whites and Reds will cross the
Seas for his sake, and, without the Expense of a Voyage, drown him upon the
Shore; And is not this, to deny that God, which is All Spirit, whilst we make
our own Flesh, and the noysomest part of it (that which is it self One
Draught-house, and fills Another) our Belly our God? Phil. 3.19.
Where is there more Swearing? He is not Gentleman enough, who, though he
Low'rs upon his Tenants, and Charge below him, those under his Roof, and under
his Command, does not Lower upwards too, and against Heaven it self, and, this
very way, challenged Obeisance from men, in that he is to Great, as not to have
a very God above him; and does not his Retinue begin to be Rude with God, and
to count it a piece of Civility and Service, to swear a Little, because he,
that pays them wages, does Much, to whom yet they yield a Prerogative in some
great Oath, and will no more dare to meddle with that, than with the Meat upon
his Trencher? and is not this to Deny God? do we not, when we take his Name in
Vain, make himself also to be a Vain, a No-God? Wh^re is there less of
Marriage, and more of Uncleanness? and is not this, to Deny God, whilst God
himself, when he would declare his Detestation of this sin, calls the Forsaking
of God by this Name? He does so, in the Mouth of David, 78.27.
They go a Whoring from thee; he does so in his own Mouth too, Hos. 4.12.
My People ask Counsel at their Stocks -- for -- the Spirit of Whoredom has
caused them to err, and they have gone a Whoring from ^^nder their God; Where
is there more Covetousness? how many, at this day, sit under Vines, not of
their own, and under Figtrees, of other Men, whilst the Owners of them sit sub
Dio, and rest their Cold Heads upon Jacob's Pillows of stone? and does not the
Covetous Man Deny God by Distrusting his Providence? does he not worship
another, and not the true God? St. Paul says, he does, when he tells him he is
an Idolater; Col. 3.5.
and the True God himself tells him, who it is he Does worship, and who it is he
Can Not worship; it is his own Mammon which he Loves and Holds to, and therefore
He cannot Love, but (...). Epictet. c. 18.
Hate, he cannot Hold to, but Despise his Dis-own'd God; Let him not Deceive
himself, (for, his Undeceiving God he cannot Deceive, (...), Plato, in Fine 2.
Polit.) to think Christ will be God in the Breast, when Silver is God in the
Bag? was it so with Judas think ye? it was not, it cannot be, Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. Mat. 6.24.
Where is there more Un-blushing Theft, when one Takes, and will not humble
himself to Borrow? Another Borrows, and will not honest himself to Pay? unless
it be with a Text of our Saviors, and a Gloss of his own -- Lend, Luke 6.35.
Hoping for Nothing again? when a third would take pains, and pay, and is
himself more put by from Emolumental Labor, than another preferred to it? when
one Parent would withold his Child, and cannot, and another Parent breeds up
the Child to it, makes it the Child's Trade, and Occupation, and
Apprenticeship, and the Parents Livelihood, and Meat, and Income, to Steal?
when the Tradesman sels his Ware at an Over-price, and his Soul, and his God,
at an Under? when some of the People will sooner take away two Coats, than give
one? Luke 3.11.
when some of the Publicans will rather exact more than is Appointed them, V.
13.
than Mitigate the Taxes? when some of the Soldiers will be readier to do
Violence, than to be Content with their Wages? V. 14.
when some of the Divines will be more Vehement to Preach away Tithes from
their Brethren-Divines, than to Preach Salvation, and Baptism, and Eucharist,
to their Flock? Some of all sorts do Steal, either with an Oppressing Tongue,
or with an Envious Eye, with a Ravening Hand, or a Devouring Heart, and some of
all sorts, do give, either an Alms, or a Pity; and though these do, in their
Bounty, worship their God (for, Right Charity is a Service of his; 'twas known
so to be in Warmer Days -- Knowing, Q. Elizabeth's Injunct. 25.
that to Relieve the Poor, is a True Worshipping of God -- Alms, and Devorion
of the People -- their very Alms were part of their Devotion, and with such
Sacrifices, Heb. 13.16
God is well pleased) yet, do not those Others, by their several kinds of
Theft, Deny God? this Sin is in the Head of those, against all which God
himself in this manner complains -- Will ye steal? -- and walk after other
Gods, Jer. 7. v. 9, 10, 11.
whom ye know not? and yet come and stand before me, in this House, which is
called by my Name? Is the House, which is called by my Name, become a Den of
Robbers in your Eves? Where is there more of Bloodshed, when some Fields in
London, after Night has spread her Curtains over them, cannot be walked through,
safe and dry, notwithstanding the Law dwells at the next Door to them? and the
Highways to it are sprinkled Redder with Blood, than with Sand? and is not
this to Deny God, whose very Image they cannot endure to see alive?

68. These Things are so; and though so they are, what Blessings are we to seek
for, besides the Blessings of Holiness and Obedience? of Peace and Love? we are
Blessed in our Basket and in our Store (though my self have so Little Store,
that I have scarce a Basket to put it in, and am almost in the Condition of
those, whom our Savior sent abroad, Mat. 10.10 V. 9. Ephesians. 4.25.
Without Scrip, as well as without Gold, and Silver, and Brass, yet, in that we
are Members One of Another, I put my self into the Number, because I see
others, of whom my self, in a Spiritual Alliance, am part, to be Rich, and
Full, though they reign as Kings without me) as Blessed, as if we had done all
that to which Performances these Blessings are promisd, Deuteronomy. 28.1.
Hearkened diligently to the voice of the Lord, to Observe and Do All His
Commandments; And, Therefore are we thus Blessed Temporally, that, by these we
might be wrought upon, to hearken to the voice of the Lord our God in All
things, and by that, be blessed Eternally.

69. But, if any of those several sinners (all of whom I ^^rive to reclaim as
well as that Atheist, who himself is all of them) who shall read how heinous
and Atheistick their sins are, would forsake them, because of -- I cannot say
more then -- the Ungodliness of them, and yet fear they can not forsake them,
God will not forgive them, because they are so estranged from God, by them; not
to tell any such, that Niniveh (as sinful as the most sinful of those, who
will stoop to read this) did repent at the first voice of Jonah, I shall
conclude this (which by this time, is digression enough) with setting before
them the Great Mercies of God against the sim of Paul, and Gods recovering him
out of those sins, into which he was plunged all over; but the ears of him,
which, by hearing Christ's voice, taught the whole man to worship Him. Act. 9.1.
-- When Saul was yet Breathing out threatenings and slaughtters against the
Disciples of the Lord,

We have amongst us, too many of those evil qualities which S. Paul feared to
be amongst his Corinth: 2.12, 20.
Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings, Whispers, Swellings, Tumults,
Slaughter, -- but, God be thanked, None of these are intended against the
Disciples of the Lord, at least not Quatenus Ipsum, As they are the Disciples
of the Lord, not Therefore and because of that very Reason, but rather,
because, Though they are so, they are either suspected not to be so, or, if
they are suspicion-proofe, for some Temporal and Collateral reason, which,
either the Religion of That Man does not allow, or else the Man of That
Religion does Thwart; this, though it be an Atheism, is not a direct and an
Irrecoverable one; for, sure it is a much easier task, to persuade This Man to
be content with His Estate, and to serve God with that little He has, to
persuad that Man to lay dow the vain The ^hts of Honor, and to esteem the True
Worship of His God, to be the Best, Greatest, and most Durable Honor, then to
assail, and Unwind Him, who strikes the First Blow against God Himself, and
wounds Him, not as Ignorant Saul did, through the sides of His Saints, but
through the very substance of Himself; And yet, let me tell every Threatening
soul amongst us, that, whether They whom He Threatens, Are, or are Not
Disciples of Christ, Himself, who does thus Debate, and Envy, who is thus
Wrathful, and Strisefull, who does thus Backbite and Whisper, who is thus
swelling and tumultuous, during these pestilent and outrageous Humors, Matthew.
11.29. Is. 9.6. 2 Cor. 12.11. 1 John 4.16.
is no Disciple at all of the Meek Jesus, the lowly in Heart Jesus, the Prince
of Peace Jesus, the God of Love Jesus, and the God Jesus, who is love it self;
-- When Saul desired Letters -- (Authority and Commission from the Heathen and
Unchristian states) that if he found Any -- (He had made them to hide
themselves for fear of his further persecutions, that it was difficult even for
Him, who was perniciously zealous in the Cruel Inquest, and for all those
Promoters he would employ in the service of the Unbaptized State, to Find them
out) -- of this Way (professing Christ and his unacceptable Truth) -- Whether
they were Men or Women -- (He would neither show Mercy to his Fellow Men, nor
compassion to that weaker Sex, which is unable to Bear, to that Tender Sex,
which is apt to Compassionate) -- He might bring them Bound -- (they must be
brought, for he would so Bind them, that they could not Come) -- to
Jerusalem, Verse 2.
-- However we persecute One Another, the most of us do it but in a private
Malice; we seek not to Unchristian, unbaptize the State (and, O! may none of us
ever seek to do it!) by engaging the Power of That, to be as malicious as our
selves; we do but Threaten, and (what ever in past years we have done) we
Wound not Men, we do but slander, we Bind nor women; and yet, do we These? and
am I not too Courtly to say we do -- But these? And yet, in the very Act and
Fury of doing All These, in the very care and Industry (Toiling himself, that
he might be Toilsome to Others) when he Journey'd to execute All These, Christ
Call Saul, and Convert Saul, Blind him, and Cast him down, From ver. 4. to ver.
31.
Recover him, and Lift him up, make him Confess Christ, and preach Christ, and
protect him for doing This against the hate of Men, who laid wait for him,
because he did This.

O Lord, our God, we are as great Objects of Thy wonderful Mercy, as Saul was,
Pardon us, Inlighten us, Strengthen us, that we who have lived the Life of Saul
against Thee, may live and die, the life and death of Paul for thee, to the
honor of that Name of Thine which we have hitherto caused to be evil spoken
of among all the People.

70. As there is sin in every Man, and that sin is a disobedience to the
Commands of God in His Jus Natural as well as in His Jus Positivum, so that
the very waywardness of Man, does Prove that God who is the Lawgiver; Jam.
4.12.
As there is in Man Power to Discriminate, and Distinguish, sinful, and evil,
and unjust, from Holy, and Good, and Righteous, so that this Innate Faculty of
separating the One from the Other, of Discerning betwixt Light and Darkness,
betwixt Foul and Upright, by reason of which Horace does highly complement Him,
and from the very Foundation and first Aristotle in Ethic. says, Man cannot be
Praised for any thing but virtue, because strength, and beauty, etc. Natural
perfections, are not, as This, in his own power; and he has no Power to this,
but by his discerning faculty.
Principle of Praise, of whom He says -- Qui Turpi secernis Honestum, Is, and
is used by some for an Argument of the Deity; As This sin, which Man is Guilty
of, and which Man Knows Himself to be Guilty of, does hinder Him from That
great and Last happyness, which he naturally desires, and which he Naturally
Desires of God, so it is God only, which can give to Man that Final, that
uninterrupted, that eternal happyness; which happyness, as Man cannot
Understand, as well as not Enjoy, without the gift of God, so, because the
Scriptures do Teach both these, both what that Blessedness Is, so far forth as
the shallowness of the Prosoundest Man is able to Conceive and how Man may
attain to this Throughout-unconceivable Blessedness, and nothing else, but
Scripture does teach both these. Let this it self be one Argument whereby to
prove to the Hitherto doubting man that God Himself Is, not only in Himself,
but is too the Author of those very Scriptures.

71. That (...). Aristot. Ethic. l. 1. c. 1.
happyness, the greatest, the chiefest, beyond which there is nothing more, not
only to be possessed, but to be Imagined (for, the greatest, the chiefest
happyness is much More than so) is the Desire of All those, who have so much of
Man, as to be capable of a Desire, is Confessed by All; Ask the very Atheist,
who Denis God, if He would not This? and, how much soever He Robs God, not only
of his honor, his Been esse, but of his Esse too, He will not be so
ungrateful to the Calls and yearnings of his own Appetite, to say that this is
not the Desire of his Heart and Soul, to be as Happy as the Nature of Man is
Capable to be; And then take Advantage of This Partial, and interested, and
self-Concession, and ask Him, if He be not willing, for that very Happyness
sake, to grant such a God, who may Grant Him This.

72. But then, though happyness be the Desire of all, even mere Natural Men,
yet, Varro, in Philosophia, apud August. de Ci. Dei l. 19. c. 1.
since those Natural Men are so Divided amongst themselves, that they know
not, by what Qualities to Describe it, or by what Name to call it (who, amongst
the two hundred threescore and eight several Opinions Concerning it, and Names
of it, have not hit upon the Right) and are so far from Defining it (and
indeed, it is One part of the Christian Man's Happiness that He cannot define
it, unless, as many Philosophers do the soul of man, Negatively, not only
because it is More than He can Define, but because he knows it so to be) that
they cannot so much as give you the right (...) of it; They define it, only
Identically, the ignorant result of All, the Ablest of them say Concerning it,
is but This, that Praemium, Finemque virtutis, optimum, Divinumque quoddam,
atque Beatum esse constat. Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 9.
Happyness is Happyness -- Nothing else, is True, and certain, from them, and
therefore such a very Truth, and certainty as This, thus Limited, and
Identifi'd, is a part of their ignorance; since amongst the Wise ones of them,
One calls that Fortune, which is always Assistant to Good Counsels, happyness;
Fortuna Consiliorum Bonorum Adjutrix, Felicitas.
Cicero does so; and though He does well, to make Counsels, and Deliberations,
and the Goodness of them, to be One Part of Happyness, yet he does Ill, to
account of these, as if they were The Happyness of Happynesses, and not the
After-Reward of These (even of that earthly Happiness it self) to be It; and
He does worse, (to do, as the Poet reprehends the unwiser men to do -- Te
Facimus, Fortuna, deam) to make Fortune the Goddess, Juven.
which succeeds Good Counsels, and Discreet Deliberations; what has such a
Fickle thing as she, and Her Updown wheel, to do with the Certitude and
Stability of these? She, that has much less of Power, and Jurisdiction, and
sovereignty, than the stars? and the Sapiens Dominabitur Astris.
Wise man (such as Cicero was, till he Bowed the knee to Fortune) who, in some
sense is well said to Govern them, should govern her much more; or else, Tully
himself; as Politic a Statist as he was, as Governing a Headpiece as he had,
if That Fortune which is wont to Favor Fortuna Favet Fatuis.
Fools, more than Wise Men, if that Deaf Fortune, whom the most Passionate of
his Orations could not so much Inflect and persuade, as the Attentive
Multitude, does but look awry and Frown, leaves off to be happy, and a
Prosperous Catiline, all whose Counsels are evil, and Deliberations
Treasonable, will have as much claim to Happiness as a Defeated Tully,
notwithstanding the Sobriety of His Counsels, and Loyalty of His
Deliberations, since they do ex aequo divide his definition betwixt them, in
that the one Counsels, well, and Fortune Assists the other. Since Another
calls That man Bonus qui Rota Torquetur, and Malis conflictatur, Felix.
Happy, who Indures the wrack and wheel, and unyieldingly Conflicts with a
World of Miseries; -- Seneca does so; And he does, in Part, Well, to Call him
Happy, whom Adversity and wretchedness does not make Less Good; and in Part,
Amiss, for, who will be Encouraged to be Faithful and Perseverant in that
Goodness whose only Happyness is, to be Miserably-Good? Quis Virtutem
amplectitur Ipsam, Praemia si tollas? if you take away the Future Reward, who
will Court a Penurious Virtue? nay, if, insted of the Reward, you give Him
Sisiphus's stone, and Ixtons wheel, who will Court an Ungrateful, an Undoing,
a Plaguing Virtue? Since Another calls Pleasure happiness; Epicurus did so; and
Xerxes Xerxes, Rex Persarum, Nova Voluptatis Repertori praemium Constituit.
Nihil aliud putans esse vitam nisi vescendi and Potandi Licentiam, Firmicus de
err. part. Relig.
did so; and the first did, in part, Well, if you Apply to That Word. His sober
and Inward sense, if you do, as Seneca would have you do, Propius Introspicere,
and Confine it to a Mental Gust; if you suffer not the Curiosity of the
Palate, and the Insatiableness of the Machometus credidit Beatudinem
consistere, in cibo, potu, and delectationibus corporatibus. Joannes Galensis
Anglus. l. de Orig. Match. c. 5.
Belly to be the Seat, and Determinatour of that Pleasure, and thereby, make
not the Word, which was more Innocent; and Refined, and subtle, in his purpose,
obnoxious to the Misconstruction of him, who wished that he had a Cranes Neck,
that he might be a great while a Feeling and Tasting, the Delicacy, and
sapidness of His Old wines, and Sybaritique Feasts; for certainly, Xerxes the
Persian King, did much mis-understand Epicurus, and the Choiceness, and
Intimacy of His Delectation, when he constituted a Reward to him, who should so
much vex and trouble himself, even with pleasure, as to take pains to Invent a
New one; And yet when you have purged, and stilled and Fined this delight from
all its drossiness, Is This Delight it self the Happyness? what then will
become of that Good Man who has this Trial put upon his Goodness, to have the
Present joy and contentment withheld, and separated from it? must he then,
leave off to be Good? and seek out happyness in Another, more Rosy, and less
Thorny Road? Since a fourth defines Regnum res est inter Deos Hominesque
pulcherrima.
Happyness to Consist in honor, and power, sovereignty, and principability;
Livy does so; But then is none happy without that Omnis saec^li, Honor, Diabolo
est negotium. Hilarii, can. 3. in Matt.
honor, which is the Traffic and Merchandise of the Devil? and is it in the
power of that Satan, who offered the Kingdoms of this world, and all the
Gloryes of them, to that Christ, whose they always were, though without a
Contract, and unbargain'd for, to make a Blessed Man? Is none happy, unless he
be a King? None indeed, no not one; but then He must be Rex sui, Himself, and
His Passions (and, amongst the roast, this it self, by which he desires to
Reign) all the People over whom he Reigns; Is any Other Rule, the only Heaven?
and the way to that (Per Fas, per Nefas) the only way to Happyness? Few indeed
there are that find this strait Gate, Matthew. 7.14.
that walk in this Narrow way; nor was it the Well-taught Judgment, but the
ungoverned Ambition of Caesar, who said, he would rather be the First at a
siege, than the second at Rome; it savours, sure, of more Natural and
Rational, as well as Christian and Gospel Divinity, to desire to be the Least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 11.11.
rather than the greatest in any Kingdom upon earth; if it be so, that it must
be, aut Caesar, aut Nullus, how Many of the Nones will there be? if it be so,
that it must be-. Only a Prince is happy, into how close a Room is Felicity
Pent? how does it Thwart, and Contradict, imprison, and even inslave its own
self, in that it is become thus un-diffusive, and incommunicable? and is,
Therefore, neither good, nor happy? for, what is Good is Sui Diffusivum, the
more Good, the further it reaches, as the Bright and Apparent Sun, is a greater
blessing, than when That Sun wears a cloud upon his Face, and goes to Bed in
darkness, Hid from our eyes; and what is Happy, is so far from being like a
Crown, that it is, Impatiens Non-Consortis, the less happy, Lucan. Erasm. in
Mor. Encom.
the less others are happy with it; Nulla boni viri (and none, but the Good
Man, is the Blessed Man) Jucunda Possessio sine socio. Since therefore a fifth
makes Wisdom to be This happyness, and the Wise Man This King; Sapiens, uno
Minor est Jove, Dives, Liber, Honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique Regum.
Horace does so; and he does well in doing so, had he Rightly known what the
True Wisdom is; but, by reason of This Error, He makes That, which he calls
happyness, to be Nothing at all, because the Wisest of mere Natururall men,
Hoc tantum scio me nihil scire.
has so much of Socrates in him, to know, and understand, and Confess, This is
All his wisdom to Arrogate to himself None of this; he has much of Wisdom, but
he is Wise enough to apprehend, that there is much more of Wisdom which he
cannot comprehend, and therefore, he will not endure to be denominated Wise
Omnis denominatie sumitura Majori.
from the lesser part; he knows much, but, that much is little to what he knows
not; He Rules himself well, by that Talent, and Portion of Wisdom which he
has, but he does More Mis-Rule himself for want of More of that Wisdom; Since
a sixth does define Happyness to Consist in Operation, in Well-doing. Aristotle,
in One place, does so; in the Contentment, and satisfaction, and Delight, which
follows that Operation, that Welldoing; Aristotle, in another place, does so;
But, since happyness, cannot be without a Rest from Labors, for, a Toilsom
happiness who can away with? since that delight does not alvvayes follow
Well-doing here, or, if it does, since That is not the Supreme happiness; From
the uncertainty in all These, the vvisest of Natural men, what Happiness is;
from the certainty in all these, and in all mankind besides, that happiness is,
and is to be desired, Let the Natural Man, upon this very ground, search the
Scriptures to find that happiness.

73. Happiness is, in very deed, the desire of all; and yet, it cannot behad
upon this earth, if it could, a King, who has the most command of this Earth,
is most like to have had it; And yet, that such a one, a very King, who was a
mere natural Man, could not have it here, but in Heaven, nor there neither, but
in his Summum Bonum Animorum est, Deo Frui. Trismegist. Pimand. Dial. 1.
God and the God of Heaven; for, story has told us, that, when Egyptian Priests
told any of their Egyptian Kings, his God would have him leave his Kingdom, and
come to him, he presently, and cheerfully, Killed himself, as he thought, up to
Happiness, and God and Heaven.

74. Since all the writing of Heathens will not help us to it, though severally
they agree in telling us, that there is such a thing, and yet, severally
contradict each other in what that things is, let me go on, as I long since
promised, to the honor of God, and his Scriptures, to propose the Scriptures
of God, by a Natural reason, even to him, who is, yet, but a Natural Man, out
of which he may truly learn, what that happiness is, and how he may reach up
to, and be involved in that true happiness.

75. Nemo Malus, Felix. Juven.
Certainly, it is not for nothing, that Man knows, his Sin, if unremedy'd, will
unhappy; it is, sure, to a good end this; and more, certainly, Man does not
desire a vain and impossible thing, when he would be happy; for, Nature has
given an appetite to nothing, Sat. 4. Natura nihil Frustra.
but the God of nature has provided something to fill up that appetite; Let me
therefore propose to a modest scrutiny, and sober examination, such inquiries
as these.

76. Is it not of necessity, of the very essence of God, that the same God, who
is a just God, should be a merciful God too? Is it not exceeding probable,
Psalm. 5.21.
that, as the Justice of God does set our sins in order before our eyes, and,
thereby, Naturally make us to fear that punishment, which belongs, and is due,
to the disorderliness of our sin, so the mercy of God would set in order before
our eyes too, some infallible method of reclaiming us from that sin, and Indow
us with a holiness contrary to that sin, and instate us in a happiness contrary
to the punishment of that sin? What would better prescribe this holiness, and
hold forth this happiness, than the written Law of our teaching God, and the
written promises of our gracious God? since, if there were no directing Law, we
could not learn to be holy, if there were no encouraging Promises, we could not
claim to be happy, and, if neither of them were written, by the corruption of
man, and the deceiveableness of Tradition, they might both of them be changed,
and interposed, and expurg'd, till they agree with the humor and wilfulness,
and exchequer of man, who, insted of the established universal Religion of God,
might obtrude upon us the mutable Doctrines of a Sect and partee.

If it be probable, that such a Law be written (and, upon so indubitate a
ground, as to have the choicest attribute of God, that, which God most loves,
and man most loves, his very mercy, to attest the Probability of it) that such
a Law is written, and we find it not in all the volumes, the most
Apophthegmatical discourses of the wisest, the most learned, and most devout of
Heathens, whose Books are as dark to any such purpose, as the Ink they wrote
with, or the Black Ball we Print with; and if there be such a Book of Books
(not only in that, That one Book is made up of several Books, but in that, All
the Books in the world together are not comparable to that one-several, that
one-every Book) whose design it is, to instruct us in such a Piety, and to
Crown us with such a Reward, Is it not highly worth the while to turn over that
Book? that we may be sincerely and solidly Religious by it, and truly and
eternally blessed by the Author of it? and what Book has such contents in it?
can do all this? besides that, which we call the Scripture?

77. Bring hither, into a comparison, I say not all the choicest writings, of
all those, who were the holiest, and hope-fullest of Men, in a Natural Religion
(for such a low comparison would be a scandal to this Holy word; and, indeed,
any, though less unmannerly, and more approaching comparison, would be so too;
but, the Nature of this present discourse does make it somewhat tolerable, if
not require it) but bring hither the Extractions of all their holinesses, and
hopes, amass into one Treatise, only the Excellencies and Quintessence of all,
that all have said, as to an integrity, Here, and a Heaven hereafter, and see,
if they are not, all, those halt, and blind, and maimed Religions, which only
this Jesus, whom we Preach, e suggesto, and e Praelo, can heal! and that, as he
made the world, with a word only, with this very word of God, which we call
upon you, to search, and to ask Counsel of! See, how the Gospel of Jesus Christ
is, throughout, clean and sanctified! 1 Timothy 5.23.
how, though it allows Wine for the Stomach sake, yet it charges a sobriety,
even in Wine too! Prove. 23.31.
Look not thou upon the Wine, when it is red -- lest it make thee look as red
as it when it gives its color in the Cup -- lest it make thee give thine in
thy Face, -- when it moves it self aright -- lest it and make thee move wrong,
and untowardly, and reelingly, thy Legs carry thee whither thou would not;
John 21.18.
and it tells you what a mocker it is, and that he that is deceived thereby is
not wise, Prove. 20.1.
no not Seneca's self, though he says it sparingly, and with an Aliquando --
Bibendum est ad ebrietatem usque -- no Aliquando at all here, unless such a
time, which is neither Day, nor Night, nor a dubious mixture, and instantaneous
compound of both; find out such a time, and sin thou may, Gospel it self, and
the God of it, will not be angry; but, till then, ( i. e. for ever) cease from
sin; See, how there is nothing, here (as in all other the most pious writings,
which are not founded upon this) to be read and heard, cum venia and favore!
not only a Cato may, without a blush, but a Saint in Heaven dos, with an
unspotted reverence, look upon these mysteries! how there is much of it
consonant to right reason! for otherwise, man could not apprehend it much of it
(for, if we stay there; Possibly Man might have compiled it) above the
quickest, most exact reason, of the sharpest most piercing Man! and yet (for
otherwise, it were not God neither, that made it) nothing at all contrarient to
reason! What other Book is there, can tell us, how God without a violation of
his Justice against the sins of Man, can, yet, mercifully save sinful, because
penitent, Man? No way, was ever yet heard of, besides this way, which could
rationally deliver Man from the one Thraldom and captivity of his sin, and the
other Thraldom and Captivity of Hell, into which his sin would hurl him; No
way, but this, can lead him into that happiness, of which, his sin ought to
defraud him; other Books can tell you, that there is a Styx and a Charon, and a
Rhadamanth; that there are Virgins Furiae, which are incapable to be vitiated
and corrupted with any Bribes; and they tell you true; and they charge you to
believe that they tell you true, -- Tu vera Puta; but, no Book, besides this,
(unless it borrows its Narrative Traditionally from this, and makes it somewhat
the worse, because the less plain, for wearing) can, by an infiniteness of the
mercy of God, and an assent of the reason of man, 1 Pet. 5.8. Romans 5.5.
tell you, of one roaring Lion ready to devour you, and, of another Lion, that
of the tribe of Judah, which can challenge you (you who resist not, (for,
though the Debt be paid, if a wilful Man, that is in Love with bonds, reject
and tear the acquittance, He must pay it again, to the utmost Farthing) you, who
take hold by the hand of Faith, of what he has done for you) as his lawful
purchase; which can, and will, deliver you from the Jaws of that Lion, and make
him roar again, because the prey has escapt from betwixt his teeth; which can
rescue you from the Conveiance of that Charon, and the judgment of that
Rhadamanth, and the torture of that Styx, and preserve you from the loss of
your blood, by the inestimable price of his incorruptible own; O, that all
those Heathen-(far abroad, Ps. 2.8.
in the uttermost parts of the earth, and at home, and amongst us too of this
Natron, which calls upon his Name, and is called by it- which God has given to
this JESUS (who is the Author, and subject of the Book)- for his inheritance
(which he was Born to, and had not at all been Born in this world, but for that
inheritance sake)- for his possession (which he has bought with the voluntary
laying down of that Life, John 10.18.
and powerful taking it again, to which he was Born from the womb, and Re-Born,
from the Grave) O, that all those Heathens (the professed ones, beyond
Christendom, and the secret ones, Acts 17.11.
in the Bowels of it) would do as the Bereans did (who are honored with the
style of Noble for doing it) Diligently and Daily search the Scriptures (the
Evangelical Scriptures) whether these things are so!

77. And I may be excused, even amongst such People as we are, to Honor and
Defend the Authority of holy Scriptures, even by such an Argument as this,
because of the more than Exact, and Supereminent Holiness of them, L. de
Veritate Rel. Christ.
in that, not only the Learned and Indefatigable Grotius has used the like
Argument against the Heathens, but the Conscientious Balduin too has done the
same, Casus Conscientiae.
whereby to Confirm the Faith, and Settle the Consciences, even of Christians
themselves, who might, Possibly, Scruple at the Authority of holy Writ.

78. Excuse me therefore, my Brethren of the Christian Confession, and give me
leave to go on, since such a Method as this, as it may be Instrumental to the
Begetting of Faith in him, who, as yet, dis-believes that Book to be the Work,
as well as the Gift of God, so it cannot choose but re-mind you, and cherish,
and encourage that Faith which you already have, and stir up, and awaken that
Love, and Honor, and Reverence, both to God, and the Word of God, which your
Hearts bear to Both, when you consider, that by the Style and Method, the
Manner, and Matter of it, it can be no less than God, that spoke and made it.

79. Nay, has not God himself given way to such a manner of Arguing as this,
when (as, Christ, the Son, abridges the Gospel into two Commandments, so God,
his Father, Mat. 22.40.
Contracts the Law, into a Command, and a Promise, upon Obedience to it, and a
Threat, upon Rebelling against it, Isa. 1.18.
and makes his Entrance upon it with such a Preface -- Come now, and let us
reason together -- and as an Inference out of the whole -- For the Mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. Which intimates to us, V. 20.
that, as we must Believe, because God has said it, so, we may Argue, and
Reason, that God has said it, because, what is Delivered there, is above the
Power and Capacity of any Creature. I shall for a little while Respite the
Promises and Threats of Scripture, which is Isaiah's Argument, that Scripture
is the Word of God, because, in right order, I ought to begin with the
beginning, and to consider, first, the Style and Method of God, from the very
first Word, and so on, throughout his Book.

80. The Style and Method in which the Word of God begins, does continue to the
end; it speaks, as from One having Authority, Mat. 7.29.
and not as the Humane Scribes, and Writers, whose occasional sudden Voice, and
Considerate, Purposing Pen too, are subject to Error; In the Doctrines of Man,
the Method is, to Prove, unless it be only in Re Facta, that he, who speaks,
brings his Eyes with him, as the Witnesses which saw such a thing done; In all
else, it is his Reason which sways us, and works upon our Belief, and not his
Name; But in holy Scriptures the Case is altered; Moses, in the beginning of
them, does only say, that, In the Beginning, Genesis 1.1.
God created the Heavens and the Earth: He does not Prove God, nor, that Great
Work of God, the Creation; and, in this, the Authority of Moses, nay, of All
Mankind, nay, of the very First of them All, is altogether Invalid, and
Un-concluding; and, that one Exception, of being an Eyewitness, is, in this
case, wholly taken off: For, though the Invisible things of God are clearly
seen by the Creation of the World, though Every man may know, Romans 1.20.
by Every thing he sees, that there is a God that made it, and there was a time
when it was made; yet Moses was no Eyewitness of the making of the World, for
himself was made long after, and himself tells us so; neither could he receive,
by the Testimony of Man, in what Order the World was made, because Man was the
last thing that was made in the World; not only Scripture tells us, he was the
last, but Reason it self tells us, he could not be the first, his Vbi must have
been made before himself could be placed in it. He that wrote that Book, and
the whole Pentateuch, does every where discover a great measure of Wisdom in
himself, and therefore could not possibly be guilty of so much gross and absurd
Folly, to think his own Testimony Valid, when, out of himself there are
Irrefragable Reasons against the Validity of his single Testimony, or the Joint
Concurrency of the whole Rational Creation; and, therefore too, it cannot be,
but that he would have the Eternal Creator, qui nec Fallere potest, nec Falli,
to be understood the sole Author, and himself only to have been as the Pen in
the Hand of God, whilst God himself was the Ready Writer. Psalm. 45.1.
In Man, Reason is the Authority, but, in God, Authority is the Reason; and
therefore Man proves, and God only says; nay, let me say, that this it self
is the most powerful proof that can be either urged, or imagined, that God
has said it; the very Method, incommunicable, and un-applicable to Creature
does signify, that it is that God which spoke these words, who has acquainted
us, that this is his peculiar Style, Psalm. 82.6.
Dixi -- I have said that ye are Gods, Deputed Gods by me, to stand in my Room,
to Distribute my Justice, to Execute my Vengeance, 1 Timothy 6.15. Psalm. 97.9.
who my self am the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, Exalted far above all
Gods, so that we may, not only Pardon, as Hyperbolical, but Approve, as
Literally true, that Vehement Expression of Raimundus de Sabunde, Dum Minus
Probat, Magis Probat; In Naturali Theologia.
God does prove all he says, the more, in that he does not Prove at all, but
Say, because, did he Prove, it would administer Doubt, that the Words were
Man's, who, though perhaps he be in Many Things, (...), is, in Nothing, (...);
but, to Say, by way of Authority -- Non Vox Hominem sonat, This is, indeed, Act
12.22.
not the Voice of Man, but of God; and, since so it is, he that would have a
Richer Pawn, a firmer Obligation, than the Bare Word of God (and yet I do not
well to call it his Bare Word, for, his -- Dixit, and Factum est, Psalm. 33.9.
go together, what he says, is never Bare, but always apparel'd with
Performance) I know not what to compare him to, but to our Covetous Purchasers,
who think their Lease Imperfect, and their Bargain lost, if they have it not
For Ever, and, for One Day at least, more than for ever, For Ever and a Day;
Thus the Style and Method proves God to be the Author of them.

The Manner, and Matter does so too.

The Manner does so, in another manner of Style and Method.

It finds fault in the whole Creation, Gal. 2.17.
though it makes not Fault in any part of it; It is Objurgatory, and Rebuking,
to those on Earth, and to those in Heaven too; and what Creature Amongst Us
will be so Bold, to Style and Manner it so Loftily, and Majestically, and
All-Knowingly? it tells us, not only that All Men are Sinners, Jam. 3.2.
but it uses the Hands of those very Sinful Men, to self-acknowledge their
particular most grievous and heinous Sins, and makes those Men hold up their
Hands at the Bar of Heaven, and not only cry Guilty, in the Mass, as Heathens
do, but thus, and thus, thus and thus hainously and specifically Guilty; and
what Creature will be so Injurious to his own Fame, to leave his Shame, and
Scandal, and Dis-repute, upon Record? not only, as he is one of Mankind, but
too, as he is this Individual Man? A Seneca, In Vita Beata, c. 18. In Alto omn.
though he cries out -- In Profundo Omnium Vitiorum sum, would never cry out
against his own Covetousness, though he did against the Avarice of other Men;
in his own Behalf he is more sparing, and says, Sapiens (for himself did Opine
himself to be that Wise Man) non optat Divitias, sed Mavult, and he leaves
others to tell us more Loudly, not only of Senecae Praedivitis Hortos, Martial.
but of his- Amor Sceleratus Habendi; and, not only this, Job 4.18.
but God in Scripture Charges his Angels too with Folly; and Heathen Man will
rather Dispute, whether there Be an Angel, whom he never saw, than charge that
Invisible Angel to have sinned with him.

91. Would St. Paul, trow ye, have told us, that he had once been so far from
Saint, as to have been a Blasphemer, and Persecuter, 1 Timothy 1.13.
but that he was Overruled by a Divine Power, which draws Good out of Evil?
and makes the Penitence of St. Paul, V. 16.
and the Mercy of God upon it, an Example and Encouragement to Atheistical
Blasphemers, and Un-Christian Persecuters, to return from their Evil Ways, and
not to Kick out their own Blood against the Pricks? Act. 9.5.
to be more Upright, and Just, both to God and Man? Would holy David have told
us, that he had been so Un-holy, Title of Ps. 51.
as to go in to Bathsheba, but that the Adulterer should, with him, detest and
forsake that Impure and Unclean Sin? should come Home, and return to his First
Love, be constant to his Spouse Jesus, Rev. 2.4. 2 Cor. 11.2.
and not make his Members the Members of an Harlot? Would Moses have told us,
that his Anger waxed hot? that he cast the Tables (which were the work of God,
Exodus 32.19. V. 16.
and the Writing within them was the Writing of God, of God's own Commands) out
of his hands, and broke them, Et Manus and Duplices Manibus Cecidere Tabellae.
Ovid. de Remed. Am. l. 2.
But that we should not Fret (as he did) lest we should be moved to do Psalm.
37.8.
Evil, as he did? and to break all the Commandments of God, in a much worse
sense than he did? but that we should imitate him in his Sorrow, in his better
Anger against his worse Anger, and in his other more predominant, and
denominating Quality, his Meekness, Number. 12.3
and his Zealous Keeping all the Commandments of his God? It makes, and offers
Promises to All Men, it Pours out, and Denounces Threats upon All Men, even
Kings, and Judges, and Magistrates; and what One mere Man will take such a
Universal Power to himself, and will not suffer his Empire to be Bounded by any
part of that Vast Ocean, all of which has it self a Ne Vltra, Ps. 104.9.
Thus far thou shall go, and no further; were it possible that such a One Man
should be King of all the World, yet the Promises, and the Threats, are to
That One Man too; and it is as Ridiculous and Absurd, for a Man to make a
Promise to, and to Threaten Himself, as if he should have an Action at Law
against himself for breach of Promise, or sue himself to be Bound to the
Behavior and Peace, for Threatening himself; there is but one Allowable, nay
more, Commendable (and Pity it is, that it is so un-imitated, for want of Pity)
way that I know of, for a Man to sue himself; The Lord Viscount Scudamore, and
Mr. Farrar of Huntingdon shire.
some, whose Predecessors have Impropriated, have had such Berean-Nobility,
and high Primitive Christianity in them, as to cause their own Names to be
Prosecuted in Chancery, and there have Resigned, and by Law Confirmed Tithet to
the Church; and, for their sakes, I could wish this Book might Live, that their
Names might give Fame to the Book, and the Grateful Book Perpetuate their
Names.

82. Thus, from the Latitude, and Unlimitedness of Jurisdiction, in both
Branches of it, Punitive and Remunerative, Vindictive and Premiative, Ps. 145.9.
in doing Good to all, high and low, rich and poor; in calling all Men to
Account, even those Cedars, and the Tallest of those, whose Office it is to
call Inferior Men to Account here, It must be that Absolute, Universal
Monarch, the Maker, the Owner, the Possessour, the Ruler of the World, whose
words these are.

Thus, the Style, and Method, and Manner, Proves God to be the Author of them.

The Matter does so too.

83. The Promises are, Mat. 5.8.
of Eternal Happiness in Heaven, in the Sight and Enjoyment of the Eternal God;
The Threatenings are, of Pains in Hell, Mat. 25.41.
with the Devil and his Angels for ever; Neither of these can be Apprehended,
but by him, who has the faculty of Discourse and Ratiocination; and no
Reasonable Creature can Promise or Threaten these; The Good, neither Angel, nor
Man, will usurp so much False Power to himself, as to Bestow Heaven, or to
Inflict Hell; since Nothing can, Nihil dat, quod in se non habet.
of its own Power, give, or cast, that upon another, which it has not in it
self, by its own Power; and no Angel, much less, Man, how good soever, can
Possess, and Enjoy God, whether God will, or no; He may as soon be God, and
what God is, (...), as, so, Enjoy him; and, whether he be Man, or Angel, if he
be Good, he has not Hell at all; The Bad cannot lift up Another to that
Heaven, which himself has Not, nor sentence Another to that Hell, which has
himself; All, that go thither, go the same way, and, certainly, the First of
All was not so Ill a Lover of himself, as that he would Sciens and Prudens,
Damn himself thither; it is- Nullum Numen ('it is not Nullus Demon) Abest, Juven.
Sat. 1.
si sit Prudentia Tecum.

84. It makes Promises of things, which, had they not been Revealed by God,
could never have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive; that there should
be, Col. 2.9.
in the same Person, Perfect God, and Perfect Man; Is. 7.14.
that a Virgin should have a Son, and be a Virgin, when she bears him, Mat.
1.23.
and ever after, and so much the more, and more evidently a Virgin, because she
had such, and so holy a Son; Luke 1.35.
All Promises, that any Creature makes, must (like the Child that any Creature
bears) be Conceived before they are Made; and, since no Creature could ever, by
any the most lightsome faculty of its own, Conceive such mysterious Depths as
these, therefore, that in which these Promises are made, must needs be the Word
of an All-knowing, as well as an All-powerfull God, of that God, who saw his
Own, as well as his Father and Servant David's Substance, and, in whose other
Book all his Members were written, Ps. 139.16
when as yet there was none of them.

85. Mar. 12.33
It Commands a Universal Holiness to God; the Good are so Good, that they will
not Command this, in their Own, but only in the Name of their God; and the Bad
are so Bad, that they will not Command this at all, no, nor Persuade it, no,
nor Suffer it; Since therefore the Scripture is, as Nazianzen says of it, Omni
Rationabili facultate Validior, Oration 7.
above the Capacity of any Rational Creature to Compose, it must needs be, it
cannot possibly be otherwise than, the Work of that God, who alone is above all
Rational Creatures; not only Above them, but with that Reverend Addition of
St. Paul -- Far above all Principality, Ephesians. 1.21.
and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and Every Name, that is Named, not Only
in this World, but Also in that which is to come.

86. Hitherto I have showed you, how the Style and Method, the Manner and
Matter, of Holy, and Making-Holy, Scriptures, does Prove a God, and proposed to
the Hitherto-Atheist, the Diligent Search of these, in that they are, not only
Holy, and Sanctifying Scriptures, but, because they are so, Blessed and
Happifying Scriptures too; the search of these, upon this Ground, I proposed to
him, that he might find out, by these, what that True Happiness is (and Confess
GOD, not only Essentially to Be, but Mercifully to be the Author, and
Fountain, and Giver, both of the Scriptures, and of the Happiness Taught and
Reposed in them) which All Men desire, and, concering the Declaring and
Defining of which, all Un-Scriptur'd Men are as Wavering and Unconstant, as the
Citizens of Jerusalem were, in telling what was the No-Fault, of Un-guilty, and
Saint, Paul, that some cry out One thing, Act. 21.34
some Another; some a Prosperous Goodness, and some, an Innocence, though
Afflicted; some, Pleasure, and some, Honor; some, Wisdom, and some,
Contentfull Goodness; so that we can no more know the Certainty, than the Chief
Captain of the Band could, who came to Paul's Rescue, because of the
Philosophical Tumult; Of which Happiness, let me show you, in one word more, a
Glimpse and Taste out of holy Scriptures, how it is much More, and much Better,
not only than any One, but than All of those Names, by which they call it; and
so I shall, though slowly, Descend to, yet speedily pass through, the Second
Treatise, or Second part of the First.

87. That Happiness is a Prosperous Goodness, for it Consists in Enjoying that
God, who, first, Mat. 5.8.
made Man Good, and then Happy; and the Security of that Happiness, is beyond
the Power of such a Giddy thing as Fortune, either to Bestow, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
or to Deprive Man of; for it is for ever; And that Happiness is much more than
all the Successes of this World, and more than that Much More too; for he that
has been the most Successful Man here, can yet imagine Happinesses beyond all
that Actual Success; but, there, he shall Possess More, than he can Covet here;
not only the Excellency of all that God has Created, and which, in his
Infinite and Merciful Wisdom and Goodness, he shall appoint to endure in
Heaven, when he Annihilates those unworthier Creatures, which, here, we Enjoyed
too much, and Loved too well, because not well enough; and, yet, who can
Imagine the Entire, though Inferior, Happiness of the Created All in this
World? and, much more, the Things which are in Heaven, Wisd. 9.16
who has searched out? those things which the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 64.4.
and the Apostle St. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Paul, have told us, the Heart of Man, though it can Enjoy, cannot conceive:
and, yet, it shall not only Enjoy All These, in That God, 1 Cor. 15.28.
who is All in All, but therefore Much More than All these, because that God
also; There shall be Tranquil Happiness of the Mind, without the Vexation of
the happiest Mind here, which Plots, and Contrives, Studies, and Beats, to be
more Happy still; That Happiness shall consist, if not In, yet with, Virtue,
and Love, and Knowledge; we shall Love our own Glory, and Love the Glory of God
above that, and Love his, even in that he has Glorified us also; We shall
stand up complete in Virtue, 1 Cor. 10.12.
without bare thinking that we stand (though some, here, will not be contented
with a Modest Thinking, but will arrogantly Proclaim too, that they stand, even
whilst they lie flat along in that Ditch into which their Blind Guide has
thrown them) and without anxious Taking heed, lest we fall, for, Mat. 15.14
our God will take that heed for us, and hold up our Arm with his; we shall be
Wise, not in any perplexed Speculation of the Divinity in Things Created, but
in the Open Vision of the Essence of God, in the streaming Rays, though not in
the whole Sun of that Essence; we shall be like him, in Un-sinfull,
Un-dangerous Knowledge, 1 John 3.2.
because we shall see him as he is.

88. There shall be all the Happiness of the Body too; Beauty, and Health, and
Strength; the Body shall shine as the Sun; Mat. 13.43 1 Cor. 15.54.
that shall be its Beauty; It shall be Immortal as the Soul (when Man shall be,
as it were, Re-made, not of Body and Soul, but of Soul and Soul) that shall be
its Health, it shall be Impassible, Un-suffering, as the Angels of God, it
shall have an eye, which they have not, and yet, no more Tears than they which
never had Eyes to weep; Rev. 7.17.
nay, the Eyes of it shall be, like those of Christ, as a Flame of Fire, Rev.
19.12.
Un-wet, and as Dry as that; Sooner may Contradictions be Verisimilitudes, and
Fire weep here, than a Saint there; and that shall be its Strength.

And, not only the Mind shall be Happy, in that which Peculiarly appertains to
It, Virtue, and Love, and Wisdom; not only shall be added to the Happiness of
the Mind, that of the Body, in that which Peculiarly appertains to It, Beauty,
and Health, and Strength; but, to both these Distinct Happinesses, of the Body,
and of the Mind, will be added a third, which will, once again, make both of
them jointly Happy, That, which we, here, miscall the Goods of For^une, and
shall, there, rightly understand to be the Wealth of God, for, both Body and
Mind shall be (I will not say Fortunate) Happy in the perpetual possession of
all manner of Riches; for, as the Body and Mind make the Man ('it was in some
refined and limited sense, well said of Pythagoras, (...), and of Plato, Animus
Cujusque Is est Quisque yet, when Pythagoras, and Plato, were dead, his Soul,
and his Mind, still were; but that Soul was not Pythagoras, nor that Maxd,
Plato; else, Pythagoras was Alive, without any (...), even after he was Dead,
and Plato was Returned before his own Great Year) and God makes the Man a
Saint, so, the same God will make that Saint a Joseph, Genesis 41.43.
who shall be Ruler over all his Land, Ruler over all his Goods, over the whole
Kingdom of Heaven, for, that it self is, both the Field, and the Treasure,
Mat. 24.47 Mat. 13.44.46.
and the Pearl in it, for which we should Sell All we have here, and Purchase
those, by Selling, by Despising, by Counting All we have here, Phil. 3.8.
but Dung, that we might win Christ; Such an un-doting esteem of these Under,
and Deceitful Happinesses, will make them to be Dung indeed, such Dung, as
will Enrich and Fructify that Field, and make it bring forth that Treasure,
and that Pearl for us; Let us, therefore, with a Comparative Contempt of these,
cry out, as St. Austin did, Whatever else the Lord our God has given to us, In
Psalm. 26.
let him (what he has been, a long time doing) take it all away, and give us
these. For

89. With these, as he will give us an Established, and Persevering, so he will
also give us an Un-afflicted Goodness; Sin and Misery go together, and neither
of them can enter into Heaven; Sin is a Moth, which will eat a hole into our
Happiness, Mat. 6.20.
and Misery is a Thief, which will steal it all away, and there is no room for
such Guests as these; There was, sometime, a kind of Hell in the Lower Heavens,
Genesis 19.24.
but all the Fire and Brimstone of them will be rained down upon the Sodoms and
Gomorrahs here; nay, those very Heavens themselves, will endure the Plague,
which they did Inflict, they will Melt away with forvent heat, 2 Pet. 3.12
and only that Heaven shall endure for ever, in which there is, and will be,
nothing else, but God, and Angels, Saints, and Joy.

90. The Pleasures there, are much more (and much more Pleasures) than Man can
either Desire or Apprehend; for, they are not only Pleasures for evermore, Ps.
16.11.
but they are too, a whole River of them. Psalm. 36.8.

91. There is Honor; and that more multiplied in the Nature of it, than in all
those words of St. Peter, 1.1.7.
Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and more Magnified still, in that the Father of
Jesus Christ will honor those there, Joh. 12.26
who serve Jesus Christ here.

92. The Wisdom there is infinitely beyond all the Wisdom in this World; not
only beyond all the Wisdom of the Children of this World (who are so Wise in
their Generations, one would scarce think they were ever Children) but of the
Children of Life and Light too, whilst they are in this World; The Best, the
Chiefest Wisdom of the Children In this World, though not of the Children Of
this World, is, to be Wise to Another, a Greater, a Better World; it is true,
Nemini sapit, qui sibi non sapit, and it is as true, as that -- Nec sibi sapit,
qui sibi non in Aeternum sapit, Ps. 111.10.
The Beginning of that Wisdom, is the Fear of GOD, and the Instructers in that
Wisdom are the holy Scriptures; it is the great Eulogie, that St. Paul gives of
them to Timothy, 2.3.15.
that they are Able to make him wise unto Salvation; and in the verse after,
All of them are given by Inspiration from GOD; so that this one Link in the
Chain of Happiness, is sufficient to both those ends, for which I insist upon
it, both that Scriptures might be searched, as the only Certain Foundation of
Future Bliss, and that that God might be acknowledged, whose Gift that
Happiness is, and whose Fear does begin to make us Wise unto it; And, if there
be so much VVisdome, in the very Way to Salvation, how much more in the
Enjoyment of it? As certainly as much More, as that First Principle, which is
equally agreed upon by all Mankind, has Certainty in it, Totum est majus suis
Partibus, for, Here we know, but it is but in Part, we Prophecy, but, in the
most Studious, or most Enlightened of us, it is but in Part; 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
but, hereafter, When that, which is Perfect, is come, then that, which is in
Part, shall be done away; We are Children, so long as we are here, we speak,
we understand, we think, Then only, when we are grown up to a Perfect Man,
Ephesians. 4: 13.
unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ (and that is only,
when we enter into Happiness) shall we cast away Childish Things; for, though
in that place, St. Paul was become a Man even below Stairs, and out of Heaven,
by a special and bountiful Illumination and Sanctification, yet, how many of
us together, in respect of Knowledge and Holiness, cannot make up one St. Paul?
And yet the Knowledge which the Man St. Paul had here, was but VVeak, and
Childish, and that only, Manly and Perfect, which he Now has Above; The
Evangelical Knowledge, which he had, and we have here, was indeed, Perfect, if
Compared to a Legal Knowledge, but very Lame, and Heavy, Dull, and Ignorant, if
set in Competition with that in Heaven; so Theodoret interprets that place;
(...).
and so St. Paul too, when, in the verse after, he does so far Un-Man himself,
as to wrap up himself, and us, in the same Thick Cloud, for, Now, We see
through a Glass Darkly (We, not a very Paul excepted) but, Then, Face to Face;
and (lest that might be suspected for a mere piece of Civility, humbly to
involve himself in that Ignorance, which is the Lot of All) he speaks more home
yet, and to his own Door, Now I know in Part, but, then, shall I know, even as
I also am known; and, what VVisdome, what Knowledge, Greater, and more Sublime,
than to Know, even as God himself Knows, (sure, if there be a Prius and
Posterius in the Knowledge of God, the first thing that he ever knew, was, that
himself Always Is from Everlasting) and to be Wise (in some granted
Proportion, Psalm. 93.2.
even by the Testimony of God himself) as he is Wise?

93: There, is also a Contentfull Goodness, a Filling, a Satisfying Happiness
-- Lord show us the Father, Ioh. 14.8.
and it suffices; nay, not only the Father, but the Son, and the Holy Ghost
too, are showed sufficiently to all the Saints of God here, in their Exile, and
will be showed sufficingly to them all Above, in their Country.

94. The End why I propose to my Atheist-Reader all these several Branches of
our Future Happiness, (which will hereafter be bestowed by the Father of
Spirits, and are, Heb. 12.^
in the mean while, attested by the Spirit of the Father) is, that he may (by
that Loved Argument of Self-Preservation, and, for his very own sake) be in
love with those Scriptures of God, which so much Out-Promise, and Out-Give, all
that All Natural Men have written, or can desire, that, by these, he might
Know, and Acknowledge, Love with Reverence, and Serve with Fear, that God, who
is, even by Natural Reason (which, to the Atheist, is instead of God) convinced
to be the Bountiful Author, both of these Scriptures, and of all other
Bounties.

95. May such Reasons as these be effectual upon him, to seek all his Happiness
at the hands of that God, who is Rerum omnium Pleroma, Irenaeus, l. 2. c. 1.
the One, Only Fullness, and Satisfaction, Center and Rest of All things,
without whose Blessing in a Contentment here, and in making that Contentment an
Earnest of a Heaven, our Souls are Empty, when our Chests are Thronged, and our
Appetite, even when it is Sated, Hungers after we know not what.

96. In Enchiridio Orthodoxograph.
It Is good Counsel of Pisanus, that, since no Creature, without God, can do
Enough for himself, and be Satisfactory to himself, he, that would have
sufficient, and enough, should seek to enjoy his God; should Study, and Pray,
and Live, after that manner, whereby he might have a Title and Interest in that
Fundamental Universal Blessing, (without which, Nothing else, not all the Pomp
and Prosperity, the Gilded Hooks, and Candid Venoms of this World, is Blessed;
and, with which, Nothing, not all the Contempt, and Visible, naked-fac'd
Scorpions of this World, can make Wretched) I will be their God, Frequenter, in
utroque Codice.
and they shall be my People; Who suffered more than the Apostles of Christ
Jesus? and yet, 2 Cor. 3.4.
because such Trust they had, through Christ, to Godward, who suffered Less
than they? Did they suffer, to whom it was given to suffer? Who ever complained
of Liberality, as of Stripes? of Kindnesses done to him, as of a Load and
Pressure? What Liberality greater? What more Abundant Kindness, than such a
Bounty, which, in St. Paul's account (who had often experimented the Sweetness
of that, which Persecuting Man meant Gall and Wormwood) is made Equal, even
with Faith in God; His Zealous Disciples would have Envied him, if they might
not Partake with him in the Honor of Enduring Afflictions; and therefore he
does, not only Comfort his Philippians in these, but these themselves are the
very Comforts which he speaks, and God Administers to them -- For unto you it
is given, C. 1. v. 29, 30.
in the behalf of Christ, not only to Believe in him, but also to Suffer for
his sake, having the same Conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in
me; He does not, and he would not have any of those, to grieve, for any of
these; nay, he does, and would have those do so too, thank his and their God
for them; how weak, and despised, and unwealthy soever they were in this
World, yet this was his, and all his Disciples, 2 Cor. 3.5.
great Support, that -- Their Sufficiency was of God; Have God, and you have
Sufficient, for -- He is All; Have not God, and you have Nothing, for he is
All: Paul had Conflicts, and the Philippians had Conflicts; and, these were to
them, Signs, and Marks, and Testimonies of true Disciples; nay, they were more,
Mercies, and Donations, and Gifts to Beloved Disciples; Not only these, but
Christ himself had Conflicts too, and, in the Eye of the World (till the Eye
of the World, the Sun, was ashamed to see All of it, and hid both his own
Face, and the Face of the whole Earth, in Darkness) Nothing else but Conflicts;
and yet in the midst of all these Conflicts, these had All, because they had
God; and Christ had All, because He Was, and Is God, and Is to Come, to Reward
those, who Patiently Endure these.

97. By this time, I hope he, to whom I now write, has left off to be he, to
whom I Began to write, that he is Austin'd into -- Ego non sum ego, and
Paulin'd into -- I live, Gal. 2.20.
yet not I, but Christ lives in me; that he is not only a Deist, but a
Christian too; and therefore I shall take my leave of him with two pieces of
Sober Counsel; One, from the General Doctrine of God, that he would depend
wholly upon him; Another from the Particular Doctrine of Happiness, that he
would go on in being a Saint, Psalm. 85.8.
and not turn again to Folly, in prizing Glass above Pearl.

98. From the First, Learn he not to gape after the Inferior All, but to
attend on that God, who, even now, Ps. 81.10.
has brought him out of Egypt, and has promised, though he open his Mouth
never so wide, to Fill it; to labor for a Title, and not to doubt of
Sufficiency in him, who is Above Ali, Ephesians. 4.6.
and Through All, and All in All; Let him be Above all, by his Proselytical,
and our Renewed Obedience to his holy Precepts; Let him be Through All, by his,
and our Resigning all the several Powers he has given us, back to himself, by
employing them in a Subordination to Just and Merciful Power; Let him be All
in All; Desire we nothing else but him, Nothing but from him, Nothing but for
him. Are we his Children? who is so wise as he, to know what we stand in need
of? Mat. 6.8. and 32.
Who is so Good as he to supply to all our wants? Who is so Fatherly as he,
to Chastise us, and yet to Love us too? Are we not his, but Belial's Children?
who is so Gracious as he, to afflict us, that we may be his? who is so Holy and
True, Just and Potent as he, to control all our Inordinate and Sinful Desires
of Having?

99. From the Second. Learn we to return that Answer to all the gaudy
Temptations, and fond Allurements of this Enchanting World, which Agesilaus
did to him, who besought him to hearken to the Voice and Song of one, who well
imitated the Various and Pleasant Notes of the warbling Nightingale; No, says
he, Ipsam Lusciniam audivi, I have heard the Nightingale her self, and all
Imitation I know, comes short of her; Say to any Tully, who bids you ask for
Happiness from Humane Plots, and Counsels, and Contrivances, and the Aids and
Assistances of Fortune upon these, I will none of that, since I have heard of a
Firmer Happiness, which Fortune has Nothing to do with, a Happiness from Above,
and to Above, from that God, from whom Every Good Gift does come, Jam. 1.17.
and from whom too All Good Counsels do proceed; If it be not Good,
Common Prayer Book.
it is no Gift, and I will not receive it; If it be Good, it is none of hers, and
I will not be Accessory to her Theft, nor purchase a Halter, be it never so
Silken a one; I remember that of Seneca (whom I once took for Divine too much,
and now wish he were more Divine) Fortunae de me Potestatem, non do, and I am
Christian'd into a new Philosophy, which says, Non datur Fortuna. Say to any
Seneca, who calls the Conscience of Welldoing, Happiness, even then, when the
Body is in Torture, I am contented with the Yoke now, but I look for a Release
anon, Ps. 34.19.
since I have heard that though Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous, yet
the Lord not only Delivers them out of all, Genesis 15.1.
but is, himself, their Exceeding great Reward; Ps. 58.11.
Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, Verily he is a God that judges in
the Earth; I believe it enough, because David has said it, and yet I have
learnt to put both the Verilies together, Amen, Amen, dic^ vobis.
and believe it the more, for David's Sons, and my God's sake, whose Style That
Is; though I suffer Many things, 2 Timothy 1.12.
nevertheless I will not be ashamed, for I know whom I have Believed; What is a
little Bloodshed? I have emptied a Vein to Recover from a Sickness, and was
well again; Shall I not empty them All, for Christ and Heaven? Say to any
Epicure, to any He, that would be more Crane than he is Philosopher, that bids
you, to be Happy, to become a Dog, and a Sow, to wallow in your own Myrie
Vomit, to allow of nothing but Sensual Pleasure, I will none of that; since I
have heard, not only that a Friar, Erasmus in his Ecclesiastes.
to Torment a Drunkard, bade him be Drunk again, as Conceiving no Torture to be
equal to an Over-charg'd Stomach, nor the Rope it self more Cruelly to stretch
a Throat, than a Loathsome Yawning, but that at God's Right Hand there are
Pleasures for Evermore, Ps. 16.11.
Innocent, and Un-satiating Pleasures, a whole and a clear River of them; not
only a River, but the Springhead too, All my Springs are in thee O God, Psalm.
87.7.
Say to any Livy, who calls VVorldly Honor, and Earthly Sovereignty,
Happiness, I will none of that, since I have heard, There is no Honor like to
that, L. Hatton's Preface to the Psalms.
of serving God in a Great Capacity; that this is the only Lawful Way, by
which to set up a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. Exodus 19.6
a Kingdom of Priests, even amongst the Laity also, when God shall make them,
indeed to be, what in both those Scriptures they are called, a holy Nation. Say
to any Horace, who, to be Happy, bids you be VVordly-wise, and Wise in your
Generation, I will none of that, since I have heard of Another, a Heavenly
VVisdome, a VVisdome to all Eternity, and to Salvation in it; This, if compared
to the Worlds, is not Another, but an Only Wisdom; the Worlds, if compared to
this, is not Another Wisdom, but an Only Folly, Madness, Desperation; What
is my Generation, but a Point, a Nothing, to God's Eternity? My Days are but a
Hands Breadth, Psalm. 39.5.
(Diogenes's (...), in respect of some Longer Liver in the first of Ages) and
mine Age is as nothing before thee O God; Might I be as Happy, Latum Unguem,
and one Day of my Life, as all this World could make me, and wretched the whole
hand-breadth, and all the Life besides, I would not make so Indiscreet and
Unpolitique a Choice; All this Life, to all Eternity, is infinitely less than a
Day, to all this Life, and shall I choose the Greater Evil; and forfeit the
Greater Good, when I have skill enough to refuse the Lesser Good, because of a
Lesser Evil? Say to any Aristotle, who comes nearest the Mark, when he bids you
be Happy in Well-Doing, and in the Satisfaction which arises from thence, I
will more than that, since I have heard, that though a Good Conscience, Prove.
15.15.
and a Merry Heart, because of That, is a Continual Feast, yet the Reward of
that Good Conscience is a much Better, and Merrier Feast, and that therefore I
look up to that Jesus, Heb. 12.2.
who, as he is the Author, has appointed unto me a Kingdom, and, when he is
the Finisher of my Faith, will Crown me in it, that I may Eat and Drink at his
Table, Luke 22.29, 30.
in his Kingdom.

100. And yet, though this Jesus be Another Notion, Examinatio Portugalli
Atheis. 1617
or rather Another Person (for there was a Portugal Atheist, who being asked
what he thought of the Trinity, answered, Examinatio 3. quaest. 6.
Se adorare Trinitatem, sed per al^as Notiones, non sub Nominibus Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti) yet it is but One, and the Same God, who makes this
Feast of Happiness, and fills the Table with all these, and many more, Several
and Precious Messes, and who by his Unity with the Father, and the Holy Ghost
(to which Unity in Trinity be all Prayer and Praise for ever) calls upon me for
my Promised Disquisition, and Determination, That there is One (already Argued)
and But One God, to which I proceed, (...).

Polytheismus Vapulans; OR, THERE IS BUT ONE GOD.

Greg. Nazianz. (...). LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE L. VISCOUNT TRACY, My much Honored Lord and
Patron.
MY Honored Lord, Since, by some Unhappynesses (which have made Long Furrows
upon your Back, though they could not, Psalm. 129.3.
upon your Face, and, by your unmatcht patience, have left That, as they found
it, and have not writhed, nor Afflicted One wrinckle more upon your constant
Brow) I cannot, as the Duty of my Place obliges me, Preach to your Ear, give me
leave to do it to your Ey, and to be your Chaplain from the Press, when you
cannot Hear (unless by others) that I am so from the Pulpit: I may remember
your Lordship, that the ONE GOD, of whom I treat, though He binds Himself to
None, does usually observe this Method, in repairing worldly Adversities with
spiritual Advantages; and, as it is His General design, to better That man,
by any Cross, which He lays upon His shoulders, and to bring him nearer to the
Favor of That Christ, who bore the Cross for Him, by the similitude of
sufferings; so, in your Lordship's Case, he does, not only Prescribe, but
Confect too; tells you what is best, and prepares those Ingredients for you, in
removing you from him who has less of skill, in the Cure of Souls, to him who
has more of it; and who would not bless God the more, for such a Medicinal,
and Healing Tribulation? As All eyes see your Patience, Luke 21.19. Dionys.
Areopag.
in which you Possess your Soul, though, not very much besides, so I beseech
That God, who is (...), and sees All things, that the things which have
Happened unto you, Philip. 1.12. v. 13. Ibid.
may fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel in you; that, as your Bonds are
Manifest in All the Palace (and were they not manifest, I would not have named
them) so they may be Bonds in Christ, that, even This also may turn to your
salvation, through your, and our Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of JESUS
CHRIST. V. 1^.


These my god Lord, and many more Inconveniences and, Encumbrances of life and
fortunes, with which you struggle, or, to speak more properly, which struggle
with you, have made me believe that such a dedication as This, (upon which your
life is Comment, and your Fortunes Notes) would be not an unacceptable piece of
service, in recalling to your Lordships Consideration, That, which all the
Circumstances of all your Affairs, do daily Mind you of, that there is but One
Heaven, That Above, Job 22.14.
but One God, He that Walks in the Circuit thereof.

When you Tasted, and Tried All the Happinesses of the Earth together, you
were, even Then, too wise, to make a God of Any, or of All of These; in that
you Had Them, and They Had not you; in that they Served you, and you Ruled
them; and an Gbedient God, a Bounden and Chained Deity, a Divinity under Lock
and Key, You was never so much Persian to allow of; much less, Q. Curtius l. 4.
scribit de Persis, quod Deos, quo Certius retinerent, catenis vinciebant.
when Fortune has, now, turned one half of her wheel, will you make the Clay
Feet, the Iron legs, the Brazen Belly, and Thighs of That prosperity a God,
whose Breast, and Arms of Silver, and Head of Fine Gold, Dan. 2.32.33.
you could not endure to worship; Let Men, that wrangle at wealth, and for
wealth, the Clent, and the Lawyer, Creep, and Crouch to such Images as These,
and think if they will, that they are well awake the while, whilst That they
Dote upon, is but an Image, and not the Architype, a Beam, and not the Sun,
least of all, Mal. 4.2.
That of Righteousness, and they themselves, when they expect to grasp it, do
but Dream; but let my Good Lord look higher, and Pity the Childings at the
Bar; Let Him not be Froward with them that are Froward, but buy love with
love; with so cheap a Fee, let Him Purchase the One and Only God, who, though
He be but One, and Only, Is, and has All things, and will sell them All at the
Price of Love; Prove. 8.17.
I love them that love Me; (would they have Estates, V. 18.
and Titles?) Riches and Honor are with Me, (would they have Unmolested
Estates, and Unforfeited Titles?) yea Durable Riches, and Righteousness; what
ever the violence of Time, or Man, takes away, Is neither Wealth, nor yours;
That which Lasts, is Wealth, and That, which Is You, is Yours; the Philosopher
said well -- Omnia Mea Mecum, Bias.
but your Christian Lordship says better, Omnia mea Ego; your self is, only,
and all, your Own; nor can you stand in Need of Any thing from Any Other, but
from Christ; may He Clothe you, with His Robe of Righteousness, and no matter
though there be never a Pocket in it; with That Robe, you will have Peace with
God, and Without That Pocket, Peace with Men too; That you may be blessed Both
these ways; and be so like your JESUS, Luke 2, ult.
as to Increase in Favor with GOD and Man, whilst you are on Earth, at least,
inseparably, and without any Altercation, in Favor with Him, who is God and
Man in Heaven, and, yet, in Both those Natures, is but One Person, and, in That
One Person, is the same God, with the other Two, Three Persons, and One God, is
the Prayer of

Your Lordships obliged Chaplain, and faithful Servant, WILLIAM TOWERS.

Polytheismus Vapulans, OR, There is but One GOD.
1. HOw Necessarily that First Doctrine, that there Is a God, is to be backed
with this second Doctrine, that there Is but one God, will appear, out of the
corrupt nature of all, the selfdeifying opinions of some, and the Diabolical
practices of others.

2. It Is not only so, in this great Case, but it is so also, in almost every
Case, where Man has more of passion then judgment, and loves Interest above
Truth (and, almost every man has so, and dos so) that, when he is convinced, he
has been in an unprofitable error, he will never think he can run far enough
from that unrewarding mistake, till he runs into another, Equally as bad as
that; and then, dos not care how irrecoverably he sinks into a second Ditch, so
long as he is sure he escapes the danger of the former Pit. It Is so in the
Religion of Nature, in Morality; It Is not enough to tell the Covetous Man, how
base his sin is, whilst he dos, (as Bion says he days) Sordidi Divites ita
facultatum curam habent, quasi propriarum, ita parcunt, tanquam alienis.
take so much care over his wealth, as if it were his own (his beloved Spouse
-- Incubat Auro) and so much spare it, and forbear it, as if it were another
Man's; to tell him, that he starves himself, that he may starve others; to tell
him, that it is better to give, then to hoard, and that he hoards up his own
Damnation; that his Hell is stole away, when his Bags are Ris^ed, if he grieves
more for the sin of him that opened his Chest, then because he left it empty;
When you have told him all this, and more, and made him fear to be Rich, Is
33.14.
as much as he fears the everlasting burnings, you will make him apt to sin as
much in prodigality and wastfulness, as he did before in laying up, and going
to Bed with the Key in his mouth. Therefore, you must tell him too, that though
the sparkling, and yellowness of his Gold, be like the Flame of fire, of which
too much, and an ungoverned heap, will burn him, yet a little of it, if it
kindles not in the very heart, will warm him; you must not only tell him, Josh.
7.21.
that to withold the Wedge of another Man, and to bury it in his own Tent,
will cause him to be put to death, heap of stones over him in Earth, (I, and if
he repent not, if he testify not his repentance, by dispersing, by giving to
the poor, a heap of Coals over him, in Hell too) insted of a heap of Gold and
Silver under him; but you must tell him too, that, 1 Timothy 5.8.
if he provides not for his own, he is worse then an Infidel; and, if he
provides not of his own, he is the same Man still, worse then Infidel; you
must, not only tell him, that his extortion, whereby he makes the poor eat
stones, Is. 3.15.
instead of Bread, whereby himself grinds the poor people of God, Ps. 53.4.
and eats even them up, as it were Bread, that this makes him to be less
charitable, Mat. 4.3.
then the Devil himself, who besought that stones might be made Bread; but you
must tell him too, live by Bread also, though not by Bread only; you must not
only tell him, as St. L. 2. Ep. 6. Non modo aliena non appetas (hoc enim
publicae leges p^niunt, He means, when the appetite is filled and not when it
yawns) sed Tica, quae sunt aliena, non s^ves.
Hierom does, that he must not covet that, which is another Man's (for, every
right Christian St. will say as St. Austin did, that the superfluity, and
overplus of a rich Man, is the debt and portion of a poor Man) but you must
tell him too, that, though every Man besides, is his neighbor, himself is his
neighbor also; ( Proximus egomet mihi is a good rule, when it is a common
rule, and not an enclosure, when it lets this, and that Man be proximus too;
as, in a Circle, though the Line that is first drawn, points in the
Circumference, yet every after Line touches as close as that) and though he
must not reserve from others, that of his own also, which is another Man's, yet
he must not impart to others, that, without which, nothing is left his own; but
he must love, and cherish them, and himself, by liberal imparting, and moderate
using of what he has, and not leave off to love and cherish either, by
immoderate keeping; else, if you only declame against his covetousness, till
you persuade, and charm, and fright him into a renouncing, and loathing, and
ejuring of that, and use not your discreet endeavors to stop him in the right,
middle, and virtuous way, you will only dispossess him of one Devil, that he
may have room, in which he intertain another; so, a Prodigal Man may be chid
out of his spending vanity, till he does nothing else, but scrape, and neither
he, nor he, be, the more, or at all, a liberal Man, for all you have said unto
them. So it is in Christian Religion too; A Reformed Anabaptist will sooner
turn a persecuting Papist, and a Reformed Papist sooner turn a persecuting
Anabaptist, then either of them be a truly-reform'd Protestant; though, like
Sampsons Foxes, Judge. 15.4.
they turn tails to one another, (and are ready to spit fire too in the Face of
each,) yet they have a Firebrand in the midst, with which they burn up all the
shocks, (as that Corn signifies true Disciples; and tares, Apostates) all the
Olives and Vine-yards (as that Vineyard signifies the true Church of Christ)
which the Heathen Poet, Ovid. Fast. l. 4.
however it came to his hands, has acquanted us with, Scilicet vulpem.
Captivam, stipula, Foenoque Involvit, and Ignes
Admovet; Urentes effugit illa Manus;
Qua Fugit, Incendit Vestitos Messibus Agros;
Damnosis Vires Ignibus Aura dabat.
Histories are almost as full of those Passionate Changers (with whom the wise
Man, Prove. 24.21.
bids us to have nothing to do, especially, not to do, what they will not
choose but do, Meddle) who have run from One extreme to the other, as of those
Judicious changers, who have run from both extremes, to the truth; of all
enemies to the Church of England, from an English Jesuit, who has formerly
protested better, Good Lord deliver us; and I would it were well considered,
whether in these very days, and in this very Nation, for want of this
judgment and moderation, and sobriety (for, there is, and should be, a mental
sobriety, as well as there is, though there should not be, a mental drunkenness,
Pliny l. 9. Ep. 26. Ex Demosibene. Non Datum.
(...)] the office taken, at any thing, which was, or seemed offensive, has not
been the cause of so many real offenses amongst us; God in his mercy and
wisdom, restore to us, those two great blessings, which always fall off
together, truth, and love, that the swords may be beaten themselves, beaten
into plowshares, and the spears into pruning Hooks, that the Hedge of Christ's
Church may be only pruned by these, to grow the better, and not quite cut down
by those. As thus it is, in Morality, and thus in Christianity, that the
unguided hate of one fault, in ill practice, and mis-opinion, does beget
another; so, thus it is too, in the very beginning, as well as in the progress
of true Religion: not only the Cathari (for, that word will be less quarreld at
then the direct English of that word) will misdeem themselves so Paenitentiam
denegat. Austin. de Haeres. 169. Aetas nostra tam praesentibus plena est
numinibus, ut facilius possis Deu^, quam Heminem invenire; it is so true of
Aetas nostra, that I may spare to quote Petronius for it.
holy and perfect, as if they were a kind of Demigods on Earth, at least the
Dii minorum Gentium (for, they are the minors, the inferior sort of people,
who artogate to themselves this inferior kind of Divinity) nor only the
contracters and Covenanters with Hell, who rather then fail of a Plurality,
though they assuredly know, there is but one God, will worship the Devil
himself for another; but, out of the infirmity of his unknowing Nature (for,
less of knowledge is part of the punishment of Adams sin, in all Adams race)
and, in the simplicity, and mis-lead zeal of his Heart, he that is, but now,
Initiated into the belief of a God, that is convinced of his monstrous crime in
denying that there is any God, will so abhor that Atheistical gui^t, as, rather
then return to that gross mistake, every thing he sees, and knows, every thing
he loves, and fears, shall be a God; there shall not only be, as St. L de
Haeresib. Fig. 46. excus. Oxon and ad^ct. Vincenti^ Lyrinens. Co^monitoriu.
duabu^ Any 1631.
Austln says the Manichaeans held, Duo Principia, Aeterna and Coaeterna, Boni
and mali, but numerosum Principium utriusque and yet, even amongst these too
(which would make the very Soul to blush) every good Soul is of the same
nature, of which God himself is; This also they say, Ibid.
out of their former absurd principle, although with a Coguntur dicere; and
then, uno absurdo dato, sequuntur mill, if ever there were but one thousand of
good Souls, (perhaps a thousand of thousands too,) every good Soul of these is
an absurdity, a Solecism of the Manichaeans; not only the living Spirit of a
Man, but the liveless Body of the Sun shall be one God, and every Star another;
and then what Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum, mirabile signat, Id dixere Deos,
colles, Freta, Flumina flammas. Prudentius; the Heathens do worship (...) Naz.
de Natal. Christi.
store of Gods have they! and how above number! though we have store enough of
God, in one, and that, innumerable store too, because but one; yet, such a one,
as is infinitely more infinite then all else, which, in their own nature,
though not by the actual Arithmetique of Man, are capable to be numbered,
because he, alone, is more all then they, which I shall presently tell you of,
in showing you the several ways, by which God is one.

3. He is one, simplicitate, because he is not made up of several parts, as all
things are, that have this, that they are, of gift, the most simple of them,
are, at least, compounded of Actus, and Potentia; All things else, are
compounded; and the very composition of them does Un-God all things else; every
totum Physicum (and I speak only of substantials which are entire, and have
nature in them; for, they, who make the part of a Man, a God, have answered
themselves, for, how can that, which is but a part, and that but of a Man, be,
yet; a God? and a whole God too? but, when they make the worst part of Man a
God, they may safely do it, Nil securius est Lascivo Idololatra; I can only
reply to such, Phil. 2.
what Tully did to Anthony, Sunt quaedam, quae honest non possum dicere, Phil.
3.
and what to Dolabella, Ea turpitudo est, quae objici, ne ab inimico quidem
potest verecunde; and they, who make the Accidents of Man a God, who implore
Febrem Deam, to take away Febrem Morbum, who will have a Deus Vagitanus, that
their Children may not hurt themselves with crying, and a Deus Fabulanus to
teach their Children how to speak, a Deus Statelinus, that they may stand
upright, and not fall, and a Deus Potinus, that they may Drink aright, and not
fall; and if every such circumstance as these must Deity, any one Man may set
himself upon so many employments, and mishape himself into so many postures,
till he stands in need of all Hesiods thirty thousand Gods, (...).
to protect such a (...), and multiform Man; but these, and the suspicions
rather then opinions of these, are more worthy a pity, then a disproof) every
totum Physicum is made up of its Constitutive parts, matter, and form; there
must be matter, that it be not made of nothing; there must be form, that it be
not made Incomplete; and, being both these, there must be, an Efficient cause
of the union of both these, lest any thing should make it self; and, therefore,
being made by another, (and it is all one, if it were possible for any thing,
to be made by it self) it cannot be God, because not Eternal, a part ante,
much less, though it were Eternal a part post, could it, yet be God; and yet,
even thus-eternal, the choicest piece of it, is not, of its own prerogatival
nature, but only by grant, from that Ens simplicissimum, which gave it the
Originals of which it was made. Ortum quicquid habet, Statius.
Finem timet, Ibimus omnes
I^imus.
Much less can that Fortune, which this age adores, be a Goddess, because it is
not a substance; which if it were, That very Composition word -- Te FACIMUS
fortuna Deam -- is Argument enough against her Goddess-ship; for what Divinity
has she, whom such a mortal makes, Mat. 5.36.
that cannot make a Hair black or white?

4. But then, the Metaphysical Beings, which approach nearest to this ens
simplicissimum, yet they are, neither It, nor God, and therefore they are not
God, because they are not pure, though immaterial acts, but acts, and power
too; nor do they, by that spirituality they have, so much recede from the
matter below them, as they are, in the very same spirituality, distant from the
Fountain Spirit above them; they are, Spirits, but they were not; yet, when
they were not, they were in a power and capacity, to be produced; not in a
Potentia Subjectiva, as all Physical Compounds, after the Creation of the First
matter, are (when the Earth was, (as the Philosophers say that First matter Is,
Genesis 1.2.
Informis and formae vacua) without form and void) as they all, besides Man
alone, are, without all doubt and controversy, educ'd e potentia materiae, but,
in a potentia Objectiva, essentially inhaerent in God and yet, not Inhaerent in
him, as a Philosophical Potentia, in relation to future Acts, for he is Actus
Purus, and nothing else but Actus, but as an Actual Potestas) for, of
themselves, there was no part existent, till themselves were; this kind of
Composition they have; else, they always were, and, of themselves, would
always Be, Ab Aeterno, in Aeternum, and therefore, were God in deed, and being
so, would always be so; but they were, neither so, nor he; for, if they had
not this Composition, and were God (for, Gods, I cannot away to call them, so
much as in supposition,) it must be known, that they had not this, and were
that, either by the Light of Scripture, or by the Light of Nature; but, neither
of these Lights will give in any such false evidence, or bribed verduit; not
that of nature; for, in her School, the Captain Disciple of the highest form,
will sooner doubt, whether there be any such thing, as Angel, then make such an
ambiguous Essence (which is so far removed from demonstration, that there is no
such Praecognitum of it, Quod sit, but rather a dispute, and that, rather held
in the Negative, An sit) to be his God; if there be, at all, any knowledge of
an Angel by Nature, the very (...) of it will tell the Inquisitive natural Man,
that an Angel is such a Creature (for, by this time, and because of this
Office, I may well call him so) which is to deliver the Message of another to
another; and a Godhead that goes on errands, the very natural Man will not
allow of; Besides all this, may it not therefore be, that the gracious wisdom
of God did conceal the whole Order of Angels from the mere Man, upon this
prevision, and foreknowledge, that Man would be apt to adore such
spirituities, and, upon this merciful ground, to prevent such Idolatrous
adorations? And Scripture, by which we Infallibly know, there are Angels and
Archangells too, will not Connive at any such Mistake; For, There we know, the
Archest of them, is so far from being God that He is much rather, and in that
very Word, a Fool in comparison; His Angels, All of them, Job 4.18.
He charged with Folly; mark the word, and the Authority of it, it is not He
suspected them; for a meaner man may suspect a much Better than Himself, and
not^ing in this world of ours more Common, not Avarice, and Pride more in the
Heart and upon the Back of Man; than suspicion and Jealousy, in step He takes,
and of every Men he sees; tisnot barely, He knew them Guilty; for, That, the
Low, and Poor Man, may do, by the High and Rich Man; it is not barely, H. Punished
them for their guilt (though He did, some of them, even unto Damnation; one of
them, who was too proud in His Office (Angelus, Officii^, and Ministerii vox
est) Fell like lightning, (like one Fire^, Luke 10.18.
into another, like a Bright One, into a Dark one) for the Cob-Webb-Laws, in
All Nations, will vex a Fly, when it does Corvis Ignoscere, not because the
Crow is more Innocent, but because the Fly has less wings, and weaker legs;
but it is, He Charged them; He p^ead^ the La^ against them, and That no
Cob-web-Law, but the very same within them, and He pleads till themselves cry
Guilty til they do, as the lightning does, like which they Fa^^, Fall of
themselves, Romans 13.
till they also (...), not only by Resisting the power, which is Of God, but
which is inseparably In God, in aiming to Independ of Him; and I think I may
further explain the explication which a late Judicious Author has applied to
the word (...), not only, Dr. Basire in his sacr^lege Arraigned.
as He says Beza says, they shall be Damned, in a passive sense, nor only
they shall Damn themselves, in an Active sense, by wilful Perjury, or by
wi^full Impenitency, but they shall Damn themselves too, by Approbation of the
Sentence against them, (...), they shall Take Damnation as their Due, as a
Right charge against them, as a Just Judgment upon them; Coloss. 1.20.
and ever since, the Angels which stand, Confirmed by That Jesus, who has
Reconciled all things, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven,
have been very Wary not to admit, but to Reject any Over Humilities of Man to
them, to the Derogation from the Honor of Their One only God; and the whole
Multitude of them sung, Glory be to God in the Highest; not to GOD'S, Luke 2.14.
least of all to themselves.

5. Thus, from the Finite, and Made Nature of all things else, in Earth, and
Heaven too, there is but One God; for I list not to seek out Another God, in
that, which is No where, in Purgatory, nor, in That, which is the Worst where,
in Hell. And though this might suffice, yet I go on to prove the Unity of the
Godhead, from the very Nature of the Godhead.

6. He is One, singularitate; so, as he is Only One; not so, as the Sun is Only
One; for, though there never was, nor will be any more, than One Sun in the
Firmament, yet, if God had so pleased, there Might have been, and still May be,
as many Suns, as Stars, as well as Certainly there Will be neither Sun, nor
Stars; but He is, so, One Only God, that it is Impossible, and Contradictory
to the very Nature, and Essence, and Power of God, that there should be More
Gods than One; for, if there were More, there were None; and that because each
God could not be Infinite, as being Excluded from That somewhat else, which is
God as well as He; from which if He be excluded, He is a Finite God, and, as
good have no God at all, as a Finite One, which, in very deed, is no God at
all; and, if He be Not excluded, He is the very same with That somewhat else,
and, so, not More Gods, but One God; Each God, were not Almighty, or not a Free
Agent; not Almighty, because He could not do any thing contrary to the Doing of
that other God, who is equally Almighty as Himself, i. e. neither of them is
Almighty, which is a Tam and a Quam, Negatively, as good as we can devise to
Allow them; or else He is not a Free Agent, because, if He could do it, He must
not have Will to do it, till He can obtain leave from His Fellow-God, to
surcease the contrary Action; and these, to be Infinite, and Voluntary, and
Almighty are the very Nature, and Essence, and Power o^ God, without, All, or
without Any of which, He is, as Pliny said, some would have the Tribunatus to
be, Lib. 1. ep. 23.
Inanis Umbra, and sine Honor Nomen, and Lucan, to the same purpose, of Pompey
(if I forget not) as if One of them had Read the other, stat Magni Nominis
Umbra; Thus, That immutable God, in whom there cannot be so much as a shadow of
Changing, James 1.17.
would yet Himself be nothing else but shadow, and that upon such a No Ground,
as, by the same Reason, Locus est and pluribus Umbris, Nullique Deo, and all
Hesiods Three hundred Jupiters would not be sufficient to make up One. Let me
Illustrate This, by occasion of That passage in Lucan with the vanity and
Nothingness of a Bandy'd Power against Power, and a Fighting will against will
even up on Earth; When the Breach was made so wide betwixt Caesar and Pompey,
that One Land would not hold their Power, nor One Verse so much as Their Name;
but that -- Caesarve Priorem -- must stand by Himself, and then -- Pompeiusve
Parem -- by Himself; when they could not knit, and yoke together, unless in
Virgil's quarrelsome expression -- Pede pes, Densusque Viro Vir; when Caesar
would have none Above Him, but would Himself be supreme, and Pompey would have
none Equal to Him, but would Himself be more supreme than Caesaer, what
followed then, but -- Pila Minantia Pilis,- the exact and terrible Picture of
their Desires Thwarting their Desires? and when could there be an end of these
Discords, till there was an end of one of these Ambitious Pretending Supremes?
nay, even After He was deceast, as if there were a new Civil war betwixt His
own Putrefying Members, as if one fide of Him did Side with Caesar, and
Another, with Himself, One Grave could no more hold All of Pompey, than One
Pharsalia could hold Pompey and Caesar too -- Jacere -- Uno non poterat tanta
Ruina Loco; Martial.
as if Pompey were as much divided against Himself, even after he left off to
be himself, as a third Poet tells us, the very Flames of departed Etheocles and
Polynices did point several ways, and held up the Lasting Fewd, even after
Death it self, which was begun, for Empire-sake, betwixt Both of them Alive, --
Fratris primos ut Contigit Artue
Ignis edax, Statius. Thebaid. lib. ult.
Tremuere Rogi, and Novus Advena Bustis
Pellitur; exundant Diviso Vertice Flammae;


Nor shall I yet, let pass this Oneness of singularity, but give you a very
good and Rational Account of itfrom that solid probation which, even the
Heathens themselves have affixt to it; Those three properties of Ens, (which is
one of the first Lessons, we read in all the Metaphysicians) Plato and his
followers, have wisely thought fit to apply to God Himself, and to prove the
Unity of the Godhead not only by the propriety of Unity, Insequuti Doctoris
vestigia, singulari Ingenio, eloquentia non Incuriosa, Platonici multi, unum
modo esse Deum, Ratione Triplici probare connituntur; primo, quia summa est
Vnitas Nam, si quodlibet summum est Vnicum, quid magis Vnicum est, quam summa
Unitas? Est etiam Unus, quia est Veritas, summa enim viritas una est; Nam si
Duae summae Veritates esse dicantur, aut Una earum habet quicquid Altera habet,
aut Non; si prius datur, una est, non Duae; Si secundum est, Neutra est summa;
Deest enim Isti, Illud verttatis, quod in Illa est, and Illi, quod est in Ista;
Item unus est Deus, quia summa est Bonitas; summa quippe Bonitas, quicquid Boni
reperiri usquam potest, complectitur; Quod si Duas induxeris Bonitates summas,
quicquid Boni est in Vna, est and in Altera; Alioqui Neutra esset summa; and,
secundum Boni Ipsius Naturam Unum sunt, non Duo; Neque est aliquid Illis
admixtum, praeter Bonitatis Naturam, quia summae non essent, sed Inquinatae,
Unum itaque sunt Omnine. L. C. Rhodiginus, Lectionum Antiquarum lib. 22. cap.
4. M. D. XCIX. page 1029.
but by those other two of Truth, and Goodness also; there is, say they, a One
and an Only God, first, because there is a Chief, Supreme Unity, above which,
we cannot after do so much as to imagine any thing; Meditate God; Think
himself; and go up higher if thou can; Think any thing which Is, and Is Not
Himself, and thou Think Downwards, of Created spirits, or of some thing
else, which is so far off from God, that it is less than They; such a Chief
sovereign there Is; for, if every Chief in its own kind (I may Latin both the
words, and call it Genus summum) be only One; (as in the kind of substances,
That is the chief, which i^ Above a^^ the rest, abstracted from This and That,
and That is but One substance at a^ge, and not This, or That specificall.
Individual substance, of the first of which, there are always two, and of the
atter, many more) much more is the supreme Chief, which is God Himself, above
all these Inferior Chiefs, in the very Unity also. Again, He is a One, and an
Only God, because He is Truth as well as Unity, and the Chief, as well in This
as in That; and that the Chief Truths should be One, and but on^y One. Is so
Popularly granted, and so upon the Tongue of the mostignerant Man, even then
also, when He Believes amiss, and is Wedded to a Falsehood, insted of a Truth,
by the Authority and Countenance of the Next Justice, whose Religion He Will
follow, that the Derivative Truth from Him, is, Proverbiably, and undis^utably,
but One. There Can be but One Truth; nay but One Truth, even under the Sun, in
the Latitude of its Compass, nay in One Island of which, (that which resembles,
as some say, the Form of Pythagoras's Letter, as being like the Greek (...),
Triangular, and which, J. Greg. in Notes upon some passages of Scripture, to
the Reader page penult.
Another Grievingly says, He is sure it is far enough from a square) This
Nation of ours, there is but One Truth, though there be many falsehoods,
(Anabaptisticall, Jesuiticall, etc. more than I can Name, or than Christians in
former ages have felt, Or Catalogists of the Schisms and Heresies, have
reckoned) which Rebel against Her, over which she should Reign, and which,
because they are Rebellious against Her, she should subdue, and even Inslave in
Her own meek Bonds of sincere Gospell-Truth; and if, so Confessedly even by the
Enemies of Truth, there is but One Truth Below, how much less, and Impossibly
can the Author of That One Truth, who has His undisturbed, unrioted Throne in
Heaven be factious against Himself, as being Divided into several Truths? It
cannot be; for supposing there were more Truths than One, though but One Truth
more, (I suppose, as Plato did, more Supreme, more Chief Truths, though, at
most, but two Chief Truths) either One of those Chief truths, must have All
that Truth in it, which the other of those Chief Truths has, or else, it must
Not have All. If it Has All, they are so Like, that they are Altogether the
same, Et eret is in Veritatem unam, and ye Twain shall be One Truth; If, it
has not All the Truth, which the Other has; either One of These, the
Really-Chief Truth has All, that Is Truth, in it, and the Other, the but
supposedly. Chief Truth, though it has Nothing else, but Truth in it, has not
All; and then, the Former only is the Chief Truth, as Lacking nothing, and the
latter not so, as being defective, which is Contrary to the nature of
Chiefness, and Summity; and therefore, still, but One of These is the Chief
Truth; or else Both of them, have some of That Truth, which either of them Lack,
and, so, Neither of them is the Chief; though a Chief Truth, there must be,
which has neither lack of Truth in it self, nor a Chiefer Truth Above it, a
Coneessis, and a Fortiori, because there is but One Chief Truth Below the Sun,
derived from That, which is, Absolutely Incomparatively, and exclusively, The
Chief Truth above it; it somewhat Pleases me, that Plato Himself, should come,
though but Thus-Neere, to That Christ of Ours, John 14.6.
whose Name is The TRUTH, and who (though Himself was essentially, and
indivisibly, Matthew. 19 17.
the same Good God of whom He spoke) said also, there is None Good, but ONE,
that is GOD; and This, which He thus said, as Truly, as Dogmatically, directs
me to give you the English of the third Platonicall Reason for the Unity of the
Godhead, that there is One, and an Only God, because there is a Chief Bonitas,
a Supreme Goodness which Comprehends All, which is Any where, or in any Degree,
Good, within its one self; that there is such a Chief Goodness (which has no
Admixture of Bad in it, for, else it would not be the Chief Good, which is
Nothing else but Good, nothing in any Contrariety to Goodness; and, by being
partly-Good, and partly-bad, would be so far from the One only Good, that it
would almost break its very self in two) do but place Good and Goodness in the
room of True, and Truth, and the Former Arguments may be all over, Re-pleaded;
By all of which, it appears that there is bu^ One God; who is only More, in
this most allowable, Theological, and Orthodox sense, in that He is One, More
ways than One; and one way more yet; for

He is, not only One, simplicitate, by reason of the Composition, and,
thereby, of the Finiteness, and Mortality of all things else, unless H^ who is
simply-One, though He continues them in their Finiteness, Clothes them upon,
with Immortality; He is not only One, 2 Cor. 5.4.
singularitate, as, all things else, besides the Supremes in their kind, are,
at least Two; and those, in Genere suo supreme, are less One than He; who, as
He is, Ens simplicissimum, so he is Unitas simpliciter summa; but he is also.

7. Picus Mirandula.
One God, and One Only God, Universalitate (as one well says of Him) Deus est
Omnia, God, Is, All that Is: which, once again, besides the Finiteness, and
Mortanty of every thing e^s, takes off the Pretense unto Deity, from Any thing
else; All things that Are, the One God is All them together; and much More, all
them, then All they are themselves; not only, in that, all they are but,
severally, themselves; This, is this, and nothing else but this; That, is that,
and nothing else but that; and therefore, one by one, are Circumscribed, the
Dimensions of their bodies, which have Bodies, being proportionated too, and
comprehended within the Dimensions of that place, in which they are; the
Bodies, at least, are so, if the created Spirits are not, this way also,
circumscribed and comprehended; for as to these very terms, in relation to
Those very Spirits, adhuc sub Judice lis est, though it be extra Controversiam
positum, that, even These also, severally, and One by One, are so Hic, that
they are not Alibi but their Hic and Nunc, and their Anon and Elsewhere, go
together: but This One God, is, at once in all places, not circumscribed in
any, and Is, all these, In One; not only, the One God is more All things, than
all things are themselves, this one way, but he is More All They, than All they
are Themselves this Other way too, in that All They are Themselves Preeario,
and He, is All They, Potestative; they were, All, in Him, before they were at
all in Themselves, as the effects ly Hid in their Causes, till they are
Actually produced; and They having been in Him, before they were made, by way
of Power, and Authority, more than in Themselves, After they were made, they,
Then, having a Being by Dependency, and Beholdingness, do no more Multiply Him,
after they are Created, then they did Multiply Him, before they were Created,
when there was nothing in the world else but He, nay not so much as a world,
neither, Himself being, as the Alone God, so, All That world which Himself
Inhabited, in whom yet Al^things else, and Millions of worlds besides, even Then
were, by way of Eminency, and Power to produce them.

8. The Best of all these (however they are wrongfully called Gods, in respect
of the first and Independent sense of the word, though they are Precarious and
Derivative Gods, and that with a much more Authoritative (...), than Any Man
can speak; Psalm. 82.6.
Dixi quod Dii estis) are so far from being Essentially-Really Gods, that they
are not Similitudinarily so, not so much as like unto him, Amongst the Gods
(the Made-Gods, the Gods made by Man) there is None (they are called Gods, they
are not so; they are but Idols, 1 Cor. 8.4.
and an Idol is Nothing in the World, a whole Multitude of them is but a
Repeated Nothing, a deal of Ciphers crowded together, without so much as one
Figure to stamp a Being upon them) None like unto thee, Psalm. 86.^.
O Lord; Whatever it is, that pretends to this, it must be, either All, or
Part, of Heaven and Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof; and yet, All of these,
and every Part of these, are the Work of his Hands, Genesis 1.1.
In the Beginning, God made them All, and made them too, without Elaboration,
on, without putting his Whole Hand to them, for they were (as a Father
Dishonours them from the Hand of God) but Opus Digitorum Ipsius, and Fashioned
too, In Principio; they, who had a Beginning, are as much Un-Godded, in that
they, once, were not, as they, who have a Sepulcher, Diogen. Laert. in vita
Thaletis.
and are not now, (...); and, therefore, upon this Ground, because they were
Made, and were the Work of Another, does it well follow, and by way of
Powerful Argumentation and Confutation, in King David, Neither are there any
W^rks like unto thy Works; it is not a God, that can either be Idle, or not
Work Excellently; unless it makes, and no less than a New Heaven and a New
Earth, it will forfeit all the Devotion, and Knees, which it Impotently
Challenges; Nay, the Best Counterfeit of all these, is so far from being Like
that God, whom it would fain Resemble, that he that takes it so to be, is Like
even to it; Their Idols have Mouths, but they speak not; Eyes have they, but
they see not; they have Ears, Ps. 115.8.
but they hear not; they that make them, are like unto them; and what an
Inglorious God is this, when it is the Contumely of Man himself to be such! So
senseless, so unseen, Ducit, and affictu quodam Interno rapit infirma corda
mortalium, formae similitudo, and membrorum imitata compago; Plus valent
simulachra, ad Curvandam Infelicem animam quod os habent, oculos habent, aures
habent, quam ad corrigendam, quod non loquuntur, non vident, non audiunt, non
ambulant.
so unheard of, so unfit to be spoke of, a thing it is, to believe more Gods
than One; And though upon that place St. Austin says, that the Outward the
Shape, and Imitated Joyntness of Members, does not only entice, and lead, but
compel, and draw, the Affections of Weak Minds after them, yet I cannot choose
but wonder, as well as Grieve, that his Observation should be any where true,
that such Images should more prevail to humble a wretched Soul before them,
because they have Mouth, and Eyes and Ears (or, rather, Holes, instead of
these) than to instruct a wretched Soul, that it should not be humbled before
them, because those Images can neither speak, nor see, nor hear, especially
when the dumb and moveless posture of them speaks this to the Eye of the
Beholder, as loudly as the Word of God does speak it (who, if he had pleased,
might Comment upon that Text of his, Et mihi si non vis Credere, Creed tibi)
that they are made by Man, and therefore cannot be Gods: Worship him therefore,
not only all ye, the Subjected People, Psalm. 27.7.
but Worship him too, All ye, the Ruling Gods, and that, V. 9.
because Thou Lord art high above all the Earth, thou art exalted far above all
Gods; whoever he be, that would be worshipped instead of a God, he is, instead
of a God, a very Satan, and O, that we could get him hence, not only out of
this Isle, but out of the World too, that we, and all else, might neither have
his Rome nor his Company! Mat. 4.9.
For it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall
thou serve.

9. And might not these three ways, by which God is One, and but Only One, by
Incomposition, by Singularity, and by Universality; and these three Reasons of
the Indivisible Oneness of God, drawn from Unity it self, from Truth, and from
Goodness, might not either of these three Degrees, or rather Orders of Unity,
occasion that Zealous Expression of St. Bernard, in which he calls God Ont, in
the third Degree, the Superlative of Comparison? who, rather than any else
should make another God, would himself (with a modest Parenthesis) make a word,
for the Only God, Lib. 5. de Consider.
Deus Vnus est, and (si dici potest) Vnissimus: Nay, one of the Better-brain'd
Heathens, Plutarch, was so much too Rational to admit a Plurality of Gods, that
he tells us, Apollo (who was his God) was so called ab a Privitiva, and (...),
because there cannot, to any sober Imagination, be more than One; and, though
all Wise Men say so (for he is as very a Fool, that says in his heart, Psalm.
14.1.
there are Two Gods, as he, that says there is No God, no not One) yet I make
choice of the Testimony of the first of these, because of the Singularness and
Fervency of his Expression, and of the latter, because of the Resolute
Authority of the most Judicious of Heathens.

10. I shall conclude this way of Argumentation, that there is One God, that
there is but One God, that nothing else is Really God, with a Note upon Deuteronomy.
6.4. and proceed, in one word, openly against the Romanist, who, now, more than
ever, lays Snares, to draw us off from the True Worship of the One God; and
though he does not make somewhat else his God, in Terminis, yet, in effect, he
does, whilst he applies that Worship, which is only Proper to the Only True
God, to somewhat else that is not God; though he is not got into the Inner
Rooms of the Polytheists, yet I am sure he treads upon their Threshold; and, in
another word, against the Opinionist, and Ill Liver of our own, the one being a
Recusant, though not a Romanist, and the other robbing God of his honor, as
much as he, though not the same way as he.

11. But before I proceed to these, hear this one Word of God, which it self
calls upon you to hear it, Hear, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
O Israel (whatever sounds contrary to this, it must not be listened to) the
Lord our God is ONE Lord; we should wear this Verse, written in our Heads and
Hearts, (we should read and peruse it there, for it is already there, written
and engraven by the Finger of God) as it is Recorded of the Jews, Fagius, in
Exodus 13.
that they writ it out in Parchment, and wore it within their Hair, and upon
their Brow, and upon their Left Arm.

12. And yet, does not Rome at Rome, and Rome in England, sin against the Unity
of the Godhead, which she confesses to Believe, whilst, on this side, and on
yonder side the Sea, she bows down to Images, and invokes Saints, and, at this
instant, labors, though in a Mine; and fights against our Religion, though
under the Cloak of it, both in Church and State, to make Proselytes, not only
to more Spirits than one, but to less than Spirit, to less than Un-canoniz'd,
nay to less than Breathing Man, to Stocks, and Stones, Psalm. 115.135.17.
Quibus non est Spiritus in Ore Ipsorum? I could wish (but that they are too
cunning, not only for me, but, a while, for the State too, to discover) that
some Man's Buff was taken off, and sent to his Holy Father, with that Question
graven upon it, Haeccine Tunica Filit Tui? Would the Pope himself, trow ye, as
his Emissary, Counterfeit Protestant, that he might be a Successful Fisher of
Men (though the very Success in Error, is the greatest Damage) and draw all
of us, as Fish to his Net? I fear me, he would rather draw with the Binding of
a Faggot.

13. He that worships Images on Earth, and Saints in Heaven, nay, that
undoubted Saint, the Virgin Mary (although even we also justly acknowledge that
she is Quanto splendidior, Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
quam caetera sidera, fulget
Lucifer, and quanto, quam Lucifer, Aurea Phoebe,
Tanto Virginibus Praestantior omnibus --)
More than, or as much as, or besides, the Holy Offspring of that Virgin Mary,
gives that Honor of God to another, either Thing, or Person, which God himself
faies, he will give to neither; I am the Lord; that is my Name, Is. 42.8.
and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to Graven Images;
What greater Glory, than Invocation? what greater Praise, than Prayer? of
which, in its Distinction, Praise is part -- I will worship toward thy holy
Temple, and Praise thy Name; Psalm. 38.2.
What harm has the Blessed Virgin done us, that we should afflict that Modesty
and Humility of hers, (which, no doubt she retains in Heaven, and is, even
there also, the Handmaid of her God, though the very Best, and Best-beloved
that he has) with an undue Praise, and an unheard Prayer? Not only the Holy
Ghost tells us, that when she heard those great Eulogies, and Wellspeakings,
Luke 1.28.
Hail, O thou highly Favored, the Lord is with thee; V. 29. In Lib. cui Tit.
Meditationis Vitae Christi Lat. Dar. a Michaele ab Isselt. c. 2.
Blessed art thou among Women, though from the Mouth of an Angel, who knew
better what he said, than either they or we, She was troubled at his saying,
but their own Ludovicus Granatensis adds a Timuit to the Turbata est, and gives
this reason for it, Nihil enim Humili adiosius est, quam proprias audire
Lauds, Nothing is more Hateful to an Humble Mind, than to hear it self
Commended; why then do they, to the very Spirit of her, whom they so much love,
that thing which she so much hates? unless they will conceive she has put off
her Humility, with her Clothes of Flesh? and will not afford her as many
Virtues in Heaven, as she had on Earth? He goes on, Nihil magis timet, quam
hujusmod^ Gratulationes, She fears nothing more than a Mess of Praises; and why
will they diet her with that she is afraid to taste of? why are they not more
Civil, than to put so excellent a Lady (whom they can never enough esteem,
only bating her the honor of her God) into a Fright? She is, indeed,
Angelical, (whatever they will, below God) she has the Passion of Hope, that
they will Convert, the Passion of Joy, when they do Convert, not to her, but
God, and the Passions of Fear and Grief, when they do Convert, not to God, but
her; and he goes on still, and still wondrously and Pathetically well,
Quemadmodum Avarus metuit Latrones, as a covetous Man, when he rides with his
Master behind him, a Portmantieu of gold at his back, fears a highway Thief;
sic verus humilis metuit lauds hominum, quae sunt fures humilitatis; so, one,
that is truly humble, fears an over-praise, which is an enemy (pessimum
inimicorum genus laudantes) and a Thief too, Tacitus.
to steal away her humility; and why then will they put her, into so great, and
so dangerous a fear? as if they suspected, either she is not truly humble, or
else would not have her be so hereafter. Let them take heed lest by such
Adulatory complements, themselves be those Thieves, of whom our Savior, (the
Son of our Virgin Mary, and of their Goddess Marry) has said, that they shall
not come to Heaven, to break through, Mat. 6.20.
and steal there; Let them, if they will bow in their Churches, as our late In
his Speech in the Star Chamber June 14.1637.
Archbishop has observed Moses and Aaron fell down upon their faces at the
door of the Tabernacle, Numb. 20.6. as Hezekiah the King and all with him did,
they bowed and worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 29.29. as David calls upon all to do, Ps.
95.6.
O come let us worship and b^w down; nay, let me, without offense, (for I hope,
none at home, will be angry at the very, and express words of Scripture) add
one example more of this kind of veneration; because the reason of it is
involved in it, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? and bow my self before
the high God? Micah. 6.6.
the Prophet will let them alone, and we will nor quarrel at them; for, this is
no part of the pre^ent controversy, whether God is to be worshipped, with the
Body also? and holy and good Men of our own, the stoutest adversaries of the
errors of Rome, have done all this; but then let them do all this, as a worship
only to the only God; let them do it upon the Prophets account, bow, and be
lowly, because God is as high now, as ever he was; and if they tell me, the
Prophet joins them together, as there being the same and equal Authority, or,
at least, License, for bowing before the high God, as for coming before the
Lord, if they shall inquire, why we, who know it necessary to come before the
Lord, Heb. 10.25.
and not to forsake the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is, do yet call it unlawful, and either Antichristian, or Jewish, to bow
before the high God, I confess I have not wherewith to reply; and all this I
say, to take off from the scandal, which has been thrown upon the former
Pillars of our Church, Holy Scripture it self being the Pillar of their
practice, which, that is was not Judaical, the most R. In answer to the tw^lfth
Innovation, so called.
Laud has cleard, in that, long before Judaism began, Bethel the House of God
was a place of Reverence, collected out of Genesis 28.17, etc. To inquire whether
All the Negative Commandments do not, all of them, involve a Preceptive
Affirmation directly contrary to the prohibition; whether, in the The sccond to
us, but, none at all, to Rome.
second Commandment, the Affirmative Duty is not, that we ought to bow to God;
whether, to bow to graven Images, be not, therefore, Idolatry, because the
Image is thus worshipped with a reverence due to God, non est hujus institu^i and
loci; yet this is evidently and expressly enough a command, Thou shall not make
unto thee any Graven Images, Exodus 20.4.
or the likeness -- Thou shall not bow down thy self to THEM, nor serve THEM;
and I think the Emphasis lies in the last word; These words, however they have
an Art and shift, not to call them the Second Commandment, yet they have no
shift nor Art at all, not to call them Scripture, they being in their very own
Bible, as well as in Gods, one only word being changed, which alters not, and
another left out, which touches not, the quick, In the Bible translated by the
College of Doway. Printed by John Consturier, 1635. at Roven.
Thou shall not adore them, nor serve them; and this is the result of all their
long Notes upon that Commandment; they worship Saints with Dulia, not with
Latria; that Saints are to be honored with Religious Honor, which is greater
then Civil, and less then Divine; that they Honor God alone with Sacrifice,
and not Saints; that they have Authentical examples, in these Scriptures Genesis
32.48. Exodus 3.32. Numb. 22. Joshua 5.3. Reg. 18.4. Reg. 2. Psalm. 98. for
honoring Saints and Relics. Not to meddle with their Dulia and Latria any
otherwise, then as, after, they interpret them by Divine, and Religious
worship; and not to meddle with these, in the answers already given to them by
Of the Church Book 3. C. 20. p. 106. Printed at London 1606.
Doctor Field, any otherwise, than to call to your remembrance that remarkable
passage out of St. Austin Honoramus cos (i. e. Saints and Angels) Charitate,
non servitute. De vera Relig. Cap. 55. which, in the sense of that Holy Father,
dos more expressly and significantly exclude the Dulia to Saints and Angels, by
how much Servitus is more Latinely significant, than Dulia, but, to examine a
fresh their Distinction of worship, into Divine and Religious, and to determine
out of Scripture-probalities at least, by occasion of St. Austins distinction
of Charitas and Servitus.

14. I take it, Divine and Civil, are terms directly opposite; and Religious
and Civil, are terms so too; and Divine and Religious, in respect of worship,
are terms equivalent: All which if so it be, they have much faild in Logic in
dividing worship, into three parts, two of which three, against rule, and
reason, and disputation, do Coincidere; whether they do so, or not, and how
they can, or cannot be distinct, in the sense, in which Doway urges them, let
us further try.

The word Divine, though it dos always, dos not only relate to God (and the
Membra Dividentia of any thing, ought to be plain, and evident, and not only
so, but Incommunicable too, as being the essentiales differentiae, which do
dare else, and distinguere ab omni alio) else, why is the title of the last
Book of God -- (...) The Revelation of St. JOHN the DIVINE? of whom I never yet
heard that it was a (...), called in question even by the Church of Rome,
whether he was a Divine, yea or no; And then, as Creature may be Divine, in an
Interior degree, as God himself is Divine; so the Creature-Worshippers, (if
they may worship at all) may worship Creature (notwithstanding this plausible
distinction) with Divine worship, Caveated that the Divine worship be
infinitely inferior to that of God; this is all their own sense of Religious
worship, and let them evade, if they can, my application of it to Divine
worship.

15. But then, next, let them give me leave soberly to inquire concerning the
lawfulness of this Inferior degree as they call it, and but religious worship,
as they diminish it: I must confess, that, as Religion is so called a Religando,
from the Obligation it lays upon Man to perform it; so, it cannot, as yet,
enter into me, that any thing is true Religion, or truly Religious, but what is
made so, Vi Praecepti, by such a command, which makes it binding, and
obligatory to Man; is any thing Religion, which may be observed, or not
observed? is any Act Religious, which may be done or omitted, ad placitum
spontanei cultoris? O what an Indifferent, what a Neutral, what a lukewarm
Religion is this, which, when Man forbears, God is not offended, and when Man
practices, God is ready to spue him out of his mouth, with a Quis ista
Requisivit? Is. 1.12.
The DIVINE himself tells us as much, so then because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth; and let them not tell
me, that this threat is denounced upon the luke-warmness of him that pays the
worship, and not upon the indifferency of the worship which he pays, lest I
tell them, it is the same fault, to obtrude that service with too much fervor,
which is, at best, but indifferent, if not an obsequious sin, as to pay that
service, with too little fervor, which is so far from being indifferent, that
it is a sin of undutifulness, not to pay it: but is it, not a Neutral, not an
indifferent worship, but a necessary duty? if so, so it is, by virtue of
command, either from God, or from the Church of God; That God has not
commanded this kind of worship, we shall show anon; only, in the mean while let
me tell them, that if they pretend th^^ to be a duty, and their performance of
it to be an obedience to the command of their God, then, this it self, is not,
in their sense, a Religious, but, by their own Interpretation, a Divine
worship, in that they only obey that God in doing it, who commanded them to do
it; If I do not worship God himself, and worship him infinitely, in respect of
himself, and, as near to infinitely, as I can, in respect of my own devotion,
when I labor to the utmost of my own endeavors, assisted by his grace, to
fulfill, all, or any, of his own immediate commands, I would fain know, when it
is, or in what it is that they do, or I can, worship the God of us all, with a
Divine worship. If they worship Saints or Angels, by virtue of a command from
the Church of God (which very Church of God can only command, either that Gods
own commands be obeyed, or that her commands be obeyed in the name of God, in
those things, which God, by leaving them indifferent, neither charged, nor
prohibited, has left to her prudence to consider, and to her power to
determine, not at all that any Sanction of hers be submitted to against the
express will of God) then they perform this duty, either simply, as the Church,
consisting of such a number of Men, commands it, and then it is not so much as
Dulia to Saints or Angels,) but rather a civil worship of the Commanders; for,
as the stream will never run up, any higher then the Fountain which feeds it,
so, their obedience cannot be denommated by a more excellent style, then that
which belongs to the primary cause of their obedience; or else, they perform
this duty, as the Church, not considered as such a number of Men, but as
infallibly assisted with the Grace, and direction of God, Injoins it, and then,
their worship of Saints and Angels, is not so little as Dulia, but so much as
Latria, in that the Direction of God is the principal cause of their worship,
and the service performed to Saints and Angels, it being not performed to them,
as they are Saints and Angels (for, such they are, though God, and his Church
never bids the worship of them) but because God has commanded it, either by
himself, immediately, or by his Spirit residing in his Church, is as much a
Latria, and worship of God, as Prayer to God himself, even privately, because he
has commanded it, or Prayer to God, in a set form of Liturgy in his House,
because his Church has prescribed it, is a Latrta and worship of God; eadem
posita causa, idem sequitur effectus. Thus, for ought I yet see, their
distinction of Latria, and Dulia, and civil worship, grounded upon, and
proportioned to (as they tell us most triumphantly) the three several degrees
of Excellency, that of God, that of created, but supernatural, grace and glory,
that of worldly Excellency, (which, they truly say, are as much different, as
God, Heaven, and Earth) is, as to their present use of it fallen to the ground,
and has deserted them to a Palinodia Canenda; for, though in all these, the
Excellency Inherent in the several subjects is That, which Is worshipped, yet
the Cur sit, in all of them, is the Command of God; else the wisest of the
Heathen (who, often, do that, which is Bonum, but not Been, for want of
understanding the Right Cause for which they should do it) do worship aright,
because they pay Reverence to the most Excellent object of Worship, though they
pay it not according to the Command and Direction of That Chief Excellency;
else, the same Heathens Reverence their Kings aright (for, that of the King is
the Instanced worldly excellency which Inferior men ought to Reverence) though
they do not Reverence them (...); 1 Pet. 2.13.
and is there not more Regard to be had, in the Reverence and Adoration, which
we Pay to the Chief^st Excellency of all, even to God Himself, to the Why we do
it, then to the Bare doing of it? But, of this no more. Rather,

16. To take off from the Worshipping of Angels (and by consequent, from the
Worshipping Saints too; for, the Reason of their Dulia, drawn from Grace, and
Glory, is equally valid, or equally Invalid, as to both) Let me give you two
Reasons, One. Negative, out of the History of Moses, and the Other, Positive,
from the Command of Christ.

17. Why is it, that Moses, in the History of the Creation, either speaks not
at all of the Creation of Angels, in so much that some say, the Angels were
Created long before that History, which Moses wrote? or else, that He speaks of
their Creation, so obscurely, that some say, they were Created, when God made
the Heavens, others, they were Created, when God said Fiat Lux? why this,
either preterition, or Intricacy? but that it is a much less Mistake, and no
sin at all, when Man is Invincibly, I or Supinely and Carelessly, Ignorant of
the time in which the Angels were Created, or whether they were not Created
before any Time Was; (Time, which the Philosopher defines to be Numerus Motus,
Aristot. c. de quanto.
and which Motus relates to Bodies, being That, which the B^dyless Angels are
very little concernd in --) then, to know, so Curiously, of them, till Man does
Idolize them? Idolatry, we all know, was apt to creep into the very Cradle of
the world; the Serpent (which Himself was the first, and the early Idol, in
being listened to more than God) did not account it as any of his small skills,
to wrapp a superstitious Adoration in the Mantle of antiquity; In the first
Book of God, we hear of an Abraham before any tidings of an Angel, of that
Abraham, who is the Father of the Faithful, Romans 4.12.
who, it is like, would teach the people, the same Faith, which himself did
bear to God alone; of whom, it is first recorded that He Believed in the Lord,
Genesis 15.6.
and he counted it to him for Righteousness, or, in the Doway-Books, Abraham
believed God, and it was Reputed to him unto Justice, and then, in the Chapter
after the first news of an Angel, and the first business of an Angel in
Scripture, was, to send back Hagar to her Mistress Sarah, Genesis 16.7.9.
from whom she had Fled, -- And the Angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to
thy Mistress, and submit thy self unto her hands, -- perhaps, to signify that,
least of all, would they themselves robb That God whose servants, and Ministers
they are, of the Honor due to him from any their fellow servants, when they
were so Jealous of the Honor of Sarah, to send back her servant to her, and to
charge her, carry her duty along with her; least of all would they
Superstitiate those into a wrong worship, who translate that place -- And the
Angel of Our Lord said unto Her -- And why may not this b^ the Reason of the
Concealment of the Angels Creation, Doway.
as well as of the Concealment of Moses his Sepulcher, to prevent Idolatry?
since themselves say, in their Marginall Note upon That part of the sixth verse
of the 34. Chapter of Deuteron: -- And no man has known his sepulcher until
this present Day -- (so they render it) Only Angels, whose Ministry God used
herein, knew the place of his Burial: lest the Jews, prone to Idolatry, might
have honored him for God, I add to their Interpretation. In honoring him, with
That spiritual worship, which is due to God, though they never misunderstood
his very Body to be God.

18. And does not Christ Himself seem to Debar the Angels from any, Matthew.
22.37, 38, 39.
the most Minute Adoration, when He says, The First, and Great Commandment,
is, Thou shall love the Lord Thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind; and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as Thy self? That first Commandment is the summary of all in the
first Table; and that second, the Abridgment, and concise comprehension of all
in the sec^nd; That so they are, the very Naming of this Command -- Love thy
Neighbor, the Second, does sufficiently evidence; else in our account, the Not
making of Graven must be the second, and in the Roman account the Not taking in
vain -- In neither of these, is there room for Angel-Adoration; not in the
first; for, if the subordinate love of Angels must be understood there, lest we
should bestow more than Love upon them, God is content (as a prevention of That
error,) to challenge no more than Love to His very self; it is (...), both in
St. Matthew, and in St. Luke, 10.27.
it is, in neither of them (...), no, nor (...) neither, which properly signifies
ad Pedes alicujus advolvi; the Devil was as goodly a Grammarian, as He was
badly Ambitious, when He said, even to Christ Himself, (...), Matthew. 4.9.
If thou will Fall down and worship; and our Savior's Answer is very
considerable in that very word (...), thou shall Worship, thou shall fall down
to (it was an Ancient, and everywhere practice -- (...)) the Lord thy God, and
(...), Him only shall Thou serve; the Only is to be referd to the worship by
Falling down, (for That was it which Satan called for,) as well as to the
Latria; does the word thou shall Love, mean Latria, and That only? then, that
meaning of the word does shut out the Angel from any share in it; dos it mean
Latria and Dulia too? then the next words (...), the Lord Thy GOD, does shut
out the Angel from any share even in Dulia too; for, thus to love the Angel,
is to esteem him as the Lord our God; and less hope is there for the Angel to
be Reverenced in the second Commandment; for, an Angel is not such a Neighbor
of ours, as to be our Father, or Mother; I never yet heard of a she-Angell, He
is not such a Neighbor, From whom we can take away, or to whom preserve; not
such a Neighbor, whom the very'st Sodomite alive can defile, not whom the
very'st Saint alive can make more Chaste; not such a Neighbor from whom any
High-way-Man can Robb ought, or to whom any Magistrate can Restore ought; if
there be any hope at all, it is in the next command, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy Neighbor, which, as it is Principally meant against That
kind of false witness, which does Really Prejudice and Indamage my Neighbor,
so it is not, at all meant against the Defrauding, either my Brother whom I
have seen, or the Invisible Angels of God, of any part of Religious worship;
for, I must love my Neighbor as my self, and would I also, be thus worshipped?
Matthew. 7.12.
thus Religiously? What soever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even
so to them; I would, if it were possible, have the love of all, and, because so
I would, let who will Reward with hate for my love, I will Restore That, Psalm.
69.4.
which I took not away, and pay him back Love for His Hate; but I will neither
Take, nor Give to any Man, what I owe only to my God; if they say, because of
the word (...), in that Text, this is the Law only of Man to Man, and none at
all of the Law of Man to Angels, or of Whole Man to Half Man, to Saint
Departed, from His own Body, as well as from our society, they must give me
leave to tell them back, out of my Saviors words, in the Close of that Text,
that This, and nothing else but This, is the Law; if, because in Scripture, God
Himself is often Parabled, by the Name of Man, they will needs Include Angels
too, in the word (...), Let them give me the example of One Good Angel that
has thus worshiped Man, unless him who is (...), and of whom God Himself has
said -- Let the Angels of God worship HIM, Heb. 1.6.
and I will allow them a whole thousand of Men, to do even so to him, to
worship Many Angels more. And, in the last place, if their Excellency above
Nature be the Basis to Uphold, and the Diplomata to require a worship above
Civil, I would know but one thing more, and I have done with This; According
to the Equity of that Rule, that, which is More excellent, does deserve more of
This worship; why then is it, that this man chooses a Matthew for his Saint;
and the Confess^r of that man puts a Peter upon him for his, as well as a third
makes a choice of a Virgin Mary, and a fourth has a beloved John taskd upon
him? if the Virgin be a better Saint, than the Publican, why has Matthew more
of one man's Devotion than she? if John, the other Son of the Virgin Mary
(Woman, John 19.26.
behold Thy Son) is a more excellent Saint thau Denying Peter, why is Another,
more prostrate to Peter, and less, if at all, to John? or, if Peter must be the
better Saint, it is but asking the same question backwards; and why, is any one,
even the best of these, more worshipped, alone, than herself with the whole
Society of Saints, and Angels? Since, if they are Catalogu'd together; None of
Her Excellency is left out, and all of theirs is put in?

19. The Religious worship of praying to Saints and Angels is. Ex Confesso,
part of that worship which is due to God; but then, All, that is due to God,
they pay not to Saints, and Angels, because they Sacrifise not unto them;
Literal and proper Sacrifices they must mean; for those Other Sacrifices of
Praise and Thanksgiving, they offer to Saint and Angel, and those other
Sacrifices, Heb. 13.1.6.
with which God is well pleased, of doing good and Communicating, they offer
even to Men; to their God, and Christ, what do they offer? they offer even
Christ Himself; will they thus Pay Him, with nothing else, but his own Coin?
Heb. 10.14.
will they multiply the offerings of Christ, notwithstanding He, by ONE
Offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified? Will they multiply
Christ himself, whilst every one, that Receives, has All Christ, and yet All
Christ is still in Heaven too, and all this Bodily, notwithstanding that
assertory Truth of the Heathen Man, Matthew. 5.17. In Plauto Amphytrio, S^si^m
alloquitur, qui se Domi ait esse, cum peregre sit, Copus Christi, Domi? in
Coelorum Coelo and tamen peregre, in terra, in Hac Terra, and in Illa? in Hac,
and in Illis? in Hoc ore, and in Illo? in Hoc, and in Illis?
founded upon the unalterable Principles of Nature, which, as the Law, Christ
came not to destroy, but to fulfill, Tun' id dicere audes quod nemo unquam Homo
antehac
Vidit, nec Potest fieri, Tempore uno,
Homo Idem Duobus Locis ut Simul Sit?
Quae neque Fieri
Possunt, neque Fando unquam accepit quisquam, Profers.


Were their Christ not yet ascended; were He still, Bodily upon earth, though
without any Consecration of theirs, which, as the Poet says his verses can
bring down the Moon, -- DeCoelo possunt deducere Christum

Had he erected almost All of Christianity, had and not yet Instituted the Holy
Supper, they would then have nothing at all to Offer to their Christ, and to
His Father, but of the same kind, Prayer, and Praise, which they offer not to
Him alone, but to him, and to Angel, and to Saint too, unless they would
relapse into abolisht Judaism, and Sacrifise a Bullock still; since, therefore,
we cannot be persuaded to worship, Saint, and Angel, as they do, though in an
Inferior, yet in a Spiritual degree, since we cannot be wrought upon to
Sacrifise, as they pretend to do, Really, but only, in Commemoration, as Christ
has taught, Luke 22.19.
Do this in Remembrance of me, I must take leave, in one word more, to take off
this worship from Saint and Angel, in that very word, upon which they Found
their Mistaken Duty, by which it may appear, they worship God amiss, in giving
that worship, which is Peculiarly His, to that which is not He, and we worship
God aright, by the peculiar debt of Invocation, though not by the Impropriety
of Sacrifice, Heb. 10.18.
since it is as true as Gospel There is no more Offering for sin; which will
make way into the Inquiry after those which they call the Authentical examples
in Scripture.

20. Amongst the Rest, it seems to be warily done, that they Name not the 148.
Psalm, the Psalm begins, Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens; their Note upon
that, is, All ye Heavenly Spirits praise God; Psalm goes on, Praise ye him all
His Angels; though in the form of the words, David Here seems to speak to
Saints, and Angels, yet Intentionally, He speaks and prays only to God, that
Saints and Angels should praise Him, and expects no more to be heard by Saint,
and Replied to by Angel, then he believes Sun and Moon, Heaven and Waters can
grant a Request, Fire and Hayle, Snow and Vapors, have ears, or that Beasts
and Cattle, can understand, Kings, and Princes, and Judges, People are to be
worshipped at all; Praise the Name of the Lord (as doubtless, they all do, Omnia
precantur, hymnosque Proclus. l. de Sacrif.
concinunt ad Ordinis sui Ducem; alia, Intellectuali modo, alia Rationali, alia
Sensitivo, alia Naturali) is expressed verse 13. -- for, His Name Alone is
Excellent; which though they Render Is Exalted, it matters not; since every
Exaltation is Excellent in suo genere, and every excellency exalted; and if
thus to be excellent, super omnia, to have His glory above the Earth and
Heaven, be the Partial cause of spiritual praise (for, the Adaequate Cause,
is that excellency, and the Declaration of it, and the Command upon it) then,
nothing else must at all partake of that kind of Worship, though in an Inferior
degree, all eis being excluded by that Alone-Excellent, to signify, that
whatever else it be, which has an Inferior Excellency, it is not excellent at
all, as to the Claim of this praise; for, throughout the Psalm, David does only
say, and often say, Praise him, and Praise him, and not, Praise Him thus, and
thus, in summitate, whereby he asserts to God, not only the Chief, but the All
of Praise; and in that word, The praise of all his Saints, or, as They, a Hymn
to all his Saints, is only meant, that God is the Praise of the^ al, that God,
who Inhabiteth the Praises of Israel, takes possession of them all, Psalm. 23.3.
and will not divide stakes with an Inmate Saint, not that the Saints should be
a Praise, and Hymn, and Song one to the other; else, if their degree of
Excellency be Title enough to a Degree of Spiritual praise, if That should
chance to be true, which Macrobius out of Plato tells us, Plato cum de
Sphaerarum Coelestium volubilitate tractaret, singulas ait Sirenas singulis
orbibus Insidere, significans Sphaerarum motu, Cantum Numinibus exhiberi.
Macrob. in Somn. Scipion. l. 2. cap. 3.
and a Council should tell us so too, that there is a several Siren sitting
upon each several Heaven, and singing praise to God, we must sing Spiritual
Praises, not only to God (though, only to God we must) not only to Saint and
Angel (to whom we must not at all) but to that New Society of Sirens too.

But let us examine their grounds in Scripture. Genesis 32.24. There wrestled a Man
with him. Their Note says; this Man was an Angel, and this wrestling
Spiritual, as appears by Jacobs earnest prayer, and the Angels Blessing; but
whence comes this Man to be an Angel? the Text Says not so; why is not this
Man the second Person in the Godhead, who vouchsaft to appear to Jacob, in he
would, that manhood, which he would, after, Take? why may not Jacob, Tell me,
I pray thee, thy name, seem, to desire a further and plainer knowledge of this
Mystery? and why may not the answer wherefore is it, that thou do ask after
my name intend, that Jacob should be Thankful for so much Revealing of the
Lord unto him, and that the plainer evidence of the second Person, was reserved
to after Ages? what Angel will ever take upon him to Bless, and not declare
the Commission which God has given him so to do? and whether it was that
Second, or either of the other two persons of the Godhead, God it was -- I have
seen GOD face to face; when the Angels of God met Jacob, so apparently, that
they were discernd to be Angels, He does not call them God, but Gods Host, He
does not wrestle, nor pray at all; and, if prayer to One Angel would be
prevalent, how not much more, to More? And why did He pray to One, but that He
knew him not to be an Angel? why did he not pray to More, but that he knew
them to be Angels? If it was an Angel, Jacob did worship him as God, in that
he said, I have seen God face to face, and this themselves, upon Exodus,
confess to be Idolalatry, and, by consequence, themselves Idolaters, if this be
their example; but, They, and we, truly acknowledge Jacob, in that speech of
his, to have been no Idolater, therefore Jacob neither must be their example,
so much as to Invoke an Angel; for their Authority, how to Interpret that
Text, I have neither Leisure enough, nor Book enough to search; but it matters
not, since Scripture, under which Head That Argument is made, Answers for it
self; it does so again,

Genes. 48.16. The Angel ( that delivers me, says their Translation) which
Redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads; they say true, that we say, This
Angel must be understood of God; they say, we endeavor to prove this, out of
the 31. and 32. Chapter, not only so, we are not so far to seek; we will prove
this out of the very words, the Context, and your own Translation, and Comment;
you say, it is evident from this place, that the Angel (He, that is so called)
deliverd Jacob from evils, what? from All? you do well to leave out that word,
when you mean a Created Angel; but That word is in the Text, because of which
you ought to Mean the Creator God; for, who ^^s, can deliver us from All Evil,
bebesides that God, Matthew. 6.13.
to whom our Christ has taught us to Pray -- Deliver us from Evil? Amongst
All the evils, from which Jacob was delivered, was not a starving hunger one,
when he was Fed first out of Egypt, and then, in Egypt? himself reckons right,
when he maks mention only of that great Comprehensive Blessing, to Feed him,
without which he could not have Injoyd any one of all the rest? and was it not
God which did this for him? and by contexture, was not. God the Angel, who did
this, and all the rest? Look one verse backward, and you may read in your own
book; GOD, in whose sight, my Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, have walked, God,
that feeds me from my youth until this present day, The Angel, that
delivers me from All Evils, Bless -- give me leave to tell you, that God and
God, and Angel, are the Nominative before the Verb Bless; and certainly, if God
does Bless, we are secure enough, though we never Invoke His Angel which he
has Made; and that the Angel, after, is the same with the God before, appears
very probably, in that he is no more separated from God, the first and second
time named, than God the second time named, is from God the first, not with an
And, but only with a Comma; Non quisquam Hanc Verborum Forman Concepit, Sermon.
4. contra Arrianos.
says Athanasius, Det Tibi Deus, and Angelus, if he meant a Created Angel; it is
the Son of God, whom Jacob prays to, Hunc enim Magni Consilii Patris Angelum
noverat, whom the Prophet calls Angelum Faederis; Mal. 3.1.
Your own Note there, is, Christ is the Angel of the Testament; Can you imagine
it possible to be Demonstrated, that This Christ is not the Angel, whom Jacob
prays to? Your selves must be somewhat more than Angel thus to Dive into the
secrets of His Spirit; Lib. 3. Thesaur. c. 1.
Not to desire you, with Cyril's Quaeso to it, that you would not defame That
Holy Man, but, with a Quaeso and an Obsecro too, let me even Beseech you, that
you would not Dishonor our Christ so far, as, Peremptorily to Robb Him of That
Prayer, which, for ought you know, Jacob directed to Christ Himself; to Jacob,
Him of doing that good to Jacob, which, for ought you can ever dispute to the
Contrary, Christ Jesus may have done by Himself, and without the Ministry of
His Angels. In Exodus 2. and 32. not one word of worshipping Saint, or Angels;
in the One, there is required a Reverent Address to God Himself, in the Other,
is reprehended the Making and worshipping a Molten Calf.

21. Indeed, in Numb. 22. the same Balaam worshipped the Angel with Religious
worship, in their Notes upon the 31. verse, which same Balaam, in their own
Notes upon the eighth verse, Consulted his False God, whom he served, and
called him the Lord, not knowing our Lord God Almighty; the Author (since such
was their Character of Him) might render the practice well worthy suspicion, if
not abomination also, even to them who cite him with such a mark of disgrace.

22. Joshua 5. and (with them) verse 15. Joseph fell flat on the ground, and
Adoring, he said -- Adoring of him, who said verse before I am a Prince of the
Host of our Lord; why not The Prince? which the Word equally bears, why not --
The Lord? since there is no Our in the Original; (I have observed that to be a
frequent zealous mistake, Our for The) and then, All he denies, is, that he is
the same Person, for he is not Lord, and Father; not, that he is the same
Nature, for, the Son, is Lord and Prince too; and the Son it is, that said
this, who, in the Right opinion of the Ancients, did often in the Old
Testament, appear in a Similitudinary flesh, as, in the fullness of Time he
came, in a Real Flesh; and who, in this Text, was truly worshipped, if not as the
Son, yet, as True God; his Name does attest this, the Lord, Chapter 6. v. 2. (still
they call it Our Lord) it is Jehovah, a Name incommunicable to any but God; nay,
it is the Lord too, in that very style, in which he delivers himself to Josue
-- the Prince of the Host of the Lord; All the Angels in Heaven, and all the
Saints there, and in Earth, are his Host, and who but God is Prince of all
these? if it be an Angel, then that Angel is, in one Notion, a Captain, and
Commander in Chief, as being a Prince, and in another Notion, a Subject, and
under his own Command, as being Part of that Host, of which himself is Prince.
Nay, let me say it, (and not be told of a Petitio Principii, for I have
Scripture for what I say) his very accepting of this Honor done to him (since
it is evident and unscrupled, that he was no less than Angel) argues him to be
more than Angel, as much more as God; I fell, says St. John, at the Angels
feet to worship him, and he said unto me, See thou do it not, Rev. 19.10
I am thy Fellow Servants, worship God, in that very form and posture of Worship
in which Josue fell down; and you have the same again, totidem Verbis, Chapter
22.8, 9. and, if that may add any thing to the weight, it is not only in the
last Chapter, but, in the same Chapter too, in which this also follows, If any
man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him (he shall do it, no
Angel shall stop his hand) the Plagues that are written in this Book; Paul, not
only Let no man Beguile you of your Reward, but, if St. John may interpret
him, Let no man Plague you, instead of Not Rewarding you, Plague you with more
Plagues than those on Egypt, with all the Plagues which God has denounced in
both his Volumes, Let no Man (nay let no Angel neither) Beguile you, (...),
being Voluntary in Humility, Col. 2.18.
and the Worship of Angels; (...); it signifies Religion, that very Name which
they put upon it, a Religious Worship.

23. Their Figure 3, by enquiry into Joshua, is not there concerned; for,
though I was apt to believe they borrowed all their Arguments from Bellarmine
(in whom I find them all, and to whom, as well as to them, I reply) and, by the
preposterousness of 5 before 3, might well conjecture, they did not mean Josue,
yet I was willing not to spare my own pains, but to be exact, even against an
Imaginary Possibility of Objection, that I had not replied ad Idem, but made
choice of Texts which they never urged, and which themselves taught me to
answer; therefore, to follow them, and their Bellarmine, I go on to examine

24. Called with us, the First Book of Kings, cap. 18. ver. 7.
3 Reg. 18. When Abdias was in the way, Elias met him, who when he (Abdias)
knew him, fell on his Face, and said, My Lord, art not thou Elias? Their Note
says, Abdias adored Elias as the Prophet of God, and a Holy Man, with
Religious Honor, called Dulia. Did he so? I trow, not; not only because this
Dulia also is due to God, in Christ's own account, and therefore not payable to
any else, but God himself; for, when our Savior Christ says, Ye cannot (...),
serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24.
two such contrary Masters; He says it, upon the neck of this, as a strong
probation of it; No man can (...), serve two Masters, not only two, which are
contrary, as God and Mammon, but two, which are two, though in a subordination,
as God and Prophet; His Servants ye are, Romans 6.16.
to whom ye obey, says St. Paul, who himself would not be obeyed, no nor
followed neither, in his Person, but in his holy Doctrine, and exemplary Life,
as, in both of them, he followed Christ, Be ye Followers of me, 1 Cor. 11.1.
even as I also am of Christ. When he does but leave out the Name of Christ, he
does not Command, but Beseech, I beseech you, 1 Cor. 4.16.
be ye Followers of me; Salute indeed we must all them that have the Rule over
us; Heb. 13.24
I, and obey them too, but we must only obey their Precepts, and submit unto
their Counsels, and not pay (what we owe not) a Religious Worship to their very
Persons; neither This, which we owe not, nor Contempt, which we do owe, not to
pay; what we owe, and how we are to pay, is involved in the seventh verse of
that Chapter, Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the Word of God. According to that Express Word, or the Evidently Necessary
Deductions thence, we must not only greet, and mind them, but obey and submit
unto them -- But, after all this, first, is it Obligatory enough, that the
Scripture tells us, such a thing was done, though it commands not us to do the
like? if so (not to heap up Consequential Inconveniences, but to be Civil to
them whom I must not Adore) the Doway-argument from an Idolatrous Balaam, must
still stand in force, and the Bellarmine-argument of an Irreligious Saul
Adoring a Diabolical Apparition instead of the Soul of Samuel, must not only
be Logically concludent, which it is not, but also Theologically binding, which
it much less is; but, secondly, the Prostration of Abdias to Elias, was not a
Religious, but a Civil Worship; it was, indeed, to a Prophet, a holy Man, but
that does not Specificate the Act, nor any more make it a Holy, than a
Prophetical Worship; for, when they say, the Holiness of the Man Bowed to, was
the Cause of the Bowing, yet they must mean the Religiousness of the Bowing to
be inherent in him who did Bow, and not in him to whom; But not this neither;
This falling on the Face was an Outward and Civil Reverence, nor did the Heart
it self mean it any more, as far as it is possible for Man to discover; if it
be pretended otherwise, let me desire to know where that Perspective is, and of
what it is made, which lets in the Eye of one Man into the Heart of another;
nor was the Heart of Abdias deceitful, in that it did mean this, this Outward
and Civil Respect, which was writ in Broad Letters upon his Bending Face;
neither is this Civility of respect confined to the Secularity of the Object,
but dilated to those Created Excellencies, which are Spiritual also, not as
they are Spiritual, but as they are Created Excellencies, with abstraction,
from Spirituality, not Actu Negationis, by Denying them to be Spiritual, but
Actu Praecisionis, not Considering them in the Species of Spirituality, but in
the Genus of Excellency; Nay, but what if I shall say, a Civil Honor is due to
any of these Excellencies (throughout, I mean, as Doway does, the Excellencies
which inhere in Living and Rational Subjects, and not, as Persia does, the
Excellency of a Liveless, though Life-giving Sun) even in their Spiritual
Capacity, and Determination? I am yet to learn wherein the Error consists, if
so I shall say; especially, when those Excellencies, even Spiritual, and Qua
Spiritual too, are conspicuously before our Eyes, they evidencing their
Spirituity to the Eyes of our Mind, though those in our Head see only Bodily
Appearances, and either they address to us, or we to them; In the Humbling
Posture of Abdias, the Prostration of the Body (which is all the Text tells us
of) was solely and entirely Civil; and such a Civil Respect (by Bowing, or, by
what other Custom the Fashion of the Country does express Civility by, to
stir the Head, or the Hat, or to lay Hand on Breast) is Due to the Pastoral
Authority from the Unorder'd Lay, by a Reason which equally concerns them both,
that the one may be Excused, in that he has Paid it, and the other Satisfied,
in that he has Received it; that neither he, who has them not, may lie under
the Slander of Contemning holy Orders, nor he who has them, lie under the
Suspicion of being Contemned; Would God appoint such an Honor to be paid to
his own Officer, for the Receipt of which Debt, that own Officer of his could
never give any Acquittance, nor be really sensible that he has received it? He
is Man, though a Spiritual Man, that pays this Honor; He is no more than Man,
though a more Spiritual Man, that receives this Honor; and therefore, in
respect of both of them, the Honor is to be paid by one to the other, such a
way as is cognoscible to Man; and no way is such, but the way of paying
Secular, Outward, Civil Honor; He that does this, and does not mean it, does
deceive himself more than me, for the Outward Honor is paid, though
Un-willingly; He that does mean more than this, even a Religious Honor (any
otherwise than as the paying of Civil Respect is a Duty which Religion
commands) deceives both himself and me; himself, in paying that which he does
not owe; and me, in offering that which I will not receive: the Lay of Rome,
and the Lay of England (of Old England) agree in paying this Outward Respect to
the Minister of God, and I am persuaded, the Unlearned Lay of Rome (who, as
they understand it not, have never heard of this Charm-word Dulia) do it with
the same Integrity, as the well-taught Lay of England; Since therefore the
Outward Act is equally performed on both sides, let the Romish Teachers either
call it as it is, an Outward Worship, if they will not endure the word Civil,
or, in respect of the Persons to whom it was performed, Angelical, to Angels,
or, to whom it is performed, Humane, to Men, or by any other Allowable Name,
and, as to this Point, we will no longer be two sides, but one; or else let
them produce one Command in Scripture, or one Lawful and Imitable Example,
wherein the Internal, and Religious, and Duliaworship, is as Evident as the
External Prostration, and we will, in Seneca's Language, Manus dare, without
that Puta of his, and with a more Certain Concord, and in that Apostolical
Expression, we will give unto them the Right Hand of Fellowship, Gal. 2.9.
and they shall be no more Strangers and Foreiners, Ephesians. 2.19.
but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints; or, if they will not break the Word in
two pieces, giving the Angel his part, by himself, and Man his, by himself, let
them accept of St. Austin's Charitative Reverence, instead of their Religious
Dulia, and we have done again: But because this Controversy, which was begun
out of Scripture, should not close with a Father, a Paeter Patratus, I will
conclude with a Text out of him, whom Rome does more peculiarly own for a
Father, a Text apposite to the whole Matter in hand, and Refutative of their
whole Interpretation; it is that in 1 Pet. 2.17. (...), Honor all Men, Love the
Brotherhood; it is a Precept in his EPISTOL KATHOLIK, that is the Title of it,
his General, or (if they love that word more) his Catholic Epistle, and
therefore does oblige Every Man to the performance of it; What? must Every Man
Honor to Every Man? the Greater to the Less? for, the Greater is One in the
Every, and the Less is Another in the Every; Upon what Foundation then stands
that Distinction (which it self is the foundation of all this Controversy) of
Excellencies, into Divine, Religious, and Natural? Whence that Thesis, that the
Subjects, in which these are, require from their Inferiors, in all these
kinds, a Distinction of Worship, according to the distinction of Excellencies,
which are severally in them? Since it is an Apostolical (nay, which with some,
is more than that, a Petrine) Truth, that even That, which is, in it self,
Less, and Inferior, in respect of Excellency is yet the true and proper Object
of Worship, and Honor, even to That which is Greater, and Superior, in
respect of Excellency? and yet All Men are to be Honored, even the Meanest of
all, which throws a B^ock in the way of Excellency; and again, All Men are to
be Honored with no more than a Civil Honor, which throws another Block
against Dulia; that All Men are to be Honored, is the express Doctrine of the
Apostle; that amongst them all, the Ministerial Men (who are part of all, and
therefore involved in the same Worship) are to be Honored only Civilly, is
grounded upon that word which St. Peter in the same verse, (for, certainly, he
would not use the same word, in one and the same verse, to one and another
sense) uses whereby to express Civil Honor. (...), Honor All Men, and, (...),
Honor the King, therefore None of All are to be Honored with Another, a
Bigger Honor, than the Biggest, the Chief of All, the King; for, in the King's
Name it is that they themselves issue out all their Writs for Civil Honor; In
their Notes upon Exodus 20.
No Christian doubts but he honors God with Divine Honor, and the King
with Civil; which very expression of theirs, (besides that it is Argumentum ad
Hominem, that the Minister must be content with Civil Honor, with that of the
same kind, because in the same word, which is due to Kings) is yet one Argument
more against their Dulia, for certainly it does more agree with the Principles
of Sanctified Reason, to believe that, which All Christians believe (a Divine
Worship, and a Civil) than that, which only Some Christians believe (a
Religious Worship, which is below Divine, and yet not Civil. Above Civil, and
yet not Divine) But one word more, and I have quite done; and, in that one
word, let me take in the entire verse, and tell you, that that takes in all
those Excellencies they have named, and yet takes off the Religious Dulia from
the middle excellency, and applies to it only a Charitative Honor; Honor all
men, says St. Peter; then he distinguishes those All, into King, and
Brotherhood; in King he includes all Heathens, but especially, the Supreme,
though a Heathen, the Then-King being such; in Brotherhood, he includes All
Christians, but especially, those Prophetical Ministers, the Gospel- Elias's in
whom Doway instances; This, I take it, is a very Logical and Rational
Interpretation; else the Apostle does not comprehend in the two Species of King
and Brotherhood, All those whom he comprehended in the Genus of All Men, and it
is well known, Membra Dividentia must be ejusdem Latitudinis cum Diviso, and
illud totum absorbere, so that there can be nothing Potentially, in the Genus,
which is not Actually, in this, and that Species, Simul sumptis, nothing in All
Men, which is not in King and Brotherhood; for, though Estius says, by All Men
he means either Men in Authority, or Men of Holiness, and secludes the Ungodly
Man from this Honor, yet we must involve him too, in his Person, though not
him, in his Impiety; He too, in his Essential and Constitutive parts, and in
the Consecutive Propriety of his best part, is the Workmanship of the same God,
who made the Hodiest Man alive; and, in this sense, and for that Gods sake, is
an Object well worthy of Honor; and yet, not in this neither, as if there were
any thing of Excellency in him that Is Honored, above him that Does Honor;
but, though not in All things, yet, in reference to the Workmanship of God, an
Equality; and because, with Relation to God, the King, and all Heathens, to
whom God gave Power and Being; the Minister, and all Christians, to whom God
gave Orders and Holiness, are to be Honored, therefore is the Fear of that
God, who is the Cause of the Love to the one, and the Honor to the other,
placed in the midst betwixt them both; let them show, that God any where
commands that kind of Religious and Dulia-Honour which they apply to Creatures,
as we have showed them one, and can show them a whole Sheet of Texts, that God
enjoins a Charitative Respect, and, actum est, we will lay down the Cudgels.

25. With us the second of Kings, 2.15.
4 Reg. 2.15. And the Children of the Prophets said, The Spirit of Elias has
rested upon Elisaeus, and coming to meet him, adored him to the Ground; This
Argument is in cadem Navi with the former, and the same Rudder will serve to
steer it in its Right Course.

26. With us, Ps. 99.5. and worship AT his Footsteel.
Psalm. 98.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and adore his Footstool, because it is
holy. Their short Note after that verse, tells us, the Hebrew Doctors understand
this, of the Ark, the Doctors of the Church understand Christ's Humanity; their
Long Note after the whole Psalm, tells us, that the Humanity of Christ is to be
adored in the holy Eucharist: In this they follow Bellarmine to a hair, and
will err, and digress honorably, because so they think he does; but the whole
objection from hence, if we consider what he and what they would adapt this
Text to prove, we may safely enough ne pili quidem facere; he applys it, to
prove the invocation of Saints, and they do so too; for, immediately after these
words, -- the Church honored Saints and their Relics -- follow these, --
neither want there authentical examples of holy Scripture, whereby the same
(the honoring of Saints, and their Relics) is proved; amongst the Texts, in
which they instance, this, Ps. 98. is the last, explicity, though it be backed
with -- And elsehwere; if, by that footstool is meant the humanity of Christ,
and by worshipping that humanity, the honoring of Saints, I must take leave to
tell them, such an inference is not Christian, no nor Romish neither it is
Socinian, nay; and Mahumetan too; if it proves that Saints and their Relics
may be honored, it presumes no more, then that Christ was a Saint, and his
humanity the Relic of a Saint; and this, the too Reational, and too
ungraceful Socinian will confess, nay, the neither Graceful, nor Rational Turk
will not deny, that Christ was a holy Prophet, an exemplary Saint; but, no more
of this, because it is only a defect in their Logic, and not a purpose to
dishonor their Savior, by only Sainting of him; only let them pardon me that
I take so much notice of their digression, as to digress my self, in the
Confutation of it, and, if they will, let them thank me that I call it no more;
but ad rem.

27. There is much to be replied; and, though they talk much of the Fathers who
sense it the same way with them, yet I doubt not but they will grant me, that
one Scripture, which is evident, and undoubtful, is a more allowable
interpretation of another Scripture, which is obscure and ambiguous, then one
Father is, and that many Scriptures are more allowable then many Doctors of the
Church; Therefore, first let me open that Text, by Text Parallel to it; and,
though they will not take notice of the words of our Translation worship at his
footstool, yet, Ps. 132.7.
in this, I shall not vicem rependere, and look off, every where, from theirs,
-- we will go into his Tabernacles, we will worship AT his footstool, With
them, Ps. 131.7.
says our Bible; we will enter into his Tabernacle, we will adore IN the place
where his feet stood, says theirs, At the footstool and not the footstool it
self, In the place, and not the place it self. Next, consider we all those
places, in which the footstool of God is named, and worship we him at every of
those foot-stools; and if thus to do, be not more honorable to our God, more
edifying that Church of his, which is already his Church, and more increasing
that Church of his, by the Accession of those who are not, yet, his Church,
then only to worship the Body of Christ in the Holy Eucharist, then, that
Interpretation shall have the upper hand of this; and thus to frame an
interpretation, with these mighty advantages, out of the Bowels of other
Scriptures, which are Consonant to this in the most substantial word of them,
if this be not, though not the best way, a very fit way, I leave it to all
modest Christians to Judge. And, before I betake my self to this way, I shall
only bespeak them that they would not quit Admonitions with me, and call this
digression, for the honor of a painful and well deserving R. P. Michael
Auguanus Bonon, in his Comment upon the Psalms. Tom. 2. cum licentia and
privilegiis. Venitiis M. D. XIII.
writer of their own, who, upon this one Text, and to a much inferior, and
more impertinent purpose, makes use of all those other Texts, to which I now
hasten. Thus says the Lord -- the Earth is my footstool, Is. 66.1. One part
of the meaning of that, in their 98. Ps. and the entire meaning of it, in
reference to this Text, is, That, which St. Paul has commanded 1 Timothy 2.8. I
will that Men pray every where. The Lord has cast down the beauty of Israel,
and remembered not his footstool, where the Church of God is the footstool of
God; and, thus, the meaning of that in Ps. 98. is that which David has said in
Ps. 89. v. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints. 2 Chronicles. 9.18.
There was to the throne a footstool of Gold; not to inquire any further, what
that footstool of Gold is, but to accept the interpretation of Auguanus,
Scabellum Aureum est Angelica Natura, propter virtutem consummatae Charitatis;
but, if so, the meaning of that in their 98. Ps. is, that, for this cause, the
Woman and the Man too, ought to worship God, the more reverently, and
sincerely, 1 Cor. 11.10.
because of the Angels. Until I make thine enemies thy footstool Ps. 110.1.
Here, the wicked are the footstool of God, in being subjected to his will
though against their own; and, in this respect, the worshipping at his
footstool, does mean, that we should not refrain, even in the sight of the
wicked, to sing that new Song, Ps. 40.3.
which God has put into our Mouth; and which they are unacquainted with, even
praise unto our God, to this end, that many, even the wicked, may see it, and
fear; and trust in the Lord, in the last place, and out of the first Text, He
tells us Page 472 Col. 2. in Fine.
Scabellum ejus est ipsa Christi humanitas, the Manhood of Christ is this
footstool. To the purpose then, understand we, by this footstool, as Auguanus
does, in the simplicity of his heart, the humanity of Christ, quae totaliter
Deo conform is est, and not only that, but the whole Earth also; and, in that
Earth, not only the Church, the Saints of God, but the very wicked also; and,
not only the Church Militant on Earth, but that part of it which is triumphant
in Heaven, confirmed in an established undecaying Righteousness by Christ Jesus,
the Holy Angels of God; and understand we not, by this footstool, exclusively,
the humanity of Christ, and nothing else but that, nay, understand we not that
humanity of Christ only Sacramented, as Doway does, in the design of their
hearts; and then, if it does not more redound to the honor of God, and to the
edifying, and increasing of his Church, that we should sincerely worship God,
all the Earth over, not only in the Congregation of the Saints, the more to
inflame their devotion by the Conjunction of ours with theirs, but in the
presence of the wicked, to make them ashamed of their irreligious folly, and to
invite them by our example to draw near unto the Lord, with unfeigned Lips and
unfeining Hearts, and all this because of the Angels of God, nay, because of
the God of those Angels; if, thus to do, and thus every where to do, and upon
these grounds, does not conspire, in a more probable effectuality, (and a more
innocent uninsnaring conspiration) to both those ends, then to worship the Body
of Christ himself, as, that footstool, and only to worship that Body
Sacramented, at some times, in some places, with some few, then we will quit
this extensive interpretation, and run, totis pedibus into their limited
sentence.

28. And least that reason, which David gives, and which they render because IT
is holy, might bear sway against this multiform sense, confining the footstool
only to one, and the worship to that very footstool; to evade this pretended
reason, I must give them to know, not only that that word, in the Original may
be equally translated IT or He, but that, in that place, it ought rather to be
translated he, because, in the Verse after, is set down what that worship is,
to invocate the Lord; and, because though it were so, for IT is holy, yet the
worship is not of it, but at it, explained in the last verse of that Psalm, and
in both the same words, in which the reverence is charged upon us in the 5. v.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and ad re say they, and worship say we; Hitherto,
there is a perfect agreement with the 5. 1 Cor. 1.10.
and last v. they do (what the Apostle would have us all to do, though Doway
will neither hearken to us, nor him) speak the same thing; and the explication
follows -- In or at his holy Mount, because the Lord our God is holy; the Mount
is confessedly holy, yet the holiness of the Mount is not alleged as a reason,
why we should worship it, but the holiness of our God, why we should worship
in, or at, his holy Mount. I go on, to inquire after their -- And elsewhere, by
which words, and some search, I find out of their notes upon Genesis 48.5. That
they mean the Invocation of Angels, grounded upon Mat. 18. Acts 12.1 Cor. 11.
For want of their New Testament, of which I am bereft, they ought to be content
(as I must) that I reply out of the Originals.

29. And first, what says Matthew for them? He says (but not for them) that
Christ himself said, 18.10.
Take heed, that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you
that in Heaven, their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father which is
in Heaven; what means our Savior by this? not that we should invoke Angels;
himself tells us no such matter; but that we should not despise little ones;
that is it, which himself tells us; and, upon this ground because they have
Angels, (...); had they hence, inferred, that God had appointed Angels,
Ministering Spirits, to take care for, and to protect little ones, they had
argued right; and we would shake hands with them in this matter; let them tell
us, no more then what that Text tells us; let them infer no more then what our
Savior Christ infers, and we are agreed; is it not enough to that purpose, to
take off contempt from little ones, that God takes so much care of them, as to
appoint Angels over them, though they never pray (as they are never bid so to
do) to Angels? and are not those words designed to this purpose by Christ? had
Christ said -- Despise them not, Ps. 115.16.
for, to these Children of Men, I have given the Earth; Despise them not, for
it is for their sake, Job 38.8.9.
that I have shut up the Sea with doors, and made the Cloud the Garment
thereof, and tho thick darkness a swaddling band for it; Despise them not, for,
for them it is, that I have created the Lights in the Firmanent of Heaven for
signs and seasons, Genesis 1.14 Ps. 104.19
for dars and years; it is for them, that I have appointed the Moon for seasons,
for them, that the Sun knows his going down. His going down, with his Rays
into the Bowels of the Earth, and his bringing up from thence Herb for the
service both of Man and Child; that God has done all, or any of these, for
mankind, is reason enough not to contemn the least of them; but is it reason
enough, that Man should fall down, and first worship, and then eat his Herb?

(Sarculo Amicas
Colit hic Fruges
Et suum hic mandit, Bibit ille, E man. Thesourus e Soc: Jesu.
Numen
If so, Happy the Heathen, that are Heathen still,
Felices Gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in Hortis
Numina) Juven.

That Man should exalt the Sun, and adore the Moon? that Man should bow to the
Sea, and kneel down to the Lights? nay to the Cloud? nay to the thick darkness?
and do his reverence to these swaddling bands, and to that Garment as to sacred
Relics? for all of these, let us bless God that gave them, and not bless the
blessings themselves, nor set at naught, the meanest of those, who have an
interest in all of these; for his Angels, and Archangels -- Let us laud and
magnify his glorious Name, which we shall do the more acceptably even to those
glorious Angels themselves, whilst we only invoke their and our God; if there
be an Angel there, that can be offended at this, I could even suspect Heaven it
self not to be altogether so holy a place, as it is a branch, if not an
Article, of my Faith to believe it is. And, in good earuest, for what cause is
it, that we should invoke the Angels, is it, because we are benefited by them?
so we are, in all those other instances; is it because we are spiritually
benefited by them? so we are by all of these; for, from the Heavens to the
Herb, all of them Declare the glory of God; is it, because the Beneficial
Angels can hear us? but -- a posse ad esse, is no good Argument; I can, walk
ten miles to morrow; but it is inconsequent to conclude, that, Therefore, I
will not stay, all day, at home; is it because they do hear us? but we will
dispute of that anon; and yet, neither that they can, or do, is expressed or
involved in that Text; and, at last, a precept I call for, or (though they have
given me some, to which I have already replied) an allowable example; show me
(which is impossible) a command to invoke carved Images, and I will presently
invoke, and confess, that, all this while, I have much mis-believ'd King David,
for they have ears, Ps. 111.6
and hear, show me (which is equally impossible) a command to invoke Angels,
and I will become a stooping Proselyte, and profess my forrow that Epiphanius
has either told us there were no Angelici left, Austin de Haeresibus 39.
in his age, or, that he has called them Heretics, in their own, or that St.
Austin has joynd with him in that opprobrious Compellation.

30. But let me look a little further into the Text they bring me; what if
these (...), are the same little ones, of whom our Savior says, in the Chapter
after, Mat. 19.14.
(...) (for, the (...) in Mat. 18.2. was he, by occasion of whom our Savior
said (...), the little Child v. 2. was the one of these little ones v. 10.)
Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me; it should seem, by
the Context in both places, they are the very same; for, in comparison with
these little ones, it is said, Mat. 18.3. Except ye be converted and become as
Little Children ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and, in Mat.
19.14. it is said Of such (such little Children) is the Kingdom of Heaven;
there is the very sameness of matter, and expression, and, almost the sameness
of Chapter too, so that, in very good reason, we are to believe those little
ones Mat. 18.10. to be the very same with those little ones Mat. 19.14. Now,
what little ones, and how little ones these were, we may learn of St. Luke,
when he repeats the story, (...) Luke 18.15. And they brought unto him also
Infants -- read to the end of the 17. v. and St. Lukes Infants are St. Matthews
little ones, whose Angels -- let me drive it a little further, and show you
that Saint Lukes (...), does confine Saint Matthews Little ones to Infants; not
only by the Authority of Eustathius (...), they are Children new Born, ^ut by
all these Scriptures. Luke 2.16. Act. 7.19. 1 Pet. 2.2. and before you shall
find the word applied to him that is of age, and can speak for himself, you
shall sooner find it applied to him that is not yet Born, and therefore, much
less, can speak, (...) Luc. 1.44. the Babe leaped in my Womb.

31. All this being said, it is time to tell you Why; to clear That Text, out
of which they pretend to it, from giving any Countenance to Angelical worship;
for, whatever lays claim to it out of Scripture, must do it, either from the
Command of God, or, from the practice of Saints; That there is no Command is
evident; likewise that there is no example, so much as Imaginary, to be gatherd
out of that Text; for those that were Infants and could not voice a Prayer to
God Himself, could, much less, to any Angel, either of God; or of their own;
and, for ejaculatory prayers, Intended, though not utterd, although I presume
Actual Faith (and such there must be even in Mental Ejaculations) presupposes
the use of Reason, yet, in this case, it matters not, though I seem to grant
it, since, not the close Purpose, but the Manifest expression of the Heart is
only capable to grow into example; and therefore, since, from hence, they have
neither Precept, nor Practice, it concludes not so much for them as it might,
if they had said nothing at all; for, though that silence of theirs would be
very far from a probational argument, yet That silence of theirs would never
have been refuted, nor be made an argument against them, as their vain Babbling
is. I am in very great have, and I have many reasons to be so, and therefore I
will not trouble, either them, or my self, to overthrow them more; who are
already upon the ground; Let us see, if their next Quotation will lift them up,
and give them Breath for a New Contest.

32. Act. 12. And here I thank them, that their Citations and my speed may well
agree; there is so little of moment, in that whole Chapter for them; it is true,
verse 7. that an Angel of the Lord came, and smote Peter on the side, and
Raised him up; it is more easy to conclude, that the Angel suspected Peter,
being down, to worship Him, and that he smote him for it, and bade him arise
up quickly, then that Peter did Really worship, or the Angel cheerfully
accept; but, not this neither; for, till the Angel parted from him, Peter was
not come to himself, verse 10.11. No Precept, no Practice in all this; it is
true, Verse 8. Exodus 3.5.
the Angel bids Him Bind on his sandales; but, when the very ground was Holy,
the Shoes were commanded off, and to put on the Sandales, was no sign of
worshipping Angelical Purity; the Angel bids Him -- Cast Thy Garment about
Thee; Luke 19.36, 37.
Contrariwise, the garments were strewed in the way, when Christ was Honored;
His Chains fell off from his hands, verse 7. and the Iron-gate opened to them
of its own accord, verse 10. I hope, I may believe all this, and be no more of
the present Faith of Rome, then Ovid was, who, I know not by what method of
Tradition, did light upon the same story, Sponte sua patuisse Fores, Metam. l.
3.
lapsasque lacertis,
Sponte sua fama est, nullo solvente, Catenas.


But, Peter wist not, that it was true, which was done by the Angel, much less
did He Adore the Angel for Doing it; and after all this; when Peter came to
himself he knew that the Lord had sent his Angel: verse 15. when Peter Himself
knocked, they said, it is his Angel; Not to enter into That dispute at present,
whither there are Tutelar Angels to Nations, to Particular callings, to
Individual Persons; be it which way it will (Unusquisque sensu suo abundet) it
matters not, neither does this, nor that, nor the Third way make ought for the
Invocation of Angels; That, which should most deeply engage a private Person,
to Revere his peculiar Angel, does not Engage him at all, not only from the
Incapacity of the Angel, to receive That which is due to God, but from the
Incapacity of the Votary, to pay that to his Angel, when he knows not, which
is his; will you allow of a Confused worship -- Thou My Angel, whosoever thou
art -- I persuade my self, Thy own Angel, at That Instant, would not be Thine;
nor is this a gratuitous persuasion; for, may it not therefore, be, that God
Conceales, from Nations, Callings, and Men, who is their Deputed Guardian, lest
God, the Lord, might have too little of Honor, and his servant, the Angel,
too much? There is but one mention more throughout that Chapter of Angel; and
it is he, who punished Idolatry with Death, Herod with worms, for accepting
that shout of the People -- It is the voice of a God, Verse 22.23.
and not of Man, and because he gave not God the Glory; This Text will sted
them less than any.

Thus, having grappled with them, in their main Battalia, and in their Reserve,
let me follow them into their Last Hold, and examine the slrength of That, and
then wish, that we might both take our Leaves of one another.

1 Cor. 11.10. for this cause ought a woman to have Power (...) on, or Erasmus
renders it in caput.
In her head, (...) because of the Angels; a Text, in the last word of which
(which is the very sting of the Objection) Vide Heinsium super locum.
Interpreters, both Greek, and Latin, do much differ; Clemens understands by
Angels, (...), Just, and virtuous Men; some interpret it, of the Bishops, and
Overseers of the Church, and those Non pauci; says my Author; some understand
Angels, but evil ones; and those too, Men of Antiquity, for, Saint Austin
tells us of them l. 15. de Civit. Dei; so does * Tertullian, In lib. de
Virginibus Velandis.
his Elder, by 250. years; Lactantius, De divinis Institutionibus, interprets
alike; so does Eusebius, and, ex veteribus plerique Most of the Ancients as
another Author tells me; nay, their own Estius, in his first Tome upon S.
Paul's Epistles, fol. 396. col. 2. recites these three opinions, and does not
dislike the two Former; reliquae secundae expositiones suam quoque
probabilitatem habent; He adds a fourth opinion, which, some, though unfitly,
held, that women should behave themselves Modestly, lest, by a garish attire,
and wanton eye, even the Heavenly Angels might be corrupted to loose thoughts;
at length He concludes with a fifth, as a Potior sententia, because of the
Presence of the Good Angels, who are delighted to see the service of God
performd decently, and with singleness both of Heart and Ey; but, even in Him,
not one word of adoration, and I am Loath to be quicker-sighted in his own
cause, than his learned self: I will conclude this, that, (besides the Reasons
already given, and which shall be given after) this is a most unstable,
ambiguous Foundation, upon which to erect the Worship of Angels, since it is
capable of so many expositions.

34. Though I am loath to take advantage upon them, by Invalidating that one
only Text, which tells us of a Saint in Heaven, who was Really and Actually
Invokt, from being an example worthy their or our Imitation, yet, because the
beginning of this Discourse against Doway, was commenced against the Invocation
of Saints, and because all their Arguments, in that place, are the same with
Bellarmins, and because their -- And elsewhere -- upon Exodus 20. and their --
And the like -- upon Genes. 48. may seem to design That very Text, which
Bellarmin also makes use of, I shall account it no loss of time, to enervate
all his Conclusion, and all their Imaginations from thence.

35. Luke 16.24. The Rich man Cried, and said, Father Abraham have Mercy upon
me; it is true, Abraham is here Invoked, but not, in the sense of Rome, as an
Intercessour, but in the Rich man's own sense, as an Opitulatour; nay, I may
say; He is Invoked, with a perfect Idolatry, not as a Saint, but as a God; at
least, not at all to Intercede to God for Him; for, if Miserere mei, be not
incommunicable to any other, besides Him, whose Mercy is over all His works
(which, I believe Doway will not grant to me, because I find, in a By John
Bouturier, M. DC. XXXIII.
Manual of Godly Prayers, and Litanyes, taken out of many Famous Authors (of
which I have reason enough to suspect Doway, to be, if not the Compilers, the
Approbatours,) the same Frayer, to another Saint By John Bouturier, M. DC.
XXXIII.
O Holy Mary, stretch abroad the hand of thy Mercy -- By John Bouturier, M. DC.
XXXIII.
O Holy Mary have mercy on us; -- and, Page 382.
though Christ is not altogether left out, Page 383.
yet sometimes, He is prayed to, in that secondary Order, as if His Mother's
prayers were more prevalent, and first to be sought, and then, Her Son's after;
-- By John Bouturier, M. DC. XXXIII.
Virgin Mary, Page 98.
with her Benign Son, Blessus) yet, the Rich Man being in Hell, would certainly
never pray to that God, who had plunged Him thither, and from whom, He knew He
was for ever a Castaway; or, if this He did, He would not be an example to us
of Praying, even to God himself, for known Impossibilities, much less, to
Saint, or Mother of God, as shall liberally appear; though, as a Hopeful
preface to all the rest, This, at Best, is but an example from the Damned in
Hell; and That opinion is wretched enough, which must seek for succor out of
so helpless a pit; I can more easily excuse the Torturd Rich Man (who, by
reason of Anguish, said He knew not what) to call upon Abraham, than I can
forgive any Bellarmine who takes Himself to he well in His Wits, to make such a
Distracted Creature, His Laudable Pattern; But let us dive into the story.

36. The whole of it is a Parable, in the opinion of many and Learned Doctors;
Theophylact is vehement in this persuasion; Justin Martyr and Theophilus
Antiochenus, state it with him; Eucherius, in his Questions upon Saint Luke,
and Saint Chrysostom, in his Homilies, familiarly call it so; And, though
Levinus Lemnius.
He, who wrote ex Institutio, of the similitudes and Parables in the Bible,
does not mention this for One, yet, besides, that Humana authoritas non valet
Negative, He is not to be condemned for his omission, because his declared
Purpose was, only to speak of those similitudes and Parables, in which Quae in
Bibliis, ex Herbis, and Arboribus desumuntur. tit. lib.
Herbs and Quae in Bibliis, ex Herbis, and Arboribus desumuntur. tit. lib.
Trees are concerned; and, for certain, Abraham was no Herb (for, He was
translated from Grace to Glory, and I never yet, heard of an Herb of Glory)
though planted in the better than Paradise, nor was Dives a Tree, though He had
taken deep Root, even as Deep as Hell; and, if a Parable it is, it is a stated
Question, that Parabolicall Divinity affords no convincing Argument in point of
Controversy: But what if it be a History? Gregory in His 40 Homimily, says it
is, and calls it Res Facta; Tertullian, and Saint Ambrose think they Prove it,
by that Argument, which Origin used against the Jews, that there was such a
Man as Job, because the Name of the Man is set down in the Narration; and,
because, as we know, there was an Abraham; so, by the same Reason, and in the
same story, there must have been a Dives and Lazarus too; but grant we this,
what get They hence? when Dives dos particularize what He Prays for, That is
confessed, by All to be a Metaphore; send Lazarus, that he may Dip the Tip of his
Finger -- He does not mean that very thing, for which He seems to Pray; or, if
it did mean it, Abraham, is deaf, and dos not hear, or else, hears, Thou art
tormented, and he cannot come; show me a more successful copy to Pray by, or
else, I am as speechless, as the Saint is Earless: And, besides all this, the
Pontificii themselves, are not, yet, at one, amongst themselves, whether this
be a Parable or a History; from whose discord, this is one Argument, that, all,
they conclude from hence, as to the Invocation of Saints, is Inconsequent and
Unargumentative; it would look more like Christian Logic, to conclude, as In
vita Pauli. Non illuc Auro positi neque Thure sepulti pervenient. Lucan. lib. 9.
S. Hierome does, Illi quidem pauperculo Paradidisus Patet, Vos Auratos Gehenna
suscipiet; and since the poor Man went to Heaven, and the Rich to Hell,
Bellarmine had done well if he had retracted one Note, his 15th, of the true
Church, which he calls Temporal Felicity, and had well considered, that the
Israelites, only upon this ground, deserted the true Church of God, and fell
into Foul Idolatry; They answered Jeremiah, saying. Jer. 44.15, 16, 17.
As for the word that thou have spoken to us, in the Name of the LORD, we will
not hearken unto thee; But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth
out of our OWN Mouth, to Burn Incense unto Discrtis verbis, the Virgin Mary is
called so, O Holy Mary, Queen of Heaven. Manual. p. 382.
the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings unto her, as we have
done, we, and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah,
and in the Streets of Jerusalem, FOR THEN HAD WE PLENTY OF VICTUALS, AND WERE
WELL, AND SAW NO EVIL.

37. I have now done with the Errors of Authors, which, and with the Piety of
Authors, by which, to Oppose, and would heartily wish, Doway, and Doway's
Proselytes, to consider, how feeble, ill-grounded, and un-fenc'd such Doctrines
are, how Circularly the Proof roves into the Question, and the Question is left
Naked, to become its own Proof, and Syllogism, and Champion (for, does not
Bellarmine, his own self, imply all this, when he says, God Reveals our
Prayers unto the Saints, and yet the Saints deliver up those Prayers of ours,
more Prosperously to God?) When the Meanest Minister in the Church of England,
even then, when It, and He, are at the Lowest, is Big enough, assisted with the
Truth of God, and the God of Truth on his side, to wrestle with a whole
Erroneous College; what would become of them, if themselves should be at
leisure, from Designs, and Disguizes, and our Learned Fathers should be at
Leisure, from those two Controversies, of Want, and Division at home, to enter
the Lists with them? I beseech God to Humble Prosperous Mistakers, to
Strengthen Poor Truth, and to Save All.

38. But it shall not be enough to Reply to the Texts, mis-interpreted by them;
for, though thus to do, does, in some degree, shake the Foundations of Error,
yet it does not, so far as Right ought to be Defended, establish the Truth; let
me therefore (that I may not only shut the Mouth of the Pit upon Falsehood, but
open the Pit, Veritas in Puteo.
that Truth may arise, and her Enemies be scattered) conclude against the
Religious Worship, and Invocation of Saints and Angels, with some Few
Scriptures more, and a little calm Reasoning.

39. Since Invocation is so highly valued in the Word of God, as to be joined
with that Instrument of our Salvation, Romans 10.14.
Faith -- How shall they call on him, in whom they have not Believed? -- since
it is, in both Testaments, the Comprehensive Word, which Involves in it the
Entire Worship of God; Joel 2.32.
-- Whosoever shall CALL upon the Name of the Lord, shall be Delivered; by
which Expressions, God himself seems as Jealously to Call for our Calling upon
him, as for our Believing in him, or, for our Worshipping him at all; for the
sake of these, and some more Texts, I would much stagger at any
Saint-Invocation, lest otherwise I might perhaps stagger in the Faith; 2 Kings,
22. ult.
What does King David mean, when he says, Thou, O God, O THOU that hear
Prayer? Psalm. 65.2. but that he means it a Peculiar Attribute to God? not only
the Good Man is taken away from the Evil to come, that he partake not of it,
but that he not so much as See it -- I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, See
more in B. Hall's Old Religion, page 140.
and thine Eyes shall not SEE all the Evil which I will bring upon this place;
-- but, if they Reply, as Bellarmine does, that in the Old Testament the People
of God were not wont to say, Ora pro nobis Sancte Abrahame; -- what means our
Savior himself (who could best teach us to pray) when he bids us, not to call
upon Saint or Angel, Luke 11.2.
but upon Father which is in Heaven; and, though the Church of Rome does that
too, yet she has a great Favor done her by those amongst us, who do it not,
from whom by such a Continued Omission she may hope, that in time they may
forget they ever were Commanded to call upon God only; for, by this, as God is
in himself, so we acknowledge him to be our God, our God, in that we pray to
him, and our God, in that we pray as he has commanded us; and is not this,
Treason against the Divine Majesty, when, by our Disloyal Prayers, we give
those Acknowledgements to another, whereby he, that did make, and should rule
us, is testified to be our God, and our King? does not this seem to make him,
either a Nescient God, that cannot understand our Requests, unless they are
conveyed to him through the Intercession of others? or else a Proud God, that
will not admit of an Immediate Access unto himself? as if he, that humbles
himself to behold the things that are in Heaven, and in Earth, Ps. 113.6.
would, for all that, take so much State upon him, as not to take notice of the
Best things that are, in Earth and Heaven (besides those things which are in
God himself, and which are God himself) Humble and Faithful Prayer: God has
never told us, that Saimt, or Angel, does hear the words of our Lips; if any of
them do this, at any time, yet, who can tell, that this or that Saint or Angel
does hear at this time, when that Letany is prayed, Holy Mary, Manual, page 422.
Pray for us. St. Michael Pray. St. Gabriel Pray. St. Raphael Pray.
And not only St. John, and St. Peter, Paul -- Pray -- but St. Agnes, and St.
Cecily, and St. Anastasia -- Pray --? nay, when some pray to this, or that
Forged Saint, which are so far from being now in Heaven, that we have no
assurance they ever were on Earth? Yet, for those Real and Un-doubted Saints
(far be it from me to fasten a Shame upon any of them whom God has Glorified)
I only wish, they may not Rival their God in Honor (and, I am sure themselves
wish the same with me) nor be over-charg'd with Reverence, more than themselves
Desire, or God Appoints) who can tell, that their Present Employment, when Busy
Man invokes them, is not designed to them by their God elsewhere? and then take
we heed, that we do not apply that Ubiquitariness, to be Everywhere at once,
which is properly attributed to God, to Saint or Angel; but then, for the
especial part of Prayer, that of the Heart (without which, the Lips do only
Mutter, they do not Pray) and that of the Heart only; if the Heart prays to
Saint, or Angel, does not that Heart make Saint, or Angel, God, though
unmeaningly? whose Property alone it is, to search the Heart, Romans 8.27.
and the Reins. Deos, qui Colit, Ille Facit. Martial.
He, that worships Religiously, makes that a God, which he Ignorantly Worships;
and Prayer is an Especial part of Worship; and that of the Heart, an Especial
part of Prayer: And, if Any thing else but God, must be Religiously Invoked, if
any thing else but God can pry into the Hearts, notwithstanding (...) ((...)
does acknowledge that he can do it, and (...), Act. 1.24.
that he only) Thou, Lord, which know the Hearts; how little Honor is
there of which we leave God the Sole Proprietary (though the Angels and Saints
in Heaven know, themselves cannot honor him enough, much less we) if, as From
us, and To us, we may invoke others besides God, others besides God may search
into our Hearts! and what though they of Rome often say, and often in a day,
and in that Variation, throughout those three Creeds, the Apostolical, as Text,
the Nicene, and Athanasian, as Commentary; and perhaps, in one more, and larger
than all these, the Tridentine, (all the Deliberations and Conclusions of that
Council being sworn to, as if they were all one Creed) that -- they Believe in
God Almighty, the Maker of Heaven and Earth? -- of all things, Visible, and
Invisible -- that they worship God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity -- yet,
whilst they worship Saints, and Angels too, and imbase the Honor of God down
to them, in their several Confessions of Faith, they do not what they say they
do, but rather acknowledge what they ought to do, entirely to worship God;
which, it is the whole purpose of this Discourse, to Argue, and Persuade, and
upon the Knees of my Soul, to Beseech them to do. I shall conclude, with that
Advice of holy David, Give unto the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 16.28, 29.
ye Kinreds of the People, give unto the Lord, Glory and Strength; Give unto
the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, even this, Come before him, Worship the
Lord in the Beauty of Holiness; To worship any else, Religiously, is to Rob God
of his due; it is unbeauteous, altogether deformed in his Eyes, and in the Eyes
of all his Saints and Angels; Therefore, only To him, who is the Blessed, 1 Timothy 6.16. Rev. 15.4.
and only Potentate,
To him, who is Only Holy,
To God, Only Wise,
Be Honor and Power Everlasting, Romans 16.25.

Be Glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.


APOSTROPHE, To my Honored Patron, The LORD TRACY.
My good Lord,
HOW your Noble self, and my other dear Lord Newport, will excuse me, to both
of whom I have not performed all that I have promised to either, though, as to
me, the Performances of both your Lordships have exceeded the Reality of your
own, and the Vanity of other men's Promises, (which were spoke into the Air, and
writ upon the Water) I cannot tell; and I have but these two empty Reliefs,
that my Breach is but a Delay, Et mea sit solo Tempore lapsa Fides. And that
there is less of Affliction to either of your Honors, whilst such Trifles as
these, do less swell; and perhaps a little more consideration may make amends,
in the Substantialness of the rest, for the Froth of these.

Give me leave, I beseech you, to acquaint your Lordship why I insist so much
against Doway-Rome, and why in that particular, against their Worshipping of
Saints, and why too I intermit my Advertisements to the English Opinionist, and
ill Liver; I have done the first, because in a late Disputation held at
Winchcombe, some of my Brethren, Nov. 9.
and my self, have been accused for Romishly-affected, in the Good Will we are
thought to bear to Holy Days; how unjust this Imputation was, did then appear,
how Rash, and Unadvised, G. Goodman, Bishop late of Gloucester.
I collect out of my Ordinarie's Dedication to the Lord General, (and, by the
way, the Civil Supremacy was asserted by us, whom some will traduce, as guilty
of Dis-affection, against the Allowance of those, who, though by a new kind of
Popery, would be accounted the main Pulpit-Champions for it) to whom he
intimates some holy Thanks for the expected Reviviscency of Festivals. I have
done this against Doway-Rome, because I have Rational Presumptions, some of
them may be my Early Readers, and because I would divert them from
Clancular-Machinations, to a Pen-Contest; I Reprieve my Sentence against the
Opinionist, and my Spiritual Physic for his Recovery, because I would both
search to the Root and Heart of that Question which concerns the Ministerial
Order, opposed by them, who are especially obliged, even by that Order it self,
to Defend it; and because, as many have already canvast it, I resolve, not to
be a Fidentinus, a Plagiary, but to bring New, as well as More Sacks to this
Mill. This being the great (...) of this Seeking Age, a Subject in which Plain,
and Evident, and Apodictical Satisfaction, is as Necessary as in any, and in
which the Honor of God is of Fundamental Concernment, I hope none will blame
me, if I retire a while, and gather new Breath for such a severe Encounter.

And now, my Lord, I have more Reasons still for such a Postscript, and those
of a very Intimate, and Individual Signature, though I esteem it the Duty of my
Gratitude, to let our British World partake.

It Is very true, (and, though unfortunate sometimes to my self, yet always
Honorable to those of whom I make Respectfull Mention) I Complement no Man; --
and it is, not only his, but my Happiness, that my dear Lord Newport cannot be
Flattered; I have told him truly, that no Lord, besides his Excellent self,
does quite-out know me; nor does this derogate from your Honor an Iota; Salt,
and Time, and Constancy of Affection, are the marks, without which it cannot be
discerned, but by a Remote Conjecture, what a Man is; His Lordship has had
these Trials of me, and, I humbly thank him, I have had these Tastes of him;
Such Characteristical Declarations of the Spirit of a Man, may, hereafter, be
as entirely Yours, and I, if it be possible ( -- pardon my Ancient Zeal to Him,
which does not take off from You) as much Inaerated to Your Honor, as His;
Preaching is but the One Half of him, who is, at all, a Man, though his
Judgment be of so low a Stature as Mine, and is so far from being Commensurate
to the Head and Whole, that it will scarce reach up to the Skirts and Half of
some Better-grown, and Taller Mind; and One Half of this Half of me, has been
Communicated but two years to your Parish (let my Brethren pardon the word, and
not afflict Innocence, either Vocabulary, or Personal) and not One to your
Lordship, some Necessary Affairs, and some Recesses having withdrawn your
Lordship's Ear from out your own Pew; And yet, though but thus Little Known,
and Less Deserving, what Plenty of Favors have you heapt upon me, from the
time when I was not known at all, to this very day? neither will, to recount
this, be a Disparagement to the Clemency of my other Excellent, and
Ever-honour'd Lord, no otherwise than it is a Shame to have Another tread in
his Virtuous Steps, and to do Good as he has done; I am sure it will not
offend his Meekness, if I should ride over, and tell him, concerning your
Lordships Love to me -- Amat me (Nihil Possum dicere Ardentius) UT TU: Plin. l.
3. ep. 2.
Your Lordship, when you did not know me, nor I your Lordship, and therefore
was un-brib'd so much as with a Desire of mine -- Ignoti Nulla, did call me to
you, that you might know me, and, ever since, your Indulgence has increased,
un-allur'd with ought, but a Grateful Acknowledgement, as if each humble and
welcomed Visit of mine, were an Obligation upon your self, who, out of all your
Treasury of Books, have learned nothing more, than to Oblige; You instantly
Considered the Dues of the place in which you seated me, were so exceeding
small, as to the Encouragement of Studiousness, that you feared, without some
New Access, I might be rather Studious, how to Live, therefore you annexed, out
of your own Store, Ten Pounds, to be Yearly paid by your self, which I receive,
without a Call, and with Increase; the Occasional Rich Favors, and the Daily
Improvement of your Kindness, will be more tedious to you to Read, than to
Bestow; but I have no other way of Visible retribution, than thus to speak, nor
of Real, than still to pray; there are, yet, such Primitive Noble Spirits in
our Isle (and I wish them more, for, certainly, this it self is one fair step,
though this alone does not reach home, to the making of them Beatify'd Spirits)
however we are the Byword of the People, and, sometimes, of one another, God
mend it) who see, through our Calling up to God, and, for him, Regard our
Function, Prove. 3.9.
and Honor him with their Substance, and without Superstition, by imparting
some of it to such an Offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13.
as we are at THIS DAY; nay, though some of us are cast in so Rough a Mould,
and Uncourtly Frame, as nothing does more prejudice us, than our own
Backwardness, and dis-commodious Modesty; such an Indisposition I have suffered
under, for many years, and can take no better Revenge upon it, than to tell the
World what a Peevish Undoing Tyrant it has been; but you, my good Lord, like
the Sun, have searched into Obscurity, and brought forth, and made much of
that, which would still have lain in Contemptible Darkness, and be worth
nothing, had not you looked upon it; Such an affable and munificent Spirit there
is in your Neighbour-Name, Sir Humphrey Tracy.
the Bounteous Baronet, who, next to God, loves the Minister of God; His, and
your Minister, pray for Him, and You, and that the same Mind may for ever run
in the Blood of all the Tracys: Nay, my Lord, not only you, in your Person,
have done this, and more, but you, in that, and in your Example too, have done
done more than this, whilst your self, in much part, and your Village, in the
rest, have always exempted the Calling of God, (since the first day I served
you, and them in Christ) from the Burden of Taxes, so that I am, well nigh, in
as good a state now, as when I was, once, Only- Student of Christ-Church. This
I desire, with my Name to it, to Record, for the Honor of Toddington, that, in
such an Age, when some think that Proverb a Law, to Pinch on the Parson's side,
I have Neighbors of so much a better Religion, by how much they will pinch
themselves, that their Vicar may escape. Deus Hic, Semper Eadem, Alibi Meliora
-- And yet, though I do, as I ought, thus liberally acknowledge your Lordship's
Liberality, I should be sorry, if any shall take disadvantage from hence, and
(because by these grateful Presents, they know where I am) call upon me to pay
the Debts of Others; to prevent which Unprosperous Cruelty, let me give them
also to understand, what your Lordship has often said, that it is Pity I should
have so Much too Little to Live on; and that the good late Bishop of Gloucester
has Printed my dear Father amongst those Reverend Bishops who died Poor, so
Poor, that he was not able to leave to his Only Son one Only Score of Pounds;
Little I had of the -- Res Relicta -- and, that I had not much of the -- Parta
Labor -- (though perhaps, more, for want of the -- Parta -- than of the --
Labor --) my present Lowness does Testify; I take leave, to desire the World
to bear me witness, that I profess my self

From my Study. (which your Lordship built) in Todington, Nov. 20. 1653. Your
Lordships exceedingly obliged Chaplain, to serve you, WILLIAM TOWERS.

FINIS.

