(...). Extraordinary Days. OR SERMONS On the most Solemn FEASTS and FASTS
throughout the Year. viz. CHRISTMAS DAY. ASH WEDNESDAY. GOOD-FRYDAY.
EASTER DAY. ASCENTION-DAY. WHIT-SUNDAY.


Whereunto are added two other Sermons.

By JOHN TORBUCK, M. A. Rector of Ludgershal in Wilt-shier.

Romans 14.5, 6. One man esteems ((...)) one day above another.

He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not
the day to the Lord, he does not regard it.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, 1671.

To the worthily Hond. and Right Worshipful, Colonel William Ashburn-ham, One
of his Majesty's principal Officers at Court, and Burgess for Ludgarshal in the
County of Wilts.
All Happiness, etc.
Worthy SIR,
SInce no man, be he never so great a stranger to your Person, can be
unacquainted with your Virtues and goodness, so well known to your Country, and
particularly your own Borough, (whose Inhabitants are ready at all times to
throw themselves at your feet in thankful acknowledgment of your many favors)
among these, Sir, (now Providence has made me one of of them) may this my Mite
of gratuity be accepted of.

I thought these Tracts not improper for such a Patron, both in respect of
their style and subject: The Style being poor, may yet, Sir, we know travel
abroad with courage and safety under Your Protection. The Subject indeed High,
our Solemn Festivals, were at the same time with you restored to their due
splendour. And I have this to say, the plainer these Compendious discourses, the
more suitable to their Auditory, being the substance only of what was delivered
to my own charge: Nor ought these Truths any more (then some our more solid
Gentry now adays) be the less esteemed of, for their ordinary garb. Wherein,
what I have borrowed, I have chosen rather to be too troublesome, with
Interlinings, then not honest, to repay again, in the exact quotation of the
Authors: I would have no man for me such a Diagoras, as in pett to turn
Atheist, finding me not thunderstruck for wrongfully fathering another
labor. To Conclude, Sir, If these my Honest, (though weak endeavors) prove
any way profitable, with your pardon, and good liking; I have my wish, whose
chiefest ambition is to beg leave, to subscribe,

SIR, Yours in all cheerfully devoted service, JOHN TORBVCK.

The Preface To the READER.
THe Great Diespiter, (as the Poet calls him) that Father of days: God, who
made every day, Genesis 1. has made some days twice, that (as well as in respect
of a common fiat, so of a special faciamus; of a common Providence, so of some
signal and peculiar mercy) we may say of them with the Psalmist's Emphasis, 18
Psalm. 24. These be the days which the Lord has made, we will be glad, and
rejoice in them. And as there is a time of joy, so a time to weep, 3. Eccles.
4. as a time of mirth, so a time to mourn. The Luster of Gods more glorious
favors is expressed, by rendering the light of the Moon as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun, sevenfold, as the light of seven days. Now what
senselessness, and unworthiness must it needs be, to take no notice of those
times which God has so splendedly marked out for us, with the passages of a
distinct love? Such are the Festivals of Christ's Incarnation, Resurrection,
Assension, etc. And as Gods singular bounty has advanced some days to a
superlative brightness, so our notorious sins, have brought others, to a dismal
cloudiness. The former, make up our Set-Feasts, designed for public praise and
joy: These latter, Set-Fasts, for solemn sorrow and penance. But there are a
peevish generation, (who loving to tread Antipodes to the Churches custom) are
pleased with neither; against whom, we may justly take up our Saviors
complaint, 11. Mat. 17. We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we
mourned to you and ye have not lamented.

If these may Object; praiseing God for a Savior, and Repentance for sins, are
duties required every day, and therefore what needs all this ado? Besides, can
we (perhaps say they) depose, those set-times, we so much stand upon, to be the
very times of Christ's birth, Passion, Resurrection, etc. Does not Saint Paul
too severely check time-observers, 4 Gal 11. with an, I am afraid of you?

I answer.

1. What is always requisite, must be needs pure perverseness to slight then,
when the Church has commanded it, only because She has commanded it.

2. What is always requisite, may it not be sometimes requisite, in a more
solemn manner? They may with the same Argument, condemn the duties of the
Sabbath.

3. The Apostle in the forementioned place to the Galatians, speaks only
against the Superstitious observation of Judaical Festivals.

4. Are these the very times of Christ's Birth, etc. Here they think they have
us upon advantage, without remedy: But give me leave to say (such is the
different account of time, and upon many respects so undiscernable the loss
herein) that I should think him somewhat hardy, should proffer to swear, to the
Precise exactness of any day we keep. It is enough to any sober man, that the
Church has appointed them for such, or such Solemnities, esteeming them the
very times, (as near as she could be informed by the best tradition) nor can it
be any other than ill nature, conceitedness, and obstinacy, to cavil with her
herein.

I like them the worse because these Time-Levellers have been commonly found to
aim at the levelling of Kings, and Kingdoms as well as Holydaies, to their
discontented and factious humor.

Shall I tell thee Christian, devoutly observe what the Church has appointed
in all her reasonable commands (supposing them at least, to be the very days,
for what they were enjoynect) this will be a maine help to raise thy
meditations, to an Ecstatical height and an abundance of fresh supplies of
comfort will accrue to thee hereby.

Our Title is, (...), Extraordinary Days, or Days above Days, because These
in our Church Service Book have the Precedence of all others, in their proper
Psalms, (the marrow of Devotion) proper Communion Prefaces, most Articles of
our Creed, are contained in them, and these be the most most concerned in that
most pious and potent Supplication the Letany, where we passionately call for
mercy by those Acts done on them, saying, By the Mystery of thy Holy
Incarnation, by thy Holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting,
and Temptation, By thy Agony, and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by
thy Precious Death and Burial, by thy Glorious Resurrection and Assension, and
by the Coming of the Holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us!

Reader, This Consideration has not a little affected me (I proffer thee no
worse) and by Gods blessing, may have the same effect on thee, which is the
earnest Prayer, and Desire of

Thy Faithful, (though, unworthy) Servant J. T.

The Titles of the Sermons, with their Texts, contained in the Book.
First Sermon On Christmas Day. Or the Nativity of Christ. 1 Luke 16. And they
came with haste, ad found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe lying in a Manger.
Second Sermon, On Ash Wednesday, Or the Prevalency of Prayer, and Fasting. 17.
Mat. 21. Howbeit this kind goes not out, but by Prayer, and Fasting. Third
Sermon, On Good-Fryday, Or the Passion of our Savior. 26 Mat. 39. O my Father
if it be possible let this Cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as
thou will. Fourth Sermon, On Easter Day, Or the Resurrection. 24 Luke 34. The
Lord is risen indeed. Fifth Sermon, On Holy-Thursday, Or the Ascension. 4 Ephesians.
10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up, far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things. Sixth Sermon, On Whit-Sunday, Or the
Inestimable Gift of the Holy Ghost. 8 Acts 20. But Peter said unto him, Thy
money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be
purchased with money.
Moses Mis-us'd, Or the Magistrate's Authority most Impiously, and Impudently
affronted.
Preached at the Summer Assizes at Abingdon 1669. 7 Acts 27. But he that did
his neighbor wrong, thrust him away saying, who made thee a Ruler and a Judge
over us? Lex Innata. Religion Born with us. 2. Romans 14. These thaving not the
law, are a law unto themselves.
Errata.
Page 37. l. 9. r. Gaius. p. 38. l. 25. r. prayers. p. 73. l. 18. r. bones. p.
86. l. 14. r. four. p. 87. l. 18. r. Humane. l. 27. r. contact. p. 103. l. 16.
r. came. l. 22. r. Apostoli. p. 106. l. 20. r. of the Holy Ghost. 7. Sermon. p.
12. l. 26. r. doers. p. 19. l. 11. r. sleep.

These, and what other Faults (through the Authors absence from the Press) have
escaped, Courteous Reader Correct.

FIRST SERMON ON Christmas Day, OR The Nativity of Christ.
2. Luke 16. And they came with have, and found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe
lying in a Manger.


THere are two pieces of Wood that become the Jews chiefest stumbling block,
and the Pagans scorn, and yet are the main props in a Christians Creed, and
supporters in his Comfort.

I mean the Cratch and the Cross, 1 Cor. 1. c. 23. the one unavoidably
accompanying Christ's birth, the other his death.

But what the blessed Jesus (when he came to visit us in great humility) was
not ashamed to undergo for us, we have infinite less reason to be ashamed to
own.

God forbid, But that we should glory (with St. Paul) as in the Cross of
Christ, (6. Gal. 14.) so in his Cratch too, the one is in order to the other,
(Mystery of Divinity) the everliving God was born here, to be capable to
suffer there; and both for our salvation.

Hence, the Manger and the tree (seem they never so despicable) are greater
Monuments of Gods love to Mankind, than the glorious fabric of the Universe,
for who will deny our Redemption to be a mercy excelling the Creation?

This then is a great Feast, as the day of our Redeemers Birth, so of his
Invention too, and that only at the Sign of the Manger, Hoc erit signum, this
shall be it, says the Angel, v. 12. To this let us make have with those in the
Text, And they came with have, etc.

These words divide themselves into 4 Parts. 1 Inventores. The Division of the
Text in 4 parts.
2 The Personae Inventae. 3 The Vbi 4 The Quomodo.

1. The Inventores or Persons finding. They came. 2 The Personae Inventae, or
Persons found, Mary, and Joseph, and the Babe. 3 The Ubi or place where they
were found, In a Manger. 4 The Quomodo, how they found them, or what means they
used here. They came with have.

1. The Persons finding, They came, The Persons finding Shepherds.
this refers to the Shepherds, v. 8. abiding in the field, keeping watch over
their slocks by night.

But if any are offended at (...), ((...). Theoph. Excubantes, quasi extra
cubare dicas, atque adeo sub dio pernoctare Beza) and say the Shepherds being
at this time abroad without doors, must needs turn our December Christmas out
of doors quite (supposing it improbable, that they would in so cold a part of
the year, take up their lodging in the open field) they must consider the
diversities of Climates, and the vigilance of Contrymen, when necessity
requires.

The great confluence of all sorts of people and strangers at this general tax,
v. 1. might make them look about them with the more care and painfulness.

Quare vetusta traditio Ecclesiae non temere nobis rejicienda est. Casaubon.

The Shepherds did properly seek for and find, (as Bishop Andrews observes)
the (b) Chief, (c) Great, and the (d) Good Shepherd (e) of our souls; This
blessed Lamb of God (now newly yeaned) that takes away (f) the sins of the
world. (b) 1. Pet. 5. c. v. 4. (c) 13. Heb. 20. (d) 10. Joh. 11. (e) 1. Pet.
2.21. (f) 1. Joh. 29.

God says of his begotten, Let all the Angels worship him, 1. Heb. 6. which
honor as he confers on those glorious Spirits, so in his infinite mercy, he is
pleased to allow men likewise, (whose nature he took, 2. Heb. v. 16. and not
the others) and amongst these, the most ordinary plain Contrymen Shepherds.

Christ coming to undertake for us in the meanest con^ition that might be, What
may be lear^ed a from the Shepherds.
has every thing suitable thereto, a homely place for his birth, and homely
guests.

Nor will I part with my Shepherds, till from them I learn, that as there is
requisite a due distance between Superiors, and Inferiors, so this ought to
be free from all manner of Pride and Contempt, since God accepts of the
lowest as well as the highest.

Now we know (blessed Jesus) that thou art (h) he, that should come, not do we
look for another, since according to the undeniable Character of the true
Messiah (which thou thy self have given) the (i) poor here have the Gospel
Preached unto them. The Shepherds this day receive the (k) Evangelium, the
first glad tidings of a Saviors birth; vobis natus est, v. 10. (h) 11. Mat. 3.
(i) v. 5. (k) (...). v. 9.

To conclude; the Joy of this Birth is ((...)) to all people, v. 10. Christ
descended, as from David, and Solomon, and a list of Kings, so from Booz, and
Jesse, plain Countrymen: Now, he came for them, from whom he came; which
Intimates that all sorts and conditions of men from the Scepter to the
Sheep-crook, are interessed in a Savior.

Lastly, Shepherds first hear and declare a Savior, perhaps that the
plainness of the men might add the greater credit to their relation. Abfuit ab
iss fingendi voluntas, and astutia, quia rudes fuere. Lactantius.

I pass now from the Inventores, or persons finding, the Shepherds, (they came
and found) to the personae inventae, The personae Inventae. Mary, and Joseph,
and the Babe. Why Mary named before Joseph.
persons found, viz. Mary, and Joseph, and the Babe.

These be the Parents and the Child; but why Mary before Joseph? the Wife
before the Husband? This does not quit the woman of her duty of sub^ection, 5.
Ephesians. 22, 23, 24. and wring the staff of Pre-eminence, Rule, and Authority out
of the man's hand, to put it into hers. But perhaps she was found first (though
not far one from the other;) or rather it seems to me, as if the wisdom of the
Holy Ghost would imply hereby, that Mary of the two, has the greatest share in
this Birth. Mary is the real Mother, Joseph but the reputed Father of Christ.

That He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, is an
Article of our faith, without any talk of Joseph.

Hence sinful, vile, polluted Adam's offspring, Man, touch not this Holy Maid:
and hence all base and unchaste thoughts; that which is conceived in her, is of
the Holy Ghost.

Which Conception Sicut vermis calefaciente sole, etc. Aug. de temp. Ser. 181.
St. Austin makes more plain unto us by the similitude of a Worm, which Christ
compares himself to, 22. Psalm. 6. I am a worm, says he, and no man; i. e. not
conceived after the manner of men; but as the worm by the heat of the Sun
only, is formed of mud or slime: so Christ was conceived of our flesh, by the
secret assistance and operation of the Holy Ghost alone. Nec potest doceri nisi
a donaate, nec potest addisei, nisi a susc^piente. St. Bern. on the Conception.


This Melchisedec without Father, Jesus thus miraculously conceived; Mary yet
acts the part of a Mother in bearing and bringing forth this her first born, 5,
6, 7. verses.

From hence forth all generations shall call thee blessed, 1. Luke 48.

Thou art the King of glory O Christ.

Thou art the Everlasting Son of the Father.

And yet, when thou tookest upon thee to deliver man, thou did not abhor the
Quantus est qui natus est, Sed quantus est qui de Virgin natus est? Aug. Hom.
32. page 340.
Virgins Womb.

Mary! in this, He that is mighty has magnified thee. 1. Luke 49. Wheresoever
the Gospel shall be Preached, there shall also this be told. 26. Mat. 13.

Thy name stands registered in that Brief, (our belief) which must have passage
over all the world, and we will never remember thee, but with love and
reverence next to adoration.

(If I might not be thought too superperstitious and impertinent) I could tell
here, how that this name, once named, (out of aweful respect to the Blessed
Virgin) did once stop a young Gallants lust; in its full design, and work a
notable Reformation in him. The Story, we may read at large in Montaigne's
Essays, lib. 1. cap. 46.

But as the poor simple man, must needs Saint. Pontius Pilate, because his name
was suffered in the Creed, will I (on the contrary) altogether despise Joseph,
for being left out.

Joseph then, Joseph's description.
(though of mean occupation) a Carpenter. 13. Mat. 55. yet is of Royal descent:
of the house and lineage of David, v. 4.

As to his Civil condition, he is noble (belonging to the tribe of Judah) and
therefore repairs to their Metropolis Bethlehem, to be taxed, v. 4, 5.

As to his virtuous disposition, he is a just man, and obedient to the Divine
command. 1. Mat. 19.24.

I would fain leave them, as they were found, together. A loving pair, and so
not far one from the other. Indulgent Parents, and so both near the Babe.

Methinks I see the over joy'd Mother smiling upon her heavenly Offspring:
whilst Joseph admires his Virgin Wife, she busily wrapping and swaddling his
beauteous body; whilst he as cheerfully waits and tends on this sacred
Nurse.

It Is Honor over and above sufficient to Joseph only to be husband to her,
whose child he durst not own to have begotten, For the Holy Ghost came upon
her, and the power of the highest did overshadow her: wherefore that Holy thing
which was born of her, is called the Son of God. 1. Luke 35.

Which brings me to the Babe, to whom I long indeed to come as the subject
matter of this Festival.

As Contemptibly as here he seems to lie, The Babe who he is.
this is none other than a Savior, Christ the Lord, v. 11.

1. A Savior.
A Savior, and soter hoc quantum est? says Tully. How great are the thoughts
of a Savior? if but for the Body? But this is a spiritual Savior, this Babe's
name is Jesus, because, he saves his people from their sins, 1. Mat. 21.
Neither is this salvation in any other. 4. Acts 12.

A Savior, Christ.
Christ, or Christus dicitur a Chrysmate i.e. unctione St. Austin de temp. Ser.
181.
Anointed, for of a truth this Holy Child Jesus was Gods special anointed, 4.
Acts 27. with the oil of gladness above his fellows, 45. Psalm. 7. i. e. as the
Bishop Hall 's Paraphr. on the Text.
King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church: God has endued his assumed humanity
with all divine graces above all mere mankind.

Christ comes fully qualified, for the work of a Mediator, or complete Savior,
purposely designed hereto, with his Commission Patent from heaven; for him has
God the Father sealed, 6. Jo. 27.

3. Christ the Lord. The Lord.
There be Gods many, and Lords many, 1. Cor. 8. chapter 5. But Holy Babe, Thou only
art the Lord. There be many Christi Domini, the Lords Christ's or anointed, yet
but one Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ.

He is the Lord, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. 17. Rev. 14. The Lord
coeternal and coequal with God the Father, begotten of him before all worlds,
God of God, very God of very God, says the Nicene Creed.

Such a Lord, that the very Pagan Augustus.
Emperor, it is reported by Grotius, lib. 7. c. 2. upon the same day that this
Babe was born, forbid any by Edict to call him Lord, That all Lordship might be
ascribed to him. To whom he in great devotion erected an Altar with this
inscription, Haec est ara primogeniti dei. Suet.

The Delphick Oracle is said to acknowledge the Deity of this Babe, vid.
Balduin. de Cas. Consc. page 75. One of the Sybils to prophecy concerning it:
Plato to believe it: But whatever becomes of Heathenish Stories; Scripture does
sufficiently prove him our Immanuel, God with us. 1. Mat. 23. In this word
(says Bishop Andrews Ser. Not. 9. page 75.) is employed both natures, El
signifies Gods cum plenitudine potestatis, God in his full strength and virtue,
God with all that ever he can do. So is Christ, says Athan. in his Creed,
perfect God; Immanu with us: one of us, perfect man too; and that in the
Infancy of our nature, (...) a Babe.

A Babe. Christ a Babe.
((...) dicitur pro (...) Eust. (...)) implies a child newly born hanging at
his Nurses breast.

Blessed Babe! Well may thy name be called Wonderful, 9. Isaiah 6. what Christi
Nativitas silentio colatur, etc. Bas. Hom. in Sanctam Christi Not. p. 246.
a mysterious Birth is this? where Incomprehensibility is cradled, 1. Rev. 8.
Eternity has a beginning, the Rock of ages not a day old, Almightiness made
weak, the Word, 1. Jo. 1. not able to speak a word, Immensity (l) whom the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, but a span long, 2. Lam. 20. He (m) that has
gathered the winds in his fists, and bound the waters in a garment, who has
established all the ends of the Earth, is himself in a Virgins arms, in clouts,
in a stable. The great (n) creator and (o) preserver of all things, is content
to become a Creature, to take Being from her to whom he gave Being: and
nourishment from her, to whom he gives sustentation. Blessed is the womb that
bare thee, and the Paps which thou have sucked. (l) 1. K. 8. chapter 27. (m) 30.
Pro. 4. (n) 1 Col. 16. (o) v. 7.

Oh whether has thy love for us transported thee, infinitely below thy self in
Humiliation, which must needs transport us beyond our selves in admiration of
it.

3. The Ubi, or place Christ was found. The Manger. Why so?
This Humility does further demonstrate it self in the ubi, or place Christ was
found in, the Manger.

How so?

1. Take the Holy Ghosts reason, v. 7. there was no room in the Inn. No Room in
the Inn.
In respect of the meanness of her Husband Joseph, and that the concourse of
people was so great: so Bishop Hall in his Paraphrase on the Text. O ignorance
and ingratitude! no room for him on Earth, who prepares us such glorious
mansions in Heaven, 14. Jo. 2.

2. This was the Angels Sign to find Christ.
This was the sign given of the Angel, verse 12. without this, the Shepherds
might have sought Christ long enough, and not have found him: Let them alone,
say nothing to them (says Bishop Andrews in his Ser. of the Not. 12. p. 110.)
when they came to Bethlehem, they would never go to an Inn or Ostrie, but the
very best house in the Town, or if to an Inn, to the fairest Chamber in it, or
to a Chamber at least.

They would have expected a chief person in a chief place, a Lord and Savior,
somewhat Lord and Savior like, in a Crimson Mantle, in an Ivory-Cradle, etc.

But this is his state of Humiliation, and as he is Athan. in his Creed.
Inferior to God, as touching his Manhood, so inferior to man touching his
Manger. Being made like unto the Beasts that perish, 49. Psalm. 20. lower then
this he could not well go.

3. This Sign runs Counter to man's sinning.
Our Saviors Signs runs counter to man's sinning, and so it must: No fruit will
serve us but the reserved tree; no preferment but a Dii eritis, 3. Genesis no
Tower but one that shall reach to Heaven, 11. Genesis 4. Now contrary to all this,
is Christ's low, common, and despised Manger.

If Pride be the direct way to Hell, quite back again Humility, must be the way
to Heaven.

4. This Sign was proper to Shepherds.
This Sign was proper to Shepherds, to give them encouragement for their
admission to Christ, this shall be a Sign unto you, v. 12. There will be no
Porter to stop the passage, no strict Guard to hinder your access to the Manger.

5. A Sign that Christ stood not in need of any external pomp.
This is a Sign that Christ stood not in need of any external Signs or means to
set him forth: But was, and is (of himself) independently glorious.

Indifferent personages commonly covet after the gaudiest dress; a Pearl of
great price retains its value, as well in a Manger, as in the Costliest Cabinet.

The more unexpected is his greatness (by the baseness of his Sign) the more it
is to be admired.

6. The lower the sign, the higher his love.
The lower the Sign, the higher Christ's love to be so far abased for us.

7. The viler the Sign, the viler sin, that brought him to it, The viler the
sign, the viler sia.
the uncleanness of our hearts brought Christ to such an unclean and noisome
Birthplace.

8. This sign was to punish the the Jews.
This Sign might be a Sign that God had a mind (in his infinite Wisdom and
Justice) to punish the obstinacy and ingratitude of the Jews, making this Sign
of the Manger, the Sign of our Savior, rather Signum Contradictum, than
Creditum: rather spoken against, 2. Luke 34. than believed: That their haughty
spirits were ready to cry out with as great scorn as they 1. Sam. 10 c. 27. How
can this man save us? They fancied that the Messiah should have a Princely
Court at Jerusalem, and never dreamed of a Manger.

9. This was a sign Christ intended no greatness at his first coming.
This Sign was a Sign, Christ intended no greatness, no temporal greatness, at
his first coming. His beginning was a Cratch, his end no other (exaltatus) or
lifting up, (8. Jo. 28.12. Jo. 32.) then the Cross. The one was proportionable
to the other, some describe a Cratch (says Bishop Andrews in his Ser. of the
Not. 12. page 3.) to be made Cross wise.

Lastly, What God has ordained, Lastly, This sign God ordained, etc.
(for this Manger, was not left out of the Holy Pages of his eternal, wise
decrees, 40. Psa. 28.) what Christ gladly accepted of, 40. Psalm. 8. what the
Holy Ghost in Scripture testifies, the Angels openly Preached and Sung to, 11,
12, 13. verse, we have no cause at all to be offended at, but with all love,
joy, humility, and astonishment to adore this Babe lying in a Manger.

4. Quomodo, or how Christ was found. (...). Its signification.
I come to the Quomodo how Christ was found; or what means the Shepherds used
here, and that was (...). They came with have, this signifies.

4. Ephesians. 3. (...). (from whence comes (...)) and
Endeavor (...) studium, 2. Cor. 8. chapter 16.
Study and earnest care for Christ. The desire of all Nations (2. Haggai 8.) is
worthy of all this; Religion does not indulge laziness. Heaven will not drop in
our mouths, and we sit still; the promise is made to the willing and obedient,
1. Isaiah 19.

urgent and forcible Hastening. (...), The Angels hastened Lot, 19. Genesis 11. or
Hurried him by violence, for ver. 12. it is said, they laid hold on him, and
brought him forth, whilst he lingered, which implies that the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, 11. Mat. 12.

There is a natural lingering in our pursuit of Heaven. The way is either too
far, the night (of persecution) is too dark, or our flocks the World, too dear
to be left; but we must with the Shepherds, with a full resolution and sacred
force break through all these, if we intend to come to Christ.

3. Acceleration ((...) is quasi (...) viam contrahere) a Contraction of the
way by taking up of our feet nimbly.

This implies a redeeming of the ((...)) the Instant opportunity to come to
Christ. To day, whilst it is to day, 3. Heb. 7.13.

Delays are dangerous; if you ge not now the babe may be gone, and the sign to
find him in vain. If we use not timely means, they may in Judgment be taken
from us, or prove ineffectual to us.

Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. c. 2.
The Angel begins this days news with an Ecce, a Behold tidings of great Joy, A
Savior Christ the Lord, whose Birth this day speaks Peace on Earth; Good will
toward men, for which we must render Glory to God on high.

Application.
Application
Let us conclude with the Shepherds on an Eamus, out of hand, ver. 15. Now, let
us go to see the thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has made known
unto us.

Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, 55 Isaiah 6. Call upon him whilst he
is near, and indeed this day he is not far from every one of us, 17 Acts 27.
being in his Incarnation, God with us, in our nature.

God with us too in the Saeramental signs, i. e. the Bread and the Wine, not
much unlike (says Bishop Andrews in his Ser. of Not. 12. page 118.) the sign
of this day, for what are they but weak and beggarly Elements, 4 Gal. 13. in
themselves, yet in them, (as in the Cribb) we find Christ, and spiritually feed
on his Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 10. chapter 16.

Nor could the Church, in her highest rapture, at this blessed Eucharist, think
on a fitter Anthem then that of this day to the Cratch. Suddenly on (the
Infantem Jacentem in praesepi) the Bahe in the Manger, follows, gloria in
Excelsis, Glory be to God on high, etc. v. 12, 13. who in his infinite love to
mankind, brought Christ so low, to be partaker of our nature, that we might be
partakers of his divine nature.

In hoc est charitas. Herein is love. This is a Feast of Love, where Christ
himself proffers himself to be fed on, and we again love him so well, as to eat
him, with a pious longing.

We ought not to approach this Holy Table, without perfect love and charity,
Love to God, to our selves, and love to one another.

1. Love to God, who when this fullness of time was come, sent his Son, 4. Gal.
4. In this, was manifest the Love of God toward us, 1 John 4. chapter 9.

2. Love to our selves. Let us have a greater kindness for our nature, (since
our Savior Christ the Lord, has vouchsafed to dwell therein) then to make it
a sink of lusts, and uncleanness.

3. Love to one another, 1 John 4 chapter 11. Beloved if God so loved us, (witness
the place where he was found for us this day) we ought also to love one another.

Thus let us show forth Gods praise for this day not only with our lips, but in
our lives.

This days Birth fills almost the whole Chapter, with wonder and thanksgiving,
verses. 18.20.38. As we see in the Shepherds Anna, the Prophetess, and all
that heard it. Besides, the Communion Canticle, (already mentioned, learned
from the Angelical quire;) our Church borrows hence: Her constant Eveningsong
of Nune Dimittis, from devout Simeon, v. 25, etc.

What shall I say? the praise hereof shall fill all Time, and Eternity. Angels
have begun to set us in. They are only concerned in this Joy, for our sakes, 15
Luke 10. and shall not we for our selves? They cannot say, nobis to us; but
vobis to you, natus est Salvator, is born this day a Savior.

And what we must for ever remember, must we needs be so superstitious as to
forget this day, because particularly set apart for this purpose?

No. This day force up thy soul to an extraordinary pitch of praise, such, as
is not possible to keep it at every day.

Now the Church will not leave out In the Communion Service.
Lift up your hearts, let us be as ready to answer we lift them up unto the
Lord.

Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. It is meet and right so to do.

It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places give thanks unto thee O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting
God.

Because thou did give Jesus Christ, thine only Son, to be born as on this
day for us, who by the operation of the Holy Ghost, was made very man of the
substance of the Virgin Mary his Mother, and that without spot of sin to make
us clean from all sin. No less, is this Babe in the Manger: Therefore with
Angels, Archangels, and with all the company of Heaven, we laud and magnify
thy glorious name, etc.

SECOND SERMON ON Ash Wednesday, OR The Prevalency of Prayer and Fasting.
17. Mat. 21. Howbeit this kind goes not out, but by Prayer and Fasting.


IS Fasting one special means to cast out Devils, and may it be rightly used as
the only argument to prove a Demonia^k? 11. Mat. 18.

Whether it be right to hearken unto men, more than unto God, Judge ye. Our
Text is our Saviors plain and positive Assertion: The other but the
discontented Vulgars ^vil, surmise and say so. John came neither eating nor
drinking and they say he has a Devil.

We know the Devil prevailed over our first Parents, (a) Eating, and entered
Judas, after the (b) Sop; but he could effect nothing on Christ, (c) fasting
and hungry. (a) 3. Genesis (b) 13. Jo. 27. (c) 3. Mat.

(d) Fullness makes us most prone to deny God, and to forget him, and then you
know whether we are like to fly. (d) 30. Pro. 9.7. Deuteronomy. 11, 12.

Sinful and unclean excess feasts Satan, intimated by the Evil spirits (e)
importunacy, to possess the greedy Swine. (e) 5. Mar. 12.

In the words you may consider two parts. In the words two parts.
1. A Mischievous Malady. 2. A main Remedy.

1. A mischievous malady, and in this two things considerable in the evil
spirits.
A Mischievous Malady. This kind goes not out.

2. A main Remedy, but by Prayer and Fasting.

1. In the mischievous Malady, you may observe in the evil spirits.

1. Their Multiplicity.

2. Their Malignancy, both are employed in Hoc genus. This kind.

1. Their Multiplicity. Hoc genus, Their Multiplicity.
This kind, supposes a numerous species or company of the dark Region.

To denote the multitude of powers, they are said to make up a (f) Kingdom, a
(g) Synagogue, a (h) Legion. (f) 11. Luke 18. (g) 3. Rev. 9. (h) 5. Mar. 9.

The great Beelzebub can command thousands of his Ministers (if God permit) to
vex and trouble us: witness that poor Gadaren so infested with this (i) hellish
Rout; we are many, may the chief Commander of those forces seem to answer, in
respect of those that were in or about the possessed, (i) 5. Mar. 1, 2, etc.

For though Christ rebuked the spirit whereby the person was principally
actuated, in the (k) singular number, yet this Captain-agent was attended no
doubt with a sufficient rabble of the black Regiment, as appears by their
several seizing (the word once given) on their several preys in that great
herd, containing about (l) two thousand, (k) 5. Mar. 8. (l) verse 13.

A multitude of Demons (as one observes) without violence to their natures,
may lodge in the Body of one man; These spirits being able to draw themselves
out of their usual extent, into a far narrower compass; and perhaps wholly to
quit their own vehicle to make use of another; and so many may unite with the
blood and spirits.

But wherever this throng of Feinds did bestow themselves, whether in or about
one man, Gods bounty was never the less in suffering them to possess no more;
nor Christ's power in driving them away from hence; the Devils being nothing the
weaker, for not appearing each one harnessed with a several humane body.

By what has been said, we may gather, there is a damned Militia; the Devils
march about in Troops and Armies, to torment us, and conspire our ruin; yet we
know how to disband them all; no number of them can withstand Prayer and
Fasting. This kind goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting.

2. In the malady, Their Malignancy.
there is considerable in the evil spirits, as their Multiplicity, so
Malignancy.

Hoc genus. This kiud. As it includes a numerous Combination, so a Combination
of more stiff and tenacious spirits. See Bishop Hall's Paraprase on the place.
Having a more stubborn (non egreditur, and a vix discedit) goes not forth, and
a hard departing, (9. Luke 40.) stamped on them.

Hoc genus. This kind are noted for a sort of bold, abusive, most extraordinary
fierce and cruel Devils. That valued not a bare (n) Apostolical command, that
ceased not to show their malice, in the (o) face of Christ himself; (p) taring
and bruising the possessed, making him foam, gnash with his teeth, pine away,
(q) cry out suddenly, fall or wallow on the ground. Often times casting him into
the fire, and into the waters, 9 Mark 23. Seeking Extremities to destroy him,
without the least pity or respect on a (s) child, and an (t) only child. (n) 9
Luke 40. (o) ver. 42. (p) 9 Mar. 18. (q) 9 Luke 39. (r) 9 Mar. 20. (s) 9 Mar.
21. (t) 9 Luke 38.

Now Hoc geuus, this kind, be their number never so great, their nature never
so malign, is to be ejected Christ's way, though no otherwise. This kind goes
not forth but by Prayer and Fasting.

2. Remedy. Prayer and Fasting not to be sevred
The Remedy, Prayer and Fasting, not to be severed.

Christ has coupled them, and what God has joined together, let not man put
asunder, 19 Mat. 6.

Custom of the Church of old, to Join them, as we see in (u) David, in (w)
Esther, the (x) Israelites, (y) Daniel, in Anna, 2 Luke 37. So in the Epistle
appointed for this day the Proclamation goes. (z) Sanctify a Fast, gather the
People, and let the Priests say, spare thy people O Lord. (u) 2 Samuel 12.22. 75
Psalm. 13. (w) 4 Chapter 16. (x) 20 Judge. 26. (y) 10 Chapter 3. (z) 2 Joel 15, 16, 17.

practice of our Church. On our Wednesdayes and Fridayes, Days of Abstinence
(for the Bridegrooms taking away) (grounded on the command of our Savior, see
Mr. Browning on that text, p. 176, 177.) (2 Mark 20.) to his Disciples that
then they should fast in those days) our Church enjoins, (...). 12. Act. 5.
Instant, earnest Prayer, peculiarly applied to the Letany, Id. p. 148. as the
Eastern Church testifies.

Hall in his Paraphrase on the text, Efficax est oration praecedente Jejunio.
Cyp. de Jejur. and Tent. cap. 6.) Devotion in Prayer is apt to grow dull and
faint, there must be an exercise of fasting and abstinence, to set an edge upon
it, and stir it up.

Prayer may prevail without Fasting, but Fasting without Prayer, (...), etc. S.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 145.
is to small effect, and when they both join together, they make the strongest
assault on Heaven as can be.

Wherefore the Servants of God, (in their highest concerns) would not separate
them. 8 Ezr. 21.13 Act. 3.14 Act. 23.

Prayer and Fasting render us most acceptable unto God, and like unto the
Angels.

Prayer (says Reverend Hooker, The excellency of Prayer.
Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Papagr. 23. p. 23.) are those Calves of men's lips, 14 Hos.
3. Those most gracious and sweet odours, 5 Rev. 8. Those rich presents and
gifts which being carried up into Heaven, do best testify our dutiful
affection, and are for the purchasing of all favors at the hand of God, the
most undoubted means we can use. And again a little further, the knowledge is
small (says he) which we have on earth, concerning the things which are done
in Heaven; notwithstanding thus much we know, the Saints in Heaven that they
Pray, and therefore Prayer being a work common to the Church as well Triumphant
as militant, a work common unto men with Angels, what should we think but so
much of our lives is celestial and divine, as we spend in the eyercise of
Prayer.

So for Fasting (if it be right) is it not a chosen duty, The excellency of
Fasting.
an acceptable time unto the Lord? 58 Isa. 4, 5.

Again Fasting, says St. Chrysostom Ser. de Jejunio, Tom. 5. is an imitating
or following the very Angels in Heaven, so far forth as we are able, etc.
Fasting is the life of Angels, so St. Ambrose, Tom. 4. de Jejun. cap. 3. p.
239. Qui jejunat Angelorum ritu vivit, etc. St. Basil Hom. de Jejun.

These two now linked, must be of exceeding virtue and efficacy.

Prayer from Fasting cannot be sundred, for what is Fasting it self, but silent
Prayer? where in our Humility (without which vocal supplication is but an empty
sound) God effectually reads our wishes, and the pieces of a broken spirit, are
to him pleasing and prevalent Petitions, 51 Psa. 17. A broken and a contrite
heart O Lord thou will not despise.

My next business shall be to enquire why Fasting should make Prayer so
powerful? and Secondly, Why Fasting makes Prayer so powerful.
what Fasting it is that does so.

For the first, Fasting makes our Prayer more powerful.

watchfulness hereunto, sobriety and this go together. 1 Pet. 4. c. 7. Our
Vigils and Evenfasts are all one. Fullress creates drowsiness, we have an
Eminent instance of this in the Disciples, 26 Mat. 40, 41.43. who after Supper,
could not (would they never so fain) keep their Eyes open.

When the Belly is full, we use to say, the Bones are at rest, we are
indisposed to any thing else, and this indisposition of the flesh (whilst we
are in the Body) has too much influence on the soul, be it in it self never so
willing and well minded, 26 Mat. 41. 7 Romans 18.

Surfeiting degrades the ^ody to a Bestial sluggishness, whilst abstinence (as
much as in it lies) advances it self to the nature of a Soul, (a nobler
substance then to be nourished by perishing meats, Joh. 6.27.) and makes it
more suitable to that spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.44. wherewith she shall be clad
in Heaven, in order to a perfect vigorous and active devotion.

deny our selves, the more God delights to own us, 1 Samuel 15. chapter 17. and our
suit; and where can this be done better than by fasting? wherein we acknowledge
our selves most unworthy of any of his blessings: This holy Justicing our
selves, is a way to prevent Gods Judgment, 1 Cor. 11. c. 31.

want in Fasting makes us the more liable to pity others, and so the more
capable of pity our selves, according to Christ's gracious promise; Blessed are
the merciful, for they shall receive mercy.

Fasting Fasting is the Death of offenses, the racing out of sin. S. Ambrose in
the place forequoted.
kills sin, which sets God and us at distance, 59 Isa. 2. and stops his ears at
our Prayers. The starving the flesh, is the mortifying our lusts.

Fasting is the last and utmost means we can use, to procure audience to our
most earnest requests amidst our dreadfullest calamities, prescribed by God
himself, with a gracious promise of success, 2 Joel 12. Turn ye unto me (says
he Lord) with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, etc. verse 18, 19.
then will the Lord be ^ealous for his Land, and pity his people, yea the Lord
will answer.

If some measure of miraculous faith, verse. 20. together with an address to
Heaven, be not sufficient to effect a conquest on the worser Devils; all that
is left to be added to these is Fasting, and that does it. This kind goes not
forth but by Prayer and Fasting.

2. Religious Fasting. Consists.
We come to show what Fasting it is, that is so prevalent with Prayer, and that
is a Religious Fasting. Consisting

abstinence from bodily sustenance, which is either, 1 Partial. 2. Total.

1. Partial, and here I mean not the Judaical distinction of meats, nor
Heathenish niceness, nor Papistical Superstition, nor Heretical prohibitions,
nor mere Physical or Political abstinence for Healths sake, or some civil
interest, though these last ought indeed to be observed in reference to natural
self-preservation, and in obedience to just authority.

But I mean a refraining from some delicate meats, such as was Daniel's Fast,
10 c. 3. and John the Baptists, who in respect of his courser diet, 3 Mat. 4.
was said to come, neither eating nor drinking. As if this Heavenly Preacher and
pattern of penitency, this (vox clamantis in deserto) this voice in the
wilderness, (3 Mat. 1, 2, 3, 4.) stood no more in need of corporal means,
whereby to subsist, than (that pure procreation of the mind) the Voice.

Which abstinence is to no other end than ^ pious Castigation of the Body, for
the furtherance of the Soul, 1 Cor. 9. c. 27. For the Inward man may be
renewed, though the outward man decay; 2 Cor. 4. c. 16. A weak Body may lodge a
soul in good health and prosperous plight, as we see in Gailus Ep. Joh. 2.
Fasting is a refreshing of the Soul, the food of the mind. So St. Chrysostom.

2. Total Abstinence, is from all food whatever for a time, and this is either
Extraordinary, seen in 9 Deu. 9.
Moses 1 K. 19. chapter 18.
Elias, 4 Mat. 2.
Christ; or Ordinary, possible to humane nature, such as was Esthers, 9 c. 16.
This is the most complete manner of Fasting.

It cannot enter into me, how denying our selves flesh only, and gormondizing
variety of Fish (most curiously and exactly Cooked) with the best wines, etc.
can be counted Fasting, since we reckon these the most choice and courtly
entertainments.

Abstinence from all pleasure and ordinary labor, in this sense we must
sanctify a Fast, 2 Joel 16. as the Sabbath. 20 Exodus 8, 9.

pleasure. Let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her
Closet. This must be a Si sela gu la peceavit, sola Je^^^et and sufficit: si
vero ^eccaverunt membra coetora car n^^ Jejuneat and ipsa? Bern. Ser. Quadrag.
3.
general penance to the Body, keeping the throat from its pleasing meals: The
Eyes (as at all times, so then especially) from beholding vanity. The Ears from
mirth and Music, the Body from case and bravery, we see this in David's Fast,
2 Samuel 12. c. 16.20. who that while, lay on the Earth neither washed nor
anointed himself, nor changed his apparel.

Labor; Would we know what makes our Fasts slighted? Behold in the day of your
fast ye find pleasure and exact all your labors. 58 Isa. 3.

Justice, and mercy, 58. Isaiah 6.7. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen,
etc.

praises to Heaven in a general Congregation met together in the place of Gods
public worship, 1 Joel 14. Sanctify ye a Fast, gather the Elders and all the
Inhabitants of the Land, into the house of the Lord your God. This noise rends
the Heavens, and prevails with incomprehensible Majesty to take notice of our
complainrs.

Repentance, and resolution of a new life: All that we have said is but a
Mock-fast without this. But the outward Ceremony, without the substance, the
Sign without the thing signified; which does but more displease, as
disappointing the expectation, If there be no funeral, what means these
mourning weeds? If no internal Mortification, what meant this specious show of
it?

Hence open profaneness is preserred before secret Hypocrisy. The Publicans and
Harlots before Scribes and Phaerisces, 21 Mat. 31.

The Renting of the Heart, rather than the garments God looks at, and commands
sincere conversion with Fasting, 2 Joel 12. Convertimini. Turn unto me with all
your heart, and with Fasting, etc.

This godly sorrow, intimated by our External humiliation; this sorrow of
Repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. c. 10. Behold, verse. 11. what
Indignation it ought to work in us, yea what revenge against sin, what
carefulness, what fear of offending any more, yea what zeal, yes what vehement
desire of better obedience, that we may in all things be approved of God in our
Fasting.

Thus have I showed you the Excellency of Fasting and the manner of it.

Application.
But methinks by this I he ar some ready to cry out, what does this Babbler
mean? He has been all this while doing just nothing, nothing to his Text, for
how does he prove Fafting to cast out Devils, and that the worser sort: as
Christ here observes to his Disciples saying, This kind goes not forth but by
Prayer and Fasting.

To this I answer (without pretending to superstitious miracles, In what sense
Prayer and fasting casts out Devils.
or Papistical praestigies) Prayer and Fasting may be said to cast out Devils.

Calvin (see Dr. Moor's Mist. of Godl. p. 116.) Sins are Devils.
makes that Legion of Devils 5. Mar. 9. to be no other than depraved
affections, and Christ calls sinful suggestions in Peter, Satan, 16 Mat. 2, 3.
And indeed to speak the truth, Sin is worse to us than Satan, for all the
Devils in Hell, armed with their highest spite and malice, cannot hurt us
without it.

No doubt the Devil did encounter our Savior, with as desperate a design of
envy as ever he did any; and to this end, (like an Innocent Bird in the talons
of a rapacious Vulture) he was transported by him to as dangerous pracipices.
The pinnacle of the Temple, 4 Mat. 5. and the exceeding high mountain, verse. 8.
yet had no power to mischief him, because he could find nothing in him, 14 Jo.
30. he kept himself free from sin, notwithstanding those many and strong
temptations.

This Lion may roar but he cannot rent, 1 Pet. 5.8. he may tempt but he cannot
torture without Sin.

It Is observeable in Dr. Moores's Mist. of Godl. p. 114. that the Jews
Apostacy chiefly abounding in the Country of the Gadarens, made those parts
above others so obnoxious, to be so cruelly pestered with the Infernal crew.

To speak proper, Sin is the only Devil to be condemned, for all our sufferings
from the Devil; for we look at the efficient not the instrument; it with much a
do can be esteemed a cause in Philosophy.

In a Malefactor punished, we neither blame the Judge nor Executioner, but the
Offense; nor in the impious possessed, can we justly inveigh against God, nor
the Tormentors so much as the Transgression.

In this affliction, he cannot go beyond the bounds of Justice, 18 Genesis 25. nor
they beyond their Commission from him, Ep. Jud. 6. who has reserved them in
Chains for ever.

By all that has been said, I conclude, if Fasting kills sin, as has been
showed, it subdues Satan, and that in the worst kind, Hoc genus, etc. This kind
goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting,

2. The Censure due to sin, is a Delivering to Satan.
The Corrective Censure due to sin, Excommunication, is a Delivering to Satan,
1 Cor. 5. c. 5. rendering men (as Ex hoe loco decemur quod eos qui segregantur,
and ab Ecclesiastieo corpore seperantur, in vadit Diabolus eos gratia
destitutos in veniens. Theod. in locum.
one observes) to have their bodies miserably perplexed by him.

Now what acquits us from this dreadful judgment but Prayer and Fasting? the
necessary Concomitants of true Repentance, 2 Joel 12, 13, 14. The only way to
procure our pardon and absolution, 18 Ezekiel. 21, 22.

The proper business of out Fast this day begun, was in the primitive Church to
receive the penitent, etc. Eusebius. lib. 5. Hist, Eccles. cap. 24.

This day is ordered the Commination to be read, so full of threatenings to sin,
(whereto we all say Amen.) Invitations to repentance, proffers of mercy,
Prayers for amendment, with solemn Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning, that I
cannot but methinks rejoice to see Satan here fall like lightning, 10 Luke 18.
and his works so abominated (my charity gives me to believe) in this real
Humiliation; where all that is in the world, 1 Jo. 2.16. viz. The lusts of the
Flesh, the lusts of the Eye, and the pride of life; (the whole temptations of
the Prince of the world) lie buried in an Holy abstinence from all sumptuous
fare, pleasing sighs, and gaie clothing.

I shall offer but one consideration more, to win the disaffected I hope, to
complie with our Church in the custom of this Fast.

Though Repentance is always requisite, yet has there not in all ages, upon
occasion, been days wholly set apart for the solemn celebration hereof with
public Fasting?

And does it not consist in Regal Authority, to appoint those days? as we see
in Ahab, 1 Kings 21. c. 8. which Fast was proclaimed I doubt not but by a
lawful power in him, though upon a falls ground, and to an unlawful purpose.
Namely made Blasphemy, for the depriving him of his Vineyard.

Wherefore when Civil and Ecclesiastical commands concur in a general lawful
Fast, may we not harmlesly obey without asking why now!

Yet why not now? not only upon many civil designs useful, but upon many divine
considerations suitable; now we may learn from the Crane, Swallow, and Turtle
to know our proper seasons of turning, 8 Jer. 7.

Now, says Bishop Andrews, all things turn; the year; from about this time,
the new one takes date. In Heaven, the Sun in its equinoctial line; the
Zodiac, and all the constellations in it, do now turn about to the first
point. The Earth and all her Plants now turn to their best splendour and
delightsomness.

Every thing thus turning, it would not be amiss would it put man in mind of
turning too unto the Lord, 2 Joel 12. Therefore also, now says the Lord, turn
ye unto me with all your heart, with fasting, etc.

This time our Church religiously allots for a deep meditation on Christ's
infinite passion, and the very thoughts of this blessed Bridegrooms taking
away, aptly fits us for a time of fasting and mourning, according to our
Saviors injunction, in those days shall ye fast.

Now, we are to look upon him, whom we have pierced, with a more earnest and
fixed eye, we cannot but mourn, and that bitterly, (for our lusts which have
done it) without these, all the Devils in Hell could not, and therefore we
must, I think, conclude these, the worst; to tame which, Christ tells us, the
only way in the Text, Prayer and Fasting; this kind, goes not forth but by
Prayer and Fasting.

THIRD SERMON ON Good Friday, OR THE Passion of our Savior.
26 Mat. 39. O my Father if it be possible let this Cnp pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will but as thou will.


THIS week was ancientlie called By the Eastern Church: Magna and Sancta Hebdo
man. apud lat.
(...), the Great week, every day whereof is marked with blood; the full
History of our Saviors Passion; this the Church thought fit, says
Chrysostom, that it might sink deeper into us, affect us nearer, wring us and
sting us more and stronger, till it makes Christ's sufferings in some measure
ours, drawing from us, according to his Agony sweat, 21 Luke 44. (...), Bloody
tears, Blood and water in abundance, both from heart and eyes, making our
morning some what suitable, to his Heaviness and exceeding sorrow of Soul;
verse. 37, 38. Our Prayers servent like those strong cries, 5 Heb. 7. which at
some distance, in the dreadful sense thereof, he sent up prostrate, for the
removing (if it might be) of this bitter Cup. He fell on his face and Prayed
saying, O my Father, etc.

Our Text divides it self into 2 parts. Division.
1. Christ's Supplication. 2. Submission.

1 Christ's Supplication, Christ's Petition implies three things.
wherein you have his earnest Petition to God for the passing of this Cup, if
possible, implying three things.

1. The Bitterness of the Cup. 2. Christ's sensibleness hereof. 3. The
bitterness of the Cup in 3 respects.
The difficulty of its passing.
1. The bitterness of the Cup, which appears, if you consider.

1. The Cup it self.

2. The Quality of the person, who was to drink it.

3. The manner, Consider,
it was to be drank in.

1. Consider the Cup it self, The Cup it self; it is 1. (...).
it is (...), a Cup.

Christ's sufferings are sometimes compared to Baptism, 20 Mat. 22. a plunging
over head and ears; sometimes to a Cup to denote the plentifulness of them.
This Cup is wide and deep, and holds a great deal.

2. It Is (...). This Cup, (...).
which points at the grievousness of it.

This Cup, 75 Psalm. 8. is a Cup of red wine, (blood) full mixed, with the fierce
wrath of God, 1 Lam. 12. for sin.

This Cup, whosoever has tasted but one sup of it in the sense of Gods frowns to
his particular sins, may perhaps guess somewhat of its insufferableness to be
drank clear off, for the sins of the whole world.

This Cup, wherein is squeezed the whole vintage of Gods fury, due to the
transgressions of all mankind, This cup must our Redeemer take down, dregs and
all, as he becomes our Sponsor, to bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows, God
laying on him the iniquity of us all. 55 Isaiah 4.

This cup transmits most exquisite tortures into his Body, unspeakable pangs
of Soul.

1. Exquisite tortures of Body. His head was dug with thorns, his back
furrowed with the whip, 39 Psalm. 3. His hands and feet torn with vails, his
side and heart pierced with the Spear, for us he endures the painful, shameful,
lingering, cursed death of the Cross.

2. Unspeakable pangs of Soul, witness that strange distillation in the Garden,
on the very thoughts of this cup, 22 Luke 44. what wonderful inflammation, 1
Lam. 13. fire in his bones, proceeding no doubt from the dreadful anguish of
his Soul, 14 Mar. 34. caused in him this unheard of melting? A sweat of great
drops of blood showring down his body, in a cold night, for they were feign to
have a fire within, 22 Luke 55. whilst he lay abroad in the open air, upon the
cold earth!

At this hour what his seelings were, it is dangerous to define, says Reverend
Bishop Andrews in his second Sermon on the Passion, p. 354. we know them not,
we may be too bold to determine them. In respect of these, the Greek Fathers
cry out in their Liturgy, (...). By thy unknown sorrows and sufferings felt
by thee but not distinctly known by us, have mercy upon us and save us.

Such were the unspeakable distresses, Ursin Cat. page 509. Though some expound
it of his local descent thither, alleging notable reasons. See Day's L^ct.
7th. on the Creed, p. 140. 2. Consider the person that drank this cup.
torments, and terrors of Christ's soul, before, and then especially when he
hung on the Cross, witness that doleful cry of My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, 27 Mat. 46. that many make these that Hell (we say in our Creed)
he descended into.

May not then (...), This cup well make our Savior cry out? O my Father, etc.

2. This Cup is aggravated by weighing the person that was to drink it.

For as is the person, (says Bishop Andrews) so is the passion. Now Christ was
the greatest person that ever did or could suffer, and so likewise must his
sufferings be the greatest, if we consider him.

1. A man, in himself altogether Innocent.

Call it not immodesty in her sex, or only a ridiculous and superstitious
credulity to an idle dream; (but impute it rather to a good zeal raised in her
by some extraordinary Revelation) that Pilate's Wife should send such a
charge, in his behalf, to her Husband on the Bench, saying, have thou nothing
to do with that Just man, 27 Mat. 19.

'Twas nothing but what Pilate himself was convinced of, publicly declaring,
he found no fault in him, 23 Luke 14. no, nor yet Herod, ver, 15, no, nor the
Devil himself, 14 Jo. 30.

Let him be Crucified lay the envious Rabble, nor can they show any sense for
it, (why what evil has he done?) but a rash and louder crucifigatur, let him
be Crucified.

2. He was a noble Personage of the Race Royal, descended from Kings, 1 Mat. 2
Luke 4.

3. He was, (and I can go no further) God himself: The creature so miraculously
Sympathizing, with its mighty Creator, in that great Eclipse and Earthquake at
his passion, 27 Mat. 45, 51.54. makes the Centurion cry out, truly this was the
Son of God.

And the Son of God in that sense the Jews understood him, 10 Jo. 33.36. Equal
with God, without any Robbery, or Blasphemous Presumption at all.

What will you say? did our Savior then, did he suffer such extremities, he
that was God himself? must the Lord of life and glory, in whose presence, there
is fullness of Joy, 16 Ps. 11. submit to a full draught of all Infamy, pain and
death? 2 Phil. 6, 7, 8. If as the person is, the passion be, this argues again
the bitterness of (...), this cup.

3. The manner of drinking this Cup.
The manner of drinking this cup aggravates its bitterness, as,

1. Unaccompanied.
Unaccompanied (alone) of the people there was none with him, 63 Isa. 3. His
dearest ^isciples at this instant, they all forsook him and fled, v. 56. If
Peter follovv, it shall be far enough off, v. 58. If he come into the Court
where his Master is arraigned, abused, etc. It shall be with a great deal of
strangeness, protesting with Oaths and Imprecations, that he does not know the
man, v. 72.74. rather than by acknowledging him, to bring himself within the
praemunire of this bitter cup.

2. Unpitied.
Unpitied, from that nature he took, and undertook for, (Man) They for whom he
became bound, became his Executioners, They, for whom he drank this bitter cup,
put it into his hands; among these a Table friend betraies him, 13 Jo. 18. with
as great pretense of kindness, a Hail Master, and a kiss, v. 49.

Had it been an Enemy had done this, 55 Psalm. 12. it might have been borne but
a ((...)) Thou my familiar acquaintance, makes it intolerable.

Man spares not his Savior, but out of Spleen, 27 Mat. 18. and pure spite
crucifies him, and beyond all humanity, mocks and derides him, in the height of
his pains on the Cross, 27 Mat. 38, 39, etc. with Railing wagging their heads,
and desperate provocations, vah tu, 15 Mark 26. Ah thou wretch!

To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed, 6 Job 14. This yet affords
some relief, when it cannot deliver; but on Barbarism! as if some Savage Beast
only were baited, not the Son of God suffering, here is insulting and
triumphing, all helping forward, (...), this Cup, aggravating its bitterness.

2. Christ drinks this cup unpitied from God himself, as testifies the
forementioned cry of Eli, Eli, etc. My God, my God, etc. Implying that God had
for the time (showing his extreme anger due to our sins, which Christ now took
upon him) withdrawn from him the sense, and vision of his comfortable presence.
Non solvit vnionem sed subtraxit visionem. Leo.

The power of darkness is let loose to afflict him: The Influence of comfort
restrained to relieve him, says Bishop Andrews in his 2 Ser. on the passion,
page 356.

St Austin, ibid. gives this reason why the Martyrs with such courage,
cheerfulness, and singing, most of them passed through their torments.
Martyrs, says he, non eripuit sed nunquid deseruit? God delivered not his
Martyrs, but did he forsake them?

But here the Father gives the Cup to his beloved Son, 18 Jo. 11. and leaves
him with it. My God, my God, etc. This makes the Cross an insupportable
burden, after this there is no living, but an immediate yielding up the Ghost,
27 Mat. 50.

This, like the most gross and deadly poison, lies at the bottom of the cup: at
this dismal and pitiful exclamation, the Sun swounds, What Christ's sensibleness
of the Cup, (employed in his Petitioning the removing of it if possible) does
denote.
the Earth trembles, the Rocks rent, the Temple flies asunder, Jesus expires.

2. Christ's Petition for the removing of the Cup, if possible, implies as the
bitterness of it, so his great sensibleness hereof, to denote.

1. The Reality of his humane nature.
The Reality of Christ's Humane nature, See Bishop Hall's Paraphrase on the
Text, That only was it, did shrink at this cup, for though Christ, God,
suffered, yet it could not be as God. St. Austin demonstrates this at large,
Sicut Philosoph. etc. Epist. 102. page 295.

2. The sense of this cup, Sets forth Christ's graces.
did admirably set off the graces of Christ (wherein he became a pattern for
our imitation) in humility, patience, faith, constancy, etc. All these are more
seen, when pain and affliction searches us so deep, and ^ings us so
vehemently, than when by any forced generosity, stoutness of spirit, or any
natural or Artificial helps whatsoever, we bear against the sense thereof.

3. Argues the Reality of Christ's sufferings.
This sense shows the Realitie of Christ's sufferings; for indeed without this
they cannot properly be called sufferings. They seem not much otherwise, than
the scourging, piercing, crucifying of a senseless body.

This makes a greater endearment of Christ's love to us. This makes a greater
endearment of Christ's love to us.
The same that moves our pity, moves our love, now nothing attracts our pity
more to any person, than the consideration of the most sharp and severest
sufferings felt by him: The same draws a general love to Christ, when I am
lifted up says Christ, speaking of his passion on the Cross, I shall draw all
men to me.

Love is the most forcible way both to win and continue a subject, hereby
Christ enlarges and establishes his Kingdom, and confounds the ugliness, and
detestableness of his usurping Competitor, Satan, who, like a hard Master,
exacts of his vassals cruel services, cutting, slashing, destroying themselves.
Whilst our Savior, like a gracious Prince, offers up himself a Sacrifice for
his people; submitting himself for them to the most miserable usage of the
vilest and most malicious Miscreants.

5. This argues the exceeding odiousness of sin.
The sensibleness of this cup argues the exceeding odiousness of sin: For this
God spared not his own, only begotten, beloved Son, 8 To. 32. in whom with a
miraculous voice from heaven he testifies, was all his joy, delight, and
pleasure, 3 Mat. 17.

Is God angry with Sinners, do they ever feel the weight of his wrath? So must
Christ himself, and that in the highest degree, as he becomes the greatest
sinner in the world, by imputation, 53 Isaiah 6. for if he will be surety, he
takes upon him the person of the debtor, and the debt is made his. Sin then
must not be any slight or inconsiderable matter, which put the Son of God so to
it. This should work in us a greater indignation against it; our Riot and
Excess brought him to this bitter Cup.

6. This Justifies the damnation of the wicked.
The sense of Christ's sufferings, makes the damned to Justify God, in his
terrible proceedings against them. They feel no worse than what he has already
felt for them, and they slighted it.

What God spared not in his Son can we expect him to bear within us? It Is true
the merit of Christ's sufferings calls for remission of our sins, but on
condition of repentance and amendment, Jesus saves his people, not in, but from
their sins, 1 Mat. 21. we must be sanctified if we hope for Redemption and
Salvation by his blood, 1 Cor. 1. c. 30.5 Ephesians. 25, 26, 27. 1 Jo. 3 c. 2, 3.

7. This gives us assurance of a perfect satisfaction by Christ's sufferings.
The sense of Christ's sufferings, gives us the greater sense of a full and
complete satisfaction thereby made to God for sin. Sin has already spit its
utmost venom in that bitter cup which Christ so sensibly drank of. One drop of
this blood of God, 20 Acts 28. cannot but make infinite atonement; what must
whole streams do so painfully shed?

Christ's blood has a voice 12 Heb. 24. and every Groan a louder accent in it
to cry for mercy. The more pain he endured, the more pity and pardon he
commands for us, whom God made a Savior, perfect through sufferings, 2 Heb. 10.

Lastly, Lastly, This makes Christ sensible of our sufferings.
The sense of Christ's sufferings, makes him experimentally sensible of ours,
draws from him the greater compassion and succor toward us under them, 4 Heb.
15. 3 Heb. 18. We have not an high Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities, but one merciful and tender, the more ready to
refresh us in afflictions and death it self, for those sighs and fears himself
felt at the drinking of this bitter cup, which amazingly startled him and made
him so earnestly cry out O my Father, etc.

3. The Difficulty of the Cups passing, or indeed the impossibility of it
appears,

1. The Difficulty of the cups passing.
From the unalterableness of Gods decrees, 2 Acts 22, 23. Could he not here
have commanded twelve legions of Angels for his rescue? 53, 54. verses. But how
then, should the Scripture have been fulfilled that thus it must be?

Heaven and Earth may pass away, sooner than one jot or one tittle of Gods word
fail, 5 Mat. 18. (one drop of this cup be spilt.)

The stain of sin cannot be washed off, but by blood, 9 Heb. 22. now what the
blood of Bulls and of Goats could not do, the blood of the Son of God must.
Thus it is written in the Volume of his Fathers everlasting council, 10 Heb. 4,
5, 6. if you will too curiously enquire the reason, take St. Austins answer,
Ipsum interroga me scire licet quod ita, cur ita non licet: ask him, It is
lawful for me to know it is so, not why.

Notwithstanding whatsoever hardship this beloved Son underwent in this cup, it
argues the highest love of God imaginable, to suffer, and of him to drink it,
and gives us all this cheerful confidence, that he who has not withheld his
Son, but delivered him up, in this manner for us, can with him deny us nothing,
8 To. 32.

Again Christ's suffering on the Cross, was suitable to man's sinning; ut per
l'gnum erigeret lapsum in ligno Theod. Ut fieret crucifixione quae erat genus
mortis Maledictum maledictio pro nobis St. Austin, 3 Gal. 13. that as by the
Tree came Death, by the same should come life. That by his Crucifixion, which
was a cursed kind of death, he might be made a curse for us, to redeem us from
the curse of the Law; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
Tree, 21 Deuteronomy. 23.

Finally on the Cross, extensis utrisque manibus (as one observes) vocationem
tam gentium quam Judaeorum significaret, by stretching out of both arms at
widest, he shows forth most gracious proffers of embracing both Jews and
Gentiles.

2. Christ's submission.
In the text you have as Christ's Petition, O my Father, etc. so his submission;
Nevertheless, not as I will, What we learn in his Prayer.
but as thou will. Christ in his prayer teaches us, as

He fell on his Face.

He went a little further from his disciples.

Watch with me; fervency, in his Prayer he sweat great drops of blood, 22 Luke
44. Frequency, he went away and prayed the second and third time, v. 42.44.

same words v. 42.44. which were not many.

if it be possible, etc. (as if he had had, some secret intelligence from
heaven, that it could not be) he alters it thus, ver. 42. O my Father if this
Cup may not pass, etc.

our will to Gods will, for the answering our Petitions. Nevertheless not as I
will, but what thou will.

As Christ was God his will was not contrary to his Fathers, but as Gregory
Nazianzen says, (...), as the Godhead is one, so also is the will of God. But
the assumed nature, subject to humane infirmities, beginning to startle at this
cup, Christ will bring in subjection to Gods will. Since it is thy will (O my
Father) in thine infinite wisdom to order this cup for man's redemption. In
obedience to thee, and in love to him, I will freely drink it. It is a most
terrible cup indeed, witness those strange fears which possess me on the very
thought of it, making me cry out O my Father, if it be possible, pity thy dear
Son, and let it pass! Nevertheless, not what I will, according to the weak
motions of my frail flesh; but as thou will, according to thine eternal
purpose, in the working of man's salvation, verse. 42. If this cup may not pass
from me, except I drink it, Thy will be done.

FOURTH SERMON ON Easter Day, OR The Resurrection.
24 Luke 34. The Lord is risen indeed.


THe Primitive Christians (I have heard) on this day, meeting in the morning,
had this greeting: Some cried, the Lord is risen, the other answered, the Lord
is Risen indeed.

What the early women had received from the Angels, v. 1.4, 5, 6. and told to
the Apostles, v. 9. and others; The two Disciples from Emaus v. 13. now again
ratify and declare to them for a most certain and very truth saying, The Lord
is risen indeed.

The matter and manner of this report, which doubtless was with abundance of
Joy, as witnesses their great have v. 23. to bring it so many miles, v. 13. at
night, v. 29, 30. late, after Supper) offers to our consideration, two things.

1. In the text two things observable.
The Reality of Christ's Resurrection. 2. The benefit thereby.

1. The Reality of Christ's Resurrection.
The Reality of Christ's Resurrection. The Lord is risen indeed.

Some prejudiced Persons, as they did all his other Actions, of casting out
Devils, feeding the multitudes in the wilderness, rai^ing the dead, imputing
these to some delusion, Witchcraft, or Sorcerie; so they might misconstiue this
of his Resurrection also; and as they might say (as one observes in Dr. Moore's
Mist. of Godliness, p. 138.) of that great Eclipse of the Sun, at Christ's
Passion, that some delusive spirits might intercept that light, in favor of
him the great Magician, (whom they thought just to crucify betwixt those two
other Malefactors, quasi latronum pessimus (says one) as the worst of the
three) the same might say, that the same spirits might open his Sepulcher,
carry him away, and afterward appear in his shape making use of his body to
show to Thomas, or ch^nging their own vehicles into the likeness of flesh and
bones, so that no man's sense might discover any difference. To this answers Dr.
Moor in his Mist. of Godl. p. 140. give me leave to rehearse his own words, I
cannot mend them.

1. That which may be an Exception or Evasion in any case, is of consequence in
no case; for what does there at any time really happen, but evil spirits have a
power to imitate so near, that our senses may well be deceived?

2. Though they have this power in themselves, yet I deny that they can exert
it, when, and so far as they please, and therefore God would not permit them to
add so irresistible credit, to the whole Ministry of Christ, by this last
miracle, if Christ had not really been the Messiah: but he being the Messiah,
it was no delusion of theirs, but a real transaction by that hand that is
omnipotent.

3. Let me add, The Devil that grand Politician of Hell would not be such an
enemy to himself, as to give Christianity such a huge advance, by
counterfeiting the Resurrection of Christ; especially now, at such a time;
(when through the foregoing Prophecies, concerning him, and his late Testimony
of himself, in his life) all so expected it.

4. Every thing looked exactly like a real Resurrection, 28 Mat. v. 2, 3, 4.
The watch felt the Earthquake in their own fearful shaking, saw the Angel roll
the Stone from the Sepulcher, 20 Jo. c. 21. Peter looks into the Sepulcher,
finds no Body of Christ there. Christ himself immediately after appears to his
Disciples, eat and drank with them, they felt his flesh, put their fingers into
his wounds, what greater demonstration could there be to convince any
indifferent men, of the reality of his Resurrection?

5. Those Miracles he did while he was alive, being so genuine and real, as
they were, must needs beget faith in the unprejudiced, that his Resurrection
was real also, the same power in him, that raised Lazarus four days dead, 11
Jo. 39. could as easily raise himself, the third day.

Lastly, -- Fas est ab host doceri. His enemies false tale raised, 28 Mat. 13.
to put off the belief of his Resurrection, being so idle, and unlikely, gives
us the greater persuasion of the truth of it. Say ye his Disciples came by
night and stole him away whilst we slept.

There must be good words, large money, v. 12. and a fair promise of securing
their necks, v. 14. e're they can prevail with the Soldiers to blaze abroad
such an improbable story.

It was unlikely the watch should sleep, there being so severe a punishment to
the delinquents in this case. Say they did sleep, how could they tell who stole
him? or how could they once imagine it to be the Disciples? What had they more
courage for their Lord dead, than living? 26 Mat. 56. or if they were the
Disciples, where do we read they were ever arraigned, and prosecuted for this
notorious cheat? They were very merciful to forgive them that they were never
guilty of.

No, They secured the Sepulcher as it had been for their lives, rolling a stone
before the door of it, so bigg, 16 Mar. 3, 4. no ordinary strength could, so
sealed, 27 Mat. 26. the greatest durst not remove it, till the Angels are
commanded to become Porters to their rising Lord, 28 Mat. 2. and Preachers of
him to us, v. 6. He is risen. The Lord is risen indeed.

Object. How comes it to pass, the chief Priests and Rulers being so
necessarily convicted of Christ's Resurrection from the Soldiers, 28 Mat. 11.
did not yield to confess it?

Ans. Because they would rather baulk their Consciences, than their reputation
in the acknowledgement of so heinous an error.

What a blurr had it been to them to have Crucified their Messiah with their
own hands, had they owned him for such? For had they known him says St. Paul,
they would never have done it, 1 Cor. 2.8. now that such knowing men should not
know him, you shall never know by their after-acknowledging him.

Are we blind also? 9 Jo. 40. so sticks in their stomach, they will not endure
to hear it, and therefore having proceeded so far in denying him, by putting
him to death, they cannot in honor draw back, but must deny him in his
Resurrection also, though never so plain and evident. Su^rexit Domino vere. The
Lord is risen indeed.

2. Obj. If the Lo^d be risen indeed, has virally actuated that very body that
lay in the Grave, what means his appearing and disappearing at pleasure, and
coming to his Disciples when the doors were shut? this is rather spiritlike, v.
37. than suitable to the nature of a real body, v. 39. flesh and bones.

Answ. Christ, says Dr. Moor in his Mist. of Godl. p. 141. gave a specimen of
a wonderful power residing in him in his transfiguration on the mount; and that
he carried that about him then, that was able to swallow up mortality into
life, though it was usually restrained as a light in a dark I anthorn. His
Divinity therefore with his inward exalted humanity, I mean his Soul, took hold
again of his Body, and did vitally irradiate it, so that he was as naturally
united with it, as any Angel with his own vehicle, or any Soul of man, or any
other Animal with their Bodies. Nor was it any greater wonder that Christ
should rarifie his body into a disappearing tenuity, then that Angels and
Spirits condensate their vehicles, into the visibility, and palpability of a
Terrestrial body, the same numerical matter still remaining in both.

2. Christ hereby might discover the pure refined nature, and spiritual agility
of our bodies after the Resurrection, when they shall be made like unto his
glorious Body, 3 Phil. 21.

3. Christ hereby showed he was not constantly to be resident with us in his
corporal presence; and so we to apprehend him by faith, not by sense, 2 Cor. 5.
chapter 26.

Sometimes he appears and suffers himself to be handled by his Disciples, to
demonstrate to their sense the truth of his Resurrection who were to be zealous
asserters, and infallible witnessers of it to the world. Anon he withdraws, to
exercise them and us in a spiritual apprehension of him invisible. 11 Heb. 27.
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, 20 Joh. 29.

So much now for the (...), Surrexit vere, the reality of Christ's resurrection.
The Lord is risen indeed.

The benefit hereof follows, as

1. This convinces us of his Deity, his Surrexit speaks him to be Dominus, his
being risen, speaks him to be the Lord; He is risen indeed, he, and not another
no man ever before him, 19 Jo. 41. lay in that tomb, and so was he raised too
by his own power, not by another virtue; like him who revived at the touching
of Elisha's bonds, 2 K. 13. c. 21. 2 Jo. 19, 21. and 10 c. 18.

He is risen indeed. His, was a real resurrection from death, for they left him
not, till they had his very There is about man's heart (they say) a Skin called
Pericardium, containing in it water, which cools and moistens the heart, lest
it should be scorched with continual motion, this skin once pierced man cannot
live.
heart blood out, 19 Jo 34. no delusive awakening from a Lethargy, or some
ob-stupifying disease.

1. The Reality of his resurrection, proves the reality of his divine nature,
in that he is risen indeed, he is the Lord indeed; and so able to do infinitely
for us, in delivering us from all evil, and replenishing us with all good
things.

2. The Reality of Christ's Resurrection, is the only confirmation of our faith,
in him to be the true Messiah, ve^se 21. ^his day decided him to be the
Redeemer of Israel, 1 Cor. 15. c. 14.17. If Christ be not risen then is our
Preaching vain and your faith is vain also, ye are yet in your sins, grievous
consequences; but the Lord is risen indeed, and we may now stand under his
arms, and make this bold challenge with the Apostle, 8 To. 38. who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again.

3. Christ's Resurrection assures us of ours, 27 Mat. 53. after this, many dead
bodies of the Saints appeared alive, 1 Cor. 5. c. 20. Now is Christ risen from
the dead and become the first fruits of them that slept; for since by man came
death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all dye,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. This is that joyful Anthem that
welcomes in this Festival. Holy Job seeing Easter, as Abraham did
Christmas Day, 8 Jo. 56. (many hundred years before they were) by faith;
cheerfully concludes his Resurrection, from the Resurrection of his Redeemer,
19 chapter 25. Victurum me certa fide credo, libera vo^e profiteor, quia Redemptor
Meus resurget, qui inter Impiorum manus occubuit; with assured faith I believe,
and with free courage confess, that rise I shall, in as much as my Redeemer
shall rise, who is to dye by the hands of wicked men; says St. Gregory on
these very words.

Eadem catena revincta est Christi Resurrectio and nostra. Christ's Resurrection
and ours are linked with one and the same chain. If the Head be above the
water, the members cannot perish, otherwise they may, 1 Cor. 15. c. 16.17.

Now we may insult over death, 1 Cor. 15. chapter 55. since Christ risen thence,
has given death it self it is deaths wound, 13 Hosea 14. O Death! I will be thy
Death. Death now it self has its Epitaph, the Grave its Tombstone.

Nor is it a small thing for Christians to hear of their Resurrection, since it
is the Groundwork of all their hope, and happiness, 1 Co. 15. v. 19. Our Souls
are here burdened with a sinful, sickly, loathsome body; But at the
Resurrection, this corruptible shall put on incorruption, 1 Co. 15.53. this
mortal shall put on immortality; this weak, dishonorable dust, shall be raised
in glory and power, v. 43.

Well may then be rehearsed with abundance of joy, a Surrexit Dominus, the Lord
is risen, since such infinite benefit does arise to us from his Resurrection.

Application.
Is the Lord risen indeed?

1. Let us be risen with him; Then is he risen indeed to us, when our
affections are risen with him, 3 Coloss. 1, 2. Christ's Resurrection must work
in us a Resurrection to grace, 6 Romans 11. before it can work for us a
Resurrection to Glory, 20 Rev. 6. Blessed and Holy is he, that has part in the
first Resurrection, on whom the second death shall have no power.

2. Let us strive to find Christ this day risen; with the same haste as Peter
and John, 20. Jo. 3, 4. the same care, v. 11. constancy, and rapture of Joy, v.
16. as Mary; by the same means as the Disciples in the verse following our
Text, viz. Breaking of Bread, in the Sacrament. Here we may with Thomas 20 Jo.
25. thrust our hands into the print of the nails, and the wounds in his side to
convince us of the truth of his Resurrection.

I know not; Our Church will not, at this time especially, excuse us from this
duty; and cettainly the life every worthy Communicant finds in Christ (fed on
here) cannot but sufficiently inform him, that he is alive.

And having thus found him, we cannot but be Glad, 20 Jo. 20. Glad, though
Christ's rising, says Bishop Andrews in his 2 Ser. on the Resur. p. 397. did no
way concern us, or we that; yet 1. In that a Man, one of our own flesh and
blood has gotten such a victory, even for Humanities sake. 2. Then, that one
that is Innocent, has quit himself so well, for Innocencies sake. 3. Thirdly,
in that he has foiled a common enemy, for amityes sake. 4. Fourthly, in that
he has wiped away the Ignominy of his fall, with the glory of his Ri^^ng
again, for Virtue and Valors sake: for all these we have cause to rejoice, but
chiefly ^^nce his Resurrection was for us, 4 To. v. ult. how ought our souls to
overflow with gratitude?

It Is the peculiar faith of a Christian to believe Christ Risen, (Mortuum esse
Christum pagani etiam credunt, resurrexisse vero, propriafides est
Christianorum. St. Austin) and the property peculiar to this faith to create in
us Joy, for his Resurrection. Lord we believe, help thou our unbelief.

O Heavenly Father, who did raise thy Son from death, raise our dull Souls to
a due thankfulness, for this mercy!

It is meet, right, and our bounden duty that we should at all times, and in
all places, give thanks unto thee, Almighty Everlasting God.

But chiefly are we bound to praise thee for the glorious Resurrection of thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord: for he is the very Paschal Lamb that was offered for
us, and has taken away the Sin of the world, who by his death has destroyed
death, and by his Rising to life, has restored to us everlasting life.
Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and with all the company of Heaven, we
land and magnify thy glorious name evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory. Glory be
to thee O Lord most High.

FIFTH SERMON ON Holy-Thursday, OR The Ascension.
4 Ephesians. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up, far above
all Heavens, that he might fill all things.


HERE is the Highest ascent answering to the Lowest descent immaginable, and
both in one and the same person. He that descended, is the same also that
ascended, etc.

This the Apostle speaks of Christ, v. 7, 8. in his Exposition on that
Prophetical Psalm the 68. proper for this day.

His Descent we have already treated, from Heaven to the Earth, the lowest part
of the world, at his Incarnation; from the surface of the Earth, into the
Bowels thereof (the grave) at his passion.

He descended from the bosom of his Eternal Father (that excellent Glory, 2
Pet. 1. c. 17.) into the lap of a poor Virgin: He that thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, took to him humane nature and in it the form of a Servant,
submitted himself to shame pain, mortality, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried,
nay (say we in our Creed) Descended into Hell; lower than this he could not go.

Now He that descended thus, has as many lifts of his ascension till he came
to the highest pitch can be, Mark, the terms of his rise, He ascended up, far,
above, all Heavens.

In the Text. you have three parts, Division. In the Text three things.
1. The Person Ascending. 2. The Ascent. 3. The End of it.


1. The Person Ascending. He that descended, ipse est, is the same also that
ascended.

2. The ascent, long supra omnes caelos, up far above all heavens.

3. The End of it. That he might fill all things.

1. The Person ascending. The Persoa Asceading.
He that descended, is the same also that ascended. The same Person, with the
same Body, though now made immortal, Glorious, 3 Phil. 21.

Visne in altum scandere, Humilitas Gradus est. (says St. Austin) St. Paul
here shows the way and manner of Christ's Ascending (which must be ours) by
Descending first, v. 9. He makes his deep Humiliation the cause of his
Exaltation, 2 Phil. 8, 9. He humbled himself unto death, even the death of the
Cross, wherefore God also has highly exalted him.

Man's nature is aspiring and ascending, loves to be uppermost, 23 Mat. 6.7.
This we find not only in the Scribes and Pharisees, but in the Disciples
themselves, altum sapimus omnes, all would be above: would we know the right
way? It is by descending, coming down first, He that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

Ascending before Descending is Diabolical and dangerous, this made Angels
Devils, Ep. Jud. 6. ruined our first Parents, 3 Genesis He that exalts himself
shall be abased, 23 Mat. 12.

Pride being our fall the only way of recovering our selves is Humility, 20
Mat. 26, 27. whereof Christ gives him an Example, 13 Joh. 13, 14, 15. who is
there very diligent with his Towel and his Basin, washing his Disciples feet,
lower he could not well stoop.

It argues too much sensuality and Carnality to be (with Zebedee's Children) 20
Mat. v. 21, 22. all upon reigning, without any thought of affliction: The way
to Heaven is through tribulation, to eternal life, through death, 24 Luke 26.
If we would come where the Captain of our Salvation is arrived, we must tread
in the same steps, sufferings: The Servant is not greater than his Lord, 20 Jo.
16. and therefore should be content with the same fashion of Ascending, by
Descending. He that descended, etc.

2. This Descending (the lower it is) puts the greater admiration and luster on
Ascending; Motions slow and gradual, (as in a Dial) the less or no notice can
be taken of them, they are not perceptible; but those which are sudden and
aloft are gazed on, with the more delight and wonder. A rich heir apparent to
the Crown, advanced strait to his lawful Throne, causes not such astonishment
as when taken from the worst and basest condition. This demonstrates
incomparable Might and Excellency to effect. 113 Psalm. 5.7. Who is like the
Lord our God? he raises the poor out of the dust, and the needy out of the
Dunghill, that he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes.

(The Ascent, being considered in reference to the Descent,) the lower the
Descent has dug, the higher must necessarily the Ascent be reckoned from
it. Now our Creed brings Christ's Descent, as far as Hell, the better presently
to amplify his Ascent into Heaven.

He that descended thither, is the same (says the Apostle) that ascended up,
far above all Heavens; which brings me to

2. Christ's Ascent.
The Ascent, up far above all Heavens.

This going up on high, 68 Psalm. 18. whence St. Paul here quotes his Ascent,
will (says Bishop Andrews in his 7th. Sermon on Whitsun. p. 668.) bear fair
senses. It may be interpreted of Moses Ascending up into Mount Sinai, in the
literal sense. 2. Of David's Ascending up with the Ark into Mount Sion in the
Analogical sense, 2 Samuel 5 chapter 3. Of Gods triumphing over his Churches enemies,
in the Moral sense. Or 4. Of Christ's Ascending in a Prophetical sense.

Now this Ascent excells all the other, it is higher than Sinai or Sion, no
common deliverance. It Is not only some high mountain as they thought of Elias.
(2 K 2. c. 16. Pelion upon Ossa will not reach it, it is (...) above the
Heavens, quite out of Sight, 1 Acts 9. (...) ab (...) video dicitur, (...).
Above all Heavens, even the very highest of them.

Here we shall pass by (as not worthy our stay) the Sophistry of some persons
who (^s Beza observes) denying supra coelos esse locum that there is any place
above the Heavens, would attribute to Christ, Corpus (...) a Body not
circumscribed, and so unbody his Body (as I may say) ascribing to it (the
property of a divine Essence only) omnipresence: would not this somewhat
befriend Transubstantiation?

But to deny Christ Nisi sit Christus verus and naturalis homo feustra speramus
quod speramus, Beza in Textum.
pure and perfect man, (which we must do,) if we thus wrong him of his Hamane
Body, were Spem nostram a fundamentis convellere So Beza. To destroy the
foundation of all our Christian hope.

With the same Body that was passive, buffetted, bruised, buried, with the same
Body material, (flesh and bones) organical, palpable, visible, 24 Luke 29.
Behold, says Christ by all this, It is Ipse Ego, I my self) He ascended up,
far above all Heavens.

The same that after his Resurrection, retained the Print of the Nails, and the
wound of the Spear in his Side, 20 Jo. 2.7. is by him carried up into Heaven,
where he is set down, with it, on the right hand of God, i. e. Enthroned by his
immediate divine Shechina, or that ineffable unimitable Glory God does in a
most peculiar manner manifest there.

Christum scimus verum hominem fuisse, nec esse disisse, ac pro inde finitnm
corpus, finitam animam habere, scimus in coelos ascendisse gloriae Patris
socium, etc. Beza.

So much for the Ascent.

3. The end of Christ's Ascending.
We come to the en dof Christ's Ascending, viz. That he might fill all things.
(...), signifies to fulfill: That he might fulfill all that was foresaid of him,
and all that is or should be requisite for the full glorification of the
Church. So Bishop Hall in his Paraph. on the Text.

The causes then of his Ascending were,

1. To lead Captivity Captive, v. 8. Sin, Satan, Death and the Grave. He riding
in triumph into Heaven, like a glorious Victor, made an open show of these
spoils, 2 Col. 15. disarming Sin of its condemning power, 8 To. 3. cancelled
the terrible Handwriting of the Law that was against us, 2 Col. 14. slew Death
by being sl^in by it, He trod out the sting of this Adder, 1 Cor. 15. c. 55. 91
Psalm. 13. He trambled on the Dragon the Devil, 12 Rev. 19. Bruising his head
with his victorious Heel. 3 Genesis 15.

2. To give Gifts unto men. The former Act spoke the valor of his Triumph,
This the Bounty, that, showed his Greatness, this, his Goodness, v. 8. When He
ascended up on High, He led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto men. This
day of his Coronation, the Conduits run with Wine, the new Coin is scattered
abroad.

When he was taken out of Sight, 1 Acts 9. especially, at such a distance, up
far above all Heavens, we might have been apt to have concluded, out of sight
out of mind, Pharaohs chief Butlers readvance made him forget Joseph, 3 Genesis
13, 14.23. But the height of Christ's place, does not make him unmindful of us,
he remembers us in his Kingdom, 23 Luke 42. and from thence sends us rich
presents gifts, and graces, Temporal and Spiritual blessings, 1 Ephesians. 3. for
whatever we receive as a pledge of Gods greatest love toward us must be
through his mercy in Christ.

3. To prepare a place for all that believe in him, 14 Jo. 1, 2. This blessed
Harbinger, 6 Heb. 20. is gone before in our flesh, to take possession for us of
our Heavenly Mansions, most glorious certainly, and Magnificent, as provided
and appointed by such Infinite Majesty and Bounty.

Prepare us dear Jesus, for those happy habitations which thy love has so
painfully and carefully fitted and prepared for us.

The Relation that is betwixt Christ in heaven, and his Church on earth, gives
us a full assurance that he will bring that thither.

The Head is not complete without its members, 5 Ephesians. 23. nor the Bridegroom
without his Bride, 2 Mar. 19, 20. Christ therefore shall undoubtedly unite to
himself his Body Mystical, and take to the same place his beloved beauteous
Spouse; She shall be brought to the King (her Husband) in raiment of
needle work, with gladness and rejoicing shall she be brought into the Kings
Palace. 45 Psalm. 14, 15.

What Christ prays for 17 Joh. 24. himself is also able to perform, (wheree're
the man dwells he may Command his wife) none can detain the Church from
cohabiting with her Lord in Heaven.

As all Christ's undertakings in the flesh, his Birth, Death, Resurrection, he
was Born for us, 9 Isa. 6. 2 Luke 11. Dyed for us, 4 To. 25. Rose again for us;
so at his Ascension we come in too, he ascended for us, he is gone up on high
far above all Heavens to prepare there a place for us.

4. To send the Comforter down unto his Church, 16 Jo. 7. It is expedient for
you, etc. There lies an expedience that Holy Thursday should preceed Pentecost;
Christ must go before the Holy Ghost can come down; for which Bishop Andrews
alleges excellent Reasons gathered from the fathers.

1. On the Holy Ghosts part, who came to manifest himself as God; by showing
great ^^gns and wonders, now had Christ stayed, they might have att^ibuted
these to him, which had been an impeachment of the others divinity, but Christ
ascending, all such immaginations cease.

2. On Christ's part. A little impeachment it might have been to Christ's
equality to the Father; for he not going to send him, but staying still here
till he was sent; the sending of the Spirit might have been ascribed to the
Father alone, as his sole act; That he had been sent for Christ's sake had been
the most; but being ascended, his love and power is apparent to be equal with
the Father in sending him, and we alike beholding to them both. Now, the
Fathers sending him, 14 Jo. 26. and the Sons sending him from the Father, 15
Jo. 26. is all one.

3. On our part, (...). that he might fill all things, by his Spirit, (which he
could not by his Body) that he might be present with every particular member of
his dispersed Church; thus is he with all Christians in all places, at all
times even unto the end of the world, 28 Mat. 20. See Piscator on the Text, Hoc
Sophistae Ubiquitar^s sic exponunt, quasi diceret Paulus: ut omnia loca
impleret suo corpore. Sed Apostolus se ipse declarat duobus versibus
sequentibus ex quorum Collatione perspicitur, Apostolum hoc velle dicere
Christum ascendisse in coelum ut inde misso spiritu sancto, impleret illius
donis omnia Ecclesiae membra.

Again, (say they) Christ withdrew his Bodily presence, to draw us off from
sense or fleshly fondness of him, which his nearest and dearest followers were
too much prone to, as we see in Martha, 11 Jo. 21. attributing the greatest
power to his Corporal residence. Lord if thou had been here, my Brother had
not dyed. As if absent he had not been able to have prevented it. The Disciples
are upon building of Tabernacles for his stay in the flesh. As if in that only
consisted the Co summation of their happiness, 17 Mat. 4. Mary would fain be
embracing him with a carnal contract, 20 Jo. 17. which Christ strives to beat
her off from, with a Noli me tangere, touch me not, putting her in mind
nereupon of his Ascension. After that he sends his Spirit, whereby we are to
apprehend him spiritually; Seeing the invisible by faith, (which the mo^e
abstract from sense) the more notable blessing it has pronounced to it, 20 Jo.
29. Blessed are they hat have not seen, and yet have believed.

Lastly, The Fathers stick not to say, that at Christ's Ascension, before the
Coming of the Holy Ghost, it was necessary that he should withdraw himself (for
some time as to his Bodily) so his Spiritual presence likewise.

1. That the Disciples growing faint and tepid (whilst he was with them) should
now become more vigilant and watchful after him, on the sense of the loss of
him, like the Spouse, 5 Cant. 2, 3, 5, 7.

2. That they might grow less carnally secure in their thoughts of keeping him,
who were apt to presume upon a non moveber, 30 Psalm. 7. a never be moved,
though I dye with thee will I not deny thee, says Peter, 26 Mat. 35. and all
the rest, yet we find the contrary, v. 56.

3. The consideration hereof, as also the sense of their necessary falling into
sin (without Christ's Spiritual presence) drives them to humility a fit posture
to invite the Holy Ghosts Descent and abode, 57. Isai. 15.

Thus, Christus abit, ut Paracletus veniat. Christ is gone up on high, far
above all Heavens to send his Spirit down on Earth, even the lowest among men.

Lastly, To appear in the sight of God to interceed for us. 9 Heb. 24. 8 To.
34. etc. 1 Jo. 2. c. 1. 8 Rev. 3. Now we may come with boldness unto the Throne
of grace, 4 Heb. ult. since we h^ve such a prevailing friend in the Court of
Heaven; whatsoever you shall ask the Father, in my name, he shall give it you,
16 Jo. 22. Blessed Jesus! we will not robb thee of thy Mediatorship, interceed
for us still, as thou did once on earth, 17 Jo. 23. That where thou art,
there we may be also, whilst we are here, let our Souls, our affections be
above, 3 Col. 2. and hereafter receive us, both Souls and Bodies, unto that
unspeakable glory, thou now enjoyest with thy Father, where thou art ascended
up, far above all Heavens.

SIXTH SERMON ON Whit-Sunday, OR The Inestimable Gift, The Holy Ghost.
8. Acts 20. But Peter said untohim, Thy Money perish with thee, because thou
have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with Money.


THis day of Pentecost, the Fiftieth, or Jubilee from the Resurrection, has in
it two direct acts of a joyful Jubilee, 1. The Releasing of Prisoners; 2. The
Restitution of Estates gratis. Both these are effects of Christ's Ascension,
(which we have lately treated) 4. Ephesians. 8. When he ascended up on high, he led
Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. In the former, The Releasing, we
are freed from that bondage, whereunto sin had brought us.

In the Latter, our Restitution, we take again our first Happiness, (lost at
the Fall) recovered, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, 3. Tit. 5.

This is that Inestimable gift of God at this time sent, which we most
infinitely undervalue, whilst we think to value it at any temporal rate
whatever; For this, Simon Magus offers that, (which Solomon, 10 Eccles. 19.
says) answers all things, Money: But Peter said unto him, Thy Money perish
with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money.

Our Text is an Execration, In the Text, 4 parts.
wherein you have,

First, The Person Execrating, Peter. Peter said,

2. The Person Execrated Simon Magus, v. 20. Peter says unto him.

3. The Execration it self. Thy money perish with thee.

4. The Reason of this Execration, Because thou have though that the gift of
God may be purchased with money.

1. The Person Execrating, Peter, who might well take on him this Authority,
having generally with the rest of the Apostles, (20. Joh. 23) and particularly
by himself (16. Mat. 18.) received the power of the Keys, for binding and
loosing, for Absolving and Execrating.

Which power in Peter, and the Apostles, not Personally, tied only to them,
(but they receiving it, as Ministers, Priests, or Preachers (as witnesses their
preceding Mission, 20. Joh. 21. and Inspiration peculiar to this Office, v.
22) was to be derived from them, to all who should lawfully succeed in the same
function. See Bp. Andr. of the power of Absol. p. 57.

Wherefore at our entering into Holy Orders, together with Preaching the Word,
we receive this Commission; The Form is, Receive the Holy Ghost, whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they
are retained, etc.

Not but that Gods power is Ablolute, his Grace free, and unbounded, He can
save without means, or Ministers, but ordinarily, in the remitting, or
retaining of sins) he has been pleased to appoint, That the Vpper-house,
Heaven, should concur with the proceedings of the Lower House, the Pastors of
his Church on Earth, 18. Mat. 18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Christ having conferred this Honor on Ecclesiastical persons, let men be very
cautious how they deserve, and they, how they pronounce their censures.

2. The Person Execrated, Simon Magus, a notable Sorcerer, v. 9. It is reported
that in Claudius Caesar's time there was a Statue set upon in Rome in Honor of
him with this blasphemous inscription, Simoni Deo sancto, Justin Mart. Apol. 2.
of his blasphemies write Eusebius. Iren. Epiph. Of his strange things he did,
relates Egesip. lib. 1. c. 2. and Nicephor. lib. 2. cap. 22.27. He was Deified
of the people, v. 10. afterward a specious Professor, Baptized, admiring the
Apostles signs and wonders, v. 13. yet is not his heart right with God, v. 21.
He embraces the ^aith, but for some base end, makes Religion only a bait to
fish for some Secular applause, and advantage. When Simon saw that through
laying on of the Apostles hands the Holy Ghost was given, v. 18. for this
power, v. 19. (not questioning but to make his Market of it again) He offered
them money: But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, etc.

3. The Execration it self, Thy money perish with thee, (...) Thy Money go into
destruction with thee or perdition, so Judas is called, 17. Joh. 12. (...), The
son of Perdition, and Gods final Judgment on the wicked is styled ((...), 2
Peter 3.7.) The Perdition of ungodly men.

Simon Magus, Apostatizing so damnably as he did from the purity of the Faith
he had professed, and was baptized into, v. 13. (which his blasphemous, and
vile proffers, did too openly demonstrate) is by the great Apostle Saint Peter
(who as before has been said, had received the power of Binding, 16 Mat. 18)
condemned as one Excommunicate from the Fellowship of the Spirit, v. 21. Thou
have neither part nor lot in this matter, and Retained in sin, v. 23. Thou art
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

Thy money perish with thee.

This Phrase will bear a twofold Excommunication.

1. Lesser,

2. Greater.

The First, Is a Delivering to Satan, for the castigation, or destruction of
the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. in order to the salvation of the Soul. Here, the party
Excommunicated was subject (by the obsession of some evil spirit, or otherwise)
to diverse tortures of Body, sometimes to death it self.

The Latter, or greater, is An Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. the heaviest
Curse, the Fearfullest degree of Excommunication, under which who lay, could
never here be reconciled to to the Church, but carries this dreadful Sentence
with him, till the Lord shall come, to the last Judgment.

Both these intimate Gods wrath on notorious Sinners, which when inflicted,
Riches perish, fail, stand us in no stead at all. 11 Prove. 4. 7 Ezec. 19.

Thy money perish with thee.

God inflict on thee some temporal punishment, thy Purse shall not be able to
help, which they say come to pass accordingly, by the breaking of his limbs on
his pretended flight to heaven, thereby discovering his fallacious Art, and so
dying. See Egisippus lib. 3. de excidio Hierosolimitano, cap 2, Torauebatur
Magus Arostoli gratia etc. Decidat Domine, sic tamen ut nihil se potuisse
vivens recognoscat, and statim in voce Petri, implicatis remigiis alarm quas
sumpserat, corruit nec exanimatus est, sed fracto debiliatoque crure Aritiam
concessit atque, ibi mortuus est.

This is a temporal Perishing 22. Jos. 20, 119 Psalm. 92.

Or Thy Money perish with thee (without repentance) be thou doomed to eternal
damnation, this is called Perishing too, 2 Cor. 2.15. 1 Cor. 1.18.

In this First perishing, (thy bodily pain) pereat Argentum, let thy Money be
at a loss; (as indeed it shall) not able to relieve thee; Much less, if by
obstinate and impenitential persevering in sin, thou shall incurr the latter
perishing; perfect and perpetual Torment, both of soul and body, at the great
and terrible day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.10. Then, pereat Argentum, Money shall
run to nothing, at the general Conflagration, for as the old world by Water
perished, v. 6. so must this by Fire, v. 7.

4. The Reason of the Execration; Because thou have thought that the gift of
God may be purchased with money. Here we are to Consider Two things.

1. That the Holy Ghost is the Inestimable gift of God.

2. What a Horrid sin it must needs be to think it may purchased with money.

1. The Holy Ghost is Gods Inestimable gift.

1. It Is 2 Gift of his, 14 Joh. 16, 17. 11 Luke 13. Infinitely beyond all
merit, and so it is well; It is a Gift, we must have gone without it else.

2. It Is Gods special Gift (...) The Gift of God, The Gift of all Gifts, not
Datum, (as Bp. Andr. distinguishes in sermon. 14. on Whitsun. page 748.) any
worldly good thing, but Donum bonum and perfectum, That good and perfect gift,
that (this day) came down from above, from the Father of lights 1 James 17.

In this Gift are contained all the excellencies of nature, and grace.

1. Of Nature, such as Reason, Knowledge, Understanding, Arts, Policy,
Government, Stength, Courage, etc.

2. Of Grace, such as Faith, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Temperance, etc.

Every Feather of this Dove, 3 Mat. 16. is of Gold; Every drop of this
Ointment, (this Water) precious, 1 John 2.27. 7 Joh. 38. Every spark of this
Fire, beautiful, 2 Acts 3. Every gale of this Wind perfumed, v. 2. O si donum
Descires, (says our Savior, 4 Joh. 10.) if we knew but this Gift, (which
cannot be but by receiving it, 2. Rev. 17.) how sho^^d we prize it!

In this Gift, God formerly gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, verse 11. The
Gift of Healing, Miracles, etc. And in this Gift, God still gives us Pastors,
and Teachers, for these we keep this Holy Day (says Bp. Andrews) and so ought
to have for them, more then a Working-day account.

Again, The Gifts which proceed from this Gift, such as Preaching, Administering
the Blessed Sacraments, and Prayer, etc. are as good as no Gifts, but for this
Gift to the Holy Ghost. The Word, 2 Cor. 3.6. is but a dead Letter, except the
Spirit quicken it. There can be no Regeneration, or New birth, at Baptism,
except (as in the First Creation, 1 Genesis 2.) the Spirit move upon the Water. In
the Lords Supper, the Flesh 6 Joh. 63. profits nothing, if the Spirit be
away; nor can we Pray as we ought, except the Spirit help us, 8 Romans 26.

The Gift of God, Eternal Life, (through Jesus Christ) is Communicated to us by
the Gift of the Spirit: for though Christ on his part, has finished the work
of our Redemption, 19 Joh. 30. by setting his hand to it, (his undertakings on
the Cross,) yet this deed, is not forcible to us without the seal, 4 Ephesians. 30.
and witness of his Spirit, 8 Romans 16.

In this Gist, God gives peace to the dissenting, 4 Ephesians. 3. instruction to the
ignorant, 14 Joh. 26. guidance to the erroneous, 16 Joh. 13. comfort to the
disconsolate, verse 6, 7. memory to the forgetful, 14 Joh. 26. To speak all at
once, in this Gift God gives us rich discoveries of himself, 1 Cor. 2.11. nay
Himself withal, hereby the Almighty dwells among us, 68 Psalm. 18. see Bp. Hall
's Paraph, on the place.

2. The Holy Ghost now being so Infinitely Inestimable a Gift of God, (as you
have heard) what a horrid sin must it needs be, to think, it may be purchased
with money?

What Ingratitude is this to the Giver, what Indignity and affront offered to
the Gift it self?

A Gift (be it what it will) as a Gift, it is absurd to value it, much more to
put a temporal and corruptible price upon an incorruptible and Eternal
purchase: a thought of this cannot be endured: Thy money perish with thee,
because thou have thought that the Gift of God may be purchased with money.

Application.
Is the holy ghost so inestimable a gift not to be thought on, with a money
purchase.

1. This condemns Romes marketting it, by selling Crowns, Miters, Braiers,
Pardons etc. as Mantuan testifies.

-- Venalia nobis Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria sacra, Coronae, Ignis, Thura,
Preces, Caelum est venale Deuique. What does the Apostle here, (whom they so
boast of as their prime Metropolitan) refuse Simons money, and will he now have
Peter Pence? The Pope only has coined these exactions for himself, he desires
them not.

2. A Gift is such in relation to the Receivers, have we then received this
Inestimable gift? which we may know thus.

1. By Sanctity of life.

The Holy Ghost, the third person in the Trinity, is peculiarly termed Holy,
for that besides the holiness of Nature, (in which respect the Father and the
Son are also holy) his Office is, to Sanctify the Church of God, to whom it
agrees in a special manner; for where the Father Sanctifies by the Son, and
by the Holy Ghost, the Son from the Father and by the Holy Ghost; the Holy
Ghost Sanctifies from the Father, and from the Son, by himself immediately.

Where this 1. Spirit of holiness is breathed into any man it creates in him a
life of holiness, (and as the natural Spirit does) at the heart it will beat,
at the mouth it will breath, at the pulse it will be felt.

In the heart it will cause new thoughts, new desires, sane novum supervenisse
spiritum, nova desideria demonstram, says St. Bernard. In the mouth, new talk
new communication, in the hands works of new obedience.

These are the effects of that new Spirit, (the holy Ghost) God promised to
give 36. Ezekiel. 26.

This Spirit when it makes a new creature, it begins at the heart, as the heart
(they say) in any Animal, is primum vivens and ultimum moriens lives first and
dies last.) It Sanctifies the heart from all inward defilements, 15. Mat. 19.
the Lips from evil speaking, 4. Ephesians. 31. the Hands from any unlawful actions,
2 Pet. 2.8. Thus (if sincerely surveying our thoughts, words, and works, we
find them holy,) we may thence infer, We have received the Holy Ghost.

And as by Sanctity of life we may judge of the receiving this Inestimable
Gift, (for this Dov, will not light on Carrion, This Water will cleanse, this
fire will refine, this wind will fan thoroughly, a clean box it must be, that is
to hold this Ointment.)

2. By Humility. 57 Isa. 15. This Dove implies meekness, this water forsakes
the Hills, to visit the low Valleys; the less we think of our selves, the
higher esteem God has of us, (a meek and quiet spirit is with him of great
Price) 1 Pet. 3. c. 4. to whom he sends this rich present, the Holy Ghost, 4
James 6.

3. By Boldiness in suffering for Christ, this we see in the Apostles, Peter
and John, 4 Acts 8.13. and the rest, 5 c. 40, 41, 42. and Stephen 7 c. 54, 55.
Yet let men beware here, the Spirit of contradiction, obstinate gain saying of
Magistrates, and speaking evil of Dignities, (correcting Delinquency) be not
mistaken for the Spirits Magnanimity in persecution.

4. By charity, 4 James 5. Do you think that the Spirit of God (says the
Apostle) which we profess to have dwelling in us lusts to envy? (so Bishop
Hall in his Paraph. on the place) This fire from Heaven, 2 Acts 3. is to melt
us into pity, not like that mentioned, 9 Luke 54. to destroy presently all who
dislike us: who savoureth of the gall of bitterness, v. 23. has no part nor
lot in this Gift.

Lastly, Where this Gift is received, the love of God hereby so shed abroad in
the heart, 5 Romans 5. will necessarily run out at the mouth in all joyful
Expressions of gratitude, saying, Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift,
2 Cor. 9. c. 15. This effect it wrought on the Gentiles on whom it was poured
out, 10 Acts 46. they presently found new Tongues to magnify God.

They that have taken this Gift, cannot but be taken with it, (and for the Gift
sake) with the day, it descended on: Therefore let us keep the Feast, 1 Cor. 5.
c. 8.

3. Let us labor after this inestimable Gift.

1. By Prayer. It Is called the Spirit of Supplication, 12 Zech. 10. not only
because it helps our infirmities in Prayer, 8 Romans 26. but also by it, it is
attained; we draw in this Holy Breath, 20 Joh. 22. by opening our mouths in
Petitioning to God for it, 11 Luke 13.

2. By Hearing. Thus St. Peter's Auditory, 2 Acts 1. and Cornelius and his
Family received it. Acts 10. c. 44. As, (in naturalibus) in things natural
(faith Bishop Andrews) the Breath and the voice, go together; so the Spirit and
the Word in the practice of Religion. The Lord was found most chiefly in the
Voice, 1 King. 19. c. 12. His Spirit is an Instructive Word, 30 Isa. 21. and
descends (as on this day) in Tongues, 2 Acts 3.

3. By the Sacraments. The Spirit of God moves upon the Water in Baptism, and
necessarily accompanies the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Lords Supper, 2
Act. 38. Repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost. So is this Gift given us, by Christ's giving us himself to eat, 6 Jo. 57.
He that eats me, he shall live by me; now, if the breath and the spirit be
all one, 20 Joh. 22. so is the breath and life, 2 Genesis 7. and the spirit and
the life, 6 Joh. 63. They then that can make Christ a Body in the Eucharist,
must make him his spirit too, since they cannot be severed, (for (says Bishop
Andrews) The flesh that was conceived by the Holy Ghost, this is never without
the Holy Ghost by whom it was conceived) and so they can do more for him, than
they can for themselves; for who can give himself life, or Being? No, the Body
and Blood of Christ, (whereby we receive his Spirit) are verily and indeed
(says our Church-Catechism) taken of the faithful, (spiritually, not by sense,
2 Cor. 5. c. 16.) in the Lords Supper. Thus is our Soul refreshed by his flesh,
in the bread, and his blood, in the wine; and ever with this blood there
runs an Artery with plenty of Spirit in it: This cup, is a cup of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. c. 13. as may easily be perceived by that strange enlivening
wrought in us after the drinking it; then how lies the Soul prostrate with joy,
at the feet of her dear Savior, ravished with the sense of her pardon, and the
assurance of Gods love? now she has received a fresh life of devotion, whereby
she casts off her old corruptions, resolves upon new obedience, and is
transported with thankfulness. These are the effects of Gods inestimable Gift,
(the Spirit) received in the Sacrament: which though it cannot be found in the
Veins of the richest Mines (not to be purchased with Money) yet here it is to
be found in the streams of Christ's blood, and that we may so find it, God of
his infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

