

S Gribelin in: et sculps:

Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire in comparison of Thee.
Psalm. 73. ver. 25. Miscellanea Sacra: OR, POEMS ON Divine and Moral SUBJECTS.

Collected by N. Tate, Servant to His MAJESTY.

It Is not that which First we Love,
But what Dying we approve.
Mr. Waller. LONDON: Printed for Hen. Playford in the Temple-Change, in
Fleetstreet. MCDXCVI.

TO HER ROYAL HIGHNESS The PRINCESS ANNE of DENMARK.
MADAM,
THE Reformation of Poetry, and Restoring the Muses to the Service of the
Temple, is a Glorious Work, and requires a Patroness, whose transcendent
Quality and Virtues can give Sanction to what she is pleased to favor.

'Twas therefore my Duty as well as Ambition, to present these pious Composures
to your Royal Highness's Protection; which, like an Altar, should only be
approached with Religious Offerings.

A Book designed for Public Benefit, cannot want Encouragement from a Princess
who declines no Opportunity of doing Good.

Piety, Madam, has appeared in all your Actions and Deportment, with such
prevailing Charms, as have engaged many to become her Votaries, even in so
depraved an Age as This.

Your Royal Breast is the Sacred Court where the Graces and Virtues have their
respective Stations, and where Charity has her Throne -- But Madam, 'twould be
Presumption for any Pen to attempt your Panegyric, as it is written in the
Souls and Sentiments of All who are Admirers of exemplary and accomplished
Worth.

Although it is the Transport of pious Minds to Contemplate that exalted State
of Glory, Reserved for you in the Regions of Eternal Happiness: Yet, Madam, in
Pity to an Age where your Pattern and Presence are so Necessary, Your long and
prosperous Continuance Here, is the National Wish, from the Great to the
Meanest, and amongst them, the Prayer of,

Madam, Your ROYAL HIGHNESS'S most humble, and Obedient Servant, N. Tate.

PREFACE.
THE Publishing an Annual Miscellany of Poems, on Divine and Moral Subjects,
can displease no Persons who have any respect for Virtue; and She has few
professed Enemies.

That Religion and Morality are capable of all the Embellishments of Poetry,
has been confirmed by the Suffrage and Performance of best Poets in all Ages.

It Is there the Muses breath their native Air. After all their Prodigal
persuits of Vanity; It Is thither they must come, to recover Strength and
Beauty, to appear like Themselves, in a Dress that is suitable to their Quality.

Those are only to be accounted legitimate Offsprings of Wit, which are useful
to the World, or, at least, Inoffensive. For such Births which the Muse that
conceived them cannot look upon with Satisfaction, should be excluded the
Favor and Patronage of noble Minds. -- Cui non risere Parents
Nec Deus hunc Mensa, Dea nec dignata Cubili est.


Perhaps there is no Talent or Genius more capable of being serviceable to
Mankind, than That of Poetry. But it is the Misfortune of that generous Soil to
be overrun with poisonous Weeds, and thin stockt with wholesome Plants.
Otherwise, I had not inserted in this Collection any of my own Essays. Neither
will I pretend those from other Hands to be, All of 'em, choicest in their
Kind. However, they had, generally, the private Approbation, and many of them
the Applause of able Judges. Some of 'em carry their Sanction in the Names of
their Authors; such as Dr. Jeremy Tailor, Dr. Fuller, Earl of Roscommon, and
Others. Several also amongst the Anonymous will approve themselves to come from
Eminent Hands. Amongst which the Ladies may have the Entertainment to find,
that our Age and Country have produced more than One Orinda.

In so good a Design, it is hoped, the Ingenious will timely supply a second
Freight, and Pardon what they think defective in this first Adventure.

Youthful Minds will have their Diversions, where Poetry comes in for no small
Share. It Is therefore a Public Service to furnish them with such as may be
instructive, and entertain their Fancy, without viciating their Morals. For
which Reason the Encouraging a Book of this Nature is the Interest of all
Parents and Masters of Families; who are best Obeyed, in Both Capacities, when
their Children and Servants have a Sense of Piety. Nay, Religious Poetry may be
one Means of reclaiming even profligate Persons, by its insinuating Charms, in
the Sweetness of its Streins, and Harmony of its Numbers, according to that of
our divine Herbert, A Verse may take him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


If Verse has such Allurements, they will doubtless exert themselves most
happily on Divine and Moral Subjects, which naturally excite all the innocent
Passions of our Minds. Nothing furnishes the Fancy with more charming Ideas and
Imagry. No other Topics or Occasions suggest such exalted Notions and
Sentiments; nor is any Thing capable of nobler Expression: Which, (I think) are
all the Requisites a Poet can desire. He will certainly find the Holy
Scriptures his best Magazine, of which Writings Mr. Cowley has truly asserted,
That They are, already, either the most accomplished Pieces of Poetry in the
World, or the best Materials for it.

POEMS ON DIVINE and MORAL SUBJECTS.
A Morning HYMN, by Dr. Fuller, formerly Bishop of Lincoln.
THou, wakeful Shepherd that do Israel keep,
Raised by thy Goodness from the Bed of sleep,
To Thee I offer up this Hymn,
As my best Morning Sacrifice;
Like grateful Incense may to Rise,
And raise me, with it, from the bed of Sin.
And do I Live another day to view?
O! let me with the Day, my Thanks renew,
And by its Light, thy righteous Paths pursue.
Could I redeem the Time I have misspent
In senseless Scenes of sinful Merriment;
Such Exemplary Penitence
I Would practice for each past Offense,
That even the Innocent
Should always wish themselves like me,
When with such Crimes they such Repentance see.
An Evening HYMN, By Ezr. Simson.
ANother Day is past -- But can I say,
That I have Lived, not lost another Day?
For Days and Years, if spent in vain,
Can never to Life's Sum amount,
It Is only adding to Death's black Account;
And must be Reckoned for again.
Thou Setting Sun,
Art Witness how I Have been employed,
If One good Action I have done
Worthy the Light that I this Day enjoyed;
Thou see my conscious Fears,
Therefore, kind Planet, let thy Evening Beams,
Before they sink in Western Streams,
Set first in my Repenting Tears
That when thy Luster is withdrawn
From these benighted Eyes,
To cheer my Soul a fairer Dawn
And brighter Sun of Righteousness may Rise:
The Sun, who only can send forth a Ray,
That makes the Morning to Eternal Day.
INNOCENCE: Or the Inestimable Gemm.
Written by a Young Lady.
What Is Innocence? -- A brighter Gemm,
Than ever enricht a Diadem:
A Gemm that bears a Price so high,
As Crowns and Empires cannot Buy.
Yet by the poorest Mortal's Breast
This matchless Treasure is possessed,
A Treasure not like other Wealth,
That Is liable to Fraud or Stealth;
No Soul of this can be bereft
By open Force, or secret Theft;
Safe in it is Cabinet 'twill stay,
Till by the Owner thrown away.
O dismal Bargain, when for Sin we sell
This Gemm! It Is Life for Death, and Heaven for Hell.
By Dr. Fuller
LOrd what is Man, lost Man, that thou shou'd'st be
So mindful of him, that the Son of God
Should quit his Glory, his Divine Abode,
To be on Earth a poor Afflicted Man?
The Deity contracted to a Span!
And that for me (O wondrous Love) for me!
Reveal, ye glorious Spirits, when ye knew
The way the Son of God took to renew
Lost Man, Your vacant Places to supply,
Blessed Spirits tell,
Which did Excel,
Which was more prevalent,
Your Joy, or your Astonishment?
That for a Worm, a God should Dye!
Oh! for a Quill drawn from your Wing,
To write the Praises of the Eternal Love,
Oh! for a Voice, like Yours, to sing
That Anthem here, which once you sung Above.
By the same Hand.
IN the black dismal Dungeon of Despair,
Pined with a Tormenting Care,
Wrackt with my Fears,
Drowned in my Tears,
With dreadful Expectation of my Doom,
And certain horrid Judgments soon to come,
Lord, here I lie,
Lost to all hope of Liberty,
Hence never to remove,
But by a Miracle of Love,
Which I scarce dare to hope, much less expect,
Being guilty of so great, so long Neglect.
Fool, that I was, worthy a sharper Rod,
To slight thy Courtings, O my God!
For thou did Woo, Entreat and Grieve,
Did beg me to be happy and to Live,
But I would not, I chose to dwell
With Death, too far from thee, too near to Hell
But is there no Redemption, no Relief?
Thou sav'st a Murderer and a Thief.
Thy Mercy Lord once more advance,
And give, O give me such a Glance
As Peter had; thy sweet kind Chiding Look
Will change my Heart, as it did melt that Rock;
Look on me, Jesus, as thou did on him,
It Is more than to Create, thus to Redeem.
By the same Hand.
HOw have I strayed, my God! where have I been,
Since first I wandered in the maze of Sin?
Lord I have been I know not where,
So intricate Youths Follies are:
Age has its Labyrinths, and Mazes too,
But neither has a wise returning Clue.
Thy Look, thy Call to me
Shall my far better Ariadne be.
Hark, I hear my Shepherd call away,
And in a kind complaining Accent, say,
Why does my Soul thus stray?
O blessed Voice,
That prompts me to new Choice!
And fain, dear Shepherd, would I come,
But I can find no Track
To lead me back;
And if I still go on, I am undone!
It Is thou, O Lord, must bring me home,
Or, point me out, at least, the way,
For ah! poor Souls have thousand ways to stray,
Yet to return, alas, but One.
HYMN.
OH! that mine Eyes would melt into a Flood,
That I might plunge in Tears for Thee,
As thou did Swim in Blood to ransom me.
Oh! that this fleshly Limbeck would begin
To drop a Tear for every Sin!
See how his Arms are spread,
To entertain Death's welcome Bands;
Behold his bowing Head,
His bleeding Hands!
His often repeated Stripes, his wounded Side!
Hark how he Groans, remember how he Cried;
The very Heavens put weeds of Mourning on,
The solid Rocks in sunder rent;
And yet this Heart, this Stone, could not relent.
Hard-hearted Man, to weep alone denied;
Hard-hearted Man, for whom alone he Died.
The Passing Bell.
COme honest Sexton, take thy Spade,
And let my Grave be quickly made:
Thou still art ready for the Dead,
Like a kind Host, to make my Bed.
I now am come to be thy Guest,
Let me in some Dark Lodging rest,
For I am weary, full of pain,
And of my Pilgrimage complain.
On Heavens Decree I waiting lie,
And all my wishes are to dye.
Hark I hear my Passing Bell,
Farewell, my loving Friends, Farewell;
2.
Make my cold Bed (good Sexton) deep,
That my poor Bones may safely sleep;
Until that sad and joyful Day,
When from Above a Voice shall say,
Wake all ye Dead, lift up your Eyes,
The Great Creator bids you Rise.
Then do I hope, among the Just,
To shake off this Polluted Dust;
And with new Robes of Glory dressed,
To have access among the Blessed.
Hark I hear my Passing Bell,
Farewell my loving Friends, Farewell.
JOB's CVRSE.
By Dr. JEREMY TAILOR.
LEt the Night perish, Cursed be the Morn
Wherein 'twas said there is a Man-Child born.
Let not the Lord regard that Day, but shroud
It Is fatal Glory in some sullen Cloud.
May the dark shades of an Eternal Night
Exclude the least kind beam of dawning Light,
Let unknown Babes as in the Womb they lie,
If it be mentioned, give a Groan and Dye.
No sounds of Joy therein shall charm the Ear,
No Sun, no Moon, no Twilight Stars appear,
But a thick Vale of gloomy Darkness wear.
Why did I not, when first my Mothers Womb
Discharged me thence, drop down into my Tomb?
Then had I been at quiet: and mine Eyes
Had slept and seen no Sorrow; there the wise
And subtle Councillor, the Potentate,
Who for themselves built Palaces of State,
Lie hushed in silence; there is no Midnight Cry
Caused by Oppressive Tyranny
Of Wicked Rulers; There the Weary cease
From Labor, there the Prisoner sleeps in Peace,
The Rich, the Poor, the Monarch, and the Slave,
Rest undist urb'd, and no Distinction have
Within the silent Chambers of the Grave.
The Words by a Young Lady.
There Is no disturbance in the Heavens above,
And heavenly Souls do nothing else but Love;
No Anger, no Remorse, no Discontent,
Can seize a Soul that is truly Innocent,
And aims at naught, but that she may combine
With all she finds, like to her self, Divine:
And seeing Things in such Confusion hurled
Does not contend with, but despise the World.
A Dialogue between two Penitents.
1 Pt. HArk how the wakeful cheerful Cock
The Villagers Astrologer,
Clapping his Wings, proclaims the Day,
And chides thy Sleep and Night away.

2 Pt. I hear and thank my kind Remembrancer,
Flow, flow, my Tears, O when will you begin?
St. Peter's Bird Reproves St. Peter's Sin.

1 P. Complaining Man, have thou thy Christ denied?

2 Pt. Wo's me, I have done more than Peter did
With less Excuse, and many ways beside,
Even since my Christ was glorified;
And this, alas, too often, alas, more, more than thrice,
As often as I Chose, and Wooed a Vice,
Or brutish Lust (to be Abhorred)
Rejected Jesu, my dear Lord.

1 Pt. O my sad Heart! if that be to deny,
None ought to weep more Floods than I!
When to receive into my Heart a Sin,
I thrust my Jesu out, and took it in.
But Lord, how often he came, and being denied Died!
How dolefully he cried,
Why do thou use me thus, who for thee

2 Pt. Methinks, I hear him Call too from the Tree,
Ungrateful Wretch, were these Wounds made for Thee,
Who both deny'dst me and betrayed me too?
For every wanton Kiss,
A very Judas is,
And each malicious Thought a spiteful Jew.

1 Pt. If Sins do now what cruel Jews did then,
Wound him afresh and Crucify again,
Then we, alas, have his Tormentors been;
And by each vile deliberate Deed,
We make his Wounds afresh to bleed,
His Pain as various as our Sin.

2 Pt. True, for my Doubts do bind his Hands, my Pride
Does first disrobe him, then deride;
I spit upon him by my Blasphemy,
And Scourge him by my Cruelty;
My profane Tears become the Thorns
That pierced his Head with Scorns.
And my Hypocrisy. 1st. Pt. Stay!
To what prodigeous height our Sins amount!
Every Unkindness is a Dart,
The Spear that wounds his very Heart!
Christ could bear any thing but this!

Both. Since then, the Cause of both our Grief's the same,
Mix we our Tears, for Grief let us Dye,
It Is just we act our own, who caused his Tragedy.

Upon a Quiet Conscience. By K. Charles I.
CLose thine Eyes and sleep secure,
Thy Soul is safe, thy Body sure;
He that guards thee, he that keeps,
Never slumbers never sleeps.
A quiet Conscience, in a quiet Breast,
Has only Peace, has only Rest:
The Music and the Mirth of Kings,
Are out of Tune, unless she sings.
Then close thine Eyes in Peace, and rest secure,
No sleep so sweet as Thine, no Rest so sure.
A Dialogue betwixt Dives and Abraham.
D. HElp Father Abraham, help for Mercies sake,
Behold my Torments in this burning Lake;
Send Lazarus with Whirlwinds that he may
These flames of melting Sulphur fan away.

A. What Son of Hell and Darkness dare molest
This awful Saint, scarce warm yet on my Breast?

D. It Is I, great Mammon's equal, one whose lot
Alas is only now, --

Abr. I know thee not,

D. Father, it is Dives, it is thy Son, it is I,
Who Purpled ore fed once deliciously.

A. And can thou now his Charity implore
Whom thou saw lately at thy Flinty Door,
Begging for Crumbs, those Crumbs that fell beside
Thy ore-charg'd Table, and was then denied? Vain Soul.

D. Some pity take.

A. Remember Son
Thy Dogs had pity on him, thou had none.

D. Yet they were mine relieved him, O, in lieu,
Let him vouchsafe me but a little Dew
To cool my Tongue.

A. Not the least drop of Grace
Can ever enter that forsaken Place.

D. Then send him to my Brethren, lest they come
To feel the weight of my Eternal Doom.

A. They Have Moses and the Prophets.

D. True, but they
May yet a Summons from the Dead obey.

A. If to convert them Sion's Thunder fail,
A Summons from the Dead will never prevail.
When once Death's fatal Hand has shut the Door,
The Gates of Mercy never open more.

SOLILOQVY.
1.
DEar Savior, oh! what ails this Heart?
Sure it is of Stone, it cannot smart,
Nor yet Relent the Death of thee,
Whose Death alone could ransom me.
Can I behold thy Pains so great,
Thine Agony, thy bloody Sweat,
Thy Back with Whips and Scourges torn,
Thy Sacred Temples Crowned with Thorn,
Thy Veins and Nerves extended wide,
Thy panting Heart, thy bleeding Side;
Thy Hands and Feet nailed to the Wood,
And all thy Body drowned in Blood;
Can thou pour forth such Streams for me,
And I not drop one Tear for Thee?
2.
Yet tenderhearted I can cry,
To see Romantic Heroes dye,
And Priam's Fall commands my Eyes,
As Great Elias did the Skies;
Nay, a false Fable that can start,
And call up Sorrow from my Heart;
A Player too, that dies in jest,
Can raise a Tempest in my breast:
But here when I should grieve indeed,
Nor am I touched, nor can I bleed;
Heart! how I fear by this alone
There Is something in me worse than Stone.
3.
Behold! -- See how this dismal sight
Put the whole World into a fright,
The Graves did open, and the Dead,
Rose from their Tombs and Marble Bed,
Earth did with Anguish shake again,
Convulsions felt in every Vein;
The amazed Sun withdrew his light,
Transforming Day to darkest Night.
The Temple's Vail in twain was Rent,
The stony Rocks in sunder went;
The Murderer did this Death bemoan,
And pitying it, forgot his own!
Down stupid stoutness, else it is true,
The art worse than Murderer, worse than Jew;
Lord of thy Mercy work a Wonder,
Cleave this obdurate Heart in sunder.
PSALM the CIV.
By Mr. Tate.
Part the First.
1.
BLess God, my Soul, thou God alone,
Possessest Empire without bounds,
With Honor thou art Crowned, thy Throne
Eternal Majesty surrounds.
2.
With Light thou do thy self enrobe,
And Glory for a Garment take;
Heaven's Curtains stretched beyond the Globe,
Thy Canopy of State to make.
3.
He builds on Liquid Fire, and forms
His Palace Chambers in the Skies,
The Clouds his Chariot are, and Storms
The swift-wing'd Steeds with which he flies.
4.
Spirits he made his heavenly Quire,
With speed his Orders to fulfill,
His Ministers a flaming Fire
To execute his dreadful Will.
5, 6.
Earth on her Center fixed he set,
Her Face with Waters overspread,
Nor proudest Mountains dared as yet
To lift above the Waves their head.
7.
But when thy Thunder's Voice went forth,
The frighted Floods dispersed away,
Engulf'd in Caverns of the Earth,
And panting in her Bosom lay.
8.
Thence up by secret tracts they creep,
And gushing from the Mountains side
Through Valleys travel to the Deep,
Appointed to receive their Tide.
9.
There have thou fixed the Ocean-bounds,
Her threatening Surges to repel,
That she no more transgress her mounds,
Nor to a second Deluge swell.
Part the Second.
10.
Yet thence in smaller Parties drawn,
The Sea recovers her lost Hills,
And starting springs from every Lawn,
Surprise the Vales in plenteous Rills.
11.
The Ox unyoak'd is thither led,
Weary with Labor, faint with Drought,
And Asses on wild Mountains bred
Have sense to find those Currents out.
12.
There shady Trees, from scorching Beams,
Yield Mansions to the Feathered Throng,
They drink, and to the bounteous Streams
Return the Tribute of their Song.
13.
His Rains from Heaven parched Hills recruit,
That soon transmit the Liquid Store,
Till Earth is burdened with her Fruit,
And Nature's Lap can hold no more.
14.
Grass for our Cattle to devour,
He makes the self same Soil produce;
And Herbs endu'd with Sovereign Power,
For Man that knows their Sovereign Use.
15.
With clustered Grapes he crowns the Vine
Whose Nectar Mortal Cares subdue
Gives Oil that makes our Face to shine,
And Bread that wasted Strength renews.
Part the Third.
16.
The Trees of God, without the Care
Or Art of Man, with Sap are fed;
The Mountain Cedar looks as fair,
As those in Royal Gardens bred.
17.
Safe in the lofty Cedar's Arms
The Wanderers of the Air may rest:
The Hospitable Pine from harms
Protects the Stork, her pious Guest.
18.
Wild Goats the craggy Rocks ascend,
Its towering height their Fortress make,
Whose Cells in Labyrinths extend,
Where feebler Creatures Refuge take.
19.
The Moon's inconstant Aspect shows
The appointed Seasons of the Year;
The Instructed Sun his duty knows,
His Hours to Rise, and Disappear.
20, 21.
Darkness he makes the Day to shroud,
When Forest Beasts securely stray,
Young Lions Roar their Wants aloud
To Providence that sends 'em Prey.
22.
They Range all Night on Slaughter bent,
Till, summoned by the Rising Morn,
To sculking Dens, with one Consent,
The conscious Ravagers return.
23.
Forth to the Tillage of his Soil
The Husbandman securely goes;
Commencing with the Sun his Toil,
With him returns to his repose.
24.
How various (Lord) they Works are found?
For which thy Wisdom we Adore:
The Earth is with thy Treasure Crowned,
Till Nature's Hand can grasp no more.
The Fourth Part.
25.
But still Thy vast unfathomed Main
Of Wonders a new Scene supplies;
Whose Depths Inhabitants contain
Of every Form, and every Size.
26.
The Gallant Ship there cuts her way,
Waited along by gazing Shoals:
Leviathan has room to play,
And like a Floating Island rowls.
27.
These various Troops of Sea and Land
In sense of common Want agree;
All wait on Thy dispensing Hand,
And have their daily Alms from Thee.
28.
They gather what Thy Stores disperse,
Without their trouble to provide:
Thou op'st thy Hand -- the Universe,
The Craving World, is all supplied.
29.
Thou for a Moment hid'st thy Face,
The numerous Ranks of Creatures Mourn:
Thou take their Breath, -- all Nature's Race
Forthwith to Mother Dust return.
30.
Again, Thou send'st thy Spirit forth,
TO inspire the Mass with Vital Seed;
Nature's Restored, and Parent Earth
Smiles on her New-Created Breed.
31.
Thus through successive Ages, stands
Firm fixed thy Providential Care;
Pleased with the Works of Thy own Hands,
Thou do the Wastes of Time repair.
32.
He darted forth a wrathful Look,
The trembling Earth Convulsions felt;
He touched the Mountains, they did smoke,
And Rocks before his Lightning melt.
33, 34.
In praising him, whilst he prolongs
My Breath, I will that Breath employ;
And join Devotion to my Songs,
Sincere, as is in him my Joy.
35.
While Sinners from Earth's Face are hurled,
My Soul praise thou his Holy Name;
Till, with thy Song, the listening World
Join Consort, and his Praise proclaim.
The Evening HYMN.
NOW that the Sun has veiled his Light,
And bid the World good Night;
To the soft Bed my Body I dispose,
But where shall my Soul repose?
Dear God, even in thy Arms, and can there be
Any so sweet Security!
Then to thy Rest, O my Soul, and singing, praise
The Mercy that prolongs thy Days.
Hallelujah.
On our Savior's Passion.
EArth trembled, and Heaven's closing Eye
Was loath to see the Lord of Glory Dye!
The Skies were clad in Mourning, and the Spears
Forgot their Harmony; --
The Clouds dropped Tears.
The ambitious Dead arose to give him Room,
And every Grave opened wide to be his Tomb.
The impatient Temple rent her Vale in Two,
To teach our Hearts, what our sad Hearts should do.
Can senseless Things do This, and shall not I
Melt One poor Drop to see my Savior Dye!
Drill forth my Tears, and trickle One by One,
Till you have pierced this Heart of Mine, this Stone!
The PENITENT, by Dr. Jeremy Tailor.
LOrd I have sinned, and the black Number swells
To such a dismal Sum,
That should my Stony Heart and Eyes,
And this whole sinful Trunk a Flood become,
And melt to Tears, their drops could not suffice
To count my Score,
Much less to pay:
But Thou, my God, have Blood in store,
Yet, since the Balsom of thy Blood,
Although it can, will do no Good,
Unless the Wound be cleans'd in Tears before;
Thou in whose sweet, but pensive Face,
Laughter could never steal a Place,
Teach but my Heart and Eyes
To melt away,
And then one Drop of Balsom will suffice.
The Blessed VIRGIN's EXPOSTULATION,
When our Savior at Twelve Years of Age had withdrawn Himself, Luke c. 2. v.
42.
By N. Tate.
TEll me some pitying Angel, quickly say
Where does my Soul's sweet Darling stray,
In Tigers, or more cruel Herod's Way?
O! rather let his tender Footsteps press
Unguarded through the Wilderness,
Where milder Salvages resort;
The Desart's safer than a Tyrant's Court.
Why, fairest Object of my Love,
Why do Thou from my longing Eyes remove?
Was it a waking Dream that did foretell
Thy wondrous Birth? No Vision from Above?
Where Is Gabriel now that visited my Cell?
I call -- He comes not -- flattering Hopes, Farewell.
Me Judah's Daughters once Caressed,
Called me of Mother's the most Blessed;
Now (fatal Change!) of Mothers, most distressed!
How shall my Soul its Motions guide,
How shall I stem the various Tide,
Whilst Faith and Doubt my laboring Thoughts divide?
For whilst of thy Dear Sight I am beguiled,
I Trust the God -- But oh! I fear the Child.
On Pilate's Exposing our LORD to the Jews, and saying to them, Behold the Man.
By Mr. Arwaker.
BEhold the Man! inhuman Pilate! No;
Who can have Eyes for such a Scene of Woe?
Call the remorseless Crocodile, and see
If that can bear such barbarous Cruelty,
Should that behold the Outrage you commit,
Its Tears would be no longer counterfeit.
Behold the Man! oh! you mistake the Name,
Behold the Man, behold the God you mean;
No Man for so much Torture could suffice,
No Man so Triumph in his Miseries;
He shows himself a God in tyring Thee,
And proves by suffering his Divinity.
But oh! that Style the Man must not refuse,
Whom Pilate dares, whom Pilate can abuse.
While from the Sluices of each opened Pore
Flows a rich Torrent of Redeeming Gore,
And on his Head sharp piercing Thorns appear,
That Head which Rays of Glory used to wear;
And he whom Heaven's scarce worthy to contain,
Does in a Cell of Humane Flesh remain,
Exposed to Sorrows beyond parallel,
Sorrows too Tragic to behold or tell;
Oh! thou may say, Behold the Man, too well:
Behold! alas! I cannot, will not see,
I am too tender for the Tragedy,
Should I behold his vast Expense of Blood,
My Eyes would melt into another Flood.
Yet I will see whence all this Grief proceeds,
For me, alas! he Groans, for me he Bleeds!
My Sin exposed him to these Wounding strokes,
Yet he entreats the Power which that provokes;
The Tide of Blood in which he floats, is shed
To save the Wretch by whom his Wounds were made.
Oh, then forbear on Pilate to Exclaim, --
He Is Innocent, and I alone to blame!
His Guilt must justly fall on Wretched me,
Who edged his Rage, and armed his Cruelty.
Oh! then behold the Man thou have betrayed!
Behold the Man that does thy Crimes upbraid!
Behold the Man of Grief, the Man of Love!
Condemn the Author, but the Effect approve.
Behold, and Mourn for thy Ingratitude,
Behold, and Triumph for thy Pardon Su'd,
Thy Paradise regained, and Innocence renewed;
And when thou have sufficiently deplored
The Suffering Man, and Sinning Man abhorred,
Then from the Humbl'd Man thy Thoughts must soar,
And high in Heaven the Exalted God Adore.
And let the sight of this great Suff'rer move.
Toward him alike thy Pity and thy Love.
Translations out of Boethius, by Mr. Arwaker.
Lib. 2. Meter the Fourth.
WHo ere with a Serene and settled Mind
Contemns the Injuries by Fate designed,
Viewing each Fortune with indiff'rent Eyes,
And can unaltered both alike despise;
Him the loud Storms that make the Ocean swell
Amidst their Rage, shall find immovable.
His Courage would not shrink at Aetna's Fire,
But rather nobly Perish, than Retire.
Nor can the strong Convulsion Fits that make
The Earth tremble, his firm Resolution shake,
Nor even the Thunder's stroke make him afraid
By which the proudest Towers in Dust are laid.
He who does never with Hope or Fear engage,
Disarms, and triumphs over Fortune's Rage.
But he who hopes or fears what is not sure,
Nor in his power to hinder, or procure,
Has thrown away his Shield, forsook his Ground,
And made a Chain with which himself is bound.
Meter Fifth.
HE that would choose a Station so secure
To bafflle Fate, and all its Storms endure,
Must neither on the Mountain's summit stand,
Nor trust his Fortune to the failing Sand,
That stands exposed to all the blasts of Fate,
And faithless this will sink beneath your weight:
Then if thou would contemn the dangerous Shock,
Fix thy safe Footsteps on an humble Rock;
Let Fortune storm, in this secure Retreat,
Thou shall the force of all its Rage defeat.
Meter Sixth.
HAppy the former Age to which each Field
Did all the Objects of its Wishes yield!
That which cheap Acorns did its Palate feast,
And nothing in Luxurious Banquets wast;
Happily ignorant of the Use of Wine,
They Quaff'd the Streams, and thought the Drink Divine;
No Tyrian Purple Carpers then they chose,
But took on Grassy Beds more soft repose;
Beneath a lofty Pine's inviting shade,
Alike for State, and for Convenience made.
They had not then found out the fatal way
To lose their Lives and Fortunes in the Sea;
Nor did the wandering Merchant then repair
To Foreign Shores to vend, or Purchase Ware.
No Trumpets then proclaimed Warsloud Alarms,
Nor Blood in Anger shed defiled their Arms;
For who but Madmen would a Fight maintain,
Where loss of Blood and Life is all the gain?
The last TRUMPET.
The Words by Mr. Tate.
AWake ye Dead, the Trumpet calls;
Awake, awake, to Sleep no more,
Hark from aloft the Frozen Region falls
With Noise so loud it deafs the Ocean's Roar;
Alarmed, amazed, the clatt'ring Orbs come down,
The Virtuous Soul, alone,
Appears unmoved while Earths Foundations shake;
Ascends and Mocks the Universal Wreck.
The Slaughter of the INNOCENTS Matthew. ii. v. 16.
By the same Hand.
SWeet Innocents that found the way
Through Bloody Paths of Martyrdom,
To your Celestial and Eternal Home,
Before your harmless Feet had learned to stray.
Early, but not untimely, Dead,
Who to preserve the World's great Savior bled;
For all his bitter Pangs the best Return,
The best of us can make
Is for his Precious sake;
(And few have dared so far) to Bleed or Burn.
If then it is Glorious to pursue
His great Example, what must be your Due, --
Who Died for him, before he Died for you?
Upon the Sight of an ANATOMY.
By Mr. Tate.
1.
NAy, start not at that Skeleton,
It Is your own Picture which you shun;
Alive it did resemble Thee,
And thou, when dead, like that shall be:
Converse with it, and you will say,
You cannot better spend the Day;
You little think how you will admire
The Language of those Bones and Wire.
2.
The Tongue is gone, but yet each Joint
Reads Lectures, and can speak to the Point.
When all your Moralists are read,
You Will find no Tutors like the Dead.
3.
If in Truth's Paths those Feet have trod,
It Is all one whether bare, or shod:
If used to travel to the Door
Of the Afflicted Sick and Poor,
Though to the Dance they were estranged,
And never their own rude Motion changed;
Those Feet, now winged, may upwards fly,
And tread the Palace of the Sky.
4.
Those Hands, if never with Murder stained,
Nor filled with Wealth unjustly gained,
Nor greedily at Honors graspt,
But to the Poor-Man's Cry unclaspt;
It matters not, if in the Mine
They delv'd, or did with Rubies shine.
5.
Here grew the Lips, and in that Place,
Where now appears a vacant space,
Was fixed the Tongue, an Organ, still
Employed extremely well or ill;
I know not if it could retort,
If versed in the Language of the Court;
But this I safely can aver,
That if it was no Flatterer;
If it traduced no Man's Repute,
But, where it could not Praise, was Mute:
If no false Promises it made,
If it sung Anthems, if it Prayed,
'Twas a blessed Tongue, and will prevail
When Wit and Eloquence shall fail.
6.
If Wise as Socrates, that Skull,
Had ever been, it is now as dull
As Mydas's; or if its Wit
To that of Mydas did submit,
It Is now as full of Plot and Skill,
As is the Head of Matchiavel:
Proud Laurels once might shade that Brow,
Where not so much as Hair grows now.
7.
Prime Instances of Nature's Skill,
The Eyes, did once those Hollows fill:
Were they quick-sighted, sparkling, clear,
(As those of Hawks and Eagles are,)
Or say they did with Moisture swim,
And were distorted, blear'd, and dim;
Yet if they were from Envy free,
Nor loved to gaze on Vanity;
If none with scorn they did behold,
With no lascivious Glances rolled:
Those Eyes, more bright and piercing grown,
Shall view the Great Creator's Throne;
They shall behold the Invisible,
And on Eternal Glories dwell.
8.
See! not the least Remains appear
To show where Nature placed the Ear!
Who knows if it were Musical,
Or could not judge of Sounds at all?
Yet if it were to Council bent,
To Caution and Reproof attent,
When the shrill Trump shall rouse the Dead,
And others hear their Sentence read;
That Ear shall with these Sounds be blessed,
Well done, and, Enter into Rest.
PSALM the First.
By Capt. Walker.
1.
HAppy the Man, who shuns the beaten Road,
And treads the unfrequented Paths of Good;
Whom, by a virtuous Restraint,
From Sin preserved secure,
No strong contagious Vice can taint,
Nor Charming Ills allure:
Who makes Iehovah's Laws his dear Delight.
His Practice every Day, and Study every Night.
2.
Him shall Just Heaven in all his Actions bless,
And crown his Labors with a wished Success;
He, like a flourishing Tree, shall prove
Near some fair River's side,
Refresht with Heavenly Dews Above,
Below with every Tide:
Spreading his fertile Branches toward the Sky,
His Leaf shall never fade, his Root shall never die.
3.
Not so the Wicked; whose unhallowed Minds,
Like scattered Chaff, before the whistling Winds
By various and impetuous Gusts
Of Raging Passions tossed,
'Midst thousand Sins, and changing Lusts,
Are miserably lost;
And wandering from the Sacred ways of Peace,
Their Fears shall never Dye, their Plaints shall never cease.
PSALM lvii. Verse. 8, 9, 10.
By the same Hand.
1.
AWake my Glory, ever the Rosy Morn
Does with a Purple Blush the Skies adorn;
Before the Sun arise to break the Day,
Awake and chase thy gloomy Sleep away.
2.
Awake soft Lute, awake my charmful Lyre,
With sacred Transports my warm Breast inspire;
Awake each Faculty, awake and sing,
In holy Raptures my Almighty King.
3.
In Notes Divine let my glad Voice proclaim
His mighty Goodness, and Eternal Name;
Let my loud Praises through the World resound,
While crowding Nations listen all around.
4.
But oh! my God, thy Wonders are too great
For Tongue to speak, or Verse to celebrate;
So vast thy Mercies, and thy Truths so high,
They pierce the Clouds, and reach beyond the Sky.
A PARAPHRASE on the 79th Psalm.
1.
HOw long, O Lord, of everlasting Might,
Shall the successful Heathen make abode,
In thy Inheritance, O God!
How long defile thy Temple, and usurp thy Right?
See! how the once Proud City Lies,
Salem, a heap of Stones, for pity cries,
Nor here does their unbounded Fury stay,
Thy Priests they on the Altars slay,
And cast 'em forth to Birds, and savage Beasts of prey.
Witness the Blood, that now on every side
Surrounds the City with a Purple Tide;
Witness the Bodies they deny to have,
The common Privilege of a Grave.
This is our Woe, and this our Fate,
While neighboring Nations to increase the Weight,
Triumphantly Rejoice in our unhappy State.
2.
But, O! Thou God of Mercy and of Love
How long will thou remove
Thy dearest Attributes from Thee?
How long with Anger burn, and fiery Jealousy?
Rather thy irresistless Wrath employ
Upon the Kingdoms, who thy Name
Have never known, or known disclaim,
And durst thy Jacob's Dwellings impiously destroy.
Forget our Sins, O Lord:
And with a Father's Love relief afford;
Us, like thy Children, treat,
And let thy Mercy be, as our Affliction, great.
3.
Help, O God, of our Salvation,
Help, for the Glory of thy Name;
Nor let thy own, thy own, though sinful Nation,
By Thee deserted, suffer shame.
Let not deriding Heathens cry,
O! where is now their fancied Deity.
And smile, and wonder
At Thy great Power, and yet unactive Thunder.
Rise! Lord, and let that Blood the Heathen shed,
Dye them again with Red;
And let thy Vengeance public be,
That what they suffer we (O God) may see.
4.
Let the loud Groans of Captives pierce the Sky,
And hear, and in a timely Hour
Rescue from Death, who sentenced are to Dye;
Show boundless Mercy, joined with boundless Power:
But for those Wretches, who blasphemed thy Name,
Cloth them with Everlasting Shame,
That by their Suffering they may see,
And dread the Wrath of thy Divinity.
So we that are
Thy darling Flock, and thy peculiar Care,
May in most thankful Numbers raise
To Thee, Eternal God, Eternal Praise.
Hallelujah.
The CONVERT.
An Ode Written by Mr. George Herbert.
1.
IF ever Tears did flow from Eyes,
If ever Voice was hoarse with Cries,
If ever Heart was sore with Sighs;
Let now my Eyes, my Voice, my Heart,
Strive each to play their Part.
2.
My Eyes from whence these Tears did spring,
Where treacherous Sirens used to sing,
Shall flow no more -- until they bring
A Deluge on my sensual Flame,
And wash away my Shame.
3.
My Voice, that often with foolish Lays,
With Vows and Rants, and senseless Praise,
Frail Beauty's Charms to Heaven did raise,
Henceforth shall only pierce the Skies,
In Penitential Cries.
4.
My Heart, that gave fond Thoughts their Food,
(Till now averse to all that is Good)
The Temple where an Idol stood,
Henceforth in Sacred Flames shall Burn,
And be that Idol's URN.
The Prophet ELIJAH Translated up to Heaven.
By Mr. Tate.
ELijah long and faithful Service boasts,
Under the Banner of the Lord of Hosts;
Who now, his signal Conquests to Reward,
A Chariot for his Triumph has prepared;
Such matchless Virtue nobly to require,
Translates him Body'd to the Realms of Light:
The Prophet now with generous Scorn surveys
This Earth, where He but for a Passport stays;
And does entirely his fired Thoughts employ
On those bright Regions He must soon enjoy.
But first (for in his Road to Heaven they lay)
A Visit to the Prophet's Schools He Will pay,
In Legacy, where He his Progress goes,
His Council and his Blessing He bestows.
Elisha does his Master's steps attend; --
A Servant worthy to be styled a Friend.
From Gilgal's Plain, to Bethel Journeying on,
The Prophet Courts his Servant to be gone;
Near Jericho once more his Charge repeats,
But still Commands in vain, in vain Entreats.
When Love and Duty once dispute the Field,
Duty it self must to Affection yield.
The Prophet now to Iordan's Bank is come,
The last short Stage to his Celestial Home;
His Mantle's Sacred Force the Jordan knew,
And consciously in parting Tides withdrew.
That Stream, long since subdued, at his command
Was disciplined to fall, to swell, or stand.
The naked Channel now with ease passed over,
And Both arrived to the remoter shore;
On that last spot of Earth his Feet must tread;
The Prophet to his Faithful Servant, said --
O for thy Truth and Love, my Servant, say,
How shall a grateful Master Thee repay?
Ever to Eternal Mansions born away:
For Thee, who still must Earthly Toils pursue,
Instruct thy willing Master what to do,
Who would to Thee be Kind, as thou to him were True.
The Favorite with such Indulgence blessed,
So kindly urged to make his own Request,
A while with modest Gratitude stands mute,
Delays to utter his important Suit;
Who else might instantly his Wish impart,
For 'twas already formed within his Heart;
So vast a Boon he trembles to express,
Yet must depart unsatisfied with less.
Not Power or Pomp, not Safety, Wealth, or Ease,
His generous and enflamed Desires can please
Too narrow All for his expanded Mind,
It will not be to Nature's Bounds confined.
His Soul can Revelation only prize,
Rapture and Correspondence with the Skies;
The World does no proportioned Scene present;
No less than Heaven on Earth can his vast Soul Content.
O Man of God, he cried, let me inherit
A double Portion of thy Sacred Spirit:
These impious Times such strong Convictions need,
I cannot else to thy great Charge succeed;
My Weakness this Concession does require,
Ever to thy Sacred Office I aspire;
To perfect the Foundation Thou have laid,
Elisha must have 'twice Elijah's Aid.
The Prophet grants, but grants with this Reserve,
If me at paiting thy fixed Eyes observe,
If in that Minute on their Watch they are found,
Thou have thy Wish, it is else an empty Sound.
A Tempest to their Consrence puts an end,
The fiery Steeds and flaming Wain descend.
What mean these Terrors? This impetuous Air?
Can Death so dreadful as this Change appear?
Who would not choose to pass his brazen Gate,
If such fierce Blessings must on Rapture wait?
Mistaken Thought! the Chariot and the Storm
Of Terror only have the Sound and Form.
The Vision does but Lambent Flames present,
For Speed, not Violence, the Whirl-wind's sent.
Elisha the whole Scene with still-fix'd Eyes,
Beholds, and to his towering Master cries,
My Father, O my Father! -- Israel now
Has lost her Chariot and her Horse men too!
Tearing his Garments, as on him he calls,
In Recompense Elijah's Mantle falls:
While of the Rest his weeping Sight's bereaved,
His Arms the kind descending Pledge received.
Now, pensive, back to Iordan's Bank he goes,
Whose Streams his Passage to the Schools oppose;
He now must put Heavens Promise to the Test,
And prove if he Elijah's Spirit possessed.
Dismantled on the Current's Verge he stood,
Then smote, and cried, -- Where Is now Elijah's God?
Chastis'd by Him the swelling Streams give way,
And Great Elijah's greater Heir Obey.
HYMN, by H. W.
1.
THou God for ever blessed
Of uncreated Power possessed,
Whose Habitation is in Light refined,
From thy Celestial Throne
With Pity (Lord) look down,
Behold, relieve my troubled Mind:
Anguish and Horror from my Heart remove,
Thou God of everlasting Peace and Love.
2.
And Thou, who sitt'st at his Right Hand,
That do the Angelick Hosts command,
Thou, who on Earth did heavenly Power display,
Thou, whose mild Voice made Winds and Seas obey;
The Storms, the Tempest in my Breast allay.
Chastise, Control
The boist'ring Waves that roll,
And Toss and Wreck, and quite o'er-whelm my sick despairing Soul.
3.
And Thou most sweet and Sacred Dove,
The God of Consolation and of Love,
Visit, O Visit every Part
Of my afflicted Heart:
That Heart for thy Reception to prepare,
By thy most heavenly Influence,
Expel all sinful Thoughts from thence,
And Save me from the Gulf of black Despair.
Hezekiah's Sickness and Recovery: KINGS the II. Chap. 20.
By Mr. Tate.
WIth double Pleasure sprung the cheerful Dawn,
That saw the Syrians threatening Host with drawn:
Yet, ah! no sooner Wars Allarms are fled,
No sooner Peace her brooding Wings had spread;
But Sickness, armed with Death's resistless Sting,
Invades the Sacred Person of the King!
The raging Pest within his Vitals reigned,
More dangerous than the Siege he had sustained.
The fatal Summons Purple Symptoms gave,
And Thus the Prophet warns him to his Grave.
"Thy House in Order set, dispose thy State,
"For Death, O King, does on my Message wait;
"He stalks behind me to thy Palace-Gate.
The Prince, who had Besieging Hosts defied,
Turns Pale, and deeply Sighing, Thus replied;
"Can Heaven impose, where Justice is sublime,
"A Task so weighty and so short a Time?
"My House in Order set, dispose my State!
"Surpised, like Me, with Life's last stage in View,
"Alas! what could a private Master do?
"If Him a Doom so sudden would overwhelm,
"Ah! what must I, who sit at Judah's Helm,
"My Family, no less than All the Realm!
"That Realm how shall I orderly bequeath,
"Ever Wars Alarms afford me time to breath?
"How place my Scepter ever my Sword I Sheath?
"But if the Almighty Wisdom has thought fit,
"That I should Judah's Royal Ensigns quit;
"My Soul at his Decree shall never Repine,
"Both Life and Empire, at his Call Divine,
"I will Resign -- But ah! to whom Resign?
"For yet the Marriage Bed's to me unknown,
"And Judah wants an Heir to Judah's Throne.
"Shall Israel's Ten Apostate Tribes, their King
"To Sion's Tower, and worse --
"Unhallowed Idols to the Temple bring?
"Or shall Assyrian Troops the Siege renew,
"And Rabsheka's blaspheming Threats prove True?
When in such Terms the Royal Saint had mourned,
His Face, bedewed with Tears, he meekly turned,
Turned to the Wall: Why thither? that his Mind
Might less Distraction in that Posture find,
Or secret Prayers more servently to press;
(As warm Devotion loves no Witnesses.)
Or that his Palace opened on that side
A Prospect, whence his Eyes the Temple spied,
Where wished Access was to his Feet denied.
A second Deluge at his View he show'r'd,
And thus his Soul her Deprecation poured.
"Remember, Lord, (with humble Trust I sue
"How to thy Service I have been most True:
"With perfect Heart by strong Devotion warmed,
"That which was Righteous in thy sight performed.
The Royal Saint paused here; and hovering round,
Attending Angels strive to catch each Sound:
Scarce could They for their finished Errand stay,
While thus the Pious Prince proceeds to Pray --
"How prays He? -- Not one Accent more he spoke.
"But when his Tongue grows mute, his Thoughts invoke;
"His Tears and Groans their Office still maintain;
"Let then the faithful Muse --
"The Language of those Groans and Tears explain.
They said -- "Thou see, O God, most Just and Wise,
"All fixed on me, the Neighboring Nations Eyes;
"How in a Lewd and Superstitious Age
"Alone I stand, and for thy Truth engage
"Thy Worship's Champion; if in Death I sleep,
"From Pagan Force, who shall thine Altars keep?
"The Reformation, I with Toil commenced,
"Will soon relapse to Ruin when unfenc'd:
"The Assyrian Savage with impetuous Haste
"(The Enclosure gone) will lay thy Vineyard waste.
"Let me, or let my Cause, thy Favor claim,
"Support thy Servant, or at least thy Name;
"Restore me from the Grave, prolong my Days;
"Prolong them, that I may prolong thy Praise.
Nor yet the Prophet had the Palace left,
And Royal Patient, of all Hope bereft;
But He, whose Visit made the Court to Mourn,
Of Life the welcome Envoy must Return.
"Turn, cried the Vision, bring my Saint Relief,
"Tell Hezekiab, tell my People's Chief;
"Thy Father David's God has heard thy Prayer,
"Beheld thy Tears, and will thy Health repair:
"The Third Day's Sun shall see that Health restored,
"(But Miracles must first confirm my Word;)
"Who now wants Breath his mournful Cries to raise,
"Shall in the Temple then resound my Praise.
On the Death of Mr. Fell, who was found Dead upon his Knees in his Chamber.
PRetending private Study, when thy Mind
To Paradise this Voyage had designed,
Was sure a Pious (though surprising) Fraud,
And such as Saints and Angels must applaud.
Elijah thus pretending to Retire,
Told of the Water, but concealed the Fire.
Elisha, had he sought no more to know,
Had lost his Spirit and his Mantle too.
Such Legacies, blessed Soul, might thou have given,
Had we but seen thee when snatched up to Heaven.
Sure, Paradise was opened to thy view,
When with thy Prayer thy Soul together flew.
In such a sacred Rapture Stephen spied
Heaven's Gates unlockt, and forthwith kneeled, and died;
To Heaven thou now have shown the nearest way;
Which is, like Thee, to Study and to Pray.
You, that carve Virtue decked with every Grace,
As if her Beauties lay in Hands and Face,
Come Counterfeit this Image if you dare,
The first Original Statue of a Prayer!
Heaven took thee up when it beheld thee down;
So Princes kneel when they receive a Crown.
Nor did Heavens sudden Summons Thee surprise,
It scarce could ever find thee otherwise,
Thy pious Soul in Consecrated Clay,
(For 'twas a Temple) never ceased to pray.
Thy often repeated Storms Heaven's Gates assailed,
Whose sacred Violence at last prevailed;
Heaven kindly yielding sent a Message down,
To bid thee enter, and possess the Crown.
One Period ends thy Combat and thy Breath,
Thy Conquest bravely finished in thy Death.
Such was Epaminondas noble Pride;
The minute that he Overcame, he died;
Alas! what cannot warm Religion dare?
No Walls so high, but may be scaled by Prayer
New Stratagems by Piety are found,
And highest Flights take rise from off the ground.
What happy Zeal thy Spirit did inspire,
That 'midst thy Tears could kindle so much fire?
Which made thee so impatient of delay,
Thy zealous haste could scarce Heaven's leisure stay,
But lest thy Message should too late come there,
Thy self wentst post to overtake thy Prayer.
Thy Soul and Prayer so intimate became,
That, like old Friends, they now were grown the same,
'Twas only Heaven (so much alike they were)
That could discern the Spirit from the Prayer.
Enjoy blessed Shade what thou have bravely won,
Possess that Heaven which thou had here begun;
Heaven does to us thy prostrate Body grant,
The precious Relics of so great a Saint,
Which should it longer in this Posture stay,
Would, like thy Soul, we fear, be snatched away.
Grudge not thy Body should to Earth be given,
A welcome Present, as thy Soul to Heaven:
Whilst this here prays below, that sings on high,
We'll learn of this to pray, of that to fly.
A PARAPHRASE On several TEXTS of SCRIPTVRE, Expressing the SIGHS OF A PENITENT
SOUL.
Translated from Hermannus Hugo.
The INTRODUCTION.
Lord thou know all my Desire, and my Groaning is not hid from thee, Ps. 38.
v. 9.
HE only knows my Grief, whose Eyes can dart
Into the dark Recesses of my Heart;
He only views those Labyrinths of Night,
Who gilds the Day, and gives the Sun his Light.
Stretched on the solitary Shore I lie,
With winged Petitions fill the vaulted Sky;
Yet what I wish, none knows but He, and I!
The Groans, the Pangs, that in my Bosom rise,
We Two can only tell; -- and we suffice.
PSALM 6. Verse. 3.
Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, heal me for my Bones are broken.
SHall I complain? or silently depart?
Complaints are just, and I will ease my Heart.
A common Friend condoles his Friend in Woe,
What therefore should a tender Lover do?
Were then thy Oaths of Love, but flattering Wind?
I did not think thou could be so unkind!
Ah! could thou know me sick to this degree,
And yet so long defer to visit me?
Melampus, Podalyrius, Chiron too,
And Poean, though with Gout and Palsy slow,
Have all been here, each Member of the Train
Has read his tedious Lecture on my Pain.
But my Hypocrates was absent still;
Thou come the last; -- Thou whose resistless Skill
Can Cure with greater speed than they can Kill.
They shake their Heads, and with dejected Eye,
The feeble Motion of my Pulse they try:
But what is the wise Result of all their Art?
They cry, I Am sick -- Yes, I am sick -- at heart!
Through all my Veins the dire Infection creeps,
My Vitals too in strong Possession keeps.
My Pains, my Pangs, my Agonies increase,
And Physics baffled Power gives no Release.
Behold these Lineaments disguised with Woe,
If thou again this altered Face can know?
Behold these Eyes, each buried in its Cell,
These Cheeks where freshest Beauty used to dwell;
In Ruins there each graceful Feature lies;
Though chaft with Wine, no lively Blush will rise.
Then to whose Altar should I now repair,
But Thine, who only can redress my Care?
Thou only can my raging Grief control,
Who art the great Physician of the Soul.
JEREMIAH 9. Verse. 1.
O that my Head were turned into Water, and my Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I
might weep Day and Night.
Nymphs of the Flood, how truly blessed are you?
Whose beauteous Limbs in liquid Crystal flow!
And They whose metamorphos'd Frame distilled
To Lakes that soon the wondering Valleys filled,
Why of your Fortune should this Head despair;
(This wretched Head) with, more tormenting Care
Turned to a Spring, with Moss instead of Hair?
On Earth my weary out-stretcht Arms I throw,
In hopes they will, like yours, dissolve, and flow;
But my hard Stars so blessed a Change deny,
For Rivers Emblems are of Liberty.
O that I could a sudden Fountain prove,
As Acis once for Galatea's Love!
That those kind Powers, who set sad Biblis free,
Would now repeat the Miracle in me!
Since Floods and Seas, I but in vain implore,
Let some kind Shower supply me with its store.
Then from my Eyes such plenteous Streams would flow,
As fall from lofty Pindus melting Snow;
Which down the Furrows of my Cheeks should run
In Course, as constant as the Circling Sun:
No Rest should in my trickling Tears be found,
Till all my Sins were in that Deluge drowned.
PSALM 69. Verse. 15.
Let not the Water-flood overflow me, nor the Deep swallow me up.
MY Life's a Sea, now raging, now at Rest;
And I the Ship, with gaudy Streamers dressed.
What are the Breezes there, each flattering Wind,
But those dissembling Passions of my Mind?
Invited by these Gales I rashly float,
And tempt the Ocean in a sickle Boat.
No want of youthful Dalliance to excite,
But pleasures Tiding up with full Delight;
Sirens that charm at once my Ear and Sight.
O Faithless Main, that with so calm a Brow
Do smile, -- how rough and boisterous will thou grow?
Kind Offices thou do as yet perform,
Without the least Suspicion of a Storm;
But when environed round with Seas and Skies
Past sight of Shore -- Thy Tempests then will Rise.
PSALM 143. Verse. 2.
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, etc.
O Who would not this strict Tribunal dread,
Or dare before the Almighty Judge to Plead,
At his Tribunal, how shall Guilt appear,
Where Innocence it self can scarce be Clear?
Even He whose Piety did brightly shine,
(Of all the Inspired Twelve the most Divine)
Whose Life, with Vice, was one continued War,
Yet dared not plead Perfection at this Bar.
The Royal Author of Seraphick Verse,
And Anthems fit for Angels to rehearse,
What Son of Flesh conceived in Sin (said He)
Before All-seeing Eyes can righteous be?
Nor Job (in sufferings tried) allowed the Skies,
And brighter Stars, as spotless in his Eyes.
If then such Pillars sink beneath his Hand,
On what support can we, frail Rafters, stand?
And if before his Breath the Cedars yield,
How shall such Shrubs as we maintain the Field?
PSALM.
The Sorrows of Hell compass me, and the Snares of Death take hold of me.
ACteon's Fortune seems in me renewed,
When wretchedly by his own Hounds persu'd.
Wild Groves my youthful Fancy did inflame,
My Soul was always in pursuit of Game;
Till Death beset me in a Desert way,
And of the Hunter made a wretched Prey.
In every Path Death's tangling Nets are spread,
More fine and subtle than Arachne's Thread;
Behold how close that watchful Huntress lies,
Some gaudy buzzing Stragler to surprise;
Her Web once struck, forth from her Cell she springs,
And to her Den the mourning Captive brings.
Mark how the Fowler from the shades unseen
Observes his Nets, stretched on the neighboring Green;
And, to allure, where vacant Spots are found,
He scatters Grain upon the barren Ground:
While Birds whom he already has betrayed,
Are now Decoys to their own Fellows made;
And from their Cages cheerful Notes begin
To draw, with feigned Mirth, their Companions in: --
These, these, my Soul, true Emblems are of Sin.
PSALM 31. Verse. 10.
My Life is spent in Grief, and my Years in Sighing.
By N. Tate.
A Sullen Planet frowned upon my Birth,
Nor to this Hour allows one Minute's Mirth;
Yet still I Am flattered with deceitful Air,
That always says to Morrow shall be fair.
No Morrow yet has darted one kind Ray,
But still proves darker than the former Day.
The ruffling Winds oftimes disturb the Main,
But soon the Billows grow composed again;
No Leaves in Winter on the Grove are seen,
Which yet the next Spring Clothes with fresher Green.
When sudden Storms eclipse the Morning's Light,
Those once dispersed, the Day returns more bright.
My gloomy Thoughts no Interval can find,
The Tempest always rages in my Mind.
My Sighs are all the Music I employ,
My Sighs are all the Music I enjoy;
With these I pass the tedious Night away,
With these I pass the yet more tedious Day.
My Friends, it is true, their Counsel often address,
Advise me often to make my Sorrows less.
I took their Council, gave to Mirth the Rein;
Mirth only brought more sharp Returns of Pain.
For when my Griefs with Laughter I Would beguile,
Tempestuous Sighs destroyed the Infant Smile.
And when I try to Sleep my Griefs to Rest,
Their Cries fright from my Door the gentle Guest.
Ye Streams and Groves, my long frequented Seats,
Ye Rocks and Caves, my Sorrows last Retreats!
You know, how often my Groans in vain suppressed,
Have with recoiling Fury torn my Breast.
While Echo, gentle sharer of my Woe,
Returns a Sigh to every Sigh I throw.
Here Progne does her mournful Story tell,
Answered by sadder Notes of Philomel.
Each in her Turn renews the doleful Strain,
While Halcyons from the distant Shoars complain
With these the Turtle joins eternal Moan,
Like me, she mourns, and murmurs all alone!
Thus Fate, does cruelly my Life prolong,
Of all my sufferings Life the greatest Wrong!
Out of Hermannus Hugo.
I Charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye tell
him I am sick of Love. Cant. 5. 8.
YE happy souls, of Heavenly Salem's Race,
Whose snowy Feet the Azure Temples grace,
You, you, I charge, attend my sacred Strain,
If ye by chance should find my Love again,
Tell him I Languish with a Fire unknown,
As Iasmins saint beneath the Assyrian Sun;
For 'midst the Darts he lately scattered round,
He fell himself a Shaft, and I a Wound:
At least his own Blood tinged the pointed Steel'
For I more His, than my own Sufferings feel.
Ah! with what fires was then my Soul possessed,
As if whole Aetna heaved within my Breast!
If he is inquisitive, as Lovers are,
And should enquire of each particular,
Talk all the Forms of Languish and Distress,
Which Pain forbids the Sufferer to express.
He Will ask if I am Feverish; tell him, No;
My Spirits are too weak, my Pulse too low!
He Will ask if danger of my Life appears; --
Tell what your Eyes discover, not your Ears.
Tell him you bid me speak, whilst my faint breath
Imported nothing, but the signs of Death.
Perhaps he will ask you how I did appear,
What Looks, and what my other symptoms were;
This, or like This, let your Description be,
That he my danger with its Cause may see;
A pale a frightful trembling Ghost I lie
Condemned, O Fate! neither to live nor dye.
I pant and struggle for my hovering Breath,
Laboring for either perfect Life or Death.
With heavy Eyes, that sink in gloomy Shade,
My faint Right hand within my Bosom laid:
No rosy Colors, no young Native heat,
No Pulse, though touched, can be perceived to beat.
A flood of Tears wash my faint Life away,
And dying Sighs to him my Soul convey:
Whilst in these sad Complaints I still admire
To feel I burn, yet know not what is the fire,
Unless it is Love, which does these Passions move,
For every accent of my Pain is Love!
From hence, I find, from hence proceeds my flame
I know not Love, but yet a Lover am;
Love made my Plaints so loud, my Sighs so deep,
Love taught my unexperienced Eyes to weep.
From hence the Abruptness of my Language came,
That I could utter nothing but his Name.
This, in these words, Let my Beloved hear,
That I (fond of my pain) his Fetters bear:
Tell him I burn with such a gentle fire,
As Roses in the Summers heat expire;
Tell him that I with long Desires decay,
As hoary Lillies droop and fade away;
I charge ye tell him I am sick of Love,
And my last Sickness, tell him, it will prove.
ON EASTER DAY.
By an unknown Hand.
1.
HArk! Sure I hear Urania play,
I hear her tune the heavenly Strings;
Some wondrous Tidings sure she brings.
Oh! now, methinks, I hear her say,
The Sun of Rightcousness, To day,
Must break, must rise, must come away
With Healing on his Wings.
2.
It Is done -- behold the God appear,
Fulfilling all that he has said,
Captivity is Captive led;
Death of his old envenomed Spear
Behold disarmed, and conquered here;
The Grave no more the Members seat
Since risen is the Head.
3.
In vain the silly Rabbis strove
A Stratagem of Force to find
The Lord Omnipotent to bind;
Too weak, to stop Almighty Love,
Their Guards, their Stone, their Seal must prove;
The trembling Earth does all remove
Like Dust before the Wind.
4.
Let ransomed Men in Praises vie,
Let every faithful Soul rejoice
And tune, to Angels Notes, his Voice!
Hail! Son of David, let them cry,
Hail! Thou that Live, and did Dye!
That list'st thy glorious Seat on high,
And Sufferings made thy Choice.
5.
Unfold, ye Everlasting Gates,
That Guard the great Iehovah's Towers,
Those Sacred My stick Leaves of yours;
The King of Glory for you waits:
Receive him, O ye blissful Bowers,
Ye Thrones, Dominions, Sceptred Powers;
He comes: -- accomplished are the Hours
Appointed by the Fates.
6.
Be now thy Foes thy Footstool made;
Exalted high, on God's Right Hand,
A Priest for ever may thou stand,
Thy dear Redeeming Blood to plead,
The imperfect Sacrifice to aid,
Which is by wretched Man conveyed,
And never must be scanned.
A Preparation to PRAYER.
By the same Hand.
1.
LET no bold Prayer presume to rise,
Let no unhallowed Incense go
A fruitless Progress, through the Skies,
Whilst here thy Heart remains below:
Thy Heart, adorned in all its best desires,
Thy Father kindly courts, thy awful God requires.
2.
Think with what Reverence and State
Thy Maker is adored Above;
What mighty Beings round him wait,
And pay their Worship and their Love:
That Cherubims are in his Sight afraid,
And with enfolded Wings their glorious Faces
Shade.
3.
How must that Guardian Angel grieve,
(That to attend thy Soul, is sent)
Such cold Petitions to receive,
As his warm Zeal can never present!
How must he grieve, thy empty Forms to see?
In Spirit and in Truth, his God must worshipped be.
4.
How will it swell thy final Cares?
How will it all thy hopes defeat,
To see thy Sins increased by Prayers,
Which only could their force abate?
How can thou hope t'escape those foreign Harms,
Who thus against thy self turn'st thy defensive Arms?
GOLD is tried in the Fire, and acceptable Men in the time of Adversity.
By the same Hand.
1.
IF all the appointed Days of Man were fair,
And his few Hours moved over him like a
Breeze,
That gently fans the waving Trees,
Soft and Smooth, and void of Care,
As Infants balmy Slumbers are;
How should we ere assured be,
That even Temper we might see
Were Virtue, not Prosperity.
2.
Not so the Almighty Wisdom has designed
We should in Ease and Luxury remain,
Untried by Sorrow, or by Pain:
No, the great Searcher of the Mind
Unshaken Virtue there must find;
Though low as to the Dunghill brought
With him, whose sifted Patience taught
He served for Duty, else for naught.
3.
We see the wealthiest Oar the Earth does
hide,
Is not received or passed for current Gold,
Nor by the greedy Miser told,
Till by the Cleansing Furnace tried,
It does the seven fold Test abide:
So must the Path of Grief be trod,
That certain Purifying Road
By all the accepted Sons of God.
4.
God in this Method to our Needs has bowed,
Nor is it Reason guides when we complain:
Favors alas, but fall in vain,
And the good Things that are allowed,
Instead of happy, make us proud.
Let us not then refuse this part,
But wisely learn the Saving Art,
Which Tears to Comforts does convert.
On AFFLICTION.
By the same Hand.
1.
WElcome, (what ever my tender Flesh may say,)
Welcome Affliction, to my Reason still.
Though hard and rugged, on this Rock I lay
A sure Foundation, which, if raised with Skill,
Shall compass Babels aim, and reach the Almighty's Hill.
2.
Welcome the Rod that does Adoption show
The Cup, whose wholesome Dregs are given me
here,
There is a Day behind, if God be true,
When all these Clouds shall pass, and Heaven
be clear,
When those, whom most they shade, shall shine
most glorious there.
3.
Affliction is the Line, which every Saint
Is measured by, his Stature taken right;
So much it shrinks, as they repine or faint,
But if their Faith or Courage stand upright,
By that is made the Crown, and the full Robe
of Light.
PSALM the 137th, Paraphrased to the 7th Verse.
By the same Hand.
PRoud Babylon, thou saw us Weep,
Euphrates, as he past along,
Saw on his Banks the Sacred Throng
A heavy Solemn Mourning keep;
Sad Captives to thy Sons and Thee.
When nothing but our Tears were free!
A Song of Sion they require,
And, from the neighboring Trees, to take
Each Man his dumb neglected Lyre,
And Cheerful Sounds on them awake;
But Cheerful Sounds the Strings refuse,
Nor will their Masters Griefs abuse.
How can we, Lord, thy Praise proclaim,
Here in a strange unhallowed Land,
Lest we provoke them to blaspheme
A Name they do not understand!
And with Rent Garments that deplore
Above what ever we felt before.
But thou Jerusalem so dear,
If thy loved Image ever depart,
Or I forget thy Sufferings here,
Let my Right hand forget her Art,
My Tongue her Vocal Gift resign,
And Sacred Verse no more be mine.
The Second Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, Paraphrased.
By the same Hand.
The first 12 Lines being an Introduction.
HOw weak is Man that would himself persuade
Out of his Interest, and his Tempter aid!
Misled by present Ioys, and humane Pride,
Would gladly lay his future Hopes aside;
Uncloath himself of all he holds Divine,
And to the Earth his Ashes would confine.
Consent his Soul (all pains on it to spare)
Should vanish like the soft and silent Air,
This Doctrine, which in ancient Times was penned,
The industrious Devil took care should still descend,
And we by Atheists now the same are told,
Which Isreal's wisest Prince describes of old.
The CHAPTER begins.
THus reasoned they, said he, but not aright,
Deluded by the Charms of vain Delight;
Though Life be short, how tedious is the day
Which some new Pleasure does not drive away?
Death hastens on all humane Things to seize,
And there is no remedy for that Disease.
None from the Grave return, nor Moses Laws
Have seen him come to vindicate their Cause.
Chance made the World; and the same Hand of Chance
Did blindly Man into that World advance.
And, when the date of certain years expires,
As he had never been, he back retires.
That active Fire which animates the Heart,
And thence all Life and Motion does impart,
By some contending Element oppressed,
Extinguished fails and quits the darkened breast.
The Vapor in our Nostrils steals away,
And all that row remains is common Clay.
Time preys upon our Memory and Name,
And deep Oblivion swallows up our Fame.
Like a swift Cloud we pass unheeded by,
No track is left, no mark where it did fly,
Nor shall it ever return to shade the Sky.
Since past and future we at distance see,
And present time can only useful be,
Voluptuous, and in Pleasures let us live,
And freely spend what Moments we receive.
Still let us gay and warm Affections hold,
And, when in Age, forget that we are old.
Roses about our youthful Tresses ty,
Roses shall, when they fall, their place supply.
The cheerful Spring shall round our Temples shine,
Whilst our full Bowls flow with Autumnal Wine.
The polished Skin with Ointments shall begay,
Circling Perfumes shall usher on the way,
And soft harmonious Airs about us play.
Diffusing as we pass Luxuriant Bliss;
This is our Portion, and our Lot is this.
Justice shall lay aside her useless Scales,
And Force shall Justice be, when Force prevails
No Law shall govern, no dull Rule take place,
The Widow, nor the hoary Head find grace;
Oppression shall the righteous Man devour,
Fashioned by Conscience for the Tyrant's power;
Who meekly yields to wrong, or vile disgrace,
Yet from the Immortal God derives his Race,
And by himself is arrogantly styled
Of him he Worships the apparent Child;
Him let us wait for that upbraids us still
With Breach of Laws, and Education ill,
That but at distance views our loose Delight,
And blasts our Mirth with his reproachful sight:
Who, not like us, his Youth to Pleasure gives,
But singular, and solitary lives;
And does his Eyes on distant Prospects bend,
Saying, the Just is blessed in his End;
That let us hasten, and his Patience prove,
And his cool Temper with rough usage move:
If Son to him whom he Almighty calls,
He sure will Save when in our hands he falls;
Let us in Shame and Tortures make him dye,
And so his Truth and his Protector try.
Full place did such Imaginations find
With Men in Mists of Sin and Error blind,
That knew not God, nor did his Laws regard,
Unmindful of the Work or the Reward,
That shall on blameless Souls hereafter rest,
When with Eternity of Pleasures blessed.
God stamped his Image on created Earth,
And made it so, Immortal in its Birth,
And though the Inferrial Fiend, with Envy filled,
Brought Death into the World, and some has killed,
Yet only those that do his part embrace,
Shall fall to him, and his appointed place.
SOLITUDE.
HOw far the sweets of Solitude excel
The World's loud Mirth and clamorous Sports
Of Theaters, and crowded Courts,
Only the virtuous Heavenly Soul can tell.
Which when retired and loosed by Faith and Love.
From the gross Body, upward flies,
Climbs over the impurer lower Skies,
To gain sweet Converse with blessed Minds above.
Ravished with This, she seeks a clearer sight,
And chides the interposing Clay,
And bars of Flesh that take away
Her heavenly Prospect, and retard her flight.
She does her scorn of this low World express,
Derides the Pompous Trifles here,
Honors and Wealth to Sinners dear,
And wonders why Men call it Happiness.
Safe in those happy Realms of Light and Love,
From Clouds and stormy Wind that blow
Over this tempesteous World below,
She mourns she cannot always keep above.
In those bright Fields no fears her Joy control,
Securely seated from on high
She sees the ruddy Lightning fly,
And hears below the distant Thunder roll.
She Is there safe guarded from fallen Angels power,
That stray in this low void of Air.
And (watching with unwearied Care,)
First tempt to sin, then vanquished Souls devour.
Those Minds become more excellent and pure,
That Heavens calm Regions most frequent,
Free from Earth's Damps and noisome Scent;
As wholesome Climates Men's sick Bodies cure.
And when such Minds descend to Earth again,
Their heavenly Language cheerful Face,
Fresh Beauty and Celestial Grace
Declare the happy Seats where they have been.
This World is still so turbulent and loud,
That Heavens soft Voice cannot be heard,
Angels have often to Men appeared
When all alone, but never in a Crowd.
In silent Groves the Men of old grew wise,
There prostrate Votaries adored,
And invocated the true Lord,
There Heathens worshipped too their Deities.
Sage Druids there Heavens Councils understood:
The Soul does there her Thoughts compose,
Calmly devout and silent grows,
Awed by the shade and stillness of the Wood.
There the Essens Sect their Innocence were taught
Of the next Silver Stream they drank,
Got a cheap Meal from some green Bank,
And far from worldly Cares they Lived and Thought.
In Fields and Woods, may I safe Pleasures find,
Nature's Almighty Cause adore,
Admire the Works, but the Author more,
Where Objects both delight and teach my Mind.
May Valleys teach me to be fruitful too,
May Hills excite me to aspire,
Like them, to Heaven with raised Desire,
And may my Thoughts flow pure, as Fountains do.
From Birds I Will learn to sing my Maker's Praise,
The Sheep shall make me wish I may
Grow useful, and as meek, as they;
And hear the Pastor that directs my ways.
Both Birds and Beasts shall my distrust condemn,
That trust Heaven's Goodness rove about
Free from all Care and anxious Doubts,
And teach me to depend on Heaven, like them.
Motives I never shall want of Love and Praise,
For Heaven and Earth will still supply
My Thoughts with such variety,
As will new wonder fresh Devotion raise.
Oh may I something learn from all I see,
And by the Creatures still ascend,
To the first Cause whilst I attend
To Nature's Volumes of Divinity.
Let me sweet Solitude's Delights enjoy,
And Those repair to sensual Sport,
To Wine and Theaters resort,
Who know not how their Leisure to employ.
A Closet, or a secret Field with thee,
Shall Lord, to me be far more dear,
Than all the sensual Pleasures here,
Than all the poisoned sweets of Ease and Luxury.
The ENQUIRY.
By the same Hand.
I HAVE searched the barren World, but cannot find
A Happiness for an Immortal Mind.
Honors, Delights and Riches have all spent
Their Smiles in vain, to give my Thoughts Content.
The Joys they yield, but for a Moment last,
And shrink to nothing when they are close embraced.
They never satisfy, but feed desire,
And bring fresh Fuel to a restless Fire.
What Is one poor drop to him that almost bursts
With fierce desires, and for an Ocean thirsts.
My Mind can hold both the rich Indy's store,
And find it self, as empty as before.
The Treasures Earth throws in their purpose miss,
Swallowed and lost in that immense Abyss.
I Have looked over all the Riches Earth can show.
All that it Promises, but gives to few:
And still some Intellectual Good I want,
Some Happiness this World can never grant.
Hence mighty God my Thoughts ascend to Thee,
The spring of Good, and Man's Felicity.
It Is only thy Immensity can fill
The thirsty Soul's vast and immortal Will.
This single Thought, that all Earth's Joys at Death
Will end, and cease for ever with my Breath,
Quite chills my Love, and lessens my Esteem,
And makes a Kingdom but a trifle seem.
I find my Soul's misplaced, it longs to see
Some higher Good, some fixed Felicity,
Which it despairs to meet with, but in thee
I Am blessed with Faculties to entertain
Thy self, and sure thou made them not in vain,
And as I can, so I desire to be
Made happy only in Enjoying thee;
My Wishes else unsatisfied return,
And make me all my lost Endeavors mourn.
Thou do to All but Man Perfection grant,
That with their Happiness upbraid my want
No Hopes or Fears the quiet Stones molest,
That sweetly in the Earth's low bosom rest.
Trees to their height and perfect Stature grow,
No farther Tendencies or Wishes know.
Rich Flowers with daz'ling Glory crown the Year,
And in their Smiles a perfect Beauty wear.
Beasts that have all for which their Nature calls,
Pleased with themselves, are happy Animals.
Above the Earth their Wishes never fly,
Nor thirst for Heaven and Immortality.
No Prospect of a greater Excellence,
Makes them despise the low Delights of Sense,
No knowledge of Eternity can show
To them, how short these Pleasures are below.
They can no Dangers while at distance see,
To interrupt their present Peace and Rest,
From thoughts of Death and future Sorrows free,
They are with undisturbed Enjoyments blessed.
While Souls that can to higher Regions climb,
And look beyond the whirling Pool of Time,
Become unhappy by their Eminence,
And serve but to disturb the sweets of Sense.
When the sad Mind its sober thoughts emploies,
And finds it self born for Eternal Joys,
How Earth's unmanly, short Delights displease?
It rather will have none, than such as these.
It thinks of all its noble Faculties,
Then looks on Earth, and does its Joys despise,
Since I have such a Mind as this, would I
Had never been, or may I never die?
If no Delights are to be found above,
What shall I seek on Earth, what shall I Love?
If this be all the Happiness designed
For anxious Man, wretched Immortal Mind!
Happy the Bruits that cannot their State resent,
That know no nobler Joys, and are content.
If Man then cannot a perfect State attain,
His Soul and Appetites are made in vain.
Man only is Felicity denied,
Vexed with desires, not to be satisfied,
The Lord of All is most unhappy left,
Of that Perfection Beasts enjoy, berest.
But the Author sure will not be most unkind
To his best Workmanship, the Heaven born Mind.
He Is so benign he cannot but let us have
Objects for all the Appetites he gave.
It Is easy hence to know he does intend
Himself shall be the Minds last Rest and End.
On them he will at last himself bestow,
That never sought their Happiness below.
What this denies the other World will give,
Where Saints shall in Immortal Glory live,
Possessed with Heaven they shall for ever rest,
Crowned with Divine Delights, and with their Wishes blessed.
SOLILOQUY.
By the same Hand.
DOuble Allegiance, Lord, to thee I owe,
Both as thy Subject and thy Creature too;
'Twere then in me the most ungrateful Guilt,
Not to perform or suffer what thou will.
My place is to obey, and not dispute
A Will so good, a Power so absolute.
Shall my Remonstrances to Heaven be sent
To plead the Justice of my Discontent!
For Life and Enjoyments here I stand
Indebted to the Bounty of thy Hand.
What thou art pleased to take I must resign,
Yet thence sustain no Wrong, since Nothing's mine,
My Fortune's mean; the wisest and the best
Of Soul that now in Heaven outshine the rest,
Lived in this vale of Tears despised and poor,
Some wanted Necessaries, few had more.
And shall I quarrel with my Fate, when God
Afflicts me but to guide me with his Rod
The sacred Path which all the Blessed have trod?
Sure, Toil and Weariness must needs become
The Lot of Travelers remote from Home.
Pilgrims, as I am, while abroad they stay,
Must quit the Ambition to seem Rich and Gay.
Amidst my Foes I Am now a Stranger, where
What Is tolerable, is accounted rare.
Such Travelers can only Passage crave,
And That, what ever I miss, I Am sure to have.
All Sufferings here that can my Fears alarm,
Afflict the Flesh, but work no further harm.
Distress and Shame make not Heavens Servants seem
More base or wretched in their Lord's Esteem.
These cannot his Favor from my Soul remove,
Nor intercept the Pleasures of his Love.
And Happiness to Him is quite unknown,
Who cannot find it in that Love alone.
From Riches free, I Am free too from their Cares,
Safe by my distance from their fatal Snares,
An humble Fortune kindly does deny
The Incentives of our Pride and Luxury.
My weaker Virtue may be here secure,
Which might not all the Assaults of Wealth endure.
So little Vessels may securely ride
On a small River's smooth and gentle Tide;
Where weaker Winds with soft and easy Gales
Scarce heave the Bosom of their humble Sails.
But if they put to Sea, too late they find
Their Sail unequal for a fiercer Wind.
Hopeless they are with impetuous Fury born,
Split on the Rocks, or with the Tempest torn.
Thus meaner Fortunes Virtue most befriend,
Giving what is fit, and more would but offend.
Here we our Innocence can best ensure,
And that is the happyst State, that is most secure.
If now to Heaven's so difficult the Road,
What must it be with Wealth's incumbring Load?
Do my Endeavors now succeed so well,
And all Temptations with such ease repel,
That my Ambition any harder Task
Should crave, and for Herculean Labors ask,
That I with Care and Toil should purchase Foes,
And seek the Place that thickest dangers shows.
Are those I cannot shun so few or slight,
That fond of Ruin I would more invite?
This were to ravish Death it self, and scale
The Gates of Hell, lest milder Arts should fail.
I Am born for Heaven, and shall I choose to stray,
And shun the plainest and the safest way,
That I a longer Journey may endure
Through Roads more troublesome, and less secure?
Still meaner Fortunes are the safest found,
Free from the Snares which Wealth and Pomp surround.
The humble ground needs but a small desence,
We ought to dread the rising Eminence,
Where Sin does it is victorious Forces post,
And dying Souls are in such numbers lost.
Numbers, that give malicious Hell such joy,
That glut the Grave, and greedy Death over cloy.
The greatest danger that my fear should move,
Is, lest the World should too obliging prove.
She Is then most dangerous when her smiling Art,
And splendid Dress invite my yielding heart.
But when she frowns, her Charms are lost, unless
We Are fond of Misery, and court Distress.
The Worlds unkindness may abate our love,
Teach us to seek for Happiness above.
Make us for high Eternal Joys enquire,
And seek for Heaven with more inflamed desire.
For still our wishes after Home and Rest,
Are by the badness of their way increast.
It Is then from disbelief, and want of love
To God, and those pure Joys prepared above.
That in the meanest State we cannot rejoice,
And make not humble Poverty our Choice.
That Wealth and Greatness we so little dread,
Sought by the Living, cursed so by the Dead.
Blessed with the hopes of Heaven tho I Have no more,
It Is Atheism to complain my Fortune's poor.
The Man rich with these hopes may well employ
His saddest Hours in calm Delights and Joy.
Who when a few short Hours are past, will know
What Heaven to make Men happy can bestow,
For ever blessed, if God can make them so.
May I have these transporting hopes of Heaven,
And let me know that Happiness when given;
I Will praise Heavens Goodness, tho oppressed I ly
With what mistaken Men call Misery.
Why should I grieve for what I suffer here?
All these slight Troubles soon will disappear;
And what is not Eternal, is below my Fear.
The Safety of a low State.
Translated out of Seneca's Agamemnon, Chor. Argivarum.
By the same Hand.
THe treacherous Fortune of a Royal Crown;
Places what evers rich and great,
On a steep and slippery Seat.
Whence with an easy Blast all tumble down.
Proud Scepters cannot command soft Peace and Rest,
Nor chase uneasy Fears away;
They know no safe and happy Day,
But endless Cares their Greatness still molest.
The Lybian Sea not with such Fury raves,
When heaped up by rough Winds, the Sand
Does in high tottering Mountains stand,
And interrupts the loud impetuous Waves.
Euxinus neighbor to the snowy Pole, --
Where the bright Carman, by the Main
Untoucht, drives round his shining Wain,
Cannot with such force his troubled Waters roll.
As when Kings fall, turned round by rapid Fate,
Kings, whose desire is to appear
Awful, to move their Subjects fear,
Which Fear does in themselves the like create.
The Night, to hide 'em safe does Darkness want,
Soft sleep, by which a troubled Breast
Is loosed, and lies dissolved in Rest,
Cannot charm the restless Cares that Princes haunt.
The Men that born by too kind Fortune rise,
Soon sink and fall down from their height,
Pressed by their own unequal weight,
Which, those that envied, now as much despise.
Great Fortunes cannot their own vast Burden bear;
So the swift Ships expanded Sails
Swollen out with too indulgent Gales,
The Winds, they wished before, begin to fear.
So a proud Tower thrusts his aspiring Head
Among the flying Clouds, but finds
The uneasy neighborhood of Winds
And Thunderclaps, that are around him bred.
So the rude Storms that shake the bending Wood,
Design an envious fatal stroke,
To the ancient, well spread Oak,
The Grove's Defense and Glory while it stood.
High Hills the fairest mark for Thunder stand;
Great Bodies are but seldom sound,
Such have most room to take a Wound;
And the fat Deer invites the Hunter's hand.
What whisling Fortune does this day advance,
It throws down with a greater fall;
Estates that are but low and small,
Last a long quiet Age, secure from Chance.
He Is only happy, that of meaner rank
Does not his humble State resent,
But with his Fortune still content,
With a safe Wind Sails by the neighb'rng bank.
Whose wary Boat that dares not trust her Oar
To the rough usage of the Wind,
And the wide Ocean seldom kind,
Keeps still in prospect of the safer Shore.
RIGHT ZEAL.
By the same Hand.
SUre there is a Zeal that is born of heavenly Race,
Whose Lineage in its Aspects you may trace;
The generous Fervor and admired Degree
Of a victorious, healthful Piety.
This quickens Souls grown stupid, and imparts
An active Ferment to devouter Hearts.
It Is this invigorates decaying Grace,
And sheds fresh Beauty on it is sickly Face.
It works not out in Froth, nor will it vent
In angry Heats its inward Discontent.
Nor, for a Triffle, will to Blood contend,
Nor all its Warmth in Noise and Censures spend.
But meek and gentle as the Sacred Dove,
'Twill on the Soul in kindly Breathings move.
It smooths rough Nature, sweetens eager Blood,
Expels the vicious part, and saves the good.
Its heavenly Birth and Nature it will prove,
By universal Charity and Love,
It will so widen a contracted Mind
To the strait Compass of a Sect confined,
It shall embrace those of a different Name,
And find even for their Enemies a Flame.
'Twill pity smaller Faults, and those that stray
Reduce with peaceful Methods to their way:
It deals not Blows and Death about on those,
Whose Errors some less useful Truth oppose;
Nor does with Sword and Fire the Stubborn tame,
It uses none but its own harmless Flame.
In Reformations 'twill some Faults endure,
And not increase the Wounds it seeks to cure.
It stickles most on Love's and Mercy's side,
And checks the Heat and outrages of Pride.
'Twill shed its own, not others Blood to gain
The Peace it seeks, and mutual Love maintain
This Zeal has always most Impatience shown,
Where our Lord's Honor's injured, not our own:
Unaskt it can forgive an Injury,
Still love the Author, and his Rage defy.
Without this Zeal how meanly Grace appears,
See what a sick consumptive Face it wears!
It Is Beauty faded, and its Vigor lost
It seems departed Virtue's meagre Ghost.
Only this Zeal its Ruins can repair,
And render its Complexion fresh and fair.
Such Courage springs from this more active Grace,
As can the various Shapes of Terror face;
It makes us gladly take the Martyr's Crown,
And meet the Flames, with greater of our own.
No Straits, no Death it formidable thinks,
Beneath whose force a sickly Virtue sinks:
It gives the Soul the quickest, deepest Sense
Of unseen Worlds, creates such diligence,
As cheerfully dispatches all the Tasks
That Heaven prescribes, or our own safety asks.
This Zeal is wary, not enflamed by Pride,
And walks not, but with Knowledge for its guide;
Nor will too hastily Advance, but stay
To take Advice and Reason in its way.
When it grows hot, it is always certain too,
And will its doubting Thoughts as calmly show.
Blessed heavenly Zeal! how spiritful and fair
Those Souls that feel its Influence, appear!
How much such Godlike Hero's us condemn,
Whom they excel, as much as Angels, them.
Let me this truly noble Zeal attain,
And those that seek 'em, Wealth and Honor gain.
My Portion's then so great, not all the store
Of worldly Treasures can enrich me more.
TEMPTATIONS.
By the same Hand.
ALas, I walk not out, but still I meet
Paths too perplexed for my unwary Feet.
At my return the calm and even Mind
I carried forth, all discomposed I find;
My weak Devotions slackened and unbent,
And Passions loosed grow loud and turbulent.
My ruffled Mind with Sorrow secks in vain
To rank and suit its displaced Thoughts again:
My careful Steps no place securely tread,
Thick Snares over all the enchanted Ground are spread.
The smallest Inadvertencies expose
Unguarded Virtue to our watchful Foes.
Satan rejoices (if his Hell has Joy)
That, lost himself, He can Mankind destroy.
Ravenous as Lions are, and strong as they,
He does on Souls, as those on Bodies prey.
He much to's Skill, more to fallen Nature trusts,
And brings Temptations suited to our Lusts;
Temptations brings of Circe's Syren-Brood,
By feeble Resolutions not withstood,
Nor vanquished by faint Wishes to be good.
Here some great Man's displeasure over aws
Our fears of Sin; there carnal Pleasure draws.
In an alluring Dress it courts the Sense,
Whilst yielding Nature faint Resistance makes,
At last over come, gives up her Innocence,
And, in exchange, Sin and Heavens anger takes.
Sometimes a deadly Persecutors hate
Will damp our Zeal, and Love to God abate;
Sometimes the envious Scorn on Virtue thrown,
And the disgrace of being good Alone.
But after the attractive baits of Sin,
Call up the secret Sparks of Lust within;
Which taking fire burst out into a Flame,
Which our disabled Reason cannot tame,
Those Purposes small Opposition make,
That once we thought no charms, no force could shake,
But leave us to the power of Lustful Fires,
And the wild Guidance of unclean Desires.
But ah! what After-pangs will This create,
When sober Thoughts the sinful Act debate?
What guilty Blushes wounded Conscience wears
See how it starts lashed with its secret Fears?
It flies from Heaven, the thoughts of God afright
My troubled Soul, before, its chief Delight.
Heavens frown blasts all my Joys; tormenting Fears,
The secret Stings of Conscience, Sighs, and Tears,
Is all the sad Reward past Sins afford,
For these I Am by my self, and God abhorred.
When Love would rise to Heaven with fresh Delight,
Conscience suggests my Guilt, and stays its slight:
How dear a Moment's sinful Pleasures cost,
God's Favor more than Life, I Have for it lost.
One Sin can all my ancient Doubts restore,
Makes me suspect the Conquests got before;
Makes me suspend the Hopes of heavenly Bliss,
And Tyrants never found Torment, like to this.
It makes me question all my Deeds, debate
The future safety of my doubtful State.
It strangely can undo what is past, destroy
My present, and revoke my former Joy.
It shows old Sins to wound me with their view,
And the sad Penitential Scene renew.
What spreading Mischief is in Sin concealed!
By Man believed not, 'till too late revealed,
Fool that I am such Torments to create,
And buy Repentance at so dear a rate.
Upon a most Virtuous and Accomplished Young Gentleman, Who Died of the
Smallpox.
By S. H. Esquire.
1.
OF our Dead Friends ill Truths we may not tell,
Such spotless Honor in the Grave should dwell,
Yet more a breach of Charity it seems
To hide their Virtues, then to speak their Crimes;
How loudly then His worth should be proclaimed
Whom every Virtue graced, and not one Vice defamed.
2.
His Merits gained a Character so high,
As Envy could not blast, nor Pride deny;
Above disguise He scorned all varnished Arts,
And with Inherent Honor conquered Hearts.
His Actions generous all, and squared by Truth;
With Age's Prudence blessed, in the gay Bloom of Youth.
3.
Gentle, offenceless, so averse to wrong,
Obliging sweetness dwelt upon his Tongue,
With Nature's richest Gifts so decked within,
That Pride in him had scarce been judged a Sin;
His ready Wit no stop or bounds could know,
But, like a generous Spring, did clear and constant flow.
4.
Not in his Grave more quiet can he find,
Than always lodged in his unvary'd mind;
A Mind fit only for the Blessed above,
The Seat of Friendship, and the Throne of Love:
In Heaven what matchless Glory has he gained,
To bring from Earth a Soul by such an Age
unstained.
5.
The Hand of Fate seems partial to destroy;
Fond of the Happy, to the Wretched Coy:
In plenty round him Fortune's Blessings lay,
Which just attained, Fate summoned him away.
So parts the Shipwrecked Merchant from his Gain,
And (sinking) sees his Wealth Float round him
on the Main.
6.
No Humane skill the destined Hour could stay,
And hovering Death was pleased with such a Prey;
Which to secure beyond the help of Art
In every Pore he struck a Fatal Dart.
The Vicious Life an easy Conquest lies,
But Fate's whole power invades, when sacred Virtue dies.
To a LADY, Upon the X. Commandments cut by Her on White-Paper, and Presented
to S. John's College in Oxford.
THe curious Wonders we preserve with Care,
That the fair Hands of Cloistered Nuns prepare;
Who strive, poor Ladies! with a fruitless Toil
A miserable Solitude to beguile:
Promoting what they to themselves deny,
They Pride and Luxury to Mankind supply;
But in your Piece this Excellence we find,
An Entertainment for the Eye, and Mind.
A Sovereign Judgment formed the first Design
So well the Matter and the Art combine!
No other Lines could merit so much Art,
No other Hand an equal Skill impart.
The Masters see it, and their Plates disown,
Ashamed of the rude Scratches they have done,
The Printer boasts no more his Works do live,
And Sybil's Leaves, and ancient Bark survive:
But owns, that Art the longer Date deserves,
Which Things in fairest Characters preserves;
At least, if we no more Pretensions name,
The Author may a just Precedence claim;
Blind Chance did His on the dull Soldier throw,
Another Palace kindly this bestow.
Were all the holy Books transcribed anew,
And in such beauteous Letters dressed by You;
We ought the Jewish Reverence to retain,
And institute new Masorites again.
Our Tongue beneath that Sacred Character,
Would of Divine Original appear:
And, what in Theirs was but a vain Pretense,
Each Letter carry mighty Consequence:
And oh! how fit would that fair Mansion prove
For the ever-blest, and the Eternal Dove!
The officious Painter on the Altar draws
In Golden Characters these Sacred Laws,
But it is the Gold commends the strokes he makes,
His work a borrowed Value from it takes;
While wisely You such slight Materials choose,
And solid Worth by acc'rate Art infuse;
Your Piece no glittering Advantage needs,
Whose Value from the curious Work proceeds;
Yet by this Piece is represented best
The unspotted Image seated in your Breast;
As Poets, labo'ring best their Sense t'express,
Betray those Passions which their Souls possess,
Just such your Writ appears, so heavenly fair
The Angels Hand did scarce a fairer bear.
We only fear least Those who come to see
Should, unawares, commit Idolatry.
The Holy Place a solemn Reverence fills,
And deeper Awe, which this new Guest instills;
That hence we may but just Credentials call,
To vouch the Sanction of the Original:
And might the Tables by those Fingers writ,
Into the Holy of Holyests admit.
HYMN. Veni Creator Spiritus.
Englisht by Mr. Wright.
1.
APproach Celestial Dove,
Eternal Purity and Love,
And where at first you did dispense
A Being, Life, and Sense,
In the same Breasts now place
The very Soul of Life, Supernal Grace.
2.
Thou Spring of Joy still growing,
Fountain of Comfort ever flowing,
Thou greatest Gift of the most Great,
Thou Charity complete,
Unction Divine that brings
The Sanctity of Priests, Grandeur of Kings.
3.
Thou sevenfold Benefactor,
Of all that is Good, thou great transactor,
Thou promised Gift from Heaven sent
When from us Heaven went,
Thou God of Eloquence
That speakst to the Intellect before the Sense.
4.
Hither direct thy Ray,
Thou Glorious Sun of lasting Day,
And from that Sacred Heat inflame
A Passion for thy Name;
So all our present Want
Will be supplied by that Celestial Grant.
5.
Far, far, from us displace
The Immortal Enemy of Grace;
And in all Hazards let us find
Thy Peace, the Peace of Mind:
We ask no more reward,
Thou being thus our Conduct and and Guard.
6.
True Faith on us bestow
The Father-Deity to know;
And teach us by thy Inspiration,
God the Son's Incarnation,
Inform us then aright
How you add one to them, yet all unite.
7.
Eternal One, United Three,
To you belongs all Majesty;
All Power, and all Dominion's due
To you, and only you:
All Glory, then, all Praise Divine
United Three, Eternal One, be thine.
JEPTHA's VOW.
The ARGUMENT.
Jeptha having rashly Vowed (if he succeeded in his Expedition against the
Amonites) to offer up in Sacrifice the First that should meet him from his own
House; He returns Victorious: The first that comes forth to welcome his
Triumph, is his only Daughter, whom he Sacrifices according to his Vow.

By N. Tate.
BEfore the Altar the devoted Maid
(With Garlands crowned and in white Robes arrayed).
Appears all Mild, to yield her destined Life,
And waiting the slow Sacrificer's Knife.
A Virgin Blush her Aspect purpled over,
As young, and never beheld by Crowds before)
(Such Tincture Crimsoned Alablaster shows,
Or Lillies shaded by a neighboring Rose.)
Yet generous Resolution does display,
That with her Modesty bears equal Sway.
She, only she, appears without surprise,
And views the weeping Crowd with cheerful Eyes.
Some call to mind the public Service done,
And Battle lately by her Father won;
His Blood's Expense in Field to save the State,
And with it the unhappy Victor's Fate.
Of Age's last Reserve and Hopes bereft,
His ancient House and Lineage Heirless left.
The Younger sort bewail her blooming Charms,
And grutch so fair a Prize to Death's cold Arms.
The Nymph for whom the noblest Youths had pined,
A Booty to the Thankless Grave assigned.
For now (as Chance would play the Tyrant's Part,
And fret their Wounds with fresh Supplies of smart)
Those Beauties Nature had before conferred,
Sublimed and to Advantage all appeared;
Their Grief was now to Consternation turned,
They now Mourn silent, as before, they burned,
Of this the Virgin does Advantage take,
And her afflicted Father thus bespake:
To Ammon's Court, Great Sir, these Plaints remit;
These Plaints are only for the vanquished fit.
My self to Death's cold Arms I freely give,
While you to shield our State and Altars live,
You Rate my useless Life at Price too high
To make me yours, and Israel's Victim Dye!
More than my Merits or my Hopes could claim,
To purchase with few Years Immortal Fame.
With Comfort to your Palace, Sir, repair
To cherrish Her that is now your only Care:
My tender Mother's Sorrow to assuage:
For only You can check the Tyrant's Rage.
Forget your Worthless Daughter, and survive
By your Example to keep Her Alive.
You else resign your Laurels to the Foe,
And Conquered Ammon Triumphs in your Woe.
Or have you lavished all your Love away
On my past Years --
Reserved no Kindness for my latest Day?
If my past Life did you in ought offend,
In Death at least I would my Fault amend,
And to the Shades a guiltless Soul descend.
O Torture (the distracted Father cries,
With Arms extended and uplifted Eyes)
Too much, ye conscious Skies, for Man to bear!
For This is Torment that exceeds despair.
The weeping Crowd around he then surveyed,
O if the Death of this Illustrious Maid
You wretched makes, her Death you only see,
What must the Murderer her Father be?
In Innocence your Sorrow finds Relief;
I bear the double Load of Guilt and Grief.
Worldly Greatness.
By Mr. Ezr. Simson.
What Is worldly Empire, Pomp and Power?
The Pageant-Triumph of an Hour.
Or if the Courtesy of Fate
Prolong the Scene an Age's Date,
It Is all that Fortune can bestow:
And if for Life's time lasts the Show,
Not to a Minute 'twill amount
In vast Eternity's Account.
Were Heaven so pleased, one Monarch may
Arrive to universal Sway;
Mankind in sole Subjection have,
Yet to his Passions be a Slave.
Their stronger Forces shall invest
Alarm, Assault, and Storm his Breast,
And with the Havoc there they make,
Keep Him, as He the World, Awake.
HUMILITY.
By the same Hand.
MUch injured Grace, for being Mild,
Meaness of Spirit Thou art styled:
Thus senseless Mortals Thee defame,
Who do with Heaven Alliance claim:
It Is Thou alone that do inspire
The Greatness that brave Souls Admire.
The proudest Heroes of the Field
To Thee the Prize of Fame must yield,
To Thee belongs the first Renown,
Thou only can the Glory own
To Triumph over Fate's outmost Force,
And Steer in Storms a steady Course.
When Fortune tempts with flattering Wiles,
Thou only can resist her Smiles;
And when her angry Tempests rise,
Thou only can her Frowns despise.
On the Day of Judgment:
By the E. of Roscommon.
THe Day of Wrath, that dreadful Day,
That shall the World in Ashes lay,
It Is coming -- will not, cannot stay.
The Last loud Trumpet's wondrous Sound
Shall through the cleaving Graves rebound,
And Wake the Nations under Ground.
Nature and Death shall, with supprise,
Behold the conscious Wretches rise,
And view their Judge with frighted Eyes.
Then shall, with universal Dread,
The sacred Mystic Rolls be read,
To try the Living and the Dead.
The Judge ascends his awful Throne;
But when he makes all Secrets known,
How will a Guilty Face be shown?
What Intercessor shall I take,
To save my last important stake;
When the most Just have cause to quake?
Thou mighty Formidable King,
Mercy and Truths eternal Spring,
Some Charitable Pity bring.
Forget not what my Ransom cost;
Nor let my dear bought Soul be lost
In storms of guilty Terror tossed.
Thou who for me have felt such Pain,
Whose precious Blood the Cross did stain;
Let not thy Birth and Death be Vain.
Thou whom avenging Powers obey,
Remit, before the Reckoning Day,
The Debt which I can never pay.
Surrounded with amazing Fears,
Whose Load my Soul with Anguish bears,
I sigh, I weep: Accept my Tears.
Thou who wast moved with Mary's Grief,
And by Absolving of the Thief
Have given me Hopes, oh! give me relief.
Oh! let thy Blood my Crimes deface,
And fix me with those Heirs of Grace
Whom Thou on thy Right Hand shall place.
From that Portentuous vast Abyss,
Where Flames devour, and Serpents hiss,
Call me to thy Eternal Bliss.
Prostrate, my contrite Heart I rend;
My God, my Father, and my Friend,
Do not forsake me in my end.
When Justice shall her Sword unsheath,
How will they Curse their second Breath,
Who rise to a severer Death?
Great God of Mercies pity take
On Souls thou did Immortal make,
Nor let their State be that of Woe,
Which must, if Once, be ever so.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Morning Hymn, by Dr. Fuller, formerly Bp. of Lincoln. Page 1 An Evening
Hymn, by Ezr. Simson. 2 Innocence; Or the Inestimable Gem, by a Young Lady. 3
By Dr. Fuller. 5 By the same Hand. 6 By the same Hand. 7 Hymn. 8 The
Passing Bell. 9 Job's Curse, by Dr. Jeremy Tailor. 11 The Words by a Young
Lady. 12 A Dialogue between two Penitents. 13 Upon a Quiet Conscience, by K.
Charles the First. 16 A Dialogue betwixt Dives and Abraham. Ibid. Soliloquy. 18
Psalm the 104, by Mr. Tate. 21 The Evening Hymn. 27 On our Savior's Passion.
page 28 The Penitent, by Dr. Jeremy Tailor, 29 The Blessed Virgin's
Expostulation, when our Savior at 12 Years of Age had withdrawn himself, by N.
Tate. 30 On Pilate's exposing our Lord to the Jews, and saying to them, Behold
the Man. 32 Translations out of Boethius, Lib. 2. Meter the Fourth. 35 Meter
Fifth. 36 Meter Sixth. 37 The last Trumpet, by Mr. Tate. 38 The Slaughter of
the Innocents, By the same Hand. 39 Upon the Sight of an Anatomy, by Mr. Tate.
40 Psalm the First, by Capt. Walker. 45 Psalm 57. 8, 9, 10. By the same Hand.
47 A Paraphrase on the 79th Psalm. 48 The Convert. An Ode written by Mr. Geo.
Herbert, 51 The Prophet Elijah translated up to Heaven, by Mr. Tate. 53 Hymn,
by H. W. 58 Hezekiah's Sickness and Recovery, by Mr. Tate. 60 On the Death of
Mr (...) who was found Dead upon his Kn(...)hamber. 65 A Paraphrase on several
Texts of Scripture, expressing the Sighs of a Penitent Soul. Translated from
Herm. Hugo. 68 On Psalm 6. Verse. 3, 69 On Jeremiah 9. Verse. 1. 71 On Psalm 69.
Verse. 15. 73 On Psalm 143. Verse. 2. 74 A Psalm. 75 On Psalm 31. Verse. 10. By N.
Tate. 77 Out of Hermannus Hugo. 79 On Easter Day, By an unknown Hand. 82 A
Preparation to Prayer, By the same Hand. page 85 Gold is tried in the Fire, and
acceptable Men in time of Adversity. By the same Hand. 87 On Affliction. By the
same Hand. 89 Psalm the 137, Paraphrased to Verse 7th. By the same Hand. 91 The
Second Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, Paraphrased; The first 12 Lines being
an Introduction. By the same Hand. 93 The Chapter begins. 94 Solitude. 98 The
Enquiry. By the same Hand. 102 Soliloquy. By the same Hand. 107 The Safety of a
low State; Translated out of Seneca's Agamemnon, Chor. Argiv. By the same Hand.
page 112 Right Zeal. By the same Hand. 116 Temptations. By the same Hand. 119
Upon a most Virtuous and Accomplished Young Gentleman, who Died of the
Smallpox. By S. H. Esquire 123 To a Lady, upon the X. Commendments cut by her on
White-paper, and Presented to S. John's College in Oxford. 126 Hymn, Veni
Creator Spiritus, Englished by Mr. Wright. 129 Jeptha's Vow, by N. Tate. 132
Worldly Greatness, by Mr. Ezr. Simson, 136 Humility. By the same Hand. 137 On
the Day of Judgment, By the E. of Roscommon. 138
TWo Books of Harmonia Sacra, in which are several Hymns, etc. of this
Collection, Set to Music by Dr. Blow, the late famous Mr. Henry Purcell, and
other Masters Bound both Parts 15 s. or the 2 d Part 4 s.


