THE EAGLE-TRUSSERS ELEGY.

A Tract Bewailing the Loss of that Incomparable Generalissimo.

Gustavus Adolphus, The great King of Sweden,

Who after manifold and Glorious Victories, left his life also Triumphantly and
Laureated at the Famous Battle of L^TZEN* the Sixth of November, Anno 1632.

By G. T. Eq;

LONDON, Printed for Charles Webb at the Boare's Head in St Paul's Churchyard
1660.

Fame mounted on her nimble ^inge as high
As well she might without impeachment by
Celestial heat, and aided with a tackle
Of several engines, even to miracle*
Aduertising the senses; here imployes
Her Trumpetts, her innumerous ^ares and eyes,
Throughout our general hemisphere, to tell
The strife of tongu's* the ^oe the joye befell,
When our supr^amest Egle-trussing chief,
The great GUSTAVUS, of his massi^ life,
Exanimated was* She nere has flow'n
So high^ a pitch before, has never blow'n
So^ discrepant a medley, with so clear
A candor forth; so yt Benvolio, here
But listninge well, thou have ye distant, prime,
Loud, several, clashinge passions of ye time.


To the Reader.
SIR,
AFter a sad attraction by the per passionate dictates of Fame, to become her
Amanuensis; and an Endeavor in dilating the Stenographie* to garnish it with
fitting height and colors; the collection was intentionally presented an
Honorable Personage, who had very long and signally, obliged my services; but
since the Project became a Posthumus, the Pen and Press also but slubbering up
what should have been done in Print, it has necessarily put me upon this
farther revise; wherein if either the style ^e quarreled for high and
difficult, or the method as singular and over-fancied, yet the concernment of
that incomparable The Teuto^^ck for ^ero's.
Held Gustavus Adolphus, may justly challenge a note beyond Ela; for so was
Godfrey of Bulloign's mettle upon mettle, such an elegant Soelechism, as said
him able to refine the most staynand to the most honorable bearing: Thus with
his transcendent influence could our Edward the black Prince, irradiate that
praeposterous attribute, to set him supersuperlatively off, and with ar^etorick
far above the common rate of Conquerors: Nor is it improbable, that a fame
excelsly culminating, and as briskly sensible, should with her swift
extravagancy complicate the distant contrarieties ensewing, since our Books
will witness, that she could of yore observe (notwithstanding a vast tract of
Land and Sea between) the great Battles of Plataeae in Boetia, and Micale in
Jonia, both decided the same day; Nay, thus in the reign of Domitian, was the
defeat of Lucius Antonius in Germany, brought to Rome by her the same day,
though above two thousand miles distant* so that the several premises
considered, I have fittingly presented this volatile discovery, by the Latitude
and Plenipotence of her relation; and rather preferred a devious method and an
epick-stile, where the common road was disproportionable, Neither is that Shop
to be valued, which has not Cloth for Croesus as well as Codrus, and then
again for Cyrus above Croesus; after which account presented the benevolent and
knowing Reader (without resenting any bolted breath of others) I subscribe my
self

His affectionate Servant G. T.

Persius redivivus.
EN post limini^ redivivus Persius extat,
Romano-mastix qui fuit egregius
At non ut quondam Romanus: Persius, Anglus
Jam fit, and Angligenas i^sequitur satyris.
Mira (...): Vis and ardor, spiritus idem:
Convenient ambo carmine, voce, stylo.
Rideat hic Momus quae non intelligit, atque
Invideat Zotlus quae superare nequit.
R. L.

THE Eagle-trussers ELEGY.
Fame in Person.
CAn Hamath then the great, and populous Or Alexandria.
No,
Turn into rubble thus? must Eurus so
With scattered nets of Caterpillars, sup
The flower of Libanon, and Bashan up?
Is all our pomp, but straw and stubble, blown
Before the wind? Ye sons of men take down
Your swelling sayls, call laughter mad, reply
To joy, What do thou? Howl, o howl, ye high
And mighty Cedars, knowing that your breath,
Is likewise in your nostrils: meager Death
Implacably the fairest Eden turns
A desolate wilderness, to powder churns
The most anointed Cherub: even our great
Gustavus, how invictly whilome set
On his high places, now again goes less,
Acknowledging the worm his brother. This
Victorious Machabeus, (had he been
But a Ita quasi longaevus.
Macrobius, even a Constantine,
It might have trophe'd him,) this chosen shaft,
In his illustrious range, surmounting often
The highest Eagle; he that measured has
The bridle of our bondage, tyrannous Gath,
And all her susters, with a line of woo,
To plunder and demolish; payning so
The bitter rage, the famine, fire, slaught,
Of Heydleberg, and others; this devout
Dread In eight months he took in 80 Cities, Castles, and Sconce^ in
Pomerland, and Mechlenbou^g.
Polyorcetes, this high extolled,
And eldest son of thunder, now is rolled
Up in his leaden sheet. But out alas!
How am I here surpised? and such a cross
Impetuous conclamation now alarm's
My multiplicite ear, as almost storms
It into deafness; even alas so loud
Oppugning and tempestuous noyses crowd
And clash together, such a farce of passions,
Such worlds of Pleadings, or orations.
Harangs, broken ejulations,
Ignatian shoutings, A kind of threatening clamor used by the Romans, when
joining battle.
Barrits, burning vows,
Even such a Chorus in combustion plowes
The Welkin, I can hardly keep my wing
To paraphrase the which, running this string
A little des^ant. --
Fame in Chorus.
Hark how Futio cries
Victoria. Horn is broken, Arnheym flies,
The Saxonies comply not: nay this fond
Obstreperous blurt will boast not having don'd
His armor, yet as loud, as if about
To put it off; and then with many a shout
At our disaster, irreligious Gotz,
His nest of Soldiers so taking after plunder, that the word became by it in
disgrace, and to be taken for a theife.
Brigands, his A Brigade is a body more numerous then a Regiment, sometime as
big as two.
Brigado, whets
Again to blood and rapine; at whose din,
Both Two towns in Pomerland, which after the Citizens had first been tortured
and ravished, were plundered and burnt by the ^mperialists.
Vckermound and Pasewalk, piecing in,
Solicit vengeance; this the Butcher, this
The rigid Arab, sleep'st thou Nemesis?
These are the leaches daughters; then they shed
Innumerous tears, with Out Alas our dread
Alas our dead Adolphus! yet the while
Are these again so Shuffel'd, with a shrill
And crackling laughter, as some wilderness
Of thorns were burning; Monacum, or Camb^dunum, one of the neatest Cities of
Germany, and appertaining to the Bavarian.
Munchen crying thus,
Thus would we have it. I, quoth Angelostadium* or Aureapolis, one of strongest
pieces of Germany, where the Jesuits have an Academy.
Ingolstadt,
Now for your copper King. And hear'st thou not
How furious a The boisterous noise of Armies when in battle.
Vacarm is jointly made,
By the fierce Saxon, the victorious Swede,
The Frank, the Finlander? even how they drown
The world with clamor, make the champion groan
Beneath their prauncings? hear'st thou not, I say,
What thundering Canonades, promiscuous bray
Of rattling drums? or how the A word of art used by the French for the sound of
Trumpets.
Fanfars rage?
Or how the Fifes? and then what store of fledge,
And whistling lead, with On again, and charge,
And justice, and Adolphus? or how large
A throat pragmatical Ignatius sets
Wide open at it? or how The chief Commander of the Boores, opposing the
Evangelicals.
Shwendy beats
The livid air with hubbubs? --


Fame in Person.
I might style
The lumber almost deafing like to Nile
Amongst his Catadupes, still adding that
Of Scelestadt or Schlestadt, Perhaps the correption of civitas-scelesta, since
accordingly situate upon a River named Ill.
situate
With such a bitter brand; of Sainte-ville,
Eusebia Vrijburge now so dreading ill
To her municip laws; of Colonel General of the Crabats, or Croats men of
Croatia, the b being added for the fuller sound.
Isolaine
With his Crabats, (or call them else unclean
Devouring Harpyes,) and a passionate rabble
Of clamorous others, disproportionable
To my discourse: besides if weighing well
The dreadful medley, what nefarious toil,
May find a perfect, and a continued Passion,
Amongst these broken ends, with fit relation
Claiming the Muses? so that I should here
Be silencing abruptly, yet, my dear
Panaretus, must then thy bitter moan,
Pass as a serpent over-glides a stone,
And with no tract behind? why, maugre all
This strife of tongues, some lucid intervall
May now and then, perhaps, advantage us,
With thee upon his estimate; and thus,
(The noise even now relenting,) now thou cryest,
Fame in Proxy.
Panaretus. Come death, advance thee boldly, wherefore fleest
Thou such a precious wretch? I, now thy plaints
Are luculent enough, imposing rents,
Sackcloth and dust, for beauty, dernings up,
Scarlet, and balm. Nay, with a tedious troop
Of prodigies, thou bid'st the terrene rocks
Weep into fens and meers with inter-shocks,
The marine cliffes be rudely tumbled over,
Removing Sea-marks, puzling all the shore
With creeks and Chersoneses; do enjoin
The A hill in Over-pfaltz, out of which, the Egar, the Me^nus, the Sala, and
the Nabus, run four different ways.
Feichtelbourge, augument his weeping eyne
To Poes and Danubies; the Pyramid
So valuing This Tower is said to be 578 paces high.
Straesburgh, his ethereal head
Be now shrunk in with anguish; A Lake in Gothia, receiving into it 24 Rivers,
and emptying them al at one mouth, with such a horrid noise, that it is named The
Devils-head.
Weret rore,
As disimboguing even an hundred more
Than twenty rivers; bid'st unrip the tyles
Of sumptuous A hill in the City of Prague, built with many Noble men's houses.
Rachine, thatch it now with quils
Of wrathful Porpentines, or pinions rather
By Dragons moulted, or with many a feather
Of rigorous Alien^m tollens, one of the Harpyes.
Aello; do condemn
Her golden fretted rooms to Ohim, Jim,
Iackals, and Satyrs; blendest all the stars
With flaming Properly such swords as have indented edges.
Virolets, with fiery spears,
Injoyning Xiphii, blazing and bearded stars.
Xiphius, that his burning brand
A new he raging, further still portend
To Diadems, and Scepters; and that Sol
Or doffe his golden hair, or in a caul
Of sad and ru^ty vapors, wind it up,
As relatives appertient to the cup
Of trembling given us; and with such a gross
Of dismal symptoms to bewail the loss
Of our Adolphus: then with hideous passion
At the disaster, and in contemplation
Of what may thence ensue, he bellows out,
He still proceeds, with O what resolute
Bonarges left us now, to counterpoise
The fierce Gran-torto? he that so destroys
Our Lambs, and Turtles, nay the very Kid
While in his Mother's milk; nay children hid
Even in their tender The skin in which the child at his birth is wrapped.
Seconds. (O my soul,
Oppose, abhor his secret.) Look when all
A tedious Barnaby, the Wolf has lain
In holts, and hollowes, as the shades begin
To lengthen out, to russet every light
Dis-colour'd object, thoroughly hunger-bit,
He waxes gant and grim; and Sol, once gone
To the sea-shingle hence for pearl, upon
His morrow-grasse to melt, rages, and raves,
Barking at Cynthia, tearing open graves,
And sheep-coats, and with many a horrid prank
Frighting the Champion: such, and far more rank
His rage has been; and among mountains rude,
Of ashes, rubble, shattered spars, imbrewd
With Rivolets of gore. Lo where the broyl'd
And crumpled geniusses, of poor despoyl'd
Cities burnt by the Imperialists.
New-Brandenburg, of miserable Gartz,
Infer as much. And thou regret of hearts,
Dear Alias Magdenburg the City of Maidens.
Parthenopolis, imbroder'd late
With high and bossie work of Temples great,
Of aquaducts, of guilds, of bulwarks dread,
Burses, and Places appointed for trial of Masteries, especially shooting: the
word it self signifying agger, a But.
Doels, and even as turreted
As Berecynthia; how art thou become
An empty piece in plano, but a room
For moles, and worms to cast in? where alas
Thy ruddy virgins now? where all the gross
Of thy courageous youth, and those thy heads,
So hatched with reverend silver? nay, which breeds
Excessive horror, even the sepulchers
Of very The Marquess of Onspach and his Ancestors Tombs rifled by the
Imperialists; who had done the like also to the Duke of Saxonies Ancestors, if
not diverted by a ransom of 80000 Dollars.
Princes, girt with iron bars,
And Palisado's, built of massy, tough,
And boisterous marble, yet are petty proof,
Against his hungry clutches. O let all
Such impious pillage, rankle into gall;
Be like the gold of Toulouse, or the theft
Of the Such a Bird, as snatching meat from the Altar, carries a Coal with it
to her Nest.
Spinternix. But alas, who left
To serve this execution? our elate,
Unparalled Adolphus, knew to meat
Him with the bread of tears, to hamper him,
Sometime by force, anon by stratagem,
In some disert unextricable net:
Where like a savage Bull, he full of sweat,
Of swarthy foame, of dirt, and ordure base,
Lay stomachfully plunging; when alas,
Who now I say? --

Fame in Chorus.
Chor. But here the general rout
Complies again, and in so vast a shout,
With so much horror, rages up to heaven,
Like twenty Babels, that I must be driven
To spar mine ears up, lest their silver drums
Be cracked or rudely beaten out: Nor comes
Now in my random save a jangling farse
Of mutes, and visibles; save to rehearse
The thwart, the crossly-grain'd imagerie,
That still Armado-like within mine eye
Floats up and down; and with innumerous sorts
Of postures, mines, patheticall deports,
And ocular relations, up to dress
This empty chasme: yet, as if all excess
Implied inconstancy, the lumber here
Declines already, seizing not mine ear
With pristine horror; nay, as climing up
Ascents, and hills, abruptly often chop
Into low valleys, now it sinks so much,
That I return me to the further speech
Of our Panaretus: or wherefore dream
I such an ayrie Castle, since for him,
Lo where distended, at the rotten root
Of an old doting Pollard, breathing out
His last he lies; nor flexible to speak,
Save now and then Adolphus; or in weak,
And fumbling well-aways I know not what,
Of death and Sweden. Therefore here, my plot
Must be to change the scene; I, I, so fails
The wind in point, that we must vere our sails,
And now make ready for another board,
Hail the main boling there, I so, port hard;
And sweetest Zephyre, with propitious store
Of fragrant breath, spur up our boat so hoar,
So bright a pace, as Neptune also boast
His Galaxia: for some other coast
Bear up I say, and while we snugly run
Thus on this second tack, behold how soon
The virtuous The word signifies one that has a shrill voice.
Calasaster, fully fraught
With woeful threnes, and now already brought
Under our lee, pathetickly supplies
Mine ear again; I, hark how shrill he cries.

Fame in Proxy.
Calasaster. Calas. Comes all our hope to this? and beating then
His woeful breast, why lo the man of men,
Even he whose goodness in his greatness sat
Like Diamonds in gold; and where of late,
So many mighty can allege but words;
But Abram was our father, or the birds,
And empty beasts of Heralds; far beyond
This shell of poor formality, was crowned
With real nobleness; he that could do,
What others but discourse; and often, as two
Or three left-berries, may be found upon
A gathered Olive's upmost boughs, was one
Of our best patterns, even the most admired
Exemplar left us, is alas expired.
O that some chambering Jezebel that toils
In search of Philters, Cullices, and Oils,
To polish off the skin, and cock the blood;
Between him, and the dart of death had stood:
Or some ignoble soothing Polype, who
Can fit his foot still to the present shoo,
How grossly patched: or death for him had met
Some purple churl, or hideous monster, set
Within the scorner's chair; these are the thorns,
The bulls of Bashan, that with tyrannous horns,
So daily charge us; if decorting these,
We would have sung his dart, hung it with Bays,
And Garlands; but alas the wicked, still
Enlarge their lines; increase their households, till
They be like flocks of sheep; are fully fed
With milk and marrow; Jubal, and his seed,
Ingrosse the Lute, the Harp, they shine as stars
Of the first magnitude: O what deferrs
Unevitable justice? where alas,
In what untrodden rigid wilderness,
What rough Certain hills of E^irus, much torn with thunder.
Ceraunian hills, or sea unknown,
Is all the thunder spent, there should be none,
For such a base, licentious, execrable?
But softly swift, how at this wicked rabble
Art thou perverted thus? I hollow ho;
And wherefore, wretched Adam, run'st thou so
Stiff-necked a rebellion? dare thou cope
With Him, to whom the Nations but a drop
Are of a Bucket? Shall what grass but grows
Upon the housetop, and with which who mowes
Fills not his hand, yet quarrel the decree
Of Him that spans the Heavens, and shuts the Sea
Within his Fist? Shall weak inferior clay,
Prescribe the freedom of the Potter? nay,
Of the Creator? Likewise, what if here
The wicked often thrive, and houses rear
Among their desolate places, till the measure
Of sin be crying-full, that they may treasure
Wrath for the day of wrath; why yet but mark
The sequel, and behold they toil in dark
And slippery ways, thou will at length report
Their bliss a hearth of thorns, whose shine is short,
Whose crackling empty; or but, in compare,
Like to some upland Torrent; and thus are
The sudden brooks of desert Arabie,
As soon again exhaled fainting the dry
Approaching Caravans. Retract I say;
For though perhaps they bravely bustle may,
And branch it here a while; yet in the morn
Of our refreshing, from among the corn,
They shall severely cribadg'd be to dwell
With everlasting burnings; when the while
Gustavus and our holy zelots swim
(O happy souls!) in a celestial stream
Of Allelujahs; are as filled with bliss
(Immensly happy men!) as covered is
The Sea with water; shall I say decor'd
With palms, and crowns, and throns: o have the Lord,
Come quickly Holy Jesus! o my heart
How art thou swallowed up with the transport
Of heavenly touches!

Fame in Person.
I, the Calasast
Is here extatically so possessed,
And sweetly silenced, that dismissing him,
Withdrawn a while, I rather now declaim
The woeful The Word imports an upright and sincere person.
Degen-heart; for though at This was Wallensteins Castle in Moravia.
Znaim,
Imprisoned rigorously, his grief has yet
Such a Cathedral voice, as at the grate
I hear him cry, --
Fame in Proxy.
Degen. How are we now forlorn
Beyond a Comforter? how must I mourn
Like a sad Harp, or lowdly-howling Shalm,
For this interment? he that tore the palm
From all their glorious Chiefs, our strength, our stay,
The royal Sweden's gone! Be this a day
Of dread, of breaking down, of crying out
To hills and mountains, who shall prosecute
For any temper now? the lincks off shall,
The bolts off must, will now imprison all
Our Aequilibrium. Now let The Branden bourgs chief City.
Berlin howl,
And curdle all her faces milk, with foul,
With brackish water-floods; and also that
Courageous Or Eegodunum, a famous Mart Town of Germany wa^tered with the
Pegnitz.
Noremberg, so sung of late,
And high above the hatches; humbly now
Must kiss the rod, must supplicately bow;
Or being overpowered, live in groans,
And dye in shackells: then even he that runs
May read thy peril The Saxons chief City.
Dresden: therefore call
For curious Engineers, new-build thy wall
Of Bitumen and Mil-stones, lining it
With Terrene Thunderers, both infinite,
And of the royal size; see how he lays
For novell Levies, traversing his ways
Like a swift Dromedary, how recreuts
His shattered gross anew, with bloody suits
Of Croatians and Mo^avians.
Quads and Crabbats; now the rende-vous
Is made at Two passes betw^en Prague and Saxony
Luitmaritz; now Gallas shows
Us all his angry teeth, marching the van,
As far as The second pass.
Ausig; while that counterpain
Of Caesar's fury, that immense, renoun'd,
Prodigious Walstein, so named of his Dukall City, situate between Bohemia and
Lusatia.
Fridlander, (begirt around
With Rodo-monts, Such Gentlemen of companies, as receive extorardinary pay.
Appointees, Reformad's,
Cids, Epigons, The Spanish do extol their Gyds, as we our King Arthur or Guy
of Warwick.
and other martial blades
Boasting the Feofments Medalls dooble pays,
And other donatives, Such as are both born and bred up in the Wars.
wherewith the'yr days
Are rich enamil'd, while this termagant
D^ctator seconds him; and then so rant
Does A Holsteiner Field-Marshal to VValstein.
Hulke up with the formidable rear,
As presupposes both a flood of fire,
And blood in such abundance, that dismiss
We likewise now the fair Herbipolis,
(or call it Wortzberg) so to be deflowered,
So miserably starved and overpowered
With twitch and weeds, that where shall Galen now
Go seek alas for simples! also thou
So jovial Bacharah, that have thy name
From Bacchus altars, and a fluent stream
Of precious wine exported, break, o break
Thy chirping roomers! What symposiack
Can now be seas'nable? he comes, he comes,
His fier-locks are ready span'd, his drums
Beat with an Emphasis; what shall I say
To Two Cities in the Palatina^.
Creutznatch, Frankenthal, but that their day
Of doom is likewise near; o wring your hands
Submit, submit your necks, it is iron bands,
And cuffs you now must wear; the glorious blood
Of honorable Craven and Fairfax shed
Among your parapets, now proves in vain;
The product of it, the result, the gain,
Will soon be sworded out; and for his spite
To thee poor Heidelberg, thou have been writ
In Capitals, and with a coal, and long
In his black book, thou shall be made a song,
A byword, even a proverb of reproach,
A very heap, a hissing, even a wretch
Beyond expression, tush his Cuyrassiers
Will quaffe up Two Rivers in Saxony.
Elve, and Elster. --

Fame in Person.
Here with tears,
While eke our Degen-heart is suffocate;
Nor his huge Iron-voice articulate,
But thickly rivited with many a yell,
With many a groan, that hacks and mangles all.
He says to Nonsense, I must lightly fleck
From hence again, declining him, to speak
The furious heat of The Flowerdeluce.
Iris; lo her head
As tough and masculinely helmeted,
As e're Minerva's; and like her she hands
A threatening spear; nor poorly condescends
By Sweden's expiration to go less,
And leave her wing; but roundly does profess
The side of Justice; Ganymedes bird
Must render an account, for having stirred
The coals so fiercely; must restore a throng
Of glorious pennage, practically wrung
From the pacifick The Halcion.
Authe, The Redbreast.
Silvia sweet
The Dove, the The bird of Paradise, or of God, as this word signifies in the
Molucco^s.
Manucodiat, with a flight
Of others as deplum'd. --
Fame in Proxy.
Iris. Do do, recall,
Quoth this Virago, (fiercely therewithal
Grinding her teeth;) I, do but reckon up
The time of yore, and many a dismal stoup
Has this unsaturable aerie made,
With many a sharking Vulture, many a glead,
My breast dilacerating; on revenge
Hang out the bloody ^ur-coat; help us change
Our Pike-heads into Stings, with so much store
Of VVolfbane being smeer'd, and Hellebore,
That all our serred ranks, and squadrons rage
Like charging Hydraes, Hydra-like engage:
Come come, make ready there, advance the shot;
So so, now charge him home, pour all your hot,
And hissing lead into his bosom; were
But Sweden's Obit to be reckoned for,
Why yet the dearest souls, and essences,
Of manifold Re-publicks, Cities, Princes,
And mighty Monarchs, in his bosom met
Concentrically; made it their retreat,
Their general subterfuge; Come then, arise
Thou dread A drastria, draw thy bloud-shot eyes
Upon this rigorous brood. --

Fame in Person.
But here the late
Impetuous fragor does importunate
My deaf again; so like a multitude
Of many raging waters, every loud,
Each shriller accent drowning; that my verse
Must now the second time become a farse
Of mines, of postures, of dilacerate hair,
Hands wringing, plaudits, many a passionate pair
Of dissentaneous hands, promiscuously
Clapping and wringing. Now must the supply
Be merely visibles; convitious mowes,
Breasts beaten, gaudy capers; --
Fame in Chorus.
Chor. At out woes,
Lo there a sort of Drablers and Of Bidet, a small Nag upon which such
horse-mens Boys use to follow their Masters.
Bedees,
Cast up their caps, and leap, as if the brees
Now gave upon their rear, or else were beating
Their quarters up; and mainly aggravating
The hideous bustle, somewhat off from these,
Within a plump of old and mighty trees,
That like the pillars of a roomthy Church,
With corpulent and lofty bodies, arch
The green and brushie seeling, here behold
A pravity of monstrous, manifold,
Crabats and Gourtesans, so likewise set
Upon the merry pin, and over-heat
With heady draughts, with brimmers over-flow'd,
That wildly vapouring into scuffles, blood,
And mutual slaughter; they reflect again
The drunken Lapithes, and Centaurs, slain
At Hippodamia's wedding. Yonder look
How passionate Bishop of VVortsbourg, and Duke of Franconia, driven out of his
Country by the King of Sweden*
Hasfelt bustles, up to stoke
Whole forests into Bone-fire; which as fast
The A Country upon the River Main, divided into several Earldoms, siding
with Gustavus.
Weterawes sad several Princes haste
To dash out with their tears. Nor these alone
Dissolve so much, but see where Bogislaus then Duke of Stetin and Pomeren.
Pomeren,
And eke the John Albert, then Duke of Mechlinbourge.
Machlinbourger, and even swarms
Of Lords, and Roytelets, are sighing storms
For their Augustus, such an anagram
As without torture prophesied the name
Gustavus highly glorious; to proceed
As I have known a draught so fanciefy'd,
Per pale so parted into ridge and rivell
As with a glorious Angel has a devil
Commistly blended; let me here display
Where powdered captain Encombommata
So ranckly vapors eke, and brandishes
His Kilzadog, that pens and standishes
O quitt ye well; our Madam-gentles now
Shall caroll out his worth forsooth, and how
He rants and rages, if the surly Swed
With his bent brow to Monsieur Muri-ced
Reduce him not. Here have I found again
A rabblement of shavelings Tridentine
(Or we may call it Legion else as well,
For they are many) here I say with all
The gods of their Pantheon high and low,
Even all their puppetry, their trinckets, how
In a triumphant superstitious file
(As pleyted as a hedge of thorns the while
And as extended) how they rome about,
(May we but guess by posture) shrilling out
io to mighty Wallstein, who good man
While our Adolphus dyed a Laureat, ran
Most resolutely Prageward. I have found
Likewise a little distant, Ate woun'd
In Laynez arms, and now they part and run
Gesticulating wildly up and down,
Like Deer before a tempest, now embrace,
And newly hug each other, now they dress
Their heads with Laurel, now their bills of fare
Bespeak Podridaes, and they Printing are
For Pageants, Bonfires, Conduits running wine,
Garments of Trophee-work (in brief) design
A most insulting joy, my next relation
Must be the sad and desolate condition
Of Worms, of Frankfort (by the golden bull
Entrusted with the splendid monopoll
Of making Caesar's,) and again of Spire,
Of Wittenborgh so full of zealous fire
And Orthodoxall light; and how do these
For their Adolphus now like bullrushes
Calamitously quake and hang the head:
How now for Sackcloth, cineritian bread
Even such a penance as both man and beast
Full lowly lays, piaculerly post
Their eager sanctions; o the bitter fewd
The mortal medly that the world is brewed,
Combusted with, in present; there aloft
A most stupendous pile whose aerie shaft
May play with Tenarif for pike and place, The Emperor's chief councellor, Duke
of Cruman.

Lo^ Eggenborgh in a prospective-glasse
(That learned Kepler made, and far and near
Could thoroughly roomage all our hemisphear)
Be-jearing Oxenstern; then must I tell
How now for grief the Baltic Sea-nymphes vail
Their faces with a wash of Cepiaes ink;
And still of other desolat's that drink
Despair like water in; to balance which,
(And hail thou happy season ushering such
A temper in) Mine eye has likewise spied
Where in Campania One of the just pretenders to the Dukedom of Saxony
extorted from his Ancestors by Charles the 5.
Weymer does divide
His conquering Gross: now being in the van,
Now in the rear; and on a A kind of extraordinary Jennet bred upon the
Pirenian Mountains.
Lavedan,
(As Volteger, as ever The horses of Achilles,
Balius was,
As ever The horses of Achilles,
Zanthus) how from place to place
He nimbly flies, demonstrating right hands
Sent him from Field-Marshall under the Duke of Saxony.
Arnheim; which so countermands
The deafning hurley, with a blaze of hope
Becalming some, so roughly swallowing up
Some other in distrust and sudden fear,
That farewell Mutes and Visions, now mine ear
Distinguishes again; and of the low
Dejected residue, condoling so,
So miser-made at Swedens expiration,
Nor to be comforted, does with the passion
Of Quasi VVa^rmond, Tom Tell ^roth.
Pharamond present us, such an odd
A Mister wight, so blunt an Antipode
To ruffling mischief, that behold his face
All rigge and furrow, and his limbs (alas!)
So tenter'd out, and torn, with rods, with racks,
Strapadoes, and the like, my bosom aches,
And trembles at it: Nay, though Pasher late
Has rent him Sparrow-mouth'd with gagging, yet
He still so lashes out, so renders truth
In all her nakedness, that full of ruth,

Fame in Proxy.
Phar. Is then, quoth he, our mightiest Sweden dead?
On vengeance, on! or if thy feet be Lead,
Yet have thou Iron-hands. Ye bloody crew,
And of incestuous A great Fly, of four wings, an Emblem of over-hot
marriages, such as the Austrian Princes use.
Hanitons; it is you,
It Is you that did it; if we may prevent
The assassinating Butchers, Captain of a Horse troop. A joint conspirator with
Quint, for the murder of Gustavus.
Baptist, Quint:
Come The King is said to be slain by a Trooper of his Regiment.
Picolomoni, come open tort,
Come ball and powder, his presumptuous mart
And careless of the He was, when slain, without d^fensive arms and only in a
plain Suite of Spanish leather.
Cuyrasse, will betray
Him quickly to your fury. Thus I say,
Though The Sir name of the Austrian Emperors. See Verstegan.
Stock by surname, have thou ranted up
To Stork in practice: shut the door of hope
That we were entering at, or to decline
And waive all second causes, it is our sin
That thus imployes thee tyrant-like a while
As an expedient Crucible, to boil
And calcinate us; it is our sin that pays
Such woeful wages, sadly so dismayes
With tears in trophee-work; the flocks upon
Our many precious hills are lately grown
So course and nauseous, that we must be fed
With bills of studious fare, must have our kid
Dressed in the mother's milk, our eggs with gray
Luxurious We call it Ambergris, mistaking the latter syllable, for g^^^^
which in French and Dutch (from whence we borrow it) is Gray,
succinum. But tell me, say,
Thou soft Sir Liguritor a Glut^on, a Sweet-tooth.
Lecker-beck, is then the Mars
Incompt and rugged, with his A name, as Cotgrave has it, succeeding from the
strength of the old Earl of Angolesme.
Taille-fers,
By these so mainly timbr'd? or may these
A Peleus shield from hot Hypolites,
And her obsequious grins? why then go seek
For Sol in Tenarus, or snow where thick
Pyracmon, Two of the Clycops.
tawny Brontes, forge their hot
Tempestuous Thunderbolts: No no, complot
We temperance rather; let the cook, declined
To such a Mors in Olla, who can find
Unnatural births, luxurious A French di^h compounded of several ingredients
minced together.
Haches out,
As Anah did his Mules; let him be brought
At length upon the weights, and voided hence,
Where Who watered his Gardenherbs with Wine and Honey.
Aristoxenus at such expense
His Lettice waters, or Poppea bright,
And Cleopatra, quaffe their exquisite,
Their sumptuous Unions; I, we howl and roar,
At Swedens death, but let us sin no more,
Our sin has slain him; and indeed is wrought
To such an awlesse Belial, every draught
Commits a several health; we look the wine
For Caprialls and for Babies; then decline
Our Virgin vows, with let Lyaeus swell
As Jordan does in harvest; when if well
Observing the success, it is full of flaws,
Of babbling, wrath, of wounds without a cause,
Of Paliardise; and to bring up the rear
The drought after drunkenness, the afterthirst.
Eluchus turning, with a brand of fire
Invades the That part of the palate in which the taste remains.
Cephaline; Full happy thou
Great Ah'suerus, and could we but plough
Once with thy Heifer; if our sanctions were
Like those of Medes and Persians; to deter,
To sear, to lance, to lop off, this would teach
Us Hester also, where we now but reach
To sensual The word signifies d^inking.
Vashti; but our Laws neglect,
As Stru^hions do their eggs, or to be sucked
By Foxes, Wolves, or trodden day by day,
Among the feet of swine; I, let me say,
Thrice happy Sweden, maugre all the rage
Of our licentious Mars; who kept the sage
Temperate feasts, and void of excess.
Nephalia so precisely, clenching such
Examples in us. --

Fame in Person.
Hitherto the speech
Of Pharamond distinct enough and plain,
Was now cut off, abruptly drowned again,
By loud and squeling Claudia; one who late
Sat as be-muffled by the prison-grate
As merkest midnight, but here taking fire
By these of Pharamond, and even with ire
Her vail and precious tresses, (or be bold
To call them braydes, and bendelets of gold,)
Purpassionately rending, she replies,
Fame in Proxy.
Claudia. It Is true indeed, he was of all our eyes
The comfort, the Collyrium, even the breath
Of all our nostrills; so the sons of Heth
Oppugning, as might even applause infer
Super-superlative: but then, O where
The requisite return, and what the fruit
Of all his Travel? all his resolute
Assaults, and Sudden incursions derived from Algeires in Africa whence the
like was often made through the straight of Gibrarlter into Spain
Algarads? the magnifier
Of ancient Babel, had for conquering Tire,
An Egypt given him; thou my dearest drad,
Not a A donative of studded buskins given to soldiers.
Clavarium, how exagited
For truth and justice; with the daily tort
Of Sang-reall, Arbutus, Mal-effort,
How coursly handled; Nay, which urges more,
When being Trump, why yet cut off before
The game were cousummate; impelled away
From such a door of hope, to be the prey
Of death and darkness; so deserted is
The splendid, the mellifluous A river of Scythia, contaminated by the influx
of a bitter rillet.
Hypanis,
To Vultures inquinations; tufted all
With Negromantick herbs; and by the gaul,
The perbreak of Exampus, putrified
From all his noblesse; thus I say decry'd,
And like a thread of silver, rippl'd out,
Among the puzzels, the portents about
Inclement Caucasus. O, flow my tears,
Deep calls to deep, and the most candid ears,
Are deaf with water-spouts; I, such as at
The last grand Session, shall with heads elate,
Judge Men, and Angels; jeered as refuse are
Outed these terrene Chattels, to the bar
Of tyranny convented often, and slain
All the day long; alas the while, in vain
They cleanse their hands, their hearts they bootless wash
With innocence. --

Fame in Proxy.
Pharam. But how is it thou rash
Distempered woman, here quoth Pharamond,
(Raising his voice again, how lately drowned,
Above her clattering sharps;) thou wretch as lame,
In thy deport, thy patience, as thy name;
O how is it, I say, thou do so roar,
So wildly kick like a gainsaying Core
Against the pricks? up, up thou Libbard, up,
Reform thy freckled hide; if Fullers soap,
(Some call it eke Cymolian earth,) if this
Wash not effectually, take Herb of grace,
In penitential tears infusing it,
And it is enough abstersive; makes as white
As garden Lillies: Why the righteous here,
Must weather many a bitter storm, and bear
The parching heat, the burden of the day;
Like Balsome trees, and Larches-like display
Their worth among their wounds; Look as the brave
East-Indie-man, transpierces many a wave
That Bandog-like assailes him; nor declines
His great intendment, for the torrid line's
Malevolence, or doubling such extent
Of many a fore-land, many a Prominent,
And tedious Cape; till up at length he bear
With Taprobane, or Java, taking there
His precious lading in; such must they be
Here under sail: And in this worldly sea
If Sirens tempt thee, these with upward fair,
Are downward fish, an interdicted pair,
A wicked miscellane; If perhaps withstood
By tyrannous Whales, who tumble up the flood,
And boil it like a Cauldron; or else runs
Thy course, through Burning fevers, of Caleo.
Calentur's, The st^rmy North-east wind, Acts 27. 24.
Euroclydons,
Or barking Scylla's, yet if knowledge steer,
Zeal whistle in thy canvasse, thou shall bear
Up snugly, maugre all; invictly stem
The strongest setting tides, and leaving them
With the so tedious Cape of hope, behind
At length to lee-ward: for a terrene Ind,
A place of fading merchandise, befraight
With matchless bliss, with an exceeding weight
Of endless glory: which our royal Swede
Exemplifies, who by the triple head
Of Geryon, with his infinitely more,
And as outrageous hands as heretofore,
To steeple-high Briareus voted was
Though ruffel'd often, many a bloody base
Though virulently bid; yet with a might
Almost to miracle, could over-fight
And worst their insolence: till in a cloud
Of glorious victories and trophies strow'd
Along the world, at last he mounted up
To that divine. --

Fame in Chorus.
But here the catadup
Of noise again so passes all belief,
That lo Cleoritus to blaze his grief,
Fungus his joy, lo how they swell and stare,
And with their straining shoot as red, as are
The cheeks of Bacchanals: Nay further eke
See Bulbus-head the Boar, how Heyfer-like
He wildly gambols, often howting out
His brutish jollity the while no doubt,
In that same savage note, by woodmen used
Among their Deer, but all in a confused
Obstreperous medley swallowed; Yonder then,
(For I must slent off this same ch'ame again,
With mutes, and visions) see where Two Sycophants in chief favor with the
Emperor Ferdinand.
Cremsmunster,
And Trautmanstorfe, (in nature rigider,
More Giant than in name:) see how they buz
And croak in Caesar's ear, proscribing thus,
Innumerous innocents: And still so thwart,
So crossely run the Dice, I must impart
Upon another coast, the Turtle true,
Fair Basilissa, weltering in a dew
Of briny-tears; even all her beauteous face,
Besprent with water-gauls; and now alas,
(Which irks me deeply) lo! she groans and grieves
Her self into a swound; Now redi-vives;
In ghastly manner, newly sinks away,
Is fetched again; woe worth the dismal day
That I must leave her thus! for now that old
Sexagenary (lately so befooled,
To batter down his blood,) with many a band
Chops in between us; now they make a stand,
And At first an Enginier under Walftein, after by degrees a Collonell.
Farenbach, with other leaders join
In Pyrrhick dances, with the Mattachine
In armor jove it; now that fly of Court,
Prodigious First a follower of the Count of Hanaw, after employed to levy
Caesar's confiscations.
Ossa, tickling at the sport,
In a deep eglet of Corinthian Brass,
Healths it to Caesar. --
But to touch and pass,
To certify by sips and transiently,
Being my sole design; here passing by
These lusty Lamechs, and their gaudy scene;
See yonder also near the mantling Rhene,
How while Zelotes goes about to stave
The Heydleburgers tun, as but a wave
In our late shipwreck; see how Zuffenbeck
The trouper, charges him with many a steek,
While Grossendorst his Swager, int'rimly
Lies sucking at the spigget; --
Next mine eye
(No longer trading with so course a pair;)
Among innumerous others far and nere
Pressing for notice, singled has the bright
Illustrious Clari-dame; and while a cite
Of abler pens, will yet supinely sleep,
Fly silly muse, can thou not fly? then creep
To do her service; this the royal Queen,
Not broking up a momentany shine,
From Jewellers, and Druggists, which at night
Must be put off again; her red and white,
Her Jewels are so highly Most absolute and complete for excellency.
Paragon
And immarcessible, that they renown
Her doubly radiant, as without within;
And like the vest on both sides full of fine
Discolor'd needle work, so quondam voted
To J^bi^s Sissara; yet to be noted
As a prodigious omen, while our loud
Loo^^e gadding Mad^^oysells are struck and strewn
With morning Pinks and Roses, lo her dr^sse
Is sprigs of Yew; her pendants are (alas)
But woeful willough Cat^li^s; while the nice
Maddam She would have this, and she wou^d have that: And would h^ve she knows
not what.
Ie-^e-scay-qu^y ^o treated is
With anxious care and cost, this royal dame,
T^i^ Queen of ^ear^s, is sadded from the name
Of Naomi to Maro; ^u^h the great
The golden Bull, grows old and obsolete;
And while by By this Law but fo^r Emperors of the same house might lineally
succeed each other, yet has there now b^n six o^ ^^ven of Austria without any
interruption.
Munchum lately tug'd and sol'd,
The Wiens sword (as bloody-sharp as bold)
Has tyrannously ^ut off both his horns;
No hope, no help, the wicked world forlorns
Our noble^st pieces, even so transitory
Is worldly splendor, that full sadly sorry
See how she folds her arms; now looks to heaven,
As crying Lord alas; how was he given
A prey into their teeth? now with a hand
Exactly chambleted, and porselain'd
With white and blew she does her pen employ,
To rouse her draded brother Angli-roy,
With the Mal-heur; yet now again forbears,
Because the paper suggish is with tears,
And swallows all impression; now she goes
To yonder Temple with religious vows
That she may deprecate our further harm,
And close behind her, many a woeful swarm
Of One of the conclusions of Lipsich was, that both Calvinists and Lutherans
(to take away those distinctions, kindling so much hatred) should jointly be
thus named.
Evangelicals; Now makes a stand,
From several draughts, presented here to hand,
Choosing his A monument erected to the honor of the dead.
Cenotaphium, --
Fame in Person.
I should still
Enlarge me thus, and royalize my quill
With more of her; but as Celestial news
Here interposes, may perhaps excuse
My self a while; for yonder massy clowd,
Giving such fire, so (doubtless) full of loud,
And bellowing Meteors; lo! how from between
The dark some pleyts thereof, a Cherubin
Now gently stoops with healing on his wings,
To poor Panaretus, by several pangs,
And rigid Passions, hewn so lately down
Into the daze of death. The hideous swoon,
Now in a clammy deal of mist and gum,
Was setting both his eyes, an Icie cream,
Remissely floating over all his face,
Implacably protended; froze the pace
His pulse so long had run, and every wheel
Within him now began to fur, and feel
An earthly dullness; when behold (I say)
The starry Leech has with a fragrant May,
This sad December outed; new has wound
His pulse and all his Organs up, as sound,
As strong, as high, as ever; So the snake,
His slough, his Heckle moults, his ancient beak,
The royal Eagle. After whose recover,
Lo! how the glorious Post does backward hover,
In boughts, and wind-laces; and with a point
Now made again, into the sable tent,
From whence his stooping, has so deeply dashed
All our conclamitants; that all abasht,
See how they trembling stand, and full of fire,
Shot (as it seems) from many a sulphrous tire
Of the Celestial Cannon; Which in fine
Or being likewise cloyed, or turned again
To their first principles; about mine ear,
Insist (I say) our Redivivus here,
One from the dead, will somewhat interpose
More taking and impulsive; on with those
Thy scattered Elegiacks, do, proceed,
No Dog now moves his tongue, the broken reed
Panaretus in such a level glade,
So whilst an empty silence, may persuade
Even the most luctuall rights and rarities
To Swedens hearse. And hark how still he cries,
How passionately here! --
Fame in Proxy.
Panar. Alas for him,
Who like a brave Alcides could esteem
It all his bliss, to roam about the world,
Confounding Monsters, buffeting the curld
Presumptuous brows of Tyrants; Why but search
His general conduct, his victorious march;
And when at Two Islands in the Baltic Sea, near to Stralesundt
Vsedoome, Rugen (two of those
Prodigious quarrels, that Aegeon chose
Of yore to shoot at Heaven,) when there he drew
His active heat, General of the Imperial forces in Pomerland at the King of
Swedens arrival.
Torquato Conti flew
(Enduring not the test) to sudden air;
Nay, daring Papenheym, Hulke, Altringer
(So great a Master both of Pike and Pens)
Nay tyrannous Tscherclaes, Gallas, Wallenstein
That great Dictator, shining all how bright,
Yet as inferior planets, lost their light
At SWedens Heliack rising. All their ways
Were deep and furious, as the North west Seas,
And full of grisly shapes; of Morses, Whales,
Grim Unicorns with Adamantine scales;
And horrid Gram pusses: yet our August
Adolphus, knew to baffle their robust
Insidious heat, their knittest practices
To ravell out; Or wherefore name I these?
Since from our present ages height, survey
But that behind thee; search but far away,
Where all the hills, and steeple-Tops are clad
With bluish Land-schap; but where Elis stood,
(Even at the furthest the other end of time,)
Or Troy, or Sparta; and behold their prime
High-writ Heroes, came no nearer to
His celsitude, then rough-hewen models do
Their Archetyp's; then does the Belgic card
A Lion fierce, or Italy compared
With a neat timber'd leg. And this the brave
Victorious Eagle-trusser, from whose grave
Such woeful furrows, peremptory seas
Of sorrow even beyond emergencies
Reflected are, that now the bread of tears
Must be our daily food; our sauce the jears
And taunts of them without. Alas, alas,
What gloomy tropes, what miserable dress
Of several figures, may declaim our low
Precipitate condition! now, o now
Did squalid Pisces and Aquarius reign,
And all the racks conjoyntly drive amayn
From South-South-east, by grossly complicating
Snow, rain, and other wicked weather, beating
Each creature into covert; passion-filling
Even our insensibles, our timber chilling
With a cold sweat, bepuzling bolts and locks;
Nay poorie making, melting very rocks
Of toughest marble, yet were this too scant,
And but a mite to tender, where a mint
Paid not the debt; Alas, alas my head,
My heart, my heart, behold the sovereign Swede,
The covering See the Epist. Dedicatory.
HELD, the Lion of the North,
That quintessence of Kings, is battered forth
His wondrous conduct. Let the Trumpet rend
It self with ghastly groans; the Drum descend,
And languish from his mettl'd ruff, and roll
To a dead march; --

Fame in Person.
I, quoth the heavenly soul,
The dear ^uella Coelesti^.
Amalaswentha by him set,
Nor longer keeping silence, --
Fame in Proxy.
Amal. Let, o let,
Our vollies so condensly heaped and thrust
With muskytades, with many a boystrous breast
Of Culverin and Canon, at the stresse
That hills and regions tremble, sadly press
How very dear we held him, even so choke
The Sky with pillars, curls and clouds of smoke,
That like a deafning thunder may with ^ast
Boations, cracks, and lightenings on the last
Stretch our obsequious Farewell, to the slain,
Unparalled, invincible, --

Fame in Person,
And then
Quoth our Panaretus, as passionately
Here p^ecing with ^er. --
Fame in Proxy.
Panar. I, and then quoth he,
Ye Of this hill see fol. the fifth.
Phytelburgen-ecchoes, near distraught
With the prodigious noise; so tent^r out
Your clamor^u^ voices, bounding it in gross
Up to the Gr^ian Alps, that also those
Your sisters there, may with their mighty throats,
Transport it ove^ to the hollow gro^ts,
And brows of A hill in Th^a^^, six miles h^gh.
Hemus; and so taking Post
B^ shady A hill in Thessaly.
Pelion, to the forked crest
O^ paramount Olympus; being still
Thus dictated, I say, from hill to hill;
Our thickning vollies, at the length may seize
Extended Taunus, that Metropolis
Of resonancies; and in savage dens,
Deep foggy Cisterns, hollow woods, and glins;
Among the rudely packed together rocks
And pendulously torn where other flocks
Of echoes so consolidately swell
The hideous Horricane, that rushing while
Still on through many an uncouth wilderness
To Pegu, Siam, and the Thought to be Malacca in the East- Indies.
Chersonesse
Where Jedediah fetched his golden oar

Fame in Proxy.
Amal. And thence again by the Maritime shore
As far as Persian Ormus, then to Cayre
Quaking the Pyramids, and millions there
Of busy truckers,

Fame in Proxy.
Panar. Storming thus I say,
From place to place, in such a thundering key.
And over an unweldy vast extent
Of sea and shore, a tedious continent:
Till at the length, The Orcades so named of this Sea Monster, and this again
from the Latin Orcus.
it arctick-high arrives,
Among the Horrid Orks appellatives,
And frozen Thule, strike and startle may
All terrene tribes and kindreds, if I say
All creatur's into much affright and passion,
It Is such a Pleonasmick compellation,
As more pathetickly will hint our great,
Our Gospel prejudice, --

Amal. Even a defeat
Replies Amalaswenth' portently checking
And mating millions; at the quondam breaking
Of some stupenduous tank or beetle-brow
From that high Taurus, recollect but how
While cancellering, grazing here and there
Destructively, with all the neighbor air
Even a defeat
Replies Amalaswenth' portently checking
And mating millions; at the quondam breaking
Of some stupenduous tank or beetle-brow
From that high Taurus, recollect but how
While cancellering, grazing here and there
Destructively, with all the neighbor air
Torn into fragor, by the salt the souce;
How Two Mountain Kings, at length Tyranniz^d by the Tu^k and Persian.
Bahamon and poor Aladulus
Shrunk under it, as boading in event
The Persian A Persian Sword
Shamshere, or the macilent
Grand Senior's horse; So what alas ensues
From this portent, but even a world of wooes,
But matta, matta, the parsidious Swede
Being The Spanish word of slaughter, in French, tue tue, in English, kill kill.
deprived us, what else but the glead
Imp'd with again his subdititious pens
Should Eagle-rant it; o the sad design's
That now are hatching! come come, let us fly
My dear Panaretus; methinks I see
The Relics of our butchered Saints; as thrown
And exprobrately scambl'd up and down,
As chips at cutting wood. --

Fame in Person.
With fell affright,
The Roses in her face, now Lilly white
Began to languish, and she startled up
Distractedly; her anker-hold, her hope
Now drove amain; when lo Panaretus
In sweet and precious compellations, thus
Rejoynes with her anew. --
Fame in Proxy.
Panar. But tell me then,
Shall such a man as I, turn back again
Leaving the Plough? shall we that reckoned are
For beams and pillars, of the Militar,
And Orthodoxall Church, ignobly swerve,
Moulder, and leave it thus? why, but observe,
And he that sowes in rivolets of tears,
Shall after reap in joy; who weeping bears
His precious seed, and thus in season out,
Shall doubtless come again, and with the shout
Of those in harvest, bring with him his sheaves;
Retract, retract I say, o how it grieves
Me for thy fear, thy fall! collect thy self,
And let us bravely sink both syrt and shelf,
Impatience pre-supposing; steeple-deep
In the springtide of zeal. --

Fame in Person.
Here began she weep,
And chatter like a Crane, hiding her head
In a black Cypress Wimple; while the sad
Panaretus, pitching his eyes a'spar
Upon the ground, does int'rimly prefer
A Scene of silence; giving so much line
To recollection, and the discipline
Of sundry second thoughts; that as the fruit,
The sequel of this intermitted mute
Parenthesis; from her dejected stoup,
See now at retrive, how she heighthens up,
Gathers and growes^ again, as when at Sea
A sail is made to windward distantly,
As at the furthest ken, it equals but
Some petty fly at first, or little moat;
Then like Elijahs cloud becomes a hand,
And spooning on along before the wind,
Increases still, till proving at the length
When board and board of mighty bulk and strength
And being double-sheath'd; so by degrees
Now has she gotten wing again, now flies,
The former glorious height; her beamy brow
Late in a Cypress Lanthorn muffled, now
Shines as of yore; and every principle
Of holiness, e're-while within her soul,
Remissely drooping; rowses now again,
And like a Giant when refresh't with wine,
So strongly races, reigns in her so clear;
That even becomes as brave and bold, as e're
The wife Or Deborah see ^ud. 44.
of Lapidoth, her fiery zeal
Thus vents it self. --
Fame in Proxy.
Amal. O how do we reveal
Our sexe's many weaknesses, and wounds;
Yet so the good Samaritan infunds
His sovereign Wine and Oil; that now, go to,
Brings forth the rods, the beasts, the wheels, I, do;
Now sear, and cut, and kill; let me be made
A lighted torch, a One bound up in Searecloth, like the staff of a torch, and
in other such materials, stifned with wax, and fired at the bottom with brush
and dry twigs; in Latin, Sarmenta.
Sarmentarian sad,
At Rome's night-revells; do, do, string your whips
With Scorpions, Asps, or somewhat that out-strips
Their venom far; I, bring the fury-full
Busirian horses, the Perillan Bull,
Or exquisiter torments; yet my trust,
My treasure there is laid, where neither rust,
Nor moth, nor thief, nor tyrant,

Panar. Glorious dame,
Quoth then Panaretus the heavenly flame
That on thee so much fortitude confers,
Establish it relentlesse, as the bars
Of an Imperial Palace, never time
Inferring higher trial, of so grim,
Precipitate condition; And awake
Thou right hand of the Lord, up up, and take
Thy former strength again; why do not thou
Turn Moab to thy wash-pot? cast thy shoe
Out over Edom? Fast their Princes make
In lincks of Iron; and their Nobles break
Like Potters vessels. O get up, I say,
And bare thine Arm again, as in the day
Of Zeb and Oreb, or of those that had
Their punishment at Endor, and were made
Like dung upon the earth; Was it not thou?
Of Yore by whom the Hussits, even a few
Derided silly Husse in the Bohemian, signifies a Go^se.
Geese, (though in their head
But a blind Ziska) baffled so the spread
Presumptuous Eagle, and her several young,
How sharp their pounces? and again among
Our other sung Magnalia, was it not
Thy glorious spiriting our pike and shot,
That when the Spanish The Fifth, then Emperor.
Charles was whilome grown
So high and supercilious, melted down
His pertinacy, worsting him to fly
By rainy torch-light precipitiously
Among the Trentine mountains? Take, O take
Thy former strength again, awake, awake,
And busk thy self to battle; thou alone,
Maugre his furious brand, have lately slain
The giant Count of Tylle Lieut. General to the Duke of Bav^ria.
Tscherclaes, and 'twas thou that did
That Rhodomont the The Ducall t^tle of Wals^ein.
Fridlander, amidst
His iron men defeat: O show thy power,
Thou art our fort, our moat, our counter-mure,
Our total confidence; --

Fame in Proxy.
Amal. I, I, it is he
Can baffle even the highest working Sea,
Make it submisse and level; he with whom
All things are possible, even Camels come
To go through needles eyes.

Fame in Proxy.
Panar. It Is he that Blessed
The youth of our Adolphus, and so dressed
It up with Trophies, when the Polander
And mighty Russian Or Duke.
Knez, against him were
In A complication of two Enemies against a third.
Syncretisme, and did so strangely They were diseased with so general a
swelling in their throats, that they could not swallow, and were therefore
compelled to surrender.
starve
That Ottebourgh upon the rapid Narve,
Their brideling Ottebourgh, so chanted up
Invincible above both shot and sapp
And want of ^ivers; I, it is he by whom
Our wonderful Adolphus lately swom
Such a triumphant swelling tide as these.
And then again the great atchievances
Of Gripswald, and presumptuous Monro's expeditions, part the second, fol 33.
Franksort, where
The hand of Heaven did with a panick fear
So discompose and melt the temper down
Of even eight thousand Veterans to run,
Quitting their posts; nor should I here make The Martial word for haulting and
reposing a while upon a March.
Alt
But likewise hint-in that of Rugenwalt,
So to the Swede miraculously handed,
And that of Lansburg knottily defended,
Though with morass, with f^sses, breasts of thunder,
And manned redundantly, yet humbled under
His royal sword.

Fame in Proxy.
Amal. And as the Lord can thrive.
Sparks into Bonfires, this by the Vid. Monro. fol. 39.
contrive
Of a poor Blacksmith.

Fame in Proxy.
Panar. I might here declame
Of Stetin likewise, Grippenhagen, Dam,
And Colberg, with a series of such other
Magnifick stories, and at length discover,
How the great God of Battles did engage
At Lypsigh for him, Lypsigh such a stage
Of wrath and ruin, Lypsigh such a dire
Contorted Chaos of outrageous fire,
And smoke and dust, and where the horrid hail
Of many a Cannons ramm'd with musket bale
So through the serred ranks and bodies drilled,
As soon in surface sanguin'd all the field,
Made it a Shambles, even a nauseous heap
Of limbs discerpted; where, though Saxon cheap
Enough was worsted, yet the day in croope
In In Dutch, the rere.
Achter-tocht, immergently brought up
An A success wrought out against the hair.
Osculanian triumph.

Fame in Proxy.
Amal. Lypsigh where
The Meteor Tscherclaes from his lofty Sphere
Was shouldered headlong; there to nick his boast
Of beating Kings, precipitately cast
At royal Swedens feet, and paid in part
The woeful wages of his undesert
At Magdenburgh; the rest being referred
To be discharged in total, afterward
At the Where he was slain with a Canonade.
Bavarian Leech.

Fame in Proxy.
Panar. I, I, 'Twas this
Celestial wonder-working Strategus
So furiously that far out Jehued here
The son of Nimshy, driving in carreer
Even over multitudes of iron-men,
(And still to pass in point, for still my pen
Must further glass his sword, and epick out
Charabins charging with steel bullets, in use amongst the Protestants in the
civil wars of France.
His Chass-messes,) 'twas he that having fought
This Colophonian field, soon after shook
The stubborn Otherwise Bacenis, or Nigra sylv^.
Duren Walt, in sequel struck
It humbly perobsequious; he whose arm,
Whose glorious conduct with the former swarm
Of vap'ring copses, a convitious deal
Of brush and underwood, that felled the tall
Big-bodied Oaks and Elms, which far and wide
Had palli^ado'd else and fortified
Upon the passes, whereas now our Swede
Was further timber'd still and turrited
So many radiant stories high, as those
Likewise of Hall, of superstitious
Extensive Erfort, Konink^hoven strong
Of Millers^ort, of Swins^ort, with a throng
Of other such; and still a story higher
Of Wortsbourgh, where the Castle-heads attire,
Medusa-like was Drakes, was Denomin^^ perhaps from Couleuvrin Francois,
signifying Adderlike.
Culverins.
And Though of a lesser bore, commanding further then the Cannon, and so named
as King of Guns; and equally as mortal as that Serpent.
Basilisks, (that so pretend to crowns
For extramission;) O the horrid rage
Of an insulting Mars, how red the stage,
Where fierce Enyo buskined is as here,
With many a Or Bulwark.
Bastion, Case mate in Spanish, a Slaughterhouse, ab effectu; where soldiers
are covered, firing at loop-holes, Minceus will have it, Quasi casa a matir,
tiguriolum ad mactandum.
Case-mat, A mount within the walls, which seems derived from Chevalier
Francois, and is that ridge of earth that a stradling labourer heaps between
his legs with his mattock, seeming, with the height of it, to be on horseback.
The Latins use Porca for the like ridge between furrows, calling it the Sowes
back
Cavalier,
And other such, that as a smaller print,
Promiscuous^^ has often rubric in it,
And swelling Capitalls; that so by fits
Ascended more the chafing Parapetts.
O how alas was all the Castle hill,
Now generally Vesuvian, all so full
Of thundering Flammi-fers, as if some mad
And multiplicite ignis fatuus had
Bin trepidating there from pan to pan.
How did the horrid negro night unspan
Her sanguinary Bandogs? Yet, I say,
The mighty Lord of hosts that has his way
In storms and whirlwinds, that even threshes Bulls
Of Basan so to motes, and often to nulls.
That God of Battles fought this sturdy piece
To such submission, that the golden Fleece,
The massy treasure long enchanted here
By wealthy Plutus, now was beat to bear
Our Sweden faith and homage.

Fame in Person.
But my senses
Are suddenly with new occurences
Again invaded, and so mavelous
The turn of things? that here Panaretus,
And the Celestial Virgin, both are struck
Abruptly silent at the staring look
And grief of Apathes, a piece of late
So clungly grained, no wedge could penetrate
No wicked labor; but so pory made,
And weeping ripe all over at the sad
Late Tragedy, (for still in these extremes)
That far beside, beyond the dismal themes
Declam'd already, see where all surrounded
With thick and hawsie weather, how his wounded
And per-impassion'd spirit racks and rends
Him with Convulsion fits; nay which portends
Implacably.
Fame in Chorus.
Alas the Chorus here
The deaf'ning Chorus does again so rear
It self in monstrous Pillars interwooun'd;
A thousand Drums A setting the watch, an uniting many companies into an entire
gross.
pirading, might be drowned.
And swallowed in it; I, such the noise, so fell,
As tozes all the Welkin, makes it boil,
Like ointment in a pot: What shall I say,
Alas my wings so palpably decay,
So fiercely ruffled are, and ravell'd out
In the combustion, that I much mis-doubt
Some cross Catastrophe, and by fine force
If beaten from my pitch, shall but dispierce
For a redundant Elephantine book
These petty fragments; O the furious shock!
The horrible disgust, no more no more,
My perspectives, my wings are now so sore
Distracted tugged and wearied; all my dress
So puzzell'd is, and shattered with the stresse
Of many furious Typhons; that unfit
To weather out the work, The two chief n^w^^ng offers then extant.
I here submit,
Descending back to prompt the bustling brothers
Nat' Butter, Gallo-Belgicus, and others.
PARERGON.
AND now my little Book, my little Birth,
I know not how thou came into my womb;
Some other agent surely brought thee forth
Between the knees; or else thy Or the Secundine, wherein the child is wrapped,
while in the womb.
Shilo some
A kind of Sepulchrall stone, in short time consuming the body enclosed.
Sarcophagus had turned, and to thy tomb.
If ought within thee be reputed worth
The name of square; yet I am but a This differs from a square by having the
angels of it indirect: when the side angels are less extended then the rest?
and if shorter, it is a fu^il, or spindle.
Rhomb,
But a poor fusil; and must waive the Bays:
Giving to Heaven, to God alone the Praise.
G. T.

FINIS.

