

THE Soul's Communion With her SAVIOR.

OR, The History of our Lord Jesus Christ, Written by FOUR EVANGELISTS,
Digested into Devotional Meditations.

The First Part.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon nigh Devereux-Court without
Temple Bar, 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE Devout Reader.
SIr Edwyn Sandys in his Page 79.
Europae Speculum observes, That, as one principal Means used by the Papacy to
countermine the Progress of the Reformation, they took such Care to fill all
Countries with Books of Prayer and Piety in their own Language, that they
forbore not to reproach the Protestants (who had upbraided them for confining
the Peepl to the dark Devotion of an unknown Tongue) with their Poverty,
Weakness, and Coldness in that kind, as being forced to take the Catholic
Books for their Supply therein. And since the time wherein he made that
Observation, the Reformed Churches have been too long exposed to the same
Reproach and Inconvenience: for, as it was the highest Mark of deplorabl
Servitude, that 1 Samuel 13.
the Israelits went down to the Philistines to sharpen evry man his Share and
his Coulter and his Ax and his Mattock; so it must needs prove a very dangerous
Snare to the most religious Protestants that they were constrained to have
Recours to the Church of Rome for their best Helps to Devotion; whose Care of
Souls, in making that necessary Provision for Piety, carried with it so fair a
show of true Sanctity and Godliness as invited too many of the unwarily Devout,
first to a favorabl Opinion and then to the absolute Espousal of her Errors and
Superstition, craftily mingled and recommended in those Prayers and Meditations
that were hammered out at her Forge. And what was so (...) a Temtation to win
her Adversaries, may well be thought a more forcibl Argument to establish and
confirm her own Friends and Abettors, to her (...): So that without a
proportionabl Care to countermine her Policy, there could be littl hope either
of withdrawing any of her Members, or withholding many of our own, from her
Communion.

But now the Church of England has both expressed her self sufficiently sensib
of that Defect and made abundant Provision for its Supply, in compiling and
publishing such and such store of Books of Devotion in her Mother-Tong, as
neither the Roman nor any of the Reformed can boast of more or better. It may
therefore be questioned to what purpos this littl Tract should be super-added
to those many excellent pieces of Devout Meditation already in Print; which
makes me judge it requisite to giv the Reader some short Account both of its
Occasion and Design.

A most Excellent Person, eminent (not to mention her quallity, which is very
considerabl) as well for her Devotion as Intelligence, being, by a just and
rational Conviction of those gross Errors and Forgeries, on and by which the
Church (or rather, Court) of Rome has founded and upheld her Greatness,
reclaimed from her Communion to that of the Church of England; to evidence how
far she was from being induced thereunto by any other Motiv besides that of
disinterested Religion, resolved to confine her self to the same strict Rules
of Devotion and Abstinence, in the Exercise of her Protestant Principls,
whereby she had expressed her exemplary Zeal in the Popish Superstition. And that
her Soul, in those many hours which she daily allotted for Retirement, might
not grow languid and dull in the same Act either of Prayer or Reading (as the
Body is apt to become stiff and unweildy if long held to the self-same Posture
or Motion) these brief Aspirations on the Gospel-History were composed to
diversify her Entertainment, and fill up those Intervals which a pious
Difcretion thought requisite for the better Improvement and more orderly Disposal
of the time set apart for such Religious Exercises.

And what has been thus used and approved in the Devout Solitude of a Private
Closet, now appears in Publik with Design to supply the vacant Hours of other
pious Votaries, especially at such times as either the wise Authority of our
Superiors, or their own particular Resolution, shall dedicat a whole day to the
Duties of Prayer and Humiliation.

But lest that different Order wherinto the several Evangelists have cast their
Relation of our Savior's Acts and Speeches which the Holy Ghost has thought
fit to transfer unto succeeding Ages upon Record, might occasion a fruitless
Repetition of any one Part, or an unseemly Confusion in the Whole; I have
reduced it to such a Method which Gerard and Chemnitius have digested their
Harmony of the Four Gospels into: that the Religious Peruser may more regularly
pass throu the entire History, or the more readily have Recours to any
particular Transaction in it which may best suit with the present Scope of his
Devotion. Whereunto if this small Essay prove any way serviceabl, it will at once
recompens my present Labor and encorage me to proceed; being ardently desirous
to express my Self, in Communion with my Savior,

A sincere Lover of Souls, P. Traheron.

A General Prayer Preparatory to the ensuing Meditations.
O Father of Mercies and God of all Consolation, who art the Fountain of Life
and Salvation, my So^ and all that is within me bless thy Holy Name, for
sending thine Onlybegotten Son into the World to redeem Me and all Mankind to
thine Eternal Glory. I beseech Thee withdraw mine Affections from this World,
that I may serve Thee in Spirit and in Truth: Enlighten my Understanding and
reform my Will, that my Heart may be entirely united to Thee, and (all other
Business set apart) as well secretly among the Faithful, as openly in the
Congregation, adore and prais the God of my Salvation. And since the Mercies of
GOD do at once oblige and encorage me to present my Soul and Body a Living
Sacrifice at thine Altar, let this my Reasonabl Service be so acceptabl unto
Thee, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,
nor Things present, nor Things to com, nor Hight, nor Depth, nor any other
Creature be abl to separat me from the Lov of God which is in Christ JESUS our
LORD. Giv me a clear Sight into all the Mysteries of His Life, and a du Sense
of all the Miracls of His Lov unto Death, til I be so ravished with the
Contemplation of their gracious Design upon my Soul, as to count all things but
Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, and be ready
to suffer the Loss of all things, and count them but Dung, that I may win
Christ; and be found in Him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is throu the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith; that I may know Him, and the Power of His Resurrection, and the
Fellowship of His Sufferings, being made conformabl unto His Death. And let the
constant secret Meditation of His Life and Lov, His Sufferings and Glory, His
Virtues and Graces, His Precepts and Promises, His Presence and Power, be the
hidden Manna of my Soul, its Food and Refreshment in all Conditions; in
Afflictions, my Support; in Poverty, my Treasure; in Reproaches, my Glory; in
Darkness, my Light; in Sickness, my Health; in Troubl, my Repose; in Prosperity
my Defense; in Life and Health, my Joy and Consolation; that Christ being thus
formed in me, I may (through Him who gives us the Victory) overcom the
Vanities of the World, the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Temtations of the Devil,
til He become my Life in Death and my Happiness in Heven.

Amen.
THE Soul's Communion WITH HER SAVIOR.
The First Book,
Containing so much of the GospelHistory as relates to the Infancy of the H.
Jesus, and that time of his Private Life which passed before He entered on his
Public Ministry.

Cap. I. Of His Incarnation. S. Luke 1. 26, -- 79.
S. Mat. 1. 18, -- 25.

. 1.
O Holy and Ever-blessed Jesu, Eternal Son of the eternal God, who did
descend from thy Father's Bosom; from the highest Hevens, thy Royal Throne, to
this Vale of Misery; that by taking My Nature upon Thee, Thou might not only
suffer and satisfy for Me, but also impart Thy Nature unto Me.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For this thine unspeakabl Lov. I adore thee for thine infinite Wisdom and
Goodness: I am astonished at thy stupendous Humility and Condescension to lost
and undeserving Man. Bow the Hevens, O Lord, once more, and com down, touch my
Heart with thine Almighty Power; and, having cast out whatsoever may be
offensiv to thy Sacred Majesty, fill it with thy blessed Presence for ever.

. 2.
O Blessed Jesu, whose Incarnation was so sublime a Mystery, that, to usher in
a matter of such extraordinary Concernment to the World, the Angel Gabriel S.
Luke 1.
was sent from God, unto a City S. Luke 1.
whose Name was Joseph, of the

I magnify thy Glorious Name,

For making thy Spirits Ministers unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation. As
the Angels and Archangels prais Thee, the Cherubim and Seraphim adore Thee,
and all the hevenly Host bow down unto Thee, not only fitting upon thy Throne,
but even at the lowest Degree of thy Footstool, whereunto thou have voluntarily
humbled thy self in thine Incarnation: So, let me, I beseech thee, in
concurrence with the Celestial Choir, celebrat this Mystery of thy Lov on
Earth, and worship the Majesty of thy Glory in Heven, til my Life become
Angelical by rejoicing in Thee and in Thy Salvation.

. 3.
When the Angel came in unto

I prais thy Holy Name,

O Blessed Jesu, for the greatness of thine Eternal Lov to this Holy Virgin,
and to all Mankind in her. O make me sensibl how highly I my self am favored in
this great Transaction, since She was thus blessed among Women, that all the
Families of the Earth might be blessed in her Seed. A Salutation of such
infinite Importance does worthily deserv to be frequently revolved in our minds,
which, being particularly brought to a private Family in Jewry, has proved of
universal Concernment to the whole World. O let me also taste and see how
gracious the Lord has been to my Soul: No matter for the Favor of Men, so we
find Grace with God.

. 4.
While she was troubled at S. Luke 1.
his saying, the Angel said unto his Father David. And he shall

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Jesus, for thy great Glory and endless Sovereignty, for as much as thy
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion endures throu-out all
Generations. O thou Root and Offspring of David, vouchsafe to extend thy
Scepter over all Nations, and be for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, that
under thy Government all Peopl being saved from their Sins may live and prosper
in Peace and Holiness. Sit upon the Throne of my heart by the Power and
Presence of thy Holy Spirit, reign over all the faculties of my Soul, subdu
them to thy Will, and be thou my God and King forever.

. 5.
Then said Mary to the Angel, Whereunto the Angel answered, The Holy

I prais and magnify the Name,

O thou Son of God, for thine in finit Condescension to become the Son of Man.
It is not less Blessed and Mysterious to conceiv Thee in the Heart by Faith,
than to carry Thee in the Womb of Flesh: Send therefore, I befeech thee, the
same Spirit and Power to rest upon mine Affections, til Christ be formed in me,
that thy Humility and Holiness, thy Life and Lov, may be brought forth in my
Conversation, and so adapt me to be called the Son of God.

. 6.
Holy Jesu, who, for the more S. Luke 1.
rational Engagement of the Virgins Faith, did further acquaint her by the
same Angel, Behold, thy Cousin Elizabeth, who was

I magnify thy H. Name,

Because with God nothing This Maxim may suffice to silence all the Cavilling
Inquiries of human Reason, How this should be: For the same Power that makes
the barren Womb fruitful, can with the same facility dispens with those Laws of
Nature that render it unlikely there should be a Virgin Mother: And that
Spirit, which, by breathing on them, was abl to make dry Bones live, may be very
rationaly believed of sufficient Power to impregnat a Virgin's Womb. And
therefore, in Considering this transcendent Mystery of my Savior's Incarnation,
I will rather admire and recount his Goodness and Truth, than question his
Power, or pry into the manner of its Accomplishment; and in all his Trials of
my Faith or Pati nce, my Soul shall say, as the (...) of the Lord did, Be it
unto me according unto thy (...).

. 7.
Upon this Information the Blessed Virgin Mary arose and to visit her Cousin
Elizabeth, who no sooner heard her Salutation, but the Babe leaped in her Womb,
and she was filled with so that she said with a (...) voice, Blessed

I prais thy Name,

For this marvelous Effect of thy Presence, O Blessed Jesu, and for the
powerful Influence of thy Spirit manifest therein, even before thy Manifestation
to the World. Help me, O Lord, so to correspond with Thee in thy gracious
Visitations as to discharge all the Offices of Lov, Friendship, and Christian
Piety incumbent on me toward all Relations, that I also may be a Joy unto thy
Servants, and they such unto Me, as Thou art unto us all. And let the voice of
S. Luke 1.
thy Salutation, sounded in mine by the Ministry of thy Word, make me Blessed
in believing that there shall be a Performanre of those things which were told
us from the Lord, as well concerning the second Coming to judge the World as has
already been of thy first Coming to redeem it.

. 8.
O my dear Redeemer, who, in making choice of this Holy Virgin to be thy Happy
Mother, have regarded the low Estate of preferring that before all the outward
Pomp and Grandeur wherewith we are too fondly taken, to giv us an instructiv
Instance that Humility is the Fountain and Forerunner of Honor, for behold
from thenceforth all Generations do call (...) Blessed:

My Soul does magnify the Lord,

For He that is Mighty has don great things, and Holy is Lord, since the Poor
and Lowly in heart are so acceptabl in thine Eyes, teach me to lov Retirement
and delight in Devotion as this Elect Virgin did, and make me truly content and
happy in the lowest degree wherein thy Providence shall think fit to place me.
And since thou art graciously inclined to fill the hungry (...) good things,
let her Faith in relying he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and to his Seed
for ever; her Wisdom in treasuring up all thy Sacred tho Mysterious Verities;
her constant Obedience to thy revealed Will; her exemplary Humility amidst all
thy Graces conferred upon her; and that Spirit of Prais and Thanksgiving
wherewith she rejoiced in her Savior, added to her modest Chastity and holy
Fear, replenish and adorn my Soul and Life in all Estates and Conditions: for
thy Mercy is on them that fear Thee from Generation

. 9.
O thou Day spring from on S. Luke 1.
high, who throu the tender Mercy

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,

For he has visited and redeemed his Peopl, and has Lord, grant unto us, that
we being delivered Thee without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before Thee
all the days till we acquire the saving (...) of thy Salvation given unto thy
Peopl, by the Remission of their Sins.

. 10.
Holy Jesu, With what Wisdom did thou delay thine Incarnation so long? With
what Mercy no longer? Thou did defer it so long, that the Scriptures
foregoing it might testify of Thee, according to that saying, In the Volume of
the Book it is written of Me; to the end all holy Souls, in the sundry Ages and
Nations of the World, might be filled with Expectations and Desires of Thy
Coming in the Flesh, and confirmed in their Faith by the Prophecies accordingly
fulfilled. Yet would thou not delay it longer, that the Over-flowings of thy
Lov, in the Fullness of Time, might satisfy all holy Longings with the
Accomplishment of thy wonderful Incarnation, in order to our complete Redemtion

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For the exceeding Riches of thy Grace and Wisdom treasured up in this thy
mysterious and sacred Dispensation: Beseeching thee, that as Thou art the (...)
of all Nations, so to render thy self altogether lovly in mine eyes. O vouchsafe
to com into my Soul in the fullness of thy Compassion, for the Pardon of my
Sins; in the fullness of thy Grace, to subdu my Lusts; and in the fullness of thy
Power, to strengthen me in resisting Temtations; as thou came in the fullness
of thy Lov, to redeem me from their malevolent Influence.

. 11.
O Blessed Jesu, who did endure nine Months Confinement in thy Mother's Womb,
til the S. Luke, 2. 6.
days were accomplished that she should be delivered, that beginning at the
Root of our Nature thou might throuly cleans its Original Corruption:

I magnify thy Sacred Name,

For thy patient Conformity to thine own Laws of Nature, attending till her
ordinary Time and Method should open the doors of the Matrix for thy Releas.
Lord, moderat that Impatience wherewith we usualy crave any expected Good, and
that Eagerness of mind which precipitats us into irregular Courses to evade
whatsoever we fancy uneasy or troublsom: And when I am reduced to any great
Strait, enabl me, with a contented Patience and humbl Resignation, to wait on
Thee, my best Aid and Exemplar, for Deliverance in thy good time.

. 12.
When as his Mother Mary, S. Mat. 1.
being espoused to Joseph, was and that just Angel of the Lord appeared unto

I celebrat thy saving Name,

For fulfilling that which was Evidence thy self, O Jesus, to be God with Us.
in making us tender of our Neighbor's Reputation; and instead of judging rashly
according to appearance, let us rather follow the Dictats of thy Grace, if not
from the immediate Direction of thy Holy Spirit, yet according to the charitabl
Prescriptions of thy Holy Word.

. 13.
Then Joseph being raised S. Mat. 1.
from Sleep did as the Angel laying aside all the unkind Determinations of his
mistaken Jealousy.

I prais and magnify thy Name, O God,

For that steady Faith and perfect Resignation wherewith this thy Servant
entertained the Intimation of thy Divine Will, who was not disobedient to the
hevenly Vision, but readily submitted to the Authority of the Message without
disputing the Truth or Possibility of the Mystery therein revealed. Lord, render
me more inclinabl to employ my Talent in a hearty Obedience to thine express
Commands, than spend my Time in the fruitless Disquisition of those
unaccountabl (...) which thou have been pleased to reveal from Heven: And let
his unparalled Abstinence who took unto him his not only so shame all mine
inordinat Affections and engage me to abstain from fleshly Lusts which war
against my Soul, as to keep under my Body and bring it into Subjection; but
withal heighten our Esteem and Emulation of the transcendent Chastity and
conjugal Lov of that immaculat Pair whom the King of Heven thought fit to honor
and entrust with the Birth and Breeding of his own Son, who was not so styled
her Firstborn as to imply there ever was any other succeeding Fruit of her
Womb; the Mother of God being worthily believed an Eternal Virgin, as well In
and After as Before the Bringing forth of that Son whose Name they called
JESUS, according to the mystical Import of that abstruse Prophecy, in the 44th
Chapter of Ezekiel, This Gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man
shall enter in by it; because the Lord the God of Israel has entered in by it,
therefore it shall be shut.

. 14.
O Dear Jesus, who in the same Act of assuming our Humanity (...) also evidence
thy Divinity, being as well conceived by the H. Ghost as born of a Virgin.

I adore thine Eternal Godhead,

For thy great Wisdom and Care in the Discovery and Confirmation of this
sublime Mystery of thy Hypostatical Union; which thou did not only transact
in Secret by the Message of the Angel Gabriel, the Overshadowing of the H.
Ghost, and the Conception of the Virgin Mary; but have openly ratified by the
Report of those Shepherds that had seen a Vision of Angels by the Brightness of
the Star which appeared in the Hevens, and by the Deportment of the Wise men
whom it conducted from the East to Jerusalem; by the Testimony of Simeon and
Anna in the Templ, and that of thy Precursor John the Baptist in the
Wilderness: All public and unquestionable Arguments as well to confirm as
exhibit the Truth and Import of the Annunciation made in private to the devout
Virgin; that this first Step toward the Great Act of our Redemtion, being
alike Glorious within and without, might appear worthy to be received of All
with full Assurance, and contemplated by All with infinite Gratitude and Delight.

O my dear and gracious Redeemer, whose Humanity and Divinity are inseperably
united, in Thee are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, being filled
with the Fullness of God. Grant, throu the Dispensation of thy Grace, that the
same Godhead which dwells in Thee bodily, may spiritualy abide in Me; that,
as thy Body is united to thy Soul and both unto God, so my Body may be
incorporat with thine, and my Soul enflamed with such a degree of thy Lov as
shall be an Earnest of our ever-lasting Union. Fill me with great and reverent
Apprehensions of that inexpressibl Honor whereunto we are advanced in Our Union
with the Deity, in regard it is the End and Effect of Thine; and let this
Consideration disentangl me from all things here below, that living the Life of
God, from which the whole World is alienated by Sin, I may enter into an Hevenly
Fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ for ever.

Amen.
Cap. II. Of His Nativity. S. Luke 2. 1, -- 20.

. 1.
O Thou King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who do dispose and turn the hearts
of Earthly Monarchs as it seems best to thy Godly Wisdom, making that (...)
which went out from Caesar Augustus that subservient to thy Celestial Decree
long before Cyrenius was revealed by thy H. Prophets touching the place where
Christ should be born: for, in Obedience to the Imperial Edict All went to be
into Judea, unto the City of David, which is called Betl (...), to be tared
with Mary his espoused wife then great with Child, in such a juncture that
(...) they were there the days were accomplished

I prais and magnify thy H. Name,

For thy overruling Wisdom and Providence in making those Occurrences, which
seem contingent, and arbitrary to human Reason, instrumental to carry on the
good purpos of thy Divine Will; so that what the Prophet Micah had foretold
(as the Chief Priests and Scribes themselves did readily explain and apply it)
may at this day serve for the Direction and Establishment of our Faith in the
true (...). Lord, let that admirabl Concent and Harmony between thy Old and New
Testament, which is evident in this and many other singular Instances of thy
Truth and Power, be effectual to convince the obstinat Jews, convert the
unbelieving. Gentiles, and bring All Mankind to the Obedience of Faith in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

. 2.
O thou most High Possessor of Heven and Earth, who did humbl thy self to be
wrapped in Swaddling (...) and (...) in a Manger, because there was S. Luke 2. 7,
no (...) in the (...), having made choice of a poor Virgin for thy Mother and
a mean Carpenter to pass for thy reputed Father, both being destitute (not only
of a numerous Train of Attendants, and such like Marks of Worldly Pomp and
Grandeur, but even) of ordinary Conveniences:

I prais thy Glorious Name,

For thus taking upon Thee the form of a Servant, that thou might heal the
Error of our Ignorance and Ambition. Let the continual memory of this thy
blessed Exampl giv an effectual Check to the Vanity of my Mind, for the utter
extirpation of all the Pride or Avarice incident to my Nature: And, having
dispossessed all sensual Thoughts and beastly Appetits of that Room which
entirely belongs to Thee, be thou pleased to accept of my poor Heart, as thou
did of that homely Stabl to reside in, supplying their place with such
unfeigned Humility as may render me cheerfully contented in all Estates. Lord,
impart needful Consolation to the Poor, a sanctified Poverty of Spirit to the
Rich, and the abundant Riches of thy Grace to All.

. 3.
There being in (...) saine

I magnify thy Sacred Name,

For this admirabl mixture of Humility and Glory wherewith thou, O Christ, have
beautified and signalized thy Coming into the World: for, the Ministry of an
Angel, to proclaim thy Birth, is no less Glorious and Sublime, than to be an
Inmate with the Beasts of the Stabl seems base and mean in our Eyes. Lord, since
thou have vouchsafed to direct thy winged Herald to those vigilant Cottagers,
that the Poor and Simpl might have as much Occasion to show forth thy Prais as
the great and Learned; I cannot but admire (and heartily desire to imitat) the
perfection of thine impartial Lov to the Souls of men. Thou art not deluded
with the beautiful Vizard of a Great Estate, nor enamored on empty Titls of
Honor; but, seeing throu the Veil of such human Additaments and beggarly
Inventions, do infinitely prize the naked Souls and Bodies of thy Servants.
Quicken me (I beseech thee) to an industrious. Attendance on my Calling, and a
stricter Watchfulness over my Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, (those numerous
Flocks which are very apt to wander and go astray) that my Soul may be precious
in thy Sight: And, tho I walk in Darkness, in the Vale and Shadow of Death, yet
let thy gracious Visitations not only enlighten and refresh me, but also draw
and direct my Heart to follow these honest Shepherds, who (in obedience to the
direction they received from Heven) left all to go unto Bethlehem and see that
S. Luke 2.
thing which the Lord had made where they that I also, being filled with the
like Joy in Believing what they found verified by this which the Angel had
given them, may boldly publish thy Goodness and Truth together with my own
grateful Apprehensions of it, as these Shepherds did, who when they had seen
it, made known abroad the that (...), and returned S. Luke 2.
glorifying and praising

. 4.
And how could they do less. having so lately seen a Multitude of the Hevenly
Host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Shall
Angels descend to Peace on Earth? and, Shall not We lift up our Eyes on High to
giv God the Glory? Can they rejoice in the manifestation of His Good Will
toward Men, and Men themselves be unaffected with such an inestimabl Benefit?
May I be silent or insensibl, while the hevenly Host sing Praises?

I will prais and bless and giv Thee thanks for ever,

O my Dear Redeemer, for the transcendent Efforts of thy Lov to Me and all
Mankind, expressed in this Angelick Carol. O be thou graciously pleased to warm
my breast with some Sparks of this Celestial Charity, that being like unto the
Angels in doing thy Will and showing forth thy Praises upon Earth, I may at
last be made equal to them in the fruition of thy (...) Presence in Heven: and
in order thereunto, let that Lov of God which was thus manifested toward us,
by sending his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live throu Him,
even when we were Enemies to God and all Goodness, powerfuly engage us to the
Practice and Improvement of that Peace thou have restored upon Earth by
transcribing the most excellent Copy of thy Good Will toward Men; for, if God
so loved Us, we ought also to lov one another; Upon the unfeigned Discharge of
which grateful and advantageous Duty, the whole Success of His means of Grace
and Our Hopes of Glory does so much depend, that without following those things
which make for Peace as well as Holiness, no man shall see the Lord.

. 5.
Now, all they that (...) S. Luke 2.
those things which were told but the blessed Virgin Mary kept all these things
and pondered them in her Heart.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O thou uncreated Angel of the Covenant, for the astonishing Power and peculiar
Influence of thy Divine Revelations, which are usualy attended with a various
Effect upon the minds of different Persons. Grant (Lord, I beseech thee) that I
may not entertain any Discovery of thy Saving Truth or more especial Presence,
with the short-lived Flash of a bare transient Wonder or fruitless Amazement,
after the loos Exampl of the un-thinking part of Mankind: but rather so imitat
the pious Prudence of thy matchless Mother; who discreetly observed evry
Intimation of thy Godhead, and carefuly kept in mind whatever might enlighten
her Understanding therein, as to treasure up all the sacred Notices of thine
Eternal Power and Godhead in the safe Recesses of my Heart, and allow some Time
and Thought to make a du Reflection on such considerabl things as may thereupon
be worthily committed to a Religious Memory in my Soul; for, whosoever is wise will
ponder these things, and he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

. 6.
O Thou Light of the World, who wast born in the Night, an Emblem of that dark
and disconsolat Estate wherinto We by Transgression fell: Thou art the Sun of
Righteousness, by whose Rising upon the Earth the Peepl that walked in Darkness
have seen a great Light, and upon them that dwell in the Land of the Shadow of
Death has the Light shined. Thy glorious Appearing has dispersed the Cloud of
thy Father's Wrath, under which the whole Creation groaned, together with those
unwholsom Mists of Sin, Error, and Ignorance wherein Mankind was lost and
benighted: Thou have dissolved the Everlasting Chains of Darkness which were
justly prepared to bind us in Hell and Despair, and once more restored us a Day
of Hope to rejoice in the Light of thy Countenance for ever:

All that is within me does bless thy H. Name,

Who have said unto my Soul, Arise, shine, for thy Light is com, and the Glory
of the Lord, is risen upon thee. Lord, grant that in thy Light I may see Light:
let the Light of thy Grace prepare mine Eyes to behold the illustrious Splendour
of thy Glory. And since it is the Night wherein all the Beasts of the Forest do
mov, let me have no longer fellowship with the unprofitable Works of Darkness,
but rather reprov them, by walking as a Child of the Light and of the Day,
remembering that the Dayspring from on high has visited us, to giv Light to
them that sit in Darkness and in the shadow of Death, to guide our Feet into
the way of Peace, which is the Work of Right usness, as its Effect is
Quietness and Assurance (...) ever.

. 7.
O thou Prince of Peace, who, by disposing the States of the Earth to Peace and
Quietness at the time of thy Nativity, have showed that the gracious Design of
thy Coming into the World was to remov the Enmity between God and Man, by
reconciling them to each other in thy Self:

I glorify thy Name,

For so suitabl an (...), that what was written by the Prophet Isaiah is
fulfilled; for, unto Us a Child is born, unto Us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder; and, Of the increas of his Government and
Peace there shall be no End. Lord, How coms it to pass that such as call
themselves after thy Name, be no less Contentious and Bloody than (...) who are
Strangers to the Doctrine of thy Gospel? How long shall Christendom be the Scene
of those Tragic Wars and injurious Villainies which Barbarians detest and blush
at? O, Be thou pleased to extend thy Golden Scepter over the Earth, that the
Inhabitants thereof may at length be induced to beat their Swords into
Plow-shares and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: And, in order to the public
Peace, put an end to men's private Animosities, and pacify the particular
Commotions of their Minds: Compose all our tumultuous Passions whenever they
arise, regulat our disordered Appetits, subdu our pervers Wills. and reduce all
our unbridled Affections and Faculties to so serene a Temper as is meet for the
Reception and Obedience of that Great and Only Potentat, whose Name is
Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The Ever lasting Father, The Prince of
Peace.

. 8.
O thou Eternal Son, who art the Wisdom of the Father, and have endued thy
Church with such a Degree of Prudence and Gratitude as to institute and observe
an Annual Feast, for a constant Memorial of thy Nativity, to confirm our Faith,
reinforce our Duty, redoubl our Praises, and repeat our Thanks; so that being
filled with thy Graces, by a du participation of thy H. Sacraments in a
grateful Commemoration of the Word made Flesh, we may all conspire to celebrat
thy salutiferous Birth with Eucharistical Joy:

I magnify thy Name,

For the great and diffusiv Efficacy of thy (outwardly) mean and (...)
Nativity, the Fame whereof has so marvelously prevailed over all the Earth,
that the Gentiles are com to thy Light and Kings to the brightness of thy
Rising. Strengthen and direct thy Church, the Pillar and Ground of the Truth,
to maintain the Beauty of Order and the Virtu of H. Discipline, together with
the Form of sound Words in her Doctrine, throu-out all Ages, that all her
Members may with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by celebrating all such Festivals with holy Joy, in Unity of
Spirit and the Bond of Peace, as are instituted for the Honor of thy Mercy, the
Glory of thy Wisdom, and the setting forth of thy Goodness and Power, in this
great and inscrutabl Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh.

Ever-blessed God, who evry year refreshest us with a re newed Birth of devout
Affections by the Welcome Memorial of our Savior's Nativity; Grant that we may
entertain this humbl Rising of the Sun of Righteousness with such ardent
Devotions as may better dispose and engage us to follow Him, who enlightened
the World with his Truth and enflamed it with his Lov, til we acquire as great
Abilities, as we have Obligations, to join with the Celestial Choir in Singing
the Angels Carol, Glory to God in the Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will
toward Men.

Cap. III. Of His Circumcision. S. Luke 2.

. 1.
When eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the Child; tho the
Power and Innocence of my Gracious Redeemer might well have exemted Him from
that rigorous Ceremony, yet did the Holy Jesus freely submit thereunto, at once
to obey the divine Law, acquit Us from that bloody Rite, and giv us many useful
Instructions.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, for substituting a more easy Sacrament instead of that sharp
Ceremony whereunto Thou thy self have submitted, and teaching me, by this thy
voluntary Condescension, to yield ready Obedience to all the Ordinances of God,
how severe and grievous soever they seem to Flesh and Blood Let the Endearment
of thy tender Lov in undergoing those hard and painful Rules, from which thou
have thought fit to releas thy Church, engage evry Member thereof to wave all
Pleas of Dispensation or Privilege which may seem to countenance any Remisness
in the discharge of our Religious Duties: And when the Iniquity or Violence of
unreasonabl Men (who frequently impose greater Burdens than themselves are
willing to bear) shall make it necessary for me either to observe any
unwarrantabl Injunctions or undergo any severe Penalties rather than transgress
thine express Will, inspirit me with Grace and Courage patiently to submit
thereunto; but withal render me cheerfuly conformabl to all those well advised
Constitutions, whereby our lawful Superiors either in Church or State have
thought fit to regulat our Deportment in things indifferent.

. 2.
O thou true Messiah, whose Name was called JESUS, being so named of the Angel
before thou wast conceived in the Womb:

I giv thee all possibl Thanks and Prais,

For making good the gracious Purport of this thy Name, in saving thy peepl
from their Sins. O Blessed Jesus, since, by the Imposition of this adorabl
Name, the Holy Ghost has made a public Declaration that Thou art com into the
World to save Sinners, save me (I beseech thee) who am the chief of Sinners;
let me taste and see how gracious the Lord is in the Healing Influence of this
Name: A Name that does charm the dullest Ears and revive the drooping Hearts of
miserabl Sinners, infinitely beyond the sweetest Accents of Music, and
therefore is exalted abov evry Name, even by God himself; which has made it
highly reasonabl (whatever any cavelling Hypocrites, either by their irreligious
Doctrine or Deportment, argu to the contrary) that at the Name of Jesus evry
knee should bow, in (...), in Earth, and under the Earth; and that evry Tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. In
Obedience to which Divine Decree, I prostrat my Self before Thee O Lord, I
worship Thee O Christ, and humbly beg Thee on my Knees to be my Jesus, my
Savior.

. 3.
O Holy Jesus, who in this first (tho small) Effusion of thy Blood did pay
the Earnest of that Debt which thou had undertaken to satisfy as our Surety:

I bless thy saving Name,

For thus obliging thy Self to fulfill the whole Law, and expiat its Violation,
on our (...) How early began my (...) to suffer! He shed his Blood almost as
soon as he drew his Breath. O my Soul, defer not to execute His Will, who
seemed impatient to procure thy Welfare at the price of his Blood; and instead
of abusing his exact Obedience for a Cloak of Libertinism, let the Exampl of
his Perfection engage thee to follow his Steps in all holy Conversation: And do
thou, O Jesu, at once supply, and satisfy for, all the Defects of my frail
Obedience.

. 4.
This bloody Character of Circumcision left the Impression of God's Seal upon
Believing Sinners, that they bearing in their Bodies the Marks of the Most
Holy, might be put in mind whose Servants they are, and what Duty they ow.

I humbly adore Thee,

O Jesus, for submitting to the Imputation of Sin, and the Penalties
consequential thereunto, tho thou knew no Sin. Lord, Let this Prospect of
thine Exinanition, in taking upon Thee the form of a Servant, yea a Sinner, who
art God blessed and holy for ever, not only banish all those irregular Desires
of Esteem which lurk in my bosom, but also render me industrious to be truly
Holy, not to be thought (...): And may this beginning of Sorrows in Thy (...)
abate all the Vanity and Niceness of Mine.

. 5.
O my immaculat Lord, Thou had no Lusts to (...), no Corruptions to renounce,
no new Nature to put on, and yet did permit thy Foreskin to be circumcised,
that we might learn thereby to put away all (...) and superfluity of (...)
tiness:

I prais thy H. Name,

For this Visibl Sign of that (...) Grace we stand in need of. Let this thine
Infant-Wound, O J su, circumcise our Hearts, purify our Hands, and (...) our
whole Man blameless and undefiled: And since there is a Fountain opened to the
House of David, for Sin and for Uncleanness; let the Blood of Christ, who throu
the (...) offered himself without Spot to God, (...) our Conscience from dead
Works to (...) the living God, that being (...) from all (...) of Flesh and
Spirit (...) may perfect Holiness in thy Fear. To this end, I beseech thee
mortify the Deeds of my Body, cut off the Occasions of Sin, and disappoint the
Temtations most apt to betray me (...): for, He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is (...) in the Flesh; but he is
a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Prais is not of Men but of God.

. 6.
O my Soul, Who could imagine so small and private an Action, in a Country so
remote and an Age so long past, should be of such mavelous Concernment to
thee, and evry Family in the Earth besides?

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, for that (...) Wisdom and Goodness wherewith thou have enlarged my
Joys, in making all thine Actions conduciv to the Benefit and Instruction of
the whole World. Grant me Grace (I beseech thee) so to use those Faculties
wherewith thou have enabled me to reflect on and consider Objects so far distant
in Time and Place, that duly weighing the great Confequence and wide
Concernment of evry Thought, Word, and Deed, enrolled in the Volum of Eternity,
I may become the more cautious of ordering my Conversation aright, til Divine
Lov, Entire Obedience, and Uniform Devotion complete my Life in this World, and
prepare a delightful Spectacl for God, Angels, and Just Men made perfect, in
the next.

Cap. IV. Of His Epiphany. S. Mat. 2. 1, (...).

. 1.
Now, when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of (...)? for, we (...) seen his Star in
the East and are com to worship him.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O thou Wisdom of the Father, for the gracious and (...) Influence of the
Eastern (...), whose Appearance and Motion being wholly (...) did attract the
Eyes, engage the Faith, and guide the Feet of these Learned Sages in Quest of
Thee. In deed, they are the only Wise men, who use their Learning to find out
Heven. Lord, as thou did illuminat their Souls by a diviner Light to discern
the Benefit and Design of that created Star, so be thou graciously pleased to
accompany the hevenly Oracls of thy Word with such a convincing Power and
Demonstration of thy Spirit as shall be effectual to bring in the Fullness of the
Gentiles, to whom thou have extended the Scepter of thy Mercy as well as to the
Jews, having made both one and broken down the middl Wall of Partition between
us.

. 2.
O Blessed Jesu who did withdraw the Conduct of that Star as soon as the Wise
men were com to Jerusalem, leaving them to be informed by the ordinary Ministry
of the chief Priests and S. Mat. 2. 4,
Scribes of the Peepl, whom (...) gathered together, demanding of them where
Christ should be born: they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea;

I prais thy H. Name,

For the seasonabl Use of Miracls, and the transcendent Excellency of the Means
of Grace: It is unreasonabl to look for Manna when we are once entered into the
Land of Promise. Reclaim therefore (I beseech thee) all pervers and ignorant
Schismatics from that gross presumtion of temting Thee for new Lights and
needless Revelations, now thy Will is so expressly revealed in thy Word; and let
the Priests Lips, to whom thou have committed the ordinary Dispensation of
thine Oracls, always preserv sufficient knowledge to direct thy peepl in the way
of Salvation by that more sure Word of Prophecy, which was of old written for
our Instruction, and is to this day a standing Record taken from the mouths of
those holy men of God who spoke as they were moved by the H. Ghost. And as thou
did lead these honorabl Pilgrims by the Conduct of a Star to the Means of
Grace, and, by the ordinary Preaching and Explanation of thy Word, unto thy
Self, making both those Methods useful in their respectiv places; so let thine
ancient Miracls confirm and quicken us in the Use of such ordinary Means as are
adapted to these later Times: for, the Light of thy glorious Gospel is as much
more instructiv than the obscurer Language of a Star, as the shining Splendour
of the Day outvies the gloomy Shades of Night; this being no less powerful to
draw Men from all Quarters of the Earth to thy Worship, than that was to invite
these few from the East.

. 3.
The (...) men, having received so full and plain an Answer from the Priests,
in the (...) of a Truth which neither their fear of Herod nor their own Enmity
was abl to suppress, continu their Progress toward Bethlehem, nothing
discoraged either with the disappearing of their Oriental Guide, or by the
Troubl which the bold and open S. Mat. 2. 3,
Declaration of their Embassy had given Herod and all Jerusalem with him:

I magnify thy Sacred Name,

O Christ, For this their Exemplary Courage and Resolution: Be thou the
delightful Object and Answer of all mine Enquiries, the sole End and Recompense
of all my Travel; and let my Soul depend on Thee in the greatest destitution of
all Outward Helps and Encoragements, that those Obstacls which the World is apt
to cast in my way being furmounted by a firm purpos of Mind to follow Thee, I
may throu a du Use of thine Ordinances be brought out of the Maze of Error and
Ignorance (...) the Knowledge of thy Truth, and walk in the right way to thy
saving Presence.

. 4.
O H. Jesu, who, to reward the Faith and Zeal of these devout Pilgrims, did
not only signify to them the Birth of the Messiah in general, but conduct them
also to Jerusalem; and at last, when they departed thence, S. Mat. 2. 9.
attend them even to Bethlehem, by the Star which they saw in the East, that
went before them til it came and (...) where the young Child was, to great joy:

I bless and prais thy Name,

For being found of them that seek Thee, according to thy faithful Promise, I
will never leav thee nor forsake thee. Lord, since from those general Terms
which gave us Expectations of a Savior, that should be a Man, and of the Jewish
Nation (which alone had been a special Favor and Privilege to the World); thou
have descended to more exact particulars in fore telling us by thy Prophets,
That He should be of the Seed of David, born in Bethlehem, and that of a
Virgin: Let me not rest satisfied with any general Report or superficial
Knowledge of thy Coming in the Flesh, til my own Soul experimentaly find that
Thou art com to be my Redeemer in particular. For this purpos, let me never
want or neglect the Light of thy Gospel; pardon and reliev as well my Blindness
as my Backwardness hitherto, which has rendered me unprofitabl under it; and
make us all so duly sensibl of our Abuse or Mis-improvment of the Tenders of
thy Grace and Mercy, that we may henceforth obey all thy godly Motions, til our
Experience of thy Lov fill us with Joy unspeakabl and full of Glory.

. 5.
O thou Light of Israel, of whom Balaam the Gentil prophesied, saying (as it
were in Allusion hereunto) There shall com a Star out of Jacob and a (...) out
of Israel:

I (...) thy Name,

For ushering in the day of Grace with the brightness of thy Rising. Thou have
promised to giv the Morning Star to him that over comes, as a Pledge or
Earnest of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Grant therefore, I beseech
Thee, that we may have Power and Strength to get the Victory and to triumph
against the Devil, the World and the Flesh; and, whereas this is the Victory
that over-cometh the World, even our Faith, Lord, encreas our Faith, til the
Dawning (...) unto the perfect Day and Grace be consummat in Glory.

. 6.
When they were com into S. Mat. 2.
the house, they saw the young (...) fell down and (...); and opening their (...)
presented unto him Gifts, (...) and (...) and (...).

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O my adorabl Redeemer, For thy gracious Acceptance of these Tenders of their
Homage and Adoration to thy Majesty: (...) thee to cast a benign Ey upon my
humbl Addresses to thy Throne; who desire to adore thee with the entire
Oblation of my Soul and Body, and with all the Faculties of both offer unto
Thee, my King, the Gold of Loyalty and Obedience; to Thee, my God, the Odors of
Devotion and Thanksgivings; and to Thee, my Savior, the Myrrh of Mortification
and Repentance; distilling from a broken and a contrit Heart: for, these are
Sacrifices which Thou will not despise; nay, wherewith Thou art better pleased
than with all the material Gold, Frankincens and Myrrh in the World.

. 7.
These Eastern Sages are vulgarly dignified with the Titl of Kings, and tho
that Opinion appears not founded on any authentic Record, yet it is not
unimprovabl in reference to the present Subject; for, Isaiah's Prophecy, which
says, The Gentiles or Nations shall com to thy Light and Kings to the Bright ness
of thy Rising, is actualy fulfilled at this day, thy Gross, O Christ, being
advanced upon the Crowns of many Potentats, who glory in That as the chief
Ensign of their Honor:

I giv Thee Thanks and Prais,

Because the Kingdoms of the Earth are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ. Purge out of thy Kingdom all things that offend; make all Christian
Kings Holy; and all the Heathen, Christian: And let thy Loving Kindness, which
is better than the Life its self, enrich my Soul with a Contentment more
desirabl than Crowns and more advantageous than Kingdoms, in paying the Tribute
I ow to Jesus Christ the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, saying, Unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own-Blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father; to Him be Glory and Dominion for
ever and ever.

Amen.
Cap. V. Of His Presentation in S. Luke 2. 22, -- 38.
the Templ.
. 1.
When the days of her Purification the VirginMother brought her H. Child Jesus
to Jerusalem; to present him to the Lord, according to the Law of Moses.

I therefore prais and magnify thy Name,

O my God, for making the ancient Precepts of thy Law so aptly minister to the
Accomplishment of those succeeding Prophecies which tell us, The Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly (...) to his Templ; and, I will fill this House with Glory,
says the Lord of Hosts: wherein the Law and the Prophets conspire to giv the
more public Notice of the Messiah at his Manifestation to Israel. How glorious
was that Templ wherein the Lord and Owner thereof (who dwells not in Templs
made with hands) made his personal and visible Appearance: This made the Glory
of that latter (...) greater than of the (...), tho far short of it in outward
Riches and Grandeur. There Thou, O Christ, wast often Typicaly represented; but
here Thou art Personaly present, to the firm Establishment of the Christian
Faith and the utter Confusion of Jewish Infidelity, whose incorrigibl Obstinacy
in Unbelief does blasphemously turn the Truth of God into a Ly, it being
altogether impossibl that these Prophecies can ever be fulfilled after the
Subversion of the Second Templ O let my Soul be the Templ of thine Eternal
Residence, and evry Christian Heart be as well hallowed as dignified by thy
gracious Presence.

. 2.
O H. Jesus, The (...) (...). Luke 2.
which thy Blessed Mother came to offer for her Purification, being A pair of
Turtl-Doves or two young Pigeons, is no less an Argument of her Poverty than
Obedience, according to that which is said in the Law of the Lord, And if she
be not abl to bring a Lamb, then she shall bring two Turtls, or two young Pigeons.

I magnify thy Sacred Name,

For giving us hereby to understand that God has chosen the Poor of this
World, Rich in Faith, to be Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised to them
that lov him. Let this her Readiness to fulfill the Law make us more sollicitous
to do our Duty, according to the Ability God has given us, than to conceal our
Poverty for Shame, or alledg it for an Excuse to serve God of that which cost us
nothing. Lord, purify my heart, that it may yield a du Respect to all the Parts
and Precepts of thy Law; studying the mystical Sense of the Ceremonial,
observing the rational Injunctions of the Moral, admiring the politic Rules of
the Civil, and reverencing the Holy Rites of the Ecclesiastical: for, they all
bear the Stamp of thy Authority, and are therefore worthy of all Acceptance and
Esteem.

. 3.
O thou Redeemer of the World, who in conformity (...) Law, (...) that (...)
wast (...) to the High Priest, and (...) of him for (...) money, according to
the Estimation of the firstborn of Man:

I prais thy H. Name,

For becoming a (...) for many, yea, for All, whether (...) or not. By thee the
very Priests and Levits are redeemed, who themselves were taken from among the
Children of Israel instead of all the firstborn, which had been (...) to the
Lord. I beseech thee, by (...) of the Price thou have paid for my Soul, enrol
me among the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn which are written in
Heven, who, having received the Spirit of Adoption, are not only the Children
but Heirs of God and joint-Heirs with Christ. And that thine infinite Merit,
which suffices to make evry one of thy Brethren a complete Possessor of thine
Eternal Inheritance, may qualify us all to receiv a Kingdom which cannot be
moved, let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with Reverence and
godly Fear, as becoms persons redeemed from their Iniquities.

. 4.
When the Parents brought S. Luke 2.
in the Child JESUS to do to whom it was revealed had seen the Lord's Christ,
came by the Spirit into the Templ, where he took him up in his which he had
long waited for and now happily found.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O my Dear Jesus, as well for the singular Graces conferred on this reverend
person as for the public Testimony he gave of Thee to them that were present
Pardon, I beseech thee, my Neglect of Waiting for Thee, whereby I have justly
forfeited the peculiar Manifestations of thy (...) and Favor; and now that I am
not only ready, but earnestly desirous, to receiv Thee in mine Arms, yea to
lodge Thee in my Heart, vouchsafe to purify and enlighten me with the H. Ghost,
that I taking Delight in thy Sanctuary and carefully attending Thee there, with
a Soul full of Joy and a Mouth full of Praises, may also bless Thee my God and
speak of thine Honor in thy holy Templ.

. 5.
Thus did pious Simeon, whose Eyes were no sooner blessed with that desirabl
Interview, but his Tongue expressed the Contentment of his Heart in this Swan-like
Song, Lord, now (...) thou S. Luke 2.


I prais Thee, O Christ,

For being both A Light to Mother marvelled at those things which were spoken
of Thee, especialy hearing him that blessed them say (...) Mary Behold, this
Child is set for in so much that a Sword should pierce throu her own Soul also;
the Fall of any either in or out of Israel; that such as fall throu their own
Default might rise again by Faith in Thee, and those who have spoken most
bitterly against Thee may upon Repentance be forgiven, when the Thoughts of all
Hearts shall be revealed.

. 6.
This notabl Testimony of old Simeon was seconded by Anna S. (...) 2.
a Prophetess, of the Tribe of who was of a great Age, being a Widow of about
fourscore

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Redeemer of Israel, for rewarding that godly Matron's Devotion with so happy
a Change of her Fastings into Jubilees and her Prayers into Praises. Lord,
since those to whom thou revealest thy Self must be qualified for that blessed
Privilege by so much Diligence and unwearied Devotion, enable me by thy Grace
to apply my utmost Endevors thereunto Night and Day, as well in Fastings and
Prayers to deprecat my own and my Nations Sins, as by Feastings and Praises to
congratulat thy Manifestation to the World and the saving Consequences thereof;
uniting in my Devotions all the pious Longings and earnest Wishes of the Old
World, with the transporting Joys and inexpressible Satisfactions of the New.

Cap. VI. Of His Flight into Egypt.
. 1.
WHen they had thus performed S. Luke 2.
all things according but were not allowed any long Continuance there: for,
soon after the (...) of the S. Mat. 2.
Lord appeared to Joseph in a to destroy him: he took

I celebrat thy Name,

O Son of the Highest, for exposing thy Self to so many Hazards and
Inconveniences for my sake, and for the constant Vigilance of thy Father's Ey
to serve and secure Thee by the Ministry of Angels. Thy Lov alone moved thee to
descend from the Region of Bliss and Glory to this Vale of Misery and Troubl,
and nothing but thy gracious Design to free us thence inclined thee rather to
retire into the House of Bondage than yield thy (...) to the Tyrants Cruelty,
lest Our hope should have been unseasonably cut off. Watch over me, I humbly
beseech thee, in all the Dangers wherewith I am beset in this World of Iniquity,
and either instruct me to escape them or strengthen me to sustain them. Let no
Devices of the Wicked prosper against my Soul, but reflecting on this thine own
Peril, be thou ever ready to deliver me from the malicious Designs of
unreasonabl and cruel Men.

. 2.
O my blessed Redeemer, who, in thy tender Years, for the avoiding of Herod's
Rage, did endure a tedious Banishment, to let us know there is no less ground
of Contentment in a voluntary Exile (when thy Providence makes it necessary for
us) than in the Enjoyment of our nativ Soil:

I bless thy H. Name,

For being equaly near us in all places of thy Dominion; for, the whole Earth is
thine. Lord, whatsoever thy Wisdom and Authority thinks fit to enjoin me, let
thy Grace incline me cheerfuly to obey, how much soever it seem to thwart my
worldly Interest or Eas; and, in all my Endevors to execute thy Will, conduct
and defend me with thy good Providence. Obeying Thee I may be safe in Egypt,
the House of Bondage, while encompassed with Perils; and throu Disobedience to
thy Commands, may perish in Bethlehem, the House of Bread, tho surrounded with
Plenty: To thy better Choice therefore do I wholly refer the Disposal of my self
and all mine Affairs; for, Thou art God only Wise and Blessed for ever.

. 3.
O thou Mirror of Meekness, who (...) rather submit to the common Remedy of
withdrawing from the impendent Storm, than use a Miracl either to (...) the
Purpos or withstand the Power of Herod, by any irresistibl Influence of thine
own:

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For thine exemplary Subjection to Civil Magistrates, being quietly submissiv
not only to the Good and Gentl, but even to the froward. Let the Respect thou
barest them in thy Peaceableness and Patience under the grossest Abuse of their
Authority and Jurisdiction, quicken and confirm in me the Principls of an
inviolabl Loyalty, that I resist not evil (tho unjustly inflicted by the higher
Powers) but rather shun the Inconvenience by a timely Retreat than presume to
disturb their Government, or oppose their Authority, by any unwarrantabl and
contumacious Practices; for, whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receiv to themselves Damnation.

Cap. VII. Of His Return out of Egypt, S. Mat. 2. 15. -- 23.
after the Slaughter of the Innocents.
. 1.
WHen Herod saw that he (whom he had sent to Bethlehem with this Charge, Go and
search (...) but they, being warned of God in a were departed into their own
Country another way;) he was exceeding wroth:

I glorify thy Name,

O Christ, For the ready Obedience of those thy Followers in conforming to evry
notice of thy Will; who, truly judging it cannot be right in thy Sight to
hearken unto Men more than unto God, would rather incur the Danger of an
earthly King's Displeasure than the Guilt of Disobedience to the hevenly
Vision. That Tyrants and Usurpers are a Scourge unto themselves, we have a notabl
Instance in Herod, whose Passions were ever on the Rack to chastise his
Ambition: As soon as the Eastern Pilgrims came with their Inquiry, Where is He
that is born King of the Jews? he was troubled with Fears and Apprehensions of
some Innovation in the State: No sooner were they gone without giving him such an
Account of their Journey as he required, but he is tormented with Rage at the
Affront they put upon him, in sleighting his Commands and eluding his
Expectation. Evry inconsiderabl Accident does discompose an unquiet mind:
Establish me therefore O Lord, with thy free Spirit against the violent efforts
of my Passions; and that I may enjoy such a Peace and Serenity as naturally
flows from the regular Dictats of Reason and Religion, let me never do or
desire any thing contradictory thereunto.

. 2.
Herod's Wrath, not enduring the narrow Confinement of his own Breast, like a
raging Torrent that involvs all the Neighboring Plains with Ruin and
Destruction, breaks forth into a bloody S. Mat. (...).
Edict which (...) all the Children proportioning the Extent of his (...)
according to the time when he privily called them to inform him what time the
Star appeared.

I adore thy Sacred Name,

O my God, For permitting that which was spoken by (...) the Prophet to be thus
fulfilled, In Rama was there (...) The enraged King of Jewry meant to destroy
those Infants, but contrary to his merciless Intention wrought their
Deliverance: By the Death he inflicted, he freed them from Sin, as by the
Effusion of their Blood he accomplished their Baptism; and while that crafty
Fox designed to involv the Son of God in the common Butchery, his wicked
Devices recoiled upon himself in the Murder of his own. For, the Lord withdrew
his beloved Isaac, and left a Thousand innocent Lambs to be sacrifised in his
stead and accepted for his sake. These were redeemed from among Men, being the
first. fruits unto God and to the Lamb; and in their mouth was found no Guile,
for they are without fault before the Throne of God. Weep not therefore for thy
Children, Rachel, for, (...) are Blessed; they follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, therefore be comforted.

O God the Judge of all, who, by the Death of these newborn Babes, have taught
thy Church, that neither the tenderest Age, nor the most immaculat Innocence,
is exempt from Suffering for Thy Sake, or incapabl of the glorious Rewards
allotted to the Nobl Army of thy Martyrs: Giv all the Members of thy Church
Militant here upon Earth Grace so to adore Thee in this and all other
Transactions of thy Providence (how severe or unaccountabl soever they seem to
human Reason) as may confirm their Hearts in a hopeful Resignation to thy Will
and an assured Trust that their cheerful Submission thereunto shall be crowned
with thine Eternal Favor, when thy Church shall become Triumphant in Heven.
Assist me also, I humbly beseech thee, to check the first Rise of my Passions,
lest, being cherished in my bosom, they grow too headstrong to be reclaimed,
and break out into such Acts of Violence and Villainy as are not to be named
without Horror and Detestation.

. 3.
Holy Joseph (having abode in Egypt til Herod was dead) S. Mat. 2.
upon the Information and Encoragement an Angel of the Lord, that they (...)
dead which sought the young Child's Life, arose and took the (...) and his
Mother, but, in regard he where Archelaus did reign in further warned of God in
a Dream, he turned aside into Galilee, and dwelt in a City

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, For ordering the seemingly accidental Circumstances of thy Life to
fulfill that thy Return from Banishment, upon a Divine Summons, expressly
answering That Saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son; and thine Abode in
Nazareth, according to God's Direction, implicitly corresponding with This, he
shall be called a (...). although my whole Life be an unsettled Pilgrimage, yet be
thou pleased to refresh me in the various Stages of it with the Society and
Privileges of thy Chosen Peepl, and bring me in the end to the place where
(...) Honor dwells: that as Thou, S. Luke 2.
O Child of God, did grow and war strong in Spirit, being filled with Wisdom;
so the Grace of God may be upon Me in like manner.

Cap. VIII. Of His going up to the Templ, S. Luke 2. 41, -- 50.
and Disputing with the Doctors.
. 1.
NOw, whereas his Parents the Holy Child at twelv years old did accompany after
the Custom of the Feast:

I magnify thy Name,

O Jesus, For observing and countenancing thine own Ordinances; and humbly
beseech thee to establish and adorn thy Public Worship among us, by restoring
our Religious Solemnities to their du Veneration and Attendance, that
commemorating thine ancient Mercies with thankful hearts, we may derive fresh
Advantages from them, not only evry Year but all the Days of our Life. They
want no Templ who have God himself in their House; they can need no Sacrifice who
have Jesus in their Company: Yet did not the H. Virgin and S. Joseph neglect
their annual Progress to Jerusalem, but, in an uninterrupted Course of pious
Conformity to the Law, trained up the B. Child from his Youth in the strict
Observation of it. O my Soul, consider their pious and regular Devotion, and
after the good Exampl which the prudent and orderly Behavior of such holy
Persons has set before thee, be careful and conscientious as well in
celebrating the public Christian (...) as in improving all private Occasions of
Piety and Duty, to express thy religious Communion with the Saints not only of
thine own time but of former Ages too.

. 2.
When they had fulfilled the S. Luke 2.
days, his Parents returned homeward; the Child Jesus tarried behind, which
they knew for, supposing him to have been in the Company, they went a days
journey before they fought him among their (...) and acquaintance, and then
turned back again to Jerusalem; where, after three days, they

I prais thy H. Name,

O my Savior, For making the Second Templ thus glorious by thy Presence, and
giving such early Notices of thy Divinity as made all that heard Thee
astonished thine Understanding and Answers, Let all my Conferences, I beseech
thee, be holy, wise, and prudent, always aiming either to receiv or communicate
Instruction by proposing such Questions concerning the Mysteries of thy Kingdom
as may serve to the Use of Edifying and minister Grace to the Hearers: For this
purpos, make me diligent in frequenting those Places and Persons which are
consecrated to thy Service and set apart by thy Providence for our ordinary
Learning, that the Principls of true Wisdom and Piety, being instilled in my
Youth, may render me, in my riper Age, wise unto Salvation; abl to refute
Errors and maintain Truth, practice Virtu and discountenance Vice; and
coragious in laying hold on all fit Opportunities for both, without being
unseasonabl or unprofitabl in either.

. 3.
O thou Son of God, who, in Answer to that Question wherein thy Parents
expressed how much they were troubled at thine Absence S. Luke 2.
and amazed at thy supernatural Son, why have thou thus dealt with us? Behold,
thy Father and I have sought (...) sorrowing: did say

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For thy forward undertaking to do the Work of Him that (...) Thee, preferring
thy Care to pleas thy Hevenly Father before the Regard du to thine Earthly
Parentage. Lord, let no Worldly Obligation be of force to withdraw me from Thee
or lessen my Duty to Thee; nor yet suffer me upon any Pretense of doing Thee
Service to become undutiful or disobliging to those whom Grace or Nature has
made my Relations: but that, taking good heed to dispatch the Business Thou
do entrust me with, in the first place, I may also deport my Self with du
Respect to my several Relations, tendering that Duty which I ow them respectivly
with all Affability and Cheerfulness.

Cap. IX. Of His Return to Nazareth and retired Life there.
. 1.
OB. Jesu, who wentest down S. Luke 2.
with thy Parents to Nazareth,

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For recommending a mixture of Retirement and Privacy with our public Actions
and Emploiments, wherein we may have leisure and opportunity to contemplat thy
Father's Glory, as Thou did; enjoying his mavelous Works, studying in his
most excellent Laws, tracing the footsteps of his Wisdom in both, and ravished
with the Consideration of his infinite Lov in all. By these approved Means, let
My Faculties and Thy Graces be so improved in me, that I may view all things
with Thine Eyes; expose my self rarely, with Thy Prudence; retire with Thy
Contentedness; be enflamed with Thy Lov to God and Man; and partake of all the
unknown Accomplishments that ly hid in Thy concealed Life, some Sparks whereof
darted forth in thy Supernatural Understanding and exemplary Conversation evry
day. Thus, receiving of Thy Fullness Grace for Grace, I shall derive far more
Satisfaction from the Light of thy Countenance, in a domestic Privacy, than
all the inviting Advantages and public Honors of the World can pretend to.

. 2.
O thou sole Fountain of our Grace and Glory, who did not only accompany thy
Parents to Nazareth, but wast subject unto them there, being content to live and
labor in the painful Vocation of thy reputed Father til the thirtieth Year of
thine Age; for, on that account thine own Countrymen term thee The Carpenter,
as well as The Carpenter's Son:

I prais thy H. Name,

For expressing thy Subjection and Humility so long in that mean and laborious
Emploiment. Quicken me, I beseech thee, to honest Industry in my Calling, that,
whether it seem base or honorabl in the Eyes of Men, I may duly approv my self
in the sight of God, and be so well contented with whatsoever part his wiser
Providence allots me, to act, as never to be ashamed of my poorest Kindred or
of doing any the meanest Offices for them.

. 3.
O my Dear Jesus, in that silent S. Luke 2.
Painfulness and retired Condition, encreas in Wisdom and Stature, and in Favor
with God and Men.

I magnify thy Reverend Name.

For the Purity of thine inoffensiv Life, and that signal Patience wherewith
thou did attend the prefixed time of executing thy Divine Office. Lord,
rectify that Eagerness and Impatience wherewith we usualy snatch at expected
Honors and rush into new Emploiments, Pardon those Miscarriages in my present
state of Life whereby I have given Occasion of Offense to any, and endu me with
so much Prudence and Humility as may render my Lov and Service acceptabl to
all; that I may grow into favor with God and Men, which thine Exampl and
Success persuade me is a Grace not desirabl only, but attainabl also by those
that increas in Wisdom as well as Stature, and express their so doing in an
amiabl and blameless Conversation.

Cap. X. Of His Inauguration to his Office S Mat. 3, 1, -- 17.
by the Preaching and S. Mark 1. 1, -- 11.
Baptism of S. John. S. Luke 3, 1, -- 18, 21, -- 23.

. 1. S. Joh. 1. 1, -- 34.

O My Gracious Redeemer, thou did send thy Servant John (who grew and waxed
S. Luke 1.
strong in Spirit, being in the as a Messenger before thy face to prepare S.
Mark 1.
thy way before Thee, by (...) wherein he expressed The Uoice of one crying in the
Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his Paths

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For this suitabl Beginning of the Gospel of (...) Christ the Son of God. Let
me learn, I beseech thee, from the Austerity of thy Forerunner, both in
Apparel the same John had his Raiment of Camel's S. Mat. 3. 4,
hair and a leathern Girdl at (...) his Loins, and his Meat was Locusts and
wild Dony) so to comply with the Doctrine of Mortification and Repentance which
he preached and practiced, that I may (...) the Salvation of S. Luke 3. 6,
God. And, as the Peepl, who S. Mat. 3. 5,
went out to him from Jerusalem and Judea, and all the Region so do thou
baptize me with the H. Ghost and with Fire to the forsaking of mine; warned to
flee from the Wrath to com, I bring forth fruits meet for rather glorying to
have Abraham my Father in God is abl of the very Stones to raise up Children unto
him. And now that the Axis laid (...) be graciously pleased to direct the hand
that guides it, to cut off the dead or luxuriant Branches of Sin and Folly that
evry (...) may bring forth good Fruit, in stead of hewing down the whole Body to
be cast into the fire.

. 2.
When the Peepl, the Publicans, S. Luke 3.
and the Soldiers, which came forth to be baptized of Instead of requiring them
to forsake their several Callings, as unlawful or irreligious, He recommends
Charity, upright

I giv thee Thanks and Prais,

O Jesus, For making the Duties of Religion consistent with those of our
Worldly Vocations. Lord, bless my conscionabl Industry in that lawful
Emploiment whereunto thy Providence has called me, that, by my honest Diligence
therein, I may do Thee Service in my Generation, and working with my hands the
thing which is Good, may have (and have the Heart) to giv to him that needs:
And yet, let not my earnest Concernment for the things of this Life be pleaded
in Excuse for my Neglect of a better, but among all my most justifiabl Cares,
allow some Time and Thought so to attend on the Ministry of thy Word and the
Administration of thy Sacraments, as may best make a practical Expression of,
and giv a proper Answer to, this Inquiry on the behalf of my Soul, What must I
do to be saved?

. 3.
As the Peepl were in (...), so that the Jews sent Priests and Levits, who were
of the (...), S Joh. 1. 19, (...). 24, 28,
from Jerusalem to Bethabara beyond Jordan (...) he was baptizing, to ask him,
Who art thou? He denied not, but confessed, I am not the CHRIST, nor Elias,
neither whom ye know not; He comes S. Mark 1. 7, 8,
after me and is preferred S. Joh. 1.
before me; for, He was before tho born after me; the S. Luke 3.
latchet of whose shoos I am

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, For this Record of John, who (...) witness of Thee without seeking
the Enhancement of his own Reputation by the envious Concealment of thy Person
or Office. Lord, purge the floor of my Heart from all that Chaff of Vanity and
Pride which renders me at any time inclinabl to deck my self with the spoils of
that Honor which is only du to Thee; that, being littl in mine own Eyes; I may
cheerfuly magnify Him who is mightier than I, of S. Mat. 3.
whose fullness we have all received, S. Joh. 1.
even Grace for Grace, House not made with hands eternal in the Hevens; for, the
Law was given by Moses, but who, being the only Begotten Son which is in the
whom no man has seen at any time: And since the same John, being a let this
his public Testimony have its designed Effect upon (...) man not only
confirming the true Faith where it has been already planted, but creating it
also where it is yet wanting, with so great a Power and Demonstration of the
Spirit, that, although the which was made by him, without whom was not any thing
made, knew him not while He was in the World, He came unto his own, and but
being now no longer born of and behold the of the Word made Flesh, as that of
the only begotten of the Father, who as verily was as he dwelt among Us full of
Grace and Truth. And the good God of the Spirits of all Flesh grant that the
Son of thy Lov in whom was that Life which was the S. Joh. 1. 4,
Light of Men, may shine in the that has benighted the Children of this World,
til the Power (or rather Privilege) to become the Sons of God, which He gave to
them (...) graciously imparted to all the Families of the Earth, by embracing
the true Faith which has saved as many as received him.

. 4.
Then comes Jesus from S. Mat. 3.
Galilee to Jordan unto John, having quitted his dear Relations and private
Occupation, the more freely to begin and attend his Father's business:

I celebrat thy Name,

O my Dear Redeemer, For leaving the Sweetness of a peaceabl Retirement, to
enter upon a State not only encumbered with Sweat and Travel, but also (...) to
Censure and Persecution for thy Church's sake. I humbly beseech Thee, let no
Self Ends, or more pleasurabl Enjoyments, detain any one from undertaking such
public Duties as he is lawfuly called unto: but, when a more open Exposure may
any way conduce to the general Good and Benefit of thy Peepl, be a safe
Retirement never so desirabl, encorage us all to abandon our particular Eas and
Satisfaction; preferring thy Church before all our private Concernments or
domestic Interests whatsoever.

. 5.
O B. Jesus, tho John (...) thee, saying, I have need to be yet did thou
persist in thy Resolution of submitting to his Discipline and Baptism, who owned
himself (...) to carry thy Shoos, requiring him to suffer it to be so now:

I magnify thy Gracious Name,

For thus expressing how well it becomes us to fulfill all O giv me, and all
that call themselves after Thy Name, the Christian Humility of conforming to
all the Rules of Godly Discipline which shall be found requisite for thy Church's
Peace, and of submitting to any Service (how much soever abased) that may tend
to the Benefit of the smallest in thy Flock, or end in the Advancement of thy
Glory.

. 6.
Most H. Jesus, who, when all S. Luke (...).
the Peepl were baptized, did

I glorify thy Name,

Because thy Delights are among the Children of Men. Be present, I beseech
thee, in all the devout Assemblies of thy Saints and Servants; and so bless
thine Ordinances unto them, that the Will of God revealed from Heven (...) be
effectualy divulged and obeyed among all Nations. And now thou have thus
sanctified the Element of Water to become Sacramental for the Remission of Sins,
having in a Symbol purified human Nature of that Guilt and Pollution which thou
had undertaken to expiat and remov, so making good the Baptist's further
Testimony of Thee, when he saw thee, O Jesus, coming unto S. Joh. 1.
him, and said, Behold the Lord, Pardon those many heinous (...) which have
miserably defiled my Life and Conscience since I received Baptismal Grace, and
so renew thy Covenant of Mercy unto my Soul that I may never so ungratefuly
violat the Conditions or forfeit the Advantages of it any more.

. 7.
O thou Anointed of the Lord, who receivedst not the Spirit by measure; for,
being baptized S. Luke 3. 21, 22,
and praying, the Heven was (...); And the H. Ghost descended in a bodily Shape
like a Dov upon Thee: And (...), a (...) from Heven, saying, This S. Mat. 3.
16, 17,
is my Beloved Son in whom S. Mark 1. 10, 11.
I am well pleased. What could be a more glorious Attendant on thy Publication
than so express a Discovery of the B. Trinity? Thy Relation to God the Father,
the Being and Office of the H. Ghost, and the Good Will of the whole Godhead to
Mankind, being jointly displayed therein:

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For exhibiting so many Sacred Mysteries (as in a littl but accurat Picture)
which in other Ages were not made known unto the Sons of men. Lord, let me be
ravished and instructed with this mavelous Vision, as Thy Forerunner was, who
openly professed, I knew him not; but S. Joh. 1.
that He should be made manifest Enlighten the Ey of my Soul to behold this
inconceivabl yet evident Manifestation of the Ever-blessed Trinity; and exalt
mine Understanding to such a right Apprehension of that Sacred Mystery, that
all my Acts of Adoration may be duly directed and graciously accepted. May the
Hevens, which were open at thy Baptism, never be shut against my Prayers or
Praises; and since thou have opened the Kingdom of Heven to all Believers,
grant the same Spirit that descended upon Thee may abide with Me and thy whole
Church for ever, that we who are in Baptism adopted Sons of God, according to
the good pleasure of his Will, may be charmed and honored with the Echo of that
(...) from Heven which proclaimed Thee Beloved. And since thou, my merciful
Savior, have made choice of such proper Emblems to shadow forth thy Glory, make
them suitably impressiv on my Memory and Affections: for, whereas the
Promulgation of the Law was attended with terribl Thunders and thick Darkness,
to express the Dreadfulness of God's Presence unto the sinful Transgressors of
it, Thy Preaching of the Gospel of Peace is ushered in by the H. Ghost in the
likeness of a Dov, to bring the Oliv-branch of Reconciliation to Mankind, and
show what Meekness of Spirit is the proper Badg or Cognizance of thy true
Discipls.

The End of the First Book.
THE Soul's Communion WITH HER SAVIOR.
The Second Book,
Containing what occurs in the First Year of his Public Ministry.

Cap. I. S. Mat. 4. 1, -- 11.
Of His Retirement, Fasting, S. Mark. 1. 12, 13.
and Temtation. S. Luke 4. 1, -- 13.

. 1.
O Blessed Jesus, who, being S. Luke 4. 1,
full of the Holy Ghost, immediately after thy return S. Mat. 4. 1,
from Jordan, wast led by S. Mark 1.
the Spirit into the Wilderness:

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For thus chalking out the Way to divine and spiritual Atchievments. O thou,
the only Comfort of all my Solitudes, giv me Grace to set apart fit times for
Prayer and Contemplation, after thine Exampl, before I enter upon any great
Emploiment; that what I undertake with du and devout Consideration may be so
blessed and accepted by thy Goodness, as may render it succesful to thine Honor.
And, whenever it shall pleas Thee to inspire me with holy Thoughts and
Resolutions, incline my Heart cheerfuly to follow the Motions of thy B. Spirit,
that I may never incur the Guilt of Resisting the H. Ghost.

. 2.
O thou high and holy One of Israel, who have abased thy self to co-habit with
the wild Beasts S. Mark 1.
of the Desert for my sake, whose

I glorify thy Great Name,

For submitting to the disconsolat Inconveniences of that inhospitabl Place and
Company. Lord, disdain not to visit the uncultivated Wilderness of my Soul too;
and subdu therein all those brutish Appetits, those untamed Passions, that would
utterly destroy me, til thou bring all the Imaginations of my Heart into
Subjection to thy H. Will.

. 3.
O my most Gracious Redeemer, S. Mat. 4. 2,
who did fast (...) Days and forty Nights, and (...) afterward an hungered.

I prais thy H. Name,

For teaching me both the Duty and Benefit of Fasting. Lord, let me not at any
time eat or drink without such a Temper and Moderation as may better enabl me
for thy Service: but on all the Seasons and Occasions of Fasting prescribed
either by Thee or thy Church, make me impartialy strict and severe to my self,
in Communion with thy Saints, in Sorrow for my Sins, and in Memory of Thy
Sufferings; denying my self not only pleasant Bread and palatabl Drink, but all
manner of Sustenance, for a time proportionabl to my frailty, (in Conformity to
thine Exampl who in those S. Luke 4.
days (...) eat nothing) as a just Hungring and Thirsting after Righteousness
by the Sens of my bodily Wants. And whenever thou give me Grace or Leisure
to retire my self for the Exercise of Devotion, help me both to sanctify my
Retirement by Prayer and Fasting, and to spend my Time in judging my self that
I be not judged of the Lord, in punishing my self that Thou may spare me,
and in turning from my Sins that thy Judgments may be averted from me. O my
Dear Jesu, be thou my Company in Solitude, my Food in Fasting, and the
sublimest Joy of evry Feast I celebrat: Be thy divine Graces my choicest
Viands, thy Laws my Study, thy Works my Praises, thy Mercies my Enjoyments, thy
Majesty my Fear, thy Lov my Comfort, thy Wisdom my Instruction, thy Goodness my
Guide, and thy sacred Presence my Guard all the days of my Pilgrimage in the
Wilderness of this World.

. 4.
Most Holy and Invincibl Savior, thou did not only fast but wast forty days
temted of the Devil, whose Craft and Importunity thou have utterly defeated by
the Sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God:

I magnify thy Name,

That being assaulted with the subtle Insinuations of Necessity, Curiosity,
Vainglory, Presumtion, Ambition, etc. thou have experimentaly discovered with
what Weapon I may best resist and subdu all manner of Temtations. Lord,
whenever I am to encounter with any of those Enemies which war against my
Soul, let me never be sollicitous for any other Armor of Defense than thy Word;
but have Recours thereunto, in a du Sens of my own Weakness, by such devout
Fasting and Prayer as may endu me with an holy Reverence to what is written,
the du Remembrance and Application whereof may at all times secure me from the
mischievous Influence of any Temtation, and succesfuly enabl me at once to
resist and conquer the Temter. And since we have an High Priest which can be
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, having been in all points temted
like as- we are yet without Sin, so that we may com boldly to the Throne of
Grace to obtain Mercy and Favor for an (...) Relief; I humbly beseech Thee, O
faithful God, suffer Us not to be temted abov that we are abl, but with evry
Temtation make a way for our escape, that we may be abl to bear it. Let no
Arguments drawn from any sensual Wants or Comforts withdraw me from my Duty to
Thee or Confidence in Thee, since it is written, that S. Mat. 4. 4,
Man shall not live by Bread alone, S. Luke 4. 4,
but by evry Word that (...) out of the mouth of God. Let not the bewitching
Prospect of worldly Power and Glory ever make me stagger in Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God and him (...) S. Mat. 4.
shall thou lerv: And let (...) soothing Flatteries seduce me to (...) the Lord
my God by any S. Luke 4.
unwarrantabl Act of Presumtion, Ways wherein (...) Charge over me to (...) me,
(...) lose the Benefit of their Protection and dash my foot against

. 5.
O B. Lord, With what gradual Artifices did Satan attack thee? With how great a
Stock of Impudence did he renew his Solicitations? He begins to work upon thy
Need, expecting that an hungry Appetit would soon induce thee to swallow his
first Bait, Command that these S. Mat. 4. 3,
Stones be made Bread: Then (...) takes thee up into the H. (...) and sets
(...) on a Pinacl of the Templ, in hopes to see cast thy self (...) from
thence, craftily gilding over these two devilish Suggestions with so plausibl
an Argument as that of proving whether Thou be the Son of God or no: And at
last, as if the Want of Success had animated him to greater Villainies, show
thee all the Kingdoms of the World; falsely supposing the Glory of them might
induce All these things will (...) giv thee, tho it were upon the basest
Condition imaginabl, if thou will fall down and worship me.

I celebrat thy great Name,

For thine unparalled Patience in bearing with his irksom Importunity, and
that powerful Severity wherewith thou did rebuke his Impudence. Enabl me also,
I humbly beseech thee, whenever the Temter seeks to delude me by his glosing
Fallacy in mincing the Truth of God revealed in Scripture, or impose upon me by
any gross and apparent Falsehood forged in his own Mint of Lying, of the same
nature with what he affirms concerning the Disposal of this World's Pomp and
Power, That Luke 4. 6,
is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I giv it; so to descry his
Fraud and detest his I alshood as to defeat his Malice and be released from his
further Solicitations by thy divine Aid, who did banish him and his
Temtations from thee with a word, saying unto him, Get S. Mat. 4.
thee (...) me, Satan.

. 6.
My B. Redeemer, when the S. Luke 4.
Devil had ended all the Temtation, rather baffled his Attemt than abated his
Malice, he departed from thee for a Season; and no sooner did the Devil leav
thee, but behold Angels came and (...) S. Mat. 4.
unto thee:

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For this glorious Issu of thy Conflict with our Arch-enemy, and for the grand
Encoragement thou hereby give us to persevere unto the end, having thus made
that inspired Advice an experimental Truth, Resist the Devil and he will flee
from you. Lord, whenever thy Grace has succesfully armed me against the
fiery Darts of the Wicked One, so that he retires with Disappointment; let me
not grow secure as one ignorant of his Devices, but be the more cautious in
expectation of his speedy Return, and vigilant in preparing to frustrat his
next Assault; for, if when he lost the day, he did not quit the field without
thoughts of rallying his shattered Forces against the Captain of our Salvation,
What shall deterr him from re-attacquing such pusillanimous Soldiers as we are?
And, as we have all the Reason imaginabl to stand upon our Guard in respect of
the danger we are in, so we have no small Encoragement to (...) our selves like
Men in regard of the Recompense attending it; for, as soon as we can get rid of
the Temter's Solicitations, we shall be refreshed with the consolatory presence
of the Holy Angels, the Operations of Grace herein conforming to the Laws of
Nature which admit of no Vacuity.

Cap. II. Of our Savior's Entertaining S. Joh. 1. 35, -- 51.
two of S. John's Discipls, and his Conference with Simon Peter, Philip, and
Nathanael.
. 1.
ST. John the Baptist, who bare Record of Christ both Before and At his
Baptism, did also After it repeat his Testimony, looking upon Jesus as he S.
Joh. 1.
whereupon two of his which heard (...) say who finding his (...) Brother Simon,
both told We have found the (...), and brought him to Jesus.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, For thine exemplary Clemency and ready Condescension to entertain
such as own thee their Master and where thou dwellesf, tho it be about the
tenth hour. Lord, incline my Heart not only, upon thy gracious Invitation, to
Com and (...) the place where thine Honor dwells, but to take up mine Abode
with (...); who have given us a Taste of thine Omniscience, in that thou
could say to Andrew's (...), as soon as thou had (...) him (without any
previous Inquiry, or human Information) Thou art Simon the Son of Jona, thou
shall be called Cephas which is by interpretation, Peter.

. 2.
The day following Jesus, S. Joh. 1.
going forth into Galilee, (...) who was of (...), whereupon he believed Jesus
of (...), the Son of to be (...) of whom (...) in the Law, and the Prophets did
write, as he soon after acquainted (...), using it for a cogent Argument to
draw him also to Jesus.

I prais thy H. Name,

O thou Redeemer of Israel, For the magnetic Power of thy Life and Doctrine, by
virtu whereof Men are thus drawn to follow Thee, like one Link after another in
a well compacted Chain. Draw me, O Lord, we will run after thee, that as well by
mine Exampl as Arguments, I may induce others to partake of that Blessedness
which those happy (...) enjoy who are admitted to convers with Thee, (...)
believing Thou art He of whom the Lord spoke unto his Servant Moses on this
wise, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee,
and I will put my words into his mouth; and whosoever will not hearken unto my
words which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him.

. 3.
O B: Jesus, Because thou said Nathanael, I (...) thee under the Fig Tree,
he, that had lately questioned, Can there any good (...) com out of (...)? did
believ and confess, Thou art the Son of God, to encorage and confirm with a
Promise that he should see greater things than these; making this plain
Declaration of what sort they should be, Uerily, verily,

I magnify thy Name,

O thou true Jacob's Ladder, in whose Person Heven and Earth are united; for
whose sake the Celestial Spirits minister to the Saints who shall be Heirs of
Salvation; and by whose Order they either vouchsafe us their hevenly Aid and
Protection, or withdraw its sacred Influence from us. Lord, whereas thou S. John
1.
saw Nathanael, before that Philip called him, when he was and (which is yet
a greater Miracl) did discern his Heart before thou had seen his Face; make
me always apprehensiv that Darkness or Distance hides not from Thee, who
know my Downfitting and mine Up-rising, and understandest my Thoughts afar
off; til the awful Consideration of thine Omnipresence render me an Israelite
indeed, in whom And, I beseech thee, let these early Manifestations of thy
Divinity so quicken and confirm my Faith in Thee, that Thou may go on to
reward thine own Gifts in Me with greater Graces, til my present Knowledge of
thy sacred Person and saving Office be crowned and completed with that
unspeakabl Privilege reserved for the Sons of God when it does appear what they
shall be, for then we shall see him as he is.

. 4.
When these Good Men had seen and spoken with the Lord, it seems some (if not
all) of them soon after left Him; and tho his first Conference with them laid a
sound foundation of Faith in their Hearts, yet it restrained not their Hands
from returning to their former Occupations:

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, For graciously dispensing with thy Servants Necessities, whereby thou
have given us a satisfactory Intimation, that to believ in Thee as a private
Discipl is not at all inconsistent with the honest prosecution of our Secular
Emploiments; thy Wisdom and Justice having made it our Christian Duty as well as
Liberty to be diligent in the business of our lawful Callings. However, let me
never (I earnestly beseech Thee) yield mine Ear to be bored in the servil
Drudgery of any anxious Cares or useless Vanities of this present World, having
once found Thee whom my Soul loves.

Cap. III. Of his turning Water into Wine. S. Joh. 2. 1, -- 11,

. 1.
THe Mother of Jesus being a Marriage which was in Cana of Galilee, both where
the Lord of Eternal Purity did not only honor the Wedding with his: Sacred
Presence but also supply the Wants of the Nuptial Entertainment with (...) that
and that in a very liberal proportion, far beyond the stint of a niggardly
Spirit, for there were six Waterpots which he caused them to fill up to the and
then bid them draw out thence for the when the Ruler of the Feast had tasted,
he gave the Bride groom this public Commendation, saying unto him, Evry man at
the

I prais and magnify thy N^me,

O Christ, the inexhaustibl Fountain of Goodness, For this Beginning of Miracls
which S. Joh. 2.
thou (...) in Cana of Galilee, wherein Thou have at once so convincingly
manifested forth thy Glory that thy Discipls believed on Thee, and withal set a
Mark of Honor as well on the Married as the Virgin state of Life. I beseech
thee, bless and sanctify all Persons joined in holy Wedlock; visit them with
thy supernatural Grace and Power; turn their Water into Wine; change their
Natural Desires into Divine Affections; exalt their sensual Pleasures into
spiritual Delights; and refine their transitory Enjoiments into an eternal
Inheritance; that by growing up from strength to strength in mutual Lov and
joint Devotion, their last Days may be their best.

. 2.
When the Mother of Jesus couching under that brief Intimation a tacit Request
for the Supply of what they wanted; As if by such a slighting Answer he seemed
to check her pretended Interposition and Authority in the matters of his
Mediatorship, which some blind (...) have since endeavored to persuade the World
is her undoubted Right.

I prais and magnify thy H. Name,

O my sole Mediator and Advocat, For giving us this covert yet very intelligibl
Expression of thy Foresight and Dislike of that idolatrous Copartnership with
the Holy Trinity, whereunto the inordinat Devotion of some Superstitious
Christians has erroneously exalted and inshrined thy Virgin Mother, in these
later and more corrupt Ages of thy Church. Lord, I beseech thee, inlighten my
Soul with such a discreet and true Distinction between the Honor or Respect I
may justly bear to thy Earthly Mother, or any other of thy Saints enrolled in
Heven among the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and that Homage and Adoration
which I am bound to pay unto Thy Self in the Unity of thy Hevenly Father and
the Eternal Spirit; that while I commemorat the Grace Thou have conferred on
Her, whom thy H. Angel has authorized us to call Blessed among Women, I
presume not to rob God of his peculiar Honor, who declares expressly, I will not
giv my Glory unto another. And herein I shall best comply with that Advice which
She her Self gave to the Servants that attended on this Nuptial Solemnity,
Whatsoever he says unto S. Joh. 2. 5.
you, do it: for, thence we may rationaly infer, That our resolved and activ
Obedience to Thy Divine Commands is much more likely to gratify her holy Soul
in Heven, than any irregular Expression of Religious Worship unwarrantably
tendered to her Self on Earth.

Cap. IV. Of His Acts at the first S. Joh. 2. 12, -- 25,
Passover.
. 1.
AFter this he went down to with his Mother, his Brethren and Discipls, but
they continued for the Jews Passover was at hand, and therefore Jesus went up
to where finding those that sold Oxen, and (...), and Dovs, and the Changers of
thence, (...) out the Changers Money, and overthrew their

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Lord of Hosts, thou Mighty God of Sabbath, who, for the more public and
notabl Declaration of thy Power, did signalize the very Commencement of thy
Ministerial Function by purging thy (...) (...) an (...) Authority, from (...)
gross Profanation of those (...) made it an House of (...); which was an Act so
extraordinary (...) occasion to (...) that it was written, The zeal of (...)
House has eaten me up: May all Places religiously set apart for thy Worship be
ever (...) in a venerabl manner, I beseech thee, and in thy Sanctuary let evry
man speak of his Honor that dwells there; that when we (...) upon Thee, O God,
in the midst of thy Templ, our Hearts being (...) from all Sacrilegious
Thoughts of Secular Negotiations, which like a Cage of (...) are apt as well to
(...) as keep a place in thy holy Habitation, the Templ of thy more especial
Presence may be (as it ought) a House of Prayer, not a Den of Thievs.

. 2.
Most H. Jesus, When the S. Joh. 2.
(...), (...) thou (...) these questioned (...) Authority, saying, (...) thou
unto us? Thou (...) briefly make Answer unto them, (...) this Templ, and in

I celebrat thy Sacred Name,

For the hidden Mystery and yet most undoubted Truth couched in this thy
prudent Reply; which became easily intelligibl when thou wast risen from the
Dead, after that both Jew and remembered that Thou had said this unto them,
but they (...) understood that to be spoken of the Templ of Body, which the
(...) misapplied to their material Templ, in the building whereof forty and six
years were elapsed. I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, That the actual
Accomplishment of all thy mysterious yet most infallibl Predictions may so
enlighten the Understanding of thy Discipls in this later Age of thy Church, as
to engage Our Faith with no less efficacy than it did that of thy primitiv
Followers, believed the Scripture and the Word which Jesus had said.

. 3.
O B. Jesus, tho many (...) thy Name, when they saw the Miracls which thou
did in Jerusalem at the (...), in the Feast Day; yet did thou commit thy
Self unto them, because thou knew all Men:

I glorify thy great Name,

For this eminent Expression of the Divinity of the Son of Man, who was so far
abov the necessity of depending or relying on the faithless or feebl Generation
of Adam, that He (...) S. Joh. 2.
not that any should testify of for He knew what was in Man, even while he
vouchsafed to be conversant with them upon Earth in the likeness of Men. I
humbly beseech Thee, O Christ, let the same Spirit which rested upon Thee be my
Comfort and Support, that from (...) I lean not on any Child of Man, for there
is no Hope no Help in them, but fully settl my whole Trust in God, and commit
the Keeping of my Soul to Him in Well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. And
further teach me, by this thine instructiv Exampl, so much discreet Caution,
both in my Dealings with Men, as may prevent the betraying of my Self to their
deceitful Practices, and in my Deportment toward God, as may ever express me
duly sensibl of (...) Omniscience.

Cap. V. Of His Conference with Nicodemus. S. Joh. 3. 1, -- 21.

. I.
WHen a man of the Jesus by night, with a private Acknowledgment of thy Sacred
Mission and unparalled Miracls, which he wanted the Courage to avow in
public, Thou wast gracioufly pleased (without upbraiding either his Infirmity
or Ignorance) to discourse the Mysteries of Regeneration to him in such a new
and unheardof manner as far exceeded the Master of Israel:

I prais thy H. Name,

For all the profound and singular Excellencies of thy hevenly Doctrine, whereby
we know S. Joh. 3. 2;
Thou art a Teacher com from God; and for that convincing Method Thou have made
Use of to confirm it, which was of force enough to make a Ruler of the Jews
confess, No man can do these Miracls that thou do, except God be with him.
Tho the Laws of Nature do not allow a Man to be born when he is yet, by the
Power of thy Grace, let me (I beseech thee) (...) born not of Water only, but
of the Spirit too; that as I am Flesh born of the Flesh, so I may become really
Spirit born of the Spirit, and be thereby qualified both to (...) and to enter
into the Kingdom

. 2.
O most holy and hevenly Doctor, who did represent to Nicodemus the
unaccountabl yet apparent Motions of the H. Ghost in the mysterious
Regeneration evry one that is born of the Spirit, by this apt Similitude, The
wind (...) where it lists, and thou hear the Sound thereof, can not tell
whence it comes and whither it goes; which drew him that was learned in the
Matters of the Law to own his Ignorance in the Method of the Gospel, by (...)
can these things be:

I magnify thy Glorious Name,

For speaking that Thou do have seen, tho we receiv not thy Witness. I
earnestly beseech Thee, O Jesus, how backward soever Thou find us to believ
have told us earthly things, vouchsafe to tell us of hevenly things, and to
exhibit as well the powerful Efficacy of thy whole Doctrine as the indisputabl
Truth of the most abstruse parts of it, help Thou our Unbelief: That,
notwithstanding my inability to satisfy my Self or Others How the Birth from
abov is wrought in my Heart, yet I may palpably evidence to the whole World,
both in Word and Deed, What it is to be a new Creature, and make it appear that
the Spirit of God has breathed upon my Soul, tho I cannot determine the precise
Time nor describe the exact Manner of his graciousOperation.

. (...).
O thou Son of Man which S. Joh. 3.
art in Heven, whither no man thence; who, to convince us that whatever thou
have suffered upon Earth was of thine own voluntary Resolution and Praescience,
did expressly foretell as well the particular Circumstance as the gracious
Design of thy Death, in these As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness,
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever

I prais and magnify thy Name,

Because God so loved the perish, but have everlasting life. I humbly beseech
Thee, O Jesu, God sent not his Son into the World to condemn it, but that the
World throu him might be saved, establish my Soul in this Faith, and qualify me
for that happy End of it by an unblamabl Conversation, that Impiety may not
temt me to Infidelity and Unbelief consign me to Damnation: for, (as thy S.
Joh. 3.
unerring Truth assures us) he that believes not, is condemned the
preposterous Occasion of the Guilt being justly applied to aggravat and
ascertain the Condemnation, That Light is com into the yet Men loved Darkness
rather than Light, because their Deeds were evil; and shuns the Light lest his
Deeds should be reproved; whereas he that does Truth, who rightly believes and
acts according to the Principls of a sound Faith, comes to the Light, his
Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.

Cap. VI. Of His Baptizing in Judea, S. Joh. 3. 22, -- 36.
and the Dispute that arose thereupon between St. John's Discipls and the Jews.
. I.
AFter these things, the H. Jesus and his Discipls came into the Land of Judea,
where he tarried with them baptizing.

Prais thou the Lord, O my Soul,

For perfecting the Design of S. John's Baptism by the succeeding
Administration of Thine, even whilst he was also (...) Giving us thereby a tacit
yet significant Intimation of thy forwardness to prosecute the Work of our
Redemtion, which would rather shorten the Night by the hasty Approach of thy
Day of Grace, than (...) the Rising of the Sun til the Setting of thy
Morning Star, for, (...) was I humbly implore thee, O Christ, let us draw near
unto thy (...) Ordinances with a true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith, having
our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience as well as our Bodies washed with
pure Water: And, Oh! that whole Rivers of Waters might be employed and (...) for
the baptizing great Multitudes of (...) from amongst all Nations, and Kindreds,
and Peepl, and Tongs throu out the World, to accomplish the Number of thine
Elect and hasten thy Kingdom.

. 2.
Upon this Occasion there (...) S. Joh. 3.
a (...) between some of Whereupon thy Servant John gave this further Testimony
(...) Thee, O Jesus, publicly confessing in the audience of the peepl, (...)
your (...) me Witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent
before him. He that has the He that comes from (...) and although He that is of
the Earth is Earthly, and speaks of the Earth, yet He that comes from (...),
what He has seen and heard, that tho no man receiv his Testimony. But he that
which we may boldly rely upon, in regard God gives not the Spirit by measure
unto Him: nay, the Father so loves S. Joh. 3.
the Son that He has given All and resolvs our Fate shall be according to the
Faith we bear Him; for, He that believes on the Son whereas he that believes
not the Son, shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him.

I adore thy Sacred Name,

O thou whom my Soul loves, For the great Understanding this thy Servant had
touching the Knowledge of thine Eternal Godhead, and the whole Mystery of thine
Everlasting Gospel, which he has thus clearly expressed in this his excellent
Sermon left upon Record for my Instruction. Lord, I. beseech Thee, since a Man
can (...) (...) such a measure of thy Spirit, and the Grace he conveys from
(...) into the Hearts of the faithful, possess and affect my Soul, that I, in
Communion with thy Servant John, may likewise rejoice in hearing the
Bride-groom's Voice audibly uttered in His holy Word, and be ravished with
delight in the private Contemplation of the happy Union solemnized between my
Lord Christ and his Spous the Church: So as at last thou may vouchsafe to
admit me into the Fullness of that (...) which does attend the Marriage of the
Lamb, and impart unto me the Interest and Affection of a Friend in the
Consummation of thy Glory, which will qualify me as well to taste of the
Pleasures as congratulat the Perpetuity of thine Eternal Lov.

Cap. VII. S. Mat. 14. 3, -- 5.
On the Imprisonment of S. Mark 6. 17, -- 20.
St. John the Baptist. S. Luke 3. 19, 20

. 1.
O My only-wise God and Savior, who, to render thy Messenger S. John the more
conformabl to the Author and Finisher of that Faith which he was sent to usher
in by his Ministry, did permit Herod the S. Mat. 14.
to lay hold on him, and, S. Mark 6.
having bound him, shut him up S. Luke 3.
in Prison, that he might as well

I prais and magnify thy Name,

For that undaunted Freedom wherewith this thy Servant reproved the Vices of the
Greatest, not fearing to assert the Truth and Obligation of thy holy
Commandments even before Kings; for, John said unto Herod, (...). Mark. 6.
I humbly beseech Thee, O Jesu, let the just Reproofs which thy Ministers
impartially denounce against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, engage
me to unfeigned Repentance in obedience to the Authority of thy H. Word,
instead of provoking me to any impious Design of Revenge in compliance with my
own unhallowed Lusts and Passions: And enabl Them and Me so to follow the
Doctrine and Practice Practice of this first Preacher of the Gospel, that after
his Exampl we may constantly speak the Truth, boldly rebuke Vice, and patiently
suffer for the Truth's sake, whatever Loss either of Life or Liberty ensu
thereupon.

. 2.
O thou Protector of thy Saints, from whose restraining Power it came to pass
that tho (...) had therefore an inward S. Mark 6.
(...) against thy Servant and would have killed him, but she could not:

I bless and prais thy Name,

For those effectual and yet invisibl Means whereby thine Almighty Arm does curb
the Power and check the Projects of the Ungodly and Malicious, who would fain
do mischief to the faithful Witnesses of thy (...) Truth; and in particular,
for that tacit Aw and Reverence which the unreprovabl Life and Doctrine of thy
Holy Ones does inevitably fix upon the minds even of those that hate both their
Persons and Reproofs; for, Herod did not only save but observe him, which he
sufficiently expressed in that he did many things when he (...) him, and heard
him gladly. Lord, accompany the Ministration of thy H. Ordinances with such an
Influence of thy hevenly Grace as may not only win our Liking, but engage our
Lov too, that what we rejoice in for a time we may be delighted with for ever:
And let that Esteem which the unblamabl Deportment of persons eminently
Religious and Exemplary has generally obtained in the World, be a powerful
Encoragement (...) our Imitation of their laudabl Qualities; so that those
things which (...) venerabl, lovly, and of good Report, may engage us to
Virtuous and Godly Practices at least throu the forcibl Bent of our nativ
Inclinations, in case whatsoever things are true, just, and pure, fail of their
du Influence upon the Account of Thy (...) Authority: For, even such as think
not on these things because of any Virtu, yet are commonly rendered more
considerat if there be any Prais.

Cap. VIII. On our Savior's Conference with S. Mat. 4.
the Woman of Samaria. S. Joh. 4. 1, -- 42.

. 1.
NOw when Jesus (...) S. Joh. 4. 3,
heard that John was (...) into prison (...) departed into Galilee; but before
He left Judea, the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized (...) Discipls than He himself (...) not.

I prais and magnify thy Sacred Name,

O my Meek and Prudent Savior, For setting us this instructiv Exampl, which
does at once direct and authorize us to flee from such Dangers as may prove
injurious either to the Body or the Mind. Lord, when Persecution arises, endu
me with the seasonabl Prudence to make a timely Retreat from the impendent
Storm that threatens to invade my Life or Liberty, yet accompanied with an
unmovabl Resolution to part with either, rather than relinquish the Practice of
that Piety which becoms a Christian: for, I may change my Place, tho not my
Principls; nay, a discreet Caution in quitting the one may be a necessary and
succesful means to preserv the other inviolabl; and he that retires from the
insinuating temtations unto Pride or Vainglory, which the getting of a Name in
the (...) is apt to occasion, may well be esteemed a no less pious and
discerning Soul than he that withdraws from the rougher Hardship of a (...),
since this can only confine the Body, whereas that may also contaminat the Mind.

. 2.
The H. Jesus, in his way from Judea into Galilee, comes to a City of Samaria
(which he must (...) go throu) (...) Joh. 4.
called Sychar; and being wearied Noon, he sat on Jacob's Well was there, not
far from the parcel of Ground that the Patriarch gave to his Son Joseph.

I adore and prais thy Name,

O Christ, For submitting to the Toil and Labor of this our Flesh subject to
Weariness, wherein thou have not only conformed to the common Infirmities of a
Man, but even to the very Form of a Servant, walking on (...) from one place to
another, tho evry Beast of the Forest is thine and the Cattl upon a thousand
hills, while the Great Ones of the Earth are carried in state and ease upon
their Chariots or Horses; to assure us that as well by Experience as Compassion
Thou art touched with the Sens of their Wants who have been hungry and thirsty
til their Soul fainted in them. Let me not therefore repine at my scant
Allowance of Outward Conveniences, while my wealthy Neighbor's Cup o'rflows,
and his Tabl is spread with all the gustful Rarities of Art and Nature, but rest
content and thankful under the Dispensations of that Providence which feeds me
with Food convenient for me; remembering that thou O Jesus had occasion a
Woman of Samaria to giv thee Drink, to reliev thy Thirst; thy Discipls being
gone away at the same time unto for the redress of thine Hunger.

. 3.
When she put the Question, How is it that thou being a Jew ask drink of me
who am a woman of Samaria? The B. Jesus answered her, If thou

I glorify thy Name,

O thou inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness, For thus manifesting thy Self
greater than S. Joh. 4.
their (...) Jacob who gave Well to his posterity and drank thereof himself.
Lord, instead of questioning Whence thou have that living Water, as the woman
did, seeing thou had out of that deep Well; let me (I beseech thee) thirst
after and be satiated with that Water which whosoever drinks of shall never
thirst, that I may taste and see how gracious the Lord is in fulfilling that
Request of hers unto my Soul, Sir, giv me this so as to pass this thy Promise
into an experimental Truth, that it shall be in me a (...) of water springing up
into everlasting Life. And, to evidence the Power of thy Grace dwelling in my
heart by Faith, make it issu out thence into such wholesome Streams of universal
Charity as may write a practical Comment on that Text of thine Apostle St.
Paul, There is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond, nor free; but Christ is all and in all; since thou
have broken down the middl Wall of partition between us, having abolished the
Enmity, not only by thy Death but in thy Life; thine Exampl as well as Precept
engaging us to lay aside those distinctions whereby Schism and Faction curtail
our Kindness and hinder our mutual Edification. And tho unnecessary
Conversation with leight or scandaIous persons is to be industriously avoided
and very warily admitted, yet when a just Occasion or accidental Providence
brings a vicious person into my Company, let me rather improv the Opportunity
to reclaim an Offender, than be deterred from using my best endevor to save a
Soul from death, throu the Shame or Fear of being censured a Friend of
Publicans and Sinners, as thou my Lord and Master have often been; who like a
merciful Physician would rather inspect our very Corruptions than neglect the
Cure even of a lascivious Harlot, such as this Samaritan seems to be: for, when
thou did bid her, Go, call thy husband, and she replied, I have no husband;
thou S. Joh. 4.
could tell her, In that thou implying, that in case he were husband to some
other, she lived in Adultery; if not, yet she lived in Fornication with one not
espoused to her self.

. 4.
This particular Discovery of the private Transactions of her own life, made by
one that was wholly a Stranger both to her Country and Person, induced the Woman
to confess unto him, Sir, I perceiv that thou art a Prophet, and on that
consideration, she enters upon the Debate of a public Controversy which had
been so violently maintained between their two Nations, that the Jews would have
no Dealings with the Samaritans; supposing a person so extraordinarily
qualified, very fit to decide the matter in Dispute, Our (...) worshipped in
this Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
worship.

I prais thy Holy Name,

O thou Reconciler of the World, not only For asserting the Truth of the Jewish
Church and the Error of the Samaritan, in this thy positiv Reply, Ye but
likewise, for opening a way unto their Reconciliation, and removing the
Occasion of the Difference, by saying unto the S. Joh. 4.
Woman, Believ me, the hour Lord, since thou have no longer, confined thine
Adorers to attend thy Service in one determinat place, but do will that men
pray evry where lifting up holy hands, I humbly beseech thee, let this our
Christian (...) engage us to the more hearty and sincere Attendance as well on
thy public Ordinances as our private Offices of Religion, remembering that God
is a Spirit,

. 5.
The Woman, being hereby says unto him, I know that Messiah comes which is
called Christ; when He is com, he will tell us all things.

I celebrat thy Gracious Name,

O Jesus, For saying unto her, With what plainness do thou own the truth and
power of that thine Office to this Alien, nay, Enemy, to the Commonwealth of
Israel; which thou did with so much care reserv from the Notice of thine own
Peepl? the Mystery which thou did couch under obscure Parabls and (...)
Sayings in thy many public Sermons to them, thou have clearly unvailed in one
short and plain Expression to this Samaritan. O the depth of the Riches both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchabl are his Judgments, and his Ways
past finding out! My Gracious God, since thou have thus reduced into Practice
what thou had long before professed to thy Servant Moses, I will have Mercy
on whom I will have Mercy, I humbly beseech thee, have Compassion on my Soul, and
vouchsafe to make thy self effectually known unto me, who am wors than a
Samaritan by Nature, a Sinner of the Gentiles in Conversation.

. 6.
As soon as thou, O Christ, had given her this open Evidence and
Acknowledgment of thine Office and Authority; the Woman (as having forgot her
S. Joh. 4.
corporal Necessities, and tasted Sir, giv me this Water that I thirst not,
neither com (...) to draw) left (...) Water-pot and went her way into the City,
and (...) to the Men that-lived in her Neighborhood, Com and see a man which
told me all things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ?

I magnify thy Name,

For the communicativ Virtu of the Christian-Faith, and the gradual Propagation
of thy Gospel thereby: Many of the Samaritans of that City having believed on
Thee, for the Saying of the Woman which testified, He told me all that ever I
did. Let those apparent Notices of thy Will, O my God, which have enlightened
mine Understanding and engaged mine Affections in the Profession of the true
Faith, render me zealous and succesful in publishing those sacred Truths whereof
I my self am convinced, that I may become an happy and industrious Instrument to
promote thy Glory and the Good of others, whether they be my Brethren and
Neighbors in the flesh, or not; since throu him who came and preached peace to
us which were afar off, as well as to them that were nigh, we are no more
Strangers and Foreiners, but are made capabl of becoming fellow Citizens with
the Saints and of the hous-hold of God, by being built upon the foundation of
the Apostls and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.

. 7.
In the mean while, his Discipls, S. Joh. 4.
who were newly returned and marvelled that He talked with the Woman, prayed
him saying, Master, eat: But he said unto

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Jesus, Because, (whereas thy Discipls were apt to mistake thy words in a
carnal sense, as appears by their questioning one another, Has any man brought
him ought to eat?) thou have fully explained the spiritual Meaning thereof by
this thy gracious Declaration, My Meat is to do the Will of him O hevenly
Father, create in me (I beseech thee) the same Mind which was in thy Son Christ
Jesus; that I also may prefer doing good in my Generation before my necessary
Food, and esteem the Performance of those things which are agreeabl to the Will
of thy Holiness my chief Repast and Satisfaction; such Acts of Obedience and
Charity being capabl to (...) my Soul unto Everlasting Life; while the daily
Bread which my Body stands in need of does perish in the using.

. 8.
O Lord of the Univers, All the Nations of the Earth are thy Fields, whereon
thou requirest thine Apostls and Ministers to lift up their Eyes and lock; and
they are white already to Hatvest;

I giv Thee Thanks and Prais,

Because he that reapeth, (...) Wages and gathers S. Joh. 4.
Fruit unto Life Eternal. As thy Barn: And let the hopes of such desirable
Wages engage my utmost Industry to further the Welfare of Souls, for which we,
upon whom the Ends of the World are com, have abundant Encoragement; for, other
men labored, whatsoever Christ our Lord and his H. Apostls have don or suffered
for the Promulgation of the Gospel, redounding to our Advantage and
Instruction, be it improvabl either to our own Soul's health or to make us
Instrumental for the Salvation of others: So that in us that provs true, One
(...) and another reapeth; and the Benefit is so equally conveyed throu out all
the Members of Christ's Body the Church in all Ages, That both he that S. Joh.
4.
sows and he that reapeth may

. 9.
When the Samaritans went upon their Request that he would tarry with them,

I adore thy saving Name,

O Jesus, For this thy gracious Condescension and the powerful Effect of thy
Presence among them, many mo having believed because of thy Word; who said unto
the Woman, Now Tho thy Spous, O Christ, which is the Church of the Living God,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth, by the Catholic Profession of thy Gospel givs
so rational an Invitation to the Apostat World as is persuasiv enough to win
many Proselyts to enter into the Communion of Saints upon a general Conviction;
yet when, throu the personal Experiment and Participation of thy Saving
Ordinances, they are once enl ghtned and have tasted of the hevenly Gift, the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to com, they no longer rely upon
the bare Credit of thy Church, but are established in the Faith by the full
persuasion of their own Conscience. Let me not therefore at any time content my
self with hearing the Operations of thy Grace or the Demonstration of thy Power
reported at second hand, but make my personal Address to the Ministry of thy
Word and Sacraments, that having heard Thee my self, my Soul also may know
experimentally, that Thou art indeed The CHRIST, the Savior of the World.

Cap. IX. Of His Departure into Galilee, S. Joh. 4. 43, -- 46,
and his Reception there.
. 1.
NOw after two days he not directly unto his own City Nazareth; for, Jesus
himself testified, but He came again into Cana had made the Water Wine.

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O my Gracious Redeemer, for this prudential Dispensation of thy Ministry, not
brooking to mis-spend thy Doctrine and Miracls upon such as would render them
useless by their Neglect or Dis-esteem; but directing the Labors of thy Lov to
those who, by having du Regard thereunto, were most likely to reverence thy
Person and reap the intended Benefit of thy mavelous Works: for, when com
into Galilee, the Galileans of those parts received thee, having seen all the
things that thou had don at Jerusalem, for they also were there at the Feast.
Lord, let not any prejudice of Familiarity, which commonly breeds Contemt; or
Envy, which unreasonably surmiseth the Advancement of our Equals or
Acquaintance insupportabl; or foolish Custom, which is apt to set an higher
valu upon any foreign unknown Commodity than on the more useful Product of our
own Growth and Neighborhood; hinder my paying the du Respect or making a
religious Improvement of those Gifts and Graces wherewith thou shall think fit
to qualify any of my Countrymen or fellow-Citizens to do good in his
Generation. And render (I beseech thee) the manifest Evidences of thy Grace no
less effectual at this day to creat in me that Esteem and Reverence which is du
to Thee in thy Members, than the supernatural Operations of thy Power,
exhibited before their Eyes in former times, were available to prepare a way for
thine honorabl Reception among the Galileans; that receiving those who bear
thine Image, as well with a glad Heart as a cheerful Aspect, thou may think or
make me worthy of thy beatifick Presence for ever.

Cap. X. Of His Healing the Son of S. Joh. 4. 46, -- 54.
a certain Nobl-man.
. 1.
WHen a certain Noblman, the point of Death. Then said Jesus unto him, Except
ye see wherein He did only delay, not deny, the desired Answer to his Request
reflecting on the gross Infidelity of his Countrymen together with the great
End for which his Miracls were wrought; for, as soon as the Nobl man repeated
his S. Joh. 4.
Petition in these Terms, Sir, the Holy Jesus made him this gracious Go thy
way, thy Son (...).

I prais thy Sacred Name.

Because the man believed the word that thou, O Jesus, had spoken unto him,
whereof he gav an evident Demonstration in that he went his way, as fully
satisfied and contented in the Assurance of thy Goodness and Power. Let not (I
beseech thee) the transitory Affairs of this decaying Body take up all my
Thoughts, but make me deeply affected with the future State and Eternal
Concernments of my diseased Soul: I confess my Hope is weak, my Charity faint
and heartless, and my Faith welnigh dead, without those Works by which it
should be made perfect. Lord, com down and heal my spiritual Infirmities; say
unto me, Thy Soul lives, with that Word of Power which is abl to revive all
its faculties to their du Use and Vigor. And, tho thou defer to grant the
Request of my Lips, yet will I (...) make my Prayer unto Thee, and will look up,
until thou have Mercy upon me.

. 2.
His Servants that met him having told him, Thy (...) lives; hr

I prais and magnify thy Name,

O Christ, For this exact Notice of the punctual Execution of thine Almighty
Word, and for the saving (...) of this (...), 4.
(...) that thou did in (...) as well upon the Minds of the Sound as the Body
of the Sick. Lord, let evry Act of Power or Goodness signalized in thy
Providence, and each Expression of the good Pleasure of thy Will signified in
the Word of thy Grace, have the same Effect upon Me which this had upon the
Father of the Child thus supernaturally recovered, who himself believed, and
brought his whole House unto the Obedience of Faith; that not only the Hot-fitts
of my irregular Passions may be quenched or prevented, but my personal
Convictions may likewise become so exemplary and persuasiv to all my Relations
as to render old Joshua's pious Resolution both our Practice and Privilege, As
for Me and my house we will serve the Lord.

The End of the Second (...)
Books lately Printed for and Sold by W. Crook.
1. THe Protestant Religion the safe way to Salvation, together with the
Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. As also Nine Sermons on special
Occasions, By William Chillingworth, M. A. Oxford, the Fifth Edition: To which
is added, Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against Popery, (...). 2. A Discourse
about Conscience, relating to the present Differences among us in opposition to
both (...) of Popery and Fanaticism in Quarto, price 6 d. 3. An Introduction to
the Sacrament, or a Plain and Safe way to the Holy Communion Table, being an
Instruction for the worthy receiving the Lord's Supper; Collected for, and
familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant, By L. Addison, D. D. Dean
of Lichfield, and Archdeacon of Coventry. (...) Twelves in a great Print, 1 s.
Bound plain. In 24o fitted for the Pocket, 6 d. bound Plain, and 1 s. gilt on
the back; many Ministers buy Dozens of this small Book to distribute to their
Parishioners. 4. Two Sermons of Mr. Maningham's; The one before the Lord Mayor
of London, the other at St. Marie's in Oxford before the University, Quarto. 5.
Two Sermons of G. Hascard D. D. and Dean of Windsor, the one Preached on the
Fifth of November, the other before the Lord Mayor of London, Quarto. 6. The
Complete Solicitor, Entring-Clerk and Attorney, fully instructed in the
Practice, Methods and Clerkship of all His Majesty's Courts of Equity and
CommonLaw, Superior and Inferior as well those at Westminster and in the City
of London, as elsewhere throughout the Kingdom of England, Octavo, price bound
3 s. 6 d. 7. Compendium Geographicum, or a more exact plain and easy
Introduction into all Geography than yet extant, after the latest Discoveries
and new Alterations, with two Alphabets of Ancient and Modern places, By P.
Chamberlayn, price bound 1 s. 8. The Present State of the Jews, wherein is
contained an exact Account of their Customs, Secular and Religious, etc. By L.
Addison, D. D. Dean of Lichfield, and Archdeacon of Coventry, Twelves, price
bound 1 s. 6 d. 9. French Intriques, or the History of their Delusory Promises,
since the Pyrenean Treaty, Printed in French at Cologn, and now put into
English, price bound 1 s. 10. The first Estate of (...), showing all the
Designs that Impostor had to carry on and settle the Turkish Religion, Written
by L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Lichfield and Archdeacon of Coventry, Octavo. 11.
The Works of Homer, viz his Odysses and Illiads, with his Life, (...) into
English by T. Hobbes, in Twelves, price bound (...) s. 12. The Court of
Curiosity, being the most curious Fortune Book ever extant, answering more than
double the Questions, and with more exactness than any other Fortune Book. With
the learned, best and most methodical Interpretation of Dreams that is in
English: The third Edition, much Explained and (...), especially in the Fortune
Book, Octavo, price bound 1 s. 6 d. 13. The Flower-Garden and Complete Vinyard
together, by W. Hughes, Twelves, price 1 s. 6. d. 14. Moral Instruction of a
Father to his Son upon his Departure for a long Voyage, etc. Octavo. 15. The
London Practice of Physic, containing the whole Practical Part of Dr. Willis
his Works in English, price bound 6 s. 16. The Grecian Story, being an
Historical Poem in Five Books, Quarto. 17. The Odes of Horace in Five Books,
Englished by J. H. Esquire 18. The Bucaniers of America, the Second Volume,
containing their dangerous and bold Assaults in the years 1680 and 1681. --
Printing.

