TREASON DISCOVERED FROM HOLLAND OR, A Discovery, of a most damnable and
divellish attempt of two Jesuits, and three other Catholics, against the
life and person of the LADY ELISABETH. WITH, The manner and means of their
prevention; as also, the names of the Jesuits, and the rest of the
Conspirators.

LIKEWISE, A true report of the mercy of God, showed in the most unexpected
Deliverance of the City of Cork in Ireland, from a most terrible Famine: Which
report was brought over by one Mr. Wilson, who did suffer in that extremity,
and was a witness of that great Deliverance.

LONDON. Printed for I. Tompson. 1642.

NEWS from HOLLAND.
THe malignant disposition of some ill affected persons to the Common wealth,
like some Diseases in man's body, which by a kind familiarity, and consent with
nature, fasten and get the possession of the body, and by degrees does subvert
and ruin the whole structure in man. None are of a more dangerous nature then
those which seem to comply with our constitution, and which by a pleasing
sympathy work themselves into custom and consent. Of our enemies, the Civil
enemy is most dangerous, and as his practice has the least suspicion, so have
they the most danger, by this means working his designs from all means of
prevention. Since the last desire sent over unto the Lady Elizabeth, for the
prevention of the access unto the Queens Majesty, of all such persons, which
may be by any means suspected to be evil Counselors, and advisers unto her
Royal Person, and thereby strive to divert the good opinion of the proceedings
of this Kingdom; whereby much danger and hazard has accrued unto this
Kingdom: Religion has bin in its power perverted, the passage of the Gospel
much hindered, the Laws of the Kingdom in many points subverted, the execution
of justice upon many Malefactors prohibited, and the small peace of this Realm
drawn into many most strange distractions and distempers, and His Majesty's
good opinion of his most Loyal Subjects good intentions has bin much abused;
so that the proceedings concerning the affairs of this Realm have taken very
small or none effect. The Catholic Faction, perceiving their malicious
practices to be hindered, did well hope that now her Maesty being in those
remote Parts, that they might have the more real access unto her privacy, and
by that means, the better opportunity to execute their divellish counsels, and
malicious intentions, have often attempted their access unto her Majesty: but
by the care and vigilance of that most religious and virtuous Princess,
complying with the desires of this Realm now to be hindered, have endeavored by
most execrable, and irreligious attempts to remove all obstacles, which they
apprehend, did hinder the prosecution and execution of their wills and desires.

Whereupon, upon the 5. of March last, two Priests, and some others of that
Hellish Confederacy, having often attempted access unto her Maj. (without
question, their aim not being ingenuous, or faithful) but being often
prevented, now did begin to express their venom, in the removal of all
hindrances that did retain and hinder their ayms, and came unto the Princess
Court, now being at the Hague, their persons were veiled in a strange disguise,
and their pretense was to prefer a Petition unto her Highness, concerning the
distresses of themselves, and their Families, which they have suffered by the
long and tedious wars in those parts; and for which they did supplicate unto
Her Highness for some relief. Thus no Cheat never wants a fair dissimulation,
to cloak and cover their base intentions, and Vice as yet could never want any
excuse for its deformity.

Being thus come to the Court, without a very tedious stay, her goodness not
being jealous of any evil intentions, as virtue is not suspicious; gave them
admittance unto her person, after which admittance they delivered unto her
hands and consideration a Paper, which while her Grace was perusing one of the
disguised persons, drew forth from under his Coat a Pistol, charged with a
brace of ballets, and with the cock drawn up, and withal endeavored to
discharge it: but by the mercy of God who does still preserve his elected, and
does bring to naught the naughty counsels, and attempts of the wicked; the
Pistol would not go off, another of the Conspiracy drew out a Poniard, and
when he saw that, the Pistol did not perform what they intended, with the
Poniard he offered to finish, what the Pistol did not execute; but Her
Highness did escape away into her private Chamber, and so by the mercy of Her
Creator, and Her flight escaped the intended danger and destruction.

Immediately, being forced in by Her Highness cries, for which there was just
occasion many of her Attendants, who waited not far off, issued in, and did lay
hands upon those base and Traiterous villainy, and incontinently conveyed them
away into safe Custody, which were the next day put upon the Rack, and enforced
to confess as follows. That they having oftentimes essayed their access
unto the Qs. Majesty, for what end they would not confess, and being by the
strict Guard always kept about her Majesty, prohibited and forbidden, that
they now made this attempt upon her sacred Person, supposing by her Removal to
accomplish their ends, and one of them Tho. Earnie did make confession, that he
was sorry he did miss his opportunity, and wished a Curse upon himself, for
failing in his enterprise. This was the sum that they would at the first
confess, and so for that present they were released from the wrack, and
committed unto the prison again, where now they remain in the Dungeon, and will
ere long, be called again into a second Confession, where until then, let them
rest, until that Justice shall further determine of them. I thought it also
fit for the satisfaction of the Reader, and the credit of the Relation, to set
down the Names of these Traitors, which might otherwise neither gain belief,
nor give the Buyer any content.

The Names of the two Jesuits, were John Brown, Anthony Tailor, both
Englishmen, and born in Derbyshire, by their own Confession.

The Names of the other three, were, Patrick Orny an Irish man, Jews Antony,
an Italian, and Tho. Earny an Italian also, who have discontinued their
Country, and lived in Holland this eight years, during the time of those wars.

A true Report of the mercy of God, showed in the most unexpected Deliverance
of the City of Cork in Ireland, from a most terrible famine: Which report was
made by one Mr. Wilson, who did suffer in that extremity; and was an eye
witness of that great deliverance.
FOr although the Calamity of Ireland has been very great, yet still in their
greatest extremity, the Relieving power of the Almighty has not been
deficient in their utmost extremity. The City of Cork of late, was much
vexed, and grieved with a most terrible and sharp famine, wherein was such a
violent dearth, and scarcity of all provision necessary for their sustenance,
that the poor distressed inhabitants within the limits of that City, were
constrained (for their daily preservation) to eat and devour their horseflesh,
and so by the extremity of that necessity, those beasts which they did keep
and preserve for their defense against the persecution of their enemy, they
were enforced to make use of, for their sustenance, a pound whereof was sold
within the walls of that City, for six pence. You may by this, without any
further addition, imagine their extremity, but now in this their greatest
necessity, the Lord did make his power appear unto them, and being in a most
desperate case, they found the power of God to be beyond the conceit of
apprehension of man's expectation. Being thus encompassed by two great
extremities (...) violence of the enemy, and the famine within themselv^^ by
the general consent of the High powers within the C^^tie, it was determined to
send forth three hundred and fift^ soldiers out of that City, which should
give the Enem^^ Battle, who lay not then above half a league from the City,
whose forces were not of strength and number above five hundred. According to
the Order of the Magistrate, the distressed souls issued forth of the City,
under the command of Sergeant Major Rawlins, and being resolved rather to die
with honor and glory, then to be starved up by the insolence of their
insulting enemy; gave them so fierce and violent an encounter, that what by
reason of the unexpected onset, and their disordered troops, they slew, on a
sudden, of the Rebels, eightscore; and did enforce Captain Blunt their
Ringleader, to save himself by flight, not daring to stand the prosecution of
the skirmish: and so by this means, they took and drove away at the least two
hundred Cartle whereby the City was relieved, and delivered from the extremity
of the famine, which did so much hazard the lives of many poor Protestants, and
the liberty and continuance of that City.

FINIS.

