A SERMON CONCERNING VOCAL and INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC In the CHURCH.

As it was Delivered in the Parish Church of St. Andrew Undershaft, UPON The
31th of May, 1696, being Whit-Sunday, and the Day wherein the ORGAN there
Erected was First made Use of.

By GABRIEL TOWERSON, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aymer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, MDCXCVI.

A SERMON CONCERNING VOCAL and INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC In the CHURCH.
EPHESIANS. 5. part of the 18th and 19th Verse. -- But be filled with the Spirit;
Speaking to your selves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, and
making melody in your heart to the Lord.

The whole Period runs thus, And be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but
be filled with the Spirit; Speaking to your selves in psalms, and hymns, etc.


THE Purpose of the ensuing Discourse is to satisfy the double business of
this day; That which prompts you to reflect upon the Graces of that Spirit,
which did as this day descend upon the Church; And that which prompts you to
commemorate that, and all other the Blessings of God to it with Psalms, and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: Whether they be such as mount up to Heaven on the
alone wings of their own breath; Or whether they be such as are also advantaged
in their ascent thither by the breath of Musical Instruments, and both
conducted, and pushed on by it. And may that Spirit, by which these, and all
other Religious Actions ought to be directed, so assist me in the handling of
the Exhortations that are now before me, that I may both my self apprehend, and
set before you the due importance of each of them, and approve them both to
your Reason, and Affections. In order whereunto,

I. I will begin with that, which suggests our being filled with the Spirit,
and accordingly enquire, 1. What St. Paul means by being filled with the
Spirit. 2. For what end we are to endeavor after it. 3. By what means we may
come to be filled with it. 4. Of what use our being so filled is.


1. What St. Paul means in the general by being filled with the Spirit, will
not be difficult for him to learn who shall consider what that Spirit is, which
he, and indeed all Christian Writers commend to our desires, and endeavors, or
who they are whom St. Paul invites to get themselves replenished with it.
Because it is certain on the one hand that the only Spirit, which either he, or
they commend to us, is that Spirit of God which did as this day descend upon
the Church, or rather the Gifts, and Graces of it; And no less certain on the
other (because St. Paul directs this Exhortation of his to the Community of the
Ephesians) that he meant such Gifts, or Graces of that Spirit, as are common to
all Believers, or at least intended by God to be so.

2. But because it is certain that even those Gifts, or Graces of the Spirit
are many, and various, and no necessity lies upon us to understand St. Paul of
all alike, but rather the contrary, as will appear by and by from what
precedes, and follows his Exhortation to be filled with them; Therefore it will
be necessary for me to go on to enquire for what end he exhorts us to endeavor
after such a filling, as which alone will give us to understand what Gifts, and
Graces he especially intended.

Now that I shall not doubt to affirm, to be the either exciting, or
maintaining in us the Passion of Joy. A Passion, which Religion does not only
not forbid, but enjoin upon us, and commend to us; As without which Religion it
self would be very uneasy to us, but however we should not be able to bear up
under those many evils, which either Religion it self, or the present
Dispensations of the Divine Providence will be sure to bring upon us. Now as
for that Reason it is that Religion it self does so often endeavor to stir up
this Passion of Joy in us, and indeed never professes any the least enmity to
it, save where it is either misplaced, or immoderate; so we shall find, if we
look into the Context, that it is St. Paul's great design in this place to stir
up, and keep alive in us this Passion of Joy, and make it acceptable to God, as
well as beneficial to our selves. For wherefore else should St. Paul exhort,
that Men should rather be filled with the Spirit, than drunk with Wine, as that
too in order to their Singing, and making Melody? But that he meant to direct
them to a proper means for the exciting of their Joy, and such as should give
them a much more innocent, as well as more excellent one, than the Wine of the
Drunkard does to him. Or wherefore insist, as he does, upon their speaking to
one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing, and making
Melody in their Heart to the Lord? These, as they are the Natural Expressions
of Joy, and accordingly directed to by St. James Jam. 5.13.
, when a Man is under the sensation of it; so the fomenters, and maintainers of
it, that I say not also of the well-being of him in whom it is. St Paul saw how
necessary the Passion of Joy was to support the Spirits even of Christian Men;
But especially when they are also taken off from the common incentives to it in
Mankind, from the indulging of Lustful Practices, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
or as loose Discourses. He alike saw how necessary it sometime was, even where
there wanted not proper incentives to that Passion, to make use of other means
to raise the dull spirits of Men, and put them into a condition even to enjoy
their own Happiness: Those, who live more at ease than the Christian does,
making use of brisk Wine to raise their Spirits, and furnish them with that
pleasing emotion, which all their other acquisitions cannot give them. That
therefore those, with whom he had to do, and who by means of their own sense of
Sin, or Calamity, had much more need of it, might not want such an excitation;
He exhorts them, instead of filling themselves with Wine (which would give them
but a fading, as well as superficial Joy) to fill themselves with Gods Spirit,
and particularly with such Graces of it as might be thought most to minister to
it, as well as afterward to keep it alive, and increase it with Psalms, and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.

Which supposed, the Graces, wherewith St. Paul exhorts that we should
especially fill our selves, will be found to be a grateful sense of Gods
goodness and beneficence; a steadfast belief of his promises; but especially of
those which relate to the Happinesses and Glories of the other World; and what
will not fail to follow from the former if they be well improved in our
Thoughts, and Meditations, an ardent love, and affection for himself. For if
our Souls be filled with these, they cannot want a Joy as great, as they
themselves are able to contain, and such as no present Evils, how great soever,
can ever ravish from us: The Passion of Joy, though for the most part arising
from a present Good, yet arising no less from such a one as is present to us by
Faith, provided that that Faith be firm, and steadfast, and we find that in us
which may as certainly entitle us to the object of it. The former whereof he
cannot want, who has a due sense of Gods Truth, as well as Goodness; no more
than he can be without the latter, who finds in himself an ardent Love for God,
because the whole both of the Law, and the Gospel.

3. That therefore being the due sense, and meaning of being filled with the
Spirit, and the Passion of Joy the end for which we are exhorted to get our
selves so filled; Enquire we in the Third place by what means we may come to be
filled with it; which, as it is a much more important enquiry, so may seem also
of more difficult resolution. Because that, no doubt, depends more upon the
good pleasure of the filler, than it does upon any thing that we can do toward
the attaining of it. But as if we be well assured of the good Will of him that
is to fill us, as well as of his calling upon us to get our selves filled with
it, we cannot doubt of his chalking out ways, whereby we may come to be filled
with it; so we shall find, if we consult the Scripture, or our own Reason, what
those ways, and means are, because directed to either by the one, or the
other. Of which,

(1.) The first, and, no doubt, most especial one is to invite that Spirit into
us by Prayer, and beg of God to fill us with the Graces of it; because expressly
recommended to us as a means to attain it, yea assured of obtaining it from
him. For after our Savior had set before his Disciples the general efficacy of
Prayer, and confirmed it from the disposition of Earthly Parents to gratify
their Children in all those good things, which they may be supposed to ask of
them; He not only infers from it the greater likelihood of Gods gratifying the
Requests of his Children in all their Reasonable Demands, and particularly as
to what they make of his Holy Spirit, but represents it as a thing
inconceivable how God should deny that Spirit to them. For if ye (says he Luke
11.13.
) being evil, are not yet so evil as to deny good Gifts to your Children; how
much less shall your Heavenly Father deny the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.

(2.) I look upon as no less sure a mean, though not so particularly directed,
your cherishing that Spirit when you have it in any measure (as to be sure all
Believers have) by attending to the Motions of it, and readily complying with
them, in all those things to which they shall incline you: Such an attention
and compliance naturally disposing a Benign Being not only to continue his
Graces to you, but to give you more and more instances thereof, as knowing that
what he shall farther vouchsafe you, shall be as kindly received and complied
with, as what he has already afforded to you. Which supposed, it will not be
difficult to show, which is all that will be farther necessary on this Head,
how you may come to be filled with those particular Graces, which I have said
St. Paul to refer more especially to, when he exhorts to be filled with the
Spirit: For then may you expect to be filled with a grateful sense of Gods
Goodness, a firm belief of his Promises, and as ardent a love for himself, when
you not only endeavor to cherish them by a due consideration of the excellency
thereof, but set your selves to the doing of all those things, which such a
sense, and belief, and love will prompt you to the performance of; because that
is all, beside Prayer, which can be supposed to be required of you to invite
God to fill you with them.

4. The Fourth and last thing comes now to be spoken to, even of what use our
being filled with the Spirit is, and particularly as to that Joy, for which I
have said it to be designed. Which we shall find upon examination to be, to
direct our Joy in an especial manner to Spiritual Objects, to moderate it as to
Earthly, and Sensual ones, and both keep it up, and express it, if not by means
purely Spiritual, yet by such as are principally and especially such.

For whereas he, that is inspired with Wine, will by that very Wine of his be
prompted to place his Joy on Sensual Objects, if not also on forbidden ones;
He, who is filled with the Spirit of God, and particularly with those Graces of
it which I before described, will by that very Spirit be directed especially to
fix his Joy upon God, and the things of God, to delight in his Commands, and to
aspire after his Favors. In fine, to set as high a value upon them, as the Men
of the World do upon their most pleasing Enjoyments, yea to suffer the want of
all Sensual Enjoyments, rather than run the hazard of more Spiritual and
refined ones.

Whereas again he, who is inspired with Wine, will by that very Wine of his be
tempted to an immoderate Joy in Earthly and Sensual Things, and such a one, as
shall not only prompt him to forget that God, who is the giver of them, but
abuse them also to his dishonor; He, who is filled with the Spirit of God,
will by that very Spirit of his be prompted to enjoy them with Moderation,
because no way comparable to those Spiritual Enjoyments, which he himself
suggests, and much less to those Blessed and Heavenly ones, which he assures us
of in another World.

Whereas lastly he, who is inspired with Wine, will by that very Wine of his be
prompted to keep up, and express his Joy by Extravagant Actions, or Lewd Songs,
and such as tend rather to corrupt his own, and other Men's Minds, than either
to refresh, or improve them; He, who is filled with the Spirit of God, and
particularly with a grateful sense of his immense Goodness, a steadfast belief
of his Heavenly Promises, and a no less ardent love and affection for him, will
be thereby prompted to keep up, and express his Joy by Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, by such as will put new Life into his Devotion, as well as
show it forth, and put new Life into other Men's Devotions, as well as into his
own. The Second General to be spoken to, and equally enjoined with the former:
He, who (as you have heard) exhorts Men to be filled with the Spirit, exhorting
them in like manner to speak to themselves, or rather to one another in Psalms,
and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing, and making melody in their Heart to
the Lord.

II. In the handling of which Second Exhortation, I will proceed in this
Method; 1. I will enquire what the Apostle meant by Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs. 2. What he meant by speaking to themselves, as our Translation
here renders it. 3. What he meant by singing, and making melody in their Heart
to the Lord. 4. Of what use such a Singing, and making Melody is, and
particularly in the present case. 5. What is to be thought of that Singing, and
making Melody, which is attended with Musical Instruments.


1. That, which is first to be inquired into, with respect to the present
Exhortation, is what St. Paul meant by Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs;
That is to say, whether he meant so many different sorts of Songs; and, if he
did so, what those sorts of Songs are. I must needs say, that I cannot think
St. Paul made use of so many words to express one, and the same thing: And I
think as little that he was so curious, as other Men think he was, in
distinguishing them. For which last cause I must alike say, that Beza's Annot.
in Col. 3.16.
distinction of them seems to me to be more nice, than well grounded, when he
makes St. Paul to understand by Psalms all sorts of Songs, whatsoever their
Argument be, as it is certain those of David were of many; By Hymns, Songs of
Praise; and by (...), or Spiritual Songs, such as were of a more Artificial
Composition. For beside that it is plain from the Argument, that I am now upon,
that our Apostle is here entreating of the matter of Joy, and no other Songs
therefore to be here understood but Songs of Praise, or such as have an
affinity with them: I do not see why Hymns, as well as Odes, may not pass for
Songs of an Artificial Composition, and Odes therefore, no more than Hymns, to
appropriate that Notion to themselves. I rather think that when St. Paul
exhorted these Men to speak to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Odes, or Songs, his meaning was that they should speak to one another, and to
God either in such Songs as were taken out of the Scripture, and particularly
out of the Book of Psalms, or in such Songs as were of their own, or other
Private Men's Composition, by what Names soever known, or distinguished, and
particularly by those of Hymns, and Odes. According to that known distinction
of Tertullian Apolog. cap. 39.
, where he speaks of the usual Singing in the Ancient Church; To wit, that as
any Man was able to sing either out of the Holy Scriptures, or of his own
Composition, he was invited into the midst of their Assembly to do it to
entertain the rest, or rather to be their Praecontor unto God. And indeed than
this sort of Singing there is nothing more known in the Church, even from the
very beginning of it. For there is mention in that so well known Epistle of
Pliny Lib. 10. ep. 97.
to Trajan of their Singing upon the day of their Assemblies a Song, or Hymn to
Christ as God: As in like manner elsewhere Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 28.
of other the like Hymns which were framed by the Brethren from the beginning,
and from which Paulus Samosatenus Eusebius. ibid. lib. 7. c. 30.
took occasion to introduce others of his own Composition, but which were more
in honor of himself, than of Christ.

2. But to go on to that, which is next in order, even what St. Paul meant by
speaking to themselves in them, according as our Translation has rendered it;
but which ought rather to have been rendered among themselves, or to one
another: That being not only the signification of the word (...) in several
other places of Scripture, and particularly, Ephesians. 4.31. but more agreeable too
to the design of all Public Devotions, which though not without an eye to the
Private Benefit of every one that uses them, yet are more especially intended
for a mutual stirring up one another to that Spirit, wherewith the whole ought
to be attended: According to that parallel place of St. Paul to the Colossians
Col. 3.16.
, and where though the same Greek (...) is used, yet it is rendered even by our
selves teaching, and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in their Hearts to the Lord. And stands
farther confirmed by that as known place of the Author to the Hebrews Heb.
10.25.
, where he dehorts from the forsaking of their common Assemblies; because
opposing to it on the one hand their considering one another, and provoking
unto Love, and to good Works, as on the other, the Exhorting of one another.
Both the one, and the other of which show what is the principal end of
Christian Assemblies, or rather that Men's inciting one another to a kind of
Contention in Devotion is.

3. Which supposed, we may proceed to enquire what is in like manner meant by
Singing; and making Melody in the Heart to the Lord. A thing not difficult for
those to guess at, who shall but remember that St. Paul does not only invite
Men upon this occasion to Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, both here,
and in the forequoted place to the Colossians, but in this place to speak among
themselves; or rather to one another in them, and in the other to teach, and
admonish one another by them. For that is enough to show, that by Singing, and
making Melody in the Heart, cannot be meant a mere internal praising of God,
because that is a sort of Melody, which can be heard by none but God, and
cannot therefore be supposed to have an influence upon any other; But either
(as Chrysostom In locum. (...).
has well glossed it) causing the attention of the Mind to go along with the
Voice, or both that, and the Affection to accompany it. As without which Men
will have no more share in the Praises of God, than those Musical Instruments,
which attend their Singing or at best sing rather to themselves, than unto God.
And indeed were it not for a certain peevishness of Mind, or rather a
resolution in some Persons to go cross to all that went before them; such
Expressions as Singing, and making Melody in the Heart could not ever be looked
upon as in the least excluding the Melody of the Voice, but rather as
supposing, or connoting it. I say not only, because that is the known and usual
sense of the words, that are made use of to express it; But because we learn
from St. James James 3.9.
, that the Tongue was made to bless God, as well as the Heart; and from St.
Paul Romans 10.10.
, that as with the heart men believe unto righteousness, so with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. And how much it may contribute both to the
one and the other, will appear if we consider,

4. Of what use such a Singing, and making Melody may be, and particularly a,
to the matter of Joy, the next thing to be inquired into.

Now that we shall find to be, 1. First, Its composing the disorderly Passions
of the Mind, and bringing it to a serene and sedate Temper. 2. Secondly, Its
stirring up, and improving, and directing its more regular ones. 3. Thirdly,
Its prompting the Mind to reflect with so much the more pleasure on that which
is the subject matter of it.


The Learned Author of the Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxos Apud. Justin
Martyr q. 107.
, has this Question among many others; Why, when Songs were invented by
Infidels to deceive, and were brought in upon those that were under the Law by
means of the weakness of their Minds, they, who have received the perfect
discipline of Grace, and such as is far removed from the manners of the other,
should yet make use of the same Songs in the Church? I meddle not at present
with that part of his Answer to it, which concerns Instrumental Music, because
I shall by and by have a fairer Occasion to consider it. But I cannot forbear
to take Notice of that which concerns Vocal, because it gives such an
Advantageous Character of it. For not only does he deny that sort of Music to
be a thing adapted only to weak, and tender Minds, but affirms moreover, That
it draws the Mind, not without some pleasure to the desire of that, which is
the Argument thereof; That it lays asleep such of the Passions, as rise up
against us from our own Fleshly Nature, and repels those Evil Thoughts, that
are injected into us by our invisible Enemies; That it prepares our Soul, as by
a kind of watering, for the bringing forth of Divine Fruits; That it makes the
Champions of Piety to bear up stoutly under their several pressures, and is a
cure of all those afflictive Evils, that may happen to them in the present
Life: In fine, That it is a driver away of Devils, and perfects the Soul in all
those Virtues, which true Piety suggests. Which several Properties of it I
shall take Notice of, as they shall fall in with those Uses, of which I but now
said this Singing and making Melody to be.

1. To begin with that, which is first in order, even its composing the
disorderly Passions of the Mind, and bringing it to a serene and sedate Temper.
A thing not to be doubted of by those who shall consider, that it does by the I
leisure, and even Surprise, which it gives to the Mind of him that hears it,
fix his Spirits, and stops them from running out into those extravagant
courses, which a disorderly Passion puts them in. But how much less to be
doubted, when we find by the Scriptures, that it was also the effect of
Instrumental Music, and which, because wanting that sweet and engaging Sense
which belongs to Songs, must be supposed to be farther removed from it. For
thus it appears from the 16th Chapter of the First Book of Samuel, that when an
Evil Spirit from the Lord came upon Saul (which the Jewish Writers, and not
without cause, interpret of a disorder of the Mind, whether raised in him, or
fomented by the Devil) the Servants of Saul, agreeably to his own Injunctions,
did in order to his Cure provide him of that great Musician David, who no
sooner took his Harp, and played with his Hand, but Saul was refreshed, and was
well, and the Evil Spirit departed from him, v. 23. of that Chapter. Agreeable
hereto is what we learn from Profane Authors, as Grotius has pertinently
observed on the First of Samuel, the tenth, and the fifth Verse: He there
telling us, that Pythagoras did by Musical Sounds soften fierce Minds,
Asclepiades put a stop to Seditions, Damon reduce Drunken, and Petulant Men to
a Sober, and Modest Behavior, and Xenocrates by the same means bring Madmen to
themselves.

2. But beside that the Music we speak of does compose the disorderly Passions
of the Mind, which is in it self of no small service to Religion, beside the
disposition it produces in us to farther impressions of it; We shall find if
we look a little farther, that it does equally stir up, and improve, and direct
its more regular ones. Of the first of which we have a famous instance in the
great St. Augustine, which is so much the more worthy of our belief, because it
has a place in the Confessions, which he made to God, and in which Holy Men,
at least, are not wont to speak lightly, or unadvisedly. For how much, says he
Conf. lib. 9. cap. 6.
, did I weep at thy Hymns, and Songs, being not a little stirred up by the
Voices of thy sweet-singing Church? Those Voices of theirs flowed in at my
Ears, and together with them thy Truth was melted into my Heart, from whence
boiled up an affection of Piety, which again issued forth in Tears, and then it
was well with me because of them. And though in the next Book Conf. lib. 10. cap.
33.
of the same Confessions, he seems to be afraid, lest the Music of the Church
should more affect his Ears, than that, which was sung, did his Heart, and was
thereupon inclined to think that it would be much better if such a Singing were
used, as departed little from a simple pronunciation; Not well considering, I
suppose, at that time this Exhortation of St. Paul concerning speaking to one
another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Odes, or Songs, which undoubtedly
signify somewhat more than Words delivered with a light flexion of the Voice:
Yet again, when he considered the Tears, which he himself shed in the very
beginnings of his Conversion, and how much he was even then moved, not with the
Singing, but with the things that were sung, when they were chanted forth with
a clear, and agreeable Voice, he was led again to acknowledge the great profit
of that Institution, and of the Custom of the Church in it. So great force
there is in Songs to stir up a regular Passion, as well as to compose an
irregular one; And if so, there will be less doubt of their being able to
improve, as well as stir it, and least of all of their directing it aright.
Because the matter of the Song, where it is Holy, and Pious, will draw the
Passion after it; and, where it has to do with Sorrow, improve it into a
Penitential one, as in like manner, where it has to do with Joy, into a Holy,
and Pious one, and such as shall even in Temporal Blessings consider rather the
goodness of God in them, than the sweetness of the Blessings themselves.

3. The Third, and last Advantage of Vocal Music, or (as my Text expresses
it) of Singing, and making Melody, is its prompting the Mind with so much the
more Pleasure to reflect upon that, which is the subject matter of it, and
possess it with the thing sung, as well as with the Singing it self. A thing
which you see St. Augustine was brought to acknowledge as to himself, even when
he was most afraid of being carried away by the Music; And will not be so hard
to attain, where the Man is intent (as no doubt he ought to be) to sing with
the Heart, as well as with the Voice, with the Devotion of the one, as well as
with the Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs of the other. For as Charming
as Music is, and must be acknowledged to be; yet may it, no doubt, be made
subservient to that, which is the subject matter of it, where a due Intention
of the Mind goes along with it: Yea made to give such a delight to that
Argument, which it professes to adorn, and sweeten, that it shall make Grief
it self lovely; And how much more then imbellish such things, as are of a more
Joyful Consideration. Otherwise I do not see how it shall come to be the
delight of the Saints in Heaven, because there, to be sure, nothing shall enter
that shall take them off from more Spiritual Delights. I will conclude this
Argument, when I have said that the Advantage is so great to a Mind, that is
also intent upon the matter, from the Melody of Spiritual Songs; And the
motions of the Mind so languid, in comparison, where there are mean Words, and
as mean Singing to commend the subject matter thereof to it, that a Devout Soul
will willingly prefer the former with all its Accidental Disadvantages, before
the dullness and heaviness of the other. For that any of our performances should
be without all Disadvantages is impossible in this state of things, and nothing
therefore, which is otherwise of signal use, and beside that, under Command, as
we see this of Singing is, to be refused because of them.

5. I have hitherto proceeded with very little disturbance, because there are
not many, that are Enemies to that Music, which has been hitherto considered.
But I must not expect to pass on so smoothly while I deliver my Opinion
concerning that Singing, and making Melody, which is attended with that of
Musical Instruments; Because though our Foreign Writers allow of Singing, even
where the Composition is more Artificial, yet they represent Instrumental
Music among the Rudiments of the Law Calvin. Comment. in Psalm 33.2. and alibi.
, as long before them the Author of the Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxos
Resp. ad qu. 107.
as a thing only suitable to that Infant-state, wherein those of the Law were.
For which cause the use of it was (as he says) taken away in the Churches, and
simple Singing left in its stead.

What reason there is to look upon Instrumental Music as a Rudiment of the
Law, I cannot understand; because throughout the whole Law there is no mention
of any other Instrument, than of the Trumpet, and which too appears rather to
have been used Number. 10.2. Lev. 25.9.
to give notice of a Festival, or to call the People together to celebrate it,
than any proper attendant of its service. And as little reason I think there
is, why we should look upon such Instruments as accommodated only to an
Infant-state, and particularly to that of the Law; Because as there is mention
of the use of them before the giving of the Law, and particularly at the
Singing of that so famous Song of Moses upon the overthrow of the Egyptians in
the Red Sea: (For Moses tells us Exo. 15.20.
that Miriam the Prophetess, and the Women that attended her, did not only
answer that Song of his with their Mouths, but with their Timbrels); so it
appears that they were mostly employed, if not also appointed, when the
Spiritual part of Gods Worship was at the highest among that People, (as to be
sure it was in the time of David) and frequent and earnest Exhortations Psalm
33. -- 81.150. and alibi passim.
made to the Praising of God with them. For who can look upon that as a Legal
Institution, which was the attendant of the most Spiritual Worship, which ever
the Jews had, and which has always been thought so Spiritual, that the
Scriptures of the New Testament call upon us to make use of it, and the Church
of God has from the beginning made the principal part of it is.

This I take to be a sufficient Answer to an Objection, that is without all
ground; because that very Law, to which it entitles Instrumental Music, makes
no mention of it. But I will however, to silence, if possible, the Clamours of
Unreasonable Men, make it appear to have a sufficient foundation in that Reason
which is common to us all, and which as it had a being long before the Law of
Moses, so will continue of force, as long as we our selves shall: That, I mean,
which persuades the use of such things in the Worship of God, as may be
servicevble to it, or helpful to the Devotions of those that have a part in it.

For whereas the greater part of those that assist at the Worship of God,
neither have, nor can well be supposed to have, any such skill in Singing, as
to carry them with any tolerable concent through the Psalms, or Hymns that are
used in the Church; By which means the Service it self comes to be abborred,
or, at least, many, that are concerned in it, are forced to give it over: The
Organ, in particular, both by the Lowdness, and the Harmoniousness thereof
does, with a kind of grateful Violence, carry the Voices of Men along with it,
and not only prevents any such indecent Discords as might otherwise arise, but
makes their Voices indeed and in truth to answer that Melody, which is here
exhorted to, and is, it may be, the only Instrument that can with any certainty
procure it.

Whereas again the Affections of the generality of Men are, and will be dull,
but however there is none of us all, whose Affections do not often want
quickening in the Worship of God; In which case Reason it self will persuade the
use of such probable means as may be helpful to us in the stirring of them, but
especially in that part of Gods Service, which requires a sprightly and a
cheerful Mind: What can be more reasonable than to make use of such Instruments
of Music, as tend in their own Nature to excite and improve them; yea, do not
seldom transform Men into a perfectly different Temper from what they were
before they liftned to them?

So great reason is there to believe that Instrumental Music, as well as
Vocal, came into the Church, not from any perverse imitation of the Law of
Moses, as some have fondly enough imagined, but from the apparent usefulness of
the thing it self, and which Men's common Reason, as well as Experience, led
them to the approbation of. If it came not in sooner, or did not spread more
universally when it did, (for it appears not to have come into the Church till
the Year 660 Joan. Bona Divin. Psalmo. cap. 17. sect. 2.
, nor to have diffused it self every where when it did) it was either because
the disconsolateness of the Times did not comport with it, as to be sure those
of the first Three Hundred Years did not; Or because Men had an unreasonable
scruple against it as a thing only suited to the Infant-state of the Synagogue;
Or, because, where it was received, it was not managed with that Gravity,
wherewith all Ecclesiastical Offices ought to be attended. For against the
thing, in it self considered, there can be no scruple at all; neither have
there been more devout Men upon Earth, than those who have delighted in it, and
practiced it with signal advantage to themselves, if the Prophet David, and our
Divine Herbert may pass for such.

What remains then, but that having in the first place endeavored to get our
selves replenished with the Spirit, and particularly with those Graces of it,
which serve more immediately to the exciting of a Spiritual and Heavenly Joy,
we endeavor to keep it up, and improve, and express it by Psalms, and Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs? Singing indeed, and making Melody in our Heart to the
Lord, because without that it can be no Melody in the Ears of the Divine
Majesty, but withal Singing, and making Melody with our Voices, and
Instruments, as well as in our Hearts, because these do in their way express
our grateful resentment of his Benefits, and do moreover excite, and improve
that Melody of the Heart, which we have said to be so acceptable to him.

After which the following Hymn was sung.

The HYMN.
COme Holy Ghost, and with thy Light, and Fire
Dispel our Mists, and kindle our Desire;
That we at once thy saving Truths may know,
And with thy gracious Fruits enamored grow.
The greater, and the lesser World to thee
Does owe its Light, and Life, and Purity.
By thee the Patriarchal Age was taught,
By thee the Christian was to Knowledge brought;
By thee each came to love, as well as know
What their Great Lord had ordered them to do.
Thou did to each their Light, and Heat impart,
For thou the Teacher of their Teachers were.
O may thou still the same kind Beams display,
Direct us to, and cheer us in our way;
Prompt us to love, as well as to fulfill
The harshest parts of our Creatours Will.
The fear of Ill may drive Men to his Law,
But thou alone to it can sweetly draw.
And may we also, when we are thus inspired,
And with a calm, but ardent Zeal are fired
Make liveless Organs join with us in Praise,
And to thy Grace a grateful Trophy raise.
For it is not they, but we those Accents frame,
Which our Devotion, and thy Praise proclaim.
FINIS.
Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty Four Sermons and Discourses on Several Occasions;
Together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were Published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alphabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity-College in
Cambridge. The Third Volume. Containing Forty Five Sermons upon Several
Occasions. In Folio.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End, and the Danger
and Mischief of Delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow, in Octavo. Price 18 d.

The Four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Practically
Considered and Applied. By W. Bates, D. D. in 120. Price 2 s.

The Great Duty of Resignation to the Divine Will in Afflictions. Also by Dr.
Bates. In 8 vo. Price 18 d.

Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. On Psalm. 130. v. 4. Also by Dr. Bates.
Price 18 d.

The Cure of Distractions in Attending upon God. In several Sermons. By Nath.
Vincent, M. A. In 8 vo. Price 2 s.

Also several Sermons against the Love of the World. By N Vincent. In 120.
Price 12 d.

Also his Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Lawrence. 6 d.

The Trial and Condemnation of Sir John Friend, and Sir William Parkins,
Knights, for the Horrid and Execrable Conspiracy, etc. who, upon full Evidence,
was found guilty of High Treason, at the Sessionshouse in the Old Baily.
Together with a true Copy of the Papers delivered to the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, by them at the place of Execution, owning their Crimes. To be sold
at 12 d. each Trial. By B. Aylmer.

The Bishop of Gloucesters Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the House of
Lords April 16.

Mr. Stephens of Sutton in Surrey, his Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Bow Church the same day.

Mr. John Showers his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

Mr. Strype of Low-Layton in Essex, his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

Mr. Gardener of London his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

The Christian Merchant, described in a Sermon; Humbly Dedicated to all the
Merchants of the City. By W. Gostwyke, Rector of Purley in Berks.

The Advice of a Father: Or Counsel to a Child; Directing him how to demean
himself in the most important passages of this Life. By E. C. Gent. In 120.
Price 12 d.

A Conference with an Anabaptist. By Dr. Asheton of Beckenham in Kent. Price 12
d.


