A POEM, Occasioned by the Late Discontents and Disturbances IN THE STATE. WITH
REFLECTIONS UPON THE RISE and PROGRESS OF PRIESTCRAFT.

Written by N. TATE.

-- Liberius si
Dixero quid, si forte Jocosius, Hoc mihi juris
Cum Venia dabis.
Hor. Vincit Amor Patriae. Virg. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, MDCXCI.

PREFACE.
I Could heartily have wished there had been no Occasion offered, or
Subject Matter for an Essay of this kind. After so happy and wonderful a
Revolution as we have seen, when our Hopes were grown desperate, and our
Liberty reduced to its very last gasp, to have the only Remedy in Nature so
effectually applied, so miraculous a Recovery performed; after all this, to
find Englishmen, and such as pretend to no other Interest or Religion but That
of their Country; to find Them expressing Dissatisfaction, everywhere busy in
sowing Dissension, obstructing, as far as in them lies, the Progress of
Affairs, and unhinging the present Settlement (upon which alone depends the
Safety of these Nations, and common Quiet of Europe); This is so just a Cause
of Indignation, as must make every Lover of his Country to turn Satyrist, or,
at least, excuse the honest Zeal of such as upon this Occasion express their
Resentments. To be unconcerned for a Man's Country, is the worst want of
natural Affection: A Crime reputed so heinous amongst the more generous
Heathens, that it divested the indulgent Brutus of all Compassion on his Sons,
whom he submitted to the extremity of Punishment, for making Commotions in the
new Settlement of the Roman Liberty.

-- Gnatosque Pater nova Bella moventes
In Poenam dulci pro Liberate vocabit.
In tracing the Occasions of the late Disturbances and Discontents of the
State, I was unwillingly brought within the Verge of the Church. There is no
Man that has a greater Veneration for the Sacred Function and Order, or the
Discipline and Worship by Law established; neither does the Passive Principle
it self, that has so nearly endangered the Shipwreck both of State and Church,
derive it is source from the pure Fountain of our Reformation: 'Twas a
new-sprouted Tail of the Dragon, that swept many of our Stars, tho but few of
the First Magnitude; most whereof recovered themselves as soon as they were
sensible of the Consequence. Letter to a Dissenting Clergyman.
For my own part (says one) I am so little ashamed of altering my Opinion in
this matter, that I think I have nothing to blush for, but that I no sooner
discovered my Error, and the ungrateful and odious use that was designed to be
made of it. The Number is but small of such as still adhere to the Prejudice of
their Education under a Government, whose business it was to debauch our
Principles, and dispose us for the Slavery that was to be brought upon us.

What I have touched concerning Penal Impositions on Conscience, and the Nicene
Assembly, (amongst whom were many Persons that preserved the Primitive
Character), I must for the Consequence refer you to the Testimony of
Church-Historians; instancing only one Passage in St. Hilary, who gives us this
Account: Conscii sumus quod post Nicaenam Synodum nihil aliud quam Fidem
scribimus, dum in Verbis pugna est, dum de novitatibus quaestio est, dum de
Ambiguis Occasio est, dum de Authoribus querela est, dum de studiis certamen
est, dum in Consensu difficultas est, dum Alter Alteri Anathema esse caepit
prope jam nemo Christi est, etc. Tandem eo processum est ut neque penes nos,
neque penes quenquam, ante nos Sanctum exinde aliquid perseveret; annuas atque
menstruas de Deo fides decernimus, decretis poenitemus, poenitentes defendimus,
defensos Anathematizamus, aut in nostris aliena, aut aliena in nostris
damnamus, and mordentes invicem, jam absumpti sumus ab invicem.

I cannot better make my Apology, than in the words of a late Writer upon this
Occasion, who says, It is not their declaring their Opinion (wherein they seem
to me to have light upon the Truth, if they had likewise upon the Measure) that
could have moved me to speak with this liberty, but their imposing what was not
contained in express words of Scripture, under Spiritual and Civil Penalties,
contrary to the Privilege of Religion, and making a Precedent, followed and
improved by all succeeding Ages, for most Cruel Persecutions.

There is no Person so obscure or inconsiderable, but might have observed our
most zealous Protestants, both Churchmen and Dissenters, to have been all
along Properties to the Common Enemy; so visible have been the Triumphs and
Insultings of Roman Emissaries upon the Animosities they have sown amongst us,
and of which they reckoned shortly to reap the Harvest.

The Unreasonableness (that is to say, the Impossibility) of Force in matters
of mere Conscience and Opinion, has demonstrated it self through all Ages. Our
Dissenters have had their Faults, and they have suffered: Neither is it the
least Blessing amongst those Great and Many that seem to be reserved for His
present Majesty's Reign, That we do not yet despair of a Comprehension. His
Majesty has, with more than Constantine's Piety, signalized His Royal
Inclination; the ablest of our Spiritual Guides are zealous Endeavourers for
it: and That (amongst other weighty Reasons) for the True Interest and
Inviolable Security of the Church Established: Which, as it influences the
Public Happiness, it is the Duty of even the meanest Layman to be sollicitous
for it. And this Privilege, at least, I may plead for what I have said; For
common quiet is Mankinds Concern. Relig. Lai.

Now as to your Censure of this Essay as a Poem, I have that Indifference which
is necessary for an ill Writer. If it have the least degree of Art or Beauty,
the Judicious will not miss of it: Otherwise, I have seldom known a Reader
harangu'd into a favorable Opinion against his Conscience. The Nature of the
Dialogue obliged me for the most part to Expressions that were familiar, and
Sermoni propiora. You will find it but praeliminary to a more agreeable
Subject, if any Pitch of Zeal can warrant so mean a Talent in the Faculty as
Mine, for the Undertaking.

A POEM, Occasioned by the Late DISCONTENTS AND DISTURBANCES, etc.
NEar Isis Spring, the Muses poor Retreat,
Palaemon dwelt in his unenvied Seat;
Whose little, but Hereditary Soil,
Answered his moderate Hopes, if not his Toil;
For Nature's Wants did Modestly provide,
Content and Innocence the Rest supplied.
His Years declined, his Thoughts their Manly Fire
Preserved, advancing as his Days retire.
None better knew or practiced in his Cell,
The Chaste Delights that in Retirement dwell,
That Scorn the Golden Mansions of the Proud,
And fly the Haunts of the unhallowed Crowd;
Betimes he shunned the Beaten Roads of Strife,
And found the Secret Track to Peaceful Life.
Too Blessed, if while his private Cares did cease,
No Fears had seized him for his Countries Peace;
So strong the Guard of Virtues which he chose,
Fate had no other way to his Repose.
Religion He, and Loyalty, held Dear;
Begot in neither, tho in both Sincere,
In every Course by Truth and Sense did steer:
Did gen'rously his Rules for Practice draw
From Sacred Writ, and uncorrupted Law.
Of Church and Court th'Encroachments did Survey;
In Priests and Statesmen found the same Foul Play;
Both Functions saw, alike by Interest Swayed,
Both grown a Cheat, for both were grown a Trade.
Philander, whom the Muses Charms had moved,
By Learned Palaemon's Rules his Vein improved,
And next the Muses his Palaemon loved.
His awful Steps with reverend distance traced,
Silence and Sacred Poverty embraced.
His sole Ambition to compose some Lay,
That might to Britain's Pollio force its way;
From his sharp-judging Patron gain a Smile,
And of an Hour the waiting State beguile.
In this alone he wronged the Publick-Weal,
For which no Swain confessed a warmer Zeal.
Oppressed with Thought, one Evening he repairs,
With his Palaemon, to concert his Cares:
Just then returning from his Ev'ning's Round
(His Farm's short Bounds) the good old Swain he found,
Who in his Arms brought Home a New-ean'd Lamb,
A Firstling, but forsaken by its Dam.
The Youth with that unkindly Omen struck,
To vent his pensive Thoughts occasion took,
and thus began --
PHILANDER. -- The same Disorder reigns
Amongst our Flocks that has possessed our Swains,
Perversely both to their own Hopes unkind,
Expose their tender Comforts to the Wind:
But lately 'twas that every Shepherd Sung,
While with the general Glee the Valleys rung,
As Nature had renewed, and fresh Creation sprung;
Each Muse to the Restorer tuned her Lyre,
Their only and almost despaired Desire.
They sung, How in his Belgick-Seat he lay,
Silent as Night, but watchful as the Day;
His sure, but secret Councils did advance
To check the Progress of encroaching France,
While Belgia did the Tyrants summons wait,
And Britain from the Continent disjoined,
No Safety in her Seas embrace could find,
Not Britain knew to shun the common Fate.
To Bondage sold, despairing to be freed
The servile Contract her own Act and Deed.
Her Roman Masters at their Conquest smile,
Secure in Hopes, they cantle out the Isle.
Palaemon, you must needs remember well
That ruthful Season which you could foretell,
To Unbelievers preached, who mourned too late
Their Trojan Fathers Folly, and their Fate.
If just Disdain will suffer, call to mind
How in that pensive Time
Our Swains at their own handiwork repined,
And cursed their Tillage to new Lords assigned;
Wished Blight and Mildews on their generous Soil,
E're Lubber-Priests should batten on the Spoil,
And Consecrated Sloth devour their Toil.
By Husbandmen of yore forwarn'd the Harm;
No Caterpillars like a sacred Swarm.
The vile Remembrance we can scarce support,
How Vermin to our Palace did resort,
And Nations purged their Scum into our Court,
The Rogue was qualified for Magistrate,
Tribunals then were Shambles of the State.
We suffered much, and Fear suggested more,
Till Ruin should o rewhelm our fenceless Shore,
We heard the near advancing Billows Roar.
With every Gust the impetuous Tide came on,
Our Sluices opened, and our Moundings gone,
When Tyranny with Sword high-brandish'd stood,
And Zeal, the worst of Fiends, for seeming good,
The Monster now confessed with darted Claws,
And licked for Thirst of Blood her frothy Jaws.
'Twas then Fame's Voice did first our Coasts surprise,
(A Voice like that shall bid the Dead to rise)
That brave NASSAW approached to our Relief:
With Joy as Speechless as our former Grief
The Tidings we received, with early Eyes,
Preventing Day, we watched the Eastern Skies:
At last the Hero came, the long expected Guest,
As from a present Deity
The conscious Monsters fly,
The Specters vanished, and the Land had Rest.

PALAEMON. Unparalled in Story was the Change!
But nothing, where such Virtue works, is strange.

PHILANDER. Then tell me, good Palaemon, whence this Cloud
Of Discontent, that does our Morning shroud?
Can we so soon grow sick of Happiness,
So soon suspect the Blessings we possess?
The Reasons of this stupid Change relate,
Our Fault or Lot, our Folly or our Fate.

PALAEMON. Too soon we slept, and let the watchful Foe,
Before our Wheat was sprung, his Darnel sow.

PHILANDER. A disappointed Foe you cannot blame,
At once by Interest urged Revenge and Shame.
Think not a losing Gamester will be fair,
Who at his Best never played upon the Square.

PALAEMON. Rome's Frauds are now of such an ancient Date,
The Harlot pleads her Privilege to cheat.
Her holy Panders too you must forgive,
Who keep her Trading up, by which they live.
The Ghostly Pimps must starve, or else combine
For her Support, the State to undermine.
Necessity sways Here with some Pretense,
To Right Divine -- at least to common Sense:
But who that unintelligible Wight
Can e're decipher, called a JACOBITE?
(The Appellation he with Pride does claim,
Nor will I grutch him the Auspicious Name)
How shall we him define, who never could find
The Sentiments of his own Wayward Mind?
Foe to his Own, and to his Country's Ease,
And whom no Color of Affairs can please:
For, trust him with the Power he does aspire,
With mad Career he drives into the Mire;
While groveling there, in woeful Plight he lies,
He wearies Earth and Heaven with restless Cries.
Assist the Wretch, and place him on firm Land,
He Will curse the Friendly unexpected Hand.

PHILANDER. How dismal were your State, ye murmuring Race,
Should your own fatal Wishes once take place?
But Heaven, and God-like Kings, their Grace extend,
And even to save th'Ingrateful, condescend.

PALAEMON. Ah! what can Heaven, and God-like Kings devise,
For their Relief? what Charm unseal their Eyes,
Whom common Danger warns not to be Wise?

PHILANDER. Yet, good Palaemon, lest the Plague increase,
Mark out and brand the Troublers of our Peace.

PALAEMON. The Faction a mere Hydra you will find,
Whose different Aspects to one Trunk are joined,
Of Humane Form, but all of Serpent-kind.
Some hiss and murmur, whom no Schemes of Law
Can please, but what their own wild Notions draw;
Nor would even these content the Changlings long.
Others by Sympathy affect the wrong,
To Error by Impulse of Nature led,
Like Dungeon Toads on poisonous Vapors fed,
Amongst Caitiffs, who had sold for Stated Sums
Their Country, summoned now to hasty Dooms.
They who had longest Trusted, most repined,
Discarded Knaves, to want and shame consigned,
The Drudg'ry past, their dear Arrears behind.
For Envy some revile, who wanted Heart
In the bold Scene to bear a timely Part.
Some who nor Prince nor Providence dare trust,
Cautious how they too soon the Foe disgust,
Decry the Cause, of present Grace assured,
And wisely for another Turn secured.
Some sleepy Sotts, born swiftly down the Stream,
Wake, Stare, and think the wondrous Change a Dream.
Some who had lent their helping-hand, recoil;
For want of Business, their own work they spoil;
Fall off, as they came on, they knew not why;
Start any Game, and they will pursue the Cry.
Mistaken Politics did some incense;
And some found fault for honest Want of Sense;
The frailer Souls (for when were Women wise?)
Give ear to murmuring Fiends suggested Lies,
Fair gloz'd to cheat 'em of their Paradise.

PHILANDER. But Man methinks his Reason should recall,
Not let frail Woman work his second Fall.

PALAEMON. The Sex to censure were unjust and rude;
The Foe has few to boast beside the Lewd.
To spiritual Whore-mongers let Whores be kind,
Their carnal Harlotry were too confined,
Without the Fornication of the Mind.
Rank next the giddy Thoughtless Lawless Rout,
The Atheist, and mistakenly Devout;
Bigots whose cross-grained Piety loose-rid,
Starts, Flounces, Kicks --
Tame Asses when by Tyrants they are bestrid.

PHILANDER. Ah! when did Mischief in the State begin,
Where Conscience did not for her share come in?

PALAEMON. Mark the whole Chain of Public Woes, you will find
The last Link still to the Priest's Girdle joined.
Pan prosper me, as I the Function hold
Most Sacred, and the Watchmen of the Fold;
But hate the Shepherds who their Labor spare,
To Hirelings leave their Flocks, their only Care
To call at Sheering-time for an ungodly Share:
Fleece-warm, and with an Amaryllis sped,
They Pipe and Feast, and jocund Measures tread,
While their lean Sheep look up, and are not fed.
Nor care which way, make but the stipend large,
Through Door or Breach they climb into the Charge.
Profit with them is Grace's loudest Call;
Preferment's Sacred, let the Blessing fall
From a Court-Mistress, or a Priest of Baal.

PHILANDER. From hence, from this corrupted Fountain's Head,
The poisoned Stream of Passive Nonsense spread:
Divines of Fortune, to deserve their Pay
From Court, the People to the Prince betray;
With Fire and Lough-Bells for his Service set,
To awe the Partridge, while he spreads his Net;
To honest Self-Defence Damnation give,
And ring their constant Peal, PREROGATIVE.

PALAEMON. While elder Chanticleers, and more inspired,
To sound the Spiritual Watch alone aspired,
Our young and dapper Brood of forward Chicks
No sooner Perch, but scream out POLITICS.
Grown Parish-Cocks, each in his Barn can crow
Against tame Fowl, but Cravens to the Foe;
Plump, richly-plum'd, and of the Treading Strain,
They strut amongst their Hens, and spread their pompous Train.

PHILANDER. Ah! had the Passive Systeme no support,
Beside the Cock'ril-Clergy of the Court?
The Church long since had lent the Cause her Hand,
But awful Names, and such as bore Command,
Too far, too long indulged the sickly Dream;
Peace springs; but while reserved those Leaders seem,
The Herd gaze on, and dare not taste the Stream.

PALAEMON. Enough: If Great Examples may prevail,
Our brightest Stars have escaped the Dragon's Tail;
Have owned Heavens Cause, and took their Michael's Part,
Nor ever from Freeborn Truth's Defense did start;
Whose sense no Gorgons, no Chimaera's charm,
To hang dead Weights on their Restorer's Arm;
Who never to slavish Principles gave way,
That would Religion, Church and State betray:
From Ancient Sanctions still their Measures drew;
And, tho they soared not with the Modern Crew,
EUSEBIA never could boast of Sons more True.
In this bright List let that Learned Champion come,
EUSEBIA's Glory, and the Scourge of Rome;
Whose piercing Wit to all her Frauds gave light,
The deep-engender'd Births of Papal Night.
The Fiends, who long secure in Darkness lay,
Shrunk from his Beams, and yell'd at sight of Day.
Of numerous Champions can EUSEBIA boast;
But This the Leader of the Sacred Host.

PHILANDER. Yet equal Praise to that Learned Pastor give,
Of Modern Skill, and Meekness Primitive;
But bold in Fight, with Arguments concise,
He lightens in the Eyes of Rome and Vice:
With Wonder Men, with Triumph Angels see
His blameless Life, from Pride and Passion free;
No Priest more frank the Ghostly Counsel gives;
No Layman with more liberal Hand relieves;
Unpracticed in the worldly Shepherds Guile,
His Life's whole business is to Reconcile;
His very Aspect breaths an Air of Grace
So mild, he carries Gospel in his Face.

PALAEMON. How shall EUSEBIA then her self excuse,
Whose Builders could this Cornerstone refuse?

PHILANDER. Yet even the unjust Repulse his Worth confessed,
Rejected by the Many, not the Best.

PALAEMON. Ah! without Envy let the Truth be told,
Such as never knew the Shepherds Staff to hold
Feared MODERATION would set open the Fold.

PHILANDER. Often have I found, while I my Sheep did guide
To Pastures sweet, the friendly Gate set wide,
They freely entered, and my Crook obeyed;
But still of narrow Inlets were afraid;
Or if a Bridge too straight they spied before,
Would rather take the Stream, than venture o'r.
But say, What prejudice had thence ensued,
Had they received the separate Multitude?
Was ever Shepherd yet a Foe to Peace,
Or ever repined to see his Flock increase?

PALAEMON. The Fold set open, had gained more Sheep, it is true,
But had withal received more Shepherds too,
Who with new Stewards diligence at first
(If not for Conscience Sake) their Flocks had nursed;
Our Loiterers from hence foresaw their Doom,
When none but painful Pastors could have room.
This made 'em rave like Men on Ruin's brink,
And cry, The Deluge comes, stop every Chink,
Shut fast the Door, or else the Ark will sink.
To lose one useless Peg did Shipwreck seem,
And every rotten Rafter was a Beam.

PHILANDER. Let questioned Beauties owe their Charms to Dress,
EUSEBIA's Frame does all that is Fair possess;
Too gaudy Tire but makes a Matron scorned,
Let mild EUSEBIA shine
A Firmament by her own Stars adorned.

PALAEMON. Yet Meteors to the Firmament may rise,
And Comets Pestilent invade the Skies;
'Twas so of old. --
Their Influence in first Ages did appear.
Bright and untroubled shone the Church's Sphere,
Till Sons of Vengeance got th'Ascendent there.
In petty Factions first her Stars engaged,
Till War broke out, and Persecution raged.
This Pest, by Constantine's warm Summer bred,
At once through all the infected Clergy spread.
The bloody Paths had long in vain been trod,
Till Heathen Princes, tired, threw down the Rod
Ambitious Priests the Utensil to burn
Thought pity, till themselves had took their turn,
And persecuting by more dextrous Rules,
Proved Maximine and Dioclesian Fools.
'Twas Rooting up God's Heritage before,
While Magistrates the Iron Scepter bore:
In Them the Exercise, tho more severe,
Was Discipline, and Ecclesiastic Care.

PHILANDER. For Church or State on Conscience to impose,
Must wider make the Breach they think to close:
And he that Fetters would for Reason find,
May shackle the Sunbeams, and grasp the Wind,
Which no restraints of Human Laws will know,
But where and when they please will shine or blow.
But Truth should bind; And your Opinion's true,
And erring Judgments should submit to you,
I grant. --
But first you must convince by Reason's Light,
That They mistake, and You are in the right:
Where You mistake, and They the Truth may hit,
Will you to your own Rule of Force submit?
You Will plead the Privilege They urged before,
Conviction crave, and They demand no more.
Conviction clear the Soul can only win;
With Club or Hammer try to force the Pin,
The Brains you may beat out, never drive the Notion in,
Absurd the Zeal that Gospel's Power promotes
Against Gospel Laws, and Peace by cutting Throats;
That Faith to plant does Charity disband,
And break for doubtful Truths a clear Command.
Since first this Pest the Christian World annoyed,
Since Persecuting Power the Church enjoyed,
Zeal marred Religion, Creeds the Faith destroyed.

PALAEMON. Where Rome bears sway, bid Laws Divine farewell,
And Human Rights t'assert, is to Rebel.
Speak, suffering Witness, I appeal to Thee,
Thou First Apostle of our Liberty,
Condemned to Stripes. Thy Crime? Thou did presume
To write against Arbitrary Power and Rome;
Did Inferences of strange Treason draw,
And say, 'Twas Legal to defend the Law.
Thy envious Foes no other Crimes could urge,
And to confute thy Pen, produced the Scourge.

PHILANDER. You mentioned Constantine, in whose mild Reign
The harassed Church did first her Freedom gain,
When Priests secure to Bishoprics aspired,
Without First Fruits of Martyrdom required:
Tell me, How then could Cruelty intrude?
How came the Persecuting Plague renewed?

PALAEMON. Lust, Riot, Avarice, Ambition, Strife,
Are Bastard-off springs of too peaceful Life.
With nice Disputes the wanton Priests began,
To Envy next, and wild Confusion ran;
Would Mysteries too curiously enquire,
That first raised Smoke, then set the Church on fire.
From brangling Arrius the first Firebrand came.

PHILANDER. But Constantine took care to quench the Flame.

PALAEMON. The Nicene Fathers, summoned to decide
The Strife, instead of Lenitives applied,
Too late convinced the indulgent Emperor
How fatal 'twas to trust a Priest with Power.

PHILANDER. The pious Prince, to do The Assembly Grace,
Refused (I Have heard) Himself to take his place
'Till they were sat. -- 'Twas favor ill applied,
If such Behavior taught the Doctors Pride.

PALAEMON. Then having, as a Christian Monarch ought;
First burnt th'Invectives which the Fathers brought
Against each Other, and for Union pressed,
Thus to the Council he himself addressed:
God made you Priests, and God alone can be
Your Judge; Rest therefore from my Censure free;
No Man should judge of Gods, and You are Gods to Me.

PHILANDER. When Princes yield, the Prelate must prevail.

PALAEMON. When ever did Priest to take Advantage fail?
Forthwith Church Censures flew as thick as Hail:
The Arrian Systeme to just flames assigned,
And Nicene Creed with Penalties enjoined.
They fixed not Here; but for each trifling Cause
The Metal tried of their new Penal Laws.
Think how each Victor went triumphant home,
With Titles swelled too bulky for his Dome,
From Council Orthodox and Catholic;
Each Hare that crossed him was an Heretic.
And if his Horse but stumbl'd in his way,
Th'erroneous Beast incurred the Anathema.

PHILANDER. Yet, since they squared by Rules of Sacred Writ
Their Symbol, you to their Decrees submit?

PALAEMON. I own what e're the Sacred Books contain,
Can Mysteries believe, though not explain;
Have none in Footsteps of first Martyrs trod,
And died for Truth, who never conceived the Mode?
Brand such as will not to Truths revealed agree,
But Penalties on such as cannot see
What others can, is Breach of Charity.
Had Charity in Synods interposed,
The Seamless Garments Breach had soon been closed,
Which to repair the wrangling Doctors tried,
(While Metaphysics sacred Truths decide)
And by ill-botching made the Rent more wide;
But they had now learnt Sciences, and must
To their own Fame, as well as Truth be Just.
Would Mysteries, not like Mechanics know,
But both the (...) and (...) show;
Were subtle Schoolmen grown, and to agree,
Had Scandal been to their Philosophy.

PHILANDER. But tell me, did these Clouds the Faith invade,
When first whole Nations were its Converts made?

PALAEMON. The Faith shone clear till School-Terms, raised like Mists,
Favored the Juggles of Imposing Priests;
And Councils having Scripture Bounds o're-past,
Advanced to forging of New Creeds at last;
Which by the Hocus of Infallible,
Went down so glib the Difference few could tell,
The Priest's Turn better served, and pleased the Crowd as well;
They heard how their Redeemer at his Death
Did Sacred Legacies to all bequeath,
Which if they would now inspect, and had the Skill,
The Church into her Hands had got the Will;
For now the Laity were left in the Lurch,
The Encroaching Clergy were become the Church:
Nor stood the Magistrate on higher Ground,
In vain to Scripture their Appeals they found,
While 'twas the Churches Priv'ledge to expound.
Thus (through Indulgence, Fond of such as Reigned,
And through the People's Sloth) the Ascendent gained,
Romes Prelate topp'd upon her Temp'ral Power,
And from her Priest became her Emperor.
With artful Baits the Fisher long had sought,
And Empire was the Fish at last he caught.
But Time, and Breath, and Patience too would fail
To count the Steps of this prodigious Scale;
Suffice it, that at first the Impostor gained
By Frauds his height, and by worse Frauds maintained;
Sloth, Ignorance, blind Zeal, and blinder Fear,
Combined to level Thrones, and mount the Chair.

PHILANDER. 'Twas then the aspiring Clergy Crowned their Hope,
And formed their Church- Leviathan, a Pope,
In whom they still possess the Power they give,
Earth's Tyrant, but their Representative.

PALAEMON. It Is Done, the Ambitious Priest has got the Day,
The Prelate Rules, and Princes must Obey;
The Spiritual Lord exalted to the Skies,
Looks down, and all the Subject World defies,
Does safe his Empyraean Height possess,
His only Care to manage his Success;
How to dispense his Beams, to whom be kind,
And who shall his Malignant Aspects find:
To whom large Territories he shall give,
To whom sell Crowns, and whom of Crowns deprive,
To Judge who best to Merit does pretend,
And Merit is to be the Church's Friend.

PHILANDER. For Crimes so black, that Humane Nature shockt,
Unpeopled Earth, and Hell's Plantations stockt;
The Indulgence-Shop was ope'd with Pardons stored,
And to a Friend good pen'orths could afford,
At the old fixed Rates, the rest their Ware must take:

PALAEMON. But if you are impious for the Churches sake,
Even with their Office-Fees they can dispense,
They con you Thanks, and Consecrate the Offense:
A Cutthroat Priest of Murder, could make sport,
From Laws protected by the Spiritual Court;
Kings let him Kill, and blackest Treasons Act;
His Judges still were Parties in the Fact.

PHILANDER. What if a Layman did the Priest Offend?

PALAEMON. An injured Priest, or who could Wrong pretend,
Cried, Burn the Heretic -- the ready Stake
Forthwith did Pious Reparation make.

PHILANDER. To hurt his Person made the Sentence Just,
^^at the Priest said, 'twas Death but to mistrust.

PALAEMON. Fear more than Wit this Tyranny enjoined,
Lest the dull Crowd at last the Cheat should find,
And to requite their gross pernicious Pranks,
Pull down their Stage, and stone the Mountebanks;
Dull Souls, with Ease are of their Rights bereaved,
But none Revenge, like Fools, when undeceived;
And strongest Stomachs, with large Draughts oppressed,
The last Disgusts, and throws up all the rest:
Heap Crime on Crime, to keep the Frauds from Air,
The last of Course must lic exposed and bare;
And too much weight o're-throw the Guilty Chair;
Now Monster, Triple-Crown'd, expect thy Doom,
Luther the Saxon Thunderbolt is come,
T'Unhinge at once the Babel-Toils of Rome.
For though to Heaven the threatening Front aspire,
He Will show the Wretched Basis laid in Mire
In Papal Nets, shall Breaches make so wide,
That Kings and Kingdoms through the Rents shall slide:
Then shall Eusebia, clothed in Truth Divine,
Her Roman Rust filled off, the Stars outshine

PHILANDER. Far must her first Reformers Skill extend,
To leave succeeding Ages naught to mend.

PALAEMON. I not pretend to Judge, since all confess
Her Beauty, who except against her Dress,
Which if she may with Decency neglect
Or does too much the Roman Mode affect;
I leave her Guides that Question to decide,
And dare not charge the Sacred Dame with Pride;
Would see Contention, but not Order cease;
Order is needful, nor less needful Peace:
Hope, though unthinking Formalists repine,
The Indulgent Mother will at last incline
To gratify her Pious Constantine,
The Hero from Domestic Cares unbind
To prosecute the Business of Mankind;
Wave Jealousies, and yield the Trust that is due
To her kind Patron, and Restorer too;
Her Sacred Birthright may she so retain,
Dissenting Flocks so may her Sheep-Folds gain,
And leave the baffled Wolf to grin and howl in vain.

PHILANDER. The Mother still in vain will condescend,
In vain to wilful Sons her Arms extend,
As she enclines let them Advances make,
Beware how Pride for Conscience they mistake;
How Uncommission'd Shepherds lead astray,
Securely on the wilder'd Sheep to prey:
Divided Flocks, but make the Wolf more bold,
The greatest Safety's in the common Fold,
The Bars removed, Compliance mild will show
Your Pastors Care, if for Themselves or You.
Our ablest Guides for Comprehension strive,
That Sacred Union may once more revive,
None more than He who late the Mitre took,
Deserv'dly, as before, He held the Crook,
The Skilfulst Text-man at the Shepherd's Book:
True to his Function and the Publick-Weal,
For which his steady Votes have proved his Zeal
In each Debate (by Party or Design,
Unbiased) does his Country's Interest join,
And stamps on State-Decrees a Seal Divine,
What Shepherd from his Judgment would divide.
What Flock refuse to wait on such a Guide,
Whose Truth and Courage has of old been tried?
Whom not the Raging Pestilence could make
To slake Attendance, or his Charge forsake;
His Sheep to Comfort did their Danger share
When Hirelings fled, and for themselves took Care.

PALAEMON. From hence let Britain her new Freedom date,
The Church Consenting to Support the State,
Since she at last has found a King to Trust,
And Worthy Senate, who to both are Just.

PHILANDER. Hail, Generous Patriots, you that poize the Realm!
And lest encroaching Waves the State o're-whelm,
Bring kind Supplies while Caesar Sits at Helm.
In vain the Oppressed would call for his Alarms,
And Conquest beckon forth his Pious Arms,
Unless with Europes Freedom you complied;
Caesar and You must Europe's Fate decide,
Invading Powers within just limits draw,
Teach Tyrants Justice, and Oppressors Law.
For though the Gallick Pride has swelled so high,
United States and Empire to defy,
Stolen Conquest boast, and Neighboring Cities hold,
The wretched Purchase of extorted Gold;
From you, the Tyrant his Just Doom must wait,
For Nero's Guilt must look for Nero's Fate:
Even now the State-Magician in his Cell,
Sits close contriving some new impious Spell,
Which He sends forth his Demons to perform,
Well-skill'd to raise, but dares not meet the Storm:
It Is You the Sword must furnish, You must Arm
Our Pious Hero to dissolve the Charm.

PALAEMON. Our Swains o're-joy'd their Senates Conduct see,
And carve their Sacred Names on every Tree,
To their disposal yield their Grain and Fleece,
A ready Offering to their Country's Peace.

PHILANDER. Oh! like our Patriots may our Swains agree!
From homebred Strife, as foreign Dangers free,
So shall our Vales resume their former Lays,
And Shepherds Skilled in Song the Consort raise,
To celebrate once more our Great Restorer's praise,
Employ their Leisure purchased by his Toil,
In Raptures on Juverne's rescued Soil.

PALAEMON. Repeat, kind Youth, for I o're-heard your Strain
Last Night, by Moonshine, from the dusky Plain,
That joins the Copse, my Farms extremest Bounds,
Repeat, for they were more than vulgar sounds;
Your Song pursued the Hero to the Coast
Of moist Juverne, where the adverse Host
Confused, the Mountain Passes did resign,
And showed their Rear to the disdaining Boyne,
On whose steep banks our British Troops you left;
Of what ensued the listening Dales bereft;
Nor had retrencht your well-come Notes so soon,
If shrill Lycisca had not bay'd the Moon.

PHILANDER. To happy Swains, that task I must resign,
Who sing beneath the Shade of their own Vine,
From dewy Morn, and sultry Noon can creep
To their cool Sheds, and choose to Pipe or Sleep,
With vacant Songs call up the Evining Star,
Their Strains may rouse the noble Din of War,
Make Squadrons move, give foaming Steeds the Rein,
And trace a Hero through the dusty Plain,
Lure hovering Conquest down where they incline:
Through all you see the generous Freedom shine,
And what false strokes their Pencil strikes in Heat,
Their happy Leisure makes correct and great.
What can Philander do, the wretched Heir
Of Thought-confounding Grief, and Slave of Care,
To servile Hours of tedious Day confined,
Exposed all Night to welter through the Wind,
To tend in Sunburned Lawn, or thirsty Dale
His Master's Flock, and must make good the Tale;
How shall the strict Damaetas be repaid?
Suppose a Milcher stolen, or Firstling strayed?
With Notes refined can I repair the Wrong,
Or make him Restitution with a Song?
'Twas then great Maro found the Art to Charm,
When He regained his Freedom and his Farm,
With Meadows, and an Oaten Pipe began,
Till warmed with ripening Beams he sung the MAN.
Thy poor Philander to the Muses Seat
By stealth has crept and felt the Inspiring Heat;
Been Midnight-Present at the Sacred Quire,
Has seen the Lawrell'd God, and heard his Lyre.
In smooth Pirene dipped his Fancy's VVing,
And tasted of the learned Castalian Spring.
What steads it that he knows his Flowers to cull,
If rufling Care before his Garland's full
Consound the fancied Order in a Trice,
Moil his clear Spring, and blast his Paradise.

PALAEMON. Yet has our Britains Pollio heard thy Lays.

PHILANDER. Our Pollio's Skill might Phaebus's Envy raise,
For though the Court be Pollio's proper Sphere,
Although he shines the brightest Planet there,
He thinks no scorn sometimes to cheer the Plain
Often condescends to hear the rural Strain;
Yet Pollio's smiles should make no Shepherd vain:
My uncouth Muse let gibing Goat-Herds laugh
To Death, and Codrus write her Epitaph,
If Pollio's Goodness she so far abuse,
Or Ween He likes because he does Excuse.
On VVit's steep Heights he sits the Ruling God,
Those Heights which by Himself alone are trod,
Yet thence vouchsafe's his Gentle Beams to throw,
And pitty's all the panting Crowd below.

PALAEMON. Yet William's Praise no Shepherd can refuse,
And Fortune may assist the daring Muse,
Deep sense of Duty, and immense Desire
Can make the Pipe keep Consort with the Lyre,
The Vanquished Boyne and Shannon will inspire.

PHILANDER. When next we meet expect the Silvan Rhyme,
Night hastens, and it is now my Folding time;
The winding Song will ask your Leisure's leave,
Employ your Patience, though your Hopes deceive.
The Daring Muse unbeaten Paths shall tread,
In Visionary Dreams of Rapture led,
Descend into the Regions of the Dead,
Elysian Bowers, where Waller's well-tuned Lyre,
The Art of Numbers shall instruct the Quire,
Where Milton on Eternal Roses lies,
Deep wrapped in Dreams of his own Paradise:
The adventurous Muse, with this kind Vision charmed,
And dear Concern for her loved Country warmed
Of Secrets that to Britain's Peace belong,
Shall question Fate, consult the Sacred Throng,
And through the dangerous Course --
The Learned Couleian Shade direct her Song,
The Victor Crown, and to reward their Pain,
Embalm and Consecrate the noble Slain,
If that low Pitch to which my Voice can rise,
May reach such Theams, and rural Notes suffice
To please the Plain, is all my Hopes pursue:
The Palace has already had its due.

FINIS.

