A COMMENTARY, OR, EXPOSITION Upon The XII. Minor Prophets.

Wherein the Text is explained, some Controversies are discussed, sundry Cases
of Conscience are cleared, and many remarkable matters hinted, that had by
former Interpreters been pretermitted.

Hereunto is added, a Treatise called, The Righteous Man's Recompense, Or, A
true Christian characterized and encouraged, out of Malachi Chap. 3. Verse. 16,
17, 18.

In all which diverse other Texts of Scripture, which occasionally occur, are
fully opened: and the whole so intermixed with pertinent Histories, as will
yield both pleasure and profit, to the judicious Reader.

By John Trapp M. A. once of Christ-Church in Oxford, now Pastor of Weston upon
Avon in Gloucester-shire.

Acts 7.42. As it is written in the Book of the Prophets.

The XII. Minor Prophets were conjoined in one Volume, or Book, lest by their
littleness they should be scattered or perish. Rivet.

March 1th. 1652.
Imprimatur

Edm: Calamy.

LONDON, Printed by R N for Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

Viro Eruditione juxta ac Pietate praestantissimo, IOANNI OWENO, SS.Th.D.

Aedis Christi Decano dignissimo, and Academiae Oxoniensis jam secundum
Procancellario vigilantissimo.

Lucubrationes hasce suas quales quales, in animi devotissimi testimonium ac
monumentum, L.M.Q.D.D.D.

IOANNES TRAPPVS

Ejusdem Aedis Christi, annis abhinc triginta, Alumnus.

The Preface to the Reader.
TRuly Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the
Sun, O but much more pleasant for the eye of faith to see the Sun of
righteousness: that light of life. Blessed, may we say, are our eyes which see
this Sun shine so gloriously from the Gospel; and though through glasses, yet
such as are, and will be kept from breaking by that presence of Christ promised
his Ministers of the Gospel to the end of the World, whom he calls, the light
of the world. Happy art thou, O England, where it has been daylight these
hundred years, and God-forbid that we should expose our selves to that the
condemnation, in loving darkness rather then light. If we shorten this our
day, certainly it will be our death. An evil generation therefore is that,
whose hellish principles prompt them utterly to extinguish all our burning and
shining Lamps, by draining out all their oil; and so are those children of the
night, whose hellish practices attempt the blowing out of these lights that do
discover their deeds of darkness, and because they cannot (no more then becken
the Sun from the sky) their breath is spent in cursing them as freely, and
fiercely, as the Ethiopians do the Sun for scorching them. If this continue,
sad are our fears, lest our Sun be not far from setting: and we take up that
lamentation with Jeremy, Woe unto us for the day goes away, for the shadows of
the evening are stretched out.

Neither are the Symptoms of this only in the professed disavowing of the
Ministry, by men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, and who
have put away a good conscience; but also in the dark lives of many of those
who seem to affect Gospel Light, and yet walk not honestly as in the day:
rejoice in the light, yet walk not as children of the light. Nay amongst the
best are not notions prosecuted more then practice? and our light like the
Moon's without heat? yea, and whereas the Father of lights has set up his
Candlestick amongst us, that we might do his work; we rather do our own, making
our selves, and not him our end. The good Lord in mercy make all his to face
about toward himself; and ^o face one another, as the Cherubims over the
Mercy-seat.

Reader, our advice to thee is, to do thy duty, though many others neglect
theirs: Bless God there are so many windows to let in light unto thee, and
pray that they may be yet clearer, to give in daily new light (thou know we
speak not in a fanatic Dialect) we mean, fresh, and fuller discoveries of
Gospel-mysteries; whereunto thou will find this Author has made no small
contribution, by these his Annotations upon the small Prophets, from before
which few have drawn the curtain so far as he; open therefore the Casement in
reading, and much light may be let into thy mind to understand things that have
been hid from thine eyes, or seen but dimly.

We need not commend the Author, all his works speak him to be a workman that
needs not to be ashamed, an Interpreter one among a thousand: we may say of
him, as Cyprian. to Called. Adeo exercitatus and in Scripturis peritus, ut caute
omnia, and consulto gerat. Origin speaking of the Prophets, calls them Bees,
and their Prophesies honey-combes, this Expositor God has made skillful both
in hiving and expressing.

This friend of the Spouse, presents her here with more new borders of gold,
enameld and set out with spangles of silver, wrought upon a precious part of
holy Writ, which he has beautified with variety of humane Learning. And lest
thy heart should rise against this expression; give us leave to tell thee, that
though many in these last, and worst, and woeful days; scoff at the learned
Languages, and Arts and Sciences, as the Fox in the Greek Epigram, disparaged
the fair and ripe grapes, because they were out of his reach; yet there is a
necessity of them, for the right dividing the word of truth which is evinced by
a man approved; Dr. Featly tree of sav. kn.
who between derogating from the al-sufficiency of Scripture (which is
sacrilege, and blasphemy) on the one side, and detracting from the worth of
University Learning (which is an Anabaptistical frenzy) on the other side;
lays down the truth in the middle, in this Aphorism: Scripture is of it self
abundantly sufficient for us, but we are not sufficient for it, without the
help of Arts and Liberal Sciences: we cannot sufficiently conceive or declare
the works of God without natural Philosophy, nor Law of God without moral,
nor his Attributes without Metaphysics, nor the dimensions of the Ark, and
Temple without the Mathematics, nor the songs of Sion without Music and
Poetry: we cannot Interpret the text without Grammar, analize it without
Logic, press and apply it without Rhetoric. These it has seemed good to the
holy Ghost to use in the Penning of Scriptures, to show their usefulness in
their opening; and who can understand, or expound Prophesies already fulfilled,
and to be accomplished, without insight into profane History. As for knowledge
in the Tongues, he deserves to have his tongue cut out that dares but mutter a
word against it: dulcius ex ipso font.

There are indeed diverse Cautions, and Directions, given by the ancient holy
Fathers, in the use of humane Learning, which this learned, godly Writer has
exactly observed: For he has purged and cleans'd it, cut off the bond-womans
hair, pared her nails, and washed her with Soap; his chief care being not
(...), but (...); as it is not only (...), but also (...). In him (to use the
words of that divine Poet) doctrine and life, colors and light combine and
mingle. He does moreover subject and make humane Learning subservient to
Divine. And finally uses it moderately, without affectation; and modestly
without ostentation.

If we should now work an Emblem of this giver in his gift, brought unto the
Spouse of Christ, as that reverend, learned, pious Doctor did upon his four
Preachers, and apply all his images and motto's to this Author, they that know
him, and have heard him, and seen his constant conversation, would (we presume)
justify our judgment: but we forbear; only taking leave (before we take
leave of thee) to super-adde thus much to our thoughts of this Book: That
though in his former Commentaries he has done excellently, yet this excels
them all; as in other things, so in this especially, that the Text is expounded
more largely, and large satisfaction given to the Reader in the sense of the
word; which well becomes a work of this nature. So that here is not only
work for the studies of young Divines, but the gravest may ask counsel of this
Elihu, who is so full of matter, the Spirit of God within him constraining him
thus to lay out himself for the good of the Church. Private men also if they
please to take the pains, here may find what will very much both profit and
delight. Let us request a concurrence of thine, with ours, and the prayers of
many, for this Reverend and worthy Author, that he may live long, and long a
burning and shining light, and be enabled (by the influence of Divine beams)
before his eyes be closed, to open the rest of holy Scripture; which we hope is
his purpose, and are sure is the earnest desire, and expectation of his
fellow-brethren: And that his path may be as the shining light that shines
more and more unto the perfect day.

His and thine in the service of Christ, John Bryan. Obadiah Grew.
Coventry, August 29th. 1654.
Christian Reader,
THough an Attestation from me to this work, is but to light a candle to the
Sun, the Author being so well known, and approved of in the Church of Christ
by his former labors: yet out of my respect to the Author, and desire of thy
profit, I thought fit to tell thee, that besides the golden Eloquence, sweet
Similitudes, and fitly applied Histories, which thou shall find interwoven
through all this Work, thou shall meet with more for Exposition and opening of
the difficult Texts in this, then in most of his former Commentaries: And there
is no Verse through all these twelve Prophets, upon which he has not said
something. And that which may make this Work more desirable is, that there is
very little in English, written upon this portion of Scripture: Besides the
Author is now grown Aged, and so better experienced in this kind of writing
then formerly. In the latter part of this Book, thou shall meet with a
Treatise, called The Righteous man's Recompense, upon Mal. 3.16, etc. which
therefore is fitly annexed to the former. The subject is most Divine,
Comfortable, and Necessary, full of practical Divinity, and matter of daily
use for every Christian. The manner of handling it, exceeding delightful,
concerning which I may say with the Poet, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile
dulci. I presume that I shall need to add no more, but to request thee, to
join thy prayers with mine to the God of heaven, that he would prolong the
Authors life, that he may go over the rest of the Bible, as he has already
begun, and to subscribe my self

From my study in Threedneedle street: July 27th 1654. Thine in the Lord, Sa:
Clarke.

JOHN TRAP Anagr. HARP ON IT.
So sweet is Scripture Harmony, that we
Bring it to argue it is Divinity.
But yet we understand the Music better
When you HARP ON IT, both by note and letter.
We think you finger't well, and if you will,
We shall entreat you to HARP ON IT still.
S. Clarke. A. M.

To the Reverend. Mr. J. Trap, upon his Commentary, etc.
To the Reverend. Mr. J. Trap, upon his Commentary, etc.
John Trap Anagr. Oh! in part. John Trappe Anagr. Part in hope.
And was I so mistrustfull us to fear
There would no more of Trap in Print appear?
Oh! now I see 'twas but IN PART, in pledge;
What we received before, was but to edge
Our appetites, So't has. We like and wish
We might feast every day on such a dish.
May you live to complete this work: for we
Love that good fruit should ripen on the tree.
I Will fear no more, but that while heavens favor
Lends you to us, you will freely give your labor.
It Is our new treasure, though it be your old store.
Farewell but yet I PART IN HOPE of more.
J. Clark: A. M.

In Eruditum Autorem.
Livelaeus ille magnus, qui lustris abhinc
Qua^^ordecim Lingua Professor Sanctae erat
Academiarum in al^^ra nostratium,
Et partumen capitis inter masculos
Scitosque foetus, luce Lucem quam attulit
Aliq^ot Prophetarum minorum, quos vocant,
Donavit, O si (g^ns teg^ra saepius
Ardextiusque vo^a sundi^ ^^iia)
Non coel^^um ante copias kine emigrans
Auxisset, ist^m quam Prophetis omnibus,
Saltem minoribus, suam caliginem
Sic p^orsus exemisset Interpres sacer.
Quibus ille tantopere suo merito placet,
Adeste, TRAPPI has paginas evolvite;
A^^^e fut^^as erudit^ omnibus
P^^qu^ gratas atque Livelaei fuit
(...) very aureum quo pauculos
Ex ^^is Prothe^s clar^^^^s reddidit.
Livelaeus al^er TRAPPVS; Author Vividus:
Vt Liber^ si^ ^^ Libris felix suis:
Vtri^que pl^^^^^, piis, elegantibus,
E^rlesiamq^e plurimum ditantibus.
Morinecesse est a^teris, sue ut Patri:
At alteris, divina sic pandentibus
Oracla, sic docentibus, sic entheis,
Actas futura est quanta Vivacissin^is.
Thomas Dugard. A.M.R.B.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...);
(...)
(...).
Tho. Dugard. A.M.R.B.

A Table of such Texts of Scripture as in the Annotations on the twelve Minor
Prophets, and in the Treatise annexed, are occasionally explained.
Chap. Verse.

GEnesis 37.35. I will go down to the grave to my son mourning Page. 581 Levit.
19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf, etc. I am the Lord Page. 808 Numb. 11.15.
Moses said, I pray thee kill me out of hand Page. 240 -- 23.21. God sees no
iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel Page. 927 Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you
thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise people Page. 109 -- 11. As the
Eagle carries her young ones on her wings Page. 578 1 Samuel 7.6. met together
at Mizpeth, drew water and poured it out before the Lord Page. 803 2 Kings
18.4. Hezekiah brake the brazen serpent, and called it Nehushtan Page. 434 1 Chronicles. 17.23, 24, 25. See how David improves Gods promise, and works upon it
Page. 390 1 -- 21.12. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet
Page. 392 2 -- 34, 28. Thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace Page. 228
Ezra 2.62. therefore they were as polluted put from the priesthood Page. 622
Nehem.3.16. And to the house of the mighty Page. 579 Esth. 8.7. Because he laid
his hands on the Jews Page. 373 Job 13.10. He will surely reprove you, if you
secretly accept persons Page. 645 -- 14.17. Mr transgression is sealed up in a
bag Page. 101 -- 38.31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion Page. 253 Psalm. 5.3. In the morning will I direct my
prayer to thee, and look up Page. 176 -- 7. Title. David's words concerning Cush
the Benjamite Page. 287 -- 32.4.5. for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me
Page. 607 -- 36.1, 2, 3, 4. the transgression of the wicked says within my
heart Page. 805, 806 -- 65.1, 2. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion, unto
thee shall the vow be perfor. Page. 891 -- 68.21. He shall wound the hairy
scalp of such an one as goes on in trespasses Page. 870 -- 76.3. there he
broke the arrows, the shield, the sword and the Battle Page. 211 -- 12. He cuts
off the spirit of Princes Page. 513 -- 80.2, 3, 7. Stir up thy strength, and
come and save us Page. 676 -- V. 3. Turn us again O God, and cause thy face to
shine and we shall be saved -- V. 7. Turn us again O God of hosts, and cause
thy face to shine and we shall be saved -- 102.13, 14. Thou shall arise and
have mercy on Sion for the set time is come Page. 505 -- V. 14. For thy
servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof Page. 505 --
116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice Page. 608 -- 119.56. This
had I because I kept thy precepts Page. 684 Prove. 5.18, 19. Rejoice with the
wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving bind Page. 652 -- 10.25. As the
whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more Page. 393 -- 11.7. When the wicked
man dies, his expectation shall perish Page. 256 -- 24.25. But to them that
rebuke him shall be delight Page. 701 Eccles. 7.16, 17. Be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise Page. 705 Ver 17. Be not overmuch
wicked, neither be thou foolish Page. 705 -- 12.11. The words of the wise are
as goads and nayls Page. 816 Cant. 2.14. That art in the clefts of the Rocks,
in the secret places of the stairs Page. 582 -- 4.9. Thou have ravished my
heart, my sister and my spouse Page. 826 Esaiah 25.11. He shall spread forth
his hands as he that swimmeth Page. 243 -- 26.16. They poured forth a prayer
when thy chastening was upon them Page. 110 -- 305. They are but vain words, I
have counsel, and strength for war Page. 527 -- 54.^1. I will lay thy stones
with fair colors, and thy foundation with Saphyrs Page. 49 -- 66.1^.20. And I
will set a sign and send to Tharshish Pull and Lud Page. 623 Ezekiel.16.3, 4, 5,
6. Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan, etc. Page. 920 --
16.^1. Thou have slain my children, and delivered them to the fire Page. 214 --
29.1^. Every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled Page. 216 --
37.16. Take thou one stick, and write upon it for Judah Page. 603 -- 38.17. Art
thou he of whom I have spoken in ancient times by my Prophets Page. 514 Dan.
2.4. Tell thy servants the Dream, and we will show the interpretation Page. 533
-- 3.14. It is true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my God
Page. 99 Hosea 13.1, 2. When Ephraim spoke trembling he exalted himself Page.
928 Matthew. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it Page. 879 --
21.20. How soon is the sig-tree withered away Page. 626 -- 23.35. that upon you
may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth Page. 496 -- 24.7. for
nation shall rise against nation Page. 477 Luke 1.74, 75. that he would deliver
us from our enemies, that we may serve him Page. 945 -- 75. in holiness and
righteousness all our lives Page. 945 -- 18.2, 3. there was in the city a
Judge that feared not God nor man Page. 218 Acts 3.19. That your sins may be
blotted outwhen the times of refreshing come Page. 844 Romans 8.19. Expectation
of the creature waits for the manifestation of the sons, etc. Page. 889 1
Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods
Page. 926 1 -- 12.4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit.
Page. 209 1 -- 12.31. Covet earnestly the best gifts, yet I show to you a more
excellent way Page. 428 2 -- 5.14. For the love of Christ constrainethus Page.
893 Phil. 4.6. Be careful in nothing, but let your requests be made known to
God. Page. 836 Col. 4.6. Knowing how to answer every man Page. 822 1 Timothy 1.14.
The grace of God was exceeding abundant Page. 145 1 -- 4.2. Having their
consciences seared with a hot iron Page. 668 Heb. 11 6. For he that comes to
God must believe that he is Page. 698 -- 11.21. Jacob worshipped leaning upon
the top of his staff Page. 69 Jam. 1.9, 10. Let the brother of low degree
rejoice that he is exalted Page. 909 -- 4.8, 9, 10. Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to you Page. 832 1 Pet 1.11. searching what, or what manner of
time the spirit of Christ Page. 504 1 John 5.13. These things have I written
unto you that you might believe on God Page. 700 Rev. 10.1. And a rain-bowe was
on his head Page. 390 -- 13.7. fear God and give glory to him, for his hour of
judgment is come Page. 879 -- 18. Court the number of the beast, for it is the
number of a man Page. 261 -- 16.14, 15, 16. for they are the spirit of Devils
working miracles Page. 411 -- 17.1. I will show to you the judgment of the
great whore Page. 15 -- 18.2. Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen Page. 84 --
18.9. The Kings of the earth shall lament for her Page. 264 -- 21.16. He
measured it 12000 furlongs Page. 600
Books formerly published by this Author.
1 GOds love tokens, and the Afflicted man's Lessons: in a Treatise upon Revel.
3.19. 2 The true Treasure, etc. A Discourse concerning the Divinity and
Excellency of the holy Scriptures: Out of Heb. 1.1. 3 A Commentary upon the
four Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles. The second Edition much
enlarged by the Author, and printed in Fol. 4 A Commentary upon all the
Epistles of the Apostles, and upon the Revelation: together with a Decad of
Common-places. 5 A Commentary upon the Pentateuch, or Five Books of Moses. 6 A
Commentary upon the holy Writings of King Solomen: viz. Proverbs Ecclesiastes,
and the Song of Songs.
These Books following are to be sold by PHILEMON STEPHENS at the Gilded Lion
in Paul's Church yard.
1 Concil^^, Decreta, Leges, Constitutiones de Re Ecclesia^^^ o^bis Britanici
ab initio Christianae ibidem religionis c^m annotationibus non minus pijs. quam
doctis, opus Antiquitatis studiosis apprime gratum and utile a Hen. Spelmani
Equitis. Fol. 2 Glossarium crudiristimum: in quo prisci Ritus quam plurimi
^nnarantur a Hen. Spelman. Fol. 3 De non temerandis Eccles^^^, Or of the Right
and respect due unto Churches, not to be violated, written by S. Hen. Spelman.
4 4 Tithes too hot to be touched, cortain learned Treatises, proving Tithes to
be due, by the laws of Nature, Scripture, and Reason, therefore neither
Jewish, Popish, nor inconvenient, written by Sir Hen. Spelman. 40 5 Psalterium
Davidis Latino-Saxonicum, a J. Spelmanno Hen. F. e patris Bibliotheca in lucem
editum, ubi ad finem uniuscu^usque Psalmi preces op^inae in animum psalmi
reperiuntur. 40 6 The Best Religion, or certain learned Treatises and Sermons,
wherein is largely explained the sum and principal heads of the Gospel, by Dr.
Gr. Williams. 7 A Commentary, or exposition on the Proverbs of K Solomon, where
the litterall sense is chiefly considered, the Original Hebrew Texts, our
English Translations, and Classical Authors are examined and considered by
Michael Jermin Dr. in Divinity. Fol. 8 A practical exposition on 4 select
Psalms, viz. 27.84.85. and 87. by that godly and learned Divine, Tho Piersen
B.D. 40 9 An examination and confutation of the chief points of Antinomianisme,
with an answer to a pamphlet entitled, The co^passionare Samaritan, handling
the power of the Magistrate in compulsion of conscience, written by Tho Bedford
B D. 40 10 The Civil Magistrates power in matters of Religion, stated and
debated according to Scripture grounds, with an answer to all objections
against the same, by Tho. Cobbet, of Lyn in New England. 4 11 Clavis
Apocalyptica, inna^^ and insitis vesionum, characteribus e^u^a (...)
demonstrate (...) comment. in apoalypsin, qu^^^us acce^^it in hac tertia
editione conjectura de Gogo and Magogo, by Jes. Medi. 40 13 A discourse
touching the true notion of the Lords Supper, also the union of Christ and the
Church in a shadow, by R. Cudworth, D. D. 4 14 A Commentary on the Lamentations
of Jeremie, by Joh. Vdall 40 15 The New Birth, or a Treatise of Regeneration,
in Sermons, by W Wheatly 4 late of Banbury 16 The Christian conflict, showing
the difficulties and duties of a Christian soldier in his warfare, with the
armor and graces necessary thereto, as also a discussion of the case of Usury,
and depopulation, with the errors of the Antinomianits, by Tho. Bentham. 4^ 17
-- Also the society of Saints. A Treatise of Christian good-fellows, and
good-fellowship, by the same Author, in 4^ 18 A relation of the procedings of
the Assembly at Perth in Scotland, touching Divine worship, etc. in the year
1618. 19 An exposition of the ten Commandments, by Mr. J. Dod. 40 20 The
Doctrine of the Sabbath vindicated, by R. Bifield, against the Tenent of Mr. Ed
Brerewood. 40 21 Camans calamity, being a Poetical relation of the destroying
of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian. 40 22 Article^ of Religion agreed on at a
Convocation holden at Dublin in Ireland, in the year 1615. in 40 23 Touching
supremacy in causes Ecclessiasticall, showing how the powers Civil^nd
Ecclesiastical may act without incroachment on each other, written in the year
1647. tending to Peace and setling^ by John Geree. 40 24 The works of Dr. John
Owen Dean of Christ-Church, and Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford. 40
25 Several Sermons of sundry eminent Divines, on days of Public Humiliation,
and other special occasions, viz. Dr. Burges, Mr Scudder, Mr Gower, Mr.
Buroughs, Mr. Johnson, Mr. ^ickering, Mr. Vdall, Mr. Tesdale, Dr. Hill, Mr.
Green, Dr. Owen, Hardwick, etc. 40 26 The works of Mr. Robert Abbot now Pastor
of the Church at St. Augustines gate in Wa^ling street London, viz. A
Carechisticall Treatise, wherein the chief Principles of Religion are 1
Propounded. 2 Expounded. 3 Applied, with three Sermons on Psalm. 19.12. Mark
3.45.46. Psalm. 31.5. The building of a Christian Family on Psalm. 127.1.
Directing to the duties of the several persons of a Family. 80

A trial of Church forsakers, justifying against the Brownists, that the
Church of England is 1 a True Church, 2 has a True Ministry, 3 has a True
Worship. 80

The young man's warning-piece, a suneral Sermon Pro. 4 10. 120

Four other Sermons, on Judge. 11.27. Mat. 7.12. 1 Timothy 1.19 120

27 A Re^o^s^rance of the holy life, and happy death of John Bruen, of Bruen
Stapl^sord in Cheshire Esquire, exhibiting variety of memorable and exemplary
passages, useful for all for^ of people, as a path to piety and charity. 8^
Written by Mr. W Hind of Banbury. 28 The life and death of the learned and
godly Divine Mr. Sam^ Crook of Wrington in Somersetshire. 80 29 A Treatise
opening the Promises and Threatenings in Scripture, by F. Bridges. 80 The stare
of the Now Roman Church discussed in vindication of Dr. Hall, Bishop of Exeter,
against the cavils of Hen. Burton. by H. Chomley. 80

30 A Treatise directing the weak Christian how he may rightly celebrate the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, with Meditations thereon, by Joh. Downam, B.D.
80 31 The sum and substance of Christian Religion, by S. Brown. late of
Shrewsbury. 80 32 The Temple, sacred Poems and private ejaculations, by G.
Herbert. 120 33 The Synagogue, sacred Poems in imitation of Mr. G. Herbert. 120
34 The substance of 3. Sermons on Ephesians. 1.22, 23. showing the Church to be the
proper subject of the new Covenant, with other considerable practical
propositions, in reference to the debates on foot amongst us, by W. Sambrook.
120 35 Sovereign comforts for a troubled conscience, wherein Satan's subtilties
are discovered, to the consolation of the distressed, by R. Yarrow. 120 36 the
light of faith, and way of holiness showing what to believe, and for what to
strive and suffer for, in this contending age, and how to live in all estates
and conditions according to this faith, by Rich. Byfield. 120 37 Directions for
the private reading of the Scriptures, wherein the scope of the whole Scripture
is methodically set down, and rules to read with profit given, with pithy
directions to reconcile places of Scripture that seem to differ, by N. Byfield.
and Jo. Geree. 120 38 The sum of the Principles of Christian Religion, by N.
Byfield. 120 39 Tho. Categeri or Tetragrammato nomine Jehovah. dissertatatio
qua vocis Jehovah apud nostros recep^^ usus defenditor, and a quorundam
cavillationibus iniquis partier atque inanibus vindicatur. 120 40 Sabbato
Dominica, 4 propositions, tending to reconcile the seeming disterences between
the letter of the Law, and Christian liberty in the doctrine of the Sabbath, or
Lords day, by Chr. Harvey. 120. 41 An explanation of the principles of Religion
expressed in the Catechism of the Church of England, set down in the
Common Prayer book, by W. Crompton. 12 42 The hunting of the Fox, or A display
of flattery, by Hen. Harfleet Gent. 12 43 Mount Tabor, six divine Meditations,
for the exercise of faith, as propounded by Mr. S. Ward, in his Treatise of the
life of Faith. Chap. 6, page 69. with other occasional Meditations, by R.
Willis. 44 The History of the life and reign of King Henry the 7th by the
learned Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam. 45 A Treatise of the nature and
quality of such simples, which are frequently used in Medicines, together with
many compound medicines for most diseases incident to mankind; as also an
explanation of hard words and terms of Art, for the understanding of the
Vulgar. Also a Tract concerning the diseases of children, by Rob. Pemel
Physician. 4 46 A Treatise of the chief internal diseases of the Head, with
their signs, prognostics, and cures, by R. Pemel Physician. 8 47 Help for the
poor, being a collection of sundry medicines easily to be had, for many
diseases, with an appendix concerning letting blood in the small pox, by the
same Author. 8 48 Claudij Galeni, Opuscula ^ari^, cum variae lectiones and
annotationes criticae a Theodoro Goulstono 4 49 Two Lessons, 1. Of self
denial, on Matt. 16.24. 2. ^ Selftriall, on 2 Cor. 13.5. As also the
privilege of Adoption, on John 1.12, 13.40 by Mr. Tho. Hooker. of New England.
50 Tho. Campanella, his Treatise, showing by what means the K. of Spain may
attain to an universal Monarchy, together with a political description of
each particular Empire Kingdom, and Commonwealth of the World, with the causes
of their Rise and fall: published in regard of what is advised concerning
England and Holland, much whereof is accomplished. 51 Paralipomena
Orthographiae Etymologiae prosodiae, una cum scholis ad canones de genere
substantivorum de Anomalis Ptae^crito and Supinis verborum Synta^i carmiuum
ratione, and figuris, collecta ex optimis authoribus in quatuor libris, per
Joh. Dansi^. 40 52 Articles of Peace between England and Portugal. 40 53 The
Anatomy of the English Nunery at Lisbone, wherein the l^ud practices of those
Nuns and Friars are discovered to the world, by one who was seduced to their
ways, R. Sobinson. 40 54 Schicards Hebrew Grammar in 80 55 A Grammatical
explanation of the 13the book of Ovids Metamorphosis, containing that
Rhethoricall contest betwixt Ajax and Ulysses for Achilles Armor, exhibiting
the power of Valor, and prevalencie of Eloquence, by Tho. Hall. 80 56
Arithmatick made easy in 2 Books. 1 Natural. 2 Artificial by Edm. Wingate
Esquire 80 57 Two Tables of Logarithmes of ^all Numbers from 1 to 100000 cont acted
into a portable Volume, by N. Roll. The other, the Logarithmes of the right
signs and tangents of all degrees and minutes of the Quadrant, each divided
into 100 minutes. and the Logarithme of the Semidiamiter, or Radius being 10
00000 00000. with their admirable use for the resolution of Problems in
Geometry. Astronomy, Geography, and Navigation, by Edm. Wingate Esquire 80 58 The
use of the rule of Proportion, by the same Author. 59 The Art of Numbering by
Rods, whereby the redious operation by Multiplication, Division, and Extraction
of Roots, both Square and Cubick are avoided, being for the most part performed
by Addition, and Subsiraction, first invented by the Lord Napier, Baron of
Mareston, and since published by Seth Partridge. 12 60 An Abridgement of all Sea
Laws to be found among any people, or nation upon the coasts of the great
Ocean and mediterranean Sea: more especially fitted for the Sea-farers of Great
Britain. 80 61 Index Rhethoricus, and Oratorius scholis, and Institutioni
tenerioris aetatis accommodatus cui adijciuntur formulae Oratoriae, and Index
Poeticus opera, Tho. Farnabij 12 62 P.Virgilii opera and tialis M. Val. Marti
^^^ Epigrammata Notis ad marginalibus illustrata a Tho. Farnabio. 63 Magnetis
Reductorium Theologicum Tropologicum in quo ejus, novus verus and supremus usus
Indicatur, per S. Ward. 12 64 The Deaf mau cured. A Treatise on Mark 7.32.
Printed for the comfort of the Deaf, by Tho. Higgens, Minister of the Word at
Wickwar near Bristoll. 8 65 Mr. Tho. Gatakers Sermon on Psalm 48.7, 8. in
memorial of Englands Deliverance from the Spanish Invasion 1588. 4 66 The
Mystery of Godliness, or the Character of a Saint, in seeming contradictions
by Joh. Crofts Minister of the Gospel. 67 The spiritual Touchstone, or the
signs of a godly man, drawn in so plain and profitable manner as all sorts of
Christians may try themselves thereby; likewise showing how the weak Christian
may establish his assurance by Nic. Byfield. 12 68 A Commentary on the
Revelation of St. John, by Thomas Brightman. 4 69 Rob. Bodij Scoti. SS. Theol.
Acad. Salmuriana, Glascuana and Edinburgena. In Epistolam Pauli Apostoli ad
Ephesios Prelectiones, supra C.C. Lectione varia, multisaria e^uditione and
pietate singulari referiae. In quibus Analysin, and explicationem, copiosam,
and praetor doctrinarum observationem appositum, and ad usum applicatum Fol. 70
Trigonometria Britanica five de dimensione Triangulorum libri duo, a Hen.
Briggio. Fol. 71 The large Book of Martyrs in 3 Volumes. Fol. 72 A Complete
Table to the whole Common Law, by Tho. Ash Gent. in 2 Volumes Fol. 73 The works
of Dr. Joseph Hall late Bishop of Exeter. Fol. 74 A Guide to Godliness, or a
Treatise of Christian life, showing the Duties, with Helps and Reasons thereto,
and means to remove the impediments thereof by Mr. J Downam B. D. Fol. 75 The
large Bible used in Churches. Fol. 76 The large Annotations upon the whole
Bible, in two Volumes. Fol. 77 A Cordial for the afflicted touching the
necessity and utility of afflictions, with the happiness of those that
thankfully receive them, and the miscry of those that want them, by A Harsnet.
12 78 The Shield of the Righteous, or the 91. Psalm expounded, with the
addition of Doctrines and Uses, by Rob. Horn. 40 -- 79 Also 3 Sermons, preached
by the learned Dr. Eedes Dean of worcesier, upon Ephesians. 2 19, 20, 21, 22.
Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Psalm 37.35, 36, 37. published by Rob. Horn. 40. 80 A short
discourse between Mr. Robert Bolton and one M. S concerning Usury. 4 81 A
Collection of sundry most elegant phrases of the Latin Tongue, by Mr. Packer of
New England 82 A Sermon of comemoration of the Lady Danvers, by John Done Dean
of St. Paul's, together with other commemorations of her, by her Son Mr. George
Herbert 12 83 A learned Treatise of Globes both Celestial and Terrestrial,
by Robert Hues in English. 8 84 A brief Treatise of Last-Wills and Testaments,
with the Laws and Customs of the Realm in such cases, composed by Henry
Swinburne. 4 85 The Declarations and Speeches in Parliament of Sir Edw. Deering
Knight. 40 86 Sir H Martyn and Mr. Glanvils speeches in Parliament touching the
Petition of Right 1629 4 87 Several Catechismes in Welsh. 8 88 An Analysis on
the ^ Timothy 1.15. with an Appendix c^^led Chronologia vapulans, py Laurence
Sarson fellow of Emmanuel College Camb. 4 89 The Strong Helper, offering to
bear every man's b^then, showing how in all troubles to cast our burden on God,
with infallible grounds of comfort for the quieting of troubled consciences, by
Jo. Haiward. 8 90 A Commentary upon the XII Minor Prophets, wherein the Text is
explained some Controversies discused, sundry Cases of Conscience cleared, and
many remarkable matters handled that had by former Interpreters been
pret^mitted. Hereunto is added the Righteous Man's Recompense, or a true
Christian Characterized and encouraged, out of Masdhi Chap. 3. verse. 16, 17,
18. by John Trapp of Weston upon Avon in Gloucester-shire.
A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophecy of HOSEA.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE Word of the Lord] Not cunningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16.
or humane testimonies, that can make but a humane faith; but the word of the
everliving God, the Scripture that cannot be broken, John 10.35. 1 These. 2.13.
the very heart and soul of God, as Gregory calls it.

That came unto Hosea] The Lord is said to come to Laban, Abimelech, Balaam,
etc. Cor and anima Dei.
But he never concredited his word to any such profane wretches, as he did to
the holy Prophets which have been since the world began; of whom it is said, as
here, The word of the Lord came to Hosea, Luke ^.
His name signifies a Savior: a fit name for a Minister, whose work it is to
save himself and them that hear him. To save them if he can, Obad. 21. 1 Timothy
4.16.
to deliver their souls from going into the pit, Joh 33.24. to pull them, if
possible, out of the fire, Jude 23. to give them the knowledge of salvation by
the remission of sin: to give it I say, not by infusion (for that he cannot do)
but by instruction; and that he must endeavor to do, Luke 1.77.
as this Prophet did: then whom few Ministers ever ran so long a race without
cessation, or cespitation, so constantly, so courageously, so unweariable. For
he continued prophesying sixty five years at least, says Pareus; seventy,
says Oecolampadius; it is very probable fourscore years, says Mr Burroughes.
The Hebrews say ninty years, quibus multa dixit quae non scripsit, wherein he
uttered much more then he wrote. This we may easily believe: for we have but
the short Notes or heads of his Sermons, and larger Discourses, which he seems
also to have set down for the use of the Church in his extreme old age, whereof
they carry a smatch in the shortness of his speech, applied, as much as might
be, to the measure of his breath. Hence Hierom fitly calls him, comm^ticum,
and quasi per sententias loquentem, concise and sententious. Amputatas loquitur
sententias and verba ante expectatum cadentia, Victor Giselin. de Salust.
stylo. Lud. Vives.
as one says of Salust; Multo est verbis quam sensu restrictior atque
concisior, as another says of Livy; He speaks much in few; and seems to have
more sentences then sayings. The ofner you read him, the more you may get by
him: and nunquam tamen dimittat te sine siti; Lips. de Thucyd.
and yet the more you get, the more you covet. Obscure he is (as delivering
things briefly) and such as will not be easily acquainted with you, but upon
further suit: Hence that Epiphonema in the perclose of his prophecy, Who is
wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know them? But
this must waken and not weaken our more diligent search, not being content with
the first oar that offers it self to our view, but digging deeper and deeper,
till we become owner of the whole treasure, which will sufficiently pay for the
pains. Wherefore search the Scripture, follow on to know the Lord; get all the
dimensions of knowledge, which (now in the great abundance of the means we
have) does even bow down to us, as trees do that are laden with fruit, so that
a child may gather from them.

the son of Beeri] That is, of a well that has pure and clear water in it, and
that never fails; living water, as the Scripture calls it, and not mixed
with mud. Ministers should be the children of Beeri, of a well dug by the
direction of the lawgiver, Numb. 21.17. whence people should draw waters with
joy, the pure waters of life, the unadulterated milk of Gods word; not
troubled, brackish, and sowrish doctrines, such as the Popish Clergy (called
therefore the Sea, Rev. 12.12.) do set abroach, which rather brings barrenness
to their hearers, and gnaws their entrals, then quench their thirst, or cause
fruit. These and all false teachers, make Gods flock drink that which they have
fouled with their feet, Ezekiel. 34.19. yea, impoysoned with their hands: as the
malicious Jews once cast bags of poison into many wells here, to do mischief,
and were therefore banished the Country. False doctrine is like a filthy pond,
wherein fish die soon, and frogs live long: it is like the dead Sea, Rev. 8.10,
11.
or the great falling-star, called Wormwood, which made the third part of the
waters become wormwood, so that many men died of the waters because they were
made bitter by that son of perdition, who was himself the gall of bitterness,
and bond of perdition. Who this Beeri was, it appears not in Scripture. It
seems he was a man famous in those days among the Israelites (and is here
named honoris gratia, for honor sake to the Prophet) as Alexander and Rufus
the sons of Simon the Cyrenian, were men famously known in the Church of the
New Testament; and are therefore but named only by S. Mark chapter 15.21. The Jews
have a tradition, that whenever a Prophets father is named, that father was
likewise a Prophet as well as the son. And Beeri might be binominis, and have
some other name of more note: like as Pethuel the father of the Prophet Joel,
Joel 1.1. Alsted.
is thought by some to have been Samuel, and to have been called Pethuel, that
is a perswader of God, because what he asked of God, he obtained.

in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, etc.] A young Prophet he must needs be
(especially if he prophesied fourscore years: See the the note above.) Happily he
began as early as did Samuel, Jeremy, Timothy, Origin, or Cornelius Mus: of
whom Sixtus Senensis testifies, Lib. 4.
that he was an admirable preacher at twelve years old. Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz,
Hezekiah] The Throne of Judah had some enterchanges of good Princes: Israel
none at all. The same justice therefore that made Israel a scourge to Judah,
made Assyria a scorpion to Israel; as is here set forth under the type of
Hosea's two last children Lo-ruhamah, and Lo-ammi; whereof in their place.
Meanwhile, this Prophet went through variety of conditions under so many
several Kings reigns (as did likewise Athanasius and Latimer) Jeroboams,
(especially) the second of that name, and here only named, when six other Kings
of Israel (in whose time Hosea prophesied) are not once mentioned, but lie
wrapped up in the sheet of shame, because wicked idolaters, such as God took no
delight in, and has therefore written them in the earth. And in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Joash] Not the son of Nebat, that ringleader of the ten
Tribes revolt from the house of David; but another little better, and yet very
prosperous and victorious, 2 King. 14.25, 28. He reigned also forty one years,
and did great exploits: yet is Hosea sent to contest with him, to declaim
against his sin and wickedness, and to proclaim heavy judgments against him
and his people. This the Prophet did for a long while together with all
fidelity and fortitude; when the King was triumphing over his enemies, and the
people were not only drunk, but even mad again, by reason of their
extraordinary prosperity, as Calvin expresses it. Non tantum temulenti erant
sed etiam prorsus insani. Calvin.
Now that so young a Prophet should so sharply contend with so fierce a people,
in the ruff of their pride and jollity: that he should so rouse and repple up
these drunkards of Ephraim with their crown of pride, Esaias 28.1. this shows him
to have been of an heroical spirit. Jonah his contemporary flinched when sent
against Nineveh. Micah the Morasthite (another of Hosea's contemporaries)
prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, and spoke to all the people
of Judah, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Zion shall be ploughed like a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house, the
high places of a forest. Yet did not Hezekiah King of Judah, and all Judah put
him at all to death, etc. Jer. 26.18, 19. He and Hosea, though they prevailed
little with the people they preached to, yet they were better dealt with then
the Prophet Esaias (their contemporary too) of whom Hierom tells us, out of the
Rabbines, that he was sawn asunder, because he said he had seen the Lord: and
secondly, because he called the great ones of Judah, Hieron. in Isa. 1.
Princes of Sodom, and rulers of Gomorrah, Isaiah 1.10.

Verse 2. The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea] Heb. In Hosea: to
note, that the Lord was both in his mind and mouth, in his spirit and speech.
God spoke in him, before he spoke out to the people. His prophecy must
therefore needs be divine and deep. That Is the best discourse that is dug out
of a man's own breast, that comes a cord ad cor, from the heart to the heart:
And blessed are the pleople (says one) that have such Ministers, that shall
speak nothing to them but what has been first spoken by God in them: saying
with David and Paul, We believe, therefore have we spoken: we also believe, 2
Cor. 4.13.
and therefore speak: we have experimented what we deliver: we believe and are
sure, that God is in us of a truth, and that we preach cum gratia and
privilegio. The beginning] Hence some gather, that Hosea was the first Prophet:
Hoseas videtur tempore and majestate aliis prior, says O Ecolampadius. Certain
it is he began before Esaias (because he prophesied in the days of Jeroboam, who
was before Vzziah) whether before Amos or no, is not so certain. Di praep.
Evang. l. 20. ^ulut.
Eusebius tells us there was no Greek History extant before Hosea's time. Well
therefore might that ancient priest of Egypt say to Solon, You Grecians are all
boys and babies in matters of Antiquity: neither is there one old man amongst
you. Samuel is counted the first Prophet, Acts 3.24. Plato in Tim^o
but Hosea was the first of those that lived in these Kings days, and likely
held out longest (see the Note on Verse 1.) as did father Latimer, preaching
twice every sabbath day, Act. and Mon.
though of a very great age: and rising to his study winter and summer at two
of the clock in the morning. Others read the words thus, At the beginning when
the Lord spoke by Hosea, he said to Hosea himself, Go take unto thee, etc. An
uncouth precept, and a rough beginning for a young preacher, whose youth might
be despised, and whose sharpness might be disgusted. But truth must be spoken,
however it be taken: and a preacher should take the same liberty to cry down
sin, that men take to commit sin, Esaias 58.1. Hierom was called fulmen
Ecclesiasticum, the Church thunderbolt: And our Mr Perkins applied the word so
close to the consciences of his hearers, that he was able to make their hearts
fall down, Mr Fullers Holy State.
and their hairs almost to stand upright. But in old age he was more mild, and
delighted much to preach mercy; as did also our Prophet Hosea, whose prophecy
is comminatory in the forepart, consolatory in the latter part. And the Lord
said to Hosea] This is now the third time inculcated for more authority sake,
which the people so rubbed and menaced would be apt enough to question. He
therefore shows them his commission, and that he has good ground for what he
says; that they may have no cause to cavil, Melch. Ad.
but reply as that good Dutch Divine did (if God would give them a heart so to
do) Veniat, veniat, verbum Domini, and submittemus ei, sexcenta si nobis essent
colla: Let the word of the Lord come, yea, let it come, and we will submit
there unto, though we had six hundred lives to lose for so doing.

Go take unto thee a wife of whoredoms] An arrant whore, a stinking strumpet,
Calvin.
scortum obsoletum, a known and trite harlot; such as were Thais, Lais, Phryne,
etc. yea, and such a one as, after marriage with a former husband at least,
went astray after other sweet-hearts; for so the application of the figure to
the subject, Chap. 2. requires it to be understood: Whereby it appears (says
Diodate) that all this was done in a vision. Others infer as much from that
phrase in this verse, The beginning of the word of the Lord in Hosea, that is,
(says Polanus) appearing and speaking to him by an inward vision, as it were
in an ecstasy. Besides, in the third chapter, and three first verses, the
Prophet is bidden to marry another harlot. to buy her for his own use, and to
keep her at his house for a time. Now scimus hoc non fuisse completum, says
Calvin; we know that this was never really done. It follows therefore that this
figure was only proposed to the people, that they might perpceive in the
looking-glass of this allegory; first, their duty toward God, second, their
disloyalty, thirdly, their penalty for the same. It is not an historical
narration, but a Prophetical vision. Children of fornication, a bastardly
brood: such as this evil and adulterous generation is; sons of the rebellious
whorish woman, children of transgr^ssion, a seed of falsehood, Esaias 57.4. The
Hebrews call such children brambles, such as Abimelech was, who grew in the
hedge-row of an harlot: they call them also Mamzer, as ye would say, a strange
blot: And Shatuki, or silent, because when others are praising their parents,
such must hold their peace, and hold down their heads with shame enough,
because by-blows.

for the land has committed great whoredoms] Fornicando fornicata est, i. e.
frequentissime and faedissime, most frequently and most filthily: See Eezek 23.
thoroughout. Aholah, (that is, Israel) played the harlot when she was mine,
verse 5. In her youth they lay with her, verse 8. so that she might say with
that impudent strumpet Quartilla in Petronius, ^etron. Satyr.
that she could never remember her selfa virgin: Yea, she grew old in her
adulteries, verse 43. opened her feet to every passenger, and multiplied her
whoredoms, Ezekiel. 16.25. Meretrices scilicet hoc est meretricissimae. Such a
common prostibulum is the whore of Rome. whom her followers call piam matrem,
quae gremium claudat nemini. Joan of Naples was a saint to her. Idolatry is
spiritual whoredom in many respects. It defiles the soul, Gods bridal-bed. It
breaks the marriage-knot, and discovenants. It enrageth God, who in this case
will take no ransom. It subjecteth men to Gods deepest displeasure: It besots
them and unmans them: they that make idols are like unto them, so are all they
that trust in them. Psalm. 115.


Lastly, ^dolatry is seldom without adultery, in a proper sense; as appears in
the old Heathens, at their feasts of Priapus, Lupercalia, etc. the Canaanites
had filled the Land from one end to another with their uncleanness, Ezra 9.11.
and in the Papists at this day, who reckon fornication a venial sin, have their
Stews allowed them; yea, among the very Indians, who abhor their most loathsome
living: And for Rome it self -- tota est jam Roma lupanar, it is become a great
brothelhouse, and her stench is come up to heaven, as Matthew Paris (one of her
sons) long since said. Departing from the Lord] In whom all amiables and
admirables are concentred. This did exceedingly aggravate the unkindnesse.

Verse 3. So he went] He said not, john 6.60.
This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Dura mihi praecipit, and poene terret.
He does not reason but run, dispute but dispatch. God must be obeyed, though we
see no sense for it. And took Gomer] which signifies both consummation and
consumption, to show that she was consummata meretrix, a complete whore, had
all the tricks of a whore; and brings her paramours to final consumption,
utter extermination.

the daughter of Diblaim] Not quasi de Belaim, a place so called, as Hugo
dreameth: though there was a wilderness of this name, whereto some think the
Prophet here alludeth, to show the Churches wretched beginning in its own
nature: as Cant. 3:6. Ezekiel. 16.7. But Diblaim is by some taken for Gomers
father: by more, for her mother, which is also held to be an harlot, according
to that Ezekiel. 16.44. As is the mother, so is the daughter. Diblaim signifies
bunches of dried figs, that were the delicacies of those times. Gluttony is the
gallery that lechery walks thorough. Sine Cerere and Libero friget Venus.
Concupiscence (as Plato says) has the lowest places, and is alligata ventri,
as one would tie an horse or an ass to the manger. Jer. 5.8.
Jeremy not unfitly compares sensualists to fed horses, neighing after their
neighbors wives: Saturity breeds security, which is the sure forerunner of
destruction. Est ergo hic gnome, says a Lapide. i. e. Here we have then an
elegant sentence, Gomer is the daughter of Diblaim, that is, rottenness of
sensuality: for as the worm that grows in the fruit, devoureth it; so does
grief, the pleasure of sin. This Observation we have from the Cabbalists.

Verse 4. Call his name Jezreel] For the honorable name of Israel is too good
for this people; call them therefore Jezreel, a people devoted to dispersion,
(...) spargere.
and such as I will scatter into the four winds of heaven, as the seeds^man
scatters his seed. Thus Jeconiah is called Coniah, (for a judgment upon him)
Bethel, Beth-aven, Har, Hammischa, the mount Olivet, or of Unction, Har
hammaschith, the mount of corruption, 2 King. 23.13. And this is not unusual
amongst men; so when they would disgrace a man, to clip or play upon his name:
as when they spitefully called Athanasius Sathanasius, Cyprian Coprian, (as if
all his excellent works were but dung) Calvine, Cain, etc. This people, says
God here, are more like Ahab then Jacob. Call them therefore Jezreel ( Ahabs
Court) that is, a den of thieves and murderers, where innocent Naboth cannot
be master of the vineyard that he was born to. Micah (who prophesied also much
about these times) has a saying much to the same purpose, Chap. 2. ver. 7. O
thou that art named, the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straightened?
are these his doings? q. d. Ye that boast of Jacob to be your father, do you
tread in his steps? are ye of his spirit, of his practice? was there such vile
profaneness found in him, as is openly found in you? David describes the
generation of such as seek God, Psalm. 24.6.
as seek his face, and then subjoyneth, This is Jacob, these are Israelites
indeed, these are Jews inwardly: and all others are degenerate plants, and are
the worse for their outward privileges: since tribulation and anguish shall be
upon every soul of man that does evil, but of the Jew first, and then also of
the Gentile, Romans 2.9.

for yet a little while] And yet this little was a long while, through Gods
gracious forbearance. As bad as this people were, they should not perish
without warning; yea, though the Lord foreknew they would make no good use of
it. (...), says the Heathen Historian: God loves to foresignifie, Herodot.
and premonish. But there is nothing more dangerous and disinall, then these
still revenges; as when God suddenly brake out in wrath upon Nadab and Abihu,
upon Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, Pharaoh at the Red Sea, when he would not beware.
It is a just both desert and presage of ruin, not to be warned. See this in
Nineveh, spared at first, but after a little while revolting, soundly paid for
the new and old faults, Nahum. 3.19. Non consurget iterum afflictio, says the
same Prophet, Nahum. 3.19.
chap. 1.9. Affliction shall not rise up the second time: God will not make two
doings of it: but when he begins, he will also make an end, 1 Samuel 3.12. that
is, as sure as he begins, so sure will he make an end: and though it may be
some time ere he begin, yet a little while (for he is slow to wrath, and of
great kindness) yet assuredly he will avenge the blood of Jezreel,] i. e. the
executions done by Iehu upon the house of Ahab, as so many murders: see 1 King.
16.7. 2 King. 9.24, 31. and 10.11.17.
This God did not presently, but that is nothing. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi,
nedum D^^. He is slow, but sure, Et tarditatem supplicij gravitate compensat,
Val. Max.
as the Heathen could say, the longer he holds, the harder he strikes: and
visits Iehu's house for bypast sins, that they made little reckoning of. Sin
may sleep a long time, like a sleeping debt, not called for of many years: As
Saul's sin in slaying the Gibeonites, not punished till forty years after: as
Ioabs killing of Abner, slept all David's days: as Amalec perished, for their
ill usage of Israel, many hundred years after. It is ill angring the Ancient of
days. He that says, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, takes his own time
for the doing of it: and who shall prescribe to him? It is dangerous offending
him whose displeasure is everlasting. Vapors, that ascend invisibly, come down
again in storms and showers. A sinner of an hundred years shall be accursed,
and made to possess the sins of his youth. It is not the last sand that
exhausts the hour-glasse, nor the last stroke that fells the Oak. Iehu's house
is visited, and his progeny extinguished in the fourth generation, for Iehu's
offenses. Gods work must be done truly, that there be no halting, and totally,
that there be no halving. But Iehu, as he had not that true heart spoken of by
the Apostle, Hebr. 10.22. but was double minded, James 1.8. and 4.8. (like that
mad Neapolitan that said, he had two hearts, one for God, and another for him
that would:) So he fulfilled not after God, or he followed not God fully, as
Caleb did, Numb. Implevit post mi. (...).
14.24. he did not all Gods wills as David, Acts 13. he served him not with a
perfect heart, as Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. He reformed the State, but not the
Church; or if he did something toward it, yet he was not through in it. He had a
dispensatory conscience: for though he rooted out Baals-worship, yet the golden
Calves must continue; piety must give place to policy. It was a just complaint
of Chemnitius, Principes regionem potius quam religionem quaerunt: pauperes
panem potius quam Christum. All men seek their own, but not the things of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 2.21. And yet piety has ever proved to be the best policy: and
the very Philosopher in his Politics gives this golden Rule. Arist. pol. l. 7.
c. 8.
(...). First take care of Divine things. Iehu seemed at first to be as zealous
a Reformer, as Iehosaphat: but though his fleece was fair, his liver was
rotten. In parabola ovis capras suas quaerebat; he was like the Eagle which
soareth aloft, not for any love of heaven: her eye is, all the while, upon the
prey; which by this means she spies sooner, and seizes upon better. He seems
to have been of Machiavels mind, viz. that virtue it self should not be sought
after, but only the appearance: because the credit is a help, the u^e a
cumber. Am. Marcel. Confuso quodam temperamento mi^ta. Camd.
Finally, of Iehu it may he said, as Marcellinus says of Julian, that by his
hypocrisy and double-dealing, Obnubilabat gloriae multiplices cursus, he
stained his many praiseworthy practices. Or as Camden says of King Henry the
eight; Fuerunt quidem in eo rege, etc. There were in that King great virtues,
and no less vices mingled, or rather jumbled together. Or lastly, as Folieta
Galeazo reports of Sfortia Duke of Millain, that he was a very monster, made
up, and compact of virtue and vice. See more verse 5. And I will cause to cease
the Kingdom.] This fell out after 76 years; which God counts and calls here,
but a little while: A thousand years with him are but as one day. What is our
life but a spot of time betwixt two eternities? Jam. 4.14.
It is even a vapor, says S. James, that appears for a little time, Heb.
4.1.
and then vanishes away. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us,
(and a door now opened) of entering into Gods rest, any of us should seem to
come short, or to come lag, andlate, as did Esau, the foolish virgins, those
that come a day after the fair, an hour after the feast; Agree with your
adversary quickly, prepare to meet thy God, Chrysol.
O Israel, Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententiae: Repent a day before
death, (and that may be this day, before the next) make Gods judgments present
in conceit, ere they come in the event, prevision is the likeliest way of
prevention, the surest means of mitigation: whereas coming on the sudden, they
find weak minds secure, make them miserable, leave them desperate.

Verse 5. I will break the bow of Israel] though it may seem to have a back of
steel, and though it be drawn by Ieh^ himself, with his full strength, as once
against Iehoram, to the piercing of his heart, 2 King. 9.24. He means, God will
blast all the power of their Ammunition, defeat their likeliest projects, and
practices, and make the strongest sinew in the arm of flesh to crack. He
breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, etc. Psalm. 46.9. He
renders the weapons vain, or successful, Isai. 54.17. Ierem. 50.9. as he did
when the Rats and Mice were sent into Sennacheribs Army in great abundance, to
gnaw and devour their quivers, Herod. l. 2.
bowe-strings, belts, bridles, shields, (as Herodotus relates) to show that the
shields of the earth belong to the Lord, that the Militia of the World is his,
that he orders the Ammunition, Ier. 50.25. And the like was done by this Lord
of Hosts, or Armies, when the wind and weather fought for Theodosius, in that
famous battle against the tyrant Maximus, Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 5.
celebrated by Claudian: As also when the Spanish Armado was defeated and
discomfited by the English in 88. That was very remarkable and for our purpose
apposite, which fell out in the battle between Edward the third of England, and
Philip of France. Philip enraged with a defeat, resolves presently to revenge
it; and hardly had patience to stay in Abbeville one day, while the Bridge to
pass over his Army was repayring. And with this precipitation and fury, into
the field he marches, elevated with an assured hope of triumphant Victory.
Daniels Works. 237.
But it fell out otherwise; for there fell at the instant of the Battle a
piercing shower of rain, which dissolved their strings, and made their bows
unusefull. In the valley of Iezreel] A city near to Maximinianopolis, says
Hierom. Of the valley wherein this City was situate, see Josh. 17.16. Judge.
6.33. It was in the tribe of Manasseh, and bordered upon Issachar, Josh. 19.18.
It was ten miles long, and two miles over; being called also, the plain of
Galilee, and was fit for a fight, for a pitched battle. Here i^ was, says
Adrichomius, that Gideon fought the Midianites Judge. 6.7. Saul the Philistines.
1 Samuel 31. Ahab the Syrians 1 King 20. And here Zachary (the last of Jehu's
line) was slain, and with him the kingdom of Israel received such a wound, that
it could never rise again. Mona^chies have their times and their turns, their
rise and their ruin. Junius renders it Propter Vallem Jericho, I will break
the bow of Israel, because of the wall of Jezreel: that is, says he, because
of the slaughter of Ahabs house there made by Jehu 2 King. 10 Jehu's Tent in
that execution was rewarded as an Act of Justice quoad substantiam operis, and
yet punished as an Act of policy quoad modum for the perverse end. Finibus non
officijs a vitijs discernuntur virtutes says Augustine. By the ends and not by
the works done, are virtues distinguished from vices. Two things make a good
Christian, and declare him so, good Actions and good Aims. And although a good
aim does not make a bad Action good (as in Vzza) yet a bad aim makes a good
action bad, as here in Jebu. There may be then, we see, malum opus in bona
materia, a work materially good, which yet may never prove so formally and
eventually: sc. when there is a fail either quoad fontem, or quoad finem. A
thing which I see in the night may shine: and that shining proceed from nothing
but rottenness. Blazing comets (though but comets) as long as they keep aloft,
shine bright. But when they begin to decline from their pitch, they fall to the
earth, and infect the Air. So when Illuminates forsake the Lord, and mind
only earthly things, being all for self, they lose their light, and go out in
a snuff. Jehu's golden calves made an end of him and his, though he made an
end of Ahabs house and Baals worship. His rooting out of Ahabs race was but to
settle the crown better upon his own head. Like unto him was our Richard the
third, who well knowing (says the Historian) it was no policy to play the
villain by halfdeal is resolved to leave never a rub to lie in the way,
Daniels hist. 218.
that might hinder the true running of his bowl. Like unto him also (says
Master Calvin upon this text) was our king Henry the eighth, who cast off some
degree of Popery, so far as would serve his own turn: but there were the six
Articles in force (that whip with six cords, as that Martyr called it) for
which many suffered at that time. Acts and Mor.
And whereas (like Sylla) he commanded others, under great penalties, to be no
Papists, himself was either Papist or Athiest, jearing at some for their old
Mumpsimus, and at others for their new Sumpsimus, as he profanely called the
Reformation: hanging Papists on the one side of the hedge, for denying his
Supremacy, and burning Protestants on the other side thereof, for denying
Transubstantiation, etc. And hence it may be thought, is that dreadful and
dismal ruin that is now (in these our days, and in the fourth generation or
succession) befaln the royal family. The house of Jehu fares the worse for
Jehu. Offa king of East Saxons lived in the time of Charles the great, and was
a potent Prince. But the many injuries he did, and the murder he committed in
his house upon Ethelbert king of East Angles, coming to him under a public
faith, and a suitor to his daughter, were justly revenged upon his posterity,
which, after him, declining, in the end lost all. But to return to Jehu: we
shall find 2 Kin. 10.30. Daniels hist. p. 111.
that God said, that because Jehu had shed the blood of Ahab in Jezreel, that
he would reward him for it: and that his children to the fourth generation
should sit upon the throne of Israel, and govern that Kingdom. And yet, for
miscarriage in the manner, justly plagueth his posterity. As Xerxes crowned his
Steeresman in the morning and yet hanged him in the afternoon of the same day.
And as Marescal de Thermas the French General, first Knighted a French
soldier in Scotland who first mounted a besieged Fort (by that means taken)
and then hanged him within an hour after, for doing it without order. See more
of this in the Note upon the former verse.

Verse 6. And she conceived againe] To show, in a continued allegory, the weak
and woeful estate of the ten tribes, when the Assyrian took from them all the
land of Gilead and Galilee, together with all the land of Nepthali, and carried
them captive, subduing in a manner five tribes of Israel: to wit those without
Jordan (who as they had first their inheritance given them, so they were now
first carried captives) and the tribes of Zabulon and Nepthali who were seated
in the land of Galilee, And this was the first captivity of Israel: see 2 Kings
15.29, Esaias. 9.1. And bare a daughter. This age is compared to a daughter,
because from that time forward, after the bow of Israel was so broken, as Verse
5. they should be no more able to defend themselves, than if they were a
commonwealth of women: Their spirits should be so cowed out and emasculated,
their backs so bowed down with unsupportable burdens and bondages, Vt de
Ctanmer^ Melc. Ad.
that there was scarcely place left of a worse condition, nor hope of a better.
Like them were those we read of Esaias 51.23. that yielded to such as would but
say to them, Bow down that we may go over you. Hom: Jl. sic. Virg: Phrygiae,
neque enim Phryges.
Or as those in Nahum, 3.13. Their men shall be as women (...), timorous and
cowardly, like Issachar's Ass Gen: 49.15. [whose lot fell in Galilee, Josh:
19.18.] or those fugitives of Ephraim Judge. 12.4. that therefore bare a brand
of dishonor, because they would not rather die bravely, then live basely: Of
such it may be said as of Hearts and Stags, they have great horns and strength,
but do nothing with them, quia deest animus, because their spirits are imbased:
as the Israelites in Egypt were of old by Pharaoh, and as the Grecians are at
this day by the Turk. call her name Loruhamah,] When God once calls a people or
a person by this name, we may well write upon their doors (if any place be yet
left for prayer, any good to be done by it) Lord have mercy upon them: their
condition is deplorable, if not desperate. Vade frater in Cellam et dic,
Miserere mei, Deus, Brother go into thy Cell and say, Lord have mercy upon me,
said Crantzius to Luther, when he began to declaime against the Pope, for he
looked upon him as an undone man, Scultet: Annal.
and yet he was not. But those are doubly undone, to whom God shall say as here
to Israel, I will no more have mercy] Heb: I will add no more to show mercy:
but my so often abused mercy shall turn into fury. That it is not so yet with
this sinful nation, that we are not yet a Loruhamah, an Acheldama, that we are
not already as Sodom, Esa. 1.9. Zeph. 2.9.
and like unto Gomorrah, even a place of nettles and saltpits, a perpetual
desolation, as another prophet has it, we may well cry out, O the depth, the
fathomlesse depth of Gods dear love to England. Certain it is that we have
hitherto subsisted by a miracle of his mercy, and by a prop of his
extraordinary patience. Certain it is that God has not dealt with England
according to his ordinary rule, but according to his prerogative royal.
England (if one may so speak with reverence) is a paradox to the Bible. God
grant that being lifted up to heaven with Capernaum in the abundance of
blessings she be not brought down to hell by the abuse of them; that God set
not that sad impression of Loruhamah (worse then any black Theta) upon her, and
make her know the worth of his undervalued favors by the want of them: why
should it be said of us as once, Anglica gens est optima flens, et pessima
ridens? why should we provoke the Lord so long till he shall resolve upon an
evil, an only evil, i. e. without mixture of mercy; Ezekiel. 7.5.
till the decree bring forth, Zeph. 2.2. and God pronounces that fatal
sentence against us that he did once against the old world, Fiat justitia, ruat
mundus, Let justice be done though the world be thereby undone. Of all Gods
Attributes he can least abide an abuse in his mercy, Gods, mercy is precious
(says one) and he will not let it run out to wast; he will not be prodigal of
it: There is a time wherein God will say, now I have done, I have even done
with this people, mercy has had her turn etc. I will not always serve them
for a sinning-stock, but will take another course with them: I will take my own
and be gone: and woe be unto them when I depart from them. When the sun is
eclipsed, all creatures fade and flag here below. Thou hiddest thy face, Lord,
and I was troubled, Psalm. 30.7. David could not live but in the light of Gods
countenance: he begs for mercy every where, as for life, never did poor
prisoner at the bar beg harder for a psalm of mercy then he does, Psalm. 51.1.
and other where. Neither would common mercies content him, he must have such as
are proper and peculiar to Gods own people, even the sure mercies of David. Oh
make sure of mercy, what ever you go without. And the rather because there are
a race of Loruhamahs, a sort of such amongst men as are excluded from mercy.
God is not merciful to any wicked transgressors Psalm. 59.5. that go on in
their trespasses Psalm. 68.21. that allow them and wallow in them. That last
letter in Gods name had need to be well remembered Exodus 32.7. He will by no
means clear the guilty. And that terrible text should never be forgotten by
those that are obstinate in an evil course, and bless themselves when God
curses them, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. See the note there. Gods mercy goes oft-times in
Scripture bounded by his truth: and as the same fire has burning heat and
cheerful light, so has God plagues for the obstinate, and mercy for the
penitent. Surely as he is pater misevationum the father of mercies: so he is
Deus ultionum the God of vengeances: as he has vbera, so he has verbera,
treasures of punishments for those especially that kick at his bowels, that
despise his long-sufferance, that argue from love to liberty, which is the
Devils logic. Cavete a Melampygo.

But I will utterly take them away] Tollendo tollam, So Calvin renders it: and
further tells us that some render it Comburam, I will burn them: and indeed war
is fitly compared to fire that cruel element, and to extreme famine Isaia.
9.19.20. The vulgar latin translateth it Obliviscendo obliviscar, I will
utterly forget them: and that is punishment enough: as when one carried himself
insolently toward the State of Rome, a grave Senator gave this counsel, Let us
forget him and he will soon remember himself. Woe be to those to whom Christ
shall say, Verily I know you not, I have utterly forgot you. Mercer renders
it, Levabo, id est, projiciam, I will lift them up, that I may throw them down
again with the greater poise. The Seventy has I will set my self against them
in battle array. Now the Lord is a man of war Exodus 15.4. yea he is the Lord
and Victor of wars, as the Chaldee there paraphraseth. But what meant the
Chaldee here to render this text by Parcendo parcam eis, Sparing I will spare
them: is not this point blank against Loruhamah? How much better Tremellius, ut
ullo-pacto condonem-ist is, that I should any way forgive them. Have I not
pardoned them enough already? may I not well by this time be weary of
repenting? I will even break off my patience, and forbear to punish no longer,
I have long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my self: now
will I cry like a traveling woman (who bites in her pain as long as she is
able I will destroy and devour at once: I will, I will. Isa. 42.1^
The ten tribes never returned out of captivity, unless it were some few of
them that came up with the other two tribes out of Babylon, Ezr. 2. by the
appointment of Cyrus: and some others that fled home when Nineveh (where they
were held captive) was destroyed: But for the generality of them, whether they
abide in China or Tartary, or West Indies, I cannot tell you. Parcus renders
it, Nam tolerando toleravi eos, for I have a long while born with their evil
manners. And surely Subito tollitur, Aug.
qui diu toleratur, as an Ancient says, Gods patience will not always hold
etc.

Verse. 7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah.] The Ark and the mercy
seat were never separated. Judah had not utterly cast off God, as Israel had:
but worshipped God in the Temple, (how corruptly soever) therefore they shall
have mercy because they kept the right way of worship. See the Churches plea
for mercy to this purpose Jer. 14.9. Again, Judah was now in a very great
straight having been lately beaten and plundered by Israel 2. King. 4.12.
therefore they shall have mercy. God heard Hagars affliction and relieved her.
I have seen, I have seen, the sufferings of my people in Egypt, says God,
Exodus 2
and am come to ease them. Because they have called thee an outcast, saying,
This is Zion whom no man looks after, therefore I will restore health unto
thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord Jer. 30.17. He will
repent for his people when he sees their power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36. when
there is dignus vindice nodus, an extremity fit for divine power to interpose.
He knows that mercy is never so seasonable and sweet, as when misery weighs
down, and nothing but mercy turns the scale: therefore Judah shall have mercy,
when Israel shall have none. True it is, that Judah was not at this time much
better then Israel, Aholibah then Aholah: they were scarce free from Sodomy and
many such like foul abominations. But what of that? if God come with a non
obstante as Psalm 106.8. Nevertheless he saved them for his names sake etc. who
shall gainstand him: If he will show mercy for his names sake, what people is
there so wicked whom he may not save? See Esaias 57.47. Ezekiel. 20.8.14.22.44. Add
hereunto that Israel and Syria were confederate against Judah, and thought to
have made but a breakfast of them, Isay. 7.5. etc. but God here promises Judah
mercy: and lets them know to their comfort, that there is more mercy for them
in heaven, then there can be misery in earth, or malice in hell against them.
True it is, that even after this gracious promise made to Judah, it went very
hard with them, See 2. Chron. 28.6. there 120000. of them were sl^in in one
battle and 200000. of them carried captive: yea, and all this by these
Israelites here rejected from that mercy that Judah is promised; besides
abundance more misery that befell them by Edomites. Ver. 17. Philistines. 18.
Assyrians. 20. etc. Ecclesia hares Crucis says Luther, The Church as she is
heir of the promises, so is she of the Cross: and the promises are always to
be understood with condition of the cross. The palsy-man in the Gospel healed
by our Savior heard, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, and
yet he was not presently freed of his disease, till after a dispute held with
the Pharisees (which must needs take up some time) and the case cleared, Jesus
said, Arise take up thy bed and walk, and so show thy self a sound man. But to
go on: Judah shall be saved, and not Israel, that envied Judah, and maliciously
sought their ruin. David looks upon it as a sweet mercy, that God had spread
him a table in the presence, and maugre the malice of his enemies. Psalm 23.4.
Mat. 8.11.
And the children of the kingdom (so the Jews are called) shall gnash their
teeth, and be even ready to eat their nails at the reception of the Gentiles.
This was it that put the men of Nazareth into an anger, and our Savior into a
danger, Luke 4.25.26. By the Lord their God] that i, by the Lord Christ by
Messiah their Prince, by the word of the Lord their God, says the Chaldee
here, that word essential John. 1.1. that true Zaphnath Paaneach (that is
Savior of the world, as Hierome interprets it) whereof Joseph was but a type.
This horn of salvation, or mighty Savior (able to save them to the u^^ost that
come unto God by him, (...).
Heb. 7.25) God raised up for there unworthy Jews, and even thrust him upon
them, whether they would or no, Isay. 7.13.14. that all might appear to be of
free grace. Well might God say, (...) have mercy upon the house of Judah,
matchless mercy indeed: mercy that rejoiced against judgment. Man's
perverseness breaks not off the course of Gods goodness; Judah shall be saved
by the Lord their God who is Alius from his Father, but not Al^^, a distinct
person, not a distinct thing. This Angel of Gods presence saved them, in h^
love, and in his pity he redeemed them etc. Isay. 63.9. even the Angel that
had redeemed their father Jacoh from all evil Genesis 48.16. and that soon after
this prophecy, destroyed so many thousands in Senacheribs army, Not by bow ner
by battle etc. but by his own bare hand immediately and miracul usly 2. King.
19. where we may see that when Senacherib (after the example of his father
Salmaneser, who had captivated the ten tribes) came up against Judah, having
already devoured Jerusalem in his hopes, and thinking to cut them off at a
blow, as if they had all had but one neck, they were saved by Jehovah their
God: the Virgin daughter of Zion knew well the worth and valor of Christ her
champion, and that made her so confident Esaias. 37.22. She knew whom she had
trusted, not with her outward condition only, but with her inward and
everlasting, with her precious soul, saying with David I am thine, save me: for
I have sought thy precepts. Psalm. 119.94. I will not trust in my bow, neither
shall mine arm save me: but thy right hand and thine arm, Psalm. 44.3.5.
and the light of thy countenance: for thou have a favor unto me. See the Note
on Zach. 4.6. and on 14.3.5. That Is an excellent passage Psalm. 21.13. Be thou
exalted O Lord in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.

Verse. 9. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah] That is, after that the patience
of God had waited and long looked for their conversion; but all in va^ne, he
resolved upon their utter rejection. And first he sent for his love tokens back
again: Esa. 66.11.
he weanes them and takes them off from those breasts of consolation, the holy
Ordinances, deprived them of those dugs (better then wine, Cant. 1 4.) that
they had despised, carried them far away from that good land that abounded with
milk and honey: the men of the East should be sent in upon them to eat their
fruit and drink their milk, Ezekiel. 25.4. This nation (says a Divine) is sick of
a spiritual plurisie: we begin to surfeit on the bread of life, the
unadulterated milk of Gods word, and to spill it. Now when God sees his
mercies lying under table, it is just with him to call to the enemy to take
away. Say not here with those in the Gospel threatened with this judgment, Luke
20.16.
God forbid. Think it not a thing impossible, that England should be thus
visited. The Sea is not so calm in summer, but it may be troubled with a
storm: the mountain so f^me, but may be moved with an earthquake. We have seen
as fair Suns as ours fall from the midst of heaven, for our instance, Lege
historiam, ne fias historia. Surely except we repent and reform a little
better then we have done yet; a removal of our Candlestick, a total eclipse
of our Sun, may be as certainly foreseen and foretold, as if visions and
letters were sent us from heaven, as once to the seven Churches of Asia, who
sinned away their light, etc. And bare a son,] Not a daughter as before, but
a son, because under Hosea, the last King of Israel, that Kingdom began a
little to lift up the head, and to stand it out against the Assyrian. But this
was but extremus nisus regni, the last sprunting of that dying State. For soon
after, Samaria the chief City was close besiege^: and although it held out
three whole years, with a Masculine resolution, yet at length it was sacked,
and all the people of the land carried captive, young and old, naked and
barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, etc. as it is said of their
confederates the Egyptians, Esaias 20.4. and as it shall be done at length to
that purple whore of Rome, who shall be stripped naked, broiled and eaten, Revel.
17.16. A cold sweat stands already upon her limbs: and, for a presage of her
future ruin, it is observed, that Rome, since it became Papal, was never
besieged by any, but it was taken; As for their late Masculine attempts and
achievements (if any) it is but as here in the Kingdom of Israel, a lightning
before death, as the blaze of a candle a little before it goes out, the bulging
of a wall that is ready to come down, or as it was said of Carthage, a little
before it was taken, Morientium bestiarum violentiores esse morsus, dying beasts
bite cruelly.

Verse 9. Call his name Loammi] Nomen extremum and deploratum, says Pareus,
the last and most lamentable name of all, containing a most heavy, but
spiritual, and therefore less sensible punishment, viz. an utter abjection and
abdication from the covenant, from grace, from God, from life eternal. For ye
are not my people] But, being totally cashiered, and discovenanted; Are ye not
as the children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, says the
Lord? Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistims
from Caphtor, Amos 9.7.
and the Syrians from Kir? q. d. True it is, I have brought you up out of Egypt
(and therein you greatly glory) but have I not done as much as all this, for
those profane Nations here mentioned? with and amongst whom, henceforward I
shall reckon you, for you are no people of mine, but discarded, and dispeopled?
Till the Covenant made with Abraham, all Nations were suffered to walk in their
own ways, as fishes pass at liberty through the paths of the Seas, Psalm. 8.8.
One person was no more respected then another. But as soon as it was said, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, the Church became as fish
cast into a Pond for peculiar use: and was divided from other Nations, Act.
14.16.
no otherwise then light was from darkness in the first creation, or then
Goshen was from Egypt, in that wonderful separation. But here God seems to
rescind his own act, to cast off the people of his purchase, and utterly to
disown them; as once before he also did, when he fathered them upon Moses,
saying, Thy people, which thou have brought out of Egypt, etc. Exodus 32.7. But
this (we must know) is no other then mutatio rei non Dei, effectus non
affectus, facti non consilij, not a change of Gods will, but only of his
works. For has God indeed cast away his people? God forbid. Romans 11.1, 2.
God has not cast away his people, whom he foreknew. Thus says the Lord God,
If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have
done, says the Lord. Jer. 31.37.
And albeit (by an angry Aposiopesis) he say here, I will not be your God. (The
word God, is not in the Original, ab irato omittitur, says Mercer) yet to show
that he is Bagnal Chemah, One that can rule his wrath, as Neb. 1.2. he
subjoyneth here, verse 10.

Verse 10. Yet the number of the children of Israel]. i. e. of the Israel of
God, those Jews inwardly the Circumcision indeed, which worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, putting no confidence in the flesh, Phil.
3.3. Bern.
but saying each for himself as that good Father did, Horreo quicquid de meo
est, ut sim meus; All my care is to be found in Christ ( sc. when sought for by
the justice of God) not having mine own righteousness which is of the law,
Beza.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith. Phil. 3.9.
Lo, to such Israelites indeed, and of such it is here promised (the Lord in
Judgment remembering Mercy) that they shall be the sand of the sea which cannot
be measured nor numbered; This was first promised to Abraham; and afterward
confirmed with an oath, Genesis 22.16. It began to be fulfilled; when, by the
preaching of the Apostles, so many of both Jews and Gentiles came in and were
converted to the faith of the true Messiah, as S. Paul expounds this text,
Romans 9.24, 25. and he had the mind of Christ. It shall have its full
accomplishment, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel
shall be saved, Romans 11.26. Then the Church shall be as the stone that smote
the Image, it shall become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth. Though
the beginning of it be small, yet the later end of it shall greatly increase,
Job 8.7. for all the earth shall be filled with the glory of Christ: he shall
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth,
Psalm. 72.8, 11, 17 Great is the paucity of Gods people for present: but let us,
by the help of this promise, get above that stumbling block. Cosmographers tell
us, that if we divide all the known world into thirty parts, the Heathens part
is as nineteen of this thirty: the Mahometans as six, the Christians as five
only: And of those five, more then the one half is held by idolatrous Papists.
But let not this discourage us; it will be otherwise one day, for the Scripture
cannot be broken. And although God may seem utterly to have abandoned his
ancient people the Jews (the ten Tribes especially) yet they, as well as the
rest, shall be vouchsafed this honor to be called to the participation of
Christ, Ezekiel. 37.16, 19. Jer. 3, 12, 13, etc. Esaias 11.12, 13. Obad. 20. Zach.
10.6. Romans 11.26. If God after so dreadful a threatening come in with his
non-obstante (as he does likewise Psalm. 106.8. and elsewhere) and say, yet the
number of the children of Israel shall be, etc. who shall gain say him? Their
interpretation is too narrow, that understand this text of the increase of this
people in all their dispersions, until the time of their conversion. And that
of Rabbi Ezra is pretty though not proper; that as the sand keeps the waves of
the sea from breaking in and drowning the world: so does Israel preserve
mankind from perishing by the waves of Gods wrath. It should have been
considered by him and the rest of those refractary Rabbines, that at that
general conversion of the Jews (here plainly foretold) there shall be some
stubborn spirits that will not even then stoop to Christ; but will be filled
with envy, as those cankered Pharisees their forefathers were ( Acts 13.44,
45.) to see almost the whole City come together to hear Christ; Yea, they will
be ready to say, as John 12.19. perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold,
the whole world follows him. Now against these spiritual spirits, the wrath of
God shall be revealed from heaven, Rev. 21.8. Dan. 12.2. Esaias. 65.11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17.

and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them] As
if God did now even repent, and would make them a full amends: make them glad
according to the time, Psalm. 90.15.
and in that very place when and where they had seen evil. Jerusalem shall be
inhabited again in Jerusalem, Zech. 12.6. The Jews (it is thought) shall dwell
in their own Country, Jer. 3.18. and 23.8. Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. Amos 9.14, 15. and
God have a very glorious Church in the Land of Canaan. But that is not all; The
Gentiles, who shall be made a spiritual Israel, though in time past they were
not a people, yet now are they the people of God; and which had not obtained
mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. yea, such a signal mercy as S.
John cannot look on without an Ecce admirantis; Behold, Qualem and quantum As 2
Pet. 3.11.
says he, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should
be called the sons of God: 1 John 3.1. Yes, the sons of the living God] who as
he lives, so he gives us all things richly to enjoy; and is therefore to be
trusted, 1 Timothy 6.17. And that we should not only be Gods people, but his sons
(reconciled, but adopted) and not only be so, but be called so, have the name
and the note, the credit and the comfort. Well might the Apostle say, that the
grace of God herein had abounded, even to an overflow, (...)
1 Timothy 1.14. Well may Oecolampadius say as he does upon this very Text, Vide
ut major gratia quam peccatum, Behold, how as sin abounded, grace
superabounded. Sermon. 6. de Nativit.
Well might Leo say, Omnia dona excedit hoc donum, etc. This is a gift of God,
that exceeds all gifts, that man should call God Father, and God call a man
his son; this is a greater dignity then to be called an Angel, Archangel,
Cherubim, Seraphim, etc. See more of this in my Righteous man's Recompense.
part. 2. doct. 5. Calvin upon this verse notes, that there is an emphasis in
these words, It was said, and It shall be said, The latter shows, that till
the Lord speak peace to his people, and say to their souls that he is their
salvation, they cannot have the comfortable assurance of their Adoption, and
acceptance into his favor Ephesians. 1.13. After that ye heard the word of truth,
the Gospel of your salvation; ye believed and were sealed with that holy spirit
of promise. Again, if God by his Prophets have said to any, ye are not my
people, etc. he will effect it. God heweth men by his Prophets, and slays
them by the words of his mouth, Hosea 6.5. Elisha has his sword, as well as
Jehu and Hazael, 1 Kings 19.17. Ezekiel besieges Jerusalem, and overthrows
it. Jeremy is set over nations and kingdoms to root out and pull down, etc.
Chap. 1.10. S. Paul has vengeance ready for the disobedient. 2 Cor. 10.6.
And what Gods Ministers do on earth, he ratifies in heaven, Mat. 16.19. and
18.18.

Verse 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be
gathered together] i. e. they shall unite into one body, and one religion, and
shall all make one entire Kingdom, John 12.
Ezekiel. 37.22, 24. Christ once lifted up, shall draw all things to himself: and
wherever this carcass is, Mat. 24.
there will the spiritual Eagles be also. Caiaphas, like another Balaam,
prophesied that Jesus should die for that Nation: And not for that Nation only,
but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were
scattered abroad. John 11.51.52 Zeph. 3.9.
This is the gathering together here mentioned: Christ shall be one amongst his
people, and his name one, Ze^h. 14.9. (See the Note there) they shall serve the
Lord with one shoulder: It seems to be a Metaphor taken from Oxen that are
yoked together, and that set their shoulders jointly to the work. Surely, the
more the Gospel prevails, the more peace there will be. They shall be
gathered together in that day: So when Christ shall be preached, and obedience
yielded to his government, Esaias 9.7. then shall there be a blessed harmony of
hearts: then shall they fly in flocks to the ordinances, as the doves to their
windows: then shall they come to the Lords house upon horses, and in charrets,
and in litters, Esaias 66.20.

and appoint themselves one head] The Lord Christ, called David their King,
chap. 3.5. A multitude gathered under this one Head, and united to him is a
Church. This head is indeed appointed, and set up over the Church by God, Psalm.
2.6. Ephesians. 1.22. But the Saints are said to appoint Christ their head, and
indeed, to set the Crown upon his head, as Cant. 3.11. when they choose him and
embrace him for their Sovereign, when with highest estimations, most vigorous
affections, and utmost endeavors of unfeigned obedience, they set him up in
their hearts, and serve him in their lives; giving him the pre-eminence, and
holding all in Capite in Christ: yea, holding of the head, as the Apostles
expression is, Col. 2.19. not of Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas. That Popish
Buzzard was utterly out, who said that he had found in the Dictionaries, that
Cephas signifies an Head, and that therefore Peter was head of the Church. For
neither does Cephas signify an Head, but a Stone or Rock: nor, if it did,
would that prove, what he alleges it for. Judah and Israel shall appoint to
themselves one head, not more then one. The Church is not bellua multorum
capitum: neither is there any need of a ministerial head of the Church: Indeed
there is a contradiction in the very mention of it (as one well observes) a
Ministerial Head; it is absurd to speak it.

and they shall come up out of the land] i. e. They shall be gathered into the
heavenly Jerusalem, says Occolampadius; They shall come up from their
miserable life, says Luther: from their earthly affections, says Hierom.
Rather, from Chaldea, or where ever they lie captivated and dispersed, to
Jerusalem; there to join in the same way of worship (as once the twelve Tribes
did before the schism under Jeroboam) with the Christian Church, and so go on
the way to the kingdom of heaven.

for great is the day of Jezreel] i. e. of Christ (says Hierom) who is Gods
seed, and shall see his seed, and so prolong his days by a succession of
Saints, Esaias 53.10. for whom God also will do great things in that day of his
power, Psalm. 100.3. when there shall be a mavelous increase of his Church,
which he shall sow with the seed of men and of beasts, Jer. 31.37. Ezech. 36.38.
revealing his arm (another etymology of the word Jezreel) for the ingathering
of his Elect. Sic, Octogesimus octavus mirabilis annus.

CHAP. II
Verse 1. Say unto your brethren Ammi] Besides the public preaching of this
gracious promise, chap. 1.10. There it shall be said unto them etc. charge is
here given that this be the subject of their more private discourse also: and
that they that fear the Lord speak often one to another, we that were not a
people, are now a people: we that had not obtained mercy, have now obtained
mercy. Jubet per Prophetam ne haec vox in ecclesia taceatur. Mercer.
God commands by the prophet that these sweet words Ammi Ruhamah, be tossed and
talked of at every friendly meeting; I will not leave you fatherless: In me
the fatherless finds mercy: (...). Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee, I will not, not, not forsake thee: so many Nots there
are in the Original for more assurance, God would have such precious passages
as these, to be rehearsed (even in the places of drawing water Judge. 5.11.
where the maids met to fetch water, or do other ordinary chares) for mutual
encouragement, and for the praise of his name. O the matchless mercy of our
God! O the never-enough adored depth of his free grace! who would not fear thee
o King of Nations! Psalm. 92.1.
who would not be telling of thy goodness in the morning, and of thy
faithfulness every night? Read that triumphant Psalm. 145. per totum; and be
you ever chaunting out, (as they of old at their daily employments) aliquid
Davidicum; so building up one another with Psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs. Think but on these two words in the text, and you cannot want matter. Is
it nothing to be in covenant with God, and to be under mercy? O blessed are the
people that have the Lord for their God, Psalm. 144.15.
says David. But I obtained mercy says Paul. 1 Timothy 1.16. and that was his
(...) his confident boasting, where ever he came, being a constant preacher of
Gods free grace: (as was likewise Austin, which makes him hardly censured by
the Semipelagian papists and Arminians as an enemy to nature, because so high a
friend to grace.] Neither is he forgetful to tell his Ephesians and others to
whom he writes, that they were once dead in sins and trespasses, but now,
quickened together with Christ etc. They were forreiners, but now
fellow-citizens with the Saints: they were darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
but now light in the Lord, and should therefore walk as children of light, and
talk of his praises, who had drawn them out of dreadful darkness, into
marvelous light. Come, says David, and I will tell you what God has done for
my soul. The Lord has done great things for us, says the Church, whereat we
are glad. Psalm. 66.19. Psalm. 126.3. Luke. 1.49.
He which is mighty has done to me great things: and holy is his name, says
the blessed Virgin. Say ye unto your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters
Ruhamah. Say it, say it, to brethren and to sisters, upon every opportunity,
and with the utmost importunity, that it may take impression upon their
spirits, and not be as a scale set upon the water, nor as rain falling upon a
rock that leaves no sign behind it. The Grecians being delivered out of
servitude by Flaminius the Roman General, Plutark.
rang out Soter, Soter, that is Savior, Savior, with such a courage, that the
very birds of the air, astonished thereat, fell to the earth. The people of
Israel gave such a loud shout at the return of the Ark, that the earth rang
again. A drowning man being pulled out of the water by Alphonsus King of
Arragon, and rescued from so great a death, cried out (as soon as he came again
to himself) by way of thankfulness Arragon, Arragon. Valor. Max. Christian. p.
41 1. Sam. 7.12. Psalm. 116.8.
let us cry as loud Ammi, Ruhamah, hitherto God has helped us, who were lately
(with those Israelites in the wilderness) talking of our graves. Say therefore
with the Psalmist, Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes
from tears, my feet from falling, I will walk before the Lord in the land of
the living etc.

Verse 2. Plead with your mother, plead] Here of right begins the second
chapter (the former verse being not so fitly separated from the former chapter)
and it is nothing else but a commentary upon the first, as Parcus well notes.
For the Prophet here proceeds in accusing the people of disloyality and
ingratitude: whereupon he denounces a divorce and punishment: and then
foretells their repentance and return into favor with God under the kingdom
of the Messiah. Now the end wherefore both the accusation and the promise is
here reiterated, is not so much to confirm what had been before affirmed as to
set forth the means whereby this off-cast people was to be at length reduced
unto the Church: viz. Partly by external means (as sharp Sermons and sore
afflictions) and partly by the internal grace of the Spirit of God, and good
affiance of his love sealed up to them, by sundry spiritual and temporal
favors conferred upon them; as so many love tokens. Come we now to the words
of this verse; where Oecolampadius begins the chapter: Plead with your mother,
plead] It is verbum forense, says Mercer. An expression borrowed from pleaders
at the bar. q.d. Be in good earnest with her, rebuke her roundly and openly,
according to the nature of her offense: that she may be sound in the faith, and
ashamed of her perfidiousness. What though she be your mother, and in that
respect to be honored by you, yet she is a perverse rebellious woman, as Saul
once said of his son Jonathans mother (how truly I enquire not: malice little
regards truth, 1 Samuel 21.30
so it may gall or kill) and therefore to be barely and boldly told her own.
Besides, we cannot better show our respect to Parents, then by seeking their
souls health: and by dealing fairly but freely with them therein. Not as Walter
Mupes (sometimes Archdeacon of Oxford) did by his mother Church of Rome: For
relating the gross simony of the Pope in confirming the election of Reginald
bastard son of Jocelin Bishop of Sarum into the sea of Bath, he thus concludes
his narration, Sit tamen Domina materque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus:
and absit credere quae vidimus: yet let our Lady, and mother Rome be as a stick
put into the water, which seems to be broken, but is not so: and far be it from
us, to believe our own eyes against her. Was this charity? or stupidity rather?
Charity may be ingenuous, but not servile and blockish. Levit. 19.17.
It is not love but hatred (if Moses may judge) to suffer sin in a dearest
friend to pass uncontroulled. Good Asa deposed his own mother for her
idolatry: and our Edward the sixth would not be drawn by any persuasion of
friends or fear of enemies, to indulge his sister, the Lady Mary, Act. and Mon.
to have Mass said in her house. The truth is, those Ammi's and Ruhamah's that
have found mercy from God, they have their hearts so fired up thereby with a
holy zeal for him, that they cannot endure to see him dishonored, but must
appear and plead for him against any in the world. Again, as any one is more
assured of his own salvation by Christ, the more he thirsts after the
salvation of others; as we see evidently in Saint Paul that vessel of mercy. I
am persuaded, says He, or I am sure, that neither life nor death, etc. shall
ever separate me from Gods love in Christ. And what follows in the very next
words, but this, I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost; Romans 8.38, 39. Romans 9.1, 2, 3, 4.
That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could
wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen
according to the flesh, who are Israelites, etc. And how effectually and
convincingly he pleads with them to draw them to Christ and hold them close
to him, that golden Epistle to the Hebrews will well witness to the worlds end.

For she is not my wife] For I have put her away by a bill of divorcement,
Isai. 50.1. with a Habe tibi quae tua sunt (which was the form of divorce among
the Romans) Take thine own things and be gone. Now the Jewish Synagogue had
nothing she could properly call her own, but sin and misery: when God first
took her, she had not a rag to her back, Ezekiel. 16.10. nor any kind of
comeliness. But what he was pleased to put upon her, verse 14. But she (
foolish woman and unwise, Deuteronomy. 32.5.) trusting in her borrowed beauty played
the harlot, and poured out her fornication on every one that passed by: his it
was verse 15. The Synagogue of Rome is such another meretrix meretricissima
quae gremium claudit nemini, as her own sons say of her, by way of
commendation. Saint John calls her the whore, the great whore, Rev. 17.1.15.
and further tells us, that she sits upon her paramours in a base manner,
in an unseemly sort, she sits upon their very consciences, and keeps them
under by force: whereas Stephen King of Polony (one of her sons but not
altogether so obsequious) was wont to say, that God had required three things
to himself, sc: ex nihilo aliquid facere, scire futura, and dominari velle
conscientijs, that is, to make something of nothing, to know things to come,
and to bear rule over men's consciences. How she forces men to commit folly
with her by the cruel Inquisition; and how she hireth others for preferments (
Luther was offered a Cardinalship: Bessarion of Nice was won over to her by
such an offer; Val. Max. Christian. page 289.
Thomas Saranzius was of a poor Shoomakers son made Bishop, Cardinal and Pope;
all in one year, and called Nicolas the fifth, Alsted. Chr. Page 378.
the like might be said of Aeneas Sylvins Canon of Trent; afterward Pope Pius
the second) and for a price too, is notoriously known to the Christian world.
Stratagem nunc est Pontificium ditare multos ut pijesse desinant, John Baptist.
Gelli. Dialog. 5.
says a good Author. It is one of the Popes Stratagems to enrich men that he
may oblige them to himself: and bring them into his own vassallage. In diverse
towns of Germany (as at Ausburgh, etc.) there was a known allowance by the year
for such Lutherans as would become Papists. Thus this whore of Rome imitateth
Her in the text: of whom it is elsewhere complained, Ezekiel. 16.33. They give
gifts to all whores (and so buy repentance at too dear a rate) but thou give
thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them that they may come unto thee on
every side for thy whoredom: Yea thou have played the harlot with them, Nolo
tanti poenitentiam emere. Them.
and yet could not be satisfied, verse. 28. It was but time therefore that God
should cast her off, as now no wife of his but an adulteress of the Devil, as
she showed her self notably in the Trent-Conventicle: Jer. 3.3.
where with a whores forehead that refused to be ashamed she not only
established by a Law their abominable Idolatry, but also set forth that
Heathenish decree, whereby she equalleth (at least) the Apocrypha to the holy
Canon, the Vulgar puddle to the Hebrew and Greek fountains, unwritten verities
and traditions to the sacred Scriptures: and further adds, that the holy
Ghost himself is not to be hearkened unto, speak he never so plainly and
expressly, D. Pride. Lect.
nisi accedat meretricis purpuratae eff^ons interpretatio, unless she may have
the interpreting of his meaning, according to her way. O monstrous impudency,
deserving a divorce! True it is that God hates putting away, Mal. 2.16. and
Isa. 50.1. he tells these Jews, that he had not given their mother a bill of
divorcement, ut solent morosi et crudeles mariti as cruel and f^o^ and
husbands use to do, for every light offense. But what he had done this way, he
was merely compelled to it; as not able to wink any longer at their flagi^ious
practices: Hear his own words. Thus says the Lord, where is the bill of your
mothers divorcement whom I have put away? or which of my creditours is to whom
I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities you sold your selves; and for your
transgressions is your mother put away. And yet not so far put away neither,
but that if she repent, she may be received again: and that is no small mercy.
See Jer. 3.1. They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him and
become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be
greatly polluted? but thou have played the harlot with many lovers; yet return
again to me, says the Lord. Lo, God is above Law; and his mercy is matchless:
he will do that for his people that none else in like case would ever be drawn
to do, Mic. 7.10. Who is a God like unto thee? says the Prophet, by way of
admiration. David never came near his concubines more after that Absalom had
gone in to them, and Achitophel judged that act would be such an injury, as
David would never put up and therefore gave that pernicious counsel. But Gods
thoughts are not as man's thoughts, neither are our ways his ways, etc. Of
mercy, and multiplied-pardons. Isai. 55.8.9.
But as the heavens are higher then the earth so are his ways higher then our
ways, and his thoughts then our thoughts. We are not to mature things according
to our own model; and to have as low thoughts of God and his goodness as those
Miscreants once had of his power, when they demanded, Can God prepare a table
for us in the wilderness? Can he give us water out of the Rock? Surely a
Finite creature cannot believe the infinite attributes of God thoroughly,
without supernatural grace: which therefore must be implored, and every of us
excited not to cast away our confidence which has so great recompense, so
great encouragement: Ezekiel. 18.
but to say to our mother, and each to other, put away your whoredoms. etc.
Cast away all your transgressions, etc. Ye have done all this wickedness
(says Samuel to the revolted People of his time) but what of that? yet turn
not aside from following the Lord: for that were to add rebellion to sin, as
Herod to all his other hateful practices added that of beheading the Baptist.
Do not therefore turn aside from following the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.20, 21, 22.
but go home again to him, and he will speak peace. For the Lord will not
forsake his people for his great Names sake: since it has pleased the Lord once
to make you his people. He chose you for his love: and now loves you for his
choice; yea he cries after you, as once, Return you backsliding children, and I
will heal your backsliding. O that you would reciprocate and say, Behold, we
come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God. Jer. 3.22.

Let her therefore put away her wheredoms out of her sight] Not out of my
sight, (as a Lapide reads it, neither according to the Original, nor yet his
own vulgar Translation) but out of her sight, or from her face, So the Sepiua.
(...).
and her adulteries from between her breasts. Sed quid hoc sibi vult? says
Calvin here. But what may be the meaning of this. It surely seems harsh to
say, that women play the whores; either with their faces, or with their
breasts: And yet it is not unknown to the Learned what Arch^silans the
Philosopher said to a young wanton, that cast lustful looks, and laseivious
glances upon others; Nihil interest quibus membris cinaedi sitas, posterioribus
an prioribus: You may be naughty-packs more ways then one And Plutarch tells
of a certain Orator, Li. (...) am and pupillam oculi significat.
that said of an impudent fellow; Quod in oculis haberet non (...) sed (...),
that he had in his eyes not Pupils, but Punks. And S. Peter says of the
Sectaries of his time, that they had eyes full of the adulteress, (so runs the
Original) and that could not cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. It is evident enough
(says Calvin) that the Prophet in this Text alludeth to the manner of harlots,
painting their faces, decking, (...).
or laying out their breasts to allure lovers. Filthy dressing and naked
breasts, (says another Divine) this is whoredom between the breasts. A third
calls naked breasts and wrists, Bifield on 1 Pet 2. Mr. Bolion.
abhorred filth. Hierom says, if a man or woman adorn, or carry themselves so,
as to provoke others to lust after them, though no evil follow upon it, yet the
parties shall suffer eternal damnation; because they offered poison to others,
though none would drink it. In Scripture, women taxed for this, were notorious
wicked persons, and usually whores: as Tamar, Jezabel, those Damsels, Esaias 3.
Dives, Luke 16. Lupa Romana, Rev. 1.73. Our Henry the sixth, when a Mask of
women were presented unto him, whereof some of them showed their naked breasts,
he left the presence, crying, Daniels hist 1^8.
Fie, fie Ladies, in sooth ye are to blame, to bare those parts to the eyes of
man, that nature appointed modesty to conceal. Frederick the Emperor, seeing
some country wenches, near Florence, in dancing to show their naked legs,
Eamus, said he, meretricum hic ludus est non virginum, Let us go hence, for
this is not maids play, Vol Moz. C^^st. 377.
but whores rather. That Yonker in the Proverbs, was met by a woman with the
attire of an harlot, and subtle of heart, or trussed up about the breasts,
(...) pro (...) quasi nudato pude^ d^. And ve^se 18. Ne^v^h dod^^ (...)
uberibas.
with her upper parts naked, like a bedlam. So Levi Ben Gersom, she met him
with her naked breasts, yea with something else naked, which modesty forbids to
name, as some construe that Text, Prove. 7.10. So she caught him and kissed him,
verse. 13, with strange impudency: and no question but having caught him, her
lust grew more flagrant: as by unclean touches of the face and breasts, men are
more enkindled. Hence that of our Savior in expounding the seventh
Commandment, Matthew. 5.30. If thy right hand offend thee, sc. by dalliance, and
wanton touches, cut it off, etc. Hippocrat^s observes, that there are venae
and viae ab utero ad mamillas, veins and passages that go from the beily to the
breasts; and that is the reason that he gives of the temptation to lust, that is
in the breasts. Keep thy self pure, says Saint Paul to his son Timothy. And
again, The younger women exhort with purity, or chastity. It is not safe to pry
into the beauty of young women. Vt vidi ut perij, etc. The eyes are those
windows of wickedness, and loop-holes of lust. Let her therefore put away her
whoredoms out of her sight. Prove. 6.25.
And let not the strange woman take thee with her eyelids, says Solomon. For
prevention hereof, in Chrysostoms time, the women were disjoined from the men
in the Church, by a wooden wall. And Tertullian says to the Christian women,
Judicabunt vos Arabiae foeminae Ethnicae, etc. The Heathen women of Arabia
shall judge you: De veland. virg. c. 17.
for they do not only cover their faces but their heads too; and rather then
they will have any part appear naked, they will let the light but into one eye.
In Barbary, they say, it is death for any man to see one of the Xeriffes
concubines; Heyl. Geog. page 156.
and for them too, if when they see a man (though but through a casement) that
do not suddenly screek out. Millions of people have died of the wound in the
eye. Aholah and Aholibah, that is, Israel and Judah, no sooner saw the
Assyrians, (those desirable young men) though but pourt^^yed upon the wall, but
they doted upon those Paramours, and received them into the bed of love, Ezekiel.
23.16, 17. Et divarica^ it tibias suas, Ezekiel. 16.25. and multiplied their
whoredoms. The very sight of the Altar at Damas^us, set Abaz agog to have one
of the same fashion, 2 King. 16. And Jeroboam coming out of Egypt, where the Ox
was worshipped, brought home two Calves with him; and set them up at Dan and
Beth^l. The Nicodemites and Familists hold it no sin, to be present at
Idoll-service, and allege a Text for it out of Apocryphal Baruc. Mr.
Borroughs.
But a good Interpreter well observes, that, that which is intended specially
here, in these words, Let her put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her
adulteries, etc. is, that they should not be content merely with change of
their hearts, to say, Well, we will acknowledge the Lord to be the true God,
and our hearts shall wholly trust in him; but for these external things, what
great matter is in them? Oh no, they must abstain from all appearance of evil,
from the badges of Idolatry, etc. Thus he. Those badges, or ensigns of
Idolatry they usually carried between their breasts, (says another Author) to
testify that the Idol had their hearts; whereas Christ should have been
there, Cant. 1.13. Who to show his dear love to his Church, appeared to John
girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Rev. 1.13. See the Note there, Cor
seeds amoris. The heart is the seat of the affections. Hence God calls for
it; My son give me thine heart: and the devil strives for it, Luke 22.3. Act.
5.3. Once he strove about a dead man's body, Jude ver. 9. but his design
therein, was to have set up an idol for himself in the hearts of the living.
His eldest son and successor the Pope, uses the same policy. It was a
watchword in Gregory the thirteenths time, in Queen Elizabeth's days, My son,
give me thy heart: Dissemble, go to Church, be a Papist in heart, and then do
what ye will: Take the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, any thing that shall be
put to you, I will absolve you. Do but carry a Crucifix between your breasts
(that is the place where they wear such mawmets) and kiss it when you have
sworn (as Jews the eleventh of France used to do) and it shall suffice.
Cominaeus.
An oath upon the conscience of a Popish Idolater is like a colier upon a
Monkeys neck; that he will slip on for his Masters pleasure, and slip off again
for his own. Pascenius scoffs King James for the invention of the Oath of
Allegiance. Equivocation the Jesuits have invented, or revived rather, ad
consolationem afflictorum Catholicorum, for the comfort of afflicted
Catholics, as Garnet and Blackwell profess. So impudent is Idolatry, such
frontlesse whoredoms appear in their very faces, they openly prostitute
themselves; Imo volunt extare signa foeditatis suae, says Calvin, here they
hang out their filthy superstitions in the sight of the Sun, as Sodom: they set
them upon the cliffe of the rock, as Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 24.7, 8. ut similes sint
publicis scortis, like common whores that solicit lovers, and send to them, as
she, Ezekiel. 22. It was a sad complaint God made Chap. 7.1. of this Prophecy.
When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered,
then it broke forth as the leprosy in their foreheads: Their fornications were
not only covert, but overt. Their whoredoms in the face, were their
worshipping the two golden Calves and Baalim (says Parcus) their adulteries
between their breasts, were their trust in Idols, in the arm of flesh, in
confederacies, etc. when they would seem nevertheless to trust in God alone:
As now the Papists profess to do, and have thereto coined diverse nice
distinctions of worship, per se, and per accidens, proprie, and improprie, and
a hundred the like evasions. But there is no hiding of their Asses cars by
these subtilties. Doctor Reynolds in his Books de Idolatria Romana has (among
others) proved them rank Idolaters. Weston writes, that his head aked in
reading that Book; but they all yield it unanswerable: and yet they repent not
of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of
gold, and silver, and brass, and stones, and of wood, which neither can see,
nor hear, nor walk, Revel. 9.20. But, as those that make them, are like unto
them, so are all those that trust in them, stockish, and s^upid; given up to
the efficacy of error, to believe a lie, yea and that against common sense,
Isaiah 44.17. which is no small stumbling block, to both Jews and Mahometans.

Verse 3. Lest I strip her naked] Deus ideo minatur ut non puniat. God
therefore threatens, that he may not proceed to punish. Here he does not so
much direct as threaten, as conditionally terrify, from the pernicious effect,
or sad issue of their adulteries, a full and final desolation, after an utter
deprivation of Gods gifts and graces, shadowed under a fourfold Metaphor. 1. Of
stripping her of all her borrowed beauty, those jewels, and that comeliness
that he had put upon her. 2. Ezekiel. 16.6.
Of reducing her to her first forlorn condition wherein he found her, Ezekiel. 16.
viz. in her blood, in her blood, in her blood, as it is there said and set out
for greater emphasis. 3. Of laying her wast as a wilderness, (by the
incursions and hostilities of cruel enemies) or, as in the wilderness (so some
read it, by understanding the particle In) that is, as in the wilderness of
Arabia, where they were put to great straits when they came out of Egypt. The
very first handsel God gave them there, was bitterness and thirst. It was by
Marah that they came to Elim, etc. 4. Of afflicting and punishing her with the
most miserable and unsufferable kind of death; I will slay her with thirst,
which is worse then to be slain with hunger. All which is soretold, with some
hope nevertheless of grace and forgiveness, if she return and seek the Lord;
as by the word lest is secretly given to understand: Lest I strip her naked,]
As a jealous husband snatcheth away with indignation the clothes and ornaments
that he had bestowed upon his adulterous wife. The Lord threatens the wanton
women of Zion, to make naked their secret parts, Esaias 3.17. so that their shame
should be seen, Esaias 47.3. even all their nakedness, Ezekiel. 16.37. to discover
their skirts upon their face, as Nahum. 3.5. Thus the great whore of Babylon is
threatened with nakedness, Revel. 17.16. And this we see already performed upon
her in part, as Mr. Philpot barely told Chadsey in that vehement expression of
his, Before God, you are bare-breecht in all your religion: Act. and Mon. 1657.
he utters it somewhat more grossly. There was a base custom in Rome, that
when any woman was taken in adultery, they compelled her (for a punishment)
openly and beastly to play the harlot: ringing a bell whiles the deed was
doing, that all the neighbors might be made aware. This the good Emperor
Theodosius took away, M. Clark in the life of Theod. senior. 47.
and made better Laws for the punishment of adultery. God, when he threatens
to strip the Jewish Synagogue naked, means (says Mercer) that he will take
away ornamenta regni and sacerdotit those ornaments of the Kingdom, and of the
Priesthood, leave them as, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. without the true God, and without a
teaching Priest, and without Law, sine lege, sine rege, sine fide, as the
Brasilians are said to be. The children of Israel (says our Prophet, Chap.
3.4. where he interprets this Text) shall abide many days without a King, and
without Princes, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an
Ephod, and without Teraphim: that is, without any form of civil Government,
and without any exercise of true (yea or of false) religion. What a comfort was
it to good David, in his banishment, and after the slaughter of the Priests by
Saul (even fourscore and five persons, that did wear a linen Ephod, 1 Samuel
22.18.) that Abiathar the son of Abimelech, came down to him to Keilah, with an
Ephod in his hand, and that thereby he could enquire of God what to do, as he
did, 1 Samuel 23.6.
1 Samuel 30.7? And what a grief and misery to Saul, that God had forsaken him in
those visible pledges of his favor, and would not be found of him? Hence he
lay all open and naked to his enemies; who now might do what they would to him,
and none to hinder them. This also was the case and condition of the people,
when Aaron (by making the golden Calf at their command) had made the people
naked unto their shame amongst their enemies, Exodus 32.25. that is, destitute
of Gods powerful protection, and deprived of their former privileges. A
people, or a person may sin away their happiness; and forfeit the favors they
formerly enjoyed. An hypocrite may lose his gifts, and common graces; as that
idle and evil servant did his talent; his light may be put out in obscure
darkness. See Ezech. 43.11, 17. with the Note.

and set her as in the day that she was born,] Not only nudam tanquam ex
matre, Naked as ever she was born, (The Albigenses in France, those old
Protestants, were turned out stark-naked, both men and women, at the taking of
Carcasson, by the command of the Popish Bishop: and so were thousands of good
Christians by the bloody Rebels in Ireland now alate) but as she was born of
the Amorite, and Hittite; her navel was not cut, her birth-blot was not washed
in water, nay she was cast out into the open field, and no eye pitied her. (as
the Princess did Moses, and as the shepherdess did Romulus and Remus) See all
this and more, most elegantly set out, Ezekiel. 16. together with what high
honor, and sumptuous ornaments God did put upon her, verse 11, 12. What this
people were in the day of their nativity, Ioshuah tells them in part, Chap.
24.2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah
the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor, and served other gods: And I
took your father Abraham out of Vr of the Chaldees, as a brand out of that
fire, etc. and gave him Isaac^ And I gave unto Isaac Jacob, who, together with
his children, went down into Egypt, where they fell to the worshipping of
Idols, Ezekiel. 16.26. And although they were there, held under miserable
servitude, yet they continued exceeding wicked and abominable. The fire of
their afflictions seemed to harden their hearts, as much as the fire of the
furnace did the bricks they made. Hence, as they hardened their hearts. God
hardened his hand, and had hastened their destruction, had it not been that he
had seared the wrath of the enemy: lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, Deuteronomy. 32 27.
and lest they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all
this. Psalm. 107.8.
The Psalmist was sensible of all this and therefore says, Our fathers
understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy
mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea. Nevertheless he
saved them for his Names sake etc. And what was it else, but the respect to his
own great Name, and the remembrance of his holy covenant that moved the Lord to
premonish this perverse people of their present danger: and not to suffer his
whole wrath to arise against them, and to rush in upon them without a Ne forte,
Am. 4.12.
lest I set her as in the day etc. The eso^e thus will I do unto thee, O
Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God with
entreaties of peace. lest your house be left unto you desolate. Luc. 21. least
wra^h seize upon you, and that without remedy. And make her as a wilderness]
after that ^ have brought her out of a wilderness, and set her in a land that
flows with milk and honey. God can quickly curse our blessings, and destroy us
after that he has done us good. See this excellency set forth Isay 5.5. and
Jer. 17.5.6. Psalm. 107.34. Zech. 7.14. with the Note there and take heed lest
living in gods good land, but not by Gods good laws, we forfeit all into his
hand, and he take the forfeiture. For he had rather that wild beasts should
devour the good of a land, yea, that Satyrs and devils should dance there:
then that wicked and stubborn sinners should enjoy it. If Philip of Spain could
say he had rather have no subjects, then Lutheran subjects: And if the Council
of Toulouse (out of a like blind zeal for propagating Popery) did decree that
the very house should be p^lled down in qua fuerit inventus baereticus wherein
an heretic (as they then called Gods true servants) wa^ found: How much more
shall the King of heaven, the righteous judge, root out and pluck up a rabble of
rebels that refuse to be ruled by him. Idolatry is a Land-desolating sin, and
brings in the devouring sword Judge 5.8. 1. Joh. 5.21.
Psalm. 78.58.59.62. Jer. 22.7.8.9. Cavete ab Idolis. And slay them with thirst]
Surgit hic oration, surgit afflictio; To be slame with thirst is a grievous
judgment. Lysimachus parted with his kingdom, for a draught of water in a dry
land: and made himself of a great King a miserable Captive to the King of
Getes; Darius slying from his enemies, Plut.
was glad to drink of a dirty puddle, that had carrion lying in it: professing
that it was the sweetest draught that ever he drank in his life. Dives would
have given all that ever he was worth for a drop of cold water. The members,
infeebled for want of due moisture, seek to the veins for relief, the veins
to the liver, the Liver to the Entrals, the Entials to the ventricle, ^he
ventricle to the orifice. But these being not ab^e to impart what they cannot
receive, One he cries, Father Abraham. But hospitable Abraham has it not to
him: Rab. Samuel.
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, is now the portion of his cup, extreme
thirst is a piece of Hels pains, Act. and Mon. fol. 1547.
and one of the greatest of earths miseries. A dear servant of God in Queen
Mary's days, (kept and pined in prison) would feign have drunk his own water:
but for want of nour shm^nt could make none. Inward refreshings he had, even
those divine consolations of the ma^ty^s: he drank of the river of Gods
pleasures, Psalm. 26.8. which cast him into a sweet sl^^^: at which time one
clad all in white seemed to stand before him and to say, Samuel, Samuel, be of
good cheer, for after this day tho sh^^t never be hungry or thirsty more: for
soon after this he was buried: and from that time till he should suffer, he
felt neither hunger nor thirst (as himself declared) though he were kept by the
cruel B of Norwich with 2. or 3. morsels of bread every da^, and th^ee
spoonfuls only of water. Mercer expounds this text of spiritual thi^st, the
same that was foretold by Amos. Am. 8
Ideoque subdit verse. 4. says Oecolampadius, and therefore God adds in the
next verse, that he will not have mercy upon her childrer, but will kill them
with death; hu^^ them to hell as he threateneth to do Jes^bel's children, Ren.
2.23. Oh when the poor soul shall be in a wilderness in a dry and thirsty
land, scorched and parched with the sense of sin and fear of wrath; when the
terrors of God fall thick upon it, even the invenomed arrows of the Almighty:
Besides the bufferings of Satan, that hail shot, hell-shot of fiery darts,
Ephesians. 6. so called for the dolor and distemper they work, (in allusion to the
poisoned darts used in war by the Scythyans and other nations, the venomous
heat whereof is like a fire in the flesh) when conscience I say shall by this
means lie burning and boiling, what would it not gieve for a cup of
consolation, Phil. 2.1. Genesis 16.14. Judge. 15.19
yea for any consolation in Christ as the Apostle has it, for any
Beer-lahai-roi, to fill the bottle at, yea for any En-haccore, any cleft in a
jaw bone to revive a thirsty Sampson, that must else be slain with thirst.
David never so desired after the water of the well of Bethlehem, as he did
after God in a dry and thirsty land, where no water was, Psalm. 63.1. As the
hunted Heart (the Hind says the Septuagint) pants after the water-brookes, so
pants or brayeth my soul after thee. My soul thirsts for God etc. Oh, (...)
Psalm. 42, 1.2.3
when shall I come and appear before God. The tears have been my meat etc.
Hunters say the Heart sheds tears (or something like) when hotly pursued, and
cannot escape. He is a beast thirsty by nature, and whose thirst is much
increased when he is hunted, The female especially, in whom the passions are
stronger then in males. Christ (that Aicleth Shachar, that is, the morning-Hart
or stagg, as he seems to be styled Psalm. 22.1. in the title, felt his soul
heavy to the death in his bitter agony; and tasted so deep of that dreadful
cup, that in a cold winter night he swat great clods of blood, which, through
cloths and all, fell down to the ground. And when this lamb of God was even a
roasting in the fire of his fathers wrath, he cried out, I thirst. At which
time men gave him cold comfort, even vinegar to drink: but God his Father most
sweetly supported him: so that he might better say then David, In the multitude
of my perplexed thoughts within me, thy comforts have refreshed my soul. But
what shall those poor creatures do that are strangers to the promises, and
have no water of the well of life to relieve them, when Gods wrath is as a fire
in their bones, and falls upon their flesh like molten-lead or
running-bell-mettle. Then they that have sucked in sin as an Ox sucks in water,
shall suck the gall of asp^ and venom of vipers, and have none to pity them.
Francis Spira feel this spiritual thirst etc.

Verse 4. And I will not have mercy upon her children] Lo here another, And to
those four before; and more dreadful then the rest: Like as that in the 16. of
Jeremy verse. 13. where I will not show you favor, was worse to them then their
captivity in a strange country. Say that God do cast off his people, yet if he
say, Ezekiel. 7.5.
they shall be as if I had not cast them off, and will hear them Zech. 10.6.
the affliction is nothing so great, as when he sends an evil, an only evil
without mixture of mercy, as here. Oh, this pure wrath, this judgment without
mercy must needs be very heavy: when it is once grown to hatred, there is
little hope. Hos. 9.15. All their wickedness is in Gilgal, for there I hated
them. God is not of himself (...) a hater of mankind, but the contrary, Titus
3.4. But such is the venomous nature of sin, and so contrary it is to Gods both
holy nature and just law, (...).
that he cannot but hate it in whomsoever he finds it: yet with this
difference, that he pitties it rather in his Saints, and hates it in his
enemies: as we hate poison in a toad, but we pity it in a man: because in the
one it is their nature, in the other, their disease. And as revenge is the next
effect of hatred, wicked men may expect no better dealing from God, then a man
would afford to his stubborn enemy. Pharaoh had plague upon plague: neither did
the Lord leave him, till he had dashed the breath out of his body: so true is
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.
With the froward thou will wrestle, and that of Solomon, The back slider in
heart shall be filled with his own ways. He has made a match with mischief,
he shall have his belly-full of it. Prove. 14,
He would needs have his own way, and had it, (for I would have purged him, but
he would not be purged) Now I will have my way another while: for thou shall
not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest
upon thee, Ezekiel. 24.13. So our Savior to those refractory Jews in the
Gospel. I would have gathered thee as the hen gathers her chickens, I would
but thou would not: therefore they shall lay thee even with the ground, and
thy children within thee. And I will not have mercy upon her children] Lo, God
is so incensed by a general defection, that he will make havoc and destroy
even the mother with the children, (which was Jacobs great fear, Genesis 32.11.)
yea he will dash the mother in pieces upon the children as Shalman did at
Betharbel Hos. 10.14 he will put young and old into the same bag together, as
fowlers deal by birds, which yet was forbidden by a law, (...). Qualis matter
talis filia. Partus sequitur ventrem.
Deuteronomy. 22.6. his eyes shall not spare children, as Isai. 13.19. And why? For
they are the children of whoredoms] They are maliex malis, as Hierom interprets
it: they love and live in the adulteries of their mother: they take after her,
as the birth usually follows the belly, and as in a Syllogism, the
conclusion follows the weaker proposition. Those Jews in the Gospel boldly
boasted to our Savior that they were not the children of fornication, for they
had Abraham to their father Joh. 6.33. nay, God to their father verse. 41, But
he as boldly tells them, that they a e^a bastardly brood, yea a serpentine
seed; and that they were of their father the devil, verse. 44. And in another
place, as Serpents, says He, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell. If mercy interpose not, as the cold grave must one day hold
your bodies, so hot hell your souls. But I will have no mercy upon her
children: for they are the children of fornications] i.e. they are not only
misbegotten and illegitimate, (which though no fault of theirs, yet is their
reproach, as has been said in the Notes on the former chapter) but they are
children of fornications in an active sense too; they have learned of their
mother to fornicate: they are as good at resisting the holy Ghost, as ever
their Fathers were, Acts 7.51. they fill up the measure of their fathers fias,
that wrath may come upon them to the utmost. Children as they derive from their
parents a cursed birth blot which comes by propagation; so they are very apt to
fall into their vices by imitation: and then they ^ue both their own and their
parents iniquities.

Verse 5. For their mother has played the harlot] Being a wife of whoredoms
chap. 1.2. (see the Note there,) therefore I will not have mercy upon her
children, but will root out all her increase, job. 31.12. Either she shall
commit whoredom, and not increase, Hos. 4.10. Or if she do, it is for mischief:
she shall bring forth children to the murderer: or at least, she shall
bequeath them a fearful legacy of sin and punishment, worse then that leprosy
that Gehezi left to his posterity, or that Joab lest to his, 2 Samuel 3.29.
lameness and gonorrhaea, etc. It is a dangerous thing to keep up the succession
of a sin in the world, and to propagate guilt from one generation to another:
it is a great provocation. When the wickedness of such is ripe in the field
(and they have filled up the measure of their fathers sins) God will not let it
shed to grow again: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable vengeance. Let
parents therefore break off their sins and get into Gods favor: if for nothing
else, yet for their poor childrens sake: laboring to mend that by Education
which they have marred by propagation and evil example. And let children of
wicked parents (as they tender their own eternal good) take Gods counsel,
Ezekiel 20. verse. 18.30. Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and
commit ye whoredom after their abominations? Oh, walk ye not after the statutes
of your fathers: neither observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with
their idols. True it is, men are wondrous apt to dote upon their fathers
doings, and are hardly drawn off from their vain conversation by received
tradition from their ancestors 1 Pet. 1.18. A bo^e majori discit arare minor.
Ovid.
Prescription is held Authority sufficient. Me ex ea opinione quam a majoribus
accepi de cultu deorum nullius unquam movebit oration, ^ic.
says Tully, No man shall ever dissuade me from that way of divine worship
that my forefathers lived and died in. It is reported of a certain Monarch of
Morocco, that having read Saint Paul's Epistles he liked them so well, that he
professed that were he then to choose his Religion, he would, before any other,
embrace Christianity. But every one ought, Heyl. Geog. page 714.
said he, to die in his own Religion: and the leaving of the faith wherein he
was born was the only thing that he disliked in that Apostle. Thus He. Sed
teto erravit caelo, Antiquity must have no more Authority then what it can
maintain, (...), Mine Antiquity (said Ignatius) is Christ Jesus, who said not
to the young man, Do as thy forefathers, but Follow thou me. She that conceived
them has done shamefully] She has utterly shamed her self and all her
friends; husband, children, all. The woman is or should be the glory of the
man. Solomon's good huswife was she, Prove. 31.28, 29. Her children rise up and
call her blessed: her husband also, and he praises her, saying, Many daughters
have done virtuously: but thou excellest them all. Alphonsus King of Arragon
was once resolved never to commend his wife, lest he should be accounted
immodest, or uxorious: but afterward he changed his mind, Val: Max. Chri. 73.
and was so taken with his wives virtues and constancy, that he resolved to
praise her quocunq in trivio, cuique obvio, sine modo, et modestia in all
places and companies, etc. So did Budaeus, Pareus, and others. Plin. Tacit.
utinam aut coelebs vixissem, aut orbusperirssem. Prove. 14.34. Deuteronomy. 28. Jer.
25.9. Ezekiel. 5.15.
but a wicked wife, (an harlot especially) puts her husband to the blush and is
a great heart-break, as Livia was to Augustus ( Eudemus was both her Physician
and her stallion) his children also proved start naught: which made him wish
that either he had lived a Batchelour, or died childlesse. Righteousness
exalts a nation: but sin is a shame to any people. It is the snuff that
dimmeth their candlestick, the leaven that sowreth their Passover, the
reproach that renders them a proverb, and a byword, an astonishment and an
hissing, a taunt and a talk to other countries. Such was Isreal's Apostasy and
Idolatry, their subjecting Religion to carnal policy in setting up the two
calves, and Baalim: when Ephraim spoke there was trembling, and then he exalted
himself in Israel: but when he offended in Baal, he died Hos. 13.1. Whilst he
kept close to God, who but Ephraim. None durst quack, but all quaked at the
name of Ephraim: he was on high, and much honored. But when he declined to
Idolatry, he became contemptible: and every paltry adversary cast dirt in his
face, and crowed over him. So true is that of Solomon, The wise shall inherit
glory: Prove. 3.35.
but shame shall be the promotion of fools: What a victorious Prince was Henry
the fourth of France, till he (for politic respects) turned Papist? Till then
he was Bonus Orbi: but after that, Orbus Boni, as the wits of the time played
upon his name Borbonius, Life of Phil. de Mornay.
by way of Anagram. Once he was (before his revolt) persuaded by Du-Plessy to
do public penance for having abused the daughter of a certain Gentleman in
Rochel, by whom he had a son. Hereunto he was drawn with some difficulty, being
read, to fight a battle: and this was no disgrace to him: But when, by
compliance at least, he became an Idolater for lucre of a crown, and love of
life, he became a vile person, as Antiochus is called, Dan. 11.21. and was
worthily lashed with rods by the Pope, in the person of his Ambassadors; and
butchered by the instigation of those Jesuits whom he basely recalled into
France, whence they had been banished, and admitted them into his bosom; making
Father Cotton his Confessor et sic probrose se gessit, et rem confusione
dignam admisit, as here. He both shamed and undid himself. For she has said, I
will go after my lovers] Amasios meos, My sweet-hearts, Marbeck. Act. and Mon.
those that have drawn away my heart from my husband. But if that persecutour
could say to the Martyr. What (a devil) made thee to meddle with the
Scriptures? how much better might it be said to the Synagogue, (and so to all
Apostates) What (a devil) meant you to go a whoring from such an husband (who
is totus, Cant. 5.16.
totus desiderabilis, altogether lovely, even the chief of ten thousand,) after
dumb idols and false Prophets who are their brokers (proxenetae et proci) and
spokesmen? Athenaeus brings in Plato bewailing himself and his own condition,
that he was taken so much with a filthy whore. Adultery is filthiness in the
abstract: Gelulim. Ezekiel. 22.3. 1 Pet. 4.3.
so is also idolatry: and therefore idols are called by a word that signifies
the very excrements that come out of a man; a term too good for those
dunghill-deities, those abominable idolatries, as Saint Peter expresses it.
Mention is made in histories of a certain heathen people that punish adultery
with death: and with such a death as is suitable to the sin. For they thrust
the adulterers or adulteresses head into the paunch of a beast, where lies all
the filth and garbage of it, there to be stifled to death. (...) Jude 7.
Sodom and Gomorrha had fire from heaven for their burning lust: and stinking
brimstone for their stinking brutishness. They are also thrown out (as St.
Jude phraseth it) for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. And
in the like pickle are the Beast, and the false Prophet (those Arch-idolaters)
for these both are cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone Rev.
19.20. And worthily, Esaias 3.9.
since they declared their sins as Sodom, they hid it not: And as this huswife
in the text: who said I will go after my lovers] she did, of wickedness
forethought, upon deliberation, de industria, ex consilio, wilfully and of
purpose, impudently and without all shame of sin, say, I will go after. This
was shameless indeed: They should rather have gone after her, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
then she after them. Moses fitly compares a whore to a salt-bitch that is
followed after by all the dogs in a town. And am I dogs-head, said Abner to
Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 3.8. that is. Am I so given to lust and lasciviousnes as
dogs are that run after every salt-bitch? But this harlot verified that saying
in Ezekiel. The contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms: whereas
none followed thee to commit whoredoms, thou followest them; and gloriest in
thy so doing, as Lots daughters did in their detestable incest, naming their
children Moab, that is, a birth by my father; and Benammi, that is, begotten by
one of my near kindred. These all might have held their tongues with shame
enough. But such kind of sinners are singularly impudent, Jer. 3.3.
infatuated, Hos. 4.11. and past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. And so are Idolaters
wickedly wilful, and irreclaimable for most part. See Jer. 44.16, 17. and
2.10. Esaias 44.19, 20. A seduced heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul; nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? How stiff are
Papists to this day in defense of their Image Worship? how severe against such
as deface, or but disgrace them? Murder is not so heinous a sin, etc.

That give me my bread and my water, etc.] What can be more like to the doings
of the Papists then this? says Danaeus. Who knows not what suit they make, and
what thanks they return to their He-Saints, and She-Saints, and how they
sacrilegiously transfer the glory due to God alone, to the creature. The Lord
rightly resolves the genealogy of corn, wine, and oil into himself, verse 22.
of this chapter. And the Aposte tells us, that it is He that fills men's
hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14.17.

-- Et cum charissima semper,
Munera sint Author quae preciosa facit.
This should make us lift up many an humble, joyful, and thankful heart to
God: well content if we may have offam et aquam, bread and water, and the
gospel: and vowing with Jacob, Genesis 28.20.
that if God will give us bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall he be
our God, and we will honor him with the best of our substance. As for other
gods, whether Pagan, or Papagan, say we as that Heathen did, Contemno minutulos
istos deos modo Jovem mihi propitium habeam, I care not for these
petty-deities: I trust in the living God, who gives us all things richly to
enjoy: All things, I say, both ad esum, et ad usum, for back and belly,
(besides better things) which is all that carnal people care for. There be
many (too many) that say (and can skill of no other language) Who will show us
any good? who will give us bread, Psalm. 4.
water, wool, oil, etc? they look no higher, know no heaven but plenty, hell
but penury, God but their belly, whereunto they offer sacrifice with
Poliphemus, and care for no more, quam ut ventri been sit ut lateri, then that
their bellies may be filled, Epicur. ap. Hor.
their backs fitted. Let them have but plenty of victuals, and the Queen of
heaven shall be their good Lady, Jer. 44.17. Base spirits look only after low
things: gain and credit carry them any way. They work for their penny a day; and
are like little children, which will not say their prayers unless they may be
promised their breakfast: Whereas a true worshipper of God soareth aloft, has
his feet at least, where other men's heads are, trades for higher commodities,
cannot be put off with mean matters. When great gifts were sent to Luther, he
refused them with this brave speech, Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic
satiari: Melch. Adam.
I deeply protested, that I would not be put off by God with these low things.
The Papists offered to make him a Cardinal, if he would be quiet. He replied,
No, not if I might be Pope. They sent Vergerius, the Popes Nuncio, to tempt him
with preferment, and to tell him of Eneas Sylvius, who following his own
opinions, Hist. of Counc. of Trent. p. 73.
with much slavery and labor, could get no further preferment then to be Canon
of Trent, but being changed to the better, became Bishop, Cardinal, and
finally, Pope Pius 2. The same Vergerius also minded him of Bessarion of Nice,
who of a poor Collier of Trapezond, became a great renowned Cardinal, and
wanted not much of being Pope. But what said Luther to all this? Contemptus est
a me Romanus et favor, et furor, I care neither for the favor nor fury of
Rome. The Bramble thought it a brave business to reign over the trees: not so
the vine and fig tree. We read of Pope Silvester, that he gave his soul to the
devil for seven years enjoyment of the Popedom; which Luther spurned at. One
good cast of Gods loving countenance, was more to David then a confluence of
all outward comforts and contentments. Thou have put gladness in mine heart,
says he, more then in the time that their corn, and their wine increased,
Psalm. 4.7. Their corn, and their wine he calls it; because it is their
portion, (poor souls) and they are too too well apaid of it. Wealth upon any
terms is welcome to them, and those are their lovers that will keep them to
it, yea though it be the devil himself: whose language also here they seem to
have learned when they say, my corn and my water etc. All Is their own if you
will believe them: like as the devil said to our Savior, Luke 4.6. All this
wealth is mine and to whomsoever I will, I give it. But God is the true
proprietary, the owner of all: and it is his alone to say Cui volo, do illa.
Dan. 4.22. The devil is God of this world: 2 Cor. 4.4
but it is but titular only, as a king at chesse: or at best, by usurpation
only as Absalom was a king: and as the Pope is Lord of all the kingdoms of
the world, both for temporals and spirituals; to dispose of them at his
pleasure. When he makes Cardinals, he uses these big-swoln words, estote
confratres nostri, et principes mundi, Be you brethren to us, and princes of
the world. And by such high honors, bishoprics, and benefices, he prevails
with very many to be wholly at his devotion. One of his poor beneficiaries
ingenuously confessed, that he and those of his rank preached the gospel for
nothing else, nisi ut nos pascat and vestiat then to get a poor living by it.
Let Saints say, Non est mortale quod opto, we breath after better things: Rev.
12.1.
we have the moon under our feet and are above corn, wool, flax etc. The
devil shall not stop our mouths with these palterments. Balaam may run and
ride after the wages of wickedness, and get a sword in his guts. Ahab may make
a match with mischief, and sell himself to do wickedly: Judas hunt after lying
vanities, and hastened to his own place. But Moses was of another spirit, Heb.
11.37.
and refused to be called the son of Pharoah's daughter Heb. 11.24. And those
Worthies in the same chapter that were tempted with offers of profit and
preferment, could not be won over, but resisted the devil, and he fled from
them. The world was crucified to Saint Paul, and he to the world. He was of too
generous a spirit: he was no malleable matter: all was but dung and dogs-meat
in his account Philip. 3.8. D. Tailor martyr was promised not only his pardon,
but great promotion; yea a Bishopric: but he would none of it: Another D.
Taylour Bishop of Lincoln, Act. and mon. fol. 1386. Ib. 1918. Ib. 815. Ib.
1444. Ib. 1578.
was violently thrust out of the Parlament-house in his robes, in Q. Mary's
reign, and deprived. So was Hirmanius Archbishop of Colen for certain
reformations, done by the aid and advice of Martin Bucer. I dare say, (said B.
Bonner to Mr. Hawks martyr) that Cranmer would recant if he might have his
living: so judging others by himself. But Latimer and Shaxton parted with their
Bishoprics in King Henry the eights time, rather then to submit to the six
Articles. And John Knox refused a Bishopric offered him by King Edward the
sixth, as having aliquid commune cum Antichristo: so did Miles Coverdale in Q.
Elisabeths reign; Knox his life by Mr. Clark.
choosing rather to continue a poor Schoolmaster. Pliny says of Cato, that he
took as much glory in those dignities and honors that he denied, as he did in
those that he enjoyed. He was wont also to say that he had rather men should
question why he had no statue or monuments erected to him, then why he had:
Plin. Not. hist. praef.
Certainly it is so with the Saints: and upon better grounds.

Verse 6. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns] i. e. with
difficulties and distresses; So God had fenced up Jobs way that he could not
pass, Chap. 19.8. he had thrown the cross in his way, to stop him in his
career. And so he had hedged the church about, that she could not get out. Lam.
3.7. he had enclosed her ways with hewn stone, and made her paths crooked.
Verse. 9. A great mercy if well considered, though grievous to the flesh, that
loves not to be cooped or kept within compass. Man is fitly compared to a
wild-asse colt used to the wilderness, Jer. 2.24. Job. 11.12.
snuffing up the wind at her pleasure, rude and unruly, untamed, and
untractable, To be kept by hedges and fences within a pasture, seems to such
no small punishment: neither count they any thing liberty but licentiousness:
or a merry life, unless they may have the devil their play-fellow: But the
devil plays at no small games: capite blanditur, ventre oblectat, cauda ligat:
he plays at swoop-stake, he lies in wait for the precious life, as that
harlot. Prove. 6.26. nothing less will content him. In great wisdom therefore,
and no less mercy to men's souls, does God restrain, and bound them by
afflictions, that they may not run wild as they would: nor feed upon the devils
commons which would fat them indeed, but for the slaughter. This made Job prize
affliction as a special favor, Job. 7 18. Jerome prays, Correct me O Lord,
Chap 10. and Luther to like purpose, Feri Domine, feri clementer -- Strike
Lord, strike, it shall be a mercy. And King Alfred prayed God always to send
him some sickness, whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better
affectioned to Godward. It is observed by one of our Chroniclers, Dan hist
fol. 14.
that Affliction so held in the Saxon Kings in the Danick wars, as having
little out-lets or leisure for ease and luxury, they were made the more pious,
just, and careful in their government: otherwise it had been impossible so to
have held out etc. Sure it is, that if God did not hedge us in (as by his hedge
of protection Is. 5.5. so) by his hedge of affliction as here, no reason would
rule us, no cords of kindness would contain us within the bounds of
obedience. David himself before he was afflicted, I went astray says He: But
God brought him home again by weeping cross. He once so leapt over the pale,
that he broke his bones, and felt the pain of it to his dying day: he brake
Gods hedge, and a Serpent bit him, Eccles. 10.8. his conscience flew in his
face, the guilt whereof is compared by Solomon to the biting of a Serpent and
sting of an Adder. Prove. 23.32. he roared for the disquietnesse of his heart:
But better so, then roar in hell, where is punishment without pity, misery
without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, mischief without
measure, torment without end and past imagination The Prophet Amos likeneth
incorrigible persons to horses running upon a rock, where first they break
their hoofs, and then their necks, Amo. 6.12. Another fitly compares them to
that Jesuit in Lancashire who followed by one that found his glove with a
desire to restore it him, but pursued inwardly by a guilty conscience, leapes
over an hedge, plunges into a marlepit behind it unseen, and unthought of,
where in he was drowned. To prevent their deserved destruction (if it may be)
God tells them here that he will not only hedge them in, but wall up their
way, And make a wall] macerabo maceriam, I will wall a wall, and immure her: as
jealous husbands do their wives whom they mistrust: And this God speaks by an
Apostrophe to others, as loathing the thought that ever he should be put to it,
I will make a wall that she shall not find her paths] q. d. I Will hamper her and
handle her as she was never handled. By a like passionate Apostrophe Genesis 49.4.
old Jacob, speaking of Rubens incest, Thou wentest up to thy fathers bed: then
defiledst thou it: moved with the odiousness of the fact, he breaks off his
speech to Reuben, and turning him to the rest, he adds, He went up to my
couch. q. d. Out upon it, I am the worse to think of it. Maginus tells us, that
in Lituania the men are such wittals, that they suffer their wives to have
their stallions whom they call Cennubij adjutores, and prize them far above all
their accquaintance. And Balthazar Exnerus tells us of a certain Duke of
Oppania, who marrying a Lituanian Lady, and going forth to meet her, Val. Max.
Christian.
when she came first to him: he found in her company one of that rank, a lusty
young fellow; whom when he understood what he was, and wherefore he came,
voluit laniandum canibus objicere, he was once in mind to make dogs-meat of
him. But understanding that it was the custom of that country, he sent him
home again without further hurt. The Lord our God is a jealous God: and be the
Gods of the Heathen good fellows, says One, yet he will not endure corrivals:
nor share his glory with another. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? And
why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way, thou also shall be ashamed of
Egypt as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. Yea thou shall go sorth from him, i. e.
from the Egyptian thy present patron and protector. And thy hands upon thy
head, which was the gesture of women in great sorrow. 2 Samuel 13.19. for the
Lord has rejected thy confidence, and thou shall not prosper in them, Jer.
2.33.36.37. This people to have a stake in store, howsoever the dice chanced to
turn, sought to join friendship as soon with the Assyrian. as with the Egiptian,
and so to secure themselves: but it would not do. They followed after these
lovers, but could never overtake them. Egypt proved but a broken reed. Assyria
the rod of Gods wrath, the staff in his hand, Es. 10.5. yea the hedge of his
making, hemmed them in by straight sieges, both at Samaria and Jerusalem: till
at length the Romans came, and walling them about, till they were forced to
yield, took away both their place and their nation, according to that they
feared, Job. 11.48. and caused to cease the daily sacrifice which they would
needs till then hold out in opposition to the Gospel. (...).
That she shall not find her paths] those highways to hell wherein she has
hitherto tired her self, by trotting after her lovers. Drusius notes here,
that an harlot has her name in the Chaldean tongue from her tracing up and
down; delighting to be abroad altogether, to see, and to be seen, that she may
draw in the silly-simple. See Prove. 7.11, 12. with the Note. God is able to
strike such people with such blindness as he did the wicked Sodomites at Lots
door, subito scotomate, says Junius, such as tormented their eyes, as if they
had been pricked with thorns, as the Hebrew word there signifies, Genesis 19.11.
See Psalm. 75.6. Isai. 29.19. and 19.11, 12, 13. The fool knows not how to go
to the city, Eccles. 10.15. they are so blinded and baffled many times in their
own ways. God loves to make fools of them.

Verse 7. And she shall follow after her lovers,] Follow them hot-foot, pursue
them eagerly and earnestly, as the hunter does his game, or the pursivant, the
party to be arrested: So little was she bettered by her former sufferings: Thus
the blind Sodomites continue groping still for the door, as if they were
ambitious of destruction, which was now even at next door by. And thus Pharaoh,
that sturdy rebel. rages against God, and menaceth Moses with death, then,
when that palpable gross darkness was upon him. This was one of those wild
bulls in a net that was full of the fury of the Lord, Isa. 51.20. He was full
of it, and yet lay raging against it, adding impatience to his impenitence, and
passive dissobedience to his active. Another Bull of the same breed was
Ahaziah, who sent a third Captain after the two former had been consumed with
fire from heaven: as if he would despitefully spit in the face of heaven, and
wrestle a fall with the Almighty. And a third was that stubborn stigmatick
Ahaz, who the more he was distressed, Perdidistis fructum afflictionis. Aug.
the more he trespassed, This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. These men lost
the fruit of their afflictions; which indeed was a great loss, but that they
were not sensible of it. Those that belong to God shall have stroke upon
stroke, one cross in the neck of another, till they be kindly humbled, and
brought home to their first husband. God will strike a parting-blow, betwixt
them and their sweethearts; and make them pollute the Idols which they had once
perfumed, Esaias 30.22. She shall follow them, but she shall not overtake them,]
Persequetur, sed non assequetur. She shall meet with disappointment, but it
shall be in mercy: she shall be crossed with a blessing, chastened by the Lord,
that she may not be condemned with the world. She shall seek for favor and
succor at her sweet-hearts hands, but all in vain, they shall all forsake her,
and shall change their ancient love into mortal hatred, Jer. 2.36. Ezekiel.
36.17. It is the usual practice of the devil, and his instruments, to bring
men into the briers, and there to leave them to shift as they can: thus the
Pharisees dealt by Judas; What is that to us? say they; Matt. 27.4.
see thou to that: they left him when they had led him to his bane; like as
familiars leave their witches, when they have once brought them into fetters.
God deals not so with any of his, when he is most angry. But as in very
faithfulness he afflicts them, that he may be true to their souls. So when
they follow hard after him, as David did, they are sure to overtake him, though
perhaps not presently; when they seek him, they are sure to find him, so they
search for him with all their heart, Jer. 29.13. True it is, that God often by
the hand of the enemy, as by a pursivant at Arms, fetches in bankrupt tenants,
that is, his own untoward and backsliding people, and leaves them in the
pursivants hand, till they take some course to satisfy for their arrears. But
that once done, he will soon set them at liberty, and make them glad, according
to the days wherein he had afflicted them. Psalm. 90.
Let a poor soul but say, as here, I will go and return to my first husband,]
that is to God. I have run away from him, by my sins, I will now return again
to him by repentance. Let there be but such language in the hearts of Gods
prodigals, and he will soon relent toward them, meet them on the way, Isa.
65.24. fall upon their necks and kiss them, Luke 15.20. he will receive them
with all sweetness. Jam ex hoc loco licet colligere quae sit vera
resipiscentia, says Calvin here. By this Text we may gather what true
repentance is: Namely, when a sinner not only confesses himself guilty, and
worthy of punishment, but truly displeases himself, and seriously returns to
God. Here we have those two essential parts of true Repentance, sc. Contrition,
and conversion; or Humiliation, and Reformation. The former is called in
Scripture, Repentance for sin, the latter, Repentance from sin: and the one
without the other is to no purpose or profit. for then was it better with me
then now,] It was so: but how came you to conceive or consider of it in this
sort? but by disappointments and afflictions? These are to us as Benhadads best
counselors, that sent him with a cord about his neck to the merciful King of
Israel. The Septuagint render the Text thus; For he was good to me then, over
he is now. And what wonder? Is there any thing to be gotten by departing from
Christ, by leaving thy first love, by quenching the spirit, and making
Apostacy from former degrees of grace, and holiness? Can any son of Jesse do
for us as Christ can? or do we think to mend our selves by running out of Gods
blessing into the worlds warm Sun, as Demas did? O call me not Naomi, said she
once, but call me Marah: for I went out full, and am come home empty. So does a
revolted Christian say, Ruth 4.
when he comes from the act of sinning, when he has been seeking after his
sweet-hearts: he went with his heart full of peace, and his hand full of
plenty; and meeting with a bargain of sinning, thought to eeke out his
happiness, and make it fuller (as Solomon did) but came home empty: empty of
comfort, but laden with crosses. He has lost his evidences, is excommunicated
from the power of the Ordinances, is under the terror of a wounded spirit, is
buffetted by Satan, is out of hope of ever recovering the radiancy of his
graces, has his backburden of afflictions: so that he is forced to confess it
to be the greatest madness in the world, to buy the sweetest sin at so deer a
rate. David found it so, the Shulamite found it so, Cant. 5.1, 2, etc. No rest
she had at home, nor comfort abroad, till she had recovered her first husbands
company; for then it was better with her then now; and yet now too, upon her
hearty repentance, all becomes as well with her as ever it had been before,
Chap. 6.4, etc. Was it not so likewise with Ephraim, Ier. 31.19, 20, 21. with
the Prodigal, Luke 15. with Peter after his shameful recidivation. Let this
then be to all Gods relapsed people as a valley of Achor, a door of hope, that
they may be readmitted. Shall Sarah receive Hagar into favor? Joseph his
brethren? David his Absalom, Philemon his Onesimus? Shall that Non-such Ahab,
show mercy to his professed enemies the Syrians, that had the second time set
upon him? And shall not God receive his repenting children? fetch home his
banished, yea though they may seem to be as water spilt upon the ground? bring
them back into his own bosom, though they have never so far wandered out of the
way? He will, he will. Only he expects that they should say, and do, as the
Church of Israel here, and as the Church of Ephesus is advised, Revel. 2.4.
First, Remember whence ye are fallen: sc. not only from your former feelings
and comforts, but also from your former fitness for Gods kingdom; that jus
aptitudinale (as the Schools call it) that David himself had parted with for a
season, and therefore is called plain David so often together, and not my servant
David, as formerly, 2 Samuel 24.12, etc. Secondly, Repent: Sigh out that of Job,
Job 29 2, 3, 4
O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me! When
his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness: As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon
my tabernacle: When the Almighty was yet with me, etc. O it was far better then
with me, then now. Thus relent, repent, revenge upon your backslidings; spare
for no pains, but be extraordinarily humbled: detest your selves, give God no
rest till he return unto his rest, etc. Thirdly, Do your first works, with a
redoubted diligence for your former negligence; and tie your selves thereto by
solemn Covenant. Begin (though at first but faintly) to pray, read, confer,
meditate, cease from sin, shun the occasions, recover by degrees as a weak body
does by good diet, moderate exercise, etc.

Verse 8. For she did not know] i. e. She would not be aknown or affected, of
this she was willingly ignorant, as S. Peter has it, 2 Epist. 3. Vt liberius
peccet libenter ignorant, as Bernard. Her ignorance was not a mere nescience, or
an invincible ignorance, such as she could not help; but it was wilful,
affected, acquired: they not only desired not the knowledge of Gods ways, but
haced it, spurned and scorned at it, Tu aedepol, si sapis quod scis, nescies.
Terent.
shutting the windows lest the light should come in: and being blinded by the
God of this world, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine
unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. lest they should see and say that which Nature and
Scripture do both teach them, viz. that all their accommodations and comforts
come from me alone. Had this their ignorance been merely negative, yet had they
not been wholly excused. The Apostle notes, that our Savior laid down his
precious life even for the not-knowings of the people which were such as they
could not help, Heb. 9.7. but there ignorance being affected, (...)
it was an high degree of ingratitude and impudence, and a very great
aggravation of their sin: it made it to be sin with an accent, wickedness with
a witness. Israel was herein worse then the Ox and the Ass (that knows his
owner and his masters crib, Isai, 1.3.) they fell below the stirrup of reason,
nay of sense. Hence God so stomacketh the matter both there and here. Non semel
hoc peccatum carpit, says Mercer: he cannot satisfy himself in saying how
much it troubled him to be thus unkindly, ungratefully, and unreasonably dealt
withal: it runs in his thoughts, his heart is grieved at it, and he must
vent himself. And when he has told his grief, and aggravated his wrong, yet he
has not done with it: but is upon it again and again; still convincing,
upbraiding; charging Israel for their foul and inexcusable unfaithfulness and
unthankfulness. Eandem sententiam quia sancta et necessaria est, repetit, says
Oecolampadius here; he repeates over the same he had said before, out of the
trouble of his spirit: and that they might once lay it to heart and be humbled.

that I gave her corn and wine and oil, etc.] A great deal more then she
reckons upon v. 5 and yet pays her rent there to a wrong Landlord too. God is
well content that we have the benefit, and comfort of his creatures, so he may
have the praise: this is all the rent he looks for; and this he indents with
us for Psalm. 50.15. the Saints also knowing his mind, promise it him, and bind
themselves to it as did Jacob, Genesis 28.20, 21. David Psalm. 51.14. For they know
that ingratitude forfeits all (as in this text. She would not know, Hieron. in
locum.
but i will make her know: ut qui ex copia datorem non senserunt, sentiant ex
penuria, for she shall fast another while, and go naked, etc.) like as the
Merchants non-payment of customs, may prove the utter loss of all his
commodities. Hence their first care to see God in all, as Moses often urges
this people in Deuteronomie to taste the superabundant sweetness of God in the
sweetness of the creatures; to look upon all, as swimming toward them in the
blood of Christ, as being a piece of his purchase: and this exceedingly
sweetneth all their comforts. God give thee the dew of heaven says Isaac to
his son Jacob Genesis 27.28. Profane Esau likewise, had the like, but not with a
God give thee: neither cared he how he had it, so he had it any way: but it is
otherwise with the Saints. See but the difference in these two brethren, long
after this Genesis 33.9.11. Esau as a mere natural man contenting himself, (like
a bruit beast made and taken to be destroyed) with a natural use of the
creature, cries out I have enough, my brother: keep that thou have to thy self.
But mark how Jacob delivers himself in another manner. Take I pray thee, my
blessing that is brought to thee: because God has dealt graciously with me,
and because I have enough, See a like difference between the rich fools Habes
multa. Thou have much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12.19. and David's
doxology, 1 Chronicles. 29.13.16. O Lord our God, all this store comes of thine
hand, and is all thine own. And to the same purpose speaks Eliezer, Genesis 24.35.
The Lord has given my master, flocks, herds, silver, gold, etc. and Job, chap.
1.21. The neglect of this observing of God and ascribing all to him is the
source of much sin in the world, and the mother of much mischief. Jer. 2.5. God
charge his people that they were gone far from him and had made his heritage
an abomination verse. 7. and why? but because they did not say, Where is the
Lord that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, etc. verse. 6. Were men but
sensible of what God does for them every day and hour, they could not in equity
and common ingenuity serve him as they do; He preserves, and provideth for us
all: lays us down and takes us up, gives us all things richly to enjoy,
commanding the best of his creatures to cater for us, Hos. 2.21. and to bring
us in the best of the best for our subsistence, Psalm. 8. Every good gift
temporal, and perfect giving spiritual and eternal comes from the Father of
lights, as naturally and as constantly as light does from the Sun, or water
from the Seal. Jam. 1.17.
Let us therefore imitate those Lights of heaven and rivers of the earth, do
all the good we can with those good things God has given us, corn, wine,
silver, gold, etc. and then reflect back toward, and return all the glory and
praise unto the Sun of our righteousness, and Sea of our salvation. The beams
of the Moon and Stars return as far back to glorify the face of the Sun, which
gave them their beauty, as they can possibly. Let us (semblably) ever send back
to Gods own glorious self, the honor of all his gifts, by a fruitful
improvement of them, and fresh songs of praise. Let the streams of Gods daily
bounty lead us (as the watercourse does, either upward to the spring, or
downward to the main Ocean) to the source and Fountain whence they flow. Let
the returns we make, be from God, of God, to God; from him, as the Efficient,
of him as the Material, and to him as the final cause: David joyneth these
three together, Psalm. 86.4, 5. And Paul Romans 11. ult. In fine, let us labor to
be like the full ears of corn that hang down the head toward the earth, their
original. Or if any be so graciously exalted, so freely favored above his
fellows, that his stalk is so stiff that it bears him up above the rest of
his ridge, let him look up to heaven; not in thoughts of pride, but humble
vows of thankfulness. Be not as horse and mule that drink of the brook, but
never think of the spring: or as swine, that haunch up the mast but never look
up to the tree: or as the barren earth, that swallows the seed, but returns
nothing to the sower, etc.

which they have prepared for Baal] Or, wherewith they have made Baal lavishing
gold out of the bag, and weighing silver in the balance, they hired a gold
smith and he made it a God: they fall down, yea they worship. Esaias 46 6. This
Baal was a special Idol of the Zidonians: but first of the Chaldees, who called
him Bell; the Carginians Bal, whence those compositions Hannibal, Hasdrubal; as
amongst the Babylonians Belteshazzar Mehetabel, etc. Varro (though a Heathen)
inveighes much against idols and images: and says, Errorem auxerunt, metum
dempserunt.
that they that first brought them increased error, and took away fear.
Plutarch says, it is sacrilege to worship by images, etc. It is thought, they
came first from Babylon. For Ninus having made an image of his father Belus
(this Baal in the text) all that came to see it, were pardoned for all their
offenses: whence, in time, that image came to be wo^shipp^d. A great promoter
of this kind of Idolatry in Israel was Ahab, in favor of his wife Jezebel, and
to ingratiate with her kindred, 1 King. 16.31. and this was the ruin of his
house. This Baal was by the Zidonians called Jupiter Thalassius, or their sea-
Jupiter, and is thought to be their chief God. They had their Dij minorum
gentium petty gods (called in scripture the host of heaven, the queen of
heaven, and a little further in this chapter Baalim) the Greeks called them
(...): which says Plato, are certain middle-powers or messengers betwixt God
and man, to carry up prayers, and bring down blessings, etc. Quam autem haec
damonum theologia conveniat cum sanctorum et Angelorum cultu apud
pseudochristianos, res ipsa loquitur, Mede in Apoc. page 115.
says learned Master Mede. How this doctrine of devils or heathen-deities
agrees with Saintworship, Melch. Ad. de Germ. Theol. page 815.
and Angel-worship among he Papists, is easy to be discerned. A great
stumbling it is to both Jews and Turks, who know it to be contrary to the
first commandment: and image worship, to the second. Whence the Turks will not
endure any images, Lib. 4.
no not upon their coins. And Paulus Jovius tells us, when Sultan Solomon had
taken Buda in Hungary, he would not enter into the chief Temple of that city,
to give praise to Almighty God for the victory, till all the images were first
down, and thrust out of the place. We read also of a certain Turkish
Ambassador, who being demanded why the Turks did not turn Christians? he
answered, because the Christian Religion is against sense and reason: for they
worship those things that are of less power then themselves, and the works of
their own hands: as these in the text, that made them Baal, yea (as if God had
hired them to be wicked) they made it of the very gold and silver which he had
given them, though for a better purpose. And this was horrible wickedness,
hateful ingratitude. This was to sue God with his own money, to fight against
him with his own weapons, as David did against Goliath, as Jehu did against
Jehoram, and as Benhadad did against Ahab with that life that he had lately
given him. Z^naras in Annal.
I read of a monster, who that very night that his Prince pardoned and
preferred him, slew him, and reigned in his stead. This was Michael Balbus, and
he is and shall be infamous for it to all posterity. Ingratitude is a monster
in nature. Lycurgus made no law against it, quod prodigiosa res esset
benesicium non rependere. To render good for evil is Divine: good for good is
humane: evil for evil is brutish: but evil for good is devilish. And yet alas^e
how ordinary an evil is this amongst us, to abuse, to Gods great dishonor, our
health, wealth, wit, prosperity, plenty, peace, friends, means, day, night,
corn, wine, silver, gold, all comforts and creatures, our times, our talents,
yea the holy Scriptures, the Gospel of grace, and our golden opportunities, the
offers of mercy, and motions of the spirit, turning our backs upon those
blessed and bleeding embracements, and pursuing our lusts (those idols of our
hearts) those Baals, that is, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
Lords and husbands that have us at their beck, and check? But is this fair
dealing? Do we thus requite the Lord, foolish and unwise as we are? Holy Ezra,
thinks there is so much unthankfulness and dis-ingenuity in such an
entertainment of mercy, that heaven and earth would be ashamed of it, Ezra.
9.13. Should we do so? says He, oh God forbid us any such wickedness. Others
render it, which they have sacrificed, or dedicated to Baal, for Idolaters
spare for no cost, Dum Deum alienum dotant, as some render that text Psalm.
16.4. whiles they give their goods not to the Saints (as David) that are on the
earth, but to another God. They lavish gold out of the bag: as we read of a
certain King of this land, who laid out as much as the whole crown revenues
came to in a year, upon one costly crucifix: and of another, that left by will
a very great sum of money for the transporting of his heart, to be buried in the
holy land, as they called it. How profuse papists are in decking their mawmets
and monuments of idolatry, is better known then that it needs here to be
spoken of Their Lady of Loretto, that Queen of heaven, as they call her stilo
veteri, has her Churches so stuffed with vowed presents and memories, Sands
his Relat.
as they are feign to hang their Cloisters and Churchyards with them.

Verse 9. Therefore will I returne] i. e. I will alter my course, change my
stand, change the way of mine administrations, deal otherwise with them then
yet I have done: they shall bear their iniquities, and know my breach of
promise, as Number. 14.34. they shall know the worth of mine abused mercyes, by
the want of them another while. I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offense and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek
me early. Hos. 5.15.
Finally, I will cut them short of alimony and hold them to straight allowance;
Hos. 7.14.
and then I shall be sure to hear them howling upon their beds for corn and
wine: as dogs do that are tied up, and cannot come at their meat. And take away
my corn, and my wine] those precious fruits of the earth, as S. James calls
them, James. 5.7. the product of Gods great care, from years end to years end,
Deuteronomy. 11.12. without which the earth could not yield her increase: neither
would there be a vein for the silver, a mine for the gold, iron taken out of
the earth, or brass molten out of the stone. Job. 28.3. All that we have is
his, in true account, and he is the great Proprietary, Mat. 20.15.
who only can say (as he in the gospel) May not I do what I will with mine
own? And what should he sooner and rather do, then take away meat from his
child that marrs it? If fullness breed forgetfulness, (as the fed hawk
forgets his master, and as the full Moon gets furthest off from the Sun) so
men, when they have all things at the full, forget God, and wickedly depart
from him, what can he do less then forget them (that so they may remember
themselves) and make fat Ieshurun look with lean cheeks, that they may leave
kicking, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Isay. 26.9.
and learn righteousness? Neither does God do this, till greatly provoked,
till there is a cause for it, Therefore I will return. He may well say, as
that Roman Emperor did, when he was to pronounce sentence of death, Non nisi
coactus, I am even compelled to it, there is no other remedy, 2. Chron. 36.16.
As a woman brings not forth but with pain; and as a be stings not, but
provoked: so here, Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox, he afflicts not
willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3.33. It Is sin that makes him
return as here: that puts him out of his road of mercy into ways of judgment,
that puts thunderbolts into his hand, and makes him do his work, his
strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Isay. 28.21. What can
a Prince do less then disarme a rebel? what can God do less, then take away his
own and be gone from such an impudent adulteress, as is here described? Jer.
7.18.
should he suffer her with his corn to make cakes to the Qu^en of heaven, and
to pour out his wine for drink offerings to other gods, that they might
provoke him to anger? No: rather then so, he will take away corn in the time
thereof, and his wine in the season thereof] He will cut off the meat from
their very mouths, Joel. 1.16. and pull their morsel from between their teeth.
Just at harvest, when their corn is to be inned, God will blast it, or
otherwise blow upon it, when all their old store is spent, and they reckoned
upon a good recruit, they shall be defeated and frustrated. Therefore has God
watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us, says Daniel, chap. 9.14. Lo,
God watches his time when to be even with his enemies: and takes his fittest
opportunity for their greater mischief. They that are wicked overmuch shall dye
before their time, Eccle. 7.17. Not before Gods time (for sta^^^a cuique dies,
every man's time is set, Job. 7.1. our bounds are prescribed us, and a pillar
pitched up by him, who bears up the heavens, which we are not to trespass) but
before their own time that they had propounded and promised to themselves as
that rich fool, Luke 12.19. who talked to himself (as fools use to do) Verse.
17. saying Soul, thou have much good laid up for many years. But we know what
became of him that very night; his many years were quickly up, his glass was
run, when he thought it had bin but new turned. Psalm. 64.7.
God shot at him with an arrow suddenly, he fetched off this bird with a bolt
whilst he was gazing at the bow, or pruning himself upon a bough. He chopped
into the earth before he was aware: as one that walks in the snow chops into
a pit. He died tempore non suo (as some render that forecited text in
Ecclesiastes) not in his own time, but in Gods time; then when it had been
better for that fool to have done any thing, then to have died, because (like
Elies sons) he died in his sins: and like Jezebels children, he was killed with
death. This made Austin say, Rev. 2.23.
that he would not for the gain of a world, be an Atheist for one half hour:
because he knew not but that God might, Job. 27.8.
in that time, call him: And then, what is the hope of the hypocrite though he
has gained, when God takes away his soul? He is troubled, when God takes
away his corn in the time thereof, and his wine in the season thereof: he is
hungry and hardly bestead, and therefore ready to curse God, and look upward,
howling against heaven, as the hungry wolf. But first he should consider, Esaias
8.21.
that the corn and wine and wool and flax that he has in keeping is not his,
but Gods; and that he reserves the propriety of all in his own hand: neither
has any man ought, in reference to him the Monarch of the world, that he can
call his own. The rich fool indeed talked much on this manner, Luke 12.18. I
will pull down [my] barns and build greater, and there will I bestow all [my]
fruits, and [my] goods. All was his own belike: God was not in all this man's
thoughts; For if he had, he would soon have known what to have done: sc. he
would have acknowledged God the Author and owner of all (as Moses minds men)
he would also have fed the hungry with his corn, Deuteronomy. 8.17.18.
and clothed the naked with his wool and flax, as Tyrus converted did with her
merchandise Isay. 23.18. he would have said to God as David did, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
all things come of thee, and of thine own we give thee. Bernard reports of
Pope Eugenius, that meeting with a poor but honest Bishop, he secretly gave
him certain Jewels wherewith he might present him. If God did not first furnish
us out of his treasury; we should have nothing wherewith either to honor him
or to help our selves or others; Gods poor, I mean, whom Solomon calls
owners of our goods and makes us but their stewards, Pro. 3.27. withold not
thy goods from the owners thereof. Next, the hungerbit hypocrite should
consider, that there is a worse hunger yet behind: and an heavy account to be
given of the corn, wine, wool, and flax, the creatures that he has deteyned
in unrighteousness, and spent upon his lusts, Jam. 4.3. If the husband men must
be ashamed and howl because the harvest of the field is perished: If the
drunkards must wake, weep and wail because the new wine is cut off from their
mouths, Sermon. 4. in Quadragess. Jo. de comb. Comp. Theol. l. 6. c. 21.
Joel. 1.5, 11. How shall they much more howl in hell, ubi nullus unquam cibus
est, nulla consolatio, says Bernard, where there is no manner of meat, no
drop of water to be had for love or money: where they must fast, and find no
mercy for ever, where they must hunger and thirst in aeterno Dei as the
Schools speak, as long as God is God. The sufferings of this world to the
wicked, is but as the falling of the leaves in comparison of the trees, that
will fall upon him hereafter, in that eternity of extremities. If here, In the
fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, and every hand of the
troublesome shall come upon him. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall
cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is
eating, as it is threatened Job. 20.22.23. what think we, will their portion be
in hell? Mean while God will recover his wool and his flax] He will snatch it
away (as the word signifies) in great displeasure, as a man does his stolen
goods out of the hands of a thief: He will rescue them, as Abraham did Lot and
the captives from Chedor-laomer, Genesis 14. 1 Samuel 30.
as David did his wives, goods, and friends from the Amalekitish rovers. The
poor creatures, corn, wine, wool, etc. groan heavily under the abuse of
graceless persons, Romans 8.22. and God hears them, as he did the oppressed
Israelites in Egypt, for he is gracious, He hears them I say, and recovers
them: He spoils their possessours of them, as Jacob did Laban of his sheep,
(...) Genesis 31.10.16.
as the Israelites did the Egyptians of their Jewels: the same word is used
there, as here, and it is a wonderful significant word says Mercer, S. Paul,
imitateth it, when he says the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption. This God does when he snatcheth away kingdoms from tyrants, wealth
fron worldlings, strength from roysters, spiritual common gifts from the proud
and secure. Zech. 11.17. See the note there, when men abuse mercies, they
forfeit their right in them: wicked men have not only a civil title, but a
right before God to the things that they possess; It is their portion, Psalm.
17.14. And what Ananias had was his own whiles he had it, Act. 5. And God gave
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar as pay for his pains in taking Tire. True it is, all
was forfeited in Adam: but wicked men have yet a right to all they do enjoy in
a lawful way, by divine donation, till the day of execution: As when a
traitor has his life given him, for a time at least, he has meat and drink
also given him to maintain his life for that time. God deals not as that
cruel Duke D'alva did, who starved some prisoners after that he had given them
quarter, saying, Though I promised you your lives, Hist of Netherl.
I promised not to find you meat. That which wicked men are charged with, and
shall be accountable for, is, not their right to use the creatures, but their
not right using them: This makes the creature cry in its kind and long for
liberty: even as birds do that thrust a long neck out of a cage (so much the
Apostles word imports Romans 8.19.) And God who hears the cry of the widow
and fatherless, and loses his prisoners Psalm. 146.7. (...).
hears and frees the poor creatures groaning under man's abuse etc. Given to
cover her nakedness.] This is the end of garments so called quasi gardmentes:
they arm and fence our bodies against the injury of wind and weather, against
heat of summer, cold of winter; They also cover our nakedness and deformity,
those parts especially that are by an Antiphrasis called verenda and pudenda
(here principally perhaps intended) because they ought never to be laid naked
but kept covered pudoris gratia for common honesty sake: that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear, Rev. 3.18. Vatab.
Nature teaches to cover our nakedness; Therefore also when a man has
commttted a sin, he blusheth: the blood, as it were would cover the sin. But
nothing will do that, save only the righteousness of Christ, the fleece of
that immaculate lamb of God, whom therefore we must put on, Romans 13.14. in all
his offices and efficacies. Our first parents indeed were born with the royal
robe of original righteousness on their back; but the devil soon stripped them
of it; and therehence they became sore ashamed of their bodily nakedness (but
chiefly of their spiritual) which therefore they sought to hide as they could,
their privities especially. Whence some are of opinion that to look upon the
nakedness of another is a sin against nature. The Prophet Habakkuk taxes it
in the Chaldees Chap. 2.15. and the Hebrews there say, It was a filthy custom
amongst them, common at their feasts. Clothes are the ensigns of man's sin,
and the cover of our shame. To be proud of them, is as for a thief to be proud
of his halter: to brag of them, is as for the Lazar to brag of a plaster laid
to his filthy sore: the finenesse of such is their filthiness: their
neatness, nastinesse, as one speaks.

Verse 10. And now will I discover her lewdness,] Or her filthiness,
baseness, foolishness, saplessnesse; perhaps the same with her nakedness,
verse 9. See the Note there. How shameless the Heathen Idolaters were, the
worshippers of Priapus especially (which Jerome and Isidore say, was the same
with Baal-peor, and made Maacha the mother of Asa guilty of that villainy) with
their infamous Nos pudore pulsa, stamus sub Jove coleis apertis, etc. is
notoriously known; how they ran about naked in their Lupercalia, Bacchanalia
and other beastly solemnities. God threatens to make her naked here in another
manner, Chaldeus reddit ignominiam, ut quam velatam desiderabant, apertam
contemnant Hieron.
to her utter disgrace and ignominy. He had threatened her before with poverty,
now with scorn and contempt: these go seldom asunder; but when self-procured,
they are very grievous. See Deuteronomy. 28. Fornicatours are fools, Ier. 29.23. Genesis
34.7. Shechem committed folly in Israel, and is therefore called a lad, or a
child, (ver. 19. Neque distulit puer) for his witlessenesse, as being carried
not by right reason, but blind affection. So Amnon was for this as one of the
fools in Israel, 2 Samuel 13.12. a Nabal, a Nebulo, one that falls below the
dignity of a man, below the stirrup of reason, flagitious and profligate.

Spiritual fornicatours are all this and more. They hunt after lying vanities,
and so forsake their own mercies; Jonas 2.8.
being singularly foolish (as the word here used imports) and miserable by
their own election. The indignity and iniquity of their practice, see Ier. 2.9,
10, 11, 12, 13. Satan deals by them as he did by Adam, when he gave him an
apple for Paradise; and set him to the tree of Knowledge, that he might not
taste the tree of life. And like unto them (says a Lapide here) is every
wicked person, who by Satan's persuasion prefers the creature before the
Creator, earth before heaven, the devil before God, hell before heaven, sin
before sanctity, evil before good. These are lewd persons of sordid and servile
dispositions, homines ad servitutem parati (as Tiberius said of the Romans) men
of an under-spirit, as those, 1 Chronicles. 4.23. Hedge rogues Mr. Dyke calls them.

In the sight of her lovers] That her, whom they have so desired whiles she was
veiled, they may deride when laid open. There can nothing befall a woman more
grievous, then to be stripped naked, but especially before her sweet-hearts, Lam.
3.8. All that honored her, despise her, because they have seen her nakedness:
yea she sigheth and turns backward. It is the paint or the dress many times,
that makes the lewd woman lovely; Think the same of Idolatry: how pompous is
it, and theatricall? but God will detect it and make it ridiculous every day
more and more. Erasmus was very isntrumental this way, and did prejudice
Popery by his witty jearing, as much as Luther did by his stomacking and
inveying, says One. Though it cannot be denied, Capito.
but that Pruriginosa istorum hominum scabies asperiori strigali fricanda
fuerat, Amama. Anibarb. Praefat.
the scabby hides of those Popelings called for a sharper curry-comb, as
another Learned man phraseth it.

and none shall deliver her out of my hand] Not her idols, not her
confederates. An idol is nothing in the world: and all Nations, set by God, are
as a drop of a bucker, or dust of a balance: they can no more stand before
him, then a glasse-bottle can before a cannon-shot. 1 Cor. 8.4. Isai. 40.15.
It was bootlesse therefore for this adulteress to hope for help from her
lovers, when God once took her in hand. He would give her, her due, Ipsis
spectantibus and stantibus instar stipitum, whiles they look on and stood like
so many stocks, not daring to stir for her rescue and relief. See for this,
Rev. 18.10. with the Note.

Verse 11. I will also cause her mirth to cease,] Idolaters are frollick and
jovial, the greatest mirth-mongers, the merry Greeks of the world, set
altogether upon the merry pin, Job 21.13.
they spend their days in pleasure, and suddenly turn into hell. Thus it was
with these old idolaters. See Amos 6.4. And thus it is with the Papists at this
day. They have a Proverb amongst them; Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus
melancholicus, A Calvinisticall spirit is a melancholy spirit. Turn Protestant
once, and you must for ever bid adieu to mirth and jollity, and lead a Monkish
melancholy life. In their supplication to King James for a Toleration, they
used this as an argument for their Religion above ours, because more suitable
and pleasing to man's nature. Revel. 13.
It is indeed an alluring, tempting, bewitching religion. Sir Walter Rawleigh
knew what he said, That were he to choose a Religion for licentious liberty,
lasciviousness, and merry-living, he would be a Papist. Hence the whole world
is said to wonder after the Beast, (...). Qu^d omnium animalium amicus sit.
Isidor.
which is said to be like unto a Leopard, or Panther: Now the Panther is
admired, and followed by most other beasts of the field (and thence has his
name) either for the beauty of his hide, or for the sweetness of his smell. So
is the Pope for those sensual delights, and swinish pleasures he allows his
followers. Lupanar utriusque Veneris Roma condidi^, says Agrippa, concerning
Pope Sixtus Quintus. But what should I rake in that dunghill? Such sinful
mirth, as it is base born, so it is of short continuance: God will make it to
cease, and to go soon out in a vexing snuff. For why? There is a snare (or
cord) in the sin of the wicked, sc. to strangle their joy with, but the
righteous sing and are merry, Prove. 29.6. yea they are merry, (or right set in
their minds, (...). And the Sept. here (...).
as the Apostles word signifies, James 5.13.) and therefore they sing, yea and
shall sing for joy of heart, when wicked men shall cry for sorrow of heart,
yea howl again for vexation of spirit, Esaias 65.14. Meanwhile their mirth is
but the hypocrisy of mirth. It may wet the mouth, but not warm the heart;
smooth the brow, but not fill the breast. It is like a little counterfeit
complexion; As they repent only in the face, Mat. 6.16. so they rejoice only in
the face, 2 Cor. 1.5.12. Indeed they revel rather then rejoice, and the end of
that mirth is heaviness, Pro. 14.13. as lightening is attended with thunder,
and as comets end in a pestilent vapor. Let the Lord but turn his hand and
take away his corn, etc. destroy vine and fig trees, etc. and this carnal mirth
is at an end: their light is put out in obscure darkness, they lie down in
sorrow, and are all Amort. they are filled with unmedicinable perplexities, and
are ready to run mad Deuteronomy. 28.34. Whereas a godly man, as he has a constant
spring of comfort within him, and can be merry without music, so he can stand
under the greatest weight of affliction without buckling, as Paul: he can be
medjis tranquillus in undis as Noah: he can confidently say with Habakkuk
Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines
etc. Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.
Chap. 3.17.

Her feast-dayes, her new-moones] Not the matter of their joy only shall be
abolished, but the times too; She shall neither have holy days nor good days
(as they are called, Esth. 8.17.) to keep and celebrate. Here then the Lord
shows how he will uncover this harlots nakedness, Viz First he will strip her
of her spirituals, and next of her temporals, Verse 12. Her feast-dayes,
new mons, sabbaths, and solemn-feasts were but apish imitations of those
commanded by God, whose ape Satan will needs be. Habent and vespae favos:
simiae imitantur homines, Waspes also have honey-combs as well as Bees; and
apes will be doing at men's actions. Satan's synagogue may seem a true Church.
The ten revolted Tribes kept also diverse solemn days, partly commanded by
the Law, (as new mons and sabbaths) and partly instituted by Jeroboam, in
honor of their idols, as now among the Papists, in pretended honor of the
Saints, with feasting, dancing, ringing, roaring of organs, etc. These
solemnities therefore, the Lord here first utterly disowneth, calling them, her
feast-dayes, her sabbaths, etc. and none of his, because they did lacte gypsum
miscere, mingle lime with milk, as Irenaeus says of Plato; Non mea, tua funt,
as Martial says of his Epigrams, ill read by another. And secondly, that he
will take them away, ( sc. by carrying themselves away captive. See Chap. 9.4,
5.) and so pull off their vizour, wash off their varnish of rites and
ceremonies, and lay them open to all in their own colors.

Verse 12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig trees,] Not her wine, and
her figs only, (i. e.) her delicious drinks and sweetmeats, (even all her
plenty) sed vineta ipsa and ficeta, as Rivet observes: which shows a great
deal of anger, (for fruit trees were not to be destroyed in an enemies
country) like as he discovered a great deal of fear of the Spanish
Inquisitours, Heyl. Geog. 52, etc.
that brought one of them his pears (which he had sent for) tree and all by the
roots It is wisdom to meet God by repentance, lest he stub up root and branch
together, lest he overturn, overturn, overturn, so as it shall be no more,
Ezekiel. 21.27. lest he cry, Cut it down, Luke 13.7.
why cumbreth it the ground? since it is not for fruit, let it be for the fire.

whereof she has said, These are my rewards,] The wages of my wickedness, the
hire of my Harlotry, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Ezekiel. 16.34. pretium m^ritorium Adultery is
costly. Whores must have their rewards, they lie in wait for a prey, Prove.
23.20. and will soon bring a rich man to beggary, Prove. 6.26. Solomon himself
was so exhausted by such she sinners (so they call them, Cruces et crumenio
ulgas, suck purses the Poet calls them) that he was forced to oppress his
Subjects, to sup^ly his coffers: which occasioned the loss of ten Tribes
Harlots know no other language but that of the horse-leech, Give, give; and may
fitly be compared to the ravens of Arabia, that full-gorged have a tunable
sweet voice; but empty, they screech horribly.

Corpus, opes animum famam, vim, lumina, Scortum,
Debilitat, perdit, necat, aufert, tripit, orbat.
Idolatry also is no less costly: witness this harlots habit, verse 13. and
the purple whore of Rome, with all her trinckets, and those masses of money
that she drains out of many parts of Christendom for the support of her state.
Muscipulata res.
Otto (one of her Mice-catchers, as the story calls him) sent hither into
England by Gregory the ninth, after three years raking together of money for
pardons, and other palterments, at last departing, he left not so much money in
the whole Kingdom, as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him.
What will not men part with to purchase heaven? Bellarm.
Now they persuaded the poor people (and still they do) that good works (and
what so good, as to gratify the Pope with great sums?) were mercatura regni
coelestas, the price to be given for heaven. Idolaters are all Merit-mongers:
they will have heaven as a purchase; they lay claim to it, as wages for their
work. They say with that wretched Monk; Read mihi aeternam vitam quam debes,
Luke 15.
Give me eternal life which thou owe me, Give me the portion that belongs
to me. God forbid, says another Papist, that we should enjoy heaven, as of
mere alms to us. On the other side, the godly disclaim their own merits, beg
hard for mercy, expect a recompense of reward from him, but all of free grace;
accounting all that they can do for God, but a little of that much, that is due
to him, and that they could well beteem him: they do all righteousness but
rest in none: they know that Gods kingdom is partum and non paratum; that their
reward is the reward of inheritance, and not of acquisition: and that if they
could do any thing this way, yet would it be mercy in God to reward every one
according to his work, Psalm. 61.12.

and I will make them a forest,] See this more fully set forth, Isai. 5.5, 6.
Such is the hatred God bears to sin, that he makes bloody wailes, as it
were, upon the backs of the insensible creatures for man's sake. A fruitful
land turns he into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein, Psalm. 107.34. Thus he dealt by Sodom, which was once as Egypt, yea as
Eden, but is now a place of nettles and salt pits: By Judea, that once Lumen
totius orbis, now laid desolate: as Babylon, where Strabo says their Barley
yielded three hundredfold increase, and their Palm Tree three hundred and
sixty several sorts of commodities, as bread, honey, wine, vinegar, etc. but
what devastation befell it by the Modes, see Esaias 13.19, etc. It were easy to
instance in the seven Churches of Asia, the Palatinate, and other parts of
Germany, in Ireland, and now Scotland, and what may England look for? Shall we
altogether pass unpunished? Shall we still sit safe under our vines and
fig trees, and not be forrested, and by those wild beasts of the field
devoured? Sure it is, that no beast of the field does show it self more raging,
or ravenous, then do the wicked, when God suffers, or rather sends them to
break into his vineyard: Witness those breathing devils the Irish Rebels, more
cruel then any Cannibals. Cursed be their wrath; for it was cruel,
transcendent^y so, extending it self both to the living and the dead. Vrsi non
saeviunt in cadavera: but these bears, Psalm. 58.4. boars, Psalm. 80.13. lions,
leopards, etc. did rage against dead carcasses, and tore them with their teeth.
Histories tell us, that the first founders of Rome were nourished by a Wolf:
Certain it is that the offspring of that people have the hearts of Wolves:
being savage and cruel above measure. Their city was first founded in blood,
and so was the Papacy: for the foundation of that See was laid when Phocas slew
his liege Lord and Emperor Mauricius, whom he stewed in his own blood. Whence
the Poet wittily; Suffocas, Phoca, imperium; stabilisque Papatum. The habit of
that harlot is, according to her heart, purple and scarlet; and her diet is the
diet of the Cannibals. Rev. 17.6.
I saw her drunken with the blood of the Saints. They are wholly bloody, both
in their positions, and dispositions, their plots, and practices. The Pope is
said to be a Leopard, or Panther, with his feet like a Bear, and his head like
a Lion, Revel. 13.2. See the Note there And of their S. Dominick (the father of
the Dominicans) it is reported, that when his mother was with child of him,
she dreamed, that she brought forth a Wolf, with a firebrand in his mouth: and
he prooved accordingly; Ezekiel. 21.31. Habac. 1.2, 3.
a brutish man, skillful to destroy, to devour the man more righteous then
himself, by his bloody inquisitors. I pray that God would deliver his turtle
from these savage creatures; that he would cause the evil beasts to cease out
of the land, Ezekiel. 34.25. that the beasts of the land may no more devour them,
verse. 28.

Verse 13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim,] That is, I will
punish the sins committed in those days wherein they went after those
multitudes of Heathenish gods: 30000. In Theog. In Georg. lib. 1.
of them Hesiod reckons up in his days And Servius upon Virgil tells us, that
for fear of offending any of them they used to close up their petitions with
Dijque Deaeque omnes, All ye gods and goddesses, etc. Some of the Hebrews by
Baalim understand Dominos domuum the Lords of the houses: for the planets are
said to have their houses. Oecolampadius understands it of those Idols which
they worshipped under the name of the Stars, called elsewhere the Queen of
heaven, or the heavenly constellations. Others by Baal conceive to be meant
their chief God: called also by them Baal-samen, or the Lord of Heaven: by
Baalim their undergods, mediozuma numina inter mortales caelicolasque vectores.
This was Plato's Demonogy (See the Note above upon verse 8. of this chapter)
Saint Paul is thought to have been well read in Plato's writings (his (...) 2 Timothy 1.6. is verbum Platoineum) and to have alluded to him in that passage, 1
Cor. 8.5, 6. Though there be that are called ( Baalim signifies Lords) whether
in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many and lords many: but to us there is
but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ, that is but one Mediator
betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who indeed in regard of his humane
nature is inferior to the Father, but yet such a Lord by whom are all things,
and we by him. The Papists acknowledge but one God, but they have many Baalims,
many Lords and Mediators both of intercession and of Redemption too. But this
is an heathenish opinion, as indeed many of theirs are: whence they are called
Gentiles, in opposition to the holy City the Church, Rev. 11.2.

wherein she burnt incense to them] which typified prayer, both in the sweet
savor, and ascending property; elationibus fumi with pillars of smoke, Chap.
3.6. This should have been done to God alone. He is the proper object of
prayer, as being omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent: and besides in
covenant with his people: He never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in
vain. No: he scorns that, and leaves that to the Heathen idols to do, Esa.
45.18.19. Deuteronomy. 2, 2.
Our Rock is not as their rock our enemies themselves being judges. He is not
like Baal, that pursuing his enemies could, not hear his friends. Nor like
Jupiter of Creet that was carved without ears, Luc. dial.
and could not be at leisure to attend small matters, no nor greater neither,
unless it were at certain times when he was pleased to look down through
certain chinkers in heaven, as Lucian faineth. He is not as Diana, who being
present at Alexanders birth, Sic. de not deor. lib. 2.
could not at the same time preserve her Ephesian temple from the fire. O thou
that hear prayers (says David: that is one of his titles of honor. Psalm.
65.2.) unto thee shall all slesh come. Whither else should I go? Basil makes
prayer a chain tied to Gods ear, and man's mouth. Jamblichus says, it is copula
qua homines cum Deo conjunguntur, a tie wherewith men are knit unto God. (...).
De orth. fid.
Damascen says it is an ascent of the heart to heaven. The Church is said to
ascend out of the world by these pillars of incense, Cant. 3.6. And as the
Angel that appeared to Manoah by ascending up in the flame of the Altar, is
said to do wondrously, Judge. 13.19, 20. So do the Saints by their daily
devotions coming up (as Cornelius his prayers and alms did) for a memorial
before God, Act. 10.4. and being a precious incense, Psalm. 141.2. far beyond
that of Baal Priests, or Chimney-Chaplaines, who were called Chemarims, 1 King.
23.5. Zeph. 1.4.
or Black-ones, ab incensione thuris from their much offering up of incense,
with the smoke whereof they were blacked and sooted; as some hold.

and she decked her self with her earrings and her jewels] Harlot-like:
matrons adorn not themselves so pompously. Whence Tully compares the Latin
tongue to a grave Matrone; the Greek to a sumptuous harlot in all her bravery.
This draws the senses, and is therefore much in use amongst adulterers and
Idolaters: as Papists for instance with their excessive gayetie in Gods
service; their palles, copes and other massing-vestments of as great price,
some of them, Athena^s.
as Demetrius king of Macedon his robewas: which none of his successors would
were propter invidiosam impendij magnificentiam for the richness thereof. Gods
likes no such doings now adays in his service. The High Priest indeed of old
was sumptuously attired from head to foot. Os humerosque Deo similis as
representing the person of God, Virg.
that he might dazzle the eyes of the beholders, and breed reverence in them by
such an appearance. But now it is far otherwise. Cor aureum requirit Deus, non
vestem. God looks not for gorgeous array but gracious hearts: faith and love
within, modesty and humility without: these are things of great price in the
sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. these beautify the soul better then Isaacs jewels
did Rebeccah's body. It was therefore excellent counsel that Tertullian gave
the young women of his time, Lib. de cult. foemin.
and may be useful to to us all: Vestite vesserico pietatis, byssino
sanctitatis, etc. Cloth your selves, says he with the silk of piety, with the
satin of sanctity, with the purple of modesty. So shall you have God himself
to be your suitour: Christ will make love to you, and greatly desire your
beauty. Psalm. 45.11. The kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is
of wrought gold verse. 13. She is like that Spartan woman mentioned by Plutarch,
who when her neighbors were showing their apparel and jewels, she brought
out her children virtuous and well taught, and said, These are my ornaments and
jewels.

and she went after her lovers] This is often objected to her, as a foul business
indeed: this was the sin that disjoynted Gods soul from her, to the making of
her desolate, a land not inhabited Jer. 6.8. We must take special care, that
no creature creep into the Bridall-bed betwixt Christ and the soul: or if any
do, complain to him betime and he will play Phineas his part, Act. and Mon.
as Master Bradford phraseth it. And forgot me, says the Lord] This is
reserved to the last, as the foot and root of all the forementioned evils both
of sin and punishment. See the lack of Gods holy fear Romans 3.18. There is no
fear of God before their eyes. And thence it is, that their throat is a gaping
grave, their mouth full of gall and guile, that destruction and miscry are in
their ways, etc. 13, 14, 15, 16. etc. Fearlesness and forgetfulness of God go
always together. Jer. 5.22, 23. those that remember him and his presence,
cannot but bear an awful respect to him. It is a problem in Aristotle, why are
men credited more then other creatures. His answer is (...), because they
believe a Deity. Man alone remembers, and therefore reverenceth God. Those
therefore that so forget him, after long experience especially of his gracious
care to protect them and provide for them, as a husband does for the wife of
his bosom, these are strange creatures, and must look to be visited and
reminded of him from whom they have so deeply revolted: for of all things God
cannot abide to be forgotten. See Isai. 17.10. Deuteronomy. 8.21.

Verse 14. Therefore behold I will allure her] A strange [Therefore] It may
very well have a Behold at the heels of it: For the sense is this; Because she
has quite forgotten me, and will never be converted of her self, I will
prevent her by my mercy, recalling her mildly but mightily by my Gospel.
Seducam eam et deducam in desertum. Such another sweet text as this we have in
Esaias 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote
him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways, and will heal him. Ways? what ways? his covetousness,
frowardness, etc. And it is as if God should say, I see these froward children
will lay nothing to heart: frowns will not humble them, blows will not better
them. If I do not save them till they seek me they will never saved: therefore
I will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his
mourners: I will create the fruit of the lips peace to him. O the never-enough
adored depth of Gods free grace and fuperabundant love to his people! This
David well understood, Psalm. 25.11.
and therefore prayed, pardon my iniquity: for it is great. He knew that God
both could and would remit more then he could commit: and that mercy rejoices
against judgment; whilst God for his own sake (though not for ours) blotteth
out the thick cloud as well as the cloud, enormities as infirmities Esaias 44.22.
See his Non-obstante Psa. 106.8. his Resolve Genesis 8.21. and his Mandamus Psalm.
14.4. and then it must needs be done, though no god would do it but himself
Mic. 7.18. though no man could imagine how it should be done. Esaias 55.7, 8. I
will allure her] that is, I will effectually persuade her by the preaching of
the Gospel. Men may speak perswasively, but God only can persuade Genesis 9.27.
they may speak to the ear, but He to the heart: and this He does to his Elect,
not only by a moral persuasion, but by an irresistible inward attraction,
Act. 11.17. by a merciful violence, by making them willing to follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. They kiss the Son with a kiss of love and homage,
having first been kissed with the kisses of his mouth: whereupon immediately
follows, Draw me, we will run after thee, Cant. 1.1, 4. Elisha could more with
a kiss, then his man could with a staff, in raising the dead child. Christ's
works upon his people fortiter, but yet suaviter powerfully, Recte Calvin.
textum hunc reddit Inclinabo eam.
but yet sweetly he inclines their hearts to his testimonies and not to
covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. and brings them to the obedience of faith monendo
potius quam minando, docondo quam ducendo. If he do seduce them (as some render
the word here) it is for no hurt, it is but to speak in a word private with
them, as one friend may with another: it is but to give them his loves, as he
speaks in the Canticles: to show them his glory; as he did Moses: to spread
before them his beauty, and so to catch them by guile, as Saint Paul did
Corinthians 2 Ep. 12.19. to steal away their hearts before they are awar^,
according to that Cant. 6.12. that they thenceforth may be an Amminadib, a
willing people, a free-hearted people, Psalm. 110.3. waiting for the law Esaias
42.8. and walking by the rule, Gal 6.16. etc. Oh it is a blessed thing to be
thus allured, thus inveigled, thus seduced out of the ways of sin and death,
into the ways of holiness and happiness; by the doctrine of the Gospel,
Mercer. Rivet.
which is the true Pitho, the Suadae medulla, qua capiuntur homines, sed bono
suo, the divine Rhetorike, wherewith men's minds are taken, but for their
greatest good.

and I will bring her into the wilderness] Look how I at first allured my
people out of Egypt where they sat by the fleshpots, and enjoyed the pleasures
of sin for a season ( out of Egypt have I called my son, that I might set him
higher then the Kings of the earth) and brought them into the wilderness, and
there extraordinarily provided for them (never was Prince so served in his
greatest pomp) and spoke to their hearts, giving them right judgments and true
laws good statutes and commandments Neh. 7.13. to their great comfort, Ps.
19.8. So will I again do for them, and much more then so, by Christ, in the
days of the Gospel. Indeed as the people at their first setting foot upon the
promised land, met with trouble in the valley of Achor by the sin of Achan; so
shall the Saints be sure of troubles; but Christ will not leave them
comfortless: a door of hope he will open unto them in their deepest distresses.
Death shall be unto them not a trap-door to hell (as it is to the wicked) but
an inlet into life eternal, where they shall sing the song of Moses, and the
song of the Lamb. Rev. 15.13. Let the Saints therefore rejoice in hope, be
patient in tribulation. Vineyards God will give them here, some grapes at least
of the heavenly Canaan aforehand, spiritual benedictions, Divine comforts to
sustain them, such generous wine as shall make the lips of those that are
asleep to speak, Cant. 7.6. Yea to sing, Ephesians. 5.18.19. Lo, such wine, of the
bests and such songs of joy shall the Saints have for those vines which before
he threatened to destroy verse. 12. and that mirth which he would cause to
cease, verse. 11. Repentance can turn crosses into comforts, and (like the
Philosophers stone) make golden afflictions 1 Pet. 1.7. As it is the fair and
happy daughter of an ugly and odious mother, viz. sin; (...).
so it is the mother of all mercies and benefits: for it is repentance unto
life, Act. 11.18. yea to salvation, and therefore never to be repented of, 2
Cor. 7.10. It is that rainbow, which if God see shining in our hearts and
lives, he will not only not drown us; but do us all good.

and speak comfortably to her] Heb. speak to her heart, such things as shall
cheer her up, and make her heart leap and even dance Levalto's. Confer Genesis
34.3. Ruth 2.13. Judge. 9.3. Pastquam perauxero eam. Tremell. Benign alloquar.
Castalio.
See Isai. 40.1. and comparing 1 Samuel 15.35. Observe that the same word (...)
Nacham signifies to repent first, and then to comfort. And to this purpose it
is that some translate the text thus, After I have brought her into the
wilderness, and so humbled her thoroughly, as I once did her forefathers there,
I will speak to her heart: yea I will take her alone for the purpose, even into
a solitary wilderness, where I may more freely impart my mind to her (so some
fense it) that having her whole desire she may come up from the wilderness,
leaning upon her beloved, Cant. 8.5. and so be brought into the bride house,
with all solemnity.

Verse 15. I will give her her vineyards from thence] or. from thenceforth:
either from that time, or from that place. God, as out of his melting
heartedness toward her he thinks she has suffered double for all her sins,
Esaias 40.1. (though she think she has suffered less then her sins Ezra 9.13.)
So he is ready, upon her repentance, to make her (strait) a plentiful amends,
He destroyed her vineyards and damped her mirth, verse. 11.12. Now she shall
have all again, with advantage: not her corn only for necessity, but her
vineyards also for delight: yea an honest affluence of both. She shall have
real manifestations of his love: and although he take her into the wilderness,
yet will he not be unto her a wilderness, or a Land of darkness: wherefore then
should his people say, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Jer. 2.31.
why should they not rather reason thus with the prodigal. I will go to my
father: for in his house is bread enough. I will return to my first husband,
for then was it better with me then now, I will repent, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand etc. Lo this is the right way of reasoning, sc. from mercy to
duty, from deliverance to obedience, 2 Cor. 5.14. Tit. 2.14. To. 2.4. To. 12.1.
Ezra. 9.14. The love of Christ constrains us, says Paul: the grace of the
Gospel teaches us to deny ungodliness, and to live godly, etc. the kindness
of God leads to repentance: and if besought by the mercies of God to present
our bodies for a sacrifice to God, how can we do otherwise? If God bring
vineyards out of wildernesses, comforts out of crosses, meat out of eaters,
honey out of the rock, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
and oil out of the flinty rock, that is, mercies out of difficulties, they
must needs be very hard-hearted, that are not melted and mollified thereby.

And the valley of Achor sor a door of hope] The valley was near unto Jericho,
that city of Palmtrees, and was fertile, fat, and full of vines, Isai. 65.10.
thought to be the same with Engeddi which is often mentioned in the Canticles.
This valley was a kind of door or inlet into the promised land: and here they
began first to eat of the fruits of the land, which they had so much longed
for, Josh. 5.10. and now hoped for the enjoyment of the whole; whereof that
valley was a pledge, and earnest. Hereby then is covertly promised to Gods
people, deliverance by Christ, together with the first fruits and earnest of
the spirit, whereby they shall be brought to an assured hope of the harvest of
happiness, of the whole bargain of Christ's benefits, Spes in humanis incerti
nomen boni: spes in divinis nomenest certissemi Heb. 11.1. this is hope
unfaileable, as proceeding from faith unfeigned, which can believe God upon his
bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against reason in
things incredible. It can take a man out of the valley of Achor, that is of
trouble (see Josh. 7.6.) and set him on the everlasting mountains, where as
from Pisgah, he may have a full prospect of heaven; the hope where of makes
absent joys present, wants plentitudes; and beguiles calamity, (as good
company does the way) yea looks upon it as an in let to mercy, a promise
whereof to apostatizing Israel some make this fat valley of Achor to be dotis
nomine, as a dowry: in allusion to the manner of the Jews in their marriages
to give some piece of ground to the spouse as a pledge.

and she shall sing there] As rejoicing in hope, Romans 12.12. Et res plena
gaudio and spes, Psalm. 65.13.
as Bernard has it. They shall shout for joy, they shall also sing. Some think
the Prophet here alludeth to that custom of the Jews to sing in the time of
their vintage, See Judge. 9.27. Esaias. 16.10. Others will have it to be an
allusion to their marriage-songs: that being the time of the rejoicing of a
man's heart Cant. 3.11. Viz. at the recovery of his lostrib. The Septuagint
render (...) shall be humbled: and indeed the word signifies both to be
humbled and (...). Some are humbled but not humble, low but not lowly: these
must look for more load. But they that mourn in a godly manner, are sure to be
comforted. God will turn all their sighing into singing; they shall sing aloud
upon their beds which they have soaked in tears, Gosr. in rit. Epist. l. 1.
Conf. l. 6. c. 12.
and made to swim again, as David Psa. 6. A reconciled condition is a singing
condition, Bernard was so over-joyed at his conversion, that he was almost
beside himself. Cyprian tells his friend Donatus, that his comforts then were
inexpressible. Austin says the like of himself. The Saints cannot but sing at
this door of hope, though they be not yet got in at it. See Psalm. 138.5. they
shall sing in the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 119.54.
though they be yet but viatores. Gods statutes are their songs even in the
house of their pilgrimage; as hoping to sing shortly in the height of Zion, to
flow to the bountifulness of the Lord, Jer. 31.22. As in the days ^f her
youth, and in the day when she came up etc. Out of a low country, but a lower
condition; being shiftlesse and succorlesse. Then did God put Timbrels into
their hands, and ditties into their mouths. See Exodus 15. And so it is here
said, he will do again in the time of the gospel. Let our Nonsingers here
take notice, that singing (and that jointly with others) is a
Gospell-ordinance: and for further proof let them read Mr. Cottons excellent
treatise upon this subject.

Verse. 16. And it shall be in that day] A sweet promise of a through
reformation, much like that Zach. 13.2. God will turn to his people a pure
language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord to serve him with
one shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. For which end he forms their speech for them, and
tutours them here how to term him. Ishi they must call him, but not Baali, my
husband, So Tyrannus; fur, sophista.
but not my Lord: Not that there was any hurt in the word my Baal or Lord: but
because it had been abused and given to Idols, God would have none of it: or
because it was grown among the better sort a name of contempt: like as for the
same reason the word Burden is rejected, Jer. 23.36. Or lastly, lest the people
whilst they spoke of one thing should think of another: and naming Baal should
be put in mind of an Idol. This is Hieromes reason. Some distinguish thus
betwixt the 2 words, Lyra. Oecelamp.
that Ish is a name of love, Baal of fear, Others observe that Ish signifies
an excellent man, and is therefore made choice of as every way better then
Baal, or Lord. Augustus forbad men to call him Lord: and desired rather that
more amiable name of Father of his country. It is wisdom when we call upon
God to make choice of fit titles, not only such as he in his word has
warranted, but also such as may be suitable to our requests, and helpful to
our faith in prayer; such as wherein we may see the thing prayed for coming
toward us, as it were. This will notably excite devotion. Instances of it see
Psalm. 80.1. Act. 1.24. and 4.24.25. etc. Note there and in the next verse, that
there is no small danger in words and names. What a deal of mischief has the
word Huguenot done in France, and Puritan here. Anno 1572. Cardinal Allen at
Rhemes instructed his emissary-seducers, sent over hither, to divide the people
under the names of Protestant and puritan: provoking them thereby to real and
mutual both hate and contempt. His Rhemists in their anotations on 1 Timothy 20.
warn their readers of using the words of Heretics (so they call us) though
they have no great hurt in them: and hold to their old terms of mass,
penance, Priest etc. they call us Novatores, but we may call them so better.
The truth is, we may not teach nova, nor yet nove? Castalion cannot be excused
in his Jana Genius Respublica for Ecclesia and other affected novelties.
Melanchthons wish was, that men would not only teach the same things, but in
iisdem verbis, in iisdem syllabis in the same words, yea in the same syllables:
for he that faineth new words brings in new doctrines (it may be thought) as
did Arminius. And yet it is not many years since here amongst us, that he that
would not be an Arminian was held no better then a practical Puritan. But let
us keep our old words (said those Veteratores) and we shall easily keep our old
faith: The devil does sometimes speak the truth for his own ends. But was
Winchester well advised when he made The Lord, and not to say our Lord, Act.
and Mon. 1116. Ib. 1803.
to be symbolum baereticorum, a note of an heretic. Or Dr. Stery, whose rule
to know an heretic was this, they will say The Lord, and we Praise God; and
The living God. This was not Novum nomen, but Novum crimen, C. Caesar. Much
like that of Pope Paul 2. Cade of the church. Alsted.
who pronounced them heretics that did but name the name Academy either in
earnest or in jest: And another Pope made it heresy to hold that there were
any Antipodes.

Verse 17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth] So
precise she shall be, so circumspect, according to Exodus 23.13. that she should
spit out of her mouth those dunghill duties with utmost contempt; as David had
done before her, Psalm. 16.4. If bodily filthiness may not be once named among
Christians Ephe. 5.3. why should spiritual? The Primitive Christians would not
call their days of the week by the Heathenish names of Dies Martis, Dies
Mercurii etc. (as Mercurius Trismegist had. superstitiously named them) but the
first, second, third etc. day of the week: as not willing to have the names of
those Idols mentioned among Gods people. Mentioned they may be (no doubt)
recitative without sin, as Baal is Romans 11.4. and Castor and Pollux. Act.
18.11. but not honoris gratia for honor sake, or without some expression of
detestation of them; such as was that of Cyril, who speaking of Paganish
idolatries breaks out thus, (...) we rake a dunghill in a discourse of dunghill
gods. What a patheticall speech or rather shriek is that of Almighty God, Jer.
44.4. Oh! do not this abominable thing: do not honor Idols in the least. Act.
and Mou.
shall I bow my knee to yonder Iackanapes? said that martyr pointing to the
Rood in Paul's. Should I kiss Baal? as they did 1 King. 19.18. Or so much as
kiss my hand in honor to him, as Job. 31.27. were not this to deny the God
that is above? Verse 28. And how can those be excused that have so often in
their mouths Jupiter omnipotens, mehercule, Mecastor, Hieron. Damaso.
and caetera magis portenta quam numina, says Hierom: and those that think
their verses nothing so neat, unless there be often naming, and sometimes
invocating too of Apollo, Jam. 3.11.
Minerva, Venus, etc. Does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water
and bitter? Those that say they think no hurt in all this, are no more excused
thereby then he that said, Lasciva est nobis pagina, Ovid.
vita proba.

Those that thus borrow garnish of the Egyptians, may therewith get their
botches and boyles. Howsoever, they may fear to have Bellarmine himself (who
was no precisian) to rise up in judgment against them and condemn them; who
would not have Paul called Divus Paulus, but Beatus: because Divus, and Diva,
were the words of the heathens for their gods and goddesses.

and they shall no more be remembred] sc. without indignation and detestation,
without a What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14.1. Esaias. 30.22.
or a Get you hence, Abite hinc, abite long as Charles 5 said of all his
worldly pomp and achievements at the last, as Amnon thrust Tamar out of doors
when he had had his will of her, when he had moyled himself in that filthy
guzzle, and sullied his conscience. She multiplied her whoredoms (says the
Prophet) in calling to remembrance the days of her youth wherein she had
played the harlot in the land of Egypt, Ezekiel. 23.21. and verse 8. Not the new
sent of meat, but the remembrance of their old fleshpots moved Israel: they
found sweetness in a lust twice sod, they had still the broth of these
abominable things in their vessels, as the Prophet Esaias has phrased it, Chap.
65.4. To remember with delight sins past is, to recommit them: and herein the
deceitful heart is with all care to be looked unto, that when we call to mind
former evil practices, though with an intent to be humbled for them, we be not
ensnared, and drawn to commit them afresh by being tickled in the thought of
them.

Verse 18. And in that day will I make my covenant for them with the beasts
etc.] At the first creation all things were subject to man on this condition,
that he should be subject to his maker as his master. Augustine.
Rebellis autem facta est quia homo numini, creatura homini. But no sooner did
man rebel against God, but the creature began to rebel against him. Look how a
Noble-mans servants will draw in defense of their Lord, and soldiers fight for
their General: so here, God is Lord of hosts. Psalm 119.91.
They continue this day according to thine ordinance (and fight in their
courses Judge. 5.20.) for they are all thy servants, ready pressed they are to
seize a sinner, and to do execution upon him, as a traitor, and rebel to the
highest Majesty: as the sword that Hector gave Ajax turned into his own bowels,
when once he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse creatures. Now here God
promises to abolish that enmity, to make peace, even pacem omnimodam, peace,
peace, as the Prophet Esaias has it, Chap. 26. a muliplied peace, a perfect,
sheere, pure peace with God, with themselves, with all creatures: and to
restore them in Christ that dominion they once had over the works of his hands,
Romans 8.28.
Psalm. 8.6. with Heb. 2.7. yea power over all nations Rev. 2.26. with a promise
that all shall work together for their good, and they shall be fully freed if
not from the smart, yet from the hurt of every creature. Compare Ezekiel. 34.25.
Job. 5.23. Esaias. 11.6.7. where the Prophet seems to allude to the carriage of
the beasts in Noah's Ark; all bloodiness and rapine laid aside. The Jews
foolishly argue from these texts, that Christ is not yet come, because the Lion
yet rages, the Wolf devoureth, Serpents yet sting and spare not the best. And
some interpreters of ours are of opinion, that these promises shall be
literally fulfilled at the restitution of all things, which they make to be at
the time of the call of the Jews. But when I find Nebuchadnezzar and other
enemies of the Church to be called Lions, Leopards, Wolves etc. as Jerem. 5.6.
and elsewhere, I cannot but think that these might be here meant, in part at
least, Virg.
ponentque ferocia Poeni Corda volente Deo: according to Peter's vision Act. 10.
and that God will so meeken the spirits of his converts, that they shall not
hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain Esaias. 11.9. The literal sense is
very good I grant: but yet it is still to be taken (as all such promises are)
1. with exception of the cross here. 2. with expectation of the full
accomplishment hereafter, in the state of perfection.

And I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth.]
These words seem to be opposed to that threat Chap. 1.5. I will break the bow
of Israel, etc. And it is as if he should say, After that I have broken their
power, and tamed their pride by the enemies forces, then I will punish those
enemies, and so take order with them, that they shall not hurt my people by any
of their hostilities. Lo, peace is a piece of Gods Covenant; and
covenant-mercies are very sweet, when all the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25.10. Not mercy only, but truth too, that comes by virtue of a
covenant: Mark, what God says to Abraham, Genesis 17.20, 21. I have blessed
Ishmael; twelve Princes shall he beget: but my Covenant will I establish with
Isaac. And in the same Chapter Divines observe, that in ten verses thereof, God
repeateth his Covenant which he made with Abraham, thirteen times: to note thus
much, that that was the mercy indeed that must satisfy Abraham in all his
troubles, sorrows, and afflictions: For the Covenant of Gods peace shall not be
removed, no not when the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, Esaias
54.10. The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will bless his
people with peace, Psalm. 29.11.

and will make them to lie down safely.] Being gathered under my wings, they
shall repose themselves upon my power and providence, committing themselves to
me in well-doing. All true and solid security, whether inward or outward; all
true peace, whether of country, or of conscience flows from Gods favor,
Psalm. 3. and 4. Hence the Apostle wishes grace and peace, and the Angels sang,
Ephesians. 1.2. Luke 2 14. Deuteronomy. 33.16.
Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, even the peace of good will
toward men, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. The Lord is with me,
says David, I will not fear what man can do unto me. I will sleep and wake,
and wake and sleep again; Psalm. 3.
for the Lord sustaineth me. No wonder I slept so soundly and safely (said King
Philip) when Antipater watched me. Abner watched not so well, when David fetched
away Saul's spear and pitcher, and was barely told of it. Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1.5.
Lev. 26.5. Psalm. 116.7.
Ishbosheth was slain whiles he slept. The Saints go ever under a double guard,
the peace of God within them, and the power of God without them, and may
therefore in utramque aurem dormire, lie down safely, (See Ier. 23.6.) call
their souls to rest.

Verse 19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever,] This, because it could
not be easily believed, is thrice repeated. We believe not (what ever men may
dream to the contrary) without much ado, and many conflicts. When faith goes
about to lay hold on Christ, the devils raps her on the fingers, and would beat
her off. Hence she is fain to take great pains for it, to work hard for her
living. The Apostle speaks more then once of the work of faith, (...).
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. and 2 Epist. 1.11. And it is no less difficult (say Divines) to
believe the Gospel then to fulfill the Law. No man can come unto the Son,
except the Father draw him: the soul naturally hangs back, and had as lief put
off its immortality, as put on Christ: Joh. 6.
The devil also does his utmost to hinder. The contest was not so great betwixt
Michael and him concerning Moses his dead Body, as it is here betwixt the
believer and him concerning Christ's living body. And should not God mightily
assist, the business would never be done. Hence faith is called, the faith of
Gods power, Tarnan.
Col. 2.12. the faith of his operation, and what an Almighty power God does
therein put forth, is elegantly described by the Apostle in that sixfold
gradation, Ephesians. 1.19. which shows it to be more then a moral swasion.
Betroth thee, I will, I will, I will, says God here: and some think the Sacred
Trinity is here (though darkly, according to the manner of those times) brought
in betrothing the Church in this trina repetitio. And mark, that he does not
say, I will be reconciled unto thee, and receive thee again after thy
foul-playes with me, (for Reconciliationes fere sunt vulpinae amicitiae inter
homines, Men are seldom reconciled heartily) but I will espouse thee, marry
thee unto me, and that for ever. I will null the Bill of divorce, love you no
less then if you had continued true to me, or were now a pure Virgin. Quis
hanc Dei bonitatem digne collaudet? says Drusius. Who can sufficiently set
forth this goodness of God? When God once pardons sin, he will remember it
no more; he will not come with back-reckonings. Discharges in justification are
never repealed or called in again. Peccata non redeunt is a true axiom: and it
is no less true, that peccata non minuunt justificationem. God can pardon sins
of all sizes; and as soon disperse the thick cloud, as the cloud, Esaias 44.22.
See the matchlessnesse of his mercy to a repenting adulteress, Jer. 3.5. What
greater love can he show to her, then to marry her again, and rejoice over her
as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, Esaias 62.5. Yea to rest in his love,
and to joy over her with singing, Zeph. 3.17. and to do this for ever, (as it
is here promised) so that there shall be no more breach of conjugall love and
communion for ever betwixt them. Ama amorem illius. Oh love this love of his,
says Bernard, and reciprocate. And as the wife will keep her bed only for her
husband (says Mr. Bradford Martyr) although in other things she is content to
have fellowship with others; Acts and Mon. fol. 1503.
as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, etc. so our consciences (which are Christ's
wives) must needs keep the bed, that is, Gods sweet promises, alonely for our
selves and our husband; there to meet together, to embrace, and laugh together,
and to be joyful together: If sin, the law, the devil, or any thing would
creep into the bed, and lie there, then complain to thine husband Christ, and
forthwith thou shall see him play Phineas part. And again, if Satan should
summon us, says he, to answer for our sins, or debts, in that the wife is no
suitable person, but the husband, we may well bid him enter his action against
our husband Christ, and he will make him a sufficient answer. Thus Mr. Bradford
in a certain letter of his unto a friend.

In righteousness and in judgment, in loving kindness, etc.] These are the
gems of that ring that Christ bestows upon his Spouse, says Mercer. These
are those (...), or love tokens, that Christ the Bridegroom gives to his Bride
the Church, says Tarnonius. Here he promises to perform to her, and to work
in her all those offices and requisites due from married couples in that estate
the one to the other. God will both justify her, by the imputation or Chri^^s
righteousness; and sanctify her by the spirit of judgment, that is or
sanctification. (See John 16.10, 11. Matthew. 12.20. and the Note there.) And
because the best have their frailties, and although they be vessels of honor,
yet are they but earthen vessels, and have their flawes, their cracks,
therefore it is added, I have betrothed thee unto me in loving-kindnesse, and
in mercies. q. d. My heart and ways toward you shall be full of gentleness
and sweetness, without mo^osity or harshnesse. My loving-kindnesse shall be
great, Neh. 9.17. mavelous great, Psalm. 31.21. Excellent, Psalm. 36.7.
Everlasting, Esaias 54.8. Merciful, Psalm. 117.2. Multitudes of loving-kindnesse,
Psalm.36.5.
Esaias 63.7. as for my mercies, or bowels of compassion toward you, they are
incomprehensible, as having all the dimensions, Ephesians. 3.18. Thy mercy O God,
reaches unto the heavens, there is the height of it: Great is thy mercy toward
me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowermost hell, there is the depth
of his mercy. Psalm. 86.13.
The earth is full of thy goodness, there is the breadth of it. All the ends
of the earth have seen thy salvation, there is the length of it. O pray to see
that blessed sight, Ephesians. 1.18. and 3.18. that beholding as in a glass, this
glory of the Lord, shining bright in his Attributes, you may be transformed
into the same image, 2 Cor. 3.18.
from glory to glory: and as in water, face answers to face, as lead
answers the mould, as tally answers tally, Indenture indenture, so may we
resemble and express the Lord our Husband, in righteousness, holiness,
loving-kindnesse, tender mercies, and faithfulness: that as the woman is the
image and glory of the man, so may we be of Christ. For our encouragement it
must be remembered, that the Covenant that Christ makes with us, is a double
Covenant, to perform his part as well as ours, to make us such as he requiret^
us to be in all holy conversation and godliness: for which end also we have a
^uplica^ of his Law written in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. a law in our mind,
answerable to the law of his mouth, Romans 7.23. In a word, he graciously
undertaketh (...) parts: therefore is the Covenant everlasting, and the fruits
of it are sure mer^^, compassions that fail not. In foedere novo nihil potest
incidere quo miniss sit ^^^raum, quum non sit ei adjecta conditio, says Mercer
upon this Text: that is, In the new Covenant there can nothing fall out whereby
it should not be everlasting, since there is no condition required on our part.
That faith, or faithfulnosse, mentioned in the next verse, God requires not as
a mutual restipulation of our part. (as works were in the old covenant) But
here it is rather a declaration of his pleasure what he would have us to do,
and whereto he will enable us. It is not a condition to endanger the Covenant;
but an assurance, that he will give us strength to keep it.

Verse 20. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulnesse] Tremellius,
Drusius, and Tarnonius render it in fide in faith, and interpret it of de fide
vera et salvifica of that true justifying faith whereby we are united to
Christ: And for this they urge the next words, as an Exposition of these. And
they shall shall know the Lord: alleging some other texts of Scripture wherein
saving knowledge is put for justifying faith, as Esaias 53.11. Jer. 31.33. Job.
17.3. The Septuagint also render it (...). Tarnou. in exer. cit. Biblic. See
Master Dugards treatise called The change.
Now (...) is the New Testament is often used for saving and growing faith Tit.
1.1. Col. 2.1. and 3 10. which indeed is the bond of the spiritual marriage:
and is it self nothing else but a fiduciall assent presupposing knowledge. For
man is a rational creature, faith a prudent thing, comprehending in it self
these three acts: 1 knowledge in the understanding. 2. Assent or rather Consent
in the Will. 3. Trust or confidence in the heart; certainty of Adherence: if
not of Evidence. The Papists fasten faith in the will, as in the adaequate
subject, that they may the mean while do what they will with the understanding
and the heart. To which purpose they exclude all knowledge, and detest Trust in
Christ's promises, expunging the very name of it every where by their Indices
Expurgatorij. A blind belief as the Church believes is as much as they require
of their misled and muzzled Proselytes. Bellarmine says that faith may far
better be defined by ignorance then by knowledge. But how shall men believe on
him of whom they have not heard? Let us leave to the Papists, their implicit
faith and their blind obedience: and cry after Christ as that poor man did.
Lord that mine eyes might be opened, and that I may know the Lord] yea grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. These things have I
written unto you (says Saint John to those that were no Babyes or Zanyes in
faith or knowledge) that believe on the name of the Son of God that ye may know
that ye have eternal life, and that ye may (yet more) believe in the Son of
God. 1 John. 5.13.
David though he had proceeded further in the discovery of Divine truths then
those before him, Psalm. 119.99. yet he was still to seek of that which might be
known ver. 96. Even as those great discoverers of the newfound lands in
America were wont to confess at their return, that there was still a
Plus-ultra more yet to be discovered.

Verse. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day] In that time of grace and
reconciliation, fitly set forth by the name of a day in regard of 1 Revelation.
2 Adornation. 3 Consolation. 4 Distinction. 5 Speedy Preterition;

I will hear says the Lord of Hosts;] that is, I that have the command of both
the upper and nether springs and forces, Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.9.
those storehouses of Gods good treasure which he opens to our profit Deuteronomy.
28.12. and therehence makes a scatter of riches upon the earth by their
influence. I that stop and unstop those bottles of the sky the clouds which
there hang and move, though weighty with their own burden: I that make the
earth to bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and meat to
the eater, Esaias 55.10. etc.

I will hear the heavens] Heb. I will answer: that is I will so hear as that I
will answer: so will not great ones sometimes: or if they do, yet the poor man
speaks supplications, but the rich answers him roughly. Solomon 2 The grand
Signior, when many thousands of his poor Christian subjects, Prove. 18.23.
to be eased of their heavy taxations fell down before him, and offered to
turn Mahumetans, rejected their conversion, and doubled their taxations. God
has here a great sort of suppliants. Blunts voyage. 111. Hom.
(The Poets fam, that Litae or Supplications are always about Jupiter) the
heaven, the earth, the corn, etc. and he hears and speedeth them all. Never
any humble petitioner went sad out of his presence: Never said he to the house
of Israel, Seek ye me in vain. The Heathen-idols may do so, but He scorns it.
Are their any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can
the heavens give showers? Surely they cannot, till God have heard and answered
them. Jer. 14.22.
The genealogy of rain of corn and wine is here resolved into Jehovah: and he
promises to endow his beloved Spouse with them as part (though the least part)
of her jointure. All are yours for you are Christ's 1 Cor. 3.23. In marrying
with the heir you have right to All. Here is omnium rerum ubertas ob Deisemen
Christum, says Hier. plenty of all things for Christ's sake, who where ever he
comes, comes with a Cornucopia a horn of salvation, besides a largess of
outward comforts. This was very necessary doctrine at all times to be taught in
the Church, lest pressed with miseries, men should faint in their minds. Christ
knows we have need of these things also: and therefore not only bids us pray,
but promises to give us our daily bread by a concatenation of causes, by a
ladder of providence which the Heathens called Destiny, but the Saints call it
the harmony of the world; agallant description whereof we have Ez^. 1. far
different from the Stoikes Fate or the doctrine of Plato and Aristotle and
other of the worlds wizzards concerning the divine providence, which they
either denied or imbased.

and they shall hear the earth] which being chapt and scorcht seems to
solicit showers and fattening influences by an elegant Prosopopoeia, as if
these insensible creatures understood what they did: when men are once in
covenant with God, all the creatures will be serviceable to them, yea greedy to
do them good: they will even cry for it. Vinum pendulum, i.e. vuas.


Verse 22. And the earth shall hear] That is, shall bear great store of corn,
wine, and oil; new and fresh oil the word signifies, newly expressed, clear and
shining, such as is called golden oil, Deuteronomy. 28.14.
Zech. 4. Gods dear children shall have the best of the best, Esaias 55. Even the
kidneyes of wheat, or whatsoever dainties the earth can afford them. They shall
suck honey out of the Rock; or, if it be but water, yet it shall be to them as
sweet as honey, because therein they taste and see the Lords goodness, and they
have meat to eat that the world wots not of.

and they shall hear Jezreel] that is they shall answer the pains and prayers
of Gods people, who are here called Jezreel still (though the Septuagint ^ead
it Israel) not to upbraid them with their former wickedness and calamities
thereby procured (which yet was the first reason of that name given them Chapter
1.) but rather to set forth the riches of his grace imparted to such a
graceless people. And withal to show that nothing could hinder them from
partaking of those covenant-mercies, and that happy communion with God whereto
they were now restored. This very name of theirs (once their shame should now
turn to their glory. O^ Jezreel scattered by God (which is one signification of
the name) they should become Jezreel a seed of God (which is another) that they
might comfort themselves with the hope of Christ the promised seed, and know
that their posterity should not to degenerate into Gentility, but that many of
them should embrace Christ and inherit the promises, as did Araunah the
Jebusite who became a samous Proselyte Zack. 9.7. (see the Note there) and as
Jether the Ismaelite, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. (...) says and religion called an
Israelite 2 Samuel 17.25. and as Christ ^^^^eth himself (...) of Nazareth as a
title of honor, which was once cast upon him as a reproach.

Verse 23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth] Not in the ^ir, as once,
when they were scattered into the four winds of heaven, but in the earth, which
the heavens should hear verse 21. the inhabitants whereof should ^^ multip^^ed:
and become as the sand of the sea which cannot be measured, nor numbered, Chap.
1.10. See the Note there, and Jer. 31.27. Ezekiel. 36.37. The Preaching of the
Gospel i^ a kind of sowing of seed, Psalm. 129.7.
1 Pet. 1.23. and this seeding is in the earth that they may be gathered into
heaven, where the mower shall fill his hand and he that binds sheaves his
bosom. And although Gods e^ect lie here for a time under the clo^s, yet at
length they shall fructify, and many spring from them by whom the name of
Christ shall be so propagated. He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand Esaias 53.10.

and I will have mercy upon her] Her unhappy name Lorubamah shall be done away,
and the contrary come in place. Lo this is as it were the collogue of the
Sermon, and it is very comfortable. The Sun of righteousness loves not to set
in a cloud. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea our God is merciful. Be
it that he is once righteous, yet he is both gracious and merciful for it.
Psalm. 116.5. The Jews, for their seventie years captivity in Babylon, had
seven seventies of years (set forth by Daniels weeks) granted for the enjoying
of their own country. Gods mercy bear the same proportion to his punishments
(when he has to deal with his elect people) which seven a complete number,
has to an unity. This promise here made, the Apostle testifies Romans 9.25. to
be begun to be fulfilled in his time by the conversion of some Jews, and
calling of some Gentiles. The full accomplishment thereof we daily expect and
pray for.

and I will say to them] that is, I will make them so: as when he said to
Lazarus come forth of the grave, he brought him forth: together with his word
there went forth a power.

and they shall say] Dicere nstrum est fides et obedientia nostra, says Pareus
here; we say thus when we believe and obey. There shall be restored therefore
between God and his people, a most sweet harmony, and an intimate conjunction:
such as he had before described to be betwixt himself and all the second
causes, for his Churches sake; And truly it is never will with us indeed, till
the heavens answer the earth, till Christ the Sun of righteousness so shine
into our hearts, that we melt and comply as here, and as Zach. 13, 9. See the
Note.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. THen said the Lord unto me, Go yet, etc.] This Yet is emphaticall:
and it is as if he had said Go over the same subject again in a shorter
discourse: and lay before them the same truths, but in more lively colors,
that the obstinate may be left without excuse, and the penitent may not be left
without comfort. Iterum abi, (...)
Go to them once more, and be instant with them or stand over them as Saint
Paul says. 2 Timothy 4.2. and as Saint Paul does, in crying down the Jews
conceit of being justified by the works of the law, and in disgracing the sin
of fornication so common at Corinth. Chrysostom at Antioch having preached
sundry Sermons against swearing, was at length asked when he would preach upon
another subject? He answered when you leave swearing, I Will leave preaching
against swearing. Austin would have a preacher so long to pursue and press the
same point, De Doct. Christian. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Shanan et Shanah repetere sicut in
acuende.
until by the gesture and countenance of the hearers he perceive tha^ ^hey
understand it, and will practice it. This is to whet the word of God upon
pe^^le (as Moses his phrase is) by going often over the same thing, as the knife
does the whet-stone. A like type to the former is here first propounded,
secondly expounded, that at length it might fasten. A preacher must not desist,
though at first he prevail not (as some from this second injunction collect,
that this Prophet would have done) but he must turn himself into all shapes and
fashions both of speech and of spirit to win people to God, with all long
suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2. And this the Lord here teaches Hosea to do
by his own example of patience and tolerance, notably set forth in this ensuing
type.

Love a woman beloved of her friend yet an adulteresse] This was an harder task
then to take her chap. 1.2. in hope she would prove honest. But now that she
has played the adulteress and so deserved to be discarded, yet to love her,
yea and that when she is habituated and hardened in her lewd practices (as the
Hebrew word signifies) Durus est hic serm^, who can bear it? If none else can,
Nontam actum quam habitum significat. Rivet.
yet God both can and will, as appears by this whole Parable wherein the
Prophet is commanded to represent God, as in the former type Chap. 1. and by
loving that wife which he had taken before, though she had played false with
him, to show what was the love of God toward Israel. She forsakes me, says
He, who give her all the good she either has or hops for, and follows
after those that put bottles of wine to her mouth, she loves those flagons,
etc. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. howbeit I will not
relinquish her, but will love her freely as if she had never offended me. O
matchless mercy. O concio plena consolationis! Mercer.
O most comfortable Sermon. God so loved the world, the Mundus immundus, that
he gave his only begotten Son, etc. This was a Sic withouta Sicut, there being
nothing in nature that can possibly parallel it. See Romans 5.8. God loves
Apostates, idolaters, adulterers, yet not as such, but as he intends and
respects their conversion to himself: which nothing will sooner effect then
the sense of such an undeserved love. I am not ignorant that another sense is
set upon these words, as thus; Go yet love a woman not married, as yet but
espoused unto thee, who may hereafter be thy wife; but is for her adultery
rejected for a long season: so God loved the Israelites as an adulterous
spouse: and therefore for a long while neglected, but yet at length to be taken
by him to wife, according to Chap. 2.15.19.

Beloved of her friend] sc. of some paramour, as Jer. 3.1. thou have played the
harlot, with many lovers. These the Greeks called (...) fellow-friends, the
whore was called (...): so they flattered their own vices putting gilded names
on them, as our blades name drunkenness good-fellowship, harlots she-sinners,
etc. The Septuagint render it a woman that loves naughty things or naughty
packs. But I like the former interpretation better; and it is agreeable to the
Chaldee Paraphrast.

Who look to other gods] Look and lust, ut vidi! ut perij! the mind lodges in
the eye, and looks out at that window of wickedness. If I beheld the Sun
when it shined, Job 31.26, 27.
or the Moon walking in brightness: And my heart has been secretly enticed:
or my mouth has kissed my hand, etc. Job alludeth to the practice of those old
Idolaters, which was to kiss their Idols, if they could reach them, as 1 King.
19.18. ( Cicero tells of the image of Hercules, cujus mentum osculis adorantium
attritum fuit: and the Papists so kiss their pictures, that hard Marble is
worn with it, Spec. Europ.
says Sir Edwin Sands, an eyewitness:) But when they could not come at the
Idol to kiss it, they looked up and kissed their hand, in token of homage: and
this was called adoration. Quast applicatio manus ados
This looking to other gods, imports a turning toward them. Se Deuteronomy. 31.18, 20.
a loving them, a longing after them, and an expectation of some good from them.
No wonder therefore that such whorish hankerings and honings were offensive to
the jealous and just God: but the unjust knows no shame, Zeph. 3.5. men are
forbidden so much as to lift up their eyes to their Idols, Psalm. 121.1.
Ezekiel. 23.27. And shall I lift up mine eyes unto the hills (says David, as
some read that Text) as if from thence came my help? Absit. Christ's Spouse has
a Doves chaste eye: and he would have her like that Persian Lady, Cant. 4.
who being at Cyrus his Wedding, and asked, how she liked the Bridegroom? How?
says she, I know not. I saw no body there but my husband.

and love flagons of wine.] See Judge. 9.27. and Amos 2.8. Bechive of Rome.
Luxury is the ordinary companion of Idolatry, as Exodus 32.6.1 Cor. 10.7.
Rovel. 18.13, 14. O monachi vestri stomachi, etc. At Paris and Lovain, the
beshin vine is called Vinum Theologicum, the Divinity-wine: it is also called,
Vinum Cos, ^we. caloris, odoris, saporis, optims. Those Clergy-Locusts lick up
all: those Abby-lubbers are good for nothing but to devour grain, like vermin:
those wine-bibbers and flesh-mongers (as Salmon calls them) are no better
then the execrements of humane society, gelulim, belly-gods, and fit servants
of those dungy-gods, as idols are called, Hab. 2.18. with Ezekiel. 4.17, 18. And a
scavenger whose living is to empty privies, is far to be preferred before such
an one, as looking to other gods, and making his gut his god lives but to fill
privies. For a flagon of wine, or a meals-meat, any god may soon have the
hearts and services of such as have ( Poliphemus-like) no supreme deity but
their belly.

Verse 2. So I bought her to me] God is to be obeyed, though it go never so
much against the heart, Epictet.
and the hair with us. (...). Follow God was a Heathen, but an honest precept.
This he that would do, must first deny himself, and say with that Dutch Divine,
Veniat, veniat, verbum Dei, etc. Let a word of command come forth from God, and
we will submit thereto, though we had six hundred lives to lose, yea though we
can see no reason for it. Indeed, in humane governments, where reason is shut
out, there tyranny is thrust in. But where God commands, there to ask a
reason is presumption, to oppose reason, is (...) rebellion.

I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver,] That is, fifteen shekels, or
shillings, or thereabouts: no great price it was that he gave for her, whether
for hire or dowry: probably it was in order to marrying her, and in reference
to that law, Deuteronomy. 21.11. Israel was once a precious people, Gods peculiar
treasure, such as comprehended all his gettings. The Jews have a saying, that
those seventy souls, that went down with Jacob into Egypt, were more worth then
all the seventy Nations of the earth beside. But now behold, how cheap they are
grown; they are valued all of them at fifteen pieces of silver, a goodly price.
( Zach. 11.12. Matt. 27.9.) If the tongue of the righteous be as choice silver,
yet the heart of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10.20. There, (as in the
Sea) is that Leviathan (the king of all the children of pride) and there are
creeping things innumerable, crawling lusts, and lawless passions; but for any
thing of worth, it is not there to be had. Hence as at the last destruction of
Jerusalem, thirty Jews were sold for one penny, so here the whole body of the
Nation are bought and sold for a small sum. How weak is thine heart, (how
light-cheap) says the Lord God to this light-huswife, seeing thou do all
these things, Ezekiel. 16.30.
the work of an imperious whorish woman? God and his people reckon of men by
their righteousness: He looked down from heaven to see who sought after God,
etc. Psalm. 14.3. As for others, he regards them no more then men do dross,
draffe, chafe, or such like refuse stuff, Psalm. 119.119. Psalm. 1.3. etc. what
ever great thoughts they take up of themselves, and how ever the world rate
them. Antiochus Epiphanes, that great king of Syria, is called a vile person,
Dan. 11.21. And, the adversary is this wicked Haman, says Esther: that was his
true title, which he perhaps never heard till now.

And an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley.] God buys not this
people (though for never so little) to starve them, but allows them alimony,
though not so fine a food: barley and not wheat. See Revel. 6.5. prisoners
pittance, course fare, such as slaves and beasts are fed with; as she had been
like horse and mule, Psalm. 32. and lest she should wax fat and kick, she is
held to strait allowance. Whereby is signified the mean and low condition that
the ten Tribes (and afterward all the Jews) should be in, till Christ came to
marry them to himself. First, they should be valued but at half the price of a
slave. Secondly, they should be coursly fed, as beasts, with barley, or
perhaps, not so well as the Jews beasts: for among them, the mouth of the Ox
treading out their corn, might not be muzled. But the Heathens were wont to put
an Engine about their servants necks, This engine was called. (...)
and it reached down to their hands, that they might not so much as lick of the
wheatmeal, when they were si^ting it. Now they were scattered among the
Heathen, and sold to the Nations for naught, Psalm. 44.11, 12. They that were
wont to feed delicately, were desolate in the streets: they that were brought
up in scarlet, embraced dunghils, Lam. 4.5. their flagons of wine were turned
into tankards of water, and their bellaria, or junkets (so the Septuagint
render it, and not flagons) into brown-bread, horse-bread: that so those whom
pride, Ezekiel. 16.49.
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness had undone, hardship and penury
might reduce to duty. God would seem for a time to have forgotten them, that
they might at length remember themselves: he loves to chastise men's insolency
with indigency, as he did Hagars, Genesis 21.15. and the Prodigals, Luke 15. who
for his swinish life, was brought to swines-meat, and thereby brought home to
his father. It is the way of God to humble those he intends good unto, to
prepare them for mercy by cutting them short of these outward comforts. Though
this be here a threatening, yet there is a promise in it, verse 3. that God will
take off the smarting plaster, so soon as it has eaten out the proud flesh.
It is in very faithfulness that he afflicts his people, because he will be
true to their souls, and save them. And hence it is that he so diets them, and
keeps them short, that he may do them good in the latter end, that he may
change their bricks (made in their bondage) into Saphires, and Agates. See
Exodus 24.10. with Isai. 54 11.

Verse 3. Thou shall abide for me many days,] Even till the last days, verse
5. or last year, as Ezekiel has it, chap. 38.8. Thus they have abode, or sat
(as a desolate widow, so the Hebrew has it) 700. years before Christ, and
above 1600. years since in a most forlorn condition; crying out in their daily
prayers to God, Veniat regnum trum, bimherah, bejamenu, Let thy kingdom come
speedily, even in our days. And again, Aedificu templum tuum, aedifica,
aedifica, cito, cito, cito; Lord build, build, build thy Temple quickly,
quickly, quickly. But Gods time is not yet come; for they are not yet thoroughly
humbled. Were they but ripe, he is ready: when help is seasonable, his fingers
itch (says One) to be doing, as the mothers breast aches, when it is time the
child had suck, Exodus 12.40, 41. At midnight were the firstborn slain, and
Israel sent away, because then exactly the 400. or 430. years of their
captivity in Egypt were expired. So Dan. 5.30. In that night was Belshazzar
slain: because then exactly the seventy years were ended. God promises to take
this Church again to wife, but having found her formerly so fickle and
faithless, he would for a long time try her, and keep her unmarried as a
probationer: he would lay her (as we do filthy garments) a soaking, and a
frosting, for many hundred years, to try them, and to purge, and to make white,
even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed, Dan:
11.35. And to presume to prescribe to him in this case, is to set the Sun by
our Dial. As he never fails his in his own time, so he seldom comes at ours.
Here then our strength is, to sit still, Esaias 30.7. and not to start up, and
say as that impatient Prince did, 2 Kings 6.30.
What should I wait for the Lord any longer? Shall Christ lose his right in his
wife, because he takes her not by the day set down in our Calender? Possibly
the Calender of heaven has a post-date to ours. Sure it is, that we are apt to
antedate the promises in regard of the accomplishment: as those Jer. 8.20. that
looked for help that summer at furthest, but were deceived. See the disease and
the remedy put together Hab. 2.2.3. and learn to wait. God will surely bring us
to it if we belong to him: and thereby inure us both to patience and continence
as here.

thou shall not play the harlot etc.] thou shall not hasten after another God,
and so multiply sorrows upon thy self Psalm. 16.4. as he that has broke prison
gets but more irons to be laid upon him and a stricter watch, Psalm. 44.19. the
Church though sore broken in the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow
of death, yet she stretched not out her hands to a strange God. She knew that
was not the way to get off with comfort. Is it because there is no God in
Israel, that thou gaddest to the God of Ekron. Isay. 20.19.
2 King. 1. Should not a people seek unto their God? from the living to the
dead? Should they seek to slip out at a back-dore and to help themselves by
sorry shifts, or sinister practices. Is that ever like to do well? or will not
such be miserable even by their own election, Ion. 2.8. Wherefore if God defer
to help (as he does usually) hold out faith and patience. Wait upon him who
even waits to be gracious, Esaias. 30.18.
for he is a God of judgment and well knows how and when to deal forth his
favors: Cito data cito vilescunt, Manna being lightly come by, was as lightly
set by. He therefore suspends us, that he may commend his mercies to us: and
when he comes with them, be the better welcome. The longer he holds us in
request, the more will he do for us at length: and if we abide for him many
days, we shall be no losers thereby.

for I also will be for thee] He will love those that love him, Prove. 8.17. 1 Samuel 2.30.
and honor those that honor him. Yea, if any man love me, says Christ, my
Father will love him, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Joh. 14.21.23. I will
gather them (sc. into my bosom out of all nations) that are sorrowful for the
solemn assembly who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.
Behold at that time I will undo all that afflict thee etc. Zeph. 5.18.19.20.
God esteems highly of those that abide for him in their banishment, that stay
for him till he mind marriage with them, that stick to him in affliction, that
resolve to reserve themselves for him, so as if they cannot have comfort in God
they will have none elsewhere. The Cherethites and the Pelethites that were
with David at Gath, and afterward stuck to him when Absalom was up, they were
ever near about him, as his guard, and dear to him as his favorites. God is
All in all to those that with the Spouse will be his altogether: Jer. 29.13.
he will do good to them with his whole heart, that seek him with their whole
heart etc.

Verse 4. For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king
etc.] They shall be as it is said of the Brasileans, Sine rege, sine lege, sine
fide, in a woeful confused estate, both for State and Church. This they had
brought upon themselves by their Idols set up at Dan and Bethel: that is, in
the place of Judgment, and in the house of God (so Dan and Bethel signify.)
Bethel was become Bethaven, and the place of judicature (called by Solomon the
place of the Holy God Eccle. 8.10.) so corrupted, that people were ready to say
as Themistocles once did, that if there were two ways showed him, the one
leading to hell and the other to the Tribunal, he would choose that which went
to hell and forsake the other. That corruption caused this confusion. The
children of Israel shall be without and without, here are six withouts that
they might be sensible of their abuse of mercies, and see bona a tergo
formosissima good things fairest behind, their worth best appearing by their
want. The Persian law commanded, that at the death, of their kings, there
should be (...) a suspension of laws, Stob. orat. 42.
a lawless liberty, for the space of five days: that subjects might know the
necessity of government, by being bereft of the benefit of it for a time: and
the better prize it when they had it. The like custom they have now in Turkey
at the death of the Grand Signor, Turk. hist.
which is no sooner known, but every man does what is good in his own eyes,
till his successor be sent for, and set upon his throne. Israel has neither
King nor Prince, Ruler nor Civil Magistrate of their own, (the ten tribes I
mean: for Judah had both Prince and Priests after the captivity, till the last
desolation, since which they have) no form nor face of Church or
commonwealth, no not of a corrupt or depraved Church, meant here by Image and
Teraphim, See 2 King. 17.10. Judge. 17.5. much less of such an one as God had
prescribed, meant by sacrifices and Ephod. Prospers conceit was that this
people were called Judaei because they received jus Dei their law from Gods
mouth. And Josephus calls their common wealth a Theocratie, or
God-government. They received their order both for Church and commonwealth
from heaven: which no other people ever did in the same manner; and might truly
take up that of the Prophet Esaias; The Lord is our Judge, Esaias. 33.22.
the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. But man
being in honor is without understanding etc. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked:
then he forsook God which made him, and sacrificed unto devils, not to God, to
Gods whom they knew not, to new Gods, that came newly up etc. Deuteronomy. 32.15.17.
When Ephraim spoke and spoke right there was trembling and none durst budge
against him: but when he offended in Baal, he died: Hos. 13.1.
then every paltry adversary trampled upon him as a dead man, Sanet. in Zech.
8.13. Heyl. Georg. 370.
then every scurrilous Poet could insult over him and cry, Credat Judaeus
Appela Non ego: then every common Turk could by way of execration say, Judaeus
sim si fallo, and in detestation of a thing: I would I might die a Jew then, a
dispersed and despised people they are (none more) under the cope of heaven;
partly for their former Idolatry, but principally for their rejecting of Christ
crucified: whom they cannot but in their consciences know to be the Shiloh that
should come, since the scepter is so long since departed from Judah, and a
Lawgiver from between his feet Genesis 49.10. That for their sins which are many
(say the Talmudists) he yet hides himself in the caverns and secret places of
the earth, is (...) a simple pretense, or rather a subtlety of Satan, to hold
them still in blindness, till God unseale their eyes: till when things that
are never so clear will not be believed.

Verse 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return] They shall come out of
the furnace more refined then ever. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged: and this is all the fruit to take away her sin: when he makes all the
stones of the Altar as chalk-stones that are beaten in sunder: the groves and
images shall not stand up. Esaias. 27.9.
then indeed has Jacob the right fruit of his sufferings, when he makes all
the stones of the Alter, as chalk-stones, crumbling them to crattle: when he
pulls down the groves and images, those Balaams-blocks that lay in his way to
God, and now resolves to return,

and seek the Lord] from whom they had deeply revolted to seek his face and
favor, to seek his ordinances and true worship, and lastly, to seek to know
and do what is well-pleasing in his sight. Their hearts shall rejoice that thus
seek the Lord: and these are true converts indeed, these are those sekers Psalm.
24.6. yea this is Jacob (as there) Jsraelites indeed, such as cannot be
(wherever they are cast) without God in the world, without Christ, Jer. 30.9.
Ezekiel. 34.24. 1 King. 12.6.
who is here called David by a Patronymick (as also elso where) no without
allusion to the Apostasy of the ten tribes from the house of David, and so from
the true God; which now also they shall bewail as the root of their sin and
ruin.

and David their King] Called by Daniel Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9. Act. 3.
and by Peter, Christ the Lord. See Luke 1.32. Some think he is here called the
goodness of God.

They shall fear the Lord and his goodnesse] which also is his glory, Pavehunt
ad Dominum.
Exodus 33.19 The Hebrew is, they shall fear to the Lord, trepidabunt that is,
trembling they shall make have to him (as frighted doves do to their
columbaries, See Hos. 11.11.) they shall kiss the Son, with a kiss of homage:
and with reverentiall fear submit to he kingdom.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. Hear the word of the Lord] This is the beginning of a new Sermon, or
judicial act of God against the ten tribes, which are here convented,
convinced, sentenced. It begins with an Oyes, like that of St. Paul. Act.
13.16. Men of Israel and ye that fear God (if any such be in so general a
defection) give audience. Ye have heard Gods mind before parabolically
delivered and in types: now hear it in plain terms, Heb. 12.25.
that you may see and understand and be converted and I may heal you. Hear
and your souls shall live. Hear him that speaks from heaven, even that
excellent speaker, as he is called Dan. 10. that Arch-prophet whom ye are bound
to hear Deuteronomy. 18.18. Mat. 17.5. upon pain of death Heb. 12.25. the Lord
Christ I mean who speaks with Authority and is mighty in word and deed. Act.
10.
He it was whom Isaiah saw upon his throne, and heard speaking Job. 12.41. And
it is a Rule in Divinity, that where the old Testament brings in God
appearing and speaking to the Patriarchs, Jer. 13.18.
Prophets and people, it is to be understood of the second person. Hear
therefore and give ear, be not proud for the Lord has spoken it. Am. 3.7.
The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but
hear and fear, humble and tremble?

ye children of Israel] But oh how altogether unlike your father? Even as
unlike, Ezekiel. 34.27.
as Jehoachim (that degenerate plant) was to his father Josiah, that plant of
renown? His heart melted when he heard the law, 2 Chronicles. 34. but Jehoiachim cut
it with a penknife and cast into the fire Jer. 35.23. These were Isreal's
children, and named the house of Jacob, as those in Micah chap. 2.7. but an
empty title yields but an empty comfort at last. Is the spirit of the Lord
straitened? (says the Prophet there:) were these Jacobs doings? Do not my
words do good to him that walks uprightly? were you Israelites indeed, I
should not thus lose my sweet words upon you: but you would incline your ears
and come unto me, Esaias 55.3. 1 King 14.6.
hear as for life it self: especially since I am sent unto you (as once Ah^jah
was to Jeroboams wife) with heavy tidings, with such a Citation or process
from heaven as may well be unto you as Samu^ls message was to Eli; that made
both his ears to tingle; or as the hand writing was to Balthazar, that made his
knees knock together.

For the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land] The former
title (children of Israel was too good) for them: they had disgraced their
fathers family, and were therefore ( Reuben-like) fallen from their dignity.
They shall henceforth be called the inhabitants of the Land, as the wicked are
called Revelation 12.12. in opposition to the heavens and those that dwell
therein, the Burgesses of the new Jerusalem: Abraham had seed of two sorts some
were as the dust of the earth Genesis 13.16. others as the Stars of heaven Genesis
15^5. And all are not Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. Multi sacerdotes et
pauci sacerdotes, says Chrysostom. There are many Ministers, and yet but few:
many in name, but few indeed: workmen that need not be ashamed; Nomen inane,
crimen immane. It was cold comfort to Dives in flames, that Abraham called him
Son; or to Judas, that Christ called him Friend; or to these rebellious Jews,
that God sometimes called them his people, and had rooted out the cursed
Canaanites to make room for them, when as they lived in Gods good Land, but not
by Gods good Law^^. for which cause the Lord has here a controversy with
them, a suit at law, and being himself both plaintiff and Judge, Mals fidei
possessores.
he is sure to cast them; yea to cast them out of that good Land as evils
tenants, that should hold no longer: for verse. 3. he threateneth to plead
against them non verbis sed verberibus with (...) and with blood as Ezekiel.
38.22. to make them say as Isai. 45.9. Woe to him that striveth with his Maker,
that has him for his adversary at Law; such a one is sure to be undone unless
he agree with him quickly, Mat. 5.25.
whiles he is yet in the way with him, and before he be brought to the
tribunal, For even our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. his tribunal also
is of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. his pleading with sinners in flames of fire, 2 These.
1.7. the trial of men's works shall be by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. the place of
punishment a lake of fire ^ed with a river of brimstone, Isai. 30.33. O pray
therefore and prevent, that God enter not into judgment with us: for if so, no
man living shall be justified in his sight. (...).
Gods people may have and shall be sure to have the devil an adversary at Law
against them, as Saint Peter's word signifies 1 Pet. 5.8. The accuser of the
brethren he is called, which accuses them before God day and night Rev. 12.12.
But him they may resist steadfast in the faith, and recover cost and charges of
him, as I may so say: for they have Christ to appear for them in heaven, Heb.
9.24. as a lawyer for his client. 1 John 2.2. to nonsuit all the devils
accusations. The Spirit also (as a Paracletus or Advocate) makes request for
them to God in their hearts, and helps them, to make Apologies for themselves
2 Cor. 7.11. Again, if a man sin against another, the judge shall judge him,
says old Eli to his wicked sons: that is the Umpire may come and take up the
controversy and put an end to the quarrel. But if a man have sinned against
the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.29.
who shall entreat for him? who dare be his ^^yesman? no mediation of man can
make his peace: no reconciliation can be here hoped for, but by running from
God as a Judge, to God as a Father in Christ. Let men therefore be wrought upon
by the reprehensions of Gods faithful Ministers, by whom he appealeth and
impeacheth them. If they stand out as the old world did against that Preacher
of righteousness, by whom he went and preached to those spirits now in prison,
(because they would not take up the matter in time, but futured and fooled away
their own salvation) he will break off his patience and say as Genesis 6.3. My
spirit shall not always strive with these men, for that they also are flesh,
etc. and are therefore the worse, because they ought to be better: Ideo
deteriores quia me liores esse debebant.
therefore they shall fare the worse, because they would be no better. I have
hewed them by my Prophets, Hos. 6.5. but can make no good work of them. Like
ill timber, they fall to splinters: and like ill stones, they crumble all tto
crattle: They are therefore fitter for the highway and chimney corner, then for
my building. My spirit shall therefore strive no more with these perverse
persons, either by preaching, disputing, convincing, etc. in the mouth of my
ministers; or in their own minds and consciences by inward checks and motions
which they reject, refusing to be reformed, hating to be healed. I will take
away my spirit, and silence my Prophets (as he does verse 4. of this chapter)
and resolve upon their utter ruin: since there is no good to be done upon them,
See Verse. 17. of this chapter, with the Note there. Currat ergo poenitentia, ne
praecurrat sententia, etc.

Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land] Lo
here the charge: and knowing the judgment of God you must needs say that those
that commit such things are worthy of death. Romans 1.32. For if the word spoken
by Angels (the law given by Angels in the hand of Moses a Mediator) were
steadfast: and every transgression and disobedience (that is every commission
and omission) received a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2. (...) should
these miscreants escape, that had left off to do good: and for evil, they did
(...) both hands earnestly; For the second table of the Law, it is articled
against them, (for matter of omission or defect) that there was neither truth
nor mercy in the land: And for the first table, that there was no sound
knowledge of God there; and consequently, no care of God, either inward or
outward worship: for there can be neither faith, nor repentance, nor due
obedience yielded to an unknown God. Joh. 4.22.
A Samaritane service there may be (ye worship ye know not what) but not a
rational service, Romans 12.1. such as whereof a man can render a reason. Now
God will not have a blind sacrifice, Mal. 1.8. 1 Chr. 28.9. It is nothing worth
that men are virtuous, unless they join to their virtue knowledge. 2 Pet. 1.5.
nor that they offer sacrifice, if they bring the sacrifice of fools, Ecc^es.
5.1. Those must needs be abominable and disobedient that are to every good work
reprobate, injudicious as the word signifies Tit. 1.11. and what marvel though
men be alienated from the life of God (or a godly life) through the ignorance
that is in them? Ephesians. 4.18. But let us take the words in order. There is no
truth. Here God declares against them, (a Lawyers do against offenders in
courts) and not for trifles, but first for want of truth or trustiness in word
and deed: without which humane society is but funiculus ex arena a rope of
sand, or arena sine calce sand without lime, it cannot hold together. It was an
old complaint of the Prophets, that Truth was fallen in the streets, Esaias 99.14
Psalm. 12.1.
and faithfulness failed from among the children of men. When Varus was slain,
Augustus grieved excessively; and that because non esset a quo verum audiret,
he had none about him that would tell him the truth of things, and deal plainly
with him. Multis annis jam transactis, nulla fides est in pactis, etc. Jeremy
bewailes it in his treacherous country men, that they bent their tongues like
their bows for lies; but they were not valiant for the truth on the earth,
Jer. 9.3. they were mendaciorum loquacissimi (as Tertullian phraseth it) loud
an lewd lairs, and (as Egesippus says of Pilat) they were viri nequam et parvi
facientes mendacium, naughty men, and such as made nothing of a lie. But Gods
people are said to be children that will not lie Esaias 63. they are (...) lovers
of truth, which was the title of honor given to Arrianus the Greek historian:
when as of all other historians Vopiscus testifies, that there is none qui non
aliquid est mentitus that takes not the liberty to lie more or less. And for
slipperinesse in contracts and covenants, nothing is more common amongst men;
its counted a peccadello. But the God of truth, the faithful and true witness,
as Christ is called, counts it not so. See Ezekiel 17.15. etc. 1 Timothy 4.2.
and 2 Timothy 3.3. There are that take truth here for justice; according to
Zech. 8.16. and so it suites well with that which follows. Nor mercy] These
two are set together Mic. 6.8. (to do justly, and to love mercy) as the sum
of the second Table. Mouthmercy there was enough, Jam. 2.15.16.
such as was that in St. James his days. But there is not any one that takes
Zion by the hand, Esaias 51.18. that draws out his soul to the hungry, and
deals his bread to such, Esaias 58.7, 10. Sodom had fullness of bread, but
would part with none to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, Ezekiel.
16.49. Therefore she had judgment without mercy, that had showed no mercy,
James 2.13. Esaias 23.18.
Whereas Tyrus when once she left heaping, and hoarding, and brought forth her
merchandise for them that dwell before the Lord to eat sufficiently, and for
durable clothing, is renowned and reckoned among those that came to Christ with
their desirable things, as some read that Text, Hag. 2.7. Colligent omnes suos
thesauros (so Calvin reads it) they shall come with strong affections, with
large contributions, as those primitive Saints did, Acts 4.34. The same Hebrew
word Chasid, signifies both Saint and Merciful; and it comes of Chesed, the
word here rendered mercy, or bounty. The tender mercies of the Almighty shed
forth abundantly upon such, leave a compassionate frame upon their hearts, as
in the Jailer, Acts 16. Their thoughts steeped in the mercies they have
received, are dyed of the same color as cloth is in the dye-fat. Col. 3.12.
This Text, after no mercy, fitly adds,

nor knowledge of God in the land.] Heb. And no knowledge of God: or, because
there is no knowledge of God in the land. Did men but know God savingly, had
they but tasted and seen how good the Lord is, they would not be so hide-bound,
and strait-handed to their poor brethren: but ready to distribute, willing to
communicate. They are the dark places of the earth, that are full of the
habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74 20. 1 Timothy 6.18.
But in the kingdom of Christ they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, says the Lord: (...) why? For the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Esaias 11.9. St. Paul thanks
his ignorance for his persecutions, and blasphemy, 1 Timothy 1.13. and resolves
the sin of those Kill-Christs into their not knowing of him, 1 Cor. 2.8.
Surely as toads and serpents grow in dark and dirty sellars: So does all sin
and wickedness in an ignorant and blind soul. Hence, in this Text, after no
knowledge of God in the land, follows that black bed-roll of abominations in
the next verse. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, etc. As
blind Alehouses are sinks and sources of all villainy: so are blind hearts.

In the land.] Though it were a land of light, a very Goshen in comparison of
the rest of the world: Though in Judah was God known, and his name great in
Israel, Psalm. ^6.1. Men may remain grossly ignorant amidst a multitude of
means: and in a land of righteousness deal unjustly, and why? they will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord, Esaias 26.10. and verse 1. They will not see.
They are willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 2. Joh. 3. Job 24.17.
says St. Peter: Vt liberius peccent libenter ignorant, says Bernard. They
hate the light, says our Savior; It is unto them as the shadow of death,
says Job. Hence they shut the windows, lest it should shine upon them: or if
it do, they rebel against it, rush against it, as Bats do against torches in
the night. That light they have by nature, or otherwise (as a Prophet from God)
they detain and imprison in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Their knowledge of
God, if any, is only apprehensive, and not affective, cognoscitiva, non vitae
directiva, illightning, not transforming into the same image, so as to make
them children of light: It is notionall knowledge, not experimental and
practical. Hence, such outrages in their lives, such errors and enormities:
For,

Verse 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing,] Heb. To swear,
and lie, and kill, and steal, and commit adultery: To do all this is held,
licitum and solenne, lawful, or at least pardonable. It is grown to a common
practice: and custom of sinning has taken away sense of sin.

By swearing,] Heb. by cursing, or swearing with an execration and cursing,
which was commonly added to an Oath, to confirm it the more, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 21.
Nehem. 10.29. And indeed, in every lawful oath, God is called to witness, to
bless us, if we swear right, and to curse us, if otherwise. Such an oath is a
special part of Gods worship, and is often put for the whole: as here, false and
frivolous oaths are put for the violation of the whole first Table, and set in
opposition to the knowledge of God in the Land: like as lying is opposed to
truth; and killing, stealing, whoring, to mercy, or kindness: Before, God had
complained of their defects, or omissions: here of their commissions and
flagitious practices. Swearers (but especially false-swearers) are traitors to
the State, as appears here, and Jer. 23.10. they bring a curse, nay a large
roll of curses (ten yards long, and five yards broad) upon their hearts, and
Zach. 5.2. and shall one day howl in hell. The same word that is here rendered
swearing, signif^eth also to howl, Joel 1.8. Go to now therefore ye swearers,
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you, James 5.1, -- 12.
Weep here, where there be wiping handkerchiefs in the hand of Christ: better do
so, then yell with devils who have borrowed your mouths, to utter horrid
blasphemies. Swearing is of the devil, says our Savior, Matthew. 5.37. and it
brings men to the devil, says St. James, Chap. 5.12. They object, that they
swear nothing but the truth. But that is not always so. Swearing and lying are
here set together, as seldom sundred. The marvel, if he that swears commonly,
do not forswear frequently: for he swears away all his faith and truth. But,
say they swear truth: yet that excuses not. Truth is but one circumstance of
an oath, Ier. 4.2. Men, as they must swear in truth, so in righteousness, (not
rashly, furiously) and in judgment, not in jest. Swear not in jest, lest ye go
to hell in earnest. It is the property and duty of a godly man to fear an oath,
Eccles. 9.2. and not to forbear it only. As on the other side, no surer sign
of a profane person, then common and customary swearing. It were well if such
were served as Lewis the ninth of France served a citizen of Paris; he seared
his lips for swearing, with an hot iron. And when some said, it was too cruel
an act; I would to God said he, that with searing mine own lips with an hot
iron, I could banish out of the Realm all abuse of oaths. Those that plead,
they have gotten a custom to swear, and therefore they must be born with,
shall have the like answer from God that the thief had from the Judge. He
desired the Judge to spare him, for stealing had been his custom from his
youth, and now he could not leave it. The Judge replied, it was also his
custom, to give judgment against such malefactors; and therefore he must be
condemned.

And lying,] Fitly linked with swearing. Some gravel or mud ever passes away
with much water; so do some lies with much swearing. How often do men forget
their oaths, and swear again that they have not sworn at all? Should men's
excrements come from them as often, and they not feel it, they would be full
sorry, and ashamed thereof. Now swearing and lying (...) file men much worse
then any jakes can do, Mark 7.22. and render them odious to God and good men.
Lying is a blushfull evil: Therefore does the liar deny his lie, as ashamed to
be taken with it; and our ruffians revenge it with a stab. God ranks and
reckons it with the most monstrous sins; and shuts it out of heaven, Revel.
21.8. Aristotle says, Arist. Ethic; lib. 4. c. 7.
It is in it self evil and wicked, contrary to the order of nature, (which has
given words to express men's minds and meanings) destructive to humane
society. Pythagoras was wont to say, that in two things we become like unto
God. Aelian. Var. hist.
1. In telling truth. 2. In bestowing benefits. Now, Mentiri, is contra mentem
ire; To lie, is to utter a known untruth with an intention to deceive, or hurt.
The Cretians of old were infamous for this: The Friars of late: 'Twas grown to
a proverb among our forefathers: A friar, a lier: It Is now amongst us, Every
lier is, or would be a thief. Hence, lying and stealing go coupled here: but
betwixt them both stands killing, Tit. 1.1. (...), etc.
as ushered in by the former, and often occasioned by the later, Pro. 1.19.

and killing,] This follows fitly upon the former: for truth has always a
scratcht face. The devil was first a liar, and then a murderer. Joh. 8.44
He cannot so well murder, without he slander first. The credit of the Church
must first be taken away, and then she is wounded, Cant. 5.6. The people here
in England, once complained, that Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, that noble
Patriot, Speed.
was twice murdered: first, by detraction, and then by deadly practice. The
French have a Proverb; Those that have a mind to kill their neighbors Dog,
make the world believe he was mad first. This is their Proverb, and accordingly
was their practice in the Massacre of Paris. A little before which, they gave
out, that the Protestants met by night, to plot against the State, and to
commit all manner of uncleanness amongst themselves. This is an old trick of
the Devil and his Instruments, first to belie the Church, and to represent her
to the world in the ugliest hue; and then to persecute her, like as of old they
used to put the poor Christians in Bears or Lions skins, and then bait them
with dogs. Paulus Fagius reports a story of an Egyptian, who said, that the
Christians were a colluvies of moist filthy lecherous people. And for their
keeping of the sabbath, he says, they had a disease upon them, and were
therefore feign to rest every seventh day. The Papists accused the Waldenses
(those ancient Protestants) for Manichees; and that they affirmed there were
two beginnings of things, God and the devil etc: and all because they
constantly affirmed that the Emperor had no dependence upon the Pope. They
gave them out also for Arrians (and published their Croisado's against them as
enemies to Christ) and all because they denied that a crust was
transubstantiated into Christ. To make way for the ruin of England by the
gun-powder-plot, they gave out beyond sea that the people here looked as black
as devils, were grown barbarous, and did eat young children. That we held
opinion to worship no God, to serve the times, to prefer profit before right,
to pretend the public cause to our private lusts, to cover hatred with
flattery, Eudaem Johannes.
to confirm tyranny by shedding innocent blood, to keep faith no longer then
will serve our own turns etc. And if the plot had taken effect, they had
fathered it upon the Puritans (having proclamations ready framed for the
purpose) that under that name, they might have sucked the blood and reveld in
the ruins of all such here, as had but the love, or any show of sound
religion. The word here used for killing signifies to kill with a murdering
weapon, such as David felt in his bones, Psalm. 42.10. such as Colignius and
other the poor Protestants felt in the French Massacre: where the Queen of
Navarre was poisoned, the most part of the peerless Nobility in France
murdered, together with their wives and children; and of the common people an
hundred thousand in one year, in diverse parts of the realm. What should I
speak of the innocent blood of Ireland, for which God has already and yet
still will make diligent inquisition. If the blood of Abel had so many tongues
as drops Genesis 4.10. what then of so many righteous Abels? Surely I have seen
yesterday (says God) the blood of Naboth 1. King. 9.26. Murder ever bleeds
fresh in his eye: to him many years, yea that eternity that is past is but
yesterday. Neither is he wanting to punish it even in this present world. He
avengeth the innocent blood that Manasseh shed, a long while after his death:
he would not pardon it, no, though Manasseh repented of it, 2 King. 24.4. The
mountains of Gilboah were accursed, for the blood of Saul and Jonathan spilt
upon them. 2 Samuel 1. and what a deal of do we find in the law made, when a
man was murdered Deuteronomy. 21.1, 2. etc. the valley where the expiatory sacrifice
was slain in that case was from thenceforth to be neither eared nor sown
Verse 4. etc. in all to show, what a precious esteem God has of man's life: and
what controversy with a land for shedding of blood.

and stealing] Those publici latrones especially, public thieves that sit in
purple robes: and by wrong judgment oppress and rob the poor innocents are
here intended, as Calvin thinks; See Isa. (23. and 33.) So are all others that
either by force or fraud get into their hands their neighbors goods; whether,
I say, it be by violence or cunning contrivance, the Lord is the avenger of all
such. 1 These. 4.6. So that though happily they lie out of the walk of humane
justice and come not under man's cognizance, yet God will find them out, and
send his flying roll of curses after them, Zech. 5.2.3. he shall vomit up his
sweet morsels, here Job 20.15. or else digest in hell what he has devoured on
earth: as his belly has prepared deceit, Job. 15.35. Sermon. before K. Edw. 6.
so God will take it out of his guts again: either he shall make restitution
of his ill-gotten goods, or for not doing it, he shall one day cough in hell,
as Father Latimer phraseth it.

and committing adultery] This is also an heinous crime (says holy Job) yea it
is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges Chap. 31.11. Heathens have punished
it very severely. Of one people we read that they used to put the adulterers or
adulteresses head into the panch of a beast where the filth of it lay, and so
stiffled him. God punished those stinking Edomites with stinking brimstone for
their loathsome bruitishnesse; and adjudged adultery to death: because society
and purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men. We read not
in any general commandment of the law, that any should be burnt with fire, but
the highpriests daughter for adultery. Lev. 21.9. yet it seems it was in use
before the law, or else Judah was much to blame for sentencing his daughter in
law Tamar to the fire. Genesis 38.24. Let us beware of that sin, for which so
peculiar a plague was appomted, and by very Heathens executed. See Jer.
29.22.23. If men be slack to take vengance on such, yet God will hold on his
controversy against them and avenge the quarrel of his covenant (for so
wedlock is called Prove. 2.17.) either by his own bare hand, or else by the
hands of the adulterers themselves. See an instance of both these even in our
times: In the year 1583. in London, two citisens committing adultery together
on the Lords day, Divine Tragedy
were struck dead with fire from heaven in the very act of uncleanness: their
bodies being left dead in the place half burnt up, sending out a most loathsome
savor, for a spectacle of Gods controversy against adultery and sabbath
breaking. This judgment was so famous and remarkable that Laurentius Bayenlink
a foreign historian has thought good to register it to posterity. Opus
Chronologiae. Or his Vniversi. Antwerp. 1611. p. 110.
Mr. Cleaver reports of one that he knew that had committed the act of
uncleanesse: and in the horror of conscience he hanged himself: But before,
when he was about to make away himself, he wrote in a paper, and left it in a
place to this effect: Indeed, says he, I acknowledge it to be utterly
unlawful for a man to kill himself: but I am bound to act the Magistrates
part, because the punishment of this sin is death: This act of his was not to
be justified, Viz. to be his own deathsman: but it shows what a controversy
God has with adulterers, and what a deep gash that sin makes in the conscience.

they break out] like wild horses over hedges: or proud waters over the banks.
The Septuagint renders in (...) They are poured out. And St. Jude has a like
expression, speaking of the Libertines of his time Verse 11. they run greedily,
Gr: (...)
they were powered out, or powered away as water out of a vessel: they ran
headlong, or gave themselves over to work all uncleanness with greediness, to
satisfy their lusts, and to oppose with crest and breast whatsoever stands in
their way; bearing down all before them. Beza.
So Sodom and Gomorrah are (in the seventh verse of the same epistle) said by
unbridled licentiousness to give themselves over to fornication, In
scortationem effusae. And when Lot sought to advise them better they set up the
bristles at him, with Base busy stranger, Dubartas.
come thou hither thus
Controwler-like to prate and preach to us? etc


Thus these Effractores (as the Psalmist somewhere calls them) these
breach-makers, Judge. 16.9. Psalm. 2.3.
break Christ's bands in sunder, (as Sampson did the seven green withes) and
cast away his cords from them. These unruly Belialists get the bit betwixt
their teeth, like headstrong horses; and casting their rider, rise up against
him. They like men (or rather like wild beasts) transgress the covenant Hos.
5.7. resolving to live as they list, to take their swinge in sin: Psalm. 12.4.
for who, (say they) is Lord over us? Tremellius reads that text, tanquam
hominis, they transgress it as if it were the covenant of a man: they make no
more of breaking the law, then as if they had to do with dust and ashes like
them selves, and not with the great God that can tame them with the turn of his
hand, and with the blast of his mouth blow them into hell. Has he not
threatened to walk contrary to those that walk contrary to him, to be as cross
as they for the hearts of them, and to bring upon them seven times more plagues
then before, and seven times and seven to that, till he have got the better of
them? for is it fit that he should cast down the bucklers first? I trow not. He
will be obeyed by these exorbitant, yokelesse, lawless persons; either
actively, or passively. The law was added because of transgression: and is
given, says, the Apostle, not to the righteous, for they are (...) a law to
themselves, 1 Timothy 1.9.
(as the Thracians boasted) but to the lawless and disobedient, who count
licentiousness the only liberty, and the service of God the greatest slavery;
who think no venison sweet but that that is stolen, Eccles. 2.2.
nor any mirth but that which a Solomon would say to, Thou mad fool what do
thou? Loc, for such rebels and refractaries, for such masterlesse monsters as
send messages after the Lord Christ saying, We will not have this man to reign
over us, for these, I say, was the law made, to hamper them and shackle them,
as fierce and furious creatures: to tame them and taw them with its four iron
teeth, 1 of Irritation, Romans 7.7. 2.ly of Induration, Isa. 6.10. 3.ly Of
obligation to condign punishment, Genesis 4.4. 4. Of execration, or malediction,
Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, etc, Let men take heed therefore how they break out against
God: Let them meddle with their matches, and not contend with him that is
mightier then they: It Is the Wise-mans counsel, Eccles. 6.10.

and blood touches blood.] i. e. there is a continuation, and as it were a
concatenation of murders, and other horrible villenies, as was at Jerusalem in
the murder of Zacharias, the son of Barachias, the blood of the sacrificer was
mingled with the blood of the sacrifice: And as Luke 13.1. the like fell out.
So at Athens, when Scylla took the Town, there was (...), as merciless
slaughter; the gutters running with blood, etc. And so at Samaria (which the
Prophet may here probably intend) when there was such killing of Kings; (and
they fall not alone) Hosea killed his Predecessor Pekah, as he had done
Pekahiah; Menahem killed Shallum, as Shallum had done Zacharias: so true is
that of the Poet, Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci,
Descendunt Reges, Juvenal.
and sicca morte tyranni.


What got most of the first Caesar's by their adoption, or designation to the
Empire, Nisi ut citius interficerentur, but to be killed so much the sooner?
All or most of them, till Constantine, died unnatural deaths: As afterward,
Phocas the traitor killed the good Emperor Mauritius, stewing him in his own
broth. Heraclius slew Phocas, putting him to a shameful and tormentfull death,
etc. Conradinus King of Germany, and Duke of Sweveland was beheaded by Charles
King of Naples and Sicily; Balthas. exner. Val. Max. Christian. page 274.
and the heads-man presently beheaded by another, ne extaret qui jactaret tam
generosum sanguinem a se effusum, (says mine Author) that there might not be
any left to boast, that he had spilt so noble blood. Our Richard the third,
Daniels hist. 249.
that bloody and deceitful man, is said to have used the instruments of his
cruel plots, (his cutthroats I mean) as men do their candles; burn the first
out to a snuff, and then, having lighted another, tread that under-foot. Faux
(that fatal actor of the intended Powder-tragedy) should have been thus
rewarded by his brethren in evil, had the plot taken effect. It is that famous
and never to be forgotten fifth of November 1651. wherein I writ these lines:
And therefore in way of thankfulness to our ever-gracious Deliverer, I here
think good to set down the relation as Mr. John Vicars (in his Quintessence of
cruelty, or Poem of the popish Powder Plot) has declared it to the world, as
he had it from Mr. Clement Cotton, the Composer of the English Concordance, who
also received it from Mr. Pickering of Titsmarsh-grove in North-hampton-shire,
and it is thus. This Mr. Pickering being in great esteem with King James, had
an horse of special note, on which he used to hunt with the King: This horse
was borrowed of him (a little before the blow was to be given) by his brother
in law Keys (one of the Conspiratours) and conveyed to London, for a bloody
purpose, which thus was plotted: Faux on the day of the fatal blow, was
appointed to retire himself to St. Georges-fields, where this said horse was to
attend him to make his escape so soon as the Parlament-house was blown up. It
was likewise contrived, that the said Mr. Pickering (noted for a Puritan)
should be that very morning murdered in his bed, and secretly conveyed away:
As also that Faux himself should have been murdered in St. Georges-fields, and
there so mangled and cut in pieces as that it might not be discovered who he
was. Whereupon it was to be bruited abroad, that the Puritans had blown up the
Parliament House: And the better to make the world believe so, there was Mr.
Pickering with his horse ready to make an escape, but that God stirred up some,
who seeing the heinousness of the fact, and he ready to escape by flight, in
detestation of so horrible a deed fell upon him, and killed him, and so had
hackt him in pieces. And yet to make it to be more apparent to be so indeed,
there was his horse found also, which was of special speed and swiftness, to
carry him away: and upon this rumor, as massacre should have gone through the
whole Kingdom upon the Puritans. But when this plot, thus contrived, was
confessed by some of the Conspiratours, and Faux in the Tower was made acquainted
with it, (who had been born in hand, to be bountifully rewarded for that his
service in the Catholic cause) when he saw how his ruin was contrived, he
also thereupon confessed freely all that he knew touching that horrid and
hideous conspiracy, which (before) all the torture of the rack could not force
him to. The truth of all this, is attested by Mr. William Perkins, an eminent
Christian and Citizen of London, who had it from the mouth of Mr. Clement
Cotton: which I could not but here insert, as coming to my mind and Pen, on
the very day whereon (46. years since) it should have been acted, when my self
was but four years of age, and it being the utmost that I can remember: but if
ever I forget, let my right hand forger her cunning. Remember, O Lord, these
children of Edom, Psalm. 134.5, 7, 8.
etc. these Romish Edomites,, Esauites, Jesuits, who said, Raze it, Raze it,
even to the foundation, O daughter of Babylon, etc. The Rabbines call the
Romists, Edomites, (they interpret the mount of Esau, Obad. ver. 21. to be
meant of Rome) and well they may, for their blood-guiltinesse, for which they
are hated of God, Psalm. 5.6. Who cannot but remember, (...).
that their sins (as a cart-rope) have reached up to heaven, Rev, 18.5. there
having been a concatenation, or a continued series of them, as the Greek there
imports, and (as some here interpret) blood touching blood, according to Esaias
1.15. Your hands are full of blood. And Chap. 4.4. The filth of the daughter of
Zion, and the blood of Jerusalem. This sense, the Chaldee Paraphrase makes.
The Septuagint (with their (...), mingle blood with blood) seem to understand
it of incestuous matches and mixtures forbidden, Levit. 18.6. and yet avowed by
David George and his disciples, and practiced in the Court of Spain, by Papal
dispensation.

Verse 3. Therefore shall the land mourn,] Here the Lord proceeds to give
sentence; and it is dreadful indeed. Lugebit terra, languebit incola, etc. You
will not mourn, therefore your land shall: the ugly face of your sin shall
appear in the miserable desolation of your Country: There is no truth, mercy,
or knowledge of God in your land: which even groans under your burden, the
axeltree thereof being ready to break; therefore it shall be eased of you, by
my sore, and great, and strong sword, which shall soon make work amongst you,
and lay all wast. And as Gods red horse of war is followed by the black horse
of famine, and that blace one, by the pale horse of pestilence, Rev. 6.4, 5, 8.
so shall it be here. As by swearing, and lying,, etc. you have broke out, so
shall my whole wrath break out upon you as mighty torrent. As blood has
touched blood, so punishment shall follow hard upon sin: for these two are knit
together with chains of Adamant, says the Poet. if thou do evil, sin lies at
the door, says God, Genesis 4.7. that is, supplicium imminet, idque proximum and
praesentissimum, says Junius there: Evil shall hunt the wicked man to destroy
him: his sin shall find him out as a bloodhound, and haunt him as an hell-hag.
Where iniquity breaks-fast, calamity will be sure to dine; to sup where it
dines, and to lodge where it sups. No sooner had man sinned, but the earth was
cursed for his sake, Genesis 3.17, 18. It was never beautiful nor cheerful
since. At this day it lies bed-ridden, and looks to be burnt up shortly with
her works, 2 Pet. 3.10. Here it is brought in as a mother in mourning,
bewayling the loss of all her children, and refusing to be comforted. And
surely though the land be eased of a very heavy burden, as I have said, when
purged by Gods just judgments of her ungrateful and wicked inhabitants: yet
because she lies under the dint of Divine displeasure at such a time, therefore
is she rightly said to mourn in this case, and to be in a sad disconsolate
condition, (See Jer. 12.4.) she becomes a very Ahil, (that is the word here
used, see Judge. 11.33.) a Bochim, an Hadadrimmon, an Iri-sland; and being
desolate she mourns unto thee: for she sees that her convulsions are like to
end in a deadly consumption.

And every one that dwells therein shall languish,] Heb. shall wither as a
flower, Nahum 1.4. Or, shall be weakened. Those that now stand upon their
tiptoes, and face the very heavens, stouting it out with God, shall then be
weak as water, withered as a flower, strengthlesse as a moth-eaten-cloth, Psalm.
39.11. low-spirited, and crest-faln, as the king of Sodom, (erst man good
enough to look four kings in the face, but anon suppliant to Abraham, a forlorn
forreiner, Genesis 14.21.) Manasseh that sturdy rebel, in trouble basely hides
his head among the bushes, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Caligula in time of thunder ran
under beds and benches. Affliction will tame, and take down the proudest
spirits: they break in adversity that bore their heads on high in prosperity:
they speak out of the ground, and whisper out of the dust, Esaias 21.4.
that look to be brought into the dust of death Psalm. 22.15. It is the
pestilence that here seems to be threatened (as before sword and famine) and
an universal pestilence too; reaching not only to men but to other creatures
made for man's uses, which shows the greatness of the wrath: like as when a
King not only executes the traitor, but also pulls down his house,
confiscateth his goods, and and disinheriteth his children etc. But what have
those sheep done? the beasts, birds, Pareus.
and fishes that they must suffer also? It is but reason they should, since
first they are part of men's enjoyments: secondly they are many times (though
harmless in themselves) yet instruments of men's sin: and therefore well does
the Chaldee here paraphrase Diminutionem patientur propter hominum peccata they
shall suffer for man's sin: who may therefore well say to them, as Judah did to
Tamar, Thou art more rigteous then I.

with the beasts of the field] which shall dye by the murrian.

and the fowls of the ayre] which shall catch the contagion, Joseph.
and fall down dead: as those birds do that attempt to fly over the dead sea.

and the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away] Colligentur, conficientur
they shall be gathered together as seeking help one of another in a common
danger: and yet they shall be destroyed, Engl. Chron.
the very waters being pestilentiall, as they were here in King Edward the
thirds days; so that the very fowls and fishes had botches upon them. This
was a heavier judgment then that which befell the old world: for then the
fishes perished not: though the Jew-doctours would persuade us that these also
died in the flood: for that the waters thereof were boiling hot.

Verse 4. Yet let no man strive nor reprove another] let him not lose so much
good labor, and spill so many sweet words upon this people: for they are grown
uncounsellable, incurable, incorrigible. They have rejected the counsel of God
within, or, against themselves Luke 7.30. corripiuntur sed non corriguntur: it
is because the Lord intends to destroy them 1 Samuel 2.25. yea he has
determined it 2 Chronicles. 25.16 Hence as dying men lose their hearing and other
senses by degrees: so those that are destined to destruction grow stupid and
stubborn, and will neither hear good counsel, nor see the things that concern
their peace: but spurn at admonition and scorn at reproof.

Tunc etiam docta plus valet art malum. And therefore God forbids to reprove
such, as deplored and desperate; to cast pearls of good counsel before such
dogs, who prefer loathsome carrion before sweet odours; yea rage at them as
Tigers do, and fly in the faces of such as present them: or at best grunt and
go their ways, as swine; leave good counsel where they find it, not putting
it in practice. Now as dogs and swine were counted unclean creatures, and unfit
for sacrifice: so are such for admonition. Let a man be never so able and apt
to teach, (...)
let him be vir praestans, eximius, insignis, a gallant man (as the word here
used sometimes signifies) and one that can do his work never so well, yet the
wisdom of his words shall be despised Prove. 23.9. Let him strive till his
heart aches, (...) Jude. 22. (...).
and disputatos arguere, as St. Jude speaks, he shall but strive against the
stream, and by reprooving a scorner get him a blot, Pro. 9.7. The Pharisees
denied our Savior, and blew their noses at him Luke 16.14. Let them alone
therefore says our Savior to his disciples, they be blind leaders of the
blind; there is no good to be done of them: Mat. 15.
therefore let him that is filthy be filthy still Rev. 22.11. and he that is
ignorant let him beignorant, since he will needs be so, 1 Cor. 14.38. Levit.
26.39.
Let him pine away in his iniquity. Let him pine and perish, go on, despair,
dye, and be damned. My spirit shall no longer strive with him, unless it be by
furious rebukes Ezekiel. 5.15. and by fire Am. 7.4. Oecolampadius upon this text
doubts not to say that the sin of such as reject admonition, is the sin against
the holy Ghost: certainly it is worse then all the forementioned swearing,
lying, etc. Blind nature could see and say as much. Hesiod says that there are
three sorts of men: the first and best are those that live so well as not to
need reproof. The second (and those not bad) are such as do not so well, but
can be content to hear of it. (...). Hesiod. Oper. et dier. Ver. 29.
The third and worst are they that will neither do as they ought, nor be
advised to do better. Plutarch says those that are troubled with toothache
will go to the Physician: those that have a fever will send for him: but he
that is frantic or stark mad will do neither, but reject the remedy and strike
at the Physician. So does the scorner etc. See my common place of Admonition.

for this people are as they that strive with the priest] though Gods officer,
and in his stead 2 Cor. 5.20. though the peoples Oracle to preserve and present
knowledge to them Mal. 2.7 and though to strive with such, be to invert Gods
order, who has appointed the people to hear and obey their Teacher; and not
to prescribe to them: to follow their Guides, and not to run before them Heb.
13.7.17. and 1 Timothy 1, 20. 2 Timothy 1.15. Number. 16. From which texts and 1 Cor.
11.2.3. a grave divine argues thus, It is a vile sin to vex our ministers by
our obstinacy, yea though they were not able to make so full demonstration: yet
when they reproove such and such things out of a spiritual jealousy and fear
they corrupt their hearts, they are to be heard: how much more when they come
in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power? 1 Cor. 2.4.
And yet how full is the church and ever has been of such Vitilitigatores as
contend with the best ministers, quarrel at Gods word and take up arms against
it? snuffing at it Mal. 1.13 chatting at it Romans 9.19.20 casting reproaches
upon it Jer. 20.8.9. enviously swelling at it Act. 13.45. The more you touch
these toads, the more they swell: the more you meddle with these serpents the
more they gather poison to spet at you: Go about to cool them with fair
words, you shall but add to their heat: as the smiths forge fries when cold
water is cast upon it: and as hot water, if stirred, casts up the more fume.
Plin. Elia^.
Vultures unguento irritantur and scaraboni rosa Vultures cannot endure sweet
odours. Tigers, if they hear the sound of a drum will rage and tear
themselve- Ahab cannot abide Micaiah, nor Herod John Baptist. The people
contested with Jeremy and cursed him Chap. 15.10. though he were Concionator
admirabilis, Rhet. Eclesiast. cap. vlt.
as Keckerman has it, an admirable Preacher; yet they sought his life, saying,
Prophecy not in the name of the Lord that thou dye not by our hands Chap.
11.25. Jer. 44.16. Bradford.
yea they told him flat and plain, The word which thou have spoken unto us in
the name of the Lord we will not hear. O lewd losels, (as that martyr in like
case exclaimed) O faithless hard hearts, O Jesabels guests, rockt and laid
asleep in her bed. O sorrowlesse sinners and shameless harlots etc. Ministers
are lights, offensive to sore eyes; the salt of the earth which is bitter to
wounds etc. Among the Athenians, if the Comedians (which were their teachers,
such as they had) pleased not the people, they were overwhelmed with stones.
Once was I stoned says Paul. 2 Cor. 11.
and Jeremy is said to have met with the like death from his flagitious
countrymen in Egypt, amongst whom he was ever a man of strife, and his service
was (in that behalf) like that of Manlius Torqu^tus among the Romans, who gave
it over saying, Neither can I bear their manners, nor they my government. See
Chap. 20.9.

Verse 5. Therefore shall thou fall] how could they do otherwise that were a
nation so incorrigibly flagitious, so unthankful for mercies, so impatient of
remedies, so incapable of repentance, so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so
lawlesly wicked?

therefore shall thou fall in the day] vivens vidensque peribis thou shall
stumble at noon day, because there is no knowledge of God in the land: but thou
have loved darkness rather then light, therefore shall thou have enough of it:
thy feet shall stumble upon the dark mountains Jer. 13.16. yea thou shall
stumble and fall and never rise again, which is threatened expressly to these
swearers Am. 8.14 and implied in the Hebrew word here used. Such was Elies fall
off his stool, and Hamans fall before Mordecai the Jew Esth. 6.13. Impenitent
persons are brats of fathomlesse perdition, they are ripe for ruin, shall fall
into remediless misery, and (though never so insolent and angry against those
that deal plainly and faithfully with them as in the former verse, yet) they
shall never want an Hosea to tell them so to their teeth: that those that will
not bend may break, that if they will needs fall they may fall with open eyes,
and not have cause to say that they were not forewarned. And this shall be
done to day (...) that is, very shortly, in this present age (so some interpret
it ( aut certe clarissima luce, says Mercer, or else in the open light, and in
the view of all men, not in huggermugger. Tremellius thinks it is as much as
rebus adhuc integris subito opprimentur, Thou shall be suddenly surprised when
thou art in thy flourish, and fear no changes. What can be more fair and
flourishing then the field a day before harvest? then the vineyard a day before
the vintage? certissime citissimeque corrues. Every wicked man may apply it:
wherefore also it is delivered in the second person singular, Thou even thou:
to thee be it spoken.

and the Prophet also shall fall with thee in the night] The Chaldee has it,
as in the night, if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no
light in him, John 11.10. The false Prophet cannot lay his hand upon his breast
and say as dying Oecolampadius did. Melch. Adam.
Hic sat lucis Here Is store of light. Such are woefully benighted shall be
utterly darkened Zech. 11.17. yet more may look to be, for their right eye
(being blind leaders of the blind) yea the night shall be upon them and it
shall be dark unto them: the sun shall go down over their heads etc. Mic. 3.6.
and when they fall together with those seduced souls into the ditch of
destruction, themselves shall fall undermost Mat. 15.17. and receive the deeper
damnation Mat. 23.14. If others shall be damned, they must look to be double
damned, as Dives feared to be, if ever his brethren (by his example) came to
that place of torment. Mercers note here is very good Nocte casuros dicit etc.
He says they shall fall in the night as signifying by an allegory, that when
calamity shall lay hold upon these false Prophets, they shall also be pricked
in their consciences, which shall tell them that ventris causa for their
bellyes sake, and other base respects, they have brought upon the seduced
people so great mischiefs. This shall be as a dagger at their hearts: and shall
fill their consciences with horror and distress.

and I will destroy thy mother] i. e. the whole synagogue, yea the whole Church
and state, the University of the Israelites: so that their nation and name
should perish together. Is it not so with the ten tribes? who can tell at this
day where to find them or whence to expect them? whether from China, as some
think and allege Isay. 49.12. Or from Tartary, as others who say that Tartar,
( alias Tatari or Totari) comes from (...) Tothar a Residue or remnant. Breerw.
Enquir. page 94.
This is no other then a vain and capricious fancy says learned Brierwood
etc. Is it not altogether unlikely that the Lord in this threat might allude to
that law Deuteronomy. 22.6. Thou shall not take the damme (Heb. the mother) with the
young: But I that am above law, says God, will cut off dam and young together
in the nest, I will utterly cut off the whole nation This was fulfilled 2 King.
17. and our Prophet lived to see it, to his great heart-break. Oh that we could
be warned etc. Let holy mother church of Rome (as they call her) look to it,
with her doctrine of Infallibility. These Israelites gloried as much of their
Mother, (...) Rev. 17.
and thought (as Dionysius did of his kingdom) that the Church had been tied
to their nation with chains of Adamant: but their mother is here threatened to
be cut off: and of the sea of Rome it is long since foretold, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen etc. It is a queston among Divines whether the Church can
fail? It is answered, that the Catholic invisible Church cannot: but any
particular and visible Church may, as this of Israel; and that of Rome, which
has long since cast off Christ, and the public exercise of true religion: and
is become ex aurea, argentea, ex argentea ferrea, ex ferrea terrea: superest
jam ut in stercus abeat said one of her own sons an dugusline friar Anno. Ren.
de vit. Pontif.
1414. and many others of their own writers say the same necessario potius quam
libenter, as wrested from them by the truth, rather then of any itching humor
to disgrace their mother by uncovering her nakedness.

Verse 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge] my people (there is the
wonder of it) of whom it was wont to be said by the heathen, surely this great
nation is a wise and understanding people: and well it might: for what nation
ever had God so nigh unto them etc. and statutes and judgments so righteous
etc. Deuteronomy. 4.6.7.8. what nation ever had Prophets, and Priests as they had, to
teach Jacob his statutes and Israel his law Deuteronomy. 33.10. all means of knowledge
they had that might be; so that God might say to them as once Abijam did to
Jeroboam and all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Hab. 2.14.
Ought you not to have known this? should ye not all know the Lord from the
least to the greatest? should not your land be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea? Does not wisdom cry in your streets? and
knowledge (in the abundance of means) bow down to you as trees do that are
laden with fruit, so that a child may gather them? How is it then that you (my
people) are yet so hard and blockish, as rude and ignorant of me and my will,
of your selves and your duties, as the blind Ethnickes? For some of you have
not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame. Yea who is blind but my
servant: or deaf as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is
perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? Esaias 42.19.
I speak it with grief and stomach, and therefore I so often speak it. Surely to
whomsoever much is given, much is required; and to whom men have committed
much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48. 2 Cor. 6.1.
It is a grievous thing to receive the grace of God in vain: and when for the
time men might have been Teachers, to have need to be taught the very first
principles of the Oracles of God. Heb. 5.
For if God will pour out his wrath upon the heathen that know him not, Ier.
10.25. Acts 14.
who yet were left in the dark to grope after him, as they could: And if the
poor Philosophers (who had but the rush-candle of Natures dim light to work by)
were yet delivered up to a reprobate sense, because they glorified God no
better, Romans 1. Oh the bloody wails that he will make upon the backs of his
non-proficients, sots and dullards in his school! Ingentia beneficia flagitia
supplicia.

Are destroyed,] Or, silenced, as Matthew. 22.12. The Chaldee renders it
obbrutuerunt, they are besotted, and so fitted for destruction: for Deus quem
destruit dementat. Ignorance is the mother not of devotion, (as Papists say)
but of destruction: and ignorant persons shall be silent in darkness, as holy
Hanna has it: they shall lie down in sorrow, as the Prophet Esaias: And although
they always wander and err in heart, as not knowing Gods ways, Psalm.
95.10.11. yet they cannot go so far wide, as to miss of hell; where they are
sure to suffer both pain of loss, and pain of sense: for they shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, in a flame of fire (there is pain of
sense) from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power (there is
pain of loss) 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9. Lo here the portion of all ignorant persons:
and withal take notice of an usual and equal proceeding of Gods impartial
justice in punishing such. He delights to punish sin in kind, to pay wicked
persons in their own coin, to overshoot them in their own bow, to answer them
in their own language, as he once did those bold Babel-builders, Genesis 11. Go
to, say they: Go to, says He: Let us build up to heaven, say they: Lets go
down, and see that building, says He: Let us make us a name, say they: Let us
confound their language, that they may not so much as know their own names,
says He: Lest we be scattered, say they: Let us scatter them abroad the world,
says He. Thus God worded it with them, and confuted their folly from point to
point. And the like he will do with ignorant people at that great day. Depart
from us, say they now to God, Job 21.14. Depart from me ye cursed, will He then
say to them. We desire not the knowledge of thy ways, say they, ibid.
therefore I have sworn in my wrath, that you shall never enter into my rest,
says He. Ye have loved darkness better then light, ye shall therefore have
your belly-full of it in the bottom of hell: God loves to retaliate, as we may
see here, and go no further: Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also
reject thee: seeing thou have forgot the Law of thy God, I will also (to cry
quittance with thee) forget thy children. Thus by giving ignorant persons their
own, he will so silence them, and even button up their mouths, that they shall
stand speechless; as being self-condemned.

For lack of knowledge,] Propter non scientiam, for mere nescience, for such an
ignorance as is privative only, and of pure negation, which does somewhat
excuse a tanto, though not a toto: as in that servant that knew not his masters
will, yet did commit things worthy of stripes, and had a few, Luke 12.48. But
Isreal's ignorance was more then all this, and a great deal worse. For did not
Israel know? Romans 10.19. and have they not heard? yes verily: ( verse 18.) No
people under heaven like them for that, Psalm. 147.19. But they rejected
knowledge, and affected ignorance: they hated the light, and loved darkness
better. This was the condemnation, the mischief of it, says our Savior; (...).
who (besides this wilful ignorance, that mother of mischief, and main support
of Satan's kingdom) laid down his life for the nesciencies, the not-knowings of
his people, Heb. 9.7. and prayed for his persecutors at his death, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do.

Because thou have rejected knowledge,] And that out of an utter hatred of it,
(as the Greek word made of the Hebrew signifies) out of deep disdain, (...).
as of a thing below thee, and vile in thine eyes, not worthy of thy pains, or
pursuit. Wisdom is the principal thing, (says Solomon, and he means that
wisdom that has the fear of God for its foundation) therefore get wisdom. It
is here called hadagnath, Prove. 4.5.
that knowledge, by an excellency, and with an accent, in opposition to that
science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. that knowledge that puffs up, 1 Cor.
8.2. as it did Joseph Scaliger, (that gulf of learning) for whom it had been
happy, that he had been ignorant but of this one thing, that he knew so much.
It is the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness (as the Apostle
describes it, Tit. 1.1.) that perfects the best part of a man, that
confirms, setleth, guides, discerns, differenceth him from others, who are
no better then bruits (though wise in their own generation, as are the Fox,
Serpent, etc.) and makes his face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. as St. Stevens did,
who was taught of God, and mighty in the Scriptures. This holy knowledge was
highly prized by Agur, Prove. 30.2. but slighted by those two slubbering Priests
the sons of Eli, sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. they
knew him apprehensively, but not affectively: they professed that they knew
God, but in their works they denied him, being abominable, and disobedient, and
to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. He that says, I know him, (says S.
John, 1 Epist. 2.4.) and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. Many of these Jeroboams Priests were ignorant Asses; like
that Bishop of Dunkelden in Scotland, who boasted, yea thanked God, that he
never knew what the old and new Testament was; and that he would care to know
nothing but his Portuise, Act. and Mon. fol. 1153.
and his Pontifical: Or that Idol-Pastour in Germany, who being asked by the
Visitours, whether he taught his people the Decalogue? answered, that he had
not the Book so called. Joh. Manl. loc. com.
Others of them, that knew more of Gods mind, yet neither cared to practice
it, nor to teach transgressors, Gods ways, that sinners might be converted
unto him. Psalm. 51.13.


I will also reject thee,] And that with a witness; with an unwonted and
extraordinary rejection, as the Hebrew word, Vecimaseka, (not found elsewhere
in the same form) seems to import: God will kick such Ignoramusses out of
the Priesthood, Tremel. in locum.
cast them out of the hearts of his people, throw them to the dunghill, as
unsavory salt; yea so reject them, as never to be received again, Ezekiel. 44.13.
God will shake them out from his house, and from his labor, Neh. 5.13. (as the
Tirshata did those Apostate Priests, Ezra 2.63.) and lay them by, as broken
vessels, of which there is no further use: taking from them even that which
they seemed to have, Luke 8.18. and blasting their gifts. See Zech. 11. ult.
with the Note.

Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God,] i. e. All that holy learning,
which thou, being a Priest, ought to have and to hold in firm and fresh
remembrance, for the good of the poor people, which, by thy default, is cut off
for lack of knowledge, even the knowledge of salvation by the remission of
their sins, which thou should have given them, Luke 1.77. not by infusion,
but by instruction, which is the Priests proper office. But thou (alas) have
forgotten that little of my Law, that thou once had attained unto; and art
grown as very a dolt and ^otard, as Theodorus Gaza (once a great scholar, but)
in his dotage so ignorant, that he knew not his letters, he could not read. Nay
thou art not only a silly Ass, but a slowbelly: all thy care is for fat
sacrifices and benefices, thy wits are in thy belly, and thy guts in thy brain:
hence thy forgetfulness of my Law, and of my peoples welfare. The Arabic
Translation has it thus, Inasmuch as thou have loved this, and the
consolation, therefore I will reject and forget the^, etc. Demas forsook Paul,
and embraced this present world; yea he became afterward a Priest in an Idol
Temple at Thessalonica, as Dorotheus testifies. The Vulgar Latin Translation
renders this Text in the Feminine gender, quia obli^a est against all Grammar
and good reason: for the Lord here, speaks to the Priest, and chiefly to the
chief Priest, qui certe foemina non erat, says Polanus, who sure was no woman:
Unless the old interpreter, (like another Balaams-asse) would have this to
have been spoken against the Sea of Rome, wherein Pope Joan sometime sat, Anno
Dom. 854. Sure it is, that the Arch-priests of Rome are so delighted in the
feminine gender, that they had rather attribute the breaking of the serpents
head to a woman, the Virgin Mary, then to the Man Christ Jesus: for in their
last Edition of the Latin Bible, they print, Genesis 3.15. Ipsa conteret tibi
caput, She shall bruise thine head, etc. Thus Polanus.

I also will forget thy children,] Thy spiritual children, say some, even that
whole people who saluted their Priests (as the Papists do their Padres) by the
name of Father and observed their institutes. But they do better that
understand the text of their natural children, whom God here threateneth to
forget, that is, to put them by the Priests office, as he threatened Eli. 1 Samuel
2.30. and thrust out Abiathar 1 King. 2.27. four-score years after. It is a
dreadful thing to be forgotten of God. We take it ill to be forgotten of a
friend and to be as a dead man out of mind, Psalm. 31.12. O take heed that God
forget not us and our children: that he cast not off the care and keeping of
us. He is so liberal a Lord and does so little forget our labor of love and
patience of hope as that he provideth for the posterity of his people, Psalm.
69.36. The seed also of the servants shall inherit it: and they that love his
Name shall dwell therein. Who then would not ^hire himself to such a master:
who would not remember Gods Law and teach it others, if but for his poor
childrens sake who else will rue for it?

Verse. 7. As they were increased] sc. in number, wealth and honor. Their
prosperity undid them, they flourished at this time in Court and Country, they
waxed fat and kicked. The Priests are here accused of detestable ingratitude,
and of unsufferable pride and insolency.

As they were multiplied or magnified, they have sinned against me] that is,
they have abused my gifts to my great dishonor. Like fed hawks, they have
forgot their master. Nay, like young mules, which when they have sucked, turn up
their heels and kick their dam: so did these haughty and haunty Priests. Psalm.
17.10. Psalm. 119.70.
Their hearts were fat as grease, they were enclosed in their own fat, but they
delighted not in Gods Law. Cum ipsis opibus lascivire coepit Ecclesia. says
Platina. The Church began to be rich and wanton at once, rich and riotous. They
had golden chalices but wooden Priests, Repugnante contra teipsum felicitate
tua, as Salvian says to the Church in his time: thy prosperity is thy bane.
What would he have said if he had seen the Pope in his Princely State,
thundering from his Capitol, and heard their big-swoln titles of Padre
benedicto, Padre Angelo, Archangelo, Cherubino Seraphino etc. Spec. Europ.
Ammianus Marcellinus a heathen historian inveiged against the Bishops of Rome,
even in those purer times, for their pride and luxury. Odi fastum illius
ecclesiae says Basil, I hate the haughtiness of that Western Church. It
caused the lamentable separation of the Greek Church from the Latin: the other
four Patriarchs (not without the like pride and stomach) dividing themselves
from the Bishop of Rome, and at their parting using these or the like words.
Thy greatness we know, thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, thy encroaching
we can no longer abide: live to thy self. And yet if they could have held them
there, and shunned those evils which they blamed in others (walking humbly with
God, and committing themselves to him in well-doing) they might have flourished
to this day. But wrangling away the truth, and contracting rust with long ease
and prosperity, God was forced to scour off that their rust with bloody War by
the Turks. Of whom these Churches being in fear and danger, fled to carnal
combinations: sent and subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome that they
might have his help. But all in vain: for shortly after, they were destroyed,
and lost all. God covered them with confusion, and turned their glory into
shame. So he has done the Roman glory in part, and will do more every day.
Parei Medull^


Roma diu titubans varijs erroribus acta.
Corruet: et mundi desinet iste caput.
God will cast dirt in the faces of proud prelates, Isa. 23.9.
be will stain the pride of all glory cast upon them with ignominy, reproach
Prove. 18.3. crush their crown with a woe, Esaias 28.1. change their glory (their
dignity and greatness wherein they gloried) into shame, not without much
bitterness in the change, as the Hebrew word here used seems to import.
Miserum enim est, fuisse felicem. (...)


Verse. 8. They eat up the sin of my people] that is, the sin offerings, as
Exodus 29, 14. This they might lawfully do, Levit. 6. and 10.17. But they were
greedy dogs; and looked every one to his gain from his quarter, Esaias 5.6.11.
They winked at the peoples sins, and cared not what evils they fell into, so
that they would bring in store of fat and good expiatory sacrifices, which made
for the Priests advantage. They ate that on earth which they were to digest in
hell: they fed upon such diet as bred the the worm of conscience, that never
dies. Just so the Papists do at this day: they teach the people, though they
sin, yet by giving money for so many Masses to be mumbled over, by a greasy
Priest, or by so many indulgences and Dirges purchased of the Popes
pardon-mongers, they shall be delivered, etiamsi, per impossible, matrem Dei
vitiassent. I tremble to English it. Tecelius told them so in Germany; and got
huge masses of money for the Popes coffers. The common sort of Papists (for want
of better teaching) will say, When we have sinned we must confess: and when we
have confessed, Specul. Europ. Psalm. 14.
we must sin again, that we may confess again; and make work for new
indulgences and Jubilees. But have these workers of iniquity no knowledge, that
eat up Gods people as they eat bread? that drink up the blood of souls, much
more worth ^hen the lives, that David's men had jeoparded to procure him the
water of the well of Bethlehem, which therefore he durst not drink of? This
surely is that filthy lucre Ministers should be free from 1 Pet. (...).
5.2. Let all non-residents look to it, that carry only forcipes et mulctrum
those instruments of a foolish shepherd Zech. 11.15. (See the Note there)
feeding themselves but starving the flock: an heavy account will they one day
make to the Arch-shepheard, of this their sacrilegious rapacity.

and they set their hearts on their iniquity.] Heb. they lift up their souls:
that is, they not only prick up their ears, as Danaeus expounds it to listen
after sins and sin offerings, but they greedily desire and earnestly look after
such emoluments, such belly timber: being gulae mancipia slaves to their guts,
and wholly given up to gormandise. See the same expression: and in this sense
Jer. 12.27. Deuteronomy. 24.15. Ezekiel. 24.25. and compare the practice of Popish
Priests, who make infinite gain of every thing almost, as their ringing of
Saints-bels, places of burial, selling of licenses for marriage and meats,
selling of corpses and Sepulchers. All things are saleable and soluble at Rome:
and the savor of gain sweet, though it come out of a stinking stews, or
Jews counting house. The Priests had a trick by wires to make their Images
here wag their chaps a pace, if some good gift were presented: as if otherwise,
Act. and Mon.
to hang the lip in token of discontent.

Verse 9. And there shall be like people like priest] i. e. they shall share
alike in punishment, as they have done in sin: neither shall their priesthood
protect them, any more then it did Elies two sons, whose white Ephod covered
foul sins. A wicked Priest is the worst creature upon earth. Who are devils
but they that were once angels of light? and who shall have their portion with
the devil and his angels, but those dehonestamenta cleri male monetae minstri,
bad-liv'd ministers: It was grown to a proverb in times of Popery, that the
pavement of hell was pitched with soldiers helmets and shavelings-crowns.
Letters also were framed and published as sent from hell: wherein the devil
gave the Popish clergy no small thanks, for so many millions of souls as by
them were daily sent down to him. Matthew. Paris. ad Ann. 1072.
The Priests might happily hope to be privileged and provided for in a common
calamity, for their office-sake; As Chrysostom says that Aaron (though in the
same fault with Miriam Numb. 12.1: yet) was not smitten with leprosy as she,
for the honor of the Priesthood, (...). Chrysostom.
lest such a foul disease on his person should redound to the disgrace of his
office. But I rather think he escaped by his true and timely repentance;
whereby he disarmed Gods indignation, and redeemed his own sorrow and shame.
For God is an impartial judge: neither is there with him respect of persons:
Priest and people shall all be carried captive one with another (the priests
for the people, according to that of Esaias, I am a man of poullted lips: for
why? I live among a people of polluted lips and have learned their language:
Esaias 6.
and especially the people for the priests Jer. 23.10.14.15. from the prophets
there goes profaneness quite through the land) so they shall fare the worse
one for another: they shall all be involved in the same punishment. Only it
shall be more grievous to the priest, by how much higher thoughts he had of
himself: looking on the people as his underlings, as they did Joh. 7.49.

and I will punish them for their wayes] Heb. visit them So Exodus 32.34. In the
day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them. God has his
visitation-dayes wherein to visit those visitours the priests; and his articles
will be as strict and as critical (says one) as ever was the inquisition of
Spain, or Lambeth. It was therefore good counsel that a Martyr gave his wife in
a letter, Among all other prisoners visit your own soul, and set all to rights
there: for else, what will you do when God rises up? and when he visits,
what will you answer him? Job. 31.14^
And that which Tertullian gave Scapula a Pagan persecutor; Si nobis non
parcis, tibi parce: si non tibi, Carthagini. God will surely make inquisition
for our blood: therefore if thou will not spare us, yet spare thy self: if not
thy self, yet spare thy country, which must be responsible when God comes to
visit.

and reward them for their deed] Heb. I will make to return your doings: Hence
this is well observed by a good interpreter; Sin passes away in the act of it
with much sweetness: but God will make it return back again in the guilt of
it, with much bitterness.

Verse 10. For they shall eat and not have enough] Only they shall be filled
with their own ways Prove. 14.14. but that is but to feed upon the wind with
Ephraim Hos. 12.1. which breeds nothing but troublesome belching, or a
doglike appetite (as they call it) that cannot be satisfied. (...) appetitus
caninus.
These greedy dogs the Priests that did eat up the sins of Gods people and
thought to have full gorged themselves therewith, they met with that sore
plague of unsatisfiablenesse for the present (a man may as soon fill a chest
with wind as a soul with wealth; See Eccles. 5.10. Non plus satiatur cor auro,
quam corpus cura. Ang.
with the note) and for the future they coveted an evil covetousness to
themselves, for they gat Gods curse along with their evil gotten goods which
will bring them to a morsel of bread: they have not only sucked in the air,
but pestilentiall air, that not only not fills them, but kills them too. See
the note on Hagg. 1.6.

they shall commit whordome and shall not increase] The Chaldee renders it,
They shall take wives, but shall not beget sons. Aristot.
Sol and homo generant hominem says the Philosopher: but unless God the first
agent concur, that cannot be neither: Lo, Children are an heritage of the
Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm. 1^7.3,
says David to his son Solomon, who found it true by experience: for by all
his wives and concubines (no less then a thousand) he had but one son that we
read of and he was none of the wisest: nothing like Edward the sixth whom alone
Henry the eight left (with his two sisters) to succeed him: though he had so
many wives and concubines. Wantonness is a sin commonly punished with want of
posterity: especially when it is accompanied with obstinacy in evil courses,
as in Ahab; who, to cross Gods threat of rooting out him and his posterity,
took many wives; 2 King. 10.1.
and so bestir'd him, that he begat of them seventy sons, but with evil
success: for they were all cut off in one day. Wicked men must not think to
carry it against God: and to have their wills al disputo di Dio, as that
profane Pope said; and as that graceless Ahaziah who sent a third captain,
after that the former two had been consumed with fire; as if he would
despitfully spit in the face of heaven, and wrestle a fall with the almighty.
Let no man expect to prosper in unlawful practices, to increase by whoredom,
as these profane priests sought to do, that they might be full of children (any
how) and leave the rest of their substance to their babes Psalm. 17.14. But
fertility is not from the means (right or wrong) but from the Author (many a
poor man has a house-full of children by one wife: whilst Solomon has but
one son by many house-fuls of wives) and Job could tell that whoredom is a
fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all his increase Chap.
31.12.

because they have left off to take heed to the Lord] God is not bound to
render a reason of his proceedings, yet does it often as here, that he may be
justified, and every mouth stopped. Their Apostasy is here showed to be the
cause of their calamity. Time was when they took some heed to God and his
ways: they kept close to him, and observed his commandments to do them, (as
the word here imports) but now they had left off to be wise, and to do good,
( Psalm. 36.3.) until their iniquity was found to be hateful, and themselves
altogether filthy Psalm. 53.3. wicked doers against the covenant Dan, 11.30.32.
Apostates cannot choose unto themselves a worse condition 2 Pet. 2.20.22. Mat.
12.43.45. Job. 9.4.
let them look to it. Has ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered?
even of late my people is risen up against me as an enemy Mic. 2.8. but what
will they do in the end thereof?

Verse 11. Whoredom and wine and new wine have taken away the heart] i. e.
have robbed my people of themselves, and laid a beast in their room. Any lust
allowed and wallowed in will eat out the heart of grace; and at length, all
grace out of the heart. Hence temporizers grow in time so saplesse, heatelesse
and heartlesse to any good: some unmortified lust or other there is, that as a
worm, lies grubbing at the root, and makes all to wither: that, like a drone
in a hive, proves a great waster: that, as a moth in fine cloth, consumes all:
or, as the light of the Sun, puts out the light of the fire: so here. But above
all others, sensual sins and fleshly lusts (such as are here instanced
whoredom and drunkenness) do war against the soul 1 Pet. 2.11. do take away
the heart: they besot and infatuate a man, they rob him of his reason, and
carry away his affections etc. Grace is seated in the power of nature. Now
these carnal sins disable nature: and so set it in a greater distance from
grace. They make men, that formerly seemed to give light as a candle, to become
as a snuff in a socket, drowned in the tallow: or as a quagmire which swallows
up the seed sown upon it, and yields no increase. Who are void of the spirit
but such as are sensual? Jude. 18.19. And who are they that say unto God,
depart from us, but those that dance to the timbrel and harp etc. Job. 21.11.
They saw God and did eat and drink Exodus 24.11. that is, say some, though they
had seen God, yet they curned again to sensual pleasures: as if it had
reference to that eating, and drinking, and rising up to play, upon the
dedication of their calf, Lib. de mirabil. auscult.
which was presently after. Aristotle writes of a parcel of ground in Sicily
that sends forth such a strong smell of fragrant flowers to all the fields
and grounds there abouts, that no hound can hunt there; the sent is so
confounded with the sweet smell of the flowers. Let us see to it that the
pleasures of sin take not away all sent (and sense too) of heavenly delights:
that the flesh, as a Siren, befoole not wisdoms guests, and get them away from
her Prove. 9.16. as Elian tells of a whore that boasted, that she could easily
get all So^rates his Scholars from him, but he could not recover one again
from her. Indeed none that go unto her return again, says Solomon Prove. 2.19.
for she gets their hearts from them: as David found, and Solomon complained.
David was never his own worthy again, after he had moyled himself with that
beastly sin. And Solomon when he gave himself to wine and women (though his
mother had sufficiently warned him Prove. 31.3.4.) he quickly took hold of folly
Eccles. 2.3. his sensualities drew out his spirits and dissolved him, and
brought him to so low an ebb in grace, that many question his salvation.
Bellarmine reckons him among reprobates: but I like not his judgment. Let
ministers of all men (this is spoken of the Priests chiefly, as some think) see
to it that they fly fleshly lusts: that they exhort the younger women with
ch^s^^ty as St. Paul bids Timothy: and drink, (if any, yet but) a little wine
for their bea^ths sake: remembering that the sins of Teachers are teachers of
sins; and that their evil practices fly far upon those two dangerous wings of
Example and Scandal. Ministers should be no wine-bibbers or Alestakes 1 Timothy
3.3. ne magis solliciti de mero qu^m de vero, magis ament mundi delicias quam
Christi divitias, lest being lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, that
should befall them that Solomon foretells Prove. 23.33. thine eyes shall
behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. Venture
aestuans mero spumat in libidinem. Hieron. Aristot. Ovid. 2. deremed. Amor.
A belly filled with wine foameth out filthiness says Hierom. Wine is the
milk of Venus says Another. Vina parant animos Veneri says a third. Whoredom
is usually ushered in by drunkenness: Hence they stand so close together in
this text.

Verse 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks] that is, at their Images
which are here called stocks in contempt, as Hezekiah called the brazen serpent
(when it was idolized by the people) Nehushtan, or a piece of brass: and as
Julius Palmer martyr called the Rood in Paul's a Jackanapes, Act. and mon.
and as the poet, in contempt of his own God Priapus, brings him in saying Olim
truncus eram ficulnus, Horat
inutile lignum.

So the Prophet cries shame upon the house of Israel, See that graphicall
description of their madness Esaias. 44.11. etc. Rivet in loc.
for saying to a stock, thou art my father: and to a stone thou have brought me
forth, Jer. 2.27. But to such senseless practices men fall many times, when
they grow sensual See 2 These. 2.10. Rev. 17.5. Spiritull whoredom, and bodily
go usually together. Rivet tells us here of a Nobleman that went out of the
Church from hearing mass into the very next house where he kept a whore; and
said to the bystanders a lupanari ad missam unum tantum esse passum, that
there is but one step from the mass to a whore-house.

and their staff] that is, says Kimchi, their false-prophets upon whom they
lean, and by whom they are led, as a blind man by his staff. But I rather
think it is meant of Rabdomancy a kind of odd way of divining by rods and
staves, as Nebuchadnezzar is brought in doing Ezekiel. 21.22. and was common in
those Eastern parts: Or else hereby are meant the Southsayers and Magicians
rods as Exodus 7.12. Heb. 11.21. it is said that Jacob worshipped leaning upon
the top of his staff, and thereby lifting up his body to do reverence to God,
where the Vulgar text, omitting the prepsition, has committed a manifest
error, in saying that Jacob worshipped the top of his rod or staff; as if
there had been some picture there engraven: the Hebrew is toward the
beds-head. And it is certain that Jacob worshipped none but God: and bowed
himself either toward the beds-head, or leaning upon his staff, to testify
his humility, faith and hope, which adoration how far it was from the
worshipping of Images (which the papists urge from this place) who sees not?

for the spirit of whoredoms has caused them to erre] That unclean spirit
Zech. 13.2. the devil (who is (...) as Synesius says, a delighter in idols)
drives them sata^ico impetu, to commit whoredom both spiritual and corporal
with strength of affection. Now if that spirit of error 1 Jon. 4.6. and of
giddiness Esa. 19.14. cause men to err, and carry them with a vehement
Impetus to idol-worship (which indeed is devil-worship) what wonder? men that
are that way bent know not of what spirit they are: little think that they are
acted and agitated by the devil. O pray with David Psalm. 143.10. that that
good spirit of God may lead us into all truth and holiness.

and they are gone a whoring from under their God] i. e. from under the yoke of
his obedience: they are gone out of his precincts, and therefore also out of
his protection: as a whore that forsakes her husband, and is therefore
worthily cast off.

Verse 13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon
the hills etc.] as nearer to heaven; and in an apish imitation of the
Patriarchs, who, before the Tabernacle was set up, sacrificed in high places
(as Abraham on mount Moriah etc.) that their bodies being mounted aloft, they
might the better lift up their hearts and eyes to heaven, saying as it were to
all worldly cares and cogitations as Abraham did to his servants whom he left
at the foot of the hill, Genesis 22.5.
Abide you here with the Ass. Hierom upon this place has this Note: Israel
says he, loves high places, for they have forsaken the high God: and they
love the shadow, having left the substance. But what could be more absurd then
to think as they did, that God who is omnipresent, was nearer to them on hills
and high places, and further off them in vallyes. See Esaias 57.7. Ezekiel. 6.13.
This they had partly also learned of the heathens; from whom nevertheless God
had shut them up as it were in an Island (so their land is called) that having
little commerce with them, Esaias, 20.6.
they might not learn their manners. But our nature is very catching this way:
and does as easily draw and suck Idolatry to it, as the loadstone does iron, or
Turpentine fire.

under oaks, and Poplars, and Elmes, because the shadow thereof is good] So
they proceed from one evil to another; for sin is infinite and when a man is
fallen down one round of Hels ladder, he knows not where he shall stop, or how
he shall step back. These Idolaters as they had their high places in imitation
of the Patriarks; so their groves of shady trees consecrated to their Idols; to
strike reverence into their hearts, as they conceited, and for the greater
solemnity. Sin comes commonly clothed with a show of reason Exodus 1.10. Come
let us deal wisely say they: yet every oppressor is a fool Prove. 28.16. It
will so bleare the understanding, that a man shall think he has reason to be
mad, and that there is some sense in sinning. (...)
But especially will worship has a show of wisdom Colos. 2. ult. or the
reason of wisdom, as the word there signifies, the very quintessence of it.
Hence the Papists write Rationals, whole volumes of reason for their rites and
ceremonies in Divine service, (the shadow is good, say these therefore, we get
under trees) And John Hunt, See Dr. Sheldons mark of the beast. sermon.
a blasphemous Papist, in his humble Appendix to King James, Chap. 6. was not
afraid to say, That the God of the Protestants, is the most uncivil and
evil-mannered God of all those, who have borne the name of Gods upon the earth:
yea worse then Pan, God of the Clowns, which can endure no ceremonies nor good
manners at all. O tongue, worthy to be pulled out, cut in gobbets, and driven
down the throat of this hideous blasphemer: for he could not but know the God
of the Protestants (as he scornfully terms him) to be the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. Did not Rabshakeh rail after this rate upon good Hezekiah,
for taking down the high places, and Altars of God (as he called them) which
yet God well approved of? 2 King. 18.22. Mr. Boroughs makes mention of a Lady
in Paris, who when she saw the bravery of a Procession to a Saint, she cried
out, Oh how fine is our religion beyond that of the Huguenots? They have a mean
and beggarly religion, but ours is full of solemnity and bravery, etc. The
Catholics in their Supplication to King James for a Toleration plead, that
their religion is (inter caetera) so pleasing to nature, and so suitable to
sense and reason, that it must therefore needs be the right. A proper Argument
surely: and not all out so convincing as that of Cenalis Bishop of Auranches,
who writing against the Christian Congregation at Paris, and basely slandering
their meetings, as if they were to maintain whoredom, Act. and Mon.
will in conclusion needfully prove (if he could) the Catholics to be the true
Church, because they had bells to call them together; but the Huguenots had
claps of Harquebuzes, or Pistolets, for that purpose, and

Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom,] Impune, they shall do it,
and for a punishment of your Idolatry: and in as much as you have prostituted
your souls (that is, my spouse) to the devil, your houses shall be whorehouses,
to your utter disgrace and heart-break. Certain it is, that where there is most
Idolatry, there is most adultery; as at Rome, which is nothing else but a great
brothel-house, and has fully made good that of the Poet; Roma quod inverso
delectaretur amore,
Nomen ab inverso nomine fecit Amor.


Thus God punished the idolatrous Ethnikes, by delivering them up, to passions
of dishonor, or vile affections; to Sodomitical practices, which did abase
them below those four-footed beasts which they adored, Romans 1.23, 24, etc. Some
put off all manhood, (...).
became dogs, worse then dogs, scalded in their own grease, verse 27. and this
is there called, a meet recompense, such as God here threatens. Mr. Levely (a
very learned Interpreter) thinks that when God says here, your daughters
shall commit whoredom, and your daughters in law (for so he renders it) shall
commit adultery, he means it not of voluntary whoredom, but of that which is
forced: according to that of Amos to Amaziah Chap. 7.17. Therefore thus says
the Lord, the wife shall be an harlot in the City: and they sons and
daughters shall f^ll by the sword, etc. that is, thy wife shall be ravished by
the enemy. Theodoret also is of the same judgment.

Verse 14. I will not punish your daughters, when they commit whoredom,] q. d.
I will not once foul my fingers with them, or be at pains to correct them: but
they shall take their swinge in sin, for me, etc. Origin in a certain Homily
quoting this Scripture, Hom. 8. in Exodus 20.
says, Vis indignantis Dei terribilem vocem audire, etc. Will you hear the
terrible voice of a provoked God? hear it here, I will not punish, etc. You
shall be without chastisement, for an argument that you are bastards and not
sons. Never was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her,
My fury, shall depart from thee, I will be quiet and no more angry, Ezekiel.
16.42. Feri Domine, seri, cried Luther, Strike Lord, strike, and spare not.

Far minora volo, ne graeviora feram. There is not a greater plague can
befall a man, then to prosper in sinful practices. Bernard calls it,
misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem, a killing courtesy, Ezekiel. 3.20. I
will lay a stumbling block before him: that is, says Vatablus, I will prosper
him in all things, and not by affliction restrain him from sin. Job surely
counts it for a great favor to sorry man, Job 7.17, 18.
that God accounts him worth melting, though it be every morning; and trying,
though it be every moment. And Jeremy calls for correction, as a thing that
he could not well be without, Correct me O Lord, etc.

For themselves are separated with whores,] Rivet.
God seems to speak this to others by change of person: Ac si puderet ipsum
cum putidis hircis verba facere, as if he were ashamed to speak any longer to
such stinking goats. Separates they were, but of the worst sort: they separated
themselves with harlots, they gat into by-corners, far from company (specially
of those that know them) that they might more freely act filthiness. Auson.
But what could the Heathen say, Turpe quid acturus, Te sine test time.
Conscience is a thousand witnesses: and men must not think long to lie hid: for
God will be a swift witness against the adulterers, Mal. 3.5. and, it may be,
bring them into all evil, in the midst of the Congregation and assembly,
Prove. 5.14. See the Notes on both places. Some render it, They beget bastards,
such as the Mule is, (which also has his name pered, ijpparedu.
from this root) Or they shall be unfruitful as the Mule. Wantonness is
commonly punished with want of children. (See the note above on verse 10) Those
children that they had took after them, it appears here: they were naught by
kind, as being an adulterous g^^eration, a seed of evildoers, a race of
rebels; and therefore it was no matter, how little they multiplied. Let those
that have children, and others under their charge, keep home as much as may be,
and not be separate from their families (with whores especially) lest their
daughters meanwhile commit whoredom, (counted but a trick of youth, a sin
that that slippery age may easily slip into, and not easily be descried, Pro.
30.19.) and their spouses commit adultery, by occasion of their lewd absence,
and to cry quittance with them at home. Let them also make Nebuchadnezzars law,
that none under their roof, say, or do ought against the God of heaven; Dan.
3.29.
and themselves be first in the practice of it, as so many living laws,
walking statutes; so may they hope to keep their houses chaste, and honest, and
provide for the credit and comfort both of themselves and of theirs.

And they sacrifice with harlots,] Heb. Holy-harlots, sacrificing-harlots, such
as Solomon speaks of, Prove. 7.14 and as those wicked women that lay with
Elies sons at the door of the Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 2.22. Or as King Edward the
fourth, his holy whore, as he used to call her, that came to him out of a
Nunnery, Speed.
when he list to send for her. His kinsman Lewis the eleventh of France,
(knowing his disposition) invited him to the French Court, promising him his
choice of Beauties there, and adding Adhibebimus tibi Cardinalem Burbonium,
Comin.
then shall Cardinal Burbon shrieve you, and absolve you of all your
misdoings, etc. It Is well enough known what foul work the Heathens made at
their sacra Eleusinia, Bacchanalia, Lupe c^lia priapeia (the same with the
sacrificing to Baal-Peor, as Hierom holds.) And to these this Text may seem to
refer; and this people too have separated themselves to that shame.

Therefore the people that does not understand, shall fall.] Heb. shall be
beaten, as some render it, shall be perplexed, and troubled, so as they know
not what to do, or how to help themselves, as Aben-ezra from the Arabic. The
Chaldee interprets it, collidetur, shall be dashed in pieces. Ignorance is much
instanced and threatened in this Chap. three or four several times at least.
Omnis peccant est ignorans.
Not because men sin only by ignorance, as the Platonists think: but 1. to
aggravate the hatefulness of this sin, which men use so to excuse and
extenuate. 2. to taunt and abase the rebellious nature of man, who now is set
in gross ignorance, and ready to pitch headlong into hell, as the just guerdon
of his aspiring and reaching after forbidden knowledge. 3. because ignorance
(affected especially) is the source of many sins, and a main support of Satan's
kingdom. See the Notes above on verses 1, 6, etc.

Verse 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend.] Lest
if God lose his glory among them too, he lose it altogether Judah was grown
almost as good as Israel, (in the days of that stigmatick Ahaz especially, 2 Chronicles. 28.) Aholibamah, as Aholibah, Ezekiel. 16. But let it not be so, says the
Prophet, since not to be warned by the harms of another, is a just both presage
and desert of ruin. Alterius igitur perditio tua sit cautio. See thou
another shipwrackt? look well to thine own tackling. God will take that from
Israel, that he will not from Judah; because these had many means and
privileges, that the other had not; as the Temple, Priests, Ordinances, etc.
Now, good-turnes aggravate unkindnesses; and men's offenses are increased by
their obligations. Judah was and would be therefore the worse, because they
ought to have been better. And God can better bear with aliants, then with his
own people, when they offend. The Philistims may cart the Ark, but if David do
it, woe be to Vzzah. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore, (whosoever escape) I will punish you for all iniquities, Amos 3.2.
The unkindnesse of your sins is more then all the rest: it grieves Gods Spirit,
and goes near his heart, etc.

Come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven,] Alias Bethel, the
house of God, so called by Jacob, who there had visions of God, and said, How
fearful is this place? It is even the house of God and gate of heaven. But now
it was become the hate of heaven, and gate to destruction, as being abused to
idolatry. Corruption optimi fit pessima. Bethel is become Beth-aven, the house
of iniquity and misery, of sin and of sorrow: for their sorrows shall be
multiplied that hasten after another God, Psalm. 16.4. The word there rendered
sorrows, signifies also idols, Psalm. 115.4. and 106.36. Gnatsahim.
because they that worship them, are sure of sorrows.

Come not therefore to Gilgal etc.] Gilgal was the key of Canaan, situate
between Jordan and Jericho, famous for sundry services there performed to God,
as were easy to instance; but now basely abused to Idol-worship. Hence this
charge (and the like in Amos chap. 5.5.) not to come near it; and the rather
because it was a border Town, Exodus 23.7. Prove.5.8. 1 Timothy 6.5.
and so more dangerous Keep thee far from an evil matter, says Moses, Come not
nigh the doors of the harlots house, says Solomon. From such stand off, or
keep aloof, says Paul. Shun them as the Seaman does sands and shelves, as the
same Apostles word imports, 1 These. 3.6. A man cannot touch such pitch, (...).
but he shall be defiled: nor live any while in Mauritania, but he shall be
discolored. Cum fueris Romae, etc. Let them look to it that so much affect to
see Italy, Rome, the Pope, the Mass, etc. But what do thou here Elias? may
God well say, as 1 King. 19.9. What protection have thou here, either from
infection of sin, or infliction of punishment? Says not the heavenly Oracle,
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. Mr. Ascham (schoolmaster to Queen
E^izabeth) was wont to thank God, that he was but nine days in Italy: wherein
he saw in that one City of Venice more liberty to sin, then in London he ever
heard of in nine years. And is it safe pressing into such pest-houses?
tampering with such temptations? Tertullian tells of a Christian woman, who
being at a play, was possessed of a devil. And when he was asked by those that
came to cast him out, how he durst possess one that was a Christian, he
answered, I found her in mine own place. Take heed therefore, ye come not where
the devil has to do. He that does so, and yet prays, Lead us not into
temptation, may as well thrust his finger into the fire, and then pray that it
may not be burnt.

Nor swear, The Lord lives:] i.e. Sweat not by God and Malcham, Zeph. 1.5.
make not a mixture of religions: Matthew. 6.23. 2 Cor. 6.15.
halt not between two opinions, think not to serve two masters. What agreement
has Christ with Belial, or the Temple of God with Idols? Cast away (says one
to a neuter passive, Nicodemus) either thy wings, or thy teeth: D. Hall Epist.
to W. L.
and loathing this Bat-like nature, be what thou art, either a bird, or a
beast. There were (belike) in Judah, that thought they could both frequent
places of Idol-worship, and serve Jehovah, swearing by his Name. God will have
none of that: if he be serve by men at all, he must be served truly; that
there be no halting, and totally, that there be no halving. To swear vere,
rite, just, as Ier. 4.1. is a piece of Gods service, and we may well reckon it
amongst our good-works. But to swear by Idols, or before Idols, made to
represent the true God (as those bugges at Dan and Bethel, etc.) or by the
creature, Matthew. 5.24. is utterly unlawful. It is a great dishonor to God;
and a great dishonor to our selves also: for we always swear by the greater,
Heb. 6.16.

Verse 16. (...)
For Israel slideth back, as a backsliding heifer,] Juvenca petulca, as an
unruly heifer, which both kicketh against the milk-pail, and wriggleth against
the yoke. (...).
As a mad Cow, so the Septuagint. Mr. Dearing told Queen Elizabeth in a Sermon,
that whereas once she wrote in Woodstock windows, Tanquam ovis, as a sheep to
the slaughter. Now she was tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untamed heifer: and
might well fear lest God would feed her as a lamb in a large place as here, and
feed her with his rod, as Mich. 7.14. The Chaldee renders, sicut bos qui
saginatur and recalcitrat, as an Ox that waxes fat and kicketh. But the Hebrew
word is feminine: and in all creatures, the female is observed to be more
headlong and headstrong.

Scilicet ante omnes furor est insignis equarum. Heifers also are more wild,
wanton, and untractable: Virg. Georg. 3.
noting the children of disobedience, those refractary rebels: that, as false
jades will not stand and pull, (as contrymen call it) set their shoulders to
the yoke, and their sides to the work, but give in and kick against the prick.

Now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place.] i. e. He will keep
them short, as an heifer kept in a sheep-pasture, where there is nothing for
her to bite on, it is so bare. A lamb can live where an heifer cannot: a lamb
can pick up the grass of the wilderness, and pick a living out of it. God
threatens these heifers, they shall have henceforth short commons. Thus
Gualther carries it. Mercer will have it thus: I will feed them as a lamb, i.
e. daintily and plentifully, that being the sooner fatted, they may be fitted
for the shambles. Other thus, and I think better, he shall feed them, that is,
punish them, (as Mich. 5.4, 6. and 7.14) as a lamb, one single succourlesse
lamb, that goes bleating up and down in the wide wast wilderness, having none
to tend it, or take care of it: it shall be all alone in a large place. How
much better and safer were it to be in Gods fold: where (though pinde, or pent
up in a narrower room, yet) Gods lambs are sure to be fed daily and daintily.
Whereas those that affect freedom from Gods service, and hold themselves at
best case when they have elbow-room enough to satisfy their lusts without
restraint or control, they shall be fed with Gos rod, Mich. 7. yea they shall
find that he has two rods. beauty and bonds, Zech. 11.7 the latter for those
that slight the former. Or if he feed them as a lamb in a large place, alone,
and at random, they will quickly become a prey to the Wolf, and soon have
enough of that wild liberty that they so much affected.

Verse 17. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone.] Ephraim, that is, the
ten revolted Tribes, who are called Ephraim in opposition to Judah. 1. Because
that Tribe was the greatest of the ten. 2. Jeroboam the ringleader of that
revolt, was of the Tribe. 3. They fell off at Shechem, which was in that Tribe,
and from thenceforth was joined, or agglutinated to idols.] as the fornicatour
is to his harlot, with whom he becomes one flesh: and from whom there is no
dissuading him. Some fetch the Metaphor from Enchanters; who by their conjuring
Art have society and fellowship with the devils; so had Ephraim with idols: and
like an enchanted person he could not stir from them, but stood fastened to
them as to a stock or stake. The Tyrians, when besieged by Alexander, fearing
the departure of their god Apollo from them, laid chains upon his statue, and
fastened him to his Temple. Ephraim was so fastened to his fray-buys (
terriculis, so Junius renders this Text) that there is no likelihood, of his
being sundred from them: he had taken fast hold of deceit, Ier. 8.5. and would
not loose his hold. Let him alone, therefore, says either God to the Prophet
(lay out no more words, lose no more labor upon him) or the Prophet to Judah;
let them even go, have nothing to do with them, though they be your brethren,
meddle not with them, let Christ alone to deal with them at his coming:
Maranatha, the Lord comes. Meanwhile, they lie under a dreadful spiritual
judgment, worse then all the plagues of Egypt: even a dead and dedolent
disposition, whereunto they are delivered. This is worse then to be delivered to
Satan: for so a man may be, and recover out of his snare by repentance, as the
incestuous Corinthian did: but when God shall say, Let such a man alone, let
him take his course, I have done with him, and let my Ministers trouble
themselves no more about him, there is thenceforth but an inch betwixt him and
hell, which even gapes for him, where he shall rue it among reprobates. Well he
may flourish a while, and feel no hurt; as Saul did not of many years after his
rejection: and as the Pharisees, after Christ had said of them, Let them alone,
they are blind leaders of the blind. Mat. 15.
But they shall pine and swelter away in their iniquities Lev. 26.39. which is
the last of those dismal plagues there threatened: they shall not be purged
till Gods wrath has rested upon them, Ezekiel. 24.13. so that now they may go and
serve every one his idols, since they have such a mind to it, Ezekiel. 20.39. and
since they have made a match with mischief, they may take their belly-full of
it. Oh let us fear, lest this should be any of our cases: that God should say
let him alone, he is resolved of his way, and I of mine: he will have his
swinge in sin, and I am bent to have my full blow at him. I am fully persuaded
(says a Reverend man now with God) that in these days of grace, the Lord is
much more quick and peremptory in rejecting men, then heretofore: the time is
shorter, neither will he wait so long as he used to do. See for ground of this
Heb. 2.3. God is often quick in the offer of his mercy: Go and preach the Gospel,
says Christ (Go and be quick: tell men what to trust to, that as fools, they
may not be semper victuri ever about to be better, but never begin to set
seriously to work) He that believes shall be saved: he that believes not
shall be damned: I shall not longer dally with him. Destruction comes and they
shall seek peace, and there shall be none. Mischief shall come upon mischief,
and rumor upon rumor: then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet: but the
law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the ancient etc. Ezekiel.
7.25.26. when men are even dropping into hell, and have an hell aforehand in
their consciences, then they will send hastily for the minister, as they did in
the sweating-sicknesse here, so long as the ferventnesse of the plague lasted:
Then the Ministers were sought for in every corner, you must come to my Lord,
you must come to my Lady, etc. But what if God have said of such a one, Let him
alone, as he reproved Samuel for mourning for Saul, and as he forbad Jeremy to
pray for the Jews, and his Apostles to take care for the Pharisees? Oh how
dreadful is that man's condition! and what can a Minister say more then what
the king of Israel said to the woman that complained to him of the scarcity of
Samaria If the Lord help thee not, 2 King. 6.27.
whence shall I help thee? out of the barne-floore, or out of the winepresse:
If any dram of comfort be applied to a wicked man, the truth of God is
falsified, and that Minister will be reckoned amongst the devils dirt-dawbers
and upholsters, Ezekiel. 13.18.
that dawb with untemper'd mortar and sow pillowes under men's elbowes: Let such
alone therefore, and let God alone to deal with them.

Verse 18. Their drink is sowre] That is, they are past grace, and it is now
past time a day to do them good: for thou see how the matter mends with them,
even as sour alemends in summer: and how they even stink above ground, as Psalm
14.2. Vina probantur odore, color, sapore etc. but their wine has neither
good color, smell, nor favor or taste; it is dead and gone, and they are as
trees twice dead and rotten, Jude.
and therefore pulled up by the roots, such as the Latins call vappae, that is
past the best, and now good for nothing, See Esaias 1.22. what life or sweetness
can be in Apostates: yea how sour and unsavory to such are all fleshly
comforts? They use to drink away their terrors, and drive away their
melancholy dumps with merry company. But will that hold? what are such plasters
better then the devils Anodynes, then his whistle, to call men off from better
practices? there is a cup in the hands of the Lord, it is full of mixture but
extreme sour: and the very dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall
wring them out, and drink them up, Psalm. 75.8. though it be eternity to the
bottom.

they have committed whoredom continually] Here they are taxed for whoredom,
as before for drunkenness (so some carry it) and afterward for covetousness.
This is that flagitiorum triga, whereby the Prophet persuades Judah to shake
off Israel, as not fit to be conversed with. He had charged them before with
fornication of both sorts: here he shows how unwearied they were in their
wickedness, and withal how intense, for fornicando fornicati sunt, they have
done wickedly as they could, they have eeked out their idolatries, and
adulteries, and though wearied and even wasted with the multitude of their
wickednesses, yet they have not given over but are unsatisfiable, and would sin
in perpetuum: as that filthy fornicatour who said he would desire no other
heaven but to live for ever on earth, and to be carried from one brothel-house
to another. She has wearied her self with lies: and yet her great scum went
not forth out of her: Therefore shall it be in the fire. Ezekiel 24.12. Therefore
shall graceless wretches be tormented for ever, because they would sin for
ever: and therefore suffer all extremity, Mic. 7.
because they do wickedly with both hands earnestly: woefully wasting the marrow
of their time, the flower of their age, the strength of their bodies, the
vigor of their spirits, in the persuit of their lusts, in the froth and filth
whereof is bred that worm that never dies: which is nothing else but the
furious reflection of the soul upon its own once wilful folly, and now woeful
misery.

her rulers with shame do love, Give ye] Her shields (o shameful!) do love
Give ye: where there is in the original an elegant Agnomination that cannot be
englished, (...)
Ahabhu hibhu Dilexerunt Afferte, not Afferre, as the Vulgar corruptly reads
it. The Dorick dialect, the horsleaches language Give, Give, they are perfectly
skilled in: (...) gift-greedinesse is all their delight: like the ravens of
Arabia, that full gorged have a tuneable sweet record, but empty, screech
horribly: Plerique offictarij, says One: Very many rulers do as Plutarch
reports of Stratocles and Dromoclites, a couple of corrupt officers,
Plutarch. in politic.
qui sese mutuo ad messem auream invitare solebant, who were wont to invite one
another to the golden harvest, thereby meaning the Court, and the
judgment-seate. These follow the administration of justice as a trade only,
with an unquenchable and unconscionable desire of gain: which justifies the
common resemblance of the Courts of justice to the Bush, whereunto while the
sheep flies for defense in weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece. Now
are these Sheilds? are they not rather Sharkes? Are they protectours, and not
rather pillagers? Latrones publici, public robbers as Cato called them? These
shields of the earth belong to God, says David, Psalm, 47.9. should they not
then be like him? 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
Now there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor accepting of persons, nor
receiving of gifts: neither by himself nor by his man Elisha, nor by his man's
man Gehezi, without distaste. By one period of speech, by one breath of the
Lord are they both forbidden, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. Thou shall not respect
persons, nor receive a gift: For why: A gift does blind the eyes of the wise,
yea it transformes them into walking Idols, that have eyes and see not, ears
and hear not: only it leaves them hands to handle that, the very touching
whereof will infect and venom a man, as Pliny writes of the fish Torpedo. Let
such therefore shake their hands from bribes Isay. 33.15. as Paul shoke off the
viper: and be so far from saying Give ye, that he should rather say to those
that offer it, Thy money perish with thee: he that hates gifts shall live,
Prove. 15.27. Jethro's Justice of peace should be a man of courage, fearing God,
hating covetousness, Exodus 18.
not bound to the peace (as one phraseth it) by a gift in a basket: nor struck
dumb with the appearance of Angels etc.

Verse 19. The wind has bound her up in her wings] The evil spirit, (says)
Hierom) hurries them toward hell, which is the just hire of the least sin: how
much more of these forementioned abominations? Take it rather to be spoken of
the suddenness, swiftness, and unresistablenesse of Gods judgments set forth
by mighty winds rending the rocks, and tearing up the mountains by the roots,
Job. 38.9. How then shall wicked men (compared to chafe or dust of the
mountains) stand before the tempest of Gods wrath, the thunder of his power?
Well they may applaud and stroke themselves for a time: but the wind shall bind
them up in her wings: God shall blow them to destruction, Job. 4.9. his
executioners have the wings of a stork, large and long, and wind in those
wings, to note their ready obedience, Zech. 5.9. And although Ezekiel. 1. God be
represented as sitting upon a throne to show his slowness to punish, yet that
throne has wings and hands under those wings, to show his swiftness and
readiness to do seasonable execution upon his enemies.

and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices] wherein they trusted,
but now see themselves disappointed, their idols not able to help them. Then
shall they cast their idols of silver and of gold, which they have made each
for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats, to go into the clefts of
the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, Isay. 2.20, 21. See also
Isay. 30.22. If they be not thus ashamed of their former fopperies, they are
the more to be pitied. Illum ego periisse dico cui periit pudor. He is an
undone man that shames not, shents not himself for his evil practices, that
blusheth not bleedeth not before God for them, lying down in his shame. Jer.
3.25. as fully ashamed of his former hopes, Psalm. 119.116. which now he sees
how far they have abused him.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. Hear ye this ye Priests] For you are not so wise, Prove. 1.5.
but that ye may hear and increase learning. Chap. 4.6. and besides, from you
is profaneness gone forth into all the land. Jer. 23.15. For you therefore in
the first place I have a citation to appear before Gods tribunal, to hear
your sin and your sentence, Jac. Ren. de. vit. Pont.
your crime, and your doom God cited Adam immediately and by himself. Genesis 7.9.
Adam, where art thou? so he did Cain, Laban, Nabal, and others, when he sends
for them by death, saying as once to that Pope, Veni miser in judicium, Come
away, and hear thy sentence. Centum revolutis annis Deo. respon debitis and
mihi.
Mediately he cites men by the mouth of his ministers; as he did the Council
of Constance by his faithful martyr John Husse, and his word stood: and as he
does here the three Estates of the kingdom, Priests, People, and Princes, by
the Prophet Hosea. That was very strange and extraordinary, that Mr. Knox
reports in his history of Scotland, Hist. of Scot.
of one Sr. John Hamilton murdered by the kings means: that he appeared to
him in a vision with a naked sword drawn, and strikes off both his arms with
these words, Take this before thou receive a final payment for all thine
impieties: and within 24 hours, two of the Kings sons died. It is indeed but
part of their punishment that wicked men here receive, seem it never so
grievous when, God enters into judgment with them, as here it is said.

for judgment is toward you] that is ^am about to pronounce sentence against
you, and to do execution: and therefore hear, harken, and give-eare, the first
second and third time I admonish you, that ye may know that my citation is
serious and peremptory: and that your damnation sleeps not. Priest and people
are set before the house of the king; Salvian.
because theirs was seeds prima, and vita ima, an high place but a low life.
And besides, Courtiers and great men, though they be in other cases forward
enough to take place of others, yet in point of punishment they slink back, and
are well content that others should go before them. God regards none for his
greatness (Potentes potenter torquebuntur) neither spares he any for his
meannesse, or because they were born down either by the laws, or lives of
their Superiors. The people are here placed betwixt the Priests and Princes,
and with them appealed and impeached, to show how frigid and insufficient their
excuse is, who plead that they did but as they were taught by their Ministers,
and as they were commanded by their Governors. Ephraim is oppressed and broken
in judgment, because h^ willingly walked after the commandment, as it is in
the eleventh verse of this chapter. See the note.

for judgment is toward you] Vengeance is in readiness for the disobedient,
be he what he will, kesar or caytiffe, Lord or losell, Priest or people: every
whit as ready in the Lords hand as in the ministers mouth. 2. Cor. 10.6.
neither shall multitudes privilege or secure them. Though they be quiet or
combined, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall
pass through. Nah. 1.12. yea though they be briers and thorns that set against
him in battle (and those never so much confortuplicated and sharpened) yet God
will go through them, and burn them together. Esaias. 27.4. he will cut off the
spirit of Princes, and destroy a whole rabble of rebels that rise up against
him.

because ye have been a snare on Mizpah] That God may be justified and every
mouth stopped, a reason is here rendered of his most righteous proceedings, and
the same recited (after the manner of men) in the preamble to their
condemnatory sentences.

because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor] These were
two very high hills, much haunted by hunters, and frequented by fowlers, to whom
these Idolaters (striving to catch people ritibus suis velut retibus et
laqueis, with their nets and snares of errors and superstitions) are fitly
compared. For they lie in in wait for men's souls and catch many of them either
by persuasions or punishments, by allurements or affrightments, as Julian the
Apostate did of old, and as the Papists do at this day. That Jeroboam and his
counselors set watchers in these two mountains, to observe who would go from
him to Judah to worship, that he might intercept them and punish them, is a
plausible opinion, but wants proof. I know what is alleged, Viz 1 King. 12.28.
and Hos. 6.8. according to the vulgar translation. I confess also that it is
not unlikely that such things should be done then (as lately wait was laid by
the Papists for such as had a mind to betake themselves as Geneva, Tygure,
Basil, etc. for conscience sake. It is more probable that upon those high hills
Idolatry was committed (see chap. 4.13. with the Note) and thereby people
ensnared, as birds and wild beasts are in the mountains: and so made slaves to
the devil, and even fatted for his tooth. Hence in the next words.

Verse 2. And the revolters are profound to make slaughter] They lay their nets
and snares deep, and lie down upon the ground that they may take the silly
birds that dread no danger. He croucheth and humbles himself that the poor may
fall into his strong paws, Psalm. 10.10. He studies the devils depths Rev.
2.24. poisonfull and pestilent policies, Machiavellian mysteries of mischief.
His head is a forge and fountain of wicked wiles: he has store and strength of
strange traps and trains, frauds and fetches, to draw in and deceive the silly
simple. That these seducers were deeply revolted Esaias 31.6. they had deeply
corrupted themselves Hos. 9.9. they sinned not common sins; as Kore and his
accomplices died not a common death. They made great flaughter of men's souls, and
of their bodies too, that refused to yield to them. Craft and cruelty seldom
sundred in seducers: as some write of the Asp that he never wanders alone,
without his companion with him; and as those birds of prey and desolation Esaias
34.16. it is said that none of them want their mate. The devil lends them his
seven heads to plot, and his ten horns to push and gore, etc.

though I have been a rebuker to them all] Heb. a correction. (...)
Understand it either of the Prophet, that he had dealt plainly with them, and
done his utmost to reclaim them, yet they refused to be reformed, hated to be
healed. We would have cured Babylon but she would not be cured: Or else of God,
that he had both by words and scribes rebuked their superstitions but nothing
had wrought upon them. They were tormented with the wrath of God, but repented
not to give him the glory, Rev. 16.9. Corrigimur, might they say, sed non
corrigimur, plectimur, sed non flectimur. See how God complains of this
stubbornness, Jer. 6.28, 29, 30. and learn to tremble at his rebukes, to
profit by his chastisements, lest a worse thing befall us. Zeph. 3.5.
The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity; every
morning does he bring his judgments to light, he fails not: but the unjust
knows no shame. There are that take the words possively and render them thus
Ego vero illis omnibus castigationi sum I have been rebuked or corrected by
them all. Levely.
See the like Lam. 3.13. and in the Psalms often I am a reproach to mine
enemies: thou make us a reproach to all that are round about us, etc. So the
Prophet here may seem to complain, as Jeremy did after him, that he was born a
man of contentions, that all the people cursed him, that he was a common
byword, and but-mark: that they sharpened their tongues against him and flew
in his face. To Preach, says Luther, Totius erbis furorem in (...) ^^are.
(...) (...) 11.19. Judicatur vel sententia pronuncia^ur. C^merar. S^^ltet.
Repetitione etiam auget populi rebelliauem. Rivet.
is nothing else but to derive (...) rage of the whole world upon a man's self.
Wisdom (that should be justified of her children) is eftsoons judged of her
childrens, as some read those words of our Savior Mat. 11.19. But I like the
active sense better.

Verse. 3. I know Ephraim and Israel is not hid from me] Those that by Ephraim
understand the Princes, and by Israel the common people etiam hoc operae
addant, et illud ex scriptura probent, says Tarnovius, let them prove what
they say by Scripture, and we will say with them: Till then we take them for
Synonima's. An hypocritical nation they were Isai. 9.17. and Athiestically they
thought, by hiding God from themselves, to hide themselves from God. Hear them
else Chap. 12.8. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out
substance; In all my labor they shall find none iniquity in me: that were
sin, that were an heinous business, that iniquity should be found in them,
though they were a people laden with iniquity. But I know them through and
through, intus et in cute says God, Isai. 1.
I am privy to all their plots and policies. And although they are profound to
make slaughter ( Tindall reads it, They kill sacrifices on heaps to deceive)
yet let not them be deceived, I am not mocked. They must not think to put me
off with shows and shadows: to color and cover their base spirits and vile
ends with specious pretenses. For I search the hearts, and try the reins:
neither is there any creature (no not the creature of the heart, the thoughts
and intentions) that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and
open ( naked for the outside, (...) Tectus clathratum. Luc.
and open for the inside; the Greek word signifies dissected, quartered, and
as it were cleft through the backbone) before the eyes of him with whom we
have to deal. Heb. 4.13. Indeed he is all eye; and every man before God is all
window: so that no man needs a window in his breast (as the Heathen Momus
wished) for God to look in at. For his eyes are upon the ways of man: and he
sees all his goings. There is no darkness nor shadow of death where the
workers of iniquity may hide themselves Job. 24.21.22. His eyes behold, his
eyelids try the children of men Psalm. 11.4. the former points out his
knowledge, the later his critical descant. David Psalm. 139. finds God not
only at his finger ends, but at his tongues end too verse. 4. His knowledge
stays not here in the porch or lobbyes, but passes into the presence, yea
privy-chamber ver. 2. yea my thoughts in posse before I think them. Deus intimo
nostro nobis intimior. The word is to God a sea of glass Rev. 4 6. a clear
transparent body: and his eyes are as a flaming fire Reu. 1.14. which needs no
outward light, because it sees extramittendo by sending out a ray; Psalm.
139.12.
so that the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both
alike to him. What wonder therefore though he know Ephraim, and Israel is not
hid from him? And how should this both humble them (for which cause it is here
urged) and caution them for the future, as it did that holy man, who had
written upon the walls and windows of his study these verses, Ne pecces, Deus
ipse videt, bonns Angelus astat,
Accusat satanas, et lex, men's conscia culpae, etc.


For now O Ephraim thou committest whoredom and Israel is defiled] in body and
soul, Ephesians. 4.19.
rushing into all impiety without restraint: working all uncleanness with
greediness: being filled withal unrighteousness, fornication wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness: full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, etc. Romans
1.29.30. All these evil things come from within and defile a man Mar. 7.23.
worse then any leprosy, worse then the vomit of a dog, or the mire of a swine.
It is the pollution of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. it is the putrefaction of
a dead carcass, the sanies of a plague sore, the devils excrement, and that
which defiles far worse then that which is cast into the draught. Mar. 7.21.
It sets defilement upon our selves, others, the whole land, Jer. 3.1. yea upon
the visible heavens, which must therefore be purged by that last fire. And this
was typified by those many Leviticall washings and purification of garments,
vessels, persons, etc. Wash you therefore, make you clean put away the evil of
your doings etc. Esaias 1.16. Wash thy heart from wickedness O Jerusalem, (...)
hands only as Pilate, though those too, Jam. 4.8. Jer. 4.14. Cleanse your
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 17.1. Of the flesh that
is, fleshly lusts and gross evils, as uncleanness, earthly mindedness, or Of
spirit, that is, those more spiritual lusts that lie more up in the heart of
the country, such as are pride, creature-confidence, self-deceit, presumption,
etc. Out with all these: there is both a stain and a sting in them. Run to the
Bath of Christ's blood, that blessed fountain, Zech. 13.1. and there wash and be
clean. Look not upon Gods Jordan with Syrian eyes, as Naaman did. Abanah and
Pharphar may wash and scour: but Jordan is for cure. And if God see fit to Iay
us a frosting, to fetch out our filth, yea or cast into the fire to take away
our defilements, let us be contented.

Verse 4. They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God] Or, their
doings will not suffer them. That is, they are so habituated and hardened in
sinful practices that they are not only disinabled to conversion but
evil-affected thereunto: they stand a-crosse to all good: to their sinews of
iron, they have added brows of brass, Isai. 48.4.
to their sin they add rebellion, which is as bad as witchcraft, 1. Sam.
15.23. till at length they lose all passive power also of being converted: and
so are transformed, as it were, into so many devils: having by custom
contracted a necessity of sinning, they are become incurable: they neither
will nor can return to their God: they will not frame their doings to it. The
Vulgar has it, their studies, the Septuagint their counsels: Castalio, their
endeavors, Pagnine their pains etc. The Original is very elegant, and
metricall Lo ijttenu magnallchem Lashub el Elohehem. I scarce know a like text
in all the Scripture, unless it be that Lam. 5.16. Oi na lanu, chi chattanu.
Woe to us that we have sinned: which is so elegant also in the Original, that
Master Wheatly of Banbury (who used to be very plain in his Preaching, and not
to name a Greek, Latin, or Hebrew word: Master Leigh nis Saints encouragement,
etc. ep. dedic.
quoted it once in the Hebrew, as witness learned Master Leigh who lived some
while under his Ministry. But to return to the text: whereas some might
possibly conceive or reply, Ephraim is far gone indeed, but he may return. No,
never, says God: for he will not give his mind to it, or show his good will:
he is even set; and there is no removing of him; he has made his conclusion,
and is as good as ever he means to be. They are so far from yielding
themselves unto the Lord, as 2 Chro. 30.8. that they stand in full opposition
to him, yea send messages after him. We will not have this man to rule over us.
The Jews were an untoward generation, says Peter Act. 2.40. they, by their
obstinate refusal of the Gospel, judged themselves unworthy of everlasting
life, says Paul Act. 13.46. there were unmalleable, unframeable, so knotty
that they were fit for nothing but the fire, so nastie, that they were fit for
no place but the dunghill. And why?

the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them] The devil is at Inn with
them as that Martyr said: he even sits abrood upon them, Master Bradford. Ephesians.
2.2.
hatching all manner of evil counsels and courses, he works effectually in
these children of disobedience, as a smith does in his forge, an artificer in
his shop: he acts them and agitates them, making their souls and all the powers
thereof nothing else but a shop of sin, their bodies and all the parts thereof
tools of sin, their lives and all their actions of both soul and body a trade
of sin, a web of wickedness spun out and made up by the hands of the devil and
the flesh, an evil spinner, and a worse weaver. Hence they he rotting all their
lives long in the graves of sin, wrapped up in the winding sheet of hardness, of
heart (they will not frame their doing to turn to God) and blindness of mind
(they have not known the Lord:) and as a carcass crawleth with wo^mes, so do
these men swarm with those noisome lusts, that are able to poisor^^^ an honest
heart. How can it be otherwise? the spirit of fornication is in the m^^dest of
them, as a King in his Kingdom: yea has filled their hearts from corner to
corner, as he had done the hearts of Ananias and Sapphira? Act. ^.
That unclean spirit besieges the pu^est hearts, and compasses them about,
seeking to devour them, 1 Pet. 5.8. but they keep him out, steadfast in the
faith, or if he any way get in, they quickly cast him out again: so that he
cannot long rest or roost, much less reign there: for the Spirit of God
keeps them, 1 John 5.18 Caietan.
and that evil one touches them not tactu qualitativo with a deadly touch;
they regard not iniquity in their heart, there is no way of wickedness found
in them. Of the spirit of whoredoms see the Note on Chap. 4.11.

And they have not known the Lord] He knows them well enough verse 3. and they
shall know it, Jer. 16.21. to their cost: but they know not the Lord, sc.
savingly and effectually: for if they did, they could not be so vile and
vicious, so loose and licentious. A man is properly said to know no more of
Gods mind then he practiteth: like as of our Savior it is said, that he knew
no sin, that is, 2 Cor. 5.21.
he did none: with an intellectual knowledge he knew it (how else could he
reprove it) but not with a practical: and as it is said of Elies two sons, that
they knew not God because they obeyed him not. Lo such was the ignorance of
this people, assected and acquired; and this is peccatorum omnium fons et
fomes, the mother of all mischief and misery; as has been often set forth in the
Notes upon the former chapter.

Verse 5. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face] Pride is the great
masterpock of the soul: it will bud, and cannot be hid Ezekiel. 7.10. It is the
grandiabolo, that filthy spirit that is gotten into the midst of men, into the
very heart of the country as it were. It is the leprosy of the soul that
breaks forth in the very forehead, and so testifies to his face. It proceeds
from ignorance of God and his will, of a man's self and his duty: hence that
connection of this verse and the former. They know not the Lord; And the pride
of Israel testifies to his face. The Laodiceans were therefore proud, because
ignorant: thou know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, etc.
So those question-sick phantasticks in Saint Paul were proud knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.4. And I would not have you ignorant of this mystery, says he to his
Romans Chap. 11.25. lest ye should be puffed up in your own conceits. Humble
Agur though full of heavenly light, yet vilifies and nullifies himself to the
utmost Prove. 30.2. and so exemplifies that Proverb of Solomen, with the lowly
is wisdom, Prove. 11.2. And as wisdom makes the face to shine, and humility
renders a man lovely: so pride on the contrary, sits in the face, and
deformeth it. The proud man flattereth himself in his own lies, till his
iniquity be found to be hateful, Psalm. 36.2. till his swelling break forth in
loathsome ulcers. Thus Miriams pride testified to her face, and Vzziah's, and
Sodoms, Esaias. 3.9. The show of their countenance witnessing against them. Pride
is a foolish sin, it cannot keep in, it will be above-board, and discover it
self by lofty looks, big-swoln-words, proud gate, ridiculous gestures, garish
attire, that nest of pride; but especially by stoutnesse and stubbornness
against God and his ways (as here in this Text it is to be taken.) When men
commit sin with an high hand, and as it were, in despite of God, and on purpose
to cross him. Hence it is that God so hates this sin above other: for
whereas all other sins flee from God, pride lets fly at him, nay flees in his
face, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? Hence he will be a swift
witness against such, and a severe Judge. Learned Mr. Leveley, reads this Text
thus; The excellency of Israel (that is God, as Amos 8.7. 2 Samuel 1.19.) will
testify to Ephraims face, give in evidence against them. He will indeed be
Index, Judex, Vindex, to such: for he resists the proud, and delights to
stain their glory, to cast dirt in those faces of theirs, that are so hatched
with impudence, as to face the very heavens, and to contest with Omnipotency.
Hence their fall with a violence, with a vengeance.

Therefore shall Ephraim and Israel fall in their iniquity:] Corruet, they
shall fall with a push, with a powther, as we say: and in their iniquity,
that is worse then all the rest. Ye shall die in your sins, says Christ to
those rebellious Jews, Ioh. 8.21. that was a great deal worse then to die in
prison, to die in a ditch, or in the worlds disfavour. Or, in their iniquity,
that is, for their iniquity which is indeed the cause of calamities. At the
loss of Calice, when a proud Frenchman demanded of an English Captain, When
will you fetch Calice again? he gravely replied, Quando peccata vestra erunt
nostris graviora. When you sins shall weigh down ours. Tarnov. in loc.
If any man ask, (says Tarnovius upon this (...)) Vnde hodi^ ^anta passim in
Germania vastitas? efficit hanc peccatorum atr^^ita^. Whence so great
desolations in Germany? It is for the grievousnesse of our ^^iquity. (...) ^his
was better yet, then the result of that consultation held once at Hambo^ (...),
^^ some of his Latheran fellow-Ministers, Vol. 1. p. 465.
concerning the cause and cure (...) manies calamities. They concluded (says
Mr. Boroug^^^ on Hosea, from the mouth of a Minister there, who told it him
with grief) that it was, because their (...) in (...) not adorned enough, which
therefore they (...). A sad husinesse, Solomon would have told them, that it is
a man's pride that brings him low, Prove. 29.23. And that before destruction the
heart of a man is haughty, ^ov. 18.12 And that pride goes before destruction,
and an haughty spirit (...) fall, Prove. 16.18. If the pride of Israel does
testify to his face, the next news we ^^^all hear of him is, that Israel and
Ephraim are fallen in their iniquity. A bulging wall cannot stand: a swelling
sore will shortly break. This shall they have for their pride, because they
have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of
Hoasts. The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods of
the earth, etc. Zeph. 2.10, 11. all those deunculi, those pretty pictures that
men so much dote upon: which should not be suffered, if for nothing else, yet
for the distraction they may cause in Divine worship. In the Councel-chamber of
the Lacedaemonians, no picture or image was suffered; lest in consultation of
weighty matters, their minds thereby might be distracted. Irenaeus reproves
the Gnostics for their pictures of Christ, though made in Pilates time, after
his own proportion. Austin denies that images can be set up in Churches, sine
praesentissimo idololatriae periculo, without exceeding great danger of
idolatry. In Psalm. 114.
Epiphanius says, it is an abomination of desolation, to set up pictures in
the Churches of Christians. Plutarch an Heathen says, Paul. Jovius. lib. 4.
it is sacrilege: And Solomon the great Turk, when he had taken Buda in
Hungary, would not enter into the great Church there, to give God thanks for
the victory, till all the images were cast out. But this by the way only. Let
us take heed by those mistaken Lutherans, Esaias 44.20.
whom a deceived heart has turned aside, that we likewise fall not from our
own steadfastness.

lest Judah also fall with them.] Lest we be wrapped up in the same condemnation,
lest we follow Germany in her plagues, as we began apace to do in her sins: for
the which we have also already severely smarted. If Judah comply with Israel in
false worship, they shall fall with Israel. God is not tied to any people, but
can well be without them. The Lord is with you, whilst ye are with him. If ye
seek him, he will be found of you: but if you forsake him, he will forsake you,
2 Chronicles: 15.2. But will the Lord be certainly found of them that seek him? yes,
if they seek him seriously and seasonably, in a time when he may be found,
Psalm. 32.6. Esaias 55.6.
and before he be utterly departed. But here was the mistake, and the mischief
of it. These Apostata's went to seek the Lord, and they went with their cost,
but they came too late: they had sinned away their God, and wiped off all their
comfortables, as Saul had done before them. The Philistims are upon me, says
he, and God has forsaken me: he answers me no more, neither by Prophets nor
by dreams, etc. It is said, 1 Samuel 28.15.
1 Chronicles. 10.14. that Saul did not enquire of the Lord, therefore he slew him.
He did, and yet he did not, because he sought him not with all his heart: his
devotion was fained and forced. Now it is a rule in the Civil Law, Ficta pro
factis non habentur: nec videtur fieri quod non legitimc sit. Fained service is
lost labor: neither is that done to any purpose, that is not orderly done. And
this was the case of these sacrificers in the next verse. Sodomites God calls
them, Esaias 1.10.

Verse 6. They shall go with their flocks, and with their heards] Cursitabunt,
they shall out up and down, from altar to altar, with all their stock, as if
they would buy off their sins, redeem their sorrows, with hecatombs, and store
of holocausts; and then be ready to say, as that Heathen Emperor did, when he
was to meet his enemy in the field, Non sic Deos coluimus, aut sic viximus ut
ille nos vinceret. Antonin. Philosoph. ap. Vulcat. Gallic. in Av^^io Cassio.
Mic. 6.7.
we have not so served the gods, or lived so, that the enemy should have the
better of us. They thought they had merited better at Gods hands, by their
thousands of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, then to fall, as in the
former verse, then to be relinquished by him, as here. Lo this is the guise of
graceless hypocrites: by their outward performances they think to oblige God
unto them; and by their good deeds to set off for their bad. Thus Brunheldis
(that French Athaliah) after many murders, and much mischief wrought by her,
Anno 600. built many Colleges for Priests, and Monks, in Burgundy and Austria,
Eo scilicet beneficio maleficia sua expiavit, says the French Chronicler;
Epit. hist. Gal. page 25. Dan. hist. fol. 76.
thereby thinking to satisfy for all her cruelty. So here in King Stevens
time, there were more Abbeys built then in an hundred years before. So the
Papists at this day, spend and are spent in their blind devotions: they lavish
money out of the bag, and run up and down from Saint to Saint with their cost:
They pray publicly in public calamities, Quarantoras Italico nomine istas
preces vocant. Polan. in loc. quem consule.
for forty hours together, by the Popes command, that they may pacify God,
and divert his displeasure. For the same cause, they make the same man (in
their greater Cities appointed) to preach every day in Lent without
intermission; so as six days in the week he preaches on the Gospel of the
days; and on the Saturday, in honor and praise of our Lady, as they call her.
Lo, thus they go, as they think, Spec. Europ.
to seek God with their will worship, and work done, etc. but they find him as
little as they did here, with their flocks, and with their herds: And why?
First, they go to seek him: they run, but in a wrong way; and so fulfill that
sacred proverb, He that hastes with his feet sins: for the faster he runs,
the farther he is out. Next, Prove. 19.2.
they pretend to seek him, but indeed they seek themselves: they seek him, but
it is to be rid of his rod: they do not so much serve him, as serve themselves
and their own turns upon him; as those hypocrites in Zachary fasted to
themselves; Zech. 7.
not to get off their sins, but their chains. Thirdly, they go with their
flocks, etc. not mine, but theirs, says God; he will not so much as own them,
though they were tendered to him in sacrifice; because brought with a wicked
mind, Prove. 21.27. as Balac and Balaam did, Number. 23.1, 2. and as Cain did,
Genesis 4.5. to whom therefore God had no respect, because he brought non personam
sed opus personae, not himself, but his sacrifice, as Luther has it: who also
calls all those Cainists, that offer to God the work done, but present not
their bodies for a lively sacrifice, Romans 12.1. Hence he rejects their services
with infinite disdain, as Esaias 1.11, 12. and 66.2, 3. though never so numerous
and precious, Mic. 6.7. Hos. 8.13. And to set forth this, as he calls them
here, their flocks, and not his, so Fourthly, he calls them flocks and herds,
not sacrifices: that was too good a name for them. Thus, Ier. 7.21. in scorn he
calls their sacrifice flesh; such as was ordinary, sold in the shambles. And
thus also, Hos. 9.4. speaking of the meat offering appointed, Lev. 2.5. he
calls it, their bread for their souls, or, for their life and livelihood, the
bread for their natural sustenance; and says, it shall not come into his
house, he will none of it. See Mal. 1.7. with the Note.

but they shall not find him] Non erit ipsis domi, non favebit eis, says an
interpreter here, he will not be at home, not within, to open to them when they
knock at his door: he will be as strange to them as ever they were to him,
because they bring him not that best sacrifice of a broken heart: and because
they come too late when the gate of grace is shut, when the gale of grace is
over, when he has fully resolved upon their ruin, and will not repent

when he has withdrawn himself from them] Heb. has snatched away himself, has
thrown himself out of their company, (...)
as Peter threw himself out from the rude soldiers into a by-corner, to weep
bitterly, Mark. 14.72. Cum se proripuisset, so Beza renders it. (...).
When God is well pleased with his people, they can no sooner cry, but he will
say, Here I am, Isay. 58.9. And though they offer but small things unto him, as
Samuel did a sucking lamb, 1 Samuel 7.9. they are highly accepted, and graciously
answered. But woe unto them when I depart from them, says God Hos. 9 12. yea
woe upon woe when Gods soul is once disioynted from them. Jer. 6.8. anevill, an
only evil, behold, is come. An end is come, the end is come, it watches for
thee, behold it is come. Ezekiel. 7.5.6. and why? because God was withdrawing from
them: Hence all evils came rushing in, as by a sluice. In the ninth, tenth, and
eleventh chapters of that Prophesy, God makes diverse removes. And still, as
he goes out, some judgment comes in. First he removes from the Cherubins in
the Oracle, to the threshold Chap, 9.3. and upon that Remove, see what
follows Verse 5, 6, 7. etc. Secondly he removes to the Cherubins on the
right side of the house Chap. 10.1. and see what follows Verse. 2. Thirdly to
the Eastgate of the house, and the first entrance into the Temple, Chap.
10.19. and then see what succeeds Chap. 11.8.9.10. Fourthly he removes to
mount Olivet, quite out of the city, Chap. 11.23. and when God was quite gone,
then follwed the fatal calamity in the ruin thereof. As there is no light in
the world but from the Sun, no water but from the Sea; so no sound comfort or
happiness to be had but with and in God. Better have him angry with us, then
not have him at all with us. The loss of God is a piece of hell; in the suburbs
whereof the Saints feel themselves, when but a while deserted.

Verse 7. They have dealt treacherously against the Lord] They have dealt
deceitfully in the Covenant, they are a perfidious cursed crew of them: this I
see well enough, says God, though they may think to darken mine eyesight with
the smoke of their many sacrifices, or to stop my mouth with their great
presents. See how he complains as in this Prophecy often, so, Jer. 3.20.
Surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so have you dealt
treacherously with me, O house of Israel. Now in such a case a man will not
regard any ransom: neither will he rest content, though thou give many gifts:
Prove. 6.35.
he will not be a pandar to his own bed, unleass he be very base indeed. Most
certain it is, that God will not endure any such doings: but though he love his
Spouse never so well, yet if she play false with him, and admit any other into
the bridall-bed, Jer. 12.7.
he will forsake his house that has been so dishonest, he will leave his
heritage that has been so embased; he will give the dearly beloved of his
soul into the hand of her enemies, who shall hate her more then ever they loved
her, as Amnon did Tamar, and deal cruelly with her, as Ezekiel. 16. is at large
discoursed. The wickedness of this people was the greater, for that they
pretended religion (as in the former verse) to their base beastly practices.
Dessembled sanctity is double iniquity. See how hainously God takes it, Jer.
7.9, 10. And when others deal treacherously and unworthily with you, see
whether you have not done as bad and worse against the Lord. Alphonsus king of
Arragon in a speech to the Popes Ambassador professed, that he did not so much
wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, (who had raised sundry of them from
mean to great estates) as at his own to God.

for they have begotten strange children] bastards such as the Jews call
Mamzer, as ye would say aliena labes, a strange blot. They call them also
brambles, such as was Abimelech who grew in the hedge-row of an harlot, and
scratcht and drew blood to purpose, Judge. 9.14. That which is here charged upon
the Isralites is, that they had not only taken to wife the daughters of a
strange God, or begotten bastards of harlots, but that they had nuzzled up
their children in idolatry, and so made them sevenfold worse the children of
the devil then before. This was a very great aggravation of their treachery,
that they should impoison their posterity, and propagate their wickedness from
one generation to another; that there should be a line and a succession of it
from their loins. None are so ready to drink in false principles, and corrupt
practices as young ones. Such parents as have a hand in undoing their children,
either by ill counsel, or example, are peremptores potius quam parents, says
Bernard, rather parricides then parents. Ber. Ep. 111.
They shall give an heavy account to God for their childrens miscarriages. Let
it therefore be the care of parents, as to keep themselves pure, so to see to
their little ones, that they be not corrupted. Satan bears an implacable spite
and hatred to them, as the seed-plot of heaven; and has his emissaries abroad
to mar them. Such was Protagoras, of whom Plato reports, that he gloried of
this, that whereas he had lived sixty years in all, forty of them he had spent
in corrupting of young people. Plato in Menone.
Of Julian the Apostate it is reported, that being of excellent parts and
proof, both in learning and religion, whilst he was young: he was afterward
corrupted by his two Heathenish Tutours Libanius, and Jamblichus, through the
carelessenesse of Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, who should have seen better to
it: and that this was a main cause of his Apostasy.

now shall a month devour them with their portions.] Some read it thus. Now
shall the enemy devour them month after month: Others put menses for
menstrua, and give this sense. Like as this people make no bones to break their
faith with God by spiritual fornication, mingling as it were their seed with
strange gods and foreign people: so shall it come to them, which happens to
women worn with adulteries, See Tremel. and Jun. Annat.
(as Ezekiel speaks) that their monthly diseases procured by inordinate
lust, shall eat up and consume their bodies. For confirmation, they allege
(but not so properly) Jer. 2.24. I willingly concur with those that by a month
understand a little short time. How soon is a month run out? And yet what
havoc will an enemy make in a months space? as we have had woeful experience
in these late stripping and killing times. Them and their portions shall one
month make an end of. Death heweth its way through a wood of men, in a minute
of time, from the mouth of a murdering-piece. The sword contemns the rod,
Ezekiel. 21.13. as if it should say; What does this silly rod do here? Let me
come; I Will quickly make work among them. I Will dung the land with their carcases,
etc. with their portions, the lots of their inheritance. Wicked men also have
their portions in this life, Psalm. 17.14. they live in pleasure on the earth,
and are wanton, Jam. 5.5. but their portion is no other, but a month may
devour it: their pleasure no other but one drop of an evil conscience may damp
and dissweeten it. But if God be thy portion, etc.

Verse 8. Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramab,] Clangite,
clamate, not with the inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvius, which sounded a
retreat when they should have sounded an alarm. But blow ye the cornet; give
notice to all the country, that Hannibal est ad portas, the enemy is at the
very gates, sending a summons, and sounding for a surrender. The desolation of
war had been denounced in the former verse; here it is proclaimed, as it were
by sound of Trumpet: the Prophet acting the part of an herald; and, by a
rhetorical hypotyposis, representing the enemies approach, as if it were
already under view: and not foretold, but acted before their eyes. Rhetoric,
we see here, is an art sanctified by Gods Spirit; and may lawfully be used in
handling of Gods word. The Scripture is full of it in every part: and happy is
that Minister, that thereby can make himself master of his hearers affections:
as potent in his Divine Rhetoric as Pericles, or Cicero, were in their humane.
Let him (by our Prophets example) strive to make the things whereof he
preaches to the people, as real before their eyes, as possibly he can. The
power of a ministry consists much in this; to set forth sin, Christ, heaven,
hell, in such lively colors, that the hearer (though unlearned) may be
convinced of all, judged of all, and having the secrets of his heart made
manifest, 1 Cor. 14.84, 25.
he may fall down on his face, worship God and report, that God is in the
Minister of a truth: Chrysostom. Eze k. 4.1.
Lo this is Preaching indeed. For as every sound is not Music, so neither is
every Pulpit-discourse Preaching. Nihil frigidius est doctore verbis solummodo
philosophante, etc. Ezekiel must lay siege to Jerusalem, pourtraying it upon a
tile, etc. So did Jeremy and other Prophets use signs, and similitudes, Saint
Paul's speech and Preaching was not indeed with enticing words of man's wisdom,
(he did not so paint the window as to keep out the light) but yet in
demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4.
and of power, close to the conscience.

Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah] that is in the bounds of the Kingdom of Judah,
Gibeah of Benjamin, Gibeah of Saul.

And the trumpet in Ramah] Samuels country, afterward called Arimathaea,
Joseph's country: this is said to be in the borders of Israel. Strong garrisons
they were both; and places of great resort: they are now alarmed, and bidden to
prepare for the approach of the Assyrian. (...)


Cry aloud at Bethaven] Or Bethel, as Chap. 4.11. a city (as it is said of
Athens, Acts 17.16.) wholly given to idolatry: and therefore more stupid and
stubborn then the rest. Here therefore the Prophet cries louder then ordinary,
classicum canit, sic clamat ut stentora vincere possit, he sets up his note
that he may the sooner awaken them, and cause them to apprehend their danger,
as present and real. Bethaven was the great place of superstition, and now
Rome is the nest of Antichrist, the habitations of devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, a cage of every unclean and hateful bird: therefore the
Angel cries mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, certo, cito, penitus, surely, suddenly, utterly. Rev. 18.2.

After thee o Benjamin] who art at the back of Bethaven, and farest the worse
for her neighborhood: like as Hamath did for Damascus Zech. 9.2. See the Note
there. Some understand Hostis adest, the enemy is at they heels; make away, or
stand upon thy guard: for thou art like to be put to it. And this concise kind
of warning here given implies a mind moved and disturbed, either with fear or
anger.

Verse 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke] Correptionis, vel
Correctionis, ut Pagninus: when thou with rebukes do correct man for
iniquity, etc. Psalm. 39.11. God has a day for such sharp rebukes, or childings
by way of conviction, or Argument (as the word signifies) wherein he will be
sure to carry it, with a great deal of sound reason and evident demonstration:
so that Ephraim shall have nothing to say, (...). Vastri ita ut videntes
obstupescant. etc.
why he should not be desolated; yea so desolated as to make the beholders
amazed thereat, as the Hebrew word imports God, will not now dally with
Ephraim, or deal favorably with him as heretofore: he will not shake his rod
at him only, but wast it to the very stumps: he shall be utterly destroyed from
being a people: the day that now comes is a black day indeed, a day not of
instruction, but of destruction, not of correction but of execution; a very
doomesday, wherein God will bring them into the furnace, and there leave them
Ezekiel. 22.20. And that none may think this sentence over severe: or not so sure
but that it might be avoided or vacated, see what follows in the text;

among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be] i.e.
Either I have forewarned them sufficiently, but they would take no warning,
which is both a just presage and desert of their ruin: Or else thus: I am now
fully resolved upon their ruin, neither is there cause that any man should
deceive himself with a vain hope, as if these evils that I foretell should not
befall you. Experience the mistress of fools, shall teach you, that the
sentence I now pronounce is precise and peremptory, not conditional as
heretofore, but absolute, and unchangeable: and this I here assure you of by
this solemn contestation.

Verse. 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound] A
wickedness condemned by the law and light both of Nature, Deuteronomy. 19.14. Prove.
22.28.
and Scripture Deuteronomy. 27.17. The Princes are mentioned, because corruption in a
people (as putrefaction in a fish) begins at the head. Now the landmark or
limit is removed many ways. As first Religione, in Religion: when the true is
changed into that which is false, as was here in Queen Mary's days against her
promise, to the Suffolk men. Secondly, in Regione, Tarnon.
in the civil State: when one man violently invadeth the right of another (as
Ahab did Naboths vineyard) and no man must question them because it is facinus
majoris Abollae the fact of a great one. Junenal.
Thirdly, In officio, in a man's office or particular station, when he keeps not
within his circle, but take liberty to transgress, prescribing new worships as
2 King. 16.10, 11. 2 Coro. 28.23. taking upon them to teach Ministers what to
teach them, as Mic. 2.6. or themselves invading the Ministerial office
uncalled thereunto as did Jeroboam 1 King. 13.4. and Vzziah 2 Chronicles. 26.16. to
their cost. This (says an Interpreter) is grandis culpa, et atrox crimen, a
foul fault, a crimson crime. Let our Lay-preachers and Levellers look to it,
unless they covet a curse. Deuteronomy. 27.17. He that breaks an hedge, a serpent
shall bite him. Fourthly, In negotio, in businesses and transactions, in
contracts and covenants he removes bounds, who cozeneth and circumventeth
another in any matter 1 These. 4.6. These must remember that God is the avenger
of all such: Heb. 10.
and that it is a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living
God. The Papists fall foul upon us as Innovatours, and removers of the ancient
bounds: because we reject their Ecclesiastical traditions and unwritten
verities (as they call them) commended unto us by the Ancients, and embraced by
whole nations for many ages. To whom we answer, that Multitude and Antiquity
are but ciphers in Divinity: they must (at least) have no more authority, then
what they can maintain. Let them boast, with the Gibeonites, of their old
shoes, moldy bread, etc. we hold us to the Scriptures, for our limits and
land-markes unmovable and immutable. And when they shall ask us as they often
do, where was your Religion before Luther? we answer as one once did, In the
Bible, where yours never was. Erasmus met with an adversary so silly as to
charge him for a remover of the ancient bounds, Erasm. in Apolog.
because he had anew Translated the New Testament: a work of singular use to
the Church of Christ, in those dark times.

therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water] which shall overflow
the banks to overwhelm those that remove the bounds. Yea God will pour it upon
them by whole pailefuls, or spouts (as they call them) at sea. Or if but by
vials (as Rev. 16.1. which are vessels of narrow mouths and pour out slowly,
howbeit) they drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God, which
wretched sinners, shall never be able to avoid or abide. Oh when God shall set
himself to set open the cataracts of his wrath as once at Noah's flood, and to
come against a sinner with a deluge of destruction to pour out his indignation
upon him, as water hastily, heavily, irresistibly, what will he do, and where
will he find refuge? This made David pray so hard. Let not the waterfloods
overflow me: nor the deep swallow me up, Psalm. 69.15. It is the priv^ledge of
every godly person, that in the floods of great waters, they shall not come
nigh to him, Psalm. 32.6. Or if they come up to his neck, yet they shall not
take away his breath: for his head is ever above water. Washed he may be (as
Paul was in the shipwreck) drowned he cannot be. Sink he may seem to do once
and again to the bottom: but he shall up again with Jonas, if out of the deep,
he call upon the Lord, who will set him on a rock that is, higher then he.

Verse 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgement] Calumniam passus est
Ephraim so the vulgar has it: Ephraim was false accused and slandered: he
suffered much by Sycophants, who depraved his good actions, drew him before the
judgement-seats and there oppressed him; as Jam. 2.6. But the word here used
signifies all manner of injuries and oppressions, whether by vexatious suits,
by fraud or by force, virulent tongues or violent hands, wrangling or otherwise
wronging a man, to his crushing and utter undoing many times: For a poor man in
his house is like a snaile in his shell: crush that, and you kill him. Ephraim
was crushed in judgment by his countrymen, who would do him no right: but much
more by the cruel Assyrians, who soon after this carried him captive, and left
him without all remedy of law, without hope of a better condition or place for
a worse. And what wonder though men so set against him, when God was pouring
out his wrath upon him as water? since all creatures are up in arms against Gods
rebels. If the cause go against a man though he have never so much right on his
side (for oft-times cedit viribus aequum, might overcomes right) and he be
broken in judgment, Let him see whether things be right between God and
himself: and if broken in judgment, let him be of a broken spirit, and he
shall be relieved.

because he willingly followed after the commandment] He was too sequacious and
obsequious to Jeroboam and his Princes, commanding him to worship the golden
calves. Queniam voluit, juit, like a tame fool; or, at least, as a foolish
child (so this Prophet calls him) he was soon won over, he came off with
little ado. Jeroboam did but hold up his finger, and he had him straight: A
mere fatuellus carried away to those dumb idols even as he was led. 1 Cor.
12.2. a Melchite, such a generation of Heretics there were in the Primitive
Church; Niceph.
so called because they followed the examples and decrees of the Emperors:
resolving to be of the Kings Religion, whatsoever it were, right or wrong. The
Russians are such at this day. God and their Emperor they say know best what is
truth or falsehood: and it is their part to obey, not to enquire. But all
Christ's sheep are rational; and will try before they trust, look before they
leap: the spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged by no
man, 1 Cor. 2, 15. Show him a clear text of Scripture for what you would
persuade him to, and convince him thereby that it is the mind of God, and you
may have what you will of him. Jam. 2.1.
But for these masters of opinions such as are magistri nostri Parisienses,
that obtrude their own placits upon people, and require to be believed upon
their bare word without further proof, he abhors them. And for the decrees of
Princes and Rulers, if they cross the Scriptures, he will take leave to
disobey them, as the Apostles did, Acts 4.19. as the three children in Daniel
did, and Daniel himself Chap. 6. and as all the holy confessors and Martyrs
both ancient and modern did. Act. and Mon.
The Bishop of Norwich asked Roger Coo Martyr whether he would not obey the
Kings Laws? he answered yes, as far as they agree with the Law of God, I will
obey them. Then said the Bishop, whether they agree with the word or not, we
are bound to obey them, if the King were an infidel. Act. and Mon. fol. 1550.
Coo answered, If Shadrach Meshach and Abednego had done so, Nabuchadnezzar had
never confessed the living God. True it is that Magistrates must be obeyed: (...)
Basil.
those that are good must be obeyed as God, those that are bad, for God: but
then it must be in licitis in things lawful, and warrantable by the word: and
herein we must not frame excuse. The blessed Virgin, though unweildy, went four
days journey (so far it was from Nazareth to Bethlehem) to obey Augustus his
decree, the charge was not so peremptory, but the obedience was as exemplary.
Whosoever keeps the commandment, sc. of the King shall know no evil thing,
Eccles. 8.4.5. And whereas some might reply, why then, let us do all the King
bids us without sciscitation, without further delay or enquiry: Solomon answers
in the next words. And a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment,
that is, he knows both when and how, and how far forth fitly and lawfully the
commands of a King may be dispatched; and no further will he go, then he can
with a good conscience. The Pope writing to Bernard, requiring him to do that
which was unlawful, Bernard writes back again this answer and it was taken; I
as a child, do not obey, and I obey in disobeying. Antigona in Sophocles says
well, Magis obtemperandum est Dijs, etc. We should rather obey God with whom we
must live ever, then men with whom we have but a while to sojourn. Lo blind
nature saw so much. See the Note on Act. 4.19. It may not be forgotten or slipped
over, that the word here rendered the Commandment signifies Command thou: (...)
Because he willingly walked after Command thou: he danced after Jeroboams
pipe, saying to him as he did once to Julius Caesar, Jussa sequi tam velle mihi
quam posse, necesse est. Lucan.


Or as Tiberius answered Justin. Vtere me pro rota figulari Plaut.
(though upon a better ground and end) Si tu volueris, ego sum: Situ non vis,
Ego non sum, I am only thy clay, and thy wax, etc. Or lastly, as Luther at
first submitted to the Pope in these words (though afterward, God gave him
more courage in his cause) I prostrate my self at your Holinesle feet, with all
that I am and have. Vivifica, occide, voca, revoca, approba, reproba; vocem
tuam vocem Christi in te praesidentis et loquentis agnoscam: Anne 1518. Epist.
ad Leon. Pontific. Kimchi.
that is, Quicken me, kill me, call me, recall me, receive me, reject me: I
shall acknowledge your voice as the voice of Christ himself ruling and speaking
in you. Jeroboam is not once named here: nor the word (Commandment) set down at
large out of detestation (likely) both of it, and Him, because it was a wicked
commandment: and He no better then an Usurper. For although he had it cleared
to him, that Gods will was that he should be King over the ten tribes, yet
because it was a will of Gods decree, and not of his Command, as of a duty done
by him, he goes among Divines for an intruder and usurper in and for that fact
of his. It Is obedience when we follow a Divine precept: but not ever, when we
follow a divine instinct.

Verse 12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth,] Their sin was the
greater, because they were so willing to it, and so easily drawn to idolatry,
as most agreeable to their nature, and making much for their ease: which was
Jeroboams main argument. It may very well be, that he threatened punishment to
those that disobeyed his commandment: but here they should have stood out, and
have bide the worst; choosing affliction rather then sin; which because they did
not, therefore they should perish by their own hand, and counsels: they shall
be motheaten, as a garment that breeds the moth, and as a tree that breeds
the worm that wastes it. Not but that God had a special hand in their
punishment: and this not permissive only, but active too, I will be unto
Ephraim, etc. For is there evil in a city, and he has not done it? The changes
and periods of Kingdoms are of him, Psalm. 75.6, 7. that men may know that the
Heavens do rule, Dan. 4.26. so are the alterations in men's bodies and estates,
as Job sets it forth, Chap. 4.19. and 13.28. and 27.18. Every one (say some
Chymicks) has his own balsam within him: his own bane it is sure that he has:
his clay-cottage is every day ready to drop on his head. And for his Estate, 2
Cor. 5.1.
there are oft-times secret issues and drains of expense, at the which it runs
out, as at an hole in the bottom of the bag, Hag. 1.6. See the Note there.
Howbeit Gods holy hand is in all this; I will be unto Ephraim as a moth, etc.
that is, I will wast them sensim, sine sensu. Secretly, insensively, slowly;
but surely, and inevitably: This David after Job, acknowledges, Psalm 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a moth, thou castest him into a corruption totius substantiae,
as the Physicians call the Hectic: surely every man is vanity. Selah: Yea he
is altogether vanity, yea and that in his best estate, when he is best
underlaid, when settled on his best bottom, verse 5. when he is gotten upon his
mount with David, and thinks to die in his nest with Job: Psalm. 130.7. Job
29.18. Luke 12. Mar. in cap. 28. and 11. c. 25.
when he counts upon much good laid up in store for many years, as that rich
fool, that reckoned without his host, as we say. Tinea damnum facit, and
sonitum non facit, says Gregory. The moth makes no noise, but does a great
deal of hurt among clothes. The worm here, rendered rottenness, is minutissimus
vermisulus, says Luther here, a very small creature, but does no small
mischief: Teredo.
for it eats out the heart of the strongest wood, yea of the strongest oaken
planks at Sea. See here what a poor creature is man, yea a whole kingdom, when
as a moth and a little worm may consume them: when they may be crushed before
the moth, as Job speaks, Chap. 4.19. he says not, before the Lion, but before
the moth. Learn also to take heed of sin, yea of secret sins, 2 King. 17, 9.
lest we be secretly wasted, our graces cast into a consumption, our
comfortables wiped away, our consciences wearied with secret buffets, as being
smitten with the rod of Gods mouth, Esaias 11.4. our estates melted as the fat of
lambs before the fire, and our land insensibly wasted, and by degrees
desolated; as Ephraim and Judah were, as the Greek Empire was, and as it began
to be here with us, in Queen Mary's reign, which was never prosperous after
that she had abolished the Gospel: for beside foreign losses, of Calice,
Speed.
etc. extreme dearths raged, much hurt was done by thunder from heaven, and by
fire in the royal Navy, and all things went to worse, till Queen Elisabeth
came in, Q. Eliz. life by M. Clark. Mart. 2. part, page 319.
a repairer of the breach, a restorer of paths to dwell in, Esaias 53.12.
according to that glorious Epitaph, caused by King James to be inscribed upon
her Princely Monument by him erected.

Verse 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness,] i. e. Felt himself moth-eaten,
hard-driven, and at a very great under, as those must needs be whom God
sets against.

and Judah his wound,] Heb. his ulcer, that needs crushing to get out the
filth, Ier. 30.13. Obad. 7. Ephraim was sick, (God had made him sick in smiting
of him, Mich. 6.13.) and Judah was sore, yea ulcerated, impostumated, and they
were both sensible of it: but no otherwise then bruit beasts, which when they
are smitten or sick, feel it, and howl out, but have not the reason to think
whence the pain comes, what may be the cause, and cure of it. Ephraim and Judah
make out indeed for help, but they run to wrong remedies, and refuges: they
turn not to him that smote them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts:
therefore is not his anger turned away, but his hand is stretched out still,
Esaias 9.12, 13. If God be angry, no other helps can relieve us; no creature
comfort us; no combination with King Iareb secure us. In a Mine, if a damp
come, it is in vain to trust to your lights; they will burn blew and dim, and
at last vanish; you must make have to be drawn upward, if you will be safe. So
must men make to God; fleeing from his anger to his grace. Blood-letting is a
cure of bleeding, and a burn a cure against a burn; and the running to God is
the way to escape him; as to close and get in with him that would strike you,
does avoid the blow. In a tempest at Sea, it is very dangerous to strike to the
shore: the safest way is to have Sea-room, and to keep in the Main still, etc.
Iareb cannot be a Defender (according to the import of his name) if God come
against a people or person. Brass and Iron can fence a man against a bullet or
a sword; Esaias 30.33. D Rainolds, sermon. before Parl. July 27. 1642.
but if he were to be cast into a furnace of fire, it would help to torment
him; if into a pit of water to sink him. Now our God is a consuming fire, and
his breath a stream of brimstone, etc. as a Reverend man makes the comparison.

Then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and Judah sent to king Iareb,] Or, to the
king of Iareb, or to the king that should plead, and revenge his cause and
quarrel. Ad Regem propugnaturum, says Iunius. Help O king, said she in the
holy history. Kings should be Helpers, Propugnatours, Protectours. Sanctuaries
of safety to the oppressed, whether Subjects or Neighbors: such as the late
king of Sweden was to the oppressed Princes of Germany: And before him, Queen
Elisabeth to the Low-countrey-men; whose protection when she undertook, the
king of Sweden that then was said, Camd.
that she had taken the crown off her own head, and set it upon the head of
Fortune. But what a madness was it in Ephraim and Judab to call in the
Assyrian to their help, as they did, 2 King. 16.7. 2 Chronicles. 28.16, 21. but
especially 2 King. 15.19, 20. and 17.3. This was to invite the enemy into their
kingdom, and to show gold-thirsty Babel, where she might have her full
draught. Thus Judea was (after the return from Babylon) lost again to the
Romans, by their calling Pompey to decide the controversy betwixt the
disagreeing brethren. And such an ungain course was attempted by John King of
England, when, being overlaid in his Barons wars, Heyl. Geog.
he sent to the Monarch of Morocco for aid, offering to hold his kingdom of
him. and to receive the law of Mahomet; but he was rejected with scorn.
Afterward, he passed away his kingdom to the Pope, in hope of help; but had
so little joy of it, that he was heard to complain, Postquam me ac mea regna
(proh dolor.) Romans subjeci Ecclesia, nulla mihi prospera, sed omnia contraria
advenerunt, I never prospered since I subjected my self and my Kingdoms to the
Sea of Rome. No more did the Greek Churches, as above has been mentioned. By
iniquity, says Solomon, shall no man be established, Prove. 12.3. Shall they
escape by iniquity? Psalm. 56.7.
says David: What? no better means and ways to help themselves by? In thine
anger cast down such a people, O God. It is not more a prayer then a prophecy:
and it was fulfilled upon this people.

Yet could he not heal you, (...) medela.
nor cure you of your wound.] Kings have their names in Greek from healing:
they should be Physicians, and binders up of wounds, as Esaias 3.7. (see Corn. a
Lapide on that Text) But King Jareb proved a Physician of no value: instead of
healing the wound, he made it wider; instead of helping King Ahaz, 2 Chro.
28.20.
he distressed him, says the Text. The creature was never true to those that
trusted to it. Such are sure to be frustrated, Jer. 14.3. subjected to Gods
wrath, Psalm. 78.22. cursed with a curse, Jer. 17.5, 6. pointed at as forlorn
fools, Psalm. 52.7.

Verse 14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion,] I, that is, my Assyrian, the
rod of my wrath: will be as a lion, or leopard, a creature swift and fierce
above measure. Aelian. de var. hist. lib. 12. cap. 39.
The Vulgar renders it, a lioness, which, says Aelian, is robustissimum and
bellicosissimum animal, a most strong and stout creature: Hence Semiram's
gloried much, when in hunting she had taken not a lion, but a lioness. What is
stronger then a lion, said those Philistims to Sampson, Judge. 14.14. See 2 Some
1.23. Prove. 30.29. The Lion (but especially the young Lion, that is in his hot
blood) fears no other creature, falls upon his prey with great fury, and
teareth it; carries it away when he has done in his mouth, or devours it in
the place, and fears no rescue. If pursued, he alters not his gate though he
die for it. Some say that he is frighted at the crowing of a cock, or the
creaking of wheels. But the Lion of the tribe of Judah cannot be terrified by
any thing or turned out of his track. And Nebuchadnezzar his servant is often
compared to a Lion, Esa. 5.29. Jer. 41.7. Dan. 7.4. as being set awork by God
to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant, upon a perverse and perfidious Nation.
Hence that oft-repetition here of the pronoune I.

I, even I will tear and go away] Tear the very kell of their heart in sunder,
tear them by the teeth of my terrible sword, which shall devour flesh and drink
blood; yea be drenched and drunk in the gall of these ungodly wretches. They
have no way to help themselves better then to fall down flat before this Lion,
Satis est prostrasse leoni. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 15.
to rend their hearts and not their garments, to break off their sins by
repentance, and to be abrupt in the work, lest he tear them to pieces, and
there be none to deliver them. If this be not timely and truly done, God will
go on in his wrath: and of a moth and little worm become a ramping and a
roaring Lion. The little cloud though at first but as an handbredth, will soon
overspread the whole heaven: yea as one cloud follows thick upon another, so
will one judgment upon another, if the Sun of Repentance do not interpose and
disperse them. Light afflictions not improved to this purpose, will be but as a
drop of wrath forerunning the great storm: as a crack forerunning the ruin of
the whole building. That is a known text, If you will not yet for all this
hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more, and seven times more
and seven to that, Levit. 26.18, 28. Three several times God raises his note,
and he raises it by sevens; and those are discords in Music. Such saying will
be heavy songs, and their execution heavy pangs to the wicked.

Verse 15. I will go and return to my place] To my palace of Heaven: so the
Chaldee rendereth it, I will withdraw my Majesty, and return into the
habitation of my holiness, which is in heaven. I will go from them that they
may come to themselves, with the Prodigal: I will forget them that they may
remember themselves: I will trouble my self no further with them (when God
comes against sinners he is said to come out of his place, and so to disease
himself Esaias 26.21. with Lam. 3.33.) that they may be afflicted and weep and
mourn after me Jam. 4.9. I will take my rest, and I will consider in my
dwelling place, as Esaias 18.4. I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.20.
and they shall see that I will be as froward as they, for the hearts of them,
Ps. 18.26. I will gather them in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave
them there, Ezekiel. 22.20. that they may know the worth of my gracious presence,
(which they have not prized) by the want of it: and be pricked on thereby to
pray, Return O Lord: how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.
O satisfy us early with thy mercy, etc. Psalm. 90.13, 14. Thus mothers use to
leave their children (or at least turn their backs upon them) till they mourn
and make moan after them. Thus the Lion seems to leave her young ones, till
they have almost killed themselves with roaring and howling: but at last gasp
she relieves them, whereby they become the more courageous. God also will
return to his people, when they once turn short again upon themselves, and see
their sin-guiltinesse, and seek his favor. This is Gods end 1 Cor. 11.32. and
the happy effect of affliction sanctified, 1 King. 8.47.

Till they acknowledge their offence] Heb. Till they become guilty: till they
plead guilty, and carry themselves accordingly, blushing and bleeding in my
presence. Thus Saint James, Be afflicted, or be miserable, Chap. 4.9. ye are
so; but see your selves to be so: tremble and humble at Gods feet for mercy:
give glory to God my Son, and confess thy sin, Josh. 7.19. The viper beaten
casts up her poison. The traitor on the rack confesses all. He that in
affliction acknowledges not his offense, and seeks Gods face, is more
hard-hearted then a Jew, as is to be seen here and Psalm. 78.34. and 1 Samuel 7.6.
In the year of Grace 1556. at Weissenston in Germany, a Jew for theft was in
this cruel manner to be executed. He was hanged by the feet with his head
downward, betwixt two dogs, which constantly snatched and bit at him. The
strangenes of the torment moved Jacob Andreas, a grave Divine, to go to behold
it. Coming thither he found the poor wretch as he hung, repeating verses out of
the Hebrews Psalms, wherein he cried out to God for mercy. Andreas hereupon
took occasion to counsel him to trust in Jesus Christ, the true Savior of
mankind. Melch. Adam. in vit. Jac. Andreae.
the Jew embracing the Christian faith, requested but this one thing, that he
might be taken down and baptized, though presently after he were hanged again
(but by the neck as Christian malefactors suffered) which was accordingly
granted him. Lat. Sermon.
Latimer reports a like story of one in his time, who being executed at Oxford,
was cut down but not quite dead. And means being used to recover him, he came
again to himself, and then confessed all his villainy, which before he would not
be drawn to do. In the life of Master Perkins also mention is made of a lusty
fellow at Cambridge, who being upon the ladder and affrighted with the
forethought of hell torments, was called down a gain by Master Perkins, who
prayed with him and for him so effectually, as that the beholders could not but
see a blessed change thereby wrought in the prisoner; Master Fuller and Mr.
Clark in Mr. Perk. his life.
who took his death with such patience and alacrity, as if he actually saw
himself delivered from the hell which he feared before, and heaven opened for
the receiving of his soul to the great rejoicing of the beholders. How well
might these men say with Themistocles Periissem nisi periissem. I had been
undone, if I had not been undone. David was brought home by the weeping-crosse,
Psalm. (...). Herod. lib. 1. Alsted. Cbroni. page 325.
119.67. Affliction was a better Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth then Master
Ascham; Nocumenta documenta, said Craesus, when he was in the hands of his
enemies. The Burgundians well beaten by the Hunnes, fled to Christ the God of
the Christians, and embraced his Religion.

and seek my face] Out of a deep sense of their sin-guiltinesse. This is the
work of Faith, as the former of Repentance. God was not so gone from his
people, nor so far out of their call: but that if they could find a praying
heart, he would find a pitying heart: if they would acknowledge their offense;
he would forgive the iniquity of their sin, Psalm. 32.5. If they would set their
Faith a work (as she in the Gospel did, of whom it is said, that when Christ
would have hid himself, it could not be: for a certain woman whose daughter was
diseased, came and fell at his feet, fetched him out of his retiring-room Mark
7.24.25.) he would break the heavens and come down from his place Isai. 64.1,
2. he would come leaping over all lets and impediments, those mountains of
Bether or of division, to the relief of his people (See this set forth Cant. 5.
with the Notes there.) Provided that they seek not so much their own ease and
ends as his face and favor, the sense of his presence and light of his
countenance, the fear of his name, and comforts of his spirit. Thus David Psalm.
63.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee
in a dry and barren Land. Carnal prayers in time of misery are but such as the
dry earth, or the hungry raven make. They are the prayers of nature for ease,
not of the spirit for grace: such as was that of Pharaoh, when the rack made
him roar, the rod slatter. See Zach. 7.5, 6. with the Notes.

In their affliction they will seek me early] Manicabunt. (...). Sept.
They will morning me, so the Orginall has it. They will do it, says God, for
I will give them to do it; both to will it, and to work it: for otherwise
afflictions (Gods hammers) do but beat cold iron: wicked men grow worse for
corrections, as water is more cold after a beat, as naughty boys are more
stubborn or more stupid after a whipping. These also may cry to God, as
prisoners at the bar, or malefactors upon the rack: yea seek him early, after
a sort, and yet not find him Prove. 1.27. no though they seek him with their
herds and flocks. Hos. 5.6. because they seek him not early, and earnestly, or
diligently as Prove. 7.15. inflamedly as Baruch Nehe. 3.20. and Jabez 1 Chro.
4.10. accurately and anxiously, as the Church sought her beloved Cant. 5.1. as
the Virgin Mary sought her lost Son. Luke 2. they seek him, not for himself,
but for his corn wine and oil Hos. 7.14. they seek not him but his; they seek
him not till they have nothing else to seek to. Most justly therefore may God
reject their suits and regest upon them, Judge. 10.
Depart from me ye wicked, Get ye to the gods whom ye have chosen, etc. Justly
may he say to them as once Jephta did to his country men. Do ye now come to me
in your distress, who in your prosperity said unto me, Depart from us, we will
none of the knowledge of thy ways? Those that will find God must seek him
early. O satisfy us early with thy mercies, Psalm. 90.14. They must seek him
early and late too Esaias 26.9. always and by all means, as the Apostle speaks
in another case; but especially in affliction, as here; for he looks for it.
Our Savior being in an agony prayed more intensively; so did David out of the
deep, Jonah out of the whales belly, the Church when she was in danger, as she
thought of losing God, then she set up her note and cried, Thou art put in the
midst of us, Jer. 14.9.
leave us not Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam. Thus afliction exciteth devotion
in the Saints: and although they seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face
evermore, yet especially, In their distress they cried unto the Lord, and he
hears them, Psalm. 120.1. in the night of affliction they take the light of a
lively faith, and seek him early. And that they may not fail to find him, they
call in help of others, as here in the next chapter. Come and let us return,
etc.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. COme and let us return unto the Lord, etc. So sweetly was Gods
expectation answered: as likewise it was in David Psalm. 27.8. No sooner could
God say, Seek ye my face, but his holy heart answered (as it were by an echo)
Thy face Lord will I seek. Look what God aims at in his administration to his
elect he will have it: He will have out the price of his Sons blood, who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, etc. Tit. 2.14.
and that he might give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Act.
5.31. See the proof and practice hereof in these Jewish converts. Come and let
us return to the Lord, etc. See how in those days and at that time the
children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going
and weeping they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way
to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Jer. 54, 5.
Come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that
shall not be forgotten. Judah and Israel could not agree at other times: but
when they are in a weeping condition, then they could, when they passed through
the valley of Bara, Psalm. 84.
and made it a Bochim with their penitent tears, even they could go from
strength to strength, or from company to company (one company coming this way,
and another that) and not rest until every one of them in Zion appears
before God. Psalm. 84.6.^.
This was fulfilled, partly when the Lord turned again, the captivity of Zion
out of Babylon, and those that had sown in tears reaped in joy: those that went
forth weeping and bearing precious seed came again with rejoicing and brought
their sheaves with them, Psalm. 126.5.6. confer Jer. 29.13. partly, under their
captivity and oppression by the Romans, which was when Christ came and by his
Apostles converted thousands to the faith, so that multitudes of them were
^aily added to the Church, Acts 2. and 3. And lastly at that long looked for
calling of the Jews; when they shall fly to Christ crucified as the doves
unto their windows; Isai. 60.20.
when they shall bring their brethren as an offering to the Lord upon horses,
in chaerets, and in litters: that is, though sick, weakly and unfit for
travel, yet rather in litters, then not at all; every one exciting other, and
saying, Come and let us return unto the Lord. etc. Return unto him, from whom
we children of Israel have deeply revolted. Isai. 31.6.
Let us not pine away in our transgressions, aa those Ezekiel. 33.10. for yet
there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. we have done all this
wickedness; yet let us not turn aside from following the Lord: for this were
to add rebellion to sin, 1 Samuel 12.20. this were worse then all the rest.

Come let us return unto the Lord] By our sins we have run from him: by
repentance let us return unto him. See for this the Note on Zach. 1.2. If the
wicked have their Come, Prove. 1.11. Esaias 56. ult. should not the Saints have
theirs? as Esaias 2.3. Zech. 13.21. See the Note. Should not Andrew call Philip,
and Philip Nathaneel, as one link in a chain does another, etc. True grace is
communicative, charity is no churl; the Saints like not to go to heaven alone.

For he has torn] Rapuit not cepit, as the vulgar, by a foul mistake of capio
for rapio in the Hebrew Lexicons. Here these converts confess that their
affliction neither came forth of the dust, Job 5.6. nor without their desert:
they acknowledge God to be the Lion that tore them, Chap. 5.14. and not without
cause: for that they had wickedly departed from him. This is is one property of
true repentance, still to justify God, and to say as Mauritius the Emperor
did (after David) when he saw his wife and children slain by the traitor
Phocas, etc. Righteous art thou, O Lord in all thy ways, and just in all thy
proceedings. Another property of it is, Psa. 119.137.
to bring a man to God with some assurance of healing.

He will heal us,] For he is Jehovah the Physician, Exodus 15.26. Now
Omnipotenti medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus, says Isidore, To an
Almighty Physician, no disease can be uncurable. Ephraim went to the Assyrian
upon sight of his disease; but he could not heal him, Chap. 5.13. But God both
can and will. Here he is compared both to a Physician, he will heal; and to a
Surgeon, he will bind up. That which the Poets fable concerning Telephus his
Spear, is here only verified: Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque ferat. Initium
poenitentiae est sensus clementiae Dei.
The same holy hand that tare us, must cure us: and the sound persuasion of his
readiness to do it for us, will soonest of any thing bring us into his
presence. Judas confesses his wound, and despaireth of the cure. But Peter is
constrained by the love of Christ to weep bitterly, and believe. A stroke from
guilt broak Judas his heart into despair: but a look from Christ brake Peter's
heart into tears. There is no mention of Isreal's lamenting after the Lord,
while he was gone: but when he was returned, and settled in Kiriath-jearim, then
they poured forth water, etc. 1 Samuel 7. then they gather about him, and will do
any thing that he commands them. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, Heb. 11.22.

Deijcit ut relevet: premit ut solatia praestet,
Enecat, ut possit vivificare, Deus.
Verse 2. Jer. 18.12.
After two days will he revive us,] Whereas some of those that were called
upon to Come and return unto the Lord, might say with those in Jeremy, Nay, for
there is no hope, Psalm. 88.5.
God has mortally wounded us, so that we are already in the jaws of death,
free among the dead, as the Psalmist has it, free of that company: The better
sort of them, fullest of faith, answer: Dead though we be, yet God will revive
us: and long though it seem, yet after two days, or such a matter, in a very
short space, so soon as ever it shall be convenient, and for our greatest good,
He that shall come to our comfort, Heb. 10.37.
will come, and will not tarry. And for the certainty of it, as sure as the
third day follows the second, so sure shall deliverance come in due season:
fear ye not.

In the third day he will raise us up,] He will, he will, never doubt of it. O
the Rhetoric of God! O the certainty of the promises! See the like
expressions, Esaias 26.20. and 10.25. Hagg. 2.7. Habak. 2.3. Heb. 10.37. and have
patience. Gods help seems long, becauser we are short: Nec quia dura, sed quia
molles patimur. We should draw forth hope as a line: Senecal Joh. 13.7.
and think we hear Christ saying as he did to Peter, What I do thou know not
now, but thou shall know hereafter.

Verse 3. Sciemus sectabimur que. Vatabl.
Then shall we know,] Heb. And we shall know, we shall follow on to know, i. e.
We shall experimentally know the Lord, if we turn unto him: we shall taste and
see that the Lord is good. We shall not only be raised out of the dust of
deaeth, that is, of deep afflictions, (wherein we lay as among the pots) and
live in his sight, Psalm. 22.15. Psalm. 68.13.
that is, comfortably; but we shall know him, which is life eternal; yea we
shall prosecute knowledge, follow on to know, as unsatisfiable, and not content
with any measures already required: yea we shall proceed therein and make
progress, as the morning light does to the perfect day. Those that turn from
their iniquities shall understand Gods truth, Dan. 9.13. shall be of his
Council, Psalm. 25.14. shall have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. the wisdom
of God in a mystery, verse 7. such as the great Rabbis of the world can no
more understand, then the Philistines could Sampsons riddle, verse. 8. yea these
pure in heart shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. see him and live, see him, and eat and
drink, being much acheared and refreshed, as those Nobles of Israel, Exodus
24.10, 11. Provided that being on^^ enlightened, and having tasted of the
heavenly gift, they be not slothful, but show the same diligence, Heb. 6.4,
11, 12. in the use of means to get more knowledge, till they all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. or, (as
the words may be read) of that age wherein Christ fills all in all, Ephesians.
3.19. so as to be able to comprehend with all Saints the several dimensions,
and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, Lo, this is indeed to
follow on to know the Lord: when we are still adding to our virtue knowledge,
till (with those famous Romans) we be full of goodness, Romans 15.14.
filled brim-full with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another,
saying, Come, and let us return to the Lord, etc. Come ye, and let us walk in
the light of the Lord, Esaias 2.5. walk in that light we have, and we shall have
more: for to him that has, sc. for use and practice, shall be given, Mar.
4.25. He that first begs, and then digs for knowledge, searching for her as for
hid treasure, Prove. 2.3, 4. He shall be sure of some daily comings in from
Christ: he shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God, verse 5. Christ will say unto him, as once he did to Nathaneel, Thou shall
see greater things then these, John 1.50. even great and mighty things, which
thou know not, Ier. 33.3.

His going forth is prepared as the morning,] That is, as sure as the morning
follows the night, and shines more and more unto the perfect day; so sure
shall God appear for our comfort, and shall dispell the night of our calamity.
Psalm. 30.
Mourning lasts but till morning; and as before the morning-light is the
thickest darkness, so before deliverance our afflictions are usually increased
upon us. God appears on the sudden and beyond expectation, (...)
(as out of a cloud, or as out of an engine) and shows himself then usually,
when things are at worst. Hence that of Job, Post tenebras spero lucem: and
that of the Church in Micah, Though I fall, Mich. 7.8.
I shall arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
Vatablus applies this Text to the coming of Christ, that day star from on
high, Orietur Christus ut aurora qua ad^entu suo depellit tenebras.
that Sun of righteousness, to whom all the Prophets point Gods people, when
they would comfort them indeed; for he is the Consolation of Israel, the Desire
of all Nations, for whom their souls waited more then they that watch for the
morning, wait for the morning, Psalm. 130.6. But because Gods going forth is
opposed to his departure, when he retired to his place, Chap. 5.10. therefore
his settled going forth here, is by most interpreted of his manifestations of
his mercy to his poor prisoners of hope, those disconsolate captives, whom he
not only brought back from Babylon, but also shined into some of their hearts,
2 Cor. 4.6.
by the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

and he shall come unto us as the rain,] As the showers of blessing, Ezekiel.
34.26. rain of liberalities, Psalm. 68.9. rain of righteousness, Hos. 10.12.
Cito exaudi me Domine: complue me, says Austin upon those words of David, My
soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land. Hear me quickly, O Lord, rain
righteousness upon my dry soul, fill me with the fruits of thy Spirit; whose
work it is to illuminate and sanctify, as it is the Fathers to heal, verse 1.
and the Sons to revive, and raise us together with himself, the first fruits of
them that sleep, verse 2.

as the latter and former rain unto the earth.] sc. in perfection of gifts and
graces, by degrees wrought in our hearts: Or, in seasonable and suitable
comforts, as rain in seed-time, softening the ground: and a little before
harvest, to plump and fill up the corn in the ear.

Verse 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee, etc?] See how soon the Prophet
changes his note. Hitherto he had set forth their repentance, in sense of
mercy: now all on the sudden, he upbraideth and threatens them for their
incorrigiblenesse, and inconstancy. Ministers must turn themselves, as it were,
into all shapes and fashions, both of speech and spirit, to win people to God.
Aarons bells must be wisely rung, says One. Sometimes the Treble of Mercy
sounds well. M. Neh. Rog.
At other times the Tenor of Judgment, or Counter-tenour of reproof sounds
better: and it often falls out that the Mean of Exhortation sounds best of all.
It is his wisdom to observe circumstances, and know how to curse as well as
bless, chide as well as comfort, and speak war to a rebel, as well as peace
to a friend. And herein indeed lies the wisdom and faithfulness of a Teacher.
Then, and only then shall he prove himself sincere, and unpartiall, when he
holds this course. What shall I do unto unto thee? It is, as if God should say,
I have done mine utmost, as Esaias 5.5. Mich. 5.3. and now am at a stand, and can
scarce tell what to do more. See the like expostulatory complaints, Ier. 2.30,
31. and Chap. 5.3. Amos 4.6. Esaias 26.10. Matthew. 11.16, 17, 18. and 23.37. I
would, but thou would not. As the loving hen is always caring for her
chickens, and calling them about her, that she may gather and guard them from
the mischief of all vermin: but they will needs be straggling, and so perish. So
if Gods people will not hearken to his voice, if Israel will none of him: what
can he do less then give them up to their own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81.12. yea
give them up to the devil, to be further hardened to their just destruction,
saying, That which will die, let is die? All that God can do is, as here, to
mourn for their obstinacy, and fool-hardinesse in rejecting his grace, as he
wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. We should also do the like, Esaias 24.16. Jer.
4.19. Rom 9.2. Acts 2.40.
crying out with Esaias, My leanness, my leanness! and with Jeremy, My bowels,
my bowels! and with Paul, I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my
heart, for my perverse Contrymen. Peter calls them, an untoward
generation: such crooked pieces that there was no working upon them. A cunning
Carver can cut the similitude of any creature, yet not on a crooked or rotten
stick. Where lies the fault? surely in the crookedness of the stick, and not
in the Carvers cunning: so is it here. When men wrestle with God, as Deuteronomy.
32.5. shift him off, (...).
as the Apostles word signifies, Heb. 12.25. take up the bucklers against the
sword of his Spirit, lest it should prick them at heart, as Acts 2.37. and let
out the lifeblood of their lusts, that they might live; what can the Lord do
in this case, more then pity their unhappiness, and punish them for their
stubbornness, as the Judge pitieth a malefactor, as he is a man, but yet
condemns him as a thief or murderer? Tell me not here, that God could have
done more for Ephraim and Judah then the did; Matt. 8.2.
and they might have said in answer to Gods question here, as that Leper in the
Gospel did. Why? Lord if thou will thou can make me clean. Hence it is, God
by his absolute power can make iron swim, rocks stream forth water, stones to
yield children to Abraham: he can do whatsoever he pleases; save without
means, etc. But it is his actual power that man must look to. And so he
(having tied the end and the means together) cannot (say Divines) because he
will not, bring men to the end, without their using those means which tend unto
the end: for that is the ordinary course which he has decreed to use, and
which he will not alter, but upon special occasion, as our Savior notes in
the cure of Naaman, and in the feeding of the widow of Sarepta, Luke 4.26.27.

for your goodness is as the morning cloud, etc.] This people hearing God say,
What shall I do unto you? might possibly reply; why? what should you do, but
rain down righteousness upon us, and load us with loving-kindnesses? for we
are good all over, we have returned and done right in thy sight, as it is said
of those hypocrites, Ier. 34.15, 16. and as Peter says of some Apostates in
his time, that they were clean escaped from them who live in error: and (for
matter of practice) they had also escaped the pollutions of the world; knew the
way of ^ighteousnesse, and seemed very forward in it; were as the fore-horses
in a Teem, ^ing-leaders of good exercises, etc. who yet afterward fell off to
the world, tur^ (...) from the holy commandments, and returned with the dog,
to their vomit, and with the washed sow to her wallowing again in the mire. And
this is that which the Lord here upbraideth this people with, (and so stops
their mouths) viz. that their goodness, or mercifulness, their piety toward
God, and charity toward men, ^as nothing else but a morning-cloud, Jude ver. 12.
a waterlesse cloud, as Jude has it, a mere flaunt, or flash, an outside
only, an empty sound, a vain pretense; It was also as the morningdew, which is
soon dried up by the Sunbeams: In a word, they were both false and fickle,
unsteady and unstable, constant only in their inconstancy. Hence this
patheticall complaint of them; God knew not where to have them, and therefore
not what to do with them. These were never right with God, because not steadfast
in his covenant, Psalm. 78.36, 37. they are unstable as water, therefore they
shall not excel, Genesis 49.4. they never were a willing people in the day of
Christ's power, Psalm. 110 3. his power was never put forth upon them, to subdue
their wills to Gods will. They never yet attained to that spirit of power, of
love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. Inconstancy comes from weakness. The
strength of Israel repents not, 1 Samuel 15.29.

Verse 5. Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets,] Therefore? wherefore?
because there is so little stability, and solidity in them: because they are so
off and on, so light and false hearted; therefore I have spared for no pains,
(though all to small purpose) but have sharply rebuked them, that they might be
sound in the faith: yea I have sought against them with the sword of my mouth,
Rev. 2.16.
and slain them by powerful convictions of conscience: so that they are
self-condemned, and the judgments are written, as it were with a beam of the
Sun, they are so clear to themselves and others. This is the coherence, and the
reason of the illative particle Therefore. It is the sad complaint of a late
Reverend writer, when we have spent all our wind on our people, their hearts
will be still apt to be carried away with every wind of doctrine. They are
won, says another, with an apple, and lost with a nut: no man knows where to
find them in one mind for a months space: such a generation of Moon-calves
never appeared in the world before. Our giddy-hearers (says a third) after all
our pains taken with them, have no mould, but what the next teacher casts
them into; being blown like glasses, into this or that shape at the pleasure of
his breath. But to return to the Text.

I have hewed them by the Prophets] who are here compared to Masons or
stonehewers, 2 King. 12.12. 1 Chronicles. 22.2. Job 19.24. Esaias 51.1. to Carpenters
1 King. 5.15. Prove. 9.1. Esaias 5.2. to day-labourers who dig pits and cisternes
Deuteronomy. 6.11. and 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 26.10. Neh. 9.25. Jer. 2.13. A ministers life is
no idlemans occupation; they meet with many rough stones, knotry pieces, hard
quarres, tough work. Some are stones crumbling, all to crattle, as soon as we
begin to hammer them; and as timber falling to splinters when we fall to hewing
of them: and other such sons of Belial there are that a man cannot speak to
them: 1 Samuel 25.17. they are thorns that cannot be taken with hands, but the
man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron, and with the staff of a
spear. These shall be thrust away as thorns, and utterly burnt with fire, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. And for the better sort, those lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5, and
smoother pieces that are to be set into Gods building, being made by his grace
more malleable and tractable, there must be a great deal of pains taken with
them, that they may be as the polished corners of the Temple: they must be
humbled and hammered, Ier. 23.29. pared and planed here in the mount; for there
may neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron be heard in the heavenly
house, for which they are fitting, 1 Kin. 6.7. And herein we are laborers
together with God; ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building, 1 Cor. 3.9. In
which labourous kind of life, I endure all things for the Elects sake, that
they may be saved, says Paul, 2 Timothy 2.10. And I dare be bold to say, says
Luther, that faithful Ministers do labor and sweat more in a day, then
husbandmen do in a month. And for mine own part, says he, Si mihi esset
integrum vocationem deserere, If it were lawful for me to leave my calling, I
could with less pains and more pleasure, dig and do day-work, then labor as I
now do, in the work of the ministry. Pareus thinks that the next words,

I have killed them with the words of my mouth] is spoken by God of the
Prophets. q. d. I have set them so heavy a task and put them so hard to it,
that it has been the death of them; such crabbed and rugged spirits they have
met with, such stubborn and tough timber that had long lain soaking in the
waters of wickedness: these tools of mine are even worn out with working. But
though this be a pious interpretation, and not altogether improbable, because
of the change of person here, viz. them for you: yet because such a change is
ordinary in Scripture and Emphatical also; namely when God seems deeply
displeased with any one, and therefore leaves taking to him, and turns himself
suddenly to another (see chap. 4.14. and 5.3.4.) I conceive it may very well be
so in this place. Sic enim contemptim loqui mur.
Occidi istos I have slain these refractaries and rebels with the words of my
mouth. I have beaten so hard upon their consciences, that they have had no joy
of their lives. I have marked them out for destruction, by threatening it, as
Jer. 18.7.8. and chapter 1.10. Elisha has his sword as well as Jehu and Hazael, 1
King. 19.17. and when Elisha unsheatheth and brandisheth his sword, it is a
fair warning that the sword of Jehu and Hazael are at hand. See Ezekiel. 11.13.
And it came to pass that when I prophesied, Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died.
So did Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. So do many despisers now adays, though it
appear not by them. A man may have his bane about him, though he fall not down
dead in the place. If any man hurt Christ's two witnesses, fire (though not
felt) proceeds out of their mouths and devoureth their enemies. Rev. 11.5.

And thy judgments are as the light that goes forth] i. e. I have clearly
denounced them and will as openly execute them in the sight of this Sun. The
righteous shall see it and shall say, Lo this is the man, etc. Psa. 2.6.7. and
119.137. Thou, by thine hypocrisy, and external services, as verse 6. has
cast a mist before men's eyes, that they cannot think thee to be so near a
judgment: but I will dispell that mist, and make my works a comment upon my
word: and having sent unto thee a powerful ministry, but to no purpose, I
will make thee, who would not hear the word, to hear the rod, and who has
appointed it. Mic. 7.9.

Verse 6. For I desired mercy and not sacrifice] that is, rather then
sacrifice: I prefer the marrow and pith of the second table, before the
ceremony and surface of the first.

I desired mercy] Heb. (...)
I desired it with singular delight and complacency, Aurea certe sententia,
says Rivet. This is a golden sentence, twice quothed by Christ himself, Mat.
9.13. and Mat. 12.7. which notes the eminency of it. And with it agrees that
answer of the Scribe so much approved of by our Savior Mar. 12.33. To love thy
neighbor as thy self is more then all burnt-offerings and sacrifices. And that
of the Author to the Hebrews. But to do good and to communicate forget not:
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased Chap. 13.16. a great deal better
pleased then with all the outward services and sacrifices of the Law, which yet
were commanded by God, but not to be rested in. These be famous sentences
indeed; M. Sam. Clark, Life of Luth.
such as a man would fetch upon his knees from Rome or Jerusalem, as a Reverend
man says of certain brave sayings of Luther, which he had recited. Mercy is
here put for all the duties of charity; as the knowledge of God is for those
other of Piety, whereof it is the rise and foundation. Mercy is set first non
ut potior sed ut notior, not as better but as better known, and more noriced.
They are set together, because they must not be sundred in our practice.
Obedience must be universal, extending to the Compass of the whole Law. A man
must not be funambulus virtutum, as Tertullian speaks, going in a narrow track
of obedience, picking and choosing what he will do and what not; following God
in such duties as will suit with him and no further. He must follow after God
as Caleb Number. 14.14. have respect to all Gods commandments, Act. 13.
and do all his wills, as David walked in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless, as Zachrry and Elizabeth Luke 16. These partial and
perverse Jews walked in all the ordinances, but they cared not for the
commandments: they were altogether for the ceremonial Law, but neglected the
moral. Or if they did any thing that way, it was but the outward act of a
commandment, which men may naturally perform. Thus Ahab humbled himself: and
some think that Vria (which Esaias calls the faithful witness) the same with
him that brought in the Altar of Damascus, Esaias. 8.2. 2 Kin. 16.10.
yet reputed a faithful man of his word. An hypocrite may show mercy, but not
love mercy, Mic. 6.8. and know God, but not affectively, practically, according
to that of Saint John, Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments, 1 John 2.23. This is that obedience which is better then
sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. Ier. 7.21. and no wonder, Quia per victimas, aliena
caro, per obedientiam voluntas propria mactatur, (...). Isoc.
says one; in sacrifices the flesh of another, but in obedience our own wills
are offered up: and this the very Heathen, by the dim rush-light of nature, saw
to be better. Hold thou it the fairest sacrifice and best service, to keep thy
self pure and upright, says Isocrates. O Nicocles. And, Non bove Mactato
coelestia numina gaudent.
Sed, quae praestanda est and sine test, fides.
Ovid. Epist.


Verse. 7. But they like, men] Heb. like Adam, that Arch-Reb^l, that old (...),
after the similitude of whose transgression these men had sinned, Romans 5.14.
and so deserved, in like sort to be punished, by being cast out of their
country, as he was out of paradise. Thus some sense it: as if the prophet
would here reduce these covenant-breakers, to that first transgressour Adam in
whom they all were; as the whole country is in a Parliament Man, and as Levi
was in Abraham's loins, and paid tithes in him, Mercer. Tremell. Vatabl.
Clavius. Tigurin. Perinde ac foedus alicujus hominis infimi and infirmi. Polan.
Heb. 7.9. Others take Adam for an Appellative, and give a reason for it out of
the text, because it is Keadam, and not Kahadam, with (...) emphatical. And of
these some again read it thus, Illi tanquam hominis transg^^ssi sunt foedus,
they transgressed the covenant, as if it had been a man's covenant: they made no
more of breaking it, then as if they had had to do with dust and ashes like
themselves, with their fellow creatures, and not with the great God: and might
therefore deal by their covenants, as monkeyes do by their collars, which they
fit on for their masters pleasure, and slip off again for their own. Others
read it, as we do; They like men have transgressed, etc. sorry men fickle and
falshearted men, such as David pointed at, when he said, All men are liars, and
Paul, 2 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not carnal, Psalm. 116.11.
and walk as men, that is, as profane men, alients from the commonwealth of
Israel? Singular things are expected from Gods peculiar, Mat. 5.47. as to be
eminent in good works, Tit 3.14. to get above others, as Saul was above the
people by head and shoulders; to get to the very top of godliness, as the
Apostles phrase imports, (...). Ishon.
Esai. 5.15. to keep Gods covenant as the apple of the eye, as Solomon says,
Prove. 7.2. that little man in the eye, that cannot be touched but he will be
distempered. This the world counts preciseness, and makes nothing of
transgressing, of leaping over the hedge of any commandment, so they may shun a
piece of foul way. Lo, this is the manner of most men, yea, of all men by
nature; they make no bones of transgressing the laws, of changing the
ordinance, of breaking the everlasting covenant, Esaias. 24.5. And this when they
do, they work de suo and secundum hominem; for Homo est inversus Decalogus, the
natural man stands acrosse to the law of God, to the whole Decalogue: the two
tables whereof are called the tables of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.9, 11. Neither is
this any excusing or extenuation of their sin, that they do but their kind,
they do it as men. It is an aggravation rather, q. d. They not only
transgress my covenant, but they do it naturally, and out of the vileness of
their proper inclinations: like as the devil, when he speaks a lie, he
speaks, de suo of his own, Joh. 8.44. he can do no otherwise. It is as
impossible for those that are carnal and walk as men to keep covenant with God,
as for a toad to spit cordials. If at any time they make an overture of doing
it, if they make an essay, it is but as the morning cloud, and as the early dew
that goes away, as verse. 5. with which this verse cohereth; the 6. verse
coming in. as it were by a parenthesis.

There have they dealt treacherously against me,] There? where? in the very
point of the covenant, which by their sacrifices and burnt-offerings they so
solemnly professed and engaged to observe: lo, therein have they prevaricated,
and then at the same time have they falsified, as the same word is used, Psalm.
14.5. I have been near in their mouth, but far from their reins, Jer. 9.2. In
words they profess to know me, but in works they deny me, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. Or there, that is,
(as the Chaldee Paraphrast senseth it,) In that good land which I have given
them, even in Gilead, as in the next words. They live in my good land, but not
by my good laws: yea, they have filled it (as the cursed Canaanites did before
them, Ezra. 9.11.) from one end to another with their uncleanness, which
therefore longs for a vomit to cast them out: There have they dealt
treacherously, as the adulteress does, who forsakes the guide of her youth,
and forgets the covenant of her God. The sins of such as break covenant with
God are sins of a double die; they are wickedness with a witness, because
they do wickedly against the covenant, Dan. 11.32. Prove. 2.17.
these treacherous dealers deal treacherously, yea, these treacherous dealers
deal very treacherously, Isay. 24.16. And this they have done against Me, who
have stooped so low, as to strike a covenant with them; and such a covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5. and have never failed or falsified. See Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25.

Verse. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity,] Another Poeniropolis;
such a city there was in Greece, and so called by king Philip, for the
naughtiness of the Inhabitants. This Gilead was one of those ten cities of
refuge beyond Jordaen, given to the Priests for a possession, Josh. 21.36, etc.
and probably the chief city, which therefore bare the name of the whole
country, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece. The inhabitants thereof
(though Levites) were the worst of men, (...).
workers of iniquity, such as did wickedly with both hands, earnestly wearying
themselves in the Devils drudgery; and then sitting down to rest them in the
chair of pestilence. There is not a worse creature upon earth, or so fit for
hell, as a profane Priest, a debauched Minister, Mat. 5.13. Corruption optimi
pessima, as the sweetest wine makes the sowrest vinegar, as the finest flesh is
resolved into the vilest earth; and as the whitest ivory burnt, becomes the
blackest coal: Who would have looked for so much wickedness at Gilead, at
Shiloh, at Anathoth, at Jerusalem where the Priests and Scribes bare sway, and
did dominari in suggestis? And yet that once faithful city was become an
harlot: it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, Isay. 1.21.
but now murderers, In our Savours time it was Prophetarum macellum, the
slaughterhouse house of the Saints; as now Rome is, and once London was in
bloody Bonners days: Act. and Mon.
whom a certain good woman once told in a letter, that he was deservedly called
the common cutthroat, and general flaughter-slave to all the Bishops of
England. At his death he boasted (as Stokesley had done before him) how many
heretics he had burned: seven hundred saints in four or five years space those
bloody and deceitful men sent to heaven, in fiery charets. There are none so
cruel to the lives of men as wicked Clergy.

Gilead was polluted with blood,] Ezekiel. 33.7. and 3.18.
not only with the blood of souls, (by their default drowned in perdition and
destruction) but of bodies too, destroyed by their hands or means. The Priests
of these times may seem, by what is said of them in the next verse, to have
been men of their hands, the sworn swordmen of the devil, such as was
Timotheus Herulus Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 467. Pope Innocent who threw
Peter's keys into the river Tiber, and took up Paul's sword, as he called it,
and that Philip Bishop of Beau-vieu in France, taken in a skirmish by our
Richard the first, who sent his armor to the Pope with these words engraved on
it, Vide number filii tui tunica sit, vel non, See whether this be the coat of thy
son, or of a son of Mars. These, and their like in their several generations,
were non Pastores sed Impostores, non Doctores sed Seductores, non Episcopi sed
Aposcopi, as an Ancient has it: And indeed, the Church has ever been so
pestered with lewd and lazy Ministers (those dehonestamenta Cleri) that
Chrysostom thought there were scarce any of that order in his time, that could
be saved: Hierome says, that the paucity of such as were good, had made them
very precious. And Campian cries out, not altogether without cause (Malice may
be a good informer though an ill Judge) Ministris eorum nihil vilius; Now this
is here instanced as an odious transgression of the covenant, when such as made
such a show of sacrifice to God, should exercise so little mercy to men: when
such as should be Teachers, were turned Tyrants and bloodsuckers.

Verse 9. And as troops of robbers wait for a man,] This verse has much of the
former in it, says an Interpreter. The sum of it is, says Wigandus, to show,
that all the forementioned wickednesses were committed, instinctu doctorum, by
the instinct of their Priests, who were now turned Tories or Mosse-troopers.
Hierome asked his Jew-doctour the meaning of this text, and received this
answer: that at the time of the Passover and the Pentecost, the people used to
come to Jerusalem; and as they were going in their journey, these Priests would
stand in the way and slay them. Others think, that these corrupt priests took
into their city of refuge diverse thieves and murderers; who not having
whereupon otherwise to subsist, turned hiwaymen, (as they call them) and
returning again into the city, divided the spoil with the Priests, who had
their share: and are therefore called companions of robbers, and are said to
murder in the way by consent, or with one shoulder, or as Simeon and Levi did
at Shechem q. d. Sichemicc crastily and cruelly (for so many ways these words
are rendered) and all this they did of malice forethought, Ex destinatae malitia
and inito consilio.
of prepensed mischief, called here committing lewdness. Even as they thought
in their hearts, so they acted, says King David. They executed the counsel of
the wicked, says the Chaldee Paraphrast. Non tam ovum ovo simile. Faciunt
quicquid cognitant.
They machinated mischief, and then practiced what they had plotted with a
deliberate will, and as it were with an high hand. Look now upon the Popish
Monks, says Tarnonius, and compare them with these Priests whom Hosea
reproves. And Luther says, that they had a proverb in Germany, that there was
nothing so bad, which the Monks could think of, but they would dare to do it.

Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effrenis Monachus, --
Verse. 10. I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel,] Now a very
den of thieves, as verse. 9. a Panthion of all sorts of idols, a chamber of
imagery, an Egyptian Temple, gay and goodly without, but within an ox or
calfe, with women weeping for Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.12.14. that is, for Osyris King
of Egypt, whose image (under the shape of an ox) his wife Isis had advanced to
be idolatrously there adored. Cap. 6.
This kind of abomination Jeroboam had learned in Egypt (whither he fled from
Solomon his master) and brought into the house of Israel. And whereas those
Idolaters said, The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth, Ezekiel.
8.12. I have seen it, says God, and been sore troubled at it, and even
affrighted; so as a man is quando horripilatur, when his hairs stand an end; as
when the devil appears to him like an hairy Satyr. See Lev. 17.7. with the
Note. Certain it is, that God hates sin (but especially Idolatry, that
abominable thing, as he calls it, Jer. 44 4.) worse then he hates the devil
himself: for he hates the devil for sins sake, and not sin for the devils
sake. Idolatry must needs be so much the more odious to him, because therein
the devil sets up himself in the place of God; and requires men (as once he did
Christ himself) to fall down and worship him. See Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20.
Rev. 9.20. So he deals by the poor Indians at this day, compelling them to
worship him with bodily worship, and tormenting them, if they do not, worse (if
worse may be) then the cruel Spaniards; Sir Francis Drake World encomp. 53.
who suppose they show the wretches favor, when they do not, for their
pleasure, whip them with cords, and day by day drop their naked bodies with
burning bacon The Hebrew word here used, has some letters more then ordinary
in it, to increase the signification, and to show what a very horrible thing
Idolatry is. It is spurca pollutio, Tremel. in loc.
as Jer. 23.14. and worse. See Jer. 2.11, 12. and 18.13. and know that God does
not use to aggravate things beyond truth, as men do, witness Nebuchadnezzar,
(...)
Dan. 3.14. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego? Or, is it of set
purpose? so Buxtorf renders it. Is it for the nonce, to provoke me? Number de
industria?
Or Nunquid desolatio? so Arias Moutanus: As if he should say, What? you, to
oppose the command of a king? If this be suffered, what desolation must needs
follow? But this is not Gods way: he lays no more words upon a thing, then the
matter amounts to if he call Idolatry, filth, fornication, abomination, an
horrible thing, such as a man would start, or stand aghast at, we may be sure it
is so. The Septuagint here, render it (...), things to be trembled at, or
shreeked at. In Barbary it is death for the Xeriffs wife, when she sees a man,
though but through a casement, not suddenly to shriek out. God is a jealous God,
and allows not his to look toward an Idol. If they do, he will soon see it, and
visit for it. I have seen, etc.

There is the whoredom of Ephraim,] Thus God looks upon it as filthiness,
and nastinesse, which the people beheld as finenesse and neatness. And the
same do all (that have the mind of God, and senses exercised to discern
betwixt good and evil) judge of all the Popish pomp and palterment, wherewith
they bewitch the deluded vulgar, as the serpent Scytale does the fleeing
passenger, whom when she cannot overtake, yet with her beautiful colors she
does so astonish and amaze him, Plin.
that he has no power to pass away, till stung to death.

Verse 11. Also O Judah, he has set an harvest for thee,] This is a very
difficult Text: and much vexed by Interpreters. Et hic nisi Lyra lyrasset, nos
omnes delirassemus. Lyra sets this sense upon the Text, and I accord him:
Though thou Judah, art also to be carried captive: yet God has set, or
provided for thee, an harvest in thine own land, when I shall have returned the
captivity of my people, viz. under the conduct of Zorobabel, by the Decree of
Cyrus. Here then is a promise of a joyful harvest to Judah, who is not to be
punished with like severity as Israel, Chap. 1.7. and for the change of person,
when I returned, for he shall have returned. See Esaias 29.19. Ier. 31.23. Zeph.
3. ult. Psalm. 14. ult. Simul Judae captivitas and reditus praedicitur
significanter admodum, says Hierom here; Both the captivity and return of
Judah is here very significantly foretold. It is a very good Note that One
gives here, sc. that God in his chastisements ever shows himself mindful of
his Covenant: after a long barrenness, Rive^.
he sets for his people a plentiful harvest, and turns again their
captivity, after that for a time he has tried them. His mercy also and
faithfulness herein appears, that he mingleth promises with threatenings: and
whiles he utterly destroys the kingdom of the ten Tribes, he preserves the
Commonwealth of Judah, wherein the Messiah was to come, and whereof there was
not (by the ancient prophesies) to be a dissolution, till Shiloh came. Hence it
is, that promises of the restoration of Judah are ever intermingled, lest any
should doubt of the manifestation of the Messiah, in the fullness of time.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. WHen I would have healed Israel, etc.] Whereas Israel, hearing of an
happy harvest promised to Judah, Chap. 6.11. and themselves excluded, unus.
might complain of hard dealing: God shows them here, that Crudelem medicum
intemperans aeger facit, the fault was merely in themselves. God came with his
healing medicines to have cured them, but they hated to be healed, and like
madmen, railed and raged against the Physician, spilt the potions, would none
of those slibber-sauses, as they accounted them: yea (as if on purpose to
cross God.) then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickednesses
(malitia multiplex) of Samaria,] Of so perverse a spirit were they: and
therefore (in Solomon's judgment, Prove. 12.8.) worthy to have been despised and
let alone to perish in their corruptions. In Hippocrates his time, the
Physicians were bound by oath, to leave such under their wounds to perish by
them, as were unruly, and would not be ordered. We would have healed Babylon,
(says the Church) but she would not be healed: forsake her therefore, says
God, Jer. 51.9. Let them alone, says Christ, Matthew. 15.14. That, that will
die, let it die: A fearful sentence. Let them swelter and pine away in their
iniquities, Levit. 26.39. In their silthinesse is lewdness, their disease is
complicate, it is the leprosy in the head, it breaks forth in their
forehead, and my people love to have it so: Jer. 5.31.
but what will they do in the end thereof? Ephraim here discovers a
headstrong wilfulness that was uncounsellable, uncureable. He runs away after
conviction, with the bit between his teeth, as it were: he runs, I say, upon
the rock. Am. 6.12. where he first breaks his hoofes, and then his neck. Some
grow desperately sinful, like those Italian Senators, that despairing of
their lives, (when upon submission they had been promised their lives, yet)
being conscious of their villainy, made a curious banquet; and at the end
thereof every man drank up his glass of poison, and killed himself. So men
feeling such horrible hard hearts, and privy to such notorious sins, they cast
away souls and all for lust; and perish woefully, because they lived
desperately, and so securely. It is a fearful sign of reprobation, when Gods
means and medicines do men no good, but hurt rather: when Physic which should
remove the disease, does cooperate with it, then death comes with the more pain
and speed. The stronger the conviction of sin is, the deeper will be the wrath
against it, if it be not by repentance avoided.

for they commit falsehood,] They do not the truth, 1 John 1.6. but deal
falsely, Ier. 6.13. every one of them, Assuunt mendacium mendacio.
from the Prophet, even to the Priest: they work a deceitful work, Prove.
11.18. their bellies prepare deceit, Job 15.35. they have an art in lying, in
stitching one lie to another, as the word signifies, Psalm. 119.69. Idolatry is
a real lie, as she in the book of Martyrs answered the Doctor, that asked
her, Do thou believe that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament of the Altar
really and substantially? I believe said she, that so to hold, is a real lie,
and a substantial lie. These Idolaters having played false with God, and
treacherously dealt with him, what wonder though they lie, deceive, rob, spoil,
both within doors and without, in private negotiations, and public
transactions? but especially forge lies against those that withstood their
superstitious vanities, and prey upon their goods; as Heb. 10.34. Sublata
pietate tollitur fides, is a truth irrefragable. Take away piety, and fidelity
is gone: as we see in that unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.2. and as Abraham
concluded of the men of Gerar, Genesis 20.11. and lastly, as Constantinus Chlorus,
the father of Constantine the Great, experimented in his own Councillors, and
Courtiers: whence that famous Maxim of his, recorded by Eusebius: He cannot be
faithful to me, who is unfaithful to God; religion being the ground of all
true fidelity and loyalty.

Verse 2. And they consider not in their hearts,] Heb. They say not in their
hearts: that is, they set not down themselves with this consideration, they
commune not with their consciences upon this most needful, but much neglected
matter. A good man's work lies much within doors: he loves to be dealing with
himself, and working good and wholesome considerations upon his own affections.
He is never less alone, then when he is alone: for still he has God and
himself to talk to.

that I remember all their wickedness,] i. e. Record and register them, as in
a book, with a pen of iron, and point of a Diamond, Ier. 17.1. that I seal them
up in a bag, Job 14.17. as the Clark of Assizes seals up Inditements, and at
the Assizes brings his bag, and produces them. Is not this laid up in store
with me, and sealed-up among my treasures? Deuteronomy. 32.34. So little reason is
there, that wicked men should please themselves in hope of impunity. And yet
they do, Psalm. 94.7. they strive to persuade themselves, that the Lord does not
see, neither does the God of Jacob remember: They hide God from themselves, and
then think they have hid themselves from Him. Herein they are alike foolish as
the Struthiocamelus, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 1.
a bird as big as a Camel, and taller then a man: When this Bustard would hide
her self, she thrusts her head into a thicket, as conceiving that no body
sees her, because she sees no body; and so becomes a prey to the hunter.
Caveatur carnalis securitas. Let us walk evermore in the sense of Gods
presence, unless we had rather be carnally secured, then soundly comforted.

now their own doings have beset them about.] Their studied wickedness, their
contrived iniquities, so Luther expounds the word doings: Studia little Tigurin.
for wicked men are great students, and break many a nights sleep in pernicious
ploddings, Prove. 4.16. But as the Blackbird is taken by birdlime made of his
own excrements, so is the wicked beset by his own devices; as by so many
sergeants set on by God. Some think (and not without probable reason) that the
Prophet in this phrase of besetting them about, alludeth to the future siege of
Samaria: wherein these sinners against their own souls were so straightly beset
by the enemy, that they could not flee, or stir, without danger. And this he
says shall befall them. Now, that is, shortly, and sooner then they think for:
Indeed how should it be otherwise, when as their doings are b^^ore my face?]
Eregione and velut adversa ac detestata, Over-anent and in full view, as a
continual eyesore to me, Psalm. 57.5. and 90.8. so that though I could or
would forget them, yet they will not suffer me to do so: such is their
impudency, and importunacy for vengeance. Lyra makes it a metaphor, from a
thief taken in the act, with his back burden of stolen goods; and as it were
beset with them, and so brought before the Judge. His own iniquities shall take
the wicked, says Solomon, Prove. 5.22. For how can he escape the multitude of
his sins within him, and the variety of Gods heavy judgments without him, etc?

Verse 3. They make the king glad with their wickedness,] A sad syncratismus
surely of king and people, exhilarating themselves and each other in
wickedness. Their kings were well apaid of the peoples compliances with their
unlawful Edicts: and the people no less well-pleased to gratify and flatter
their kings, as the Romans did Tiberius and other Tyrants, who therefore said
of them, that they were servum pecus, servile souls, and homines ad servitutem
parati, men made for slaves. Tyrants care not how wicked their subjects are:
for then they know they will swallow down any command though never so impious,
without scrupling, or conscience-making. They like to have such about them, as
will down with any thing, digest iron for a need, with the Estrich; and say as
that wretched man said (when one complained he could not do such a thing for
his conscience) I am master of my conscience, I can do any thing for all that.
Thus Balaam resolved to curse what ever came of it: he went not aside as at
other times, neither built he any more altars; but set his face toward the
wilderness, as fully bent to do it, and nothing should hinder him now, Numb.
24.1, 2. (confer Luke 9.51.) He also gave wicked counsel to king Balak (and so
made him glad at parting, though before he had angered him) to lay a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, viz. to set fair women to tempt
them to corporal and spiritual fornication, that God might see sin flagrant
in Jacob, some transgression in Israel, and so fall foul upon them with his
plagues, Numb. 23.21. Parasites propound to kings suavia potius quam sana
consilia, pleasing, but pestilent counsel: they also act for them, and under
them, as Doeg did for Saul, and so gratify them, Leti^ie them, as here, Rev. 2
make them glad, but it proves to be no better then risus Sardonius, such a
mirth as brings bitterness in the end: Woe to such mirth-mongers and
mirth-makers; for if they shall still do thus wickedly, they shall be consumed,
both they and their king, I Sam. 12.25.

And the princes with their lies] with calumnies and false accusations,
wherewith they load Gods innocent servants, and that against their own
consciences. Thus Doeg dealt by David; the Priests and Prophets by Jeremy; the
Persian courtiers by Daniel and his companions; Amaziah by Amoz, Haman by the
whole nation of the Jews, Tertullus by Paul, the Heathen Idolaters by the
primitive Christians; which caused those many Apologies made for them by
Tertullian, Athenagoras, and others. If a Ruler hearken to lies (and that is a
common fault among them, Prove. 29.12.
as David tells Saul, 1 Samuel 24.9. all his servants will be wicked: he shall
have his Aiones and Nigones that will say as he says, and fit his humor to an
hair; he shall have plenty of such as will slander the Saints, and cast an
odium upon the conscientious. I once saw (says Melancthon) an old coin, on the
one side whereof was Zopyrus, on the other Zoilus; he adds, fuit imago aulae,
comitantur calumniae been merentes, It was a picture of Princes courts, where
are store of such, as, by flattery, dawb white upon black, and, by calumny,
sprinkle black upon white.

Verse. 4. (...)
They are all adulterers,] Adulterio calescunt, so Pagnine, scalded in their
base lusts as those, Romans 1.27. all (for the most part) were such: but
especially the Courtiers, and clawback-Informers, as verse. 3. God, in his just
judgment, giving them up to those vile affections or passions of dishonor,
and punishing their impieties with impurities: as He did also in those
Heathens, Romans 1.24.

as an oven heated by the baker] An apt similitude setting forth the intense
heat of filthy lust, ( better marry then burn, 1 Cor. 7.9.) and of long
continuance as the heat of an oven; yea, of Nebuchadnezzars oven, yea, of hell
it self, whence it was enkindled, and where it shall be perpetually punished.
The holy Angels at the last day will be most active against such, to bring them
to condign punishment, 2 Pet. 2.10. (But chiefly them that walk after the flesh
in the lust of uncleanness. Note the word chiefly, and consider the example of
the Sodomites) and God most severe against them, Heb. 13.4. How much they have
lived deliciously, and drenched themselves in fleshly delights, so much
torments and sorrow shall they have proportionably, Rev. 18.7. As their hearts
have been as an hot oven or furnace, so they shall be bound up in bundles, and
cast into a furnace of fire (where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat.
13.42.

Verse. 5. In the day of our King,] Our good king, on whom they so doted, that
they forgot God and his sincerer service. Quaecunque a regibus dicuntur aut
fiunt, Gallis minifice solet placere, Epit. Hist. Gallor. 134.
It is reported of the French by their own Chronicle^, that they are wonderful
well pleased with whatsoever is said or done by their king: so that they affect
to speak like him, to be arraied like him, and to imitate him in every thing.
Their song is Mihi placet quicquid Regi placet. But is not this to idolize the
creature? and have not many (otherwise well-minded men) amongst us been by this
means miscarried to their cost in our late combustions? This day of their king
was either his Birthday (so Pagnine renders it here) or his Coronation-day
(so the Chaldee Paraphrast carries it) which also is the Birthday of a king
as he is king, Die natalis ejus.
Sam. 13.1. unless happily he have the happiness to be crowned (not in his
cradle only, as Europus king of Macedony and the late king James were, but) in
his mothers womb, as Misdatus king of Persia was, the crown being set upon his
mothers great belly before he was born. Now in this solemn day of the king,
(when they should have been better busied) The princes have made him sick, or,
the princes were sick, they drank themselves sick, drowning their bodies and
souls (as Richard the third did his brother Clarence) in a Butt of Malmesey.
How many importunate and impudent drinkers are there, that by drinking other
men's health, destroy their own? See Master Prinnes Healths-sicknesse, and
accord him that said, Vna salus sanis, nullam potare salutem,
Non est in pota vera salute salus.
But what beastly bedlams or rather incarnate devils were those three drunkards
mentioned by Jo. Manlius in his common places, page 244.
who drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead: and yet the other two
nothing terrified with such a dreadful example of divine vengeance, went on to
drink, and powered the dead man's part into him as he lay by them? Oh horrible!
Drunkenness is a detestable vice in any, but especially in men of place and
power, Prove. 31.4. Woe be to those drunken vicegods (as I may in the worst sense
best call them) woe to the very crown of their Pride, in drinking down many,
Esaias. 28.1. as Marcus Antonius wrote, or rather spued out a book concerning his
own abilities to bear strong drink; Darius also boasted of the same faculty in
his very Epitaph: a poor praise. Drunkenness in a king is a capital sin, and
makes the land reel; Hence those feast-dayes were called (...) they were like
the Romans Saturnalia. Hic pendet Amphorae.
witness Belshazzar carowsing in the bowls of the Sanctuary to the honor of
Shar his drunken god; Alexander the great drinking himself to death, and
killing forty one more with excessive drinking, to get that crown of one
hundred eighty pound weight, which he had provided for him that drank most:
Bonosus the Emperor that beastly drunkard, called therefore a Tankard: and
Tiberius surnamed Biberius for his tippling; like as Erasmus called Eccius,
Jeccius for the same cause: And well he might; for as he lived a shameful
drunkard, so being nonplust at Ratisbon by Melanchthon in a public
disputation, and drinking more then was fit that night at the Bishop of
Mundina's lodgings (who had of the best Italians wines) he fell into a fever,
whereof he died. Jah. Manl. loc. com. p. 89.
Drunkenness is a flattering evil, a sweet poison, a cunning Circe that besots
the soul, destroys the body, dolores gignit in capite, in stomacho, in toto
corpore acerrimos, Mercer in Prove. 23.32.
grievous diseases and dolours in the head, stomach, whole man. At the last, it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23.32. The drunkard
says as the vine in Jothams parable, Non possum relinquere vinum meum, Take
away my liquour, you take away my life. But it proves to him, in the issue,
like that wine mentioned by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.33. Their wine is the poison of
Dragons, and cruel venom of Aspes, which makes the spirits warm, and the body
sick to death.

with bottles of wine] Or, with heat through wine, as Esaias. 5.11. and so Jarchi
expounds it. The same word signifies the poison of a Serpent, Psalm. 58.4.
which inflameth and kills: confer Prove. 23.32. and think of that cup of fire
and brimstone, Psalm. 11.6. to be one day turned down the wide gullets of
intemperate drinkers; which will be much worse to them then was that ladle-full
of boiling lead, which the Turkish Bashaw caused to be poured down the throat
of a drunken wretch, without giving him any respite for the recovery of his
lost wits. The Grand. Sign. Serag. page 186.


he stretched out his hand with scorners] He that is the king, forgetting his
kingly dignity, authority and gravity, (for there is a decorum to be observed
in every calling, (...)
but by great ones especially) stretched out his hand, as a companion and
copesmate, as an hail-fellow-well-met, (as they say) prostituting his regal
authority to every scoundrel that would pledge him; or at least, giving them
his hand to kiss, which Job says God will not do, Chap. 8.20.

with scorners] Those worst of men, Psalm. 1.1. those Pests, (...).
as the Septuagint here render it, those incorrigible persons as they translate
the word, Prove. 20.1. where also it is fitly said, that wine is a mocker,
because it makes men mockers. Hence that of David, with hypocritical mockers
at feasts they gnashed upon me with their teeth, Psalm. 35.16. And that holy
jealousy of Job for his children, lest (while they were feasting and
merry-making) they should curse God, or mock at men. Tarnou.
Tales enim evadunt qui strenue helluantur. It is ordinary with such as are
full gorged with good cheer, and thoroughly heated with wine, to set their
mouths against heaven, and to license their tongues to walk through the earth,
Psalm. 73.9. they have a flout to fling, and a fools bolt to shoot at their
betters by many degrees: yea, though they be kings that do it, (as here) if
they stretch out their hands with scorners, and jear at the power and
profession of Godliness, they are no better then base fellows, as great
Antiochus is called, Dan. 11.21. and as Kimchi upon this text notes from his
Father, that those that at the beginning of the feast or compotation were here
called Princes, are afterward when they fell to quaffing and flowting called
(in contempt) scoffers and scorners. Polanus and others by stretching out the
hand understand, ad aequales haustus potare, etc. a drinking share and share
like with every base companion, till drunk; they became despicable. Nempe vbi,
neque men's, neque pes suumfacit officium. The Greeks when they meet at feasts
or banquets, drink small draughts at first, which by degrees they increase,
till they come to the height of intemperancy. Hence Graecari, and as merry as a
Greek. How much better those Spartans, of whom the Poet, Quinetiam Spartae mos
est laudabilis ille,
Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo?
How much better the Persians in Esthers time, Chap. 1.8. the drinking was
according to the law, none did compel, etc. And what a drunken beast was
Domitius the father of Nero, Sueton.
who slew Liberius an honest Roman, because he refused to take up his cups, as
he commanded him? The Carthag inians made a law, that none of their Magistrates
during their office should drink any wine. Romulus being invited to a feast
would not drink much, Gell. lib. 11. cap. 14.
quia postridie negotium haberet, because he had public business to dispatch
on the morrow. Ahashuerosh drinking more freely on the first day of the feast,
Esth. 1.5, 10.
became so frollick, that in his mirth he forgot what was convenient; and
guided by his passions, sent for Vasthi.

Verse. 6. For they have made ready their hearts like an oven.] As an oven red
hot is ready to bake whatsoever is cast into it, so are wicked men's hearts,
heated from hell, Ad male cogitandum. Pagnin. ad pessima facinora Tigur.
prepared for any evil purpose or practice that the devil shall suggest: but
especially to lie in wait for blood, and to hunt every man his brother with a
net, Mic. 7.2. David complains of some that lay in wait for his soul, Psalm.
59.3. that satanically hated him, Psalm. 38.20. and 7.13. and 109.4, 6, 20, 29.
that sought his soul to destroy it, not his life only but his soul too; as
that monster of Millain did, that made his adversary first forswear Christ, (in
hope of life) and then stabbing him to the heart said, Bodin. de Rep.
Now go thy ways soul and body to the devil: and as the Papists dealt by John
Husse, and Hierome of Prague, to whom they denied a confessor, which he
required after the manner of those times, to fit him for heaven; and for John
Husse, Act. and Mon.
after they had burnt him, how despitefully did they beat his heart (which was
left untoucht by the fire) with their staves: Besides, that the Bishops when
they put the tripple crown of paper (painted with ugly devils on it) on his
head, they said, Now we commit thy soul to the devil. Did not these men's hearts
burn like an oven with hellish rage and cruelty?

their baker sleeps all the night,] Concoquens illa, scilicet corda, so
Vatablus; He that concocteth or works their hearts, that is the devil (as
some interpret it) or evil-concupiscence, as others, Tota nocte protrahitur
furor eorum, so the Chaldee; their rage is deferred or drawn out to the length
all night long, till in the morning, i. e. at a convenient season it break out
and bestirs it self. A metaphor from a baker, who casting fire into the oven
with good store of lasting fuel, lets it burn all night and sleeps securely; as
knowing that he shall find it through hot in the morning. Those scorners in the
former verse, by being over-familiar with their drunken king, come not only to
slight him for his base behaviors, but also to conspire against him, and to
plot his death; wherein their heart is the oven, ambition the fire, treason the
flame of that fire, Satan that old manslayer the baker; who, though he make as
if he slept all night, yet by morning he has set his agents the traitors
awork (either by secret treacheries or open seditions) to do as in the next
verse, and as is to be seen, 2 Kin. 15.

Verse. 7. Dedit hac contagio labem, Et dabit in plures, -- Juven. Sat. 2.
They are all hot as an oven,] That none might post it off to others, all are
accused of this mad desire to do mischief; as all the Sodomites full and whole,
young and old, came cluttering about Lots house, Genesis 19.4.

and have devoured their Judges; all their Kings are fallen, etc.] Scil. being
slain with the sword of those that succeeded them in the throne, as may be
read, 2 Kin. 15.8, 9, etc. and as it was in the Roman State, where all or most
of the Cesars, till Constantine, died unnatural deaths. Neither was it much
better here in England, during the difference between the two houses of York
and Lancaster; wherein were slain fourscore Princes of the blood royal, Dan.
hist. 249.
This is the fruit of sin, Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a land many are
the Princes thereof: either many at once (as once here in the heptarchy) or
many ejecting and succeeding one another, to the great calamity and utter
undoing of the people by their new Lords, new Laws.

there is none among them that calls unto me,] though in so great a
confusion, and under so heavy calamities: a strange stupor, that there should
be none to set to his shoulder to shore up the falling State. None there were
(to speak of) in a considerable number of praying people to stand in the gap,
and to divert the divine displeasure. Their sins cried loud for vengeance,
their blood-guiltinesse especially. But had there been but a few voices more of
praying Saints, their prayers had happily out-cried them. A few birds of song are
shriller then many crocitating birds of prey: stir up your selves therefore,
ye that are Gods remembrancers, to take hold of him, and give him no rest. Lie
night and day at the gate of his grace, knocking thereat by the hand of faith,
and praying for the peace of our Jerusalem. If Englands fears were greater, thy
prayers might preserve it, Jer. 5.1. as if our hopes were greater, thy sin and
security might undo it, Eccles. 9.18.

Verse. 9. Ephraim, he has mixed himself among the people,] viz. In
confederacies, marriages, manners, superstitions. They were conformed to those
nations from whom God had separated them with a wonderful separation, Exodus
33.16. and put them up by themselves from all the world in the promised land,
as it were in an Island, Isay. 20.6. And this they had done not once but often,
as the conjugation imports; and that wilfully without any necessity: yea, and
that constantly, and of custom, or desperate obstinacy, (Heb. he will mingle
himself) so that there was little difference to be discerned betwixt Ephraim
the professed people of God, (...)
and profane heathens. Hence that, Amos. 9.7. Are ye not as children of the
Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, says the Lord? Hence Saul is called
Cush, or an Ethiopian for his black and ill conditions, Psalm. 7. title, as the
Chaldee interprets it. Cast we may be upon bad company, but we must not
mingle with them. The rivers of Peru, after they have run into the mam sea,
yea, some write twenty or thirty miles, they keep themselves unmixt with the
salt water: so that a very great way within the sea, men may take up as fresh
water as if they were near the land. At Belgradi in Hungary, where the Danuby
and Sava (two great rivers) meet, Abbats Geog. 331.
their waters mingle no more then water and oil; not that either flote above
other, but join unmixed: so that near the middle of the river I have gone in a
boat, Sir Henry Blounts voyage into Levant. p. 10.
(says mine Author) and tasted of the Danow as clear and pure as a well. Then
putting mine hand not an inch further, I have taken of the Sava as troubled as
a streetchannel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they run sixty miles
together, and for a days journey I have been an eyewitness of it. To come
nearer home, the river Dee in Merionith-shire running thorough Pimbli-meeri
remains entire, Camden.
and mingleth not her streams with the water of the lake. Let not Ephraim mix
himself among the people, but cry with David, Gather not my soul with sinners,
Psalm. 26.9. and verse. 5. I have hated the congregation of evildoers, and will
not sit with the wicked.

Ephraim is a cake not turned,] And so but half-baked, or dow-baked; neque
crudus, neque coctus, neither hot nor cold, as Laodicea, Rev. 3.15. halting
between two, as 1 Kin. 18.21. Mongrels, as those 2 King. 17.33. Zeph. 1.5.
Barnacles that are neither fish nor flesh: Amphibians that will conform to the
world, and yet seem to be for the Lord. But he likes no such retainers, no such
holy-day-servants; he requires to be served truly that there be no halting:
and totally, that there be no halving: he cannot away with dow-baked duties.
Men must be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, they must be zealous of good
works, if they look to be accepted. Romans 12.11. Tit. 2.
The effectual fervent prayer, or the thorough-wrought prayer of a righteous
man avails much. A cake that is half-baked, half burnt pleases not the
palate: no more do customary, formal bedulling performances please the Lord. It
is Gualthers note upon this text; Jam. 5.16. (...)
as a cake, says he, that is raw on the one side and scorcht on the other is
cast away; so Hypocrites that are hot in their superstitions, but cold in their
devotions are rejected of God; Introrsum turpes, speciosi pelle decora. I know
the words are otherwise interpreted by Luther, Mercer, Polanus, and others,
with reference to the following words, thus: that Ephraims adversaries, even
those strangers with whom he has mixed himself, shall be so greedy to devour
him, that they shall not stay till he be baked on both sides, but shall eat him
raw. But I like the former better.

Verse. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not,] Strange
stupidity, such as was that of Sampson, who had lost his hair, and therewith
his strength, and wist not of it. These strangers were the Kings of Syria, but
especially of Assyria. See 2 King. 13.7. and Chap. 14. with 15.19, 30. and
17.6. Salmanasar, as a deep gulf swallowed them up whole. Now that they should
not know how these strangers had devoured their strength, that is their wealth,
and warlike power, this was very strange. The Chaldee Paraphrast helps us to
the meaning of it: Non novit formidare a facie mea. He knew it not, that is, He
knew not how to fear before me, to tremble at my judgments, and to flee to my
mercies: this he knew not, that is, he cared not to do, as the old world knew
not till the flood came, though fairly forewarned, Matt. 24.39. and as the
Greeks would not know that the Turks had invaded their Empire, till they were
got into the very bowels of it. So was it with Ephraim. A spirit of pride and
of slumber had so surprised and seized him, that he took no knowledge of the
enemies and evils that were upon him. Thus the spiritual sleeper stirs not
with Saul, though the water-pot and spear be taken from his bolster. Like the
foolish hen, which loses her chickens one by one, by the devouring kite; when
one, or two, or three, are snatched away she still continues to pick up what
lies before her. It is our wisest way to observe, and improve Gods dealings
with us, to be sensible of his strokes, and to return to him that smote us, and
can as soon heal us, if we come to him for cure, Lev. 26.40. yea, gray-hairs
are here and there upon him,] Heb. sprinkled, sparsi, non spissi. He began but
to decline and decay, as a man does when he grows toward fifty. And as gray
hairs come the sooner through cares and griefs, (Histories tell us of a young
man, who being for some capital offense condemned to die, grew gray in one
nights-space, and was therefore pitied and spared) and are forerunners and
fore-warners of death. So the many and grievous miseries inflicted upon this
people, foreshewed their utter destruction to be even at next door by. And this
the rather, because they knew it not, (as before) but (as it is said of the
Flemings) that the elder they grow, the foolisher they are. Quomagis senescunt
eo magis stultescunt. Erasin. Apopht.
Cleanthes was wont sometimes to chide himself: Ariston wondering thereat,
asked him, whom chidest thou? Cleanthes laughed and answered. I chide an old
fellow, qui canos quidem habet, sed mentem non habet, who has gray hairs
indeed, but wants understanding, and prudence worthy of them. It was Chrysippus
(I trow) that offered to the world that sour distribution and choice, Aut
mentem, aut restim comparandam; Either get wit worthy of your years, or go out
of the world by an halter. Bibl. Pat.
That of Eleazer is very remarkable, who would not do any thing which migh seem
to be evil, because he would not spot his white head. Gray hairs should be a
strong argument to move men to live blamelessely (because old age is a crown,
Prove. 16.31. Genesis 25.8.
when found in the way of righteousness, as it is said of Abraham, that he
went to his grave with a good gray head) and gray hairs in a State, that is,
lesser and lighter judgments, should make men prepare to meet and prevent God:
because, as in an house, stillicidia praecedunt ruinam, and as in a man, gray
hairs fore-signifie death, so do these, desolation; if course be not timely
taken.

Verse 10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face,] Sept. the ignominy,
or impudency of Israel: q. d. They think to brave it out in a stout and
stomachfull way. Low they are, but not lowly; humbled, but not humble. God
thrust him downward, as it were with a thump on the back: but he stood stouting
it out with him; and so discovered a great deal of arrogance and folly.
Plectimur, may such say, Salvian.
nec tamen flectimur: Corripimur sed non corrigimur; We have been stricken, but
not sick; beaten, but not sensible, etc. the drunkards ditty, Prove. 23.35. When
for all this, for all that God can do to tame them, and turn them again, they
will on in their wicked ways, and not accept of the punishment of their
iniquities: not confess and forsake their sins, that they may have mercy: not
seek him, that is, come unto him by faith, Heb. 11.6. and subject themselves
unto him by true obedience, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. this is such a piece of pride as
testifies to men's faces, that they deserve to be destroyed: this is
wickedness with a witness: this is fastus adco enormis atque notorius, says
Pareus, such horrible and notorious insolency, as is not to be endured. God
complains of Israel for this with a sigh, Ah sinful nation, etc. and resolves
upon revenge, verse 24. See more of this in the Note on Chap. 5.5. Of turning
to God. See Zech. 1.3. and of seeking God, see Hos. 5.15.

Verse 11. Ephraim also is like a silly dove,] that may be drawn any way for
want of wit (so the word signifies) easily persuaded, (...)
enticed, deceived. The Septuagint render it (...), insensata, witless, or
wanting an heart, as the next words explain it; the heart being put for the
understanding, as Jer. 5, 21. Prove. 6.32. and 11.12. and 10.13.
and often in the Proverbs. Lo such a thing is Ephraim; and yet he holds himself
wondrous wise, in calling to Egypt, and going to Assyria for help. Which was as
wisely done, as if sheep should commit themselves to the Wolf for safeguard.
The Egyptians were their ancient oppressors: the Assyrians should be shortly
their executioners. Betwixt these two, as betwixt two milstones, they had been,
and were to be ground to powder, as it were: and yet to these, they were ready
to run for refuge. This was indeed to be like a silly dove, which flies from
the claws of the Hawk into the net of the fowler, who will soon make a
breakfast of them: or that waits till the fowler be gone, that she may fall
upon the bait, never fearing the snare that is laid for her. See 2 King. 17.4.
A serpents eye in a doves head is a singular ornament. Be ye wise as serpents,
innocent as doves. The serpent, when charmed, Mat. 10 16
stops his ears, by applying one to the earth, and covering the other with
his tail. The dove is too credulous and perswasible, dulce canente fistula. She
is also dull, and defends not her young ones, as other creatures do. She will
sit quiet in her columbary, and see her nest destroyed, her young ones taken
away, and killed before her eyes, and never offer to rescue or revenge; which
the hen and other fowls seem in some sort to do. Lo such was Ephraims
stupidity. The Philistines were upon him, the enemies spoiled and made a prey of
him, yet he knew it not, as it is verse 9. he was not affected with it, nor
driven to God by it: but either sat still, as the spoiled dove does in her
nest, or upon her dove-coat, delighted in the beauty of her feathers, priding
her self in the clapping of her wings: or else ran a wrong way for refuge: flew
to king Jareb, to humane helps, to carnal confederates, which never were true
to those that trusted them. See chap. 5.13. with the Note. Where you shall see
that from the Assyrian they had pro praesidio ludibrium: as likewise those
Christians had that called in the Turk, or the like to help them. True it is
that religion without policy is too simple to be safe: but it is no less
true, that policy without religion is too subtle to be good. As the dove
without the serpent is easily caught: so the serpent without the dove stings
deadly. Let that be held and remembered, that there is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. and that he takes it
very ill, when we decline him, and knock at the creatures door for help, Ier.
2.13. shifting and sharking in every by-corner for comfort. This is the devils
policy to draw men from God the Rock of ages, Josh. 8.5.
(as Ioshuah did the men of Ai out of their city, and as Bristow counsels
his fellows, Brist. Mot.
the Popes Janizares, to draw the Lutherans out of their strong-hold of the
Scriptures, into the open field of Councels and Fathers) that he may do what he
will with them, and destroy them. For he knows, that be our hopes never so
high, our helps from the creature never so likely, yet if God deny his
concurrence, and influence, the arm of flesh (as Ieroboams) shrinks up
presently; and the strongest sinew of it cracks, and becomes unusefull.

Verse 12. When they go,] Yea, flee (as the dove does very swiftly, pleasing
her self in the clapping of her wings, and cutting of the air) they cannot flee
so high, but I shall easily reach them, Obad. 3.4. for in the thing wherein
they deal proudly, I am above them, Exodus 18.11. I can overtop them, melt
their waxen wings, and bring them down with a vengeance. Psalm. 94.11.
He takes the wise in their own craftiness. And again, The Lord knows the
thoughts of the wise that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. So says the Apostle
out of the Psalmist; but with this difference. The Psalmist says, the thoughts
of men, the Apostle, the thoughts of the wise, meaning the worlds wizards, the
choicest and most picked men, the greatest politicians, the most nimble and
Mercuriall wits, quorum praecordia ex meliore luto finxit Titan. These God will
take, says Paul: he will lay hold upon them, (...) Fugientes in cursu
deprehendit manuque injecta captat, Eras. Annot.
as they are running away, (so the word signifies) as bruit beasts made to be
taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. or as fishes that are taken in an evil net,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare: so are the sons of men snared in
an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12.

I will spread my net upon them,] as a skillful fowler. By net, understand
captivity, and other miseries, compared to a net, Ezekiel. 12.13. and 17.20. and
19.8. Lam. 1.13. Psalm. 9.16. wherein being once caught, the more they struggle,
the faster they stick: the more they seek to extricate themselves, the more
they are entangled: snares are round about them, and sudden fear surprizeth
them, Job 22.10. the steps of their strength shall be straightened: and their own
counsels shall bring them down, Job 18.7.

I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven,] Though they may think
themselves extra jactum, out of gunshot, I will cause them to descend, as the
Hebrew word signifies: and though lifted up to heaven, as Capernaum, and
nested in the clouds; yea among the stars, as Edom, Obad. 4. yet shall they be
brought down to the nethermost hell. God will meet with them in their
out-strayes, casting his net over them: or bring them down with his bow,
whilst (with the foolish bird) they are gazing at the bolt: he has ways
enough to hamper such as go out of his way: to be for a gin, and for a snare
unto them, Esaias 8.14. to shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be
wounded, Psalm. 64.7. How are they brought into desolation in a moment? they are
utterly consumed with terror, Psalm. 73.19.

I will chastise them as their congregation has heard.] Or, (...). Sept.
Ligabo eos Kimchi. Judge. 8.16.
I will bind them (as a bird is bound in a net that she cannot stir forth)
and, by binding, nurture them: as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, by tawing
and tearing them with thorns and briars of the wilderness. The hypocrites in
heart, heap up wrath: thy cry not when God binds them, Job 36.13. God expects
men should cry peccavi, when they are bound as Paul was, to be beaten with
rods; and not be silent in darkness, 1. Sam. 2.9. or, not make moan when he
has them under hand. Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. Ye must now
do so, that would not hear the word sounding in they Congregations.

I will chastise them as their Congregation has heard.] Crebro and clare, I
have plainly and plentifully told them my mind: and foretold them by my
Prophets, what would be the issue of their evil practices. Sed surdo fabulam,
They would not hear Moses and the Prophets. See 2 King. 17.13. 2 Chronicles.
24.18.19. They thought that my words were but wind, Jer. 5.13.
and that all my threats were but in terrorem, to fright them a little, and not
in good-earnest. Therefore they shall find that the just Lord is in the
midst of them, he will not do iniquity: every morning does he bring his
judgment to light, Zeph. 3.5.
he fails not: but the unjust knows no shame, fears no colors, trembles
not at Gods word though it come never so close to his conscience, though it
even dash him in the mouth as it were, and make him spit blood. See Ier. 7.13.

Verse 13. Na^edu,
Woe unto them, for they have fled from me:] As Cain (the devils Patriarch) did
when he went out from the presence of the Lord, in his fathers family, into the
land of Nod, Genesis 4.16. being himself a And, that is, a runnagate, verse 12. of
the same root, that is here made use of in the Text. Now as that land took name
of Cain, and his woeful state therein, so is every land and place a Nod to
Apostates: and St. Jude throws a Woe after them, Woe unto them, for they have
gone in the way of Cain, Jude 11. that is, they have wickedly departed from
God, and his blessing, and gotten into the worlds warm sun: yea, they not
only go from God, but flee from him in hurry-hast, as from an enemy; a
metaphor from birds flying amain, Prove. 27.8. As a bird that wandreth from her
nest, (where God took order for her security, Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7.) so is a man that
wandereth from his place (how much more from his God, that Infinite good?)
exposed to misery and mischief, to ruth and ruin. Woe to such, yea double woe:
Woe and alas: destruction to such, (...).
and devastation, as the word signifies. Perdition and destruction, as the
Apostle phraseth it, 1 Timothy 6.9. whereby is meant, remediless misery, mischief
without measure, torments without end, and past imagination. This truth must be
told, how ever it be taken; that wicked men may not perish without warning.
Toothlesse truths, and silken words, would better please people who are most of
them sick of a Noli me tangere, and cry out against these fierce Preachers,
that come with their Woe unto them, Destruction unto them, etc. This is the way,
say they, to drive men into utter despair. We answer; First, if it should be
so, yet that is not the proper effect of the Word so dispensed; but to a bate
the pleasure that reprobates take in sin, and to restrain them from outrage:
that they despair, it proceeds merely from their own corruption and
guiltiness. They reply, that it comes rather from the severity of the
Teachers, who set themselves to preach damnation, and utter terrible things.
Secondly, therefore we answer; that the mad world (ever beside it self in point
of salvation) is herein very much mistaken. Let them give us an instance of any
one that was ever driven to despair by the sincere preaching of the word: and
yet for one bitter word given by us, the Prophets gave ten. This whole Prophecy
of Hosea is much more Comminatory then Consolatory. God himself comes here with
Woe unto them, Destruction to them. Indeed by this patheticall exclamation, he
declares his affection toward them whom he threatens: and how little delight
he takes, either in their destruction, or in such denunciations thereof: And so
must Gods Ministers, etc.

Because they have transgressed against me:] This is a new degree of their
Apostasy from God. Wicked men and deceivers grow worse and worse, and add
rebellion to sin. As a stone will fall down to come to its center, though it
break it self in twenty pieces: so will Apostates, till they come to their own
place with Judas: they cease not till they become altogether filthy, Psalm.
53.3. as the dog at his vomit, or the sow in her slow, 2 Pet. 2.22. It fares
with such as in that case, Lev. 13.18, 19, 20. If a man had a bile healed, and
it afterward brak out, it proved the plague of leprosy.

Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me.] All was
done against God, whence the word me, is so often inculcated in this and the
next verse. God is, as it were, a sufferer in all the sins of the sons of
men: and this is no small aggravation of the evil of sin, that it strikes at
Gods face, lifts at his throne, makes to his dishonor Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine iniquities, Esaias 43.23. And to
show this to be so, it was, that the offendour was confined to the city of
refuge, during the Highpriests life; Godw. Antiq. Heb. p. 98.
as being the chief God on earth. Good David was very sensible of this, and
much humbled, when he said, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm.
51.14. The trespass was against Vriah, but the transgression against God, so
gracious a God; and there lay the pinch of his grief: viz. the unkindnesse that
was in his sin. Therefore also Moses, in his swan-like-song, sets on this
humbling consideration, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? Is not he thy Father? and will thou kick against his naked
bowels? have no where else to hit him but there? Again, Is not he thy Redeemer,
that has bought thee, and brought thee out of the iron furnace, where thou
labouredst in the very fire, and wast wearied out with unsufferable servitude?
More, has he not made thee, and do thou rebel against thy Maker, thy
Master? Or, has he not made thee, that is, exalted thee: in which sense, he is
said to have made Moses and Aaron, 1 Samuel 12.6. that is, to have advanced them
to that honor in his Church: and so we say, Such an one is made for ever.
Lastly, has he not established thee, that thou might abide in his grace,
and remain unmovable? And do thou yet evil requite him, etc. To render good
for evil, is Divine; good for good, is humane; evil for evil, is brutish; but
evil for good, is devilish. See how grievously God takes it here. Though I
have redeemed them, viz. out of the hands of their enemies in general, (See an
ample proof hereof, Nehem. 9. and the whole book of Judges thorowout) and in
special, as a late particular mercy to Ephraim, I have delivered and prospered
them in their wars, under Jeroboam the son of Ioash, 2 King. 14.27. and
therefore they should have given me their good word at least, and spoken good
of my Name: yet They have spoken lies against me.] Ascribing the glory of their
deliverances to their Idols, or arrogating it to themselves, or fathering their
false worship upon me as the Author, or at least, Abbettour thereof, by my
present prospering of them. See Ier. 7.10.

Verse 14. And they have not cried unto me with their heart,] Hitherto has
been said what they had done: now what they had not done. Omissions are sins as
well as commissions. Not serving of God, not sacrificing is condemned, Mal.
3.18. Eccles. 9.2. Not robbing only, but the not relieving of the poor, was
the rich man's ruin. Omission of diet breeds diseases, and makes work for hell,
Luke. 16.
or for the Physician of our souls. It is the character of a graceless man,
that he calls not upon God: And we have too many of that profane Earl of
Westmorelands mind, who said, that he needed not to pray at all, Camd. Elisa.
for he had Tenants enough to pray for him. Some wicked pray (so as it is: indeed
they Cant, or Charm, rather then pray, (...).
Esaias 26.16 they powered forth a charm when they chastening was upon them) but
they pray not with their heart. Their hearts are exercised with covetousness,
2 Pet. 2.14. and inhabited by the devil, Acts 5.3. Simon Magus his heart was
not right with the Lord, Acts 8.21. How could it be, when it was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of perdition, 23. as every unregenerate heart is? Hence
though God be near in their mouths, yet he is far from their reins, Jer. 12.2.
and though they honor him a little with their lips, yet their heart is far
from him, Matthew. 15.8. A little artificial breath they can give God; and
that is all. The breath that comes from life is warm, (as that from the body)
whereas artificial breath is cold, as that from bellows. The deeper and
hallower the belly of the Lute or Violl is, the pleasanter is the sound: the
fleeter, the more grating and harsh in our ears. The voice which is made in the
mouth, is nothing so sweet as that which comes from the depth of the breast,
Ephesians. 6.6. Do the will of God from the heart: serve God in the spirit, Romans
1.9. Lift up hands and hearts to God in the heavens, Lam. 3.41. Lip-labor is
but lost-labour, yea it is sin, Prove. 15.8. Displeasing service is double
dishonor; as dissembled sanctity is double iniquity. These men cried,
vociferabantur, voce stentorea sonum edebant. They did set up their note, yea
they howled upon their beds,] whereupon they had cast themselves, being sick,
not of wantonness, as once Ahab was, but of want: which made them howl as dogs
do, when tied up from their meat and hunger-bit: but were no more regarded then
a dog that howleth, or then the Cuckoo in June. For why? Jejelilu.
They howled indeed to some tune, (as they say) the Hebrew word has a letter
more then ordinary, to note as much. It was the Heathen fashion to cry
hideously to their gods: as also the Indians do at this day. So did these,
because kept short, and held to strait allowance. It is said of the Ravens of
Arabia, that when they are hungry, they screech horribly. And a Parrot when he
is beaten, utters an hoarse and harsh voice. Esaias 66.3.
The songs of the Temple shall be howlings in that day, Amos 8.3. Their
sacrifices as the cutting off a dogs neck, which is not done without much
howling and yelling.

They assemble themselves,] sc. To make public supplication in their
Idoltemples; called beds before, (as some conceive) because as corporal
fornication is committed in beds, so is spiritual in those places of
superstition. Here therefore they met; not ad ruminandum, (as the vulgar
Latin) to feed as beasts, nor to cut and lance themselves as Baals priests
did, (as the Septuagint) and the Heathens in great afflictions, (...).
Deuteronomy. 14.1. But to howl for wheat, for provender, for provant: Inops Senatus
auxilij humani ad Deos populum and vota convertit: omnia delubra implent, etc.
Live. lib. 3.
as now the Papists do in their sacra Ambarvalia: and as of old the Pagans did
in time of extreme famine, or other public calamity. But as the grasshopper
hops not much above the earth: and as vapors exhaled and drawn up by the Sun,
do soon fall down again: so do drossie and earthy hearts in prayers, they
seldom rise above corn and wine in their desires. Si ventri been, si lateri, as
Epicurus in Horace. If the belly may be filled, the back fitted, their own
turns served, it is enough to them, whose belly is their God, and who mind
earthly things only. Which when they have once got, then they rebel against
me,] they consume it upon their lust, James 4.2. and so fight against God with
his own weapons, as Jehu did against Jehoram with his own men; they abuse their
store to his dishonor, like cornfed cattle they kick against their master; or
as the young Mulet, that when she has sucked her fill kicks her damme: or as
the wild-asse, that snuffes up the wind, and cannot be taken. Or secondly, they
rebel after they have assembled themselves, and made a show of no small
devotion: Jer. 2.
when once the duty is over, they go to their old courses again, and undo all
their prayers, as Jerem. 5.3. as if now they had prayed, they had purchased a
license to live as they list. Whereas duties should mightily engage us against
sin; and deliverances command obedience.

Verse 15. Though I have bound, and strengthened their arms,] Quum ego erudivi,
So Pagnine, Polanus, and others: when I taught them, or chastened them, as
verse 12. and strengthened their arms: there is no and in the Original; it is
an Asyndeton; to show that God had done both for them, together and at once: he
had acted the part both of an Instructour, and of a Surgeon; (like as Rev.
3.18. he takes upon him the person both of a rich merchant, and a skillful
Physician) he had done all that could be done to do them good; teaching their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight, Psalm. 144.1. binding up their broken
arms (See Ezekiel. 30.24.) and strengthening their feeble sinews, their hands
that hung down, Heb. 12.12. After I have scourged them, I have re-established
them; but what thanks for my labor? what Minerval or pay for my pains? The
worlds wages; Hoc ictu ceu didactro accepto Linus mortuus est. Buchol.
such as Hercules paid the Schoolmaster Linus, whom he knocked on the head: or
as Agricola's scholars in Germany killed their master with their pen-knives; or
as Physicians and Surgeons are many times paid by their penurious patients, of
whom the Poet wittily, Tres medicus facies habet, unam, quando rogatur;
Angelicam, mox est, cum juvat, ipse Deus. Owen: Epigr.

Ast ubi, curato, poscit sua munera; morbo,
Horridus apparet terribilisque Satan.


yet do they imagine mischief against me,] All goes against God (See the note
on verse. 13.) Here they imagine mischief against him, as before they spoke lies
against him, verse. 13. and acted rebellion against him, verse. 14. Thus they
spoke and did evil things as they could, Jer. 3.5. and the reason of all was,
they imagined mischief, cogitabant quasi coagitabant, they were men of wicked
devices, Prove. 12.2. wholly made up of sinful projects and purposes: they
plotted and plowed mischief, and that against God himself (which is horrible,)
David thought much that his enemies should machinate mischief against him,
though but dust and ashes; and threatens them sore for so doing, Psalm. 62.3.
How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? Ye shall be slain all of you;
as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence: he means, ye shall be
surely and suddenly ruined. What then will become of those Zamzummims that
imagine mischief against the Lord? and such a Lord as has bound and
strengthened their arms, that had been broken by the enemies, and sought their
good every way, puniendo, muniendo, malis and bonis afficiendo, etc. If they
had slipped into some small offense against him, of infirmity and at unawares, it
had been nothing so grievous: but to busy their brains, and bend their wits
and studies scientes, volentes, and deliberato consilio to plot and practice
mischief, (...)
or (as the Septuagint render it) mischiefs against God, (for every
transgression and disobedience is contrary to his most pure Nature, and sacred
Law, and shall therefore receive a just recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.) so
gracious a God, this is detestable ingratitude. This is, as if those in the
Gospel should have railed against Christ, for raising them from the dead: it is
like the matchless mischievousnesse of that monster Michael Balbus, who that
night that his Prince pardoned and released him; Zonaras in Annal.
gat out and slew him. Omne peccatum est deicidium, for although wicked men
cannot reach God, yet they reach at him; shooting up their darts against
heaven, (as the Thracians did once in a storm) and saying in effect as Caligula
did to his Jupiter, Herodot. Homer.
(...)! either kill me, or I will kill thee.

Verse. 16. They return but not to the most High,] Gnal for Gnelion by
contraction: as Jah for Jehovah, so afterward, Chap. 11.7. and 2 Samuel 23.1.
Return they do, or seem to do at least (for it is their hypocrisy that is here
described) but not to the most High: to whom then? to idols, or humane helps,
or any thing rather, and sooner, then to God. Jehu went far in the work of
Reformation, and made a great flaunt at first, as if he would have done as much
that way, as ever Josiah did: But he and his people came not up to the height,
turned not to the most High God, honored him not as a just and jealous God,
that can endure no corrivals. They gave the half-turn, but returned not with
all their hearts, Joel. 2.12. they turned from west to north, but not from west
to east, to the full counterpoint, setting their faces toward God, and having
their backs toward their sins. They had happily a kind of velleity, some
short-winded wishes and wamblings, as I may so say, but it boiled not up to the
full height of a resolution for God; they made believe they would cast away
their transgressions, but it was but as the mother makes her child believe,
that she will cast him to the puttock or into the water; when as she holds him
fast enough, and means him no hurt at all. These faint essays of returning are
not worthy of the most High; he delights not to be dallied with, but
requires the best of the best; and that we serve him like himself, that is,
after a godly so^t, or worthy of God, (...)
as Saint John phraseth it, 3 Ioh. 6. Thus if we do, we shall be drawn up to
him, (...)
and have cause to rejoice in our sublimity, or, in that we are exalted, Iam.
1.9. For indeed the most High stoopeth to the true convert (who considering his
distance repents and abhors himself in dust and ashes) he dwells in the
highest heavens and lowest hearts, Job. 42.5.
Esa. 57.17.

They are like a deceitful bow] a rotten bow (though otherwise fair) when an
arrow is drawn to the head, breaks and deceives the archer. Or thus, when a man
shoots with a deceitful bow, though he level his eye and his arrow directly to
the mark, and thinks with himself to hit it; yet indeed the arrow, by reason of
his deceitful bow goes a clean contrary way; yea, and sometimes reflects upon
the archer himself; semblably these false Israelites dealt with God. Their
hearts were as the bow, their purposes and promises to return as arrows; the
mark they aimed at conversion; to the which, they, in their afflictions looked
with so accurate and intent an eye, as though they would repent indeed; but
their hearts deceived them as being unsound: hence they started aside like a
deceitful bow, Psalm. 78.57. and the arrows of their fair promises and
pretenses vanished in the air, as smoke. Some take the words in another sense,
as if punishment and disappointment were here threatened: but I best like the
former. Let us look to the secret warpings of our hearts, and, seeing we are
Gods bow, Zach. 9.13. let us not be deceitful, etc.

Their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue,] and the
people with them; for princes fall not alone, as we have seen in our late wars,
wherein Lords and Losels fell together not a few at Newbury-fight especially
(...), the sword devoureth one as well as the other, 2 Samuel 11.25. God hangs up
the heads of the people as it were in gibbets, Number. 25.4. their greatness
cannot bear them out, Thrasonicae aulicorum Dej erationes ronchi and
blasphemiae in Deum, and Prophetas. Rivet. Philip of Spain. Farnesius. Minerius.
nor their life-guards defend them, for the detestation of their tongue (so
some read this text) for the hatred that God bears to them for their
blasphemies and great swelling words of vanity, uttered against him, his
people, and his ordinances. With our tongue, say they, we will prevail, our
lips are our own: who is Lord over us? Lo this and worse is the rage of their
tongue: as his, that said he would not leave one Lutheran in his dominions:
another, that he would ride his horse up to the saddle in the blood of the
Lutherans: a third, that he would send them all to dine with the devil, etc.
God will cut off the spirit of such outrageous Princes. They shall fall by the
sword, they shall be a portion for foxes, Psalm. 63.10. and a derision to the
Egyptians.

this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt,] their confederates in whom
they trusted; and upon whose help bearing themselves over-bold, they had spoken
loftily, setting their mouths against heaven, and their tongues walked through
the earth, Ps. 73.9. Lo, these should not only fail them but jear them; not
only not succor them, but scorn them; as the Monarch of Morocco did our King
John, that sent to him for help in the Barons wars. He grew into such dislike
of our king (says the story) that ever after he abhorred the mention of him.
Neither met he with better entertainment from the Pope, to whom he basely
submitted and surrendered his kingdom. It is better to trust in the Lord, then
to put confidence in Princes. For, Deo confisi nunquam confusi, they that trust
in the Lord shall never be ashamed.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. SEt the trumpet to thy mouth,] Heb. The trumpet to thy palate. A
hasty expression, an abrupt and imperfect speech, common with such as are moved
with passions, of anger, grief or fear, as Chap. 5.8. after thee O Benjamin.
God, though not subject to such perturbations, Iam. 1.17. yet here and
elsewhere utters himself in this sort; to set forth the nearness of the
peoples danger by the enemies approach: and the necessity of their return to
him by true repentance, for the diversion of his displeasure. Break off thy
sins by righteousness, says the Prophet to Nebuchadnezzar; be abrupt in the
work, cut the cartropes of vamty, if it may be a lengthning of thy
tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. Take the bark from the tree, and the sap can never
find the way to the boughs: get sin remitted, and punishment shall be removed.
In this sermon of the Prophet (which is much sharper then the former, and may
seem to be one of the last, because God is so absolute in threatening, as if he
meant to be resolute in punishing) there is (as one says) peccatorum and
poenarum (...) an heaping together of sins and punishments of many sorts: and
the prophet is commanded to give sudden warning of the enemy at hand, which is
elegantly set forth by a military hypotyposis or lively representation; as if
it were now a doing. The trumpet to thy mouth, that is, set up thy note, and
proclaim with a loud and clear voice, as Esaias. 58.1. cry in the throat (so the
Chaldee has it here) spare not, that none may say he was not warned: lift up
thy voice like a trumpet, that all may hear and fear, Am. 3.6. as people use to
do when an ala m is sounded, or the bells are rung backward. See chap. 5.8.
There they had been before alarmed, here reminded in brief: for the prophet is
as it were, monosyllabus, as one in haste; he utters amputatas sententias and
verba ante expectatum cadentia, as Seneca somewhere has it, broken sentences,
concise, but pithy periods.

he shall come as an Egle against the house of the Lord,] He, that is, the
Assyrian; not Nebuchadnezzar, though the like is said of him, Ezech. 17.3.7.
Much less the Romans (as Lyra interprets this text of the last destruction
of Jerusalem, because the Eagle was their Ensign) but Pull, Tiglath-Pileser, and
Salmanaser, who came against the ten Tribes as an Eagle, to waste, spoil, and
carry captive speedily, 2 King. 15.19. and 29. and 17.3. etc. and 18.19. Lam.
4.19. Plin. lib. 10.3.
impetuously, irresistibly: as Ierem. 4.19. The Eagle is the strongest and
swiftest of birds, and fears no obstacle, either from other fowl, or wind,
or thunderbolt, as Pliny affirms. Nebuchadnezzar is not only compared to an
Eagle (as before is noted) but to a Lion with Eagles-wings, Dan. 7.4. that is,
with invincible armies, that march with incredible swiftness. And all this was
long since forethreatned, Deuteronomy. 28.49. The Lord shall bring a Nation against
thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the Eagle flies: to
which Text the Prophet here seems to allude; as indeed all the Prophets do
but comment upon Moses, and draw out that Arras, which was folded together by
him before.

against the house of the Lord,] that is, the house of Israel, called Gods
house, Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.5. and Gods land, Hos. 9.3.15. and their
Commonwealth is by Josephus called a Theocratic. And although they were now
become Apostates, yet they gloried no less then before, to be of the stock of
Abraham, and of the family of faith: like as the Turks call themselves at this
day, Musulmans, that is, the true and right believers; especially after they
are circumcised, which is not done till they be past ten years of age;
following the example of Ismael, Grand Signior Serag. p. 191.
whom they imitate, and honor as their Progenitour: alleging that Abraham
loved him, and not Isaac, and that it was Ismael whom Abraham would have
sacrificed.

because they have transgressed my Covenant, and trespassed] Sin is the mother
of misery: and the great Makebate betwixt God and his creature. It moves him
when we ask bread and fish to feed us (as verse 2.) to answer us with a stone
to bruise us, or a serpent to bite us. The sin of this people was the more
heinous, because they were covenanters, and confederate with God. It was his
covenant that was in their flesh, Genesis 17.13. and he had betrothed them to
himself, and betrusted them with his Oracles. but they like men, transgressed
the covenant, and dealt treacherously against him, Chap. 6.7. (See the Note
there.) they performed not the stipulation of a good conscience toward God. 1
Pet. 3.21.


they trespassed against his law.] As if it had not been holy, and just, and
good, Romans 7.
precious, perfect, and profitable; grounded upon so much good reason, that if
God had not commanded it, yet it had been best for us to have practiced it,
Esaias 48.17. I am the Lord that teaches thee to profit, etc O that thou had
hearkened to my commandments! etc. q. d. It is for thy profit and not for mine
own, that I have given thee a law to live by. But they have trespassed, or
praevaricated: and this, out of pride and malice, as the word signifies; and
as before he had often convinced them of many particulars, and more will do:
therefore are they justly punished.

Verse 2. Israel shall cry unto me,] It is their course and custom to do so:
they will needs do it though I take no delight in it. Hypocrisy is impudent,
as chap. 5.6. and Ier. 3.4, 5. No nay, but it will despite God with seeming
honor; and present him with a ludibrious devotion. Israel, though revolted and
degenerated into Iezreel, chap. 1. shall cry, yea cry aloud, vociferabuntur,
cry till they are hoarse, as criers do: and unto me, but not with their heart,
chap. 7.14. It is but clamor sine side fatuus, an empty ring, that God regards
not. For, not every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord, etc Mat. 7.21. Many
lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come
unto us, Mic. 3.11. who yet shall hear, Discedite, Avaunt ye workers of
iniquity: I know you not. Woe then to all profligate professors, carnal
Gospellers: their prayers shall not profit them, neither shall they be a button
the better for their loud cries to the most High, ( Pro. 1.28. and odious
fawnings,

My God, we know thee.] When their hearts are far from him. Of such pretenders
to him and his truth, it is that the Apostle speaks, Tit. 1.16. They profess
that they know God, (which yet God denies, Hos. 4.1. and 5.4.) but in works
they deny him: being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate. To come and call God Father, the guide of our youth, and then to
fall to sin, this is to do as evil as we can: We cannot easily do worse, Jer.
3.4, 5. To cry, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord: and then to
steal, murder, and commit adultery, etc. this is painted hypocrisy, Ier. 7.4,
9. when men shall take sanctuary, and think to save themselves from danger by a
form of godliness (as the Jews fable that Og king of Bashan escaped in the
flood by riding astride upon the Ark) when they are perfect strangers to the
power of it, this is to hasten and heap up wrath, Job 36.13. Religion, as it is
the best armor, so the worst cloak: and will serve hypocrites as the disguise
Ahab put on, and perished. Castalio makes this last clause to be the speech of
the blessed Trinity, We know thee O Israel: q. d. Though thou collogue and cry,
My God: yet we know thine hypocrisy and the naughtiness of thy heart. But the
former sense is better, though the placing of the word Israel in the end of the
verse, seem to favor this: for thus it runs in the Hebrew, To me thy shall
cry, My God, we know thee, Israel.

Verse 3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good,] Heb. The Good: as
first, the good God, who is good original, universal, All-sufficient, and
satisfactory, proportionable and fitting to our soul. He both is good, and does
good. Psalm 119.68. and that both naturally, abundantly, freely, and constantly.
Good thou art, O Lord, and ready to forgive, says David, Psalm. 86.5. And the
Good Lord be mircifull, 2 Chronicles. 30.
etc. says Hezekiah in his prayer for the people. To speak properly, there is
none good but God, Ase elonganit' ^ipulis.
says our Savior, Matt. 19.17. but Israel cast him, or rather kicked him off
(procul a se rejecit) as the word signifies: So do all gross hypocrites: they
are rank Atheists, practical Atheists though professionall Christians.
Secondly, they reject Christ as a Sovereign, though they could be content to
have him, as a Savior: they send messages after him, saying, We will not have
this man to rule over us: they will not submit to the laws of his kingdom, nor
receive him in all his offices, and efficacies: they are Christlesse creatures,
as without God, so without Christ in the world. Thirdly, hypocrites reject the
good Spirit of God, (as David calls him, Psalm. 143.10.) the fruit whereof is
in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5.9. When God striveth
with them by his good Spirit (as Neh. 9.20.) they, by yielding to Satan's
suggestions, grieve that holy Spirit, and by grieving resist him, and by
resisting quench him, and by quenching maliciously oppose him, and offer
despite unto him; and so cast themselves into the punishing hands of the living
God, Heb. 10.29, 31. Lastly, they cast off the good Word, and true Worship of
God: those right judgments, true laws, good statutes, and Commandments, Neh.
9.13. they put the promises from them, and judge themselves unworthy of
everlasting life, Acts 13.46. they hate instruction, and cast Gods words behind
them, Psalm. 50.17. In a word, be has left off to be wise, and to do good:
he sets himself in a way that is not good: hec abhors not evil, Psalm.
36.3, 4. The words may be read thus, The good (God) has rejected Israel; the
enemy shall pursue him: according to that in the Psalm, God has forsaken him,
persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him, Psalm. 71.11. Sure it
is, that the Lord is with us, while we are with him: and if we seek him, he
will be found of us. But if we forsake him, he will forsake us. And if he
forsake us, woe be to us, chap. 9.12. we are in danger to be caught up by every
paltry enemy, as young Lapwings are to be snatched up by every buzzard. If
Israel cast away the thing that is good, ^ Chron. 15.2.
what marvel if evil hunt him to overthrow him, Psalm. 140.11. and if he find
himself in all evil in the midst of the Congregation, and the assembly, Prove.
5.14. Hence Cains fear, when cast out by God; and Saul's complaint, that the
Philistines were upon him, and God had forsaken him.

Verse 4. They have set up kings, but not by me, etc.] The Septuagint and
vulgar Latin render it, They have reigned to themselves: like as St. Paul
tells the haughty Corinthians, who, carried aloft by their waxen wings,
domineered and despised others, ye have reigned as kings without us, etc. 1
Cor. 4.8. But our reading is according to the Original: and so they are
charged with a double defection: the one Civil, from the house of David, they
have set up kings, etc. the other Ecclesiastical, from the sincere service of
God, they had made them idols. For the first, it was not their fault to set up
kings; but to do it without God, without his license, and approbation. They
took counsel, but not of God: they covered with a covering, but not of his
spirit, that they might add sin to sin, Esaias 30.1. They went headlong to work,
in setting up Jeroboam the son of Nebat. For although the thing were done by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, as was likewise Christ's
crucifixion, Acts 2.23. (See 1 King. 11.31, 17. and Chap. 12.15, 24.) yet
because the people were led by their own pride and ambition to choose a new
king, without either asking Gods consent, or eyeing his decree, they did it
rashly, and seditiously; neithey aimed they at any thing else, but at the
easing of their burdens, and drawing to themselves the wealth of the kingdom.
As for Jeroboam, it is before noted, that although he had it cleared to him,
that Gods will was he should be king over the ten Tribes, yet because it was a
will of Gods decree, not of his command, as of a duty to be done by him; and
because he did not as David, who when he had the promise of the kingdom, (yea
was anointed king) yet invaded not the kingdom, but waited till he was lawfully
exalted thereunto by God: therefore passes he for an usurper. And the people
are here worthily reprehended, since whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and it
is obedience when men obey a Divine precept; but not ever, when they follow a
Divine instinct.

they have made princes, etc.] Some render it, They have removed Princes, R.
Sal. Jark.
(as if in the word Hasiru Sin were put for Samech) they have taken liberty to
make and unmake Princes at their pleasure: as the Roman Army did Emperors: and
as that potent Earl of Warwick, in Henry the sixths time, who is said to have
carried a king in his pocket. But because the former reading is confirmed by
the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the sense is agreeable to what went before: neither
read we of any kings of Israel deposed by the people, we retain it as the
better.

Of their silver and their gold have they made them idols,] Of the guts and
garbage of the earth had they made them terricula, fray-bugs, or molestations:
Gnatsabim.
terrorem enim and tristitiam duntaxat afferunt suis cultoribus, for they cause
terror and heaviness only to those that worship them. Polan.
Their sorrow shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, Psalm. 16.4.
The Greek Churches, for instance, so set upon Image Worship; and therefore now
subjected to the Turkish tyranny: a type whereof were these ten Tribes carried
captive by the Assyrian, without any return. Idols are called griefs, or
sorrows, says Peter Martyr, because they torment the mind; and trouble the
conscience; neither can they quiet or pacify it: Com. in 1 Samuel 31.9.
so that Idolaters must needs be always in doubt and despair, as Papists are,
whose whole religion is a doctrine of desperation. Their penances and
pilgrimages to such or such an Idol, might still their consciences for a
while: but this was a truce rather then a peace: a palliate cure, which would
not hold long; a corrupting of the sergeant, but not compounding with the
Creditour.

that they may be cut off.] Not their silver and gold, the matter of their
idols, as some sense it; but the whole nation, Princes and people together.
Idolatry is a God-provoking, and a land-desolating sin, as in this Prophecy.
Often it is not so much the enemies sword as the sin of idolatry that
destroys cities and kingdoms, through the justice and jealousy of Almighty
God.

Verse. 5. Thy calf, O Samaria, has cast thee off,] That is, it can do thee no
stead, nor deliver thee from the destroyer. Be not afraid of such mawmets
(says Jeremy) for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good,
(...)
chap. 10.5. they can neither hurt, nor help: for an idol is nothing in the
world, 1 Cor. 8.4. nothing but a mere fiction: it has no godhead, or power
divine in it self, as the following words show, that there is none other God
but one. How then can help be reasonably expected from it? Israel had cast off
the thing that is good, for calf-worship, ver. 3. therefore is he worthily cast
off by his calf, called here Samaria's calf, or calves, because that was the
chief City, the Palace of the King, and is therefore put for the whole
Province: and their idols called a calf, by way of contempt, as the
brazen-serpent is called Nehushtan, or a piece of brass when once it was
Idolized. See how Rabshakeh insults over those Heathen-deities, 2 King. 18.33,
34, 35. and blasphemously applies it to the God of Israel, who never casts
off his faithful servants: but is with them in trouble, to deliver them, and
honor them, Psalm. 91.15. Surely the Lord will not cast off his faithful
people, neither will he forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94.14. Behold, God will
not cast away a perfect man, Job 8.20. But though he cause grief, yet he will
have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32. some
reads it thus, Thy calf, O Samaria, has been carried away into a far country,
namely into Assyria: as the idols of the nations which were overcome, were
carried away captive in triumph by the Conquerours. See Hos. 10.6.

Mine anger is kindled against them,] God is said to be angry against
idolaters, because he does that which an angry man uses to do, viz. 1. chide,
2. fight; see the second commandment in the sanction of it, and tremble at
Gods displeasure, which when once kindled, and comes into his face, or,
nostrils (as here) it burns to the lowest hell, consumes the earth with her
increase and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains, Deuteronomy. 32.22. It is
ill angring him that is the Ancient of days, and a consuming fire. The Jews
use to say to this day, that there is no punishment befalls them, in which
there is not an ounce of Aarons golden calf.

How long will it be ere they attain to innocence?] Quousque non poterunt
innocentiam? a forcible ellipsis: as if God were so vexed, that he could not
fully utter himself, nor at all speak to Samaria as he had begun, but turn his
discourse to others, saying, How long will they not be cleansed? or, not abide
innocence? By which powerful expression three things are intimated. First,
that these Israelites were refractarie and desperate: not only unclean, but
enemies to innocence, such as could not abide it: they were inveterate, and
incurable, their diseases ingrained, and not easily stirred by any potion.
Secondly, that God is most patient, who though he thinks overlong of the time
that men continue in their evil courses, and therefore cries, Quousque, How
long, etc. and when will it once be? yet bears with their evil manners, and
inviteth them to better. Thirdly, that he will at length break off his
patience, and proceed to punishment, since there is no other remedy, 2 Chronicles.
34.16. Prove. 29.1.

Compenset longas ut gravitate moras. Verse 6. For from Israel was it also,]
There is an Emphasis in Also, and it is as if the Prophet should say, This
calfe of Samaria is no less from Israel, and came out of his shop or device,
then that of old set up by them in the wilderness. Israel then brought a calf
out of Egypt, Jeroboam brought two; and Israel has received them, and are much
taken with them: so that they cannot attain to innocence, (as it is in the
former verse) so far they are engaged, and so fast joined to idols, that they
cannot get off: there is so much of Self in it: it was the barn of their own
brain; and hence so over-admired, so clasped and hugged, with the Ape, etc. or
rather, as Cleopatra hugged her Vipers that sucked her blood, and took away her
life; so did they their own inventions, though fairly warned of the danger,
verse 3, 4, 5. Lo this was Israel, that acted thus madly. Israel that was wont
to laugh at, or pity other Nations for their Idolomany, for worshipping the
works of their own hands, for going a whoring after their own inventions, for
changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things: As
in Lap-land, the people worship that all day for a god, whatsoever they see
first in the morning. Now that a calf-worship should be found in Israel, Romans
1.23. Abbats Geogr.
and not only so, but found out by Israel; who was herein worse then Egypt:
for that the Egyptians worshipped a living Ox of Gods making; but Israel, a
dead calf of their own making: such sots they were grown, and so thwart to the
very principles of reason.

the workman made it,] who confessedly is no God, therefore it is not God,] for
no man can give that divinity to another, which himself has not. Nay it is
certain that God himself by his infinite power cannot make any thing to be a
God to us. He cannot do this I say: like as he cannot lie, he cannot die, he
cannot deny himself, etc. so he cannot raise a created excellency to that
height, as to be a God to us. How vile then is the Voluptuary, that makes his
belly his god? the Mammonist, that makes his gold his god? the Ambitionist,
that makes his honor his god? How abominable the Masse-monger, that makes
his god, and eats him when he has done? This made Averroes the Mohammedan
cry out; Quoniam Christiani Deum suum manducant, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis, that is, Forasmuch as Christians do eat their God, let my soul be
rather with the souls of the Philosophers. Those Pseudo-christians the Papists,
stick not to call the consecrated Host, their God and Lord: and Harding (that
sottish Apostate, for he was once a zealous Preacher against Popery, and wished
that he had a voice as loud as the bells of Oseney, Artic. 2^
to cry it down) in his disputation against Juel, is not ashamed to defend it.
And yet we all know that that Host or Sacrament, as they call it, of the Altar,
is the work of the Baker, therefore it is no God, neither Lord nor God.
(whatsoever our Lord God the Pope say to the contrary) Which yet further
appears, in that (as the calf of Samaria here) it may be broken in pieces,
or to shivers, (which word of ours seems to come from the Hebrew shebharim
here used) yea ground to powder, as was the molten calf in the wilderness,
whereto the Prophet may well here allude. Is not their breaden-god broaken by
the Priest into three bits? Is it not chawed with his teeth? May it not be
gnawed by mice, become meat for worms, In cau^elis Missae.
etc? Murescit, putrescit, and corrumpitur: all which things the Papists
themselves confess may befall their god, which is therefore no god, or nomine
tantum and non numine deus, a nominall god only. And the like we may say of
images, and relics (such as is at Genua, the tail of that Ass, whereon
Christ rode into Jerusalem) these and other monuments of idolatry may, nay they
ought to be broken, burnt, and utterly abolished, Exodus 34.13. Deuteronomy. 7.5. Ezekiel.
20.7. as (blessed be God) they are lately amongst us, by our Worthies in
Parliament: to whom perhaps, for that and the like good services, we attributed
but too much, we even idolized them: and the king of Sweden (that bright
Northern-starre) a little before his decease, being in discourse with Dr.
Fabricius his Chaplain, he told him, Mr. Clark in his life.
that he thought God would ere long take him away, because the people did so
overvalue and deifie him.

Verse 7. For they have sown the wind, and shall neap the whirl-winde:] To
sow the wind is to labor in vain, as Eccles. 5.16. to labor for the wind,
and Prove. 11.29. to possess the wind, to feed on the wind, Hos. 12.1. and to
be eaten up of the wind, Jer. 22.22. The Greeks express the same by hunting
after, (...).
and husbanding the wind. The wind we know makes a mighty bustle, as if it
were some great business, solid and stable: but presently it blows over, and
comes to nothing. Or if it get, as seed, into the bosom of the earth, either
it breeds an earthquake, or at least arises in a whirl-winde, which blows
dust into the eyes, and once at least buried a considerable Army in the Lybian
sands. Solomon says, Cambyses his soldiers.
He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity, Pro. 22.8. But our Prophet here,
says more: He that sows the wiude of iniquity, shall reap the terrible
tempest of unconceiveable misery. By the blast of God he shall perish, and by
the breath of his nostrils he shall be consumed, Job 4.8, 9. As the beginnings
of Idolatry, hypocrisy, vainglory, (...).
carnal policy, etc. are empty and unhappy, (it is but the sowing of blasted
corn, as the Septuagint here has it, seed corrupted by the wind) so the end
thereof is very sad and dismal. The word here rendered, the whirl-winde, has a
syllable in it more then ordinary, to note (says Tremellius) the fearfulness
of the divine vengeance, Suphatha^.
that will befall the forementioned: and especially at death, when they are
entering upon eternity. Oh what a dreadful shriek gives the guilty soul at
death, to see it self launching into an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and
must swim naked in it for ever: not having the least cold blast of that wind
it sowed all its life long to cool it; but rather to add to its torment! Then
will God speak to such, as once he did to Job out of a whirl-winde, but after
another manner; Go to now ye formalists, false-worshippers, triflers, troublers
of Israel: ye that have been mere mutes, and ciphers, nullities in the world,
superfluities in the earth, or worse then all this: Jam. 5.5.
Go to now, I say, weep and howl for the miseries that are come upon you. Ye
have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished your
hearts as in a day of slaughter. Jam. 5.5.
But now, an end is come, is come; an evil, an only evil, without mixture of
mercy, sorrow without succor, mischief without measure, torments, without hope
of ever either mending or ending, are the portion of your cup: the dregs of
that cup of mine must you now drink off, that has eternity to the bottom. O
lamentable! Oh did but men forethink what would be the end of sin, they durst
not but be innocent. Oh let that terrible tempest at death be timely thought
on and prevented, Job 27.20, 21, etc. Terrors take hold of him as wa^ers: a
tempest steals him away in the night. The East-winde carries him away, and
he departs, and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. For God shall cast
upon him and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand, etc.

It has no stalk: the bud shall yield no meal:] Nihil habet fertilitatis
firmitatisque, as Ruffinus expounds it; It has no firmness or
fruitfulness: the wind of wickedness that thou have sown, the blasted corn
that thou have committed to the earth, will yield thee nothing but loss, and
disappointment. A blade there may be, but not a stalk: or if a stalk, yet not a
bud: or if a bud, yet it shall be nipt in the bud: it shall yield no meal, but
only dust and chaff: or if it come to the meal, yet strangers shall swallow it
up, so that you shall be never the better for it: but after that ye have sown
the wind of iniquity, ye shall reap the whirl-winde of misery, maledictionem
omnimodam, curses of all kinds, which God has hanged at the heels of your
idolatry, a pernicious evil, (whatever those superstitious shecsinners bragged
to the contrary, Ier. 44.17.) Or if they flourish for a season, and have hopes
of a large crop: yet God will curse their blessings, and frustrate their fair
hopes, Psalm. 37.2. as he dealt by that rich wretch mentioned by Mr. Boroughes,
in his Comment on the second Chapter of this Prophecy, page 379. I had certain
information, says he, from a Reverend Minister, that in his own Town there was
a worldling, who had a great crop of corn. A good honest neighbor of his
walking by his corn said, Neighbor, you have a very fine crop of corn, if God
bless it: yea, says he, I will have a good crop: speaking contemptuously. And
before he could come to get it into the barn, it was blasted, that the corn of
the whole crop was not worth six pence.

Verse 8. Israel is swallowed up,] Not their meal only, as verse 7. but
themselves also are devoured by those workers of iniquity, that eat up Gods
people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. Persecutours are men-eaters, more cruel
then those American Canibals, that devour men peece-meal: they make but a
breakfast of Gods people, as Senacherib meant to do of Jerusalem; and the
Powder-papists of England. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side,
when men rose up against us, Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their
wrath was kindled against us. But blessed be God, who has not given us as a
prey to their teeth, Psalm. 124.2, 3, 6. Let us keep us out of the claws and
clutches of that old manslayer, who night and day walks about (in a circular
motion) that he may take us at advantage, seeking whom he may swallow down his
wide gullet, which he has even made red with the blood of souls, (...). 1 Pet.
5.8.
and is therefore happly, called the great red-Dragon, Rev. 12.3. that has
seven heads to plot, and ten horns to push men into the sin of idolatry, and
thereby into hell. So long as Israel was holiness to the Lord, and the
first fruits of his increase, all that devoured him found that they offended:
for evil came upon them, Ier. 2.3. they could no more digest him, Judge. 5.1
then the Whale did Jonah: a cup of trembling, or of poison he was to all the
people round about, Zech. 12.2. See the Note there. But, when he offended in
Baal, he died: when he chose new gods, then was war in the gates: when they
made leagues with idolaters, then were they even swallowed up by them: as were
likewise the Greek and Latin Churches, by the Eastern and Western Antichrist,
those crooked Leviathans, those dragons in the sea, as the Egyptian, and
Assyrian are called, Esaias 27.1.

now shall they be among the Gentiles,] whose favor and friendship they have
basely sought, and dearly bought. It was threatened in the former Chapter, verse
16. that they should be a derision in the land of Egypt. See the Note. To have
Egyptians deride us, and that for sin, is an heavy judgment. So here, to be
disdained and vilified by such, as an old broken vessel, fit for none but
unclean uses.

as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.] No delight or complacency; vas
despectum, reijculum, abjectum, a vessel that is for the carrying up and down
of excrements; so shall Israel be employed by Gentiles, in base and
contemptible offices: as they were by the Babylonians, Jer. 51.34. yea
Iehojakim himself (though a King) was no better used, Ier. 22.18. and Moab,
that haughty nation, Ier. 48.38. In which sense, Mo^b shall be my washpot,
says David, Psalm. 60.10. that is, brought into most abject slavery; as your
scullions or scavengers: they shall lie among the pots, Psalm. 68.13. not only
to make pots, for the king of Babylons use, (as those servile souls, the base
brood of their degenerated forefathers, 1 Chronicles. 4.23.) Matulam praebere.
but also to hold pots, or empty pots and vessels of dishonor; that they might
know a difference betwixt Gods service (which is all clean and fair work, 2 Timothy 2.21.
fit for a vessel of honor, an elect vessel, elect and precious, sanctified
and fit for the masters use) and the service of their enemies, base and
beastly; such as is beneath the excellency of an ingenuous man: such as the
Turks at this day put the Jews to; and the Spaniards the poor Indians.

Verse 9. For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself,] This
was that that most moved the Lord to denounce and determine hard and heavy
things against Israel, they had suspicious thoughts of God, as if he either
could not, or would not do for them, and help them out, as the Assyrian (though
an enemy) would. This prank of theirs, God utters here with as great
indignation, and dislike, as old Jacob did his son Reub^ns incest, when he
said, He went up to my couch. The Lord is as jealous of his glory as any man
can be of his wife: neither will he give it to another, Esaias 42.8. he admits
not of any corrivall in heaven or earth, as Potiphars wife was his own
peculiar. Now God is no way more glorified by us, then when we put our trust in
his love and faithfulness, and expect from him safety here, and salvation
hereafter. For in so doing, we set him up for our king, Judge. 9.15. and put the
crown royal upon his head, Cant. 3.11. As in doing otherwise, we turn his
glory into shame, loving vanity, seeking after leasing. Psalm. 4.2.
Hence that angry expostulation, Ier. 2.36. Why gaddest thou about so much to
change thy way? How do think to mend thy self, by running to the creature; as
if there were no God in Israel? thou also shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou
wast ashamed of Assyria: Yea thou shall go forth from him, and thine hands upon
thine head (after the manner of mourners, 2 Samuel 13.19.) for the Lord has
rejected thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them.

a wild ass alone by himself:] Foolish and fierce above measure, untameable
and untractable: loving to be alone, and so becomes a prey to the lion, Lib. 8.
cap. 40.
as says Siracides, chap. 13. verse 21. Pliny speaks much of the wild ass,
and his properties: and Interpreters on this Text, bring many reasons why
Israel is compared to him. Israel is as stupid, and as mad as the wild ass,
says Lyra. He is all for himself, says Iunius: he casts off Gods yoke,
says Tremellius: he is a contemptible creature, says Kimchi: he walks where
he lists, as masterlesse, says the Chaldee: he seeks water in the
wilderness, but hardly finds it, so does Israel help of the cruel enemies,
and has it not, says Oecolampadius: he takes a great deal of pains for his
belly, says Mercer: he cannot be tamed and made serviceable, says Gesner. He
is left alone by God to be carried captive by the Assyrian, says Ribera. The
Scripture describes the nature of this creature in many places, Genesis 16.12.
Job 6.5. and 11.12. and 24.5. and 39.8. Psalm. 104.11. Esaias 32.14. Ier. 2.23.
and 14.6. Dan. 5.21.

Ephraim has hired lovers.] This is the second similitude, taken from a most
libidinous harlot. See the like baseness in Judah, Ezekiel. 16.33. They were so
mad upon their idols, and creature-confidences, that they were at no small
charge for them: they lavished money out of the bag: and laid on, Jer. 5.38.
as if they should never see an end of their wealth. They sent great gifts and
sums of money to the Assyrians and Egyptians; and leaned upon them as their
champions: they hired loves, as the Hebrew here has it. But love as it cannot
well be counterfeited, (a man may paint fire, but he cannot paint heat) so it
cannot at all be hired or purchased. Those that go about it shall find
loathing for love, and be scorned of those mercenaries, which are seldom
either satisfied, or sure.

Verse 10. Yea, though they have hired among the nations,] The uncircumcised;
strangers to the promises, and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel: that
they should so far distrust God, and debase themselves, as to seek help of
such; this went near to the heart of God, and was very grievous. They brought
up an evil report upon Gods housekeeping, charged him with unfaithfulness to
his people, whom he now seemed to leave in the lurch, to shift for themselves
in their straits; and hardened his enemies in their wicked, but yet more
prosperous condition. Foelix scelus virtus vocatur. Cic. de divin. lib. 2.
How would these Heathens hug themselves in the conceit that Israel should do
thus, who was Gods portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer.
12.7. of whom it was anciently sund, and commonly said among the Heathen, The
Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126.2. Happy art thou O Israel: who
is like unto thee, O people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help; and who
is the sword of thine excellency: and thine enemies shall be found liars unto
thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Whosoever was
free of the city of Rome, might not accept of any freedom in another city: for
that they counted a dishonor to Rome. And will not God take it in ill part
from his covenanters, to seek or make after correspondency with his enemies,
and safety by them? The help of the wicked, Ecclesiae sunt tandem perniciosa
and semper perfidiosa, are the best perfidious, and at length pernicious to the
Church.

now will I gather them,] This the Chaldee, and the Vulgar make to be a promise
of bringing back their captivity; when indeed it is a commination of carrying
them into captivity. I will gather them,] that is, either the enemies against
Israel; or else Israel, for the enemies; ut eos acervatim perdam, that I may
lay them heaps upon heaps, and gather them, as dead corpse slain in battle are
gathered together for burial. Or, I will gather them, to the end that I may
disperse them. And they shall sorrow a little,] And but a little now, for the
burden of the king of princes.] for the taxes and tributes exacted from them by
the king of Assyria, (whose Nobles were Princes, 2 King. 18.24. Esaias 10.) See 2
King. 15.19, 29. But all this is but a little: it is but the beginning of
sorrows; it is but small drops fore-running the great storm; or as a crack
fore-running the fall of the house. They shall sorrow much more hereafter, when
carried captive, and made a scorn to the scum of the people. See Deuteronomy. 32.42.
Some read the whole verse, Yea, because they have hired among the nations, now
will I gather them together: (for they have begun a little) because of the
burden of the king of Princes. And they thus paraphrase it: Well may they bribe
and hire, but this will be the end: The Israelites themselves shall fall by
heaps; the nations whom they hire shall come so tumbling in upon them (as Esaias
told Ahaz, Esaias 8.) Do you not see it pretily well begun already? Look upon the
late example that is yet now fresh and bleeding before your eyes: so you will
the better believe my threatening in that which is to come: I mean, the sacking
and carrying away of the Tribes beyond Jordan, by Pull and Tiglath-Pileser. If
you ask me the reason, The calling of the Jews. page 212.
why God should be so angry with you? It is because you are so foolish, or so
wicked rather, to send presents and tributes to the king of Ashur (who in the
pride and vanity of his heart names himself the King of Princes, the mighty
and most potent King) with the pilling, polling, and burdening of your Subjects.

Verse 11. Because Ephraim has made many altars to sin,] Because he has
multiplied altars against Gods express command, Lev. 17.3, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.5,
etc. Josh. 22.22. Jer. 11.13. and that, to sin: as if it were on purpose to
cross and provoke the Lord to anger, by their superstitions and will worship,
and to despite him with seeming honors (for displeasing service is double
dishonor) therefore he shall have enough of it, ere I have done with it. He
shall be given up to a reprobate sense: that going on from one sin to another,
he may fill up his measure, till wrath come upon him to the utmost. Per quod
quis peccat, per idem punitur and i^se. Idolatry is sin with an accent,
wickedness with a witness, 1 King. 15.30, 34. and 16.2. 1 King. 12.30. and
13.35. and shall be punished accordingly: for so the Chaldee paraphraseth here;
Because they have multiplied their altars for sin, the altars of their idols
shall be their ruin: there is one Hebrew word for sin and punishment: sin
hales hell at the very heels of it, as One says wittily. Polanus upon this
Text, has these three profitable Observations. First, that as in the old
Testament, one only altar was set up by Gods command in the Tabernacle and
Temple: so also in the new Testament, we have no other altar but Christ, Heb.
13.10. Iren. lib. 4. contra haeres. cap. 34. Secondly, as the Israelites sinned
in multiplying altars: so do the Papists most grievously, in that not content
with Christ and his satisfactory sacrifice alone, they set up other altars, and
bring in other expiatory sacrifices. Thirdly, as the Israelites made many
altars to sin, though they pretended good intention and devotion: So the
Papists at this day multiply altars (even hundreds in some one Church in Rome)
to sin, though they falsely pretend their good intention therein, and the
preservation and augmentation of Gods service.

Verse 12. I have written to him the great things of my Law,] Magnalia legis;
there are also minutula legis, Mat. 5.22. both must be looked to: for though
the Civilian say of his Law, De minutis non curat lex, the law takes no notice
of small faults: yet it holds not true of the Law of God, which is spiritual,
and must be kept as the apple of the eye, Prove. 7.2. and observed in every
point and part, nay in every punctilio and particle thereof. But to come to the
words; Ephraim could not plead ignorance of Gods mind, for their many altars,
and superstitions: Deus enim jure quaerat and queratur, for God might very well
say and complain, as Prove. 22.20. Have not I written for thee excellent things
in counsels and knowledge? and in the verse next before, I have made known (my
mind) this day to thee, even to thee. So here, I have written, sc. by my
Penmen and Secretaries, to him chiefly, and for his better direction in my
service, that, he might walk therein by rule, and not at random, (See Deuteronomy.
4.8. Psalm. 147.29.) the great things, or excellent documents (the multiplicity
or multiformity, says the Chaldee) of my Law, or of my doctrine sapientiall,
Prove. 13.14. which takes in the Gospel too, that Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2.

But they were counted as a strange thing.] As not pertaining to them, as that
wherein they were little or nothing concerned, as the narration of foreign
affairs. Whereas men should read and regard the holy Scriptures, as they do the
Statutes of the Land: holding themselves as much concerned and intended as any
other: threatening themselves in every threat, binding themselves in every
precept, blessing themselves in every promise, mingling the whole Word with
faith in their hearts, and resolving upon the obedience of faith; as knowing
that these are verba vivenda non legenda, words to be lived, not read only:
and that they should indwell in us familiarly, and yet richly, Col. 3.16. and
we should be as inwardly acquainted with them, as any man is with his sister,
or nearest allies, Prove. 7.4. All this the rather; First because God is the
Author of the holy Scriptures, both matter and words are his, 2 Pet. 2.21. he
spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world began:
and he guided their hands in writing the Bible. How dare Papists then say, that
they wrote it injussi without command from God. Secondly, Luke 1.
because God has written his Law for us, for our behoof and benefit, Romans
4.23. and 15.4. The Scripture is Gods Epistle to us, says Gregory. It is a
lamp to my feet, Psalm. 119.1^^
and a light to my paths, says David. Not a light that I see at a distance, a
great way off; but a light held to my feet, that I may see my way in this land
of Chabul, this dirty and dark world: and not lift up one foot, till I descry
and find sure footting for another, as those Psalm. 34.6. Thirdly, because he
has written for us, the honorabilia legis, honorable and precious things,
such as a man would fetch from China or the uttermost part of the habitable
world upon his bare feet, rather then be without. David prefers it before gold
and silver, Psalm. 19.11. Solomon before pearls and rubies, Prove. 3.15. Moses
before all the learning of other Nations, Deuteronomy. 4.6. The Scripture is the souls
food, says Athansius: the souls physic, says Chrysostom: the invariable
rule of truth, says Irenaeus. It is says Another, the Aphorisms of Christ,
the Library of the Holy Ghost, the divine Pandects, the Wisdom of the Cross,
the Cubit of the Sanctuary, the Firmament of Faith, the Touchstone of Error,
etc. What reason then had Darbishire (Bishops Boners kinsman and Chaplain) to
say to Mr. Hawks the Martyr, that he was too curious: for he would have
nothing but his little pretty-Gods-book? Acts and Mon.
And is it not sufficient for my salvation? said Hawks: yes, said he, but not
for your instruction. God send me the salvation (said Hawks) and you the
instruction. That the Scripture is full and sufficient for both instruction and
salvation, see 2 Time. 3.16, 17. and my Treatise called the True Treasure. Has
igi^ur nocturna versate manu, versate diurna, Psalm. 1.2. Let there not, by
infrequency or disuse, grow an alienation or strangeness betwixt us and the
holy Scriptures: but be ready in them, and have them, as Saul had his pitcher
and spear at his bolster: as David had his chosen stones at hand in his scrip,
etc. Luther wishes all his own books burnt; because I fear, says he, they
hinder men from reading the Bible, that book of books; in comparison whereof
all the books in the world are but wast-paper. After which, I tremble, says
he, to think of the former age, wherein many Divines spent so much time in
reading Aristotle and Averroes, and so little in reading the Book of God.
Melancthon says that he heard some preach upon Texts taken out of Aristotle's
Ethics. Carolostadius was eight years Doctor when he began to read the
Scriptures: and yet at the taking of his degree, Joh. Manlius.
being asked whether he had read the Decalogue, negitabat se hujusmodi librum
in Bibliotheca sua habuisse unquam: he denied that he had ever had, or heard of
any Book so called: Amam. in Antibar. praf.
such a perfect stranger was he to the great things of Gods Law. And if the
learned Doctors be thus bard and ignorant, what may we think of the poor
misled and muzled multitude, that lie fast locked up in the Popes dark dungeon,
and are flatly forbidden to meddle with the Scriptures, lest they should be
infected with heresy, or possessed with a devil, as some (say they) have been
by that means?

Verse. 13. They sacrifice flesh in the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat
it;] q. d. They would seem not to have rejected the great things of my Law, nor
to be such strangers thereunto; since they were much in sacrificing according to
the Law. But their hypocrisy is most hateful: In decal.
In that First, they offer (with Cain) Non personam, sed opus personae, as
Luther says; not themselves, but their bare sacrifices, Esaias 66.3. which is
but as a brainlesse head, and soul-lesse body: it is but flesh, as it is here
called in contempt, and scorn. See the like, Jer. 7.21. Hos. 9.4. And think
the same of all external services; si careant anima sua, id est rect a in Deum
fide, and erecta in illum mente, if not performed in faith and obedience.
Secondly, They pretended to serve God, when indeed they only served their own
bellies, as those, Rom, 16.18. sought their own ends, Phil. 2.21. catered for
the flesh, Romans 13.14. insigne donum quo afficior (as Luther Paraphraseth the
text) carnem offertis quam vos ipsi voratis, i. e. A goodly gift it is that you
give me, viz. the flesh of your peace offerings which your selves may feast
with: and you therefore multiply sacrifices that you may gorge your selves with
good cheer. Now one egg is not more like to another, then these old
flesh-mongers were to the Popish flesh-flies at this day. It was an honest
complaint of one of them; We, says he, handle the Scripture, tantum ut nos
pascat and vestiat, only that it may feed us, and cloth us. And it is evident
to all the world, that their Masses, pilgrimages, festivals vowed presents and
memorials, etc. are only to pamper their paunches: which made them so angry
with Erasmus, and Luther, for meddling.

but the Lord accepts them not,] How should he (say) when there was nothing
but flesh, nothing but self in them. See the like, Jer. 4.10. Am. 5.22. Esaias
1.10. where God tells them, that their sacrifices were grievous and offensive
to all his several senses, nay to his very soul too. The sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. yea though he bring it with
never so good an intent, Pro. 21.27. how much more if he bring ex rapina
holocaustum, a sacrifice of what he has got by rapine and robbery? and so the
Chaldee carries the sense of the former words: the sacrifices of mine
offerings, quae collecta sunt ex inj^ria, says He, which were gathered and
gotten by wrong-dealing: how then should the Lord accept them?

now will he remember their iniquity,] Even while they are sacrificing: let
them not think to blind his eyes with the smoke of their offerings, to stop
his mouth with their rich gifts, and donaries: to bribe him into a connivency:
to expiate and set off their sins with their sacrifices: for God will
remember them, and punish them. Yea, now will he do it, in the time of their
holy duties: he will come upon them then in his wrath, Luke 13.
as Pilate came upon the Galileans, and mingled their blood with their
sacrifices. Sure it is that sin (brought into Gods holy presence) petitions
against the sinner, as Esther did against Haman, at the banquet of wine: picks
out the time of prayer and other duties to accuse and call for vengeance. Esth.
7.6.
Take we heed, lest while we are confessing our sins, (which yet we close
with, and will not forsake) and judging our selves worthy to be destroyed, God
say not, Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee, thou graceless person,
that have so much impudence as to bring thy Cozbi into my presence, then; when
all the people (as on a fast day) are weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle. Lev. 10.3.
God will be sanctified of all that draw nigh unto him: one way or other he
will be sanctified, either in them, or on them. Of such he says, as Solomon
once did of Adoniah, 1 King. 1.5^.
If he show himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of his head fall to
the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die. If any
defile the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.
him shall God destory.

they shall return to Egypt.] They had a mind to run thither for refuge: they
sent also to So king of Egypt for that purpose, 2 King. 17.4. Instead of making
their peace with God, they betook themselves to base shifts; and sought help of
the creature. This is the guise of graceless men, when distressed. Rahab.
But they shall soon have enough of Egypt, chap. 9.3, 6. Their strength (or
their Egypt) had been to have sitten still, in expectation of help from heaven,
Esaias: 30.7. Deuteronomy. 28.6^.
and to have considered that the last and greatest curse denounced against
their disobedience, was, And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt, etc.

Verse 14. For Israel has forgotten his maker,] Not more his Factour, then his
Benefactour, as 1 Samuel 12.6. the Lord made Moses, and Aaron, i. e. he advanced
them to that honor in his Church. So our Savior is said to have made twelve,
when he ordained them to the Apostleship, Mar. 3.14. And the Apostle says of
Israel, that God exalted the people, when they dwelt as strangers in the land
of Egypt, Acts 13.17. sc. to the privilege of his peculiar people, the
possession of the promised land, the custody of his Oracles, and services, etc.
besides the many benefits and deliverances wrought for them. All which they are
said to have forgotten. 1. Because they laid them not to heart, see Esaias 57.11.
they saw not God in them: 2. Because their lives were not answerable: they
walked not worthy of such a God: but said (in effect) We are delivered to do
all these abominations, Jer. 7.10. God challenges remembrance, and well he
may, Eccles. 12.1. for he has created us for his glory, Esaias 43.7. he has
formed us, yea he has made us, (as it follows there, and all that we might
remember him) the word (made) is used for a degree of grace after creation.
Those that are his workmanship, his attificiall facture created in Christ Jesus
(who is the beginning of this creation of God, Rev. 3.14.) unto good works,
Ephesians. 2.10. if ever they should forget God, (...).
(which is the character of a wicked man, Psalm. 50.22.) if they should forsake
God that made them, and lightly esteem the Rock of their salvation; as Solomon
did the Lord that had appeared unto him twice; if they should not prefer him
above their chief joy, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
or make him ascent above the head of their joy (as the Hebrew has it, Psalm.
137.6.) and set him over all, as Pharaoh did Joseph (causing Sun moon, and
stars to do obeisance to him) I mean all their natural, moral, temporal,
and spiritual abilities to be subject and serviceable to him, he would have
an unanswerable action against them, and both heaven and earth would have cause
to blush at their disingenuity, and unthankfulness. Let it ever be remembered,
that of all things God cannot abide to be forgotten.

and builds temples;] To God, no doubt; and yet because they worshipped him
not in his own way, they are said to have forgotten him: So do Papists in all
their structures, vowed presents, and memories (as they call them.) In king
Stevens time here, notwithstanding all the miseries of war, there were more
Abbeys built, then in an hundred years before. But who required those things at
their hands? Christus opera nostra non tam actibus quam finibus pensat. Zanch.
Now the end why those Temples and Monasteries were built, appears in stories
to be pro remissione and redemptione peccatorum, pro remedio and liberatione
animae: pro amore coelestis patriae: in honorem gloriosae Virginis, in
eleemosynam animae, etc. for remission of sins, Acts and Mon. page 1077.
redemption of souls, honor of the Virgin Mary, and other superstitious ends
and uses.

and Judah has multiplied fenced cities:] As thinking thereby to fence
themselves against Gods wrath, to mott themselves up against his fire, that had
burnt up the ten tribes, and threatened them. Strong cities and munitions may
be lawfully built; but then their foundations must not be laid upon fireworks.
If sin be at the bottom (as the voice from heaven is said to have told Phocas)
though they build as high as heaven, Niceph.
it will not do. Babylons thick walls and large provisions could not secure her
from the enemy: Samaria held out for two or three years, but was surprised at
last by the Assyrian: so was Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and then by the
Romans, Esaias. 22.8, 9, 10, etc. great fault is found with this people for
their warlike preparations with neglects of God, verse. 11. and of deep and
downright humiliation, verse. 12, 13, 14. The name of the Lord is the strongest
tower, Prove. 18.10. But cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, that trusts
in men though never so great, or means though never so likely, Jer. 17.5. those
were never true to those that trusted them. The Jebusites were beaten out of
their fort, though they presumed it impregnable. The men of Shechem were fired
out, Judge. 9.49. so shall Judah be: for,

I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof,]
The enemy did this, but not without the Lord; who cannot b^ook it that men
should thrust in palaces and strongholds: and as Luthyer well observes, in
this whole chapter is fully set forth whence it is, that strong Palaces and
flourishing kingdoms come to naught; it is because men believe not in God, but
trust to their own strength, Deuteronomy. 28.52. they fortify themselves against an
enemy, but do not parifie God; displeasure; who is himself a devouring fire,
and can quickly quash all our forces, and confute our confidences.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people,] Not as good people,
for they have reason to rejoice, and are called to it in both Testaments: joy
is the just man's portion, but thou art naught all over, thou have gone a
whoring from thy God; who will shortly meet thee as a bear robbed of her
whelps, or as the jealous hu band does his adulteress, Again, not as other
bad people, for they may revel (rejoice indeed they cannot) and be merry, after
a sort: rejoice they may in the face, as the Apostle phraseth it, and from the
teeth outward: some kind of frothy and flashy mirth they may have (and let them
make them merry with it, it is all they are like to have) but so may not
thou; because thou have had warning sufficient, and have known thy masters
will, but not done it: yea, thou have done that abominable thing that other
nations never yet did, Jer. 2.11.12. thou have changed thy God for those that
are no gods; thou have forsaken the fountain, and run to the cistern, etc.
which is such a prodigious wickedness, as the very heavens are astonished at,
and are horribly afraid, (...) in Grac. (...), to dance a galliard.
yea, desolate; mourning, and as it were melting at this horrid act. Shall the
heavens mourn, and will thou rejoice? yea, fetch a frisk, or dance a galliard
for joy, as the word signifies: what if other nations do so, when they have got
the better of their enemies, or gathered in their harvest, Es. 9.4. or
otherwise have all things go well with them? yet revolted Israel had no such
cause, unless they were upon better terms with God. Say that this were the
time when Joash beat Benhadad thrice over, and recovered the cities of Israel,
2 Kin. 13.15. Or say it was, when he took Amaziah, and brought all the spoil
of Jerusalem to Samaria, Chap. 14.13. 2 Chronicles. 28.
or else when Pekah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day,
and carried captive two hundred thousand, with much spoil: these were times of
great mirth and Jollity, it is confessed. But, are there not with you even with
you sins against the Lord your God (as the prophet Oded there bespeaks them)
and should not those sins be bewailed? Besides, are they not your brethren whom
you have slaughtered and captivated? and can you have any joy of such a
conquest, of civil wars that are -- nullos habitura triumphos, that are such a
misery as all words (how wide soever) want compass to express? Hear what the
prophe^t mos (who was Hosea's contemporary) says to this, Ye which rejoice in
a thing of naught, (so he calls their victories present prosperity, pomp and
pride) which say, have we not taken to us horns by our own strength? Behold, I
will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, that shall tame you, and
take you a link lower (as they say) so that your laughter shall be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness. There is ever a snare (or a cord) in
the sin of the wicked, Jam. 4.9.
viz. to strangle their joy with; but the righteous sing and rejoice, Prove.
29.6.

For thou have gone a whoring from thy God.] That Is a foul business, and may
well damp thy joy. Sins are the snuffes that dim our candlestick, the leaven
that sowreth our pass overs, the Sanies of a plague sore that threatens our
very life. And, whereas the sins of others are but rebellions against God,
the sins of his professed people are treacheries: they go a whoring from their
God, desuper Deo suo, velomisso Deo suo, from under their God, or laying aside
their God; casting him, as it were, into a by-corner. Hence those pathetical
compaints in Jeremy, Chap. 18.13. Ask ye now among the heathen, who has heard
such things? the virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing; filthiness
in a stews is nothing so odious as filthiness in a Virgin. And again, Chap.
32.30. The children of Israel, and the children of Judah have only done evil
from their youth. God takes evil so hainously from them, as if they had never
done him any good service all their days; or as if they were the only sinners
upon earth: they were so much worse, because they ought to have been better
then other nations. Now God expects our sorrows should be proportionable to our
sins; Rejoice not therefore, but (by a Liptote) weep and houl for the miseries
that shall come upon you.

Thou have loved a reward (or a harlots hire) upon every corn-floor,] i. e.
Thou have prostituted thy self to a loose Idolatry; Mercedem meretriciam.
like to a common whore that goes a whoring up and down the threshing floors.
Hence Boaz his fear lest it should be noised that Ruth had lain at his feet,
and that a woman came into the floor, Ruth. 3.14. Or else he means (says
Diodate) some particular kind of idolatry used in the time of harvest and
threshing; as if they would have acknowledged their increase to come by their
idols goodness. Such was that of the Metapontines, of whom Strabo storieth,
that when they had had a good harvest, and were grown rich thereby, they
dedicated to Apollo at Delphos (...) an harvest of gold. See more of this Chap.
2. with the Notes.

Verse. 2. The floor and the winepresse shall not feed them,] Culpam poena
premit comes, Punishment attends sin at the heels. They had abused their
plenty, and ascribed it to their idols: therefore shall they be cut short
either in their store, as Hag. 3.6.10. and 2.16. or in their strength, as Hos.
4.10. and 8.7. (See Chap. 2.8.9. with the Notes.) One way or other their hopes
shall be frustrated, the creature shall lie to them, and not answer their
expectation.

The new wine shall fail in her,] Mustum mentietur ei, see the like phrase,
Hab. 3.17. Es. 58.11. Job. 41.6. they shall come to the corn-floors and
wine-presses, as men come to a lottery with heads full of hopes; but depart
disappointed, with their hearts full of blanks. As they have lied to God
(idolatry is nothing else but a large lie,) and dealt deceitfully with him in
the covenant: so shall all things lie to them, and not answer their hopes. Look
how a certain Prince paid a false traitor (who for a sum of money had
betrayed his country to him) in false coin; so shall it fare with such as
falsify with God: he will blast their hopes, and curse their blessings, cut
them short in the height of their expectancies, strike them in the things that
their hearts are most set upon, the new wine shall lie to them, and so set them
a howling, Joel. 1.5.

Verse. 3. They shall not dwell in the Lords land,] Because they would not live
by the Lords laws; they shall therefore be turned out of his house (so this
land was called Chap. 9.3.) as rebellious children, that are a disturbance and
a disgrace to their fathers family: they shall hold no longer, as tenants of
him the chief Landlord, because so backward to send a lamb (as rent or an
homage penny) to the ruler of the land, Esaias. 16.1. they were tenants at will,
and held upon condition of obedience, Levit. 18.26. it was divided amongst them
by lot: Joshua divided it amongst them, and left none to himself. The people
gave him a portion, and he was content with it; though it were but a mean one
in the barren mountains, as Hierome notes. He had the promise that God would
never leave him no^ forsake him: and he well knew, that if he trusted in the
Lord, and did good, he should dwell in the land and be verily fed, Psalm. 37.3.
He and Caleb were of another spirit, and fulfilled after God; therefore they
only of all that generation entered the promised land, the Lords land: which
because Moses might not do, it was a great grief to him. These Idolaters here
are threatened to be cashiered and cast out of this good land, and to have
their pleasant land laid desolate, to be spewed out, as the Canaanites had been
before them, Levit. 18.28. and so consequently to be deprived of Gods favor,
help, and protection; and altogether dispriviledged, yea, disinherited. This
was an heavy judgment to them, and must be a warning to us, that yet live in
the bosom of the Church, and under the joyful sound; that we forfeit not our
present enjoyments, that we sin not away our precious privileges, as the
seven Churches and others have done. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio. We stand
upon our good behavior, as they did; See Deuteronomy. 30.19.20.

But Ephraim shall return to Egypt,] which they ought to have been sensible of
as a punishment long since threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. ult. (see Hos. 8.13. with the
Note) though now, of their own accord, they returned to it, for fear of the
Assyrian (whom by their false-dealing they had justly incensed) yet that should
not shelter them, but Gods hand would find them out, and fetch them thence into
captivity. Often they had been warned not to go down to Egypt for help; and they
must needs be hard bestead that fled thither. True it is, that the Egyptians
are renowned in histories for a thankful people, and the Israelites are charged
not to abhor an Egyptian, because they were once strangers in his land, Diod.
Sic. l. 2. Dent. 23.7.
and had tasted of his courtesies. But withal, they could not but know how
hardly the Egyptians had dealt with their forefathers, and how treacherously
also with them; and that they ought not de jure, to have returned thither upon
any terms. Sed Deus quem destruit dementat, and although here they were
resolved for Egypt, yet Chap. 11.5. God resolves otherwise; and voluntas Dei
necessitas rei, his will shall stand, when all is done.

And they shall eat unclean things in Assyria,] Things forbidden by the law, as
swines-flesh, etc they shall be forced to eat or starve: they must not look for
liberty of conscience in Assyria, nor have that favor to make a difference of
meat as Daniel had, Chap. 1. but as Ezekiel baked his barley-cakes with
mans-dung: Even so said the Lord, shall the children of Israel eat their
defiled bread among the heathen, whither I will drive them. So haughty they
were grown, that their fathers house could not hold them; therefore they shall
be giad of husks with hogs, (as that prodigal) they shall eat as the heathens,
since they would needs act as the heathens. They thought it was hard with them
in their own land, when the floores and the winepresse would not feed them,
verse. 2. But now it is far worse, when forced by hard hunger, they are glad
of any meat, be it clean or unclean: neither have they any more mind to be so
merry with other nations, as verse. 1. or cause so to be: their stomachs craving
and themselves (with Drusus in Tacitus) ready to eat the stuffings of their
bed; or (with the Jews in the last siege of Jerusalem) not only to feed upon
dogs, rats, cats, etc. but the leather of their shoes, girdles, targets,
bridles, yea, Pontanus Hegesippus.
oxe-dung was a precious dish unto them, and the shreddings of pot-hearbs cast
out and trodden under foot, etc.

Verse. 4. They shall not offer wine-offerings unto the Lord,] Non libabunt,
multo minus litabunt, they shall not have wherewith to offer sacrifice, when
they are in their banishment, Chap. 3.4. much less to serve God with
cheerfulness, to exhilarate his heart with their wine-offerings, Judge. 9.13.
to cheer up themselves with the wine and oyle-offerings, Number. 15.5. which were
symbols, and signs of the Merit and Spirit of Christ (for the Ceremonial Law
was their Gospel, it was Christ in figure) and the deprivation of them
threatened the deprivation of grace and glory. Now therefore, since such a sad
condition, and such sinking of spirits abided this people, what reason had they
to rejoice with joy as others.

Neither shall they be pleasing to him,] Heb. they shall not be sweet or
mingled; for as sweet and sour makes the best sauce, so the mixture of things
of diverse qualities makes the sweetest confections, and most pleasing to the
palate: but so shall not be these men's wine-offerings to God, if any they should
present; but sour and savourlesse. He is now resolved to take another course
with them, to glorify himself in their calamity, and to give unto them another
while the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, Rev. 16.19. that is,
to delight as much in their misery, as a man would do in drinking off a bowl
of generous wine.

Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners,] i. e. as
funeral-feasts (whereof read Jer. 16.7, 8. Ezech. 24.17.) made ad levandum
luctum, (...)
eaten in heaviness by those that were polluted by the dead, and therefore
altogether unfit for sacrifice; since God loves a cheerful service, and will
not have any of his come off heavily. See Levit. 10.19. Deuteronomy. 13.7. and 26.14.
Mal. 2.13. where those unkind husbands are blamed, for causing their wives,
when they should have been cheerful in Gods service, to cover the Lords altar
with tears, with weeping and with crying out, so that he regarded not the
offering any more. So Ezr. 9.5. that holy man, though till then he sat astonished
at the sins of the people, yet he arose from his heaviness at the evening
sacrifice; for he knew, that even sorrow for sin might be a sinful sorrow, if
unseasonable and sullen: for it sowres a man's spirit, and makes his services
unacceptable to God.

For their bread, for their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord,]
Their bread, That is, their meat offering or other sacrifices, (see Mal. 1.7.
with the note) for their soul, that is, for themselves (soul is often put for the
whole person) shall not come, rightly and in due manner unto divine acceptance,
into the house of the Lord, it should not have come into the Temple while it
stood, and the Levitical service was orderly performed: how much less shall it
be accepted now in a strange land, being the bread of mourners. Others by the
bread for their souls understand their natural and necessary sustenance. He
speaks, say they, of that meat offering, Levit. 2.5. appointed for a spiritual
use, yet called here the bread for their life or livelihood, because God
esteemed it no other then common meat. Tarnouius by the house of the Lord here
understands the Church, as Chap. 8.1. and 9.5. and 2 Timothy 2.20. The door of
this house, says he, is Christ, Joh. 10.9. and doorkeeper the holy spirit,
ibid. verse. 3. the foundation and cornerstone Christ, Ephesians. 2.20. the wall is
God, Zach. 2.9. the stewards the ministers, 1 Cor. 4.1. Ephesians. 2.19.
those of the household the Saints, etc.

What will ye do in the solemn day, etc.] q. d. How will ye do to laugh and
leap then, as ye do now? verse. 1. How will you be able to support your selves,
to keep your hearts from dying within you? when you call to mind and consider
your former solemnities and festivities, which now (alas!) in your captivity
you are utterly deprived of? Time was when you went with the multitude to the
house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept
holy day, Psalm. 42.4. with dancing, eating, drinking and joy, Deuteronomy. 16.14, 15.
Judge. 21.19.10. But now the scene is altered; your singing is turned into
sighing, your mirth into mourning, your joy into heaviness; and you must needs
hold your selves so much the more miserable, that you have been happy. The
Epicures indeed held that a man might be cheerful against the most exquisite
torments. 1. In consideration of his honesty and integrity, Ex praeteritc rum
voluptatum recordatione. Cic. de finib. l. 2. Senec. de benef. l. 4. c. 22.
2. In consideration of those pleasures and delights that formerly he had
enjoyed; and now cheared up himself with the remembrance of. This last is a
very slight and sorry comfort indeed. The former has much in it; for a good
man keeps every day, holy day, said Diogenes: and can be merry without music,
says another Philosopher. He has a merry heart, or good conscience, which is
a continual feast; and is bound to rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. and to keep
the feast in all countries, (...).
1 Cor. 5.8. the Calender of his whole life is crowned with continual
festivals; and he is the happiest man, and may be the merriest if he but
understand his own happiness. But this (alas) was not the case of these woeful
caytives and captives. They had sinned away all their comforts; and what with
the sad remembrance of their former enjoyments, and with the sense of their
present servitude, they had little mind to keep holy day. Hence this passionate
exclamation, what will ye do, etc? God had threatened before, Chap. 2.11. to
take away their feast-dayes, new mons, sabbaths and solemnities; but they
heeded him not, tanquam monstra marina Dei verba surda aure praeterierunt:
therefore now God fulfilleth what he ^ad forethreatned, Lam. 2.^^.
and calls, as in a solemn day, his terrors round about them, what they were
wont to do in their solemn days and festivals, may be seen, Number. 10.10. what
we do or should do at least, upon our Lords day-sabbaths, (the delight of every
good soul) we need not be told. Let us take heed, lest by profane violating or
careless observing that holy rest, with all its solemnities, we deprive not
our selves (as these Israclites did) of such a precious privilege: God gave us
a good warning, in that the first blow given the German Churches was upon the
sabbath day; which is there so ill sanctified, Alsted. in Encyclop. Dike of
Consc. page 276.
that if it should be named according to their deserving of it, Doemoniacus
potius quam Dominicus, says Alsted, it should be called not the Lordsday, but
the Priests-day rather. It is very remarkable, that upon that day was Prague
lost, and with it all opportunity of hearing, singing, public praying,
communicating on that high and honorable day, Esaias. 58.13.

Verse. Abierunt, i.e. obierunt.
8. For lo they are gone, because of destruction,] They are gone either into
Egypt for refuge, or into the state of the dead, they are gone out of the
world. They shall perish by destructiou, so some render it. When God had said
in the former verse what will ye do, they should have fallen down before him and
said, What will thou have us to do, Lord? we know not what at all to do, but
our eyes are toward thee. This had been right, and thus they might have
disarmed Gods indignation: but they had other carnal shifts, and thought they
could tell well enough what to do, and whither to go: whereupon they were so
fully bent, that the prophet here reports them gone already. For lo they are
gone, and got to Egypt; as diverse of them did doubtless during the siege, and
after the sack of Samaria, when they were forced to shift for themselves as
they could: but did they so escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the
people, O God, says David, and it is not more a prayer then a prophecy, Psalm.
56.7. and this people had the proof of it.

Egypt shall gather them,] either for punishment, or for burial, as Ezech.
29.5. Jer. 8.2. so that they fled but out of the smoke into the fire; and in
running from death they ran to it: as the Historian says of those poor Scots
at Muscleboroughfield, who running for their lives, S. J. Heyw, in Edw. 6. p.
35.
so strained themselves in their race, that they fell down breathless and dead.

Memphis shall bury them,] Lest they should please themselves with vain hopes
of return to their country, he shows that that shall never be; but they shall
lay their bones in a strange land. Memphis (anciently called Noph, Isay. 19.13.
or, (as some will) No, Nahum. 3.8. at this day Grand Caire, famous for the
Pyramides and the kings sepulchers) Memphis, I say, a principal city of Egypt
shall be a Kibrothhattaavah to you, a place of sepulchers; especially then,
when Nebuchadnezzar, sent by God (who gives him Egypt as his pay for his
pains at Tire) shall come and smite that land, and deliver such as are for
death to death, and such as are for the sword to the sword, etc. Jer. 43.11.

The pleasant places for their selves, nettles shall possess them,] Heb. shall
possess them as their inheritance; so that the Israelites nor their heirs
shall ever repossesse these pleasant places for their silver, i. e. where they
either laid up their silver (their repositories or counting houses) or where
they laid out their silver, either in costly buildings and sumptuous furniture,
or else in idols and statues placed therein to their no small charge and
delight. These shall be ruined and overrun with nettles, thorns and thistles, a
token of horrible desolation, Esa. 32.13. and 34.13. Note hence, that as God
spares a place for a few good men found therein, (as he would have done Sodom,
which is now a place of nettles and salt^pits, Zeph. 2.9.) so a fruitful land
brings he into barrenness, (or saltness) for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34. witness Judaea that land of desire, Ezekiel. 1. ult.
that garden of Eden, Joel. 2.3. that glorious land, Dan. 11.16. yea, glory of
all lands, Ezekiel. 20.15. now woefully waste and desolate: so is Grecia, formerly
so farmous for arms and arts: so are some parts of Germany, and so may England
soon be (without the greater mercy of God, by a miracle of whose mercy, and by
a prop of whose extraordinary patience we have hitherto subsisted) I say,
England, whose valleys now are like Eden, whose hills are as Lebanon, whose
springs are as Pisgah, whose rivers are as Jordan, whose walls is the Ocean,
and whose defense is the Lord Jehovah.

Verse. 7. The days of visitation are come,] A visitation that is like to prove
a vexation; for every transgression and disobedience, that is, Omission and
commission, shall receive a just recompense of reward from the God of
Recompenses (so he is called Jer. 51.56.) whose eyes behold, his eyelids try
the children of men, Psalm 11.4. the former points out his knowledge, the latter
his judgment, or his critical descant in his visitation or inquisition, the
days whereof are set, Stat suae cuique dies, and Isreal's days are come, are
come, it is repeated for more assurance, as Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
certo, cito, penitus: and as Ezekiel. 7.5, 6, 7. the Prophet tells them, The end
is come, is come, is come; and so some ten or twelve times, that he might beat
it into them, and awaken them them out of the snare of the devil. The wickeds
happiness will take its end surely and swiftly: but its hard persuading them
so: And the Jews, as they were ever noted for obstinate, and overweening, so to
this day they are light, aeriall, and Satanicall, apt to work themselves into
the fools paradise of a sublime dotage. But they shall know it to be so as I
have said, by w^^^ll experience, that Mistress of fools.

Israel shall know it,] sc. to his sorrow, he shall pay for his learning, buy
his wit, Oculos incipit aperire moriendo. Plin:
open his eyes (as the mole does) when death is upon him, roar and look upward,
Esaias 8.21. as the hog does when the knife is at his throat. O Lord (says the
same Prophet, Chap. 26.11.) when thy hand is lifted up (and thy hand is a
mighty hand, Jam. 4.10. it falls heavy) they will not see, they wink wilfully,
or seek strawes to put out their eyes withal, as Bernard has it: but they
shall see, will they nill they, Festucam quarunt unde oculos sibi eruant.
and be ashamed of their former oscitancy, or rather obstinacy, when that hand
of God which was lifted up in threatening, shall fall down in punishing, and the
fire of thine enemies shall dev^ur them: How much more at that last and great
visitation, that terrible day of Retribution, when they shall answer for all,
with flames about their ears. Tunc sentient magno suo malo, then shall they
feel to their eternal woe, the truth of all the threatenings, which till then
they heard, and read, as a man does an Almanack-prognostications of wind or
foul-weather, which he thinks may come to pass, and it may be not: And give
nothing so much credit to them, as the Prior of S. Bartholomewes in London did
to an idle and addle-headed Astrologer, Holinshead in 1524.
when he went and built him an house at Harrow on the hill to secure himself
from a supposed flood, that that Astrologer foretold.

The Prophet is a fool, etc.] (...), a naughty man; the Hebrew word here is
evil, and signifies a rash and unadvised fellow, that is headstrong and
headlong: such were their false prophets that promised peace when war was at
their gates, and made all fair weather before them, when the tempest of Gods
wrath was even bursting out upon them; such a tempest as should never be blown
over. These should now appear to be fools, or rather Impostours, that had
brought the credulous people into a fools paradise.

the spiritual man is mad,] Heb. the man of the spirit, or ventosus, the windy
man, that utters vain and empty conceits, humani cerebelli Minervas, the
brats of his own brain, light, aerie Nothings, the disease of this age, full of
flashes and figments, idle speculations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute
of the truth. These pretend altogether to the spirit, and would be thought the
only spiritual men; as the Swenkfeldians (whom for their ill savor, Luther
called Stenckfeldians) who bewitched many with those glorious words (which were
ever in their mouths) of Illumination, Revelation, the inward and spiritual
man, etc. and entitled themselves, the Confessors of the glory of Christ. So
the Entusiasts and Anabaptists, what boast make they of the spirit: professing
that they will deliver nothing but what they have immediately revealed to them
from heaven. Muncer (their ringleader) wrote a base book against Luther (which
he dedicateth to king Jesus) wherein Lutherum flagellat quod Enthusiasmorum
spiritu careat and nil nist carnalin sapiat, he falls foul upon Luther, as
wanting the spirit of revelation, Scultet Annal. page 239.
and one that savoureth nothing but carnal things? All his followers look upon
Luther as more pestiferous then the Pope: and for Calvin they say, (and I have
heard it) that it had been happy for the Church if he had never been born. It
was their practice of old (as Leo Judae observed in his epistle before
Bullingers book against the Catabaptists) and is still, to discourage and
disparage Christ's faithful Ministers all they can, as carnal, and not
relishing the things of the spirit: the right offspring they are of those
ancient Heretics called Messalanii (the same with the Euchites, and
Enthusiasts) who in the year of Christ 371. professed to be wholly made up of
the spirit: gave themselves much to sleep: and called their dreams and wild
fantasies, prophesies and revelations.

for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.] Heb. the great
Satanical hatred, that thou have born against God and thy neighbor; but
especially Gods faithful prophets, whom thou heartily hatedst for their plain
dealing; as Ahab did Michaiah, because he never spoke good to him. It is very
probable that Michaiah was that disguised Prophet who brought Ahab the fearful
message of displeasure and death, for dismissing Benhadad; for the which he was
ever since fast in prison, deep in disgrace. Lo this is the worlds wages. Truth
breeds hatred, great hatred, as the text has it, devilish hatred, and this is
through the multitude of men's iniquities, the overflow of sins, which
wretched men hold so dear to themselves, that they cannot but rage against
those that declaime against them, and proclaim hellfire against their hateful
practices: they cannot stand still to have their eyes picked out; how should
they? say. Now for such, what wonder is it if God in justice give them up to
the efficacy of error that they may believe a lie, since they would not
receive the love of the truth, Augustine. in loc
2 Thessalonians. 2.11? ut infatuati seducantur, and seductijudicentur, that being
infatuated they may be seduced, and being seduced, perish? what wonder also if
he deliver them up, as to strong delusions, so to vile affections, and
abominable actions, that they may receive in themselves that recompense of
their error that is meet, Kom. 1.27? What marvel, if men that will not endure
sound doctrine be left to seducers? if those that have itching ears meet with
clawing Preachers? 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
if such as turn away their ears from the truth, be turned to fables and
fopperies? It is for the multitude of men's iniquities, and especially for their
great hatred to the truth, that the Church is so pestered with Impostours (2
Pet. 2.1, 2.) who bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them. Do not our modern seducers so amongst us, when (among other portentous
opinions held by them) they stick not to affirm, that Christ is a carnal or
fleshly thing: That those that are grown Christians may go to God immediately
without a Christ: that Christ did not rise again, etc. Others contemn him by
the notion of the man dying at Jerusalem -- O horrible! Dr. Homes his character
of the present times. 200.
Time was when the Popes were so notoriously naught, as to speak thus basely of
Christ; to deny, or at least doubt of the immortality of the soul, the
resurrection of the body, etc. and then a poor Popeling cried out, that the
sins of that Synagogue were so great, as that it deserved not to be ruled by
any other then Reprobates. Certain it is, that God plagues contempt of the
truth (that great Gospel-sin) with an inundation of errors and enormities.

Verse 8. The watchman of Ephraim was with my God,] i. e. The false prophets
above mentioned, pretend themselves to be with God, and for him; speak, look,
and act as if they came out of Gods bosom, or were so many Angels newly dropped
from heaven: take upon them glorious titles to that purpose, as Watchmen,
Prophets, spiritual-men, etc. These titles proved snares to many that enquired
not narrowly into them: and especially because they preached placentia, soothed
men up in their sins, sowed pillows under their elbowes, daubed with
untempered mortar, etc. Hence silly people lent both their ears to them (as
birds do to the lure, or whistle of the fowler) and were soon ensnared.

the prophet is as a snare of a fowler, etc.] Seducers have their pithonologie,
their art to persuade before they teach, as the Valentinians had: they are
cunning and insinuate as Zanchy testifies of Laelius Socinus, that, by
propounding questions, he sought to ensnare him, Zanch. de trib. Eloh. praefat.
semper interrogans quasi cuperet doceri, laboring to drop into him certain
dangerous principles of the Samosatenian heresy. This sly trick they have
learned of that old manslayer the devil, who by these Emissaries of his
catches simple people, as the fowler does the bird, by casting baits: or as
the fisher, by one fish catches another, that he may feed upon both.

And hatred in the house of his God.] Satanicall hatred (as in the former
verse) which these wicked watchmen do stir up against the true Prophets, and
faithful servants of God. Diodate carries it thus, These wicked watchmen are
the chief occasion of Gods hatred, and of the rejection of his people, who are
as it were his family. Luther, Wigandus, and others set this sense upon the
whole verse. (taking the former part to be spoken of the good watchmen) Those
ancient watchmen of Ephraim were joined with my God, and wholly for him: but
those at this day are a snare; etc. and if there be any yet left of the former
stock, they have left off to do good, and are become hateful, as Psalm. 36.2,
3. their iniquity is found to be hateful. There are that render the words by
way of exclamation thus, Orem odiosam and abominandam in domo Dei! Oh hideous
and hateful! oh how has the devil bestirred him, to stir up such Seducers, to
do so much mischief among Gods people! There are that interpret these two
Verses, not of false Prophets, but of the true, who were looked upon as fools
and mad men, by the mad world; ever beside it self in point of salvation, etc.
It is not for naught that Rivet says, Hi due versus satis sunt intricati.
these two verses are very intricate. And of this eight verse Luther says, that
the brevity thereof has caused obscurity. Drusius also says, Locus iste
difficilior est quam vulgus existimat; This text is harder, then most men
imagine.

Verse 9. They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah:]
The people are as bad as possible, shamelesly, lawlesly wicked: nothing better
then those sons of Belial the men of Gibeah, that were sunk to sins bottom:
Judge. 19.
totally transformed into sins image, extremely flagitious, so that a worse
people could hardly be found upon the face of the earth. As it was given in
answer to a godly man who desired to know of God, why Phocas was set up for
Emperor? Cedren.
because there could not be a worse man found, and that the sins of
Christians required it. Lipsius makes mention of one Tubulus (about Tullies
time) who was so desperately wicked, ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitij esse
videretur, that his name seemed to be the name not of a man, but of wickedness
it self. Lips antiq. lection.
Lo such were these men of Gibeah, Judge. 19. nothing behind Sodomites in sin:
as Samaria now was nothing behind them, and is therefore fitly coupled with
her sister Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.46. The reason of all which is here given, their
wicked watchmen: according to that, Esaias 3.12. qui te ducunt, seducunt. They
which lead thee, cause thee to err: and again, Esaias 9.16. The leaders of this
people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed. It is
thought that the Gibeah here mentioned, and to which this verse relates, was
the same which Josh. 21.17. is called Gebah; which was a city given to the
Priests, who being lords and owners of the Town, were (probably) the
ringleaders of the rest in that matchless villainy; Romans 1.32.
and so were of the number of those worst of sinners, who knowing the judgment
of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not only do
the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.

Now will he remember their iniquities, and visit their sins.] Now that they
had filled up the measure of their fathers sins, Matthew. 23.32. nay sought to
outsinne them, Et puduit non esse impudentes (as Austin says somewhere) God
would forbear them no longer. Let this b^hoted, by such as being told of their
vile and vicious practices, plead that they do but as their forefathers did.
Certainly if the times be as ill as they were heretofore, they are even for
that cause much the worse; and God will the sooner remember and visit, pay
wicked men for the new and the old. See chap. 8.13.

Verse 10. I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness,] Where any thing is
good and sweet, because in a barren and solitary place. Hence they are said to
have sucked honey out of the rock, Deuteronomy. 32.13. that is, water as sweet as
honey, because in such necessity. The Vine and Fig Tree are of so great
account, as that Jotham in his parable brings in the trees, offering the
sovereign power to them, Judge. 9.10, 12. To these two noble and useful trees,
and to their most seasonable and comfortable fruit does the Lord here compare
Israel: to grapes in the wilderness, Mic. 7.1^^
and to the first-ripe figs, quae delicatis in summo sunt precio, which are
counted great dainties. Our Savior came with great desire to the fig tree.
Matthew. 21.19. his soul desired the first ripe fruits: and though they had not
been full ripe, he could have been glad of them, even of the first fruits of
the fig tree, at her first-time, as it is here, in primordio ejus, of those
untimely fruits which the fig tree casts when shaken of a mighty wind, Rev.
6.12. By this expression then is set forth Gods dear and free love to Israel,
when he found him in a desert land, in the wast howling wilderness: he
compassed him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye,
Deuteronomy. 32.10. All this and more he did for them, ex m^ro motu, out of pure and
unexcited love, according to his own heart, according to the good pleasure of
his will, he loved them because he loved them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. and 10.14. in the
wilderness especially, where they grieved him forty years together, and
tempted him ten times, Number. 14.22. But God had said of Israel, He is my son,
even my firstborn, Exodus 4.22. and so, higher then the kings of the earth,
Psalm. 89.27. He had chosen him for his love, and now loved him for his choice.
This son of his he called out of Egypt, to keep a feast to the Lord in the
wilderness, Exodus 5.1. that is to serve him, Exodus 4.23. to serve him
acceptably, Heb. 12.28. to set up his pure worship according to his own
prescript in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. This was altogether as delightful to God,
as grapes in the wilderness are to a wearied parched traveller. And this the
rather, because it was the kindness of their youth, Vno anno septies fructus
sufficit.
the love of their espousals, which was as the first ripe of the figs, in the
first time, at the first bearing: for the fig tree bears twice a year: and the
Egyptian fig tree seven times a year, says Solinus. Now the first-ripe-fruits
are Ladies-meat, we say, or longing-meat. Gods soul does even long after the
first-ripe-fruits, Mich. 7.1. as we prize even Nettle-buds, when they bud out
first. If the Vine do but flourish, the Pomgranates bud, the tender grapes
appear, Cant. 6.11. and 7.12. he will pour his spirit upon the seed, and his
blessing upon the buds, Esaias 44.3. He likes not those arbores autumnales,
Jude 12. that bud at latter end of harvest: he made choice of the Almond-tree,
Ier. 1.11. because it blossometh first. So he called for first fruits of the
trees, and of the earth, in the sheaf, in the threshing-floor, in the dough, in
the loaves: yea for ears of corn dried by the fire, and wheat beaten out of the
green ears, Lev. 2.14. to signify how pleasant unto him is the primrose of our
age.

but they went to Baal-peor,] See Number. 25.3. with the Note. Heb. they went in
to him, which obscoenum quid and turpe denotat, as Genesis 16.2. so Psalm. 106.28.
They joined themselves also to Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead,
that is, sacrifices offered to the infernal Gods, or to Pluto the Devil (whom
the Phoenicians called Moth, or Death) in the behalf of the dead.

and separated themselves,] Heb. Nazarited themselves, ad religiose colendum:
they became Votaries, to that shame,] i.e. to that shameful and abominable
Idol, that blushfull Priapus, Tarn^^.
qui referebat viri pudendi speciem: and whose worshippers are brought in
saying, Nos, pudore pulso, stamus sub Jove, coleis apertis, etc. (...), we rake
a dunghill (as Cyril speaks in like case) in discoursing of such
dunghill-deities. Isidor interprets Baal-peor, simulachrum ignominiae, an
image of ignominy: and most sure it is, that idolaters, left off their Idols in
deepest dangers, shall be ashamed of their expectation of help from them, Jer.
3.19. and 11.13.

and their abominations were according as the loved.] Or, according as they
listed, so some interpret it: or, according as they loved the Moabitish women
more or less, so they worshipped their Idols: Solomon did the same. Or, they
became as detestable as their very Idols, which they loved and worshipped. Or,
I abominate them as much now as ever I loved them before: and how much that was
he had showed in the beginning of the Verse. Now there is nothing that goes
more to Gods heart, then the loss of his love upon an unthankful people. He
had healed their backslidings in Egypt (where they had worshipped Idols, Ezekiel.
16.) he had loved them freely, and immensely. Now therefore that they should
so slight such a love, to go after such a shame, and so to undo themselves for
ever; this was monstrous ingratitude, this was an unsufferable injury.

Verse 11. As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away as a bird,] Heb. Ephraim
by a Nominative absolute. Or, O Ephraim, as with a sigh, or a shriek, for grief
and horror of their ensuing calamity, exilium, excidium, and exitium. The Lord
afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men, Lam. 3.33. It goes as
much against the heart with him, as against the hair with us; witness this
patheticall expression. See also chap. 11.8. Their glory, that is, their God,
as in the next verse. Or, Hier. Epist. 7.
their children, as in the next words. They worshipped Baal-peor for
fruitfulness; but it shall not do: For either they shall be punished with
barrenness, or else with a luctuosa foecunditas (as Hierom says of Loeta, who
buried many children) a doleful fruitfulness.

their glory shall flee away as a bird,] Suddenly, swiftly, irrecoverably,
shall their numerous posterity (which they looked upon as themselves multiplied
and eternized) be cut off, be snatched away by the hand of death: so that (
Rachel like) they shall refuse to be comforted, because her children were not:
or as Cratisiclea in Plutarch, Plut. in vi^. Cleom.
who seeing her dear children slain before her, and her self ready to be served
in like sort, uttered only this word, Quo pueri, estis profecti? Poor
children, what is become of you?

From the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.] In all these
states shall the curse follow them close: Either they shall not conceive, or
die in the womb, or be stifled in the birth: they shall all prove Icabods. It
is God that gives strength to conceive, as he did to Sarah, Hannah, Elizabeth,
etc. It is he that forms us in the womb, and that by the book, Psalm. 139.15,
16. and preserves us there, Job 10.8. when neither we can shift for our
selves, nor our parents provide for us. It is he that takes us thence, Psalm.
22.9, 10. as a nurse or midwife does the newborn babe. It is he that keeps
us in the cradle, and in childhood, when we are subject to a thousand deaths
and dangers: for puerilitas est periculorum pelagus: it is a just wonder that
any child attains to maturity. But if wicked men's children do so, as often they
do, (for they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to
their babes, Psalm. 17.14.) yet it follows,

Verse 12, Though they bring up children, yet will I bereave them,] If his
children be multiplied, it is for the sword, and his offspring shall not be
satisfied with bread, Job 27.14. This was fulfilled in Ahabs seventy sons,
beheaded together, 2 King. 10.6. in whom he had vainly promised himself the
establishment of his house, which God had threatened to root out: In Iehu and
his posterity after the fourth generation: Those Romans that went out against
the enemy at the Porta scelerata (as it was thereupon called) and never
returned again: and that Eckins Raschachius a German Captain, at the siege of
Buda, Anno 1541. whose son a valiant young Gentleman, being got out of the
army without his fathers knowledge, bare himself so gallantly in fight against
the enemy, in the sight of his father and the Army, that he was highly
commended of all men, and especially of his father, that knew him not at all.
Yet before he could clear himself, he was compassed in by the enemy, and
valiantly fighting, slain. Raschachius exceedingly moved with the death of so
brave a man, ignorant how near he touched himself, turning about to the other
Captains said, This worthy Gentleman, whatsoever he be, is worthy of eternal
commendation, and to be most honorably buried by the whole Army. As the rest
of the Captains were with like compassion approving his speech, the dead body
of the unfortunate son rescued, was presented to the most miserable father;
which caused all them that were there present to shed tears. Turk. hist.
But such a sudden and inward grief surprised the aged father, and struck so to
his heart, that after he had stood a while speechless, with his eyes set in
his head, he suddenly fell down dead.

Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them,] This is indeed worse then all
the rest: this is that only evil spoken of by Ezekiel: hell it self is nothing
else but a separation from Gods presence, with the ill consequents thereof: and
the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of that beatificall
vision. How miserable was Cain, when cast off by God? Saul, when forsaken of
him? David, when deserted though but for a few months? Job for a few years,
Suidas says seven? While God was graciously with him, and prospered him, he
was Iobab, (that same mentioned Genesis 36, 34, as some think) but when under
sense of Gods absence, contracted into Job. See the like, Genesis 17.5. Ruth.
1.20. His desertion was far more comfortable then David's: it was probationall.
only, but David's penal, for chastisement of some way of wickedness. O lay we
hold upon God (as the spouse does upon her beloved) and cry as the Prophet did,
Lord leave us not. Jer. 14.9.
If he seem to be about, and his back be turned, cry aloud afrer him, as the
blind man in the Gospel did, till Jesus stood: set up thy note, as Micha did
after his lost idols, Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away my Gods, says he, and
what have I more? as if he should have said, I esteem all that you have left me
as nothing, now that my gods are gone. Jerusalem the joy of the whole earth
pleased not Absalom, unless he might see David's face. God was no sooner gone
from Miriam, but the leprosy appeared in her face. But of this before.

Verse 13. Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place:] And
therefore pleases himself as not forsaken of God. But He maybe angry enough
with those that yet outwardly prosper: As he was with the old world buried in
security: Herod. l. 1. Plin. l. 6. cap. 26.
with sodom, who had fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness: with the
land of Shinar (where Babel was built, Genesis 11.) fruitful beyond credulity, as
Herodotus and Pliny testify, with Tyrus a maritine and magnificent city,
planted in a pleasant place, in the very heart of the Sea; as Venice is at this
day, media insuperabilis unda, environed with her embracing Neptune, to whom
(as the ceremony of her throwing a ring into the Sea implies) she marries her
self with yearly Nuptials, and has for her Motto, Nec fluctu, nec flatu
movetur, Nor winds, nor waves can stir her. Of the pomp, pride, and
populousness of Tyrus read Ezech. 26, 27, and 28. chapters. Lo such a one was
Ephraim, when ripe for ruin, near to an utter downfall. What can be more fair
and flourishing then a corn-field, or vineyard, a little before the harvest, the
vintage? Physicians say, that the uttermost degree of bodily health is next
unto sickness. Glass, or other metals cast into the fire, shine most, when
ready to melt and run. This was Tyrus case, this was Ephraims, pleasantly
planted, but marked out for destruction: as a Carpenter comes to a Wood, and
with his Ax marketh out the fairest trees for felling. Ephraim is the worse
because he sees Tyrus yet prosper. But God will take that from heathen Tyrus,
that he will not take from Ephraim: and the sunshine of prosperity does but
ripen the sins of them both for divine vengeance.

They shall bring forth children to the murderers.] As to Gods executioners:
and so show themselves not parents, but parricides: because they betray their
children (as Babel did, by her idolatry, Psalm. 137.8. and Esaias 13.8.) into the
hands of the enemy. Wherein they are more cruel then that false Schoolmaster
in Italy (mentioned by Livy and Florus) that brought forth his scholars (the
flower of the Nobility and Gentry there) to Hannibal: who if he had not been
more merciful then otherwise, they had all been murdered. But what shall we
say of such wretched parents, as bring forth children to that old manslayer
the devil? and how shall such undone children curse their careless parents in
hell, throughout all eternity? If the Lord also could say of those poor
children that were sacrificed to Moloch (the Chaldee paraphrase understands
this Text of those children) Thou have slain my children, and delivered them,
to cause them to pass through the fire for them (namely for the images of the
foresaid idols) Ezekiel. 16.27. what will he say, or rather what will he not say,
to those bloody parents, that carry their children with them, to Satan's
slaughterhouse?

Verse 14. Give them O Lord: what will thou give?] This question implies
abundance of affection in the Prophet, praying for this forlorn people devoted
to destruction. It is the property of gracious spirits, to be more sensible of,
and more deeply affected with the calamities that are coming upon the wicked,
then those wicked ones themselves are: as Daniel was for Nebuchadnezzar, whose
dream he had interpreted, Dan. 4.
and as Habakkuk was for the Chaldeans, whose destruction he had
fore-prophecied, Hab. 3.16. Hoseah likewise (out of great commiseration of
Ephraims direful and dreadful condition) sets himself to pray for them;
though himself seems set at a stand, and in a manner non-plust, that he cannot
well tell what to ask for them. God once made a fair offer to a foul sinner,
even to Ahaz, that sturdy stigmatick, Esaias 7.11. Ask thee a sign of the Lord
the God: ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. But Ahaz said,
(churiishly enough) I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord, ver. 12. he
would none of Gods kindness, which yet the Lord there heapeth upon him verse
14. that where sin abounded, grace might superabound. Had our Prophet had but
half such an offer, or any the least such encouragement, oh how gladly would he
have embraced it, how hastily would he have catch at it, as those Syrians did
at Ahabs kind words, 1 King. 20.33? But he, considering the severity and
certainty of Gods judgments denounced against them, verse. 12, 13. and being
much amazed thereat, sets himself to intercede and make request for his
deplored countrymen; as Samuel did for Saul rejected by God, 1 Samuel 16.1. as
Paul did for the obdurate Jews, Romans 9.3. And because he saw that he could not
obtain of the impartial Judge of the world, to let go such an impenitent
people altogether unpunished, he begs for them, that of two evils they may
suffer the least: and rather bring forth no children at all, or children that
may die as soon as born (this had been threatened verse. 11, 12.) then bring
forth children to the murderer: It being the greatest misery that can befall a
tender hearted parent, to see his dear children butchered before his eyes, as
Zedekiah and Mauricius the Emperor did: and before them both the king of Edom,
whose eldest son, was by the king of Moab sacrificed upon the wall, in his
fathers sight, 2 King. 3.27. Amos 2.1. Thus Rabbi Kimchi gives the sense of
this text: Give Lord, what thou will give? viz. that they may suffer in the
womb, or at least in their infancy, that which they should otherwise suffer by
the enemies sword: Confer, Jer. 20.18. Luke 23.23. Eccles. 4.2. Job. 3. The
prophet knew well that God is never so bitterly bent against a people or
person, but that something he will yield to faithful and fervent prayer, Mat.
24.20.

Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus. Verse. 15. All their wickedness is in
Gilgal,] We have had the prophets prayer: Follows now the Lords answer in this
and the following verse, where we have the former threats repeated, to show
that God was unchangeably resolved upon their ruin; and that first for their
Idolatry, secondly, for their other vile practices, thirdly, for the apostasy
of their Princes: All this here. Their Idolatry was the worse, because
committed at Gilgal, where God had done much for their forefathers: See the
Note above on Chap. 4.15. The quality of the place adds much to the greatness
of the sin, Esaias. 26. In the land of uprightness they will deal unjustly,
Esaias. 25.10. the faithful city is become an harlot, Esaias. 1.21. Esaias. 5.7. he
looked for judgment, but behold a scab, The devil desires to set up himself
in such places, as have been formerly eminent for Gods sincere service, as
Gilgal once was, 1 Samuel 10.8. and 11.15. for the ark of the covenant was there,
which these Idolaters had not. So in the holy land, (as they still call it)
which is possessed by Mahometans, and Papists: So Wittenberg, where Luther
first began to reform, is now deformed by diverse errors and heresies, as
Polanus observes. Wilkinson against the Familists reports the like of
Colchester in Essex.

For there I hated them,] Angry I was with them before, and grieved for their
other misdoings: but their idolatry has enraged me with an holy hatred of
them, and that there, where I showed greatest love to their sorefathers. God
thinks the worse of such places wherein Idolaters rest and roost: like as he
thinks the better of the towns and houses, where his faithful servants inhabit,
as Esaias. 49.16. their walls are ever before him.

For the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out,] Revenge and
expulsion is the next effect of hatred. There is a great deal of other wicked
doings, where idolatry (that wickedness with a witness as it is here styled)
is set up. Surely of this abominable thing we may well say as Saint James does
of discord; where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work, Jam. 3.16. But God will not endure such doings in his house: David would
not in his, Psalm. 101. Solomon entertained Jeroboam into his house and service,
because he saw the young man was meet for the work, 1 King. 11.28. but he
proved a mischief to and against his house. Many now adays scruple not to
entertain and harbor such as are serviceable, though otherwise their religion
be either a popish puppet and calf worship, or a flat irreligion. These have
little of God in them.

I will drive them out of mine house, says he, I will love them no more,] A
fearful sentence, like that Jer. 16.13. I will show them no favor: this was
worse to them, then their captivity there threatened. Ephraim had a great deal
of outward peace and prosperity, but love they had none; because none of those
graces that flow from election, and accompany salvation. These are Gods
love tokens, that all must court: But oh I take heed (says one) if thou add'st
any more to thy wickednesses, lest that this dreadful sentence be pronounced in
heaven against thee, I will love thee no more, Heb. I will add no more to love
thee.

All their Princes are revolters,] Col sarehem sorerim, an elegancy past
englishing. (...). Dan. Hist. of Eng. fol. 207.
the Princes were all rebellious and refractary, uncounsellable, unperswadable
(as the Seventy render it) like that king of Scotland that would seldom ask
counsel, but never follow any: so wedded he was to his own will. Elati superbia
volebani superiores esse verbo, says Luther upon this text. Jeroboam-like they
would stretch out their hand against a prophet, that should cry against their
altars, 1 Kin. 13.4.
and deal plainly with them, as Hosea here does: testifying to their faces that
they were all Apostates, and made Israel sin. Princes should be the
Lord-keepers of both tables of the Law; as it was written upon the sword of
Charles the Great: December praceptorum custos Carolur.
But when they are naught, as here, the people take after them. Principis vita
censura est and cynosura.

Verse. 16. Ephraim is smitten,] As a tree that has received a deadly wound, or
that has the bark pulled off it, so that the sap cannot find the way to the
branches: or that is blasted, as the fig tree in the Gospel was by Christ's
curse; and as a vine smitten by great hailstones, and beaten down to the
ground. The Lord shall smite Israel, says another Prophet, as a reed is shaken
in the water, and he shall root up Israel, etc. 1 King. 14.15. root and branch
in one day.

The root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit,] The root of the righteous
shall not be moved, Prove. 12, 3. The root of the matter is found in me, says
Job. Chap. 19.28. the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. Esaias. 6.13. as
a teyl-tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, ib. The Duke of
Florence gave for his ensign a great tree with many spreading boughs, one of
them being cut off with this posie, Vno avulso non deficit alter Aureus. Virg.
But it is otherwise with the ungodly; as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan.
4.14. nay, worse; for not so much as a stump of their roots is left in the
earth, Verse. 15. but they are written in the earth, Jer. 17.13. written
childlesse, Jer. 22.30. their root is dried up, the parents shall perish; they
shall bear no fruit, beget no children, which are the fruit of the womb, Deuteronomy.
28.11, 18. Luke 1.42. Doegs doom shall befall them, Psalm. 52.5. God shall
destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy
dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.

Yea, though they bring forth,] as Ahab did seventy sons, after that God had
threatened his utter extirpation, following the work of generation so much the
rather; see the note on verse 13.

Yet I will slay,] for it is God that lets in, and sets on the enemy; it is he
that kills and makes alive, 1 Samuel 2.6.

Even the beloved fruit of their womb.] Heb. their desires, or their desirable
ones, Valete mea desideria, valete. Cic. ep. fam. l. 14. ep. 2.
their dearest children, called by Tully also his desideria. The Latins seem
to have their filius a son, from (...) beloved; there is an Ocean of love in a
fathers heart: Tres vomicas tria carcinomata. Sueton.
though the more he loves, the less he is loved sometimes, (as David by
Absalom) and is sure if he belong to God. to be crossed in his earthly Idol.
Children are certain cares but uncertain comforts: they may prove, as Augustus
his three children did, whom he called his three ulcers or cankers, etc.

Verse. 17. My God will cast them away,] My God, not their God, for they are
cast-awayes and Apostates: see the like, 1 John. 5.17. and learn to stick to
God the closer, when others start from him; and to secure our own interest in a
general defection, by siding with God, and subscribing as here the prophet
does, to his perfect righteousness in the rejection and destruction of
reprobates.

Will cast them away] with disdain and detestation, as vile and execrable. He
will do it, says the prophet here, not without a great deal of grief, as
finding that God was fully resolved, and would not alter. The eternity of
Israel will not he, nor repent; 1 Samuel 15.
for he is not a man, that he should repent, says Samuel to Saul, that
castaway and it is very dreadful: as indeed it is for any wicked men to have
such as have interest in God, to declare against them; since the secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. and their sentence is not to be
slighted. Gods messengers especially, out of their acquaintance with their
masters proceedings, can foresee and foretell a punishment.

Because they did not hearken unto him,] Haec not abilis est sententia, This is
a notable sentence, says Luther upon the text; and worthy to be written upon
all our walls and windows. Death came into the world by the ear, so must life:
for it is, Hear and your souls shall live; and they that will not hear the
instruction of life, are doomed to destruction, as were Eli's sons, 1 Samuel
2.25. and Amaziah, 2 Chro. 25.16. A heavy ear is a singular judgment, Esaias.
6.10. an uncircumciled ear a forerunner of ruin, Jer. 6.10, 11. O pray God to
pull off that filthy foreskin and to give us an hearing ear, (that way to
wisdom) an understanding heart, such as Solomon begged, 1 King 3.9. Pray, that
he would bore our ears, as Psalm. 40.6. and make the bore big enough, that we
may not only hear, but hearken; listen as for life, hear and give ear, be not
proud, for the Lord has spoken it, Jer. 13.15. when God has spoken once, let
us bear it twice, as David did, Psalm. 62.11. he preached over the Sermon again
to himself at home. We must do with the words directions, as we do with oil to
a stiff joint; rub and chafe them on our hearts by deep and frequent
meditation and prayer: lest else we hear with these in the text.

Because they did not hearken unto him, they shall be wanderers among the
nations,] Genesis 4.12.
Heb. Nodedim: Cains curse shall befall them. A fugitive and a vagabond shall I
be upon the earth, but could not wander so wide as to miss of hell; nor fly
so far as from his own evil conscience. Lo, this is the case of these wandering
Jews, a disjected and despised nation exiled out of the world by a common
consent of all people, till God turn again their captivity as the streams in
the south, till he gather the outcasts of Israel.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. I Sracl is an empty vine,] Heb. an emptying vine; losing her fruit,
(...)
and so deceiving the owner. How can Israel but be empty of all good, of all
fruits of the spirit, when he will not hearken unto God, nor dwell under the
droppings of a powerful ministry? when he is cast off by God, Chap. 9.17.
who fills his people with the fruits of righteousness: and is not a
wilderness a land of darkness unto them? Jer. 2.31. when his root is dried
up, Chap. 9.1^^ Phil. 1.11.
and all his juice and strength runs out into leaves, so that is ( frondosa
vitis (as the vulgar renders it) a leavy vine; such as are our profligate
professors, and carnal gospellers, and such as was Saint James his solifidian,
that empty fellow, as he calls him, Chap. 2.20. when, (...).
lastly, the holy Spirit (those two golden pipes, Zach. 4.) empties not into
his candlestick the golden oils of all precious graces, as from two blessed
olive branches? The Vine and the olive (two of the best fruit trees) grow best
together, says Melanchthon. If Isreal's heart be divided from God, as verse. 2.
and has not his fruit found in him, as Chap. 14.8. what marvel if he prove (as
Nahum. 3.10.) empty and void, and waste; and though (as verse 2.) the Lord turn
away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers
have emptied them out, and married their vine branches?

He bears fruit to himself,] As he bears fruit in and from himself (like
the ivy, which though it clasp about the oak, and sometimes kills it, yet brings
forth all its berries, by virtue of its own root) so he bears fruit for
himself, or to himself. Profit, pleasure, and preferment is his Trinity: and
corrupt self is all these in unity. He fasteth to himself, as those hypocrites,
Zach. 7.5. he prays, hears, confers, gives alms, etc. cut of sinful
self-love. In all that he does sibi soli velificatur, he seeks his own ends
only; as the Eagle, when he flies highest, has his eye on his prey. In
parabola ovis capras suas quaerit: like the fish in the Gospel, either he is
dumb, or has nothing but silver in his mouth, he is a notorious self-seeker,
he bears fruit to himself: he sacrifices to himself as Sejanus did. As
Prometheus is fabled to have stolen fire from Jupiter; so the false Israelite
would cozen God of heaven, if he could tell how. Spira confessed that he used
prayer only, as a bridge to bring him to heaven; and therefore he despaired of
acceptance, as well he might: for how should God relish such sorry
hedge-fruits? how should he say of such clusters of Gomorrah, Destroy it not,
for there is a blessing in it? The good soul, as she bears all her fruit in
Christ, Ieh. 15.2. so she keeps all her fruit for him, Cant. 7.13. Es. 65.8.
and cries out, Propter te Domine, propter te. As all his springs are in her,
so all she has and is, is for him; and if she had more and better, she could
beteem it him. Hence it is, that when he comes into his garden (upon her
invitation) Cant. 4.16. to eat his pleasant fruits, he gathers his myrrh
with his spice, he eats his honey with his honycomb, as it were crust and
crumb together, Chap. 5.1. He takes in good part the better and worse-performed
services; he passes by failings in the manner, where the heart is upright, for
the main: wicked men present also some kind of fruit, (as the oak bears some
kind of apples and acorns, but they are not man's meat: swine indeed will haunch
them up; so the devil likes well enough of these self-fruits) but they make not
to Gods palate. Delicata res est Spiritus Dei, our oaken apples will not down
with him. Self must be strained out, and God set up, Tertull.
that ye may be called Trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that
he alone may be glorified, Esaias 61.3. being filled with the fruits of
righteonsnesse, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God,
Phil. 1.11.

according to the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the altars,] Juxta
ubertatem, exuberant simulachris, says the Vulgar elegantly; but yet short of
the Original, where there is a dainty Agnomination, and a double Polyptoton.
For the sense: the Prophet as he had accused Israel of emptiness, and
selfishnesse, so he does here of unthankfulness, in abusing Gods plenty to
the promoting of idolatry; as if God had hired them to be wicked. See the like
before, chap. 2.8. with the Note: and consider how far against the ingenuity of
a Christian it is, to be least for God, when he has most from him: when his
own turn is served, then to turn his back from the Author of all his good: to
do as the Moon, that gettest furthest off the Sun, when she is fullest of his
light.

according to the goodness of his land,] Idolaters desire to be where there
are good lands, fruitful fields: that they may lavish upon their Mawmets; that
they may so beautify, or (as the Hebrew word here is) bonifie their images, as
Jezebel did her head with tires and brave dresses, 2 King. 9.30. Their sorrows
shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, or, that endow another God,
and give gifts to him, as that Text may be rendered, Psalm. 16.4. What excessive
cost the superstitious papists bestow upon their idols, or images, (which are
one and the same, as we see here) and especially upon their ^ady of Loretto,
the Jesuit Tursellinus has set forth to the world. And why they so much
desire and endeavor to recover England (praying for it, as is to be seen
written on the gates of their Colleges, Jesu, Jesu converte Angliam: fiat,
fiat) the reason is evident: it is a good land, and would easily yield them
goodly images, stately altars, etc. England was wont to be called, the Popes
ass, and his puteus inexhaustus, his pit of treasure, that could never be
drawn dry: he was wont to say, that he could never want money, so long as he
could hold a pen in his fingers, to write to England. He received here-hence
yearly, Job. Manl. loc. com. p. 492.
above nine tun of gold. Now, according to what they received, they expended
upon their images. What a shame is it then for true worshippers, that there is
no proportion between their increases for God, and their increases from God:
that those that are rich in this world, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
are not rich in good works: that they lay not by for pious and charitable
uses, according as God has blessed them, 1 Cor. 16.2. but that they should be
the richer the harder: as children that have their mouths full, and both hands
full, yet will part with none, but spill it rather. It is observed, of men that
grow very far, that they have so much the less blood. And so the fatter many
men are in their estates, the less blood, life, and spirits they have for God.

Verse 2. Their heart is divided,] sc. From God; whose soul therefore is justly
disjoynted from them, Ier. 6.8. They professed to worship the true God, and yet
they transferred the honor due to him alone upon dumb-idols: they halted
between two, and would needs serve two Lords: but God would none of that. Be
the gods of the Heathen good-fellows, says One, the true God is a jealous God,
and will not part stakes with another: The double-minded man is not for his
service: for he will be served truly, that there be no halting; and totally,
that there be no halving. Good therefore and worthy of all acceptance is the
counsel of St. James to such, (...).
chap. 4.8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners: and purify your hearts ye
double-minded, or ye cloven-hearted. Out with the corruption that cleaves to
your hearts: and then there will be a constancy and evennesse in your minds,
mouths, and manners: which is absolutely necessary to such as draw nigh to God
in holy duties, and the contrary abominable, Esaias 29.13.

Now shall they be found faulty,] Sinners against their own souls, procurers of
their own ruth, and ruin. And this they shall so clearly be convinced of (as
afflicti^ dat intellectum, smart makes wit) that they shall cry out with
Joseph's brethren, We are verily guilty, Genesis 42.21. and conscience awakened
shall answer as Reuben in the next verse, Spoke I not unto you saying, Do not
sin: (O do not this abominable thing) and ye would not hear? Did not the
Prophets foretell you what would be the fruit of your idolatries? did they not
even slit up your hearts with the sacrificing knife of Gods word, (sharper then
any two-ed^^d sword) and lay all your evil thoughts naked and open, (...).
or dissected, quartered, and cleft in the backbone (as the Apostles word
signifies, Heb. 4.13.) but ye would not then be convinced of all, and falling
down upon your face worship God, as 1 Cor. 14.24, 25? Now you are found faulty,
or guilty, and cry peccavi: or now you are, that is, shortly ye shall be wasted
and desolated, as some render it: or now shall they die, Interibunt.
(so the Vulgar) shall they perish: how should they do otherwise whose heart
(that seat of life) is cut in twain, and whom the jealous and just God will cut
in twain; (...).
tearing their souls from their bodies by death, Satan's slaughter-man, and
appointing them their portion with hypocrites, Matthew. 24.51.

He shall break down their altars.] He, that is God, my God, chap. 9.17 for
this Chapter is a continuation of that (though Gualter make it the beginning of
Hosea's seventh Sermon) He, that excellent He, that Aph-Hu, 2 King. 2.14. Even
He, proved by five reasons to be one of Gods Attributes, by Mr. Weemss in his
Exposition of the Moral Law, Part. 1. page 162. Vide sis. Others render it
thus: It shall break down their altars, Ipsum cor. It, that is, their Heart,
(which indeed is the next Antecedent) and happy had it been for them, if their
heart divided from their wickedness, had been active in breaking down their
Altars in the Prophet Esay's sense, chap. 27.9. as a fruit of their true
repentance: By this therefore, that is, by their affliction sanctified, shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit (and good fruit too)
to take ^ay his sin: When (in testimony of his sound repentance, and
self-abhorrency for former idolatry) he makes all the stones of the altar as
chalk-stones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand
up. But it appears not any where that Israel was so well-affected though
grievously afflicted: that his divided heart prompted him to any such holy
practice. Rather it brought ruin upon him, to the decolling of his altars, and
spoiling of his images (which he so doted on, and delighted in) and so might
well say to him, as Apollodorus the tyrants heart did, (...).
who dreamed one night that he was flayed by the Scythians, and boiled in a
caldron: and that his heart spoke to him out of the kettle; It is I that have
drawn thee to all this: thou may thank me for all.

Verse 3. For now they shall say, We have no king,] sc. to do us good: he is no
better to us now, then a king of clouts: he cannot protect us, or deliver us
out of the hands of our enemies. If we cry unto him, as she did, Help O king;
he must needs answer as there, If the Lord do not help thee, whence I help
thee? 2 King. 6.16, 27.
Vain is the help of man now that God sets against us. Feared him we have not,
and now help us he will not. Est ergo interrogatio negantium and desperantiuns,
says River. This is the question, not of penitentiaries (as Lyra thinks) but
of such as despair, and deny that help can be had, either from God, whom they
have slighted, or from their king, who is over-matched; as Asa was by the
Ethiopians, when he came forth against them, with an Army of five hundred
thousand, but was encountered by an Army of a thousand thousand, the biggest, I
think, that we read of in the book of God, 2 Chronicles. 14. and was therefore fain
to cry, Help us O Lord our God, for we rest in thee: and in they Name, not in
our own strength, we go against this multitude, ver. 11.

because we feared not the Lord,] We trembled not at his word, as chap. 9.17.
and now it has taken hold of us, Zech. 1.6. See the Note. By our profaneness
we have enraged God against us: by our creature-confidence, we have made him
our enemy: and now, all too late, we acknowledge our implety, we bewail our
folly: for what should a king do to us? what can he do for us? more then weep
over us, as Xerxes did over his Army? cry Alas, Alas, that great city Babylon,
etc. as those kings her paramours, Rev. 18.9, 10. wish they had never reigned
as Adrian, Felix si nan imperitassent.
etc. Once the cry of this people was, Nay, but we will have a king, and they
had him: but no such great joy of him. After that again, they would have a king
of their own choosing, Jeroboam I mean; and he proved a singular mischief to
them, as did likewise all his Successors. They doted upon a king, and put
their trust in Princes; but they soon found that in them there was no help,
Psalm. 146.3. that they could not rescue them out of the punishing hands of the
king of kings, the living God.

Verse 4. They have spoken words,] Bubbles of words, great swelling words (as 2
Pet. 2.18.) thereby thinking to bear down, and outface the Prophets, and the
godly-party. They speak violent words, (as the Chaldee has it) robustious
words, as if they would yet carry it (though their king could not help them) by
confederacies, and covenants, confirmed with oaths: holding that rule of the
Priscilianists for Gospel (as they say.)

Iura, perjura: secretum prodere noli: And that maxim of Machiavel, that
Religion it self (in contracts and covenants) should not be cared for; but
only the appearance, because the credit is an help, the use a cumber: but all
these are but words, says the Prophet, and those but wind: they shall do them
no good, because without God.

Quid nisus? risus: conamina? inania, vana:
Conventus? ventus: foedera? verba mera.
Swearing falsely in making a covenant,] A foul business, whether it be
understood of covenanting with God (whereof before) or with the Assyrian, with
whom they broke, to ingratiate with So king of Egypt, 2 King. 17. How God
plagueth perjurers, etc. covenant-breakers, see Zach. 5.3. and Mal. 3.5. with
the Notes. He will appoint the sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant,
Lev. 26.25. as he did upon Jerusalem, not leaving there one stone upon another:
upon those seven golden candlesticks, long since broken in pieces for their
breach of covenant: upon Bohemiah, that seat of the first open and authorized
Reformation, whatever will yet become of England, etc.

thus judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.] Heb. Of
my field, where I have plowed and made long furrows, fitted for good seed,
wherein I looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry, Esaias 5.7. This root of bitterness, these stalks of hemlock
(that venomous weed, full of deadly poison) is bad any where, but worst of all,
when found in Gods field, noted for an habitation of justice, and mountain of
holiness, Jer. 31.23. Where should a man look for justice, but where holiness
is professed? Luther.
since primo pracepto reliquorum omnium observantia praecipitur, the second
Table of the Law is included in the first: yea the keeping of all the ten is
enjoined in the first commandment? Velejus.
Of Rome it was anciently said, that all the neighboring cities were the
better for her example of singular care to do justice. It should be so said of
the city of God: where when judgment is turned into wormwood, and the fruit of
righteousness into hemlock, as Amos 6.12. Well it may grow till it be ripe in
the field, but God will not suffer it to shed, to grow again, but cuts it up by
a just and seasonable vengeance.

Verse 5. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear,] sc. When God shall break the
necks of their altars, and spoil their images, as verse 2. They feared not God,
by their own confession verse 3. therefore they are full of base fears, whereof
the true fear of God would have freed them, Matthew. 10.28. He that fears God
needs not fear any other thing, or person, Psalm. 112.7. but can say with
David, My feet, Horat.
that is, mine affections, stand in an even place, that is, in an equable
tenor: Impavidum ferient ruinae, I shall rest in the day of trouble, when he
comes up against the people, (says holy Habakkuk. chap. 3.16.) I shall
rejoice in the God of my salvation: when those that fear not God shall be at
their wits end: yea they shall be mad for the sight of their eyes that they
shall see, Deuteronomy. 28.34.

Because of the calves of Beth-aven,] Calves in the feminine gender,
Shee-calves, by way of contempt and derision, S. H. Blounts voyage. 122. Grand
Sign. Serag. 199. Virg. Aeneid. 9 Hom. Il. 8. In loc.
as Hierom notes: as Esaias 3.12. Women rule over them. The Jews at this day
look upon women as a lower creation, and suffer them not to enter into the
Synagogue. As among the Turks they never go to Church, neither is there any
reckoning made of their religion. The Heathens had the like conceits and
expressions: O Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges -- (...), etc. We cannot speak
over-basely of idols: the Scriptures calls them, excrements, Nothings, etc.
Luther wonders that Jeroboam knowing how ill the people had sped with their
golden. Calf in the wilderness, should yet dare to set up two at Dan and
Bethel (both here called Bethaven, or houses of iniquity:) and a man might as
well wonder, that having as great a miracle wrought before him in the drying up
of his hand, as St. Paul at his conversion, yet was he no whit wrought upon.
But if God strike not the stroke, if the Spirit set not in with the means,
all is to no purpose. Who would think that men should ever be so void of reason,
as to trust in that which cannot save it self from the enemies hands? as these
calves of Beth-aven, and as the Papists breaden-god, brought into the field by
the rebels of North-folk, in King Edward the sixths days: neither was there
lacking masses, crosses, banners, candlesticks, with holy-bread, and holy water
plenty, to defend them from devils and all adversary power: which in the end,
neither could help their friends, nor save themselves from the hands of their
enemiees: but eft-soons both the consecrated god, and all the trumpery about
him, Act. and Mon. 1190.
was taken in a cart, and there lay all in the dust; Leaving to them a notable
lesson of better experience, says Mr. Fox, who relates it.

For the people thereof] i. e. of the calf, to whom they had dedicated
themselves; as the Moabites are called the people of Chemosh, Number. 21.29. and
Turks, Mahometans. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God;
and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, Mic. 4.5.

Do mourn over it,] As those women wept for Tammuz, Ezech. 8.14. that is, for
Osiris king of Egypt, whose image they had adored, as those Rev. 18. wailed
over that old whore, when they saw her a broyling; as Idolatrous Micah cried
after his gods, Judge. 18. and as the people of the East Indies in the Isle
Zeylon, having an apes tooth which they had consecrated, gotten from them,
mourned, and offered an incredible mass of treasure to recover it. Should not
men then mourn after the sincere service of God, and hold it dear to their
souls?

And the Priests thereof that rejoiced in it] Heb. the Chemarims, or
Chimney-chaplaines, that were all black and sooty with the smoke of the
sacrifices, and were therefore called Chemarim or Camilli, as affecting a black
habit sanctimoniae ergo; or having black brand-marks upon their bodies, in
honor of their Idols, whereof these happily were the Hierophantae, or masters of
the Ceremonies, and made a great gain thereof the ground of their joy: for it
is (...), gain so called, because it delights the heart.

For the glory thereof.] i. e. of the calf, the beauty and bravery of its
worship, all is now utterly gone.

Verse. 6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria, etc.] As no small part of the
spoil, shall this Deafter be carried captive: being so far unable to save
others, that he cannot save himself.

For a present to king Jareb,] (See Chap. 3.13. in signum omnimodae victoriae.
so Aeneas, Ilium in Italiam portat, victosque penates. Aeneid. 1.
though in another sense; yet they must needs be poor despicable deities, See
Isay. 46.2.
that fall into the enemies hands. The Ark indeed fell into the Philistines
hands: but the Ark was not Gods, but only a sign of his presence, which God
suffered so to be taken, for a punishment to his people, and for a plague to
his enemies, whom he smote in the hinder parts, and so put them to a perpetual
reproach, Psalm. 78.66.

Ephraim shall receive shame] because they hoped and harped upon better things,
Job. 6.20. O pray, with David, that our hopes be not disappointed: that they
make us not ashamed, as Paul speaks; that they prove not as the spiders web,
Romans 5.5.
curiously framed but to catch flies only; or as the childs hope, who
catches at the shadow on the wall which he thinks he holds fast, or at the
butterfly, which if he catch, he has no such great catch of.

And Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsels] of their impolitick plots and
practices, in dividing themselves from David's house, and setting up unwarranted
worships, calling in foreign helps, etc. Their own counsels have cast them
down, Job. 18.7. because they were acted by false principles, and aimed at
their own corrupt ends. They took counsel, but not of God; and covered with a
covering, but not of his spirit, that they might add sin to sin, Esaias. 30.1.
They made not the Word the man of their counsel, as David did, Psalm. 119.24.
neither prayed they as he, Psalm. 73.24. Guide me Lord with thy counsel, and so
bring me to glory. In a word, they perished by their own counsels, Hos. 11.6.
whereby they provoked God, and so were brought low, by their iniquity, Psalm.
106.43. and then they were ashamed of their own counsel, they saw themselves
befooled by their carnal reason, and by that which they call Reason of State,
which indeed is treason, unless it be seasoned with Justice and Religion.

Verse. 7. As for Samaria, her king is cut off, as the feam upon the waters,] An
apt simile (whereof this prophet is full) Her king, (not her idols, as some
sense it) though gotten into Samaria, a strong city, so well victualled and
fortified, as to hold out a siege of three years continuance, yet shall be cut
off, or silenced as Chap. 4.7. as the foam upon the waters, bulla evanida, more
weak then water, whereof it arises, and whereby it is wherried away, and
cannot resist: or, as a bubble blown up by every small wind, and as easily
blown out again; it no sooner appears but it disappeares. Lo such are the
greatest kings and kingdoms, when God takes them in their wickedness. He cuts
off the spirits of Princes, Psalm. 76.12. he slips them off, (so the Hebrew is)
as one would slip off a flower between ones fingers; or as one would slip off a
bunch of grapes. The kingdoms of the earth are like foam upon the waters. 1.
For their seeming brightness. 2. For their great eminence. 3. For their
instability and inability to resist. 4. For their sudden fall, and
disappearance. The Turkish Empire (which has swallowed up so many glorious
Empires and renowned kingdoms) labors with nothing more then the
weightinesse of it self: and shall shortly be cut off as foam, and live no
otherwise then by fame, as others now do: though for the present, it be no whit
inferior, in greatness, and strength to the greatest Monarchies that ever yet
were upon the face of the earth; the Roman Empire only excepted.

Verse 8. (...) unde (...).
The high places also of Aven, etc.] Sept. the Altars, ab Alto dicta. Of Aven,
for Beth-aven, (whereof before) a place so hateful now, that God loathes at
large to mention it: he even cuts off the head of it, as he had threatened to do
by the Altars verse 2. So Jeconiah degenerating, is Coniah, etc.

the sin of Israel,] that damning sin of idolatry here committed, that
wickedness with a witness, which makes God abhor places as well as persons,
and turns them into sin as it were. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it
not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?
Mich. 1.5.

shall be destroyed.,] Thus, man's sin brings destruction upon the creatures.
It is as poison in a glass, that causes the glass to be broken, and cast
upon the dunghill. The vessels that held the sin-offering, if made of earth,
they were to be broken; if of brass, or other metalls, to be purged with fire:
as one day the earth and visible heavens also shall be for the defilement that
man's sin has set upon them.

The thorn and the thistle shall come upon their altars,] There shall be nil
nisi solitudo in terris, Tarnou.
aegritudo in animis, etc. See the Note on chap. 9. verse 6.

they shall say to the mountains, Cover us,] This they shall say out of the
sense and terror of Gods just judgments driving them to desperation. --
tellus prius ima dehiscat, etc. Aristides commends Themistocles for this,
that he never was so perplexed by any evil occurrence, as to wish that the
earth would swallow him up quick, or to pronounce the dead happy. Rivet well
observes here, that Iudaea, as it was full of hills and rocks, so they were
wont to dig themselves therein caves and dens, wherein to hide in time of
danger. To these David often repaired, and so secured himself from Saul. And to
these he alludeth when he calls God his Rock, Psalm. 18.2. and the Rock of his
refuge, Psalm. 94.22. And of these places of security Josephus writes, Antiq.
l. 14. cap. 26. De bell. Jud. ^ib. 1. cap. 12.
describing the form of them. Now when they were in those holes of the hills,
and were distressed by the enemy there, what wonder though they said to the
mountains, fall upon us, cover us bury us alive, erush us to pieces, grind us
to powder, rather then that we fall into the bloody fingers of these merciless
monsters; who will put us happily to a lingering death, kill us peecemeal, as
Tiberius did those he was angry with: Sueton.
and as the Canibals of America, when they take a prisoner, feed upon him
alive, and by degrees, to the unutterable aggravation of his horror and
torment. Our Savior foretold his disciples, that at the last destruction of
Jerusalem, men should cry out to the mountains on this manner: And so shall
the Antichristian rout also do one day, Rev. 6.16. They that would not worship
the Lamb, shall find him a Lion: those that would not cast away their
transgressions, but faced the heavens, shall run into the rocks to hide them;
those that would not aspire to eternity, shall despair of mercy; those that
would not lift up their eyes to the everlasting mountains, from whence comes
help, shall now in vain tire the deaf mountains, with hide us, help us. Now
what can the mountains do more then give an echo to such help us; for they
need help also: the wrath of God is upon the creature, etc.

Verse 9. O Israel thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah,] Or, Prae diebus
worse then in the days of Gibeah. What those days were, see chap. 9.9. and
Judge. 19. when they were, is not so certain: but probably, before the time of
the Judges, and soon after Joshuahs death: for Jebus, or Jerusalem, was not yet
taken, Judge. 19. with chap. 1. and Phineas was yet alive and ministered before
the Lord, chap. 20.28. and was one of those Elders that outlived Joshuah, who
had seen all the great works of the Lord, which he did for Israel, Judge. 2.7.
so that these days of Gibeah, were very ancient: and Isreal's sin the worse,
because from those days: and yet more, because above, or beyond those days.
God made use of your forefathers to punish that great sin: and yet you continue
to be more vile and vicious then they were, that were so punished by your
forefathers: Neither are ye at all warned by their harms: which is a just both
presage and desert of your downfall. Alterius perditie tua sit eautio. Exemplo
alterius qui sapit, ille sapit.

there they stood.] Who stood? either the men of Gibeah stood stoutly to it:
and slew in two several battles forty thousand. Or, there stood the men of
Israel, and their battle did not overtake the children of iniquity: not so
overtake them at first, but that they were twice beaten by them: All which
notwithstanding, they stood it out, and prevailed at last: but so shall not
you, since it is in my desire, and decree, verse 10. to order it otherwise, and
utterly to destroy you at once. Non surget bic asslictio.

Verse 10. It is in my defire that I should chastise them,] That is, Nahum 1.9.
I am unchangeably resolved, and fully bent upon it, to carry them captive and
enslave them to their enemies: wherein they shall find that they have to do
with God, and not with man; and that it is I that bind them, though I make use
of the Assyrians to that purpose. Luther renders it, Valde cupide eos
castigabo, exceeding desirously will I chastise them. O the venomous nature of
sin, that makes the merciful God to desire and to delight in men's miseries:
to take comfort in their punishments, Ezck. 5.13, 15. to laugh at their
destruction, (...). Act. 13.
Prove. 1. And although he bear long with men's evil manners, yet he bears them
as a burden, whereof he desires to be eased, Esaias. 1.24. as a servitude
whereof he desires to be freed, Esaias 43.24. as a pain, not inferior to that
of a traveling woman: and albeit he bite in his pains, as it were, for a time,
yet hear him what he says, Esaias 42.14. I have long time holden my peace, I
have been still and refrained my self; now will I cry like a travailing woman:
I will destroy and devour at once.

and the people shall be gathered against them,] God can bring in his armies at
his pleasure: for all creatures are at his beck and check. If he do but look
out at the windows of heaven, and cry, Who is on my side? who? all creatures in
heaven and earth will presently present their service: he never need want a
weapon to chastise his rebels. C^. Pempei.
If he but stamp with his foot (as that proud Roman said) he can have men
enough. How ready are the Assyrians here, to be the rod in his hand?

When they shall bind themselves in their two furrows,] i. e. I will bring
their enemies upon them, and they shall yoke them like oxen that are yoked to
plow: yea, they shall bring them into such servitude, that they shall make them
do double work, plow in their two furrows, be they never so weary of doing one.
The enemies shall not be moved to pity the poor Israelites, when tired with
hard labor: but shall make them plow like beasts, giving them no rest till
they have even wearied and worn them out. This is Polanus his interpretation:
who further admonishes us, as often as we behold, or think upon the yoking of
oxen for the plow, Polan. in loc.
that we likewise bethink us of the miserable condition of such poor
Christians, as are slaves to Turks, and Tartats, and other enemies, who bind
them indeed in their two furrows. It is not so long since here amongst us,
diverse of Gods dear servants were driven from Ciceter and other places (taken
by the enemy) naked and barefoot, (as the Egyptians were by the Assyrians, Esaias
20.4.) through thick and thin to Oxford-Gaole, etc. where by the cruelty of
their keepers, many of them lost their precious lives, to the incredible grief
of their dear relations. Neither can I here pass by Tillies cruelty at
Magdeburgh in Germany: where after twenty thousand persons at least put to the
sword, and the Town burned down, his soldiers committed all manner of ravages,
Mr. Clark in the life of the K. of Swed.
all the country over: Ladies, Gentlewomen and others, like beasts, they
yoaked and coupled together, leading them into the woods to ravish them; and
such as resisted, they stripped naked, whipped them, cropped their ears, and so
sent them home again. The Irish cruelties unnameable, might here be instanced.
O quam duram, O quam tristem serviunt illi servitutem! See Mr. Clarks relation.
The words may be read, They shall bind them together.

Verse 11. And Ephraim is an heifer that is taught,] sc. With the Ox-goad,
which has its name from teaching, Judge. 3.31. because therewith Oxen are
taught to plow, Malmad.
says R. David. Ephraim was a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31.18.
but God brought her to it and taught her, though at first a backsliding heifer,
chap. 4.16. (see the the Note there) taught her, as Gedeon taught the men of
Succoth, with briers and thorns of the wilderness, so that they paid dear for
their learning, Judge. 8.16. But Ephraim, though taught it, loves not plowing
work, because hard and hungry. She loves rather to tread out the corn,] where
she may dance and frisk in the loft straw without either yoke or muzzle, Deuteronomy.
25.4. As we thresh, so it was their manner to tread out their hard corn with
the feet of beasts, or by them to draw Wains over it, and so get it out of the
husk. Now this was fair and free work, and Ephraim delighted in it; the rather,
because she might feed all the while at pleasure: whereas those heifers that
plowed, wrought hard all day, and in all weathers, without any refreshment. It
is an ill sign, when men must pick and choose their work: this they will do
for God, but not that. A dispensatory conscience is a naughty conscience:
neither does he Gods will but his own, that does no more, or no other, then
himself will. Such holy-day-servants, such retainers God cares not for. Every
one can swim in a warm Bath; and every bird will sing in a summers day. Judas
will bear the cross, so he may bear the bag. And those carnal Capernaites
follow Christ, whiles he feeds them: as children will say their prayers, so
they may have their breakfast. But Abraham will forsake all to follow God,
though he knew not whither: yea though God seemed to go crosse-wayes: as when
he promised him a land slowing which milk and honey, and yet as soon as he came
there, he found famine, Genesis 12.1, 10. So when he promised him seed as the
stars, yet kept him without child for twenty years after: and after that he
must kill him too, Genesis 22. So Job will trust in a killing God: Jonah calls
upon him out of the deep: David keeps his statutes, when God had in some degree
forsaken him, Psalm. 119.8. and behaved himself wisely in a perfect way, though
God was not yet come unto him, Psalm. 101.2. This is the trial of a Christian,
to do difficult duties upon little or no encouragement; to wrestle as Jacob
did, in the night, and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one leg,
etc. This is work-man-like. The staff-rings were to continue upon the Ark: the
Kohathites shoulders felt wherefore: and so long God helped them to carry it.
But when they once fell to carting it for their own ease, 1 Chro. 15.26
as the Philistines had done, 1 Samuel 6.) God made a dismal breach upon them, 2 Samuel 6. and David was very sensible of it, when he came up the second time to
fetch the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 15.12, 13.

but I passed over upon her fair neck,] God will make her both bear and draw;
though she were grown delicate and tender, with long prosperity; her good, and
fair, and fat neck, not galled, or brawned with the yoke, which now she made
dainty of; yet He would bring her to it: though he were by her untractablenesse
forced to sit upon her neck, and make her more towardly to the yoke, as the
manner of plowmen was in that case.

I will make Ephraim to ride,] Or, as the Vulgar has it, I will ride him and
rule him, though he kick and lay about him never so much: though he champ upon
the bridle, and stamp with his feet, etc. I Will master him, and make him more
serviceable, or at least, less insolent. See this fulfilled, Jer. 31.18, 19.
where Ephraim is brought in seeing his need of mercy in the sense of misery.

Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods.] Judah does the worst of
the work, and suffers more hardship in the ways of my worship, and is held
under by Israel, as appears in the second book of Kings, chap. 10.16. etc.
Jacob, that is, the ten Tribes, did only break the clods, or harrow, which is
the lighter work; and should therefore have been done with more delight. But
they love to take their ease, and only follow after their pleasure, and
profit: and though taught to plow, yet like it not, because laborious: no
though they have Judah for an example of better.

Verse 12. Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy:]
Righteousness is a sure seed, a precious grain, which those that sow (and
every action of our life is a sowing) shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, and bring their sheaves with them, Psalm. 126.6. Only they must not
look to sow and reap all in one day; as one says of the Hyperborean people
far North, that they sow shortly after the Sunrising with them, and reap
before the Sunset: that is, because the whole half year is one continual day
with them. The Church is Gods husbandry, Heresbach. de. re rust.
1 Cor. 3.9. the seed is the Word of God, Luke 8.11. Ministers are Gods
husbandmen, harvestmen, Matthew. 9.37, 38. the plough, Luke 9.62. plough-staff,
Luke 13.8. axe, Mat. 3.10. are the Laws threatenings: the fruit-causing rain,
are the promises of the Gospel, Esaias 55.10, 11. faith that works by love, are
the fruits: the last day, the harvest, Mat. 13.39, 40, 41. Then, at utmost,
(...).
those that sow bountifully (or, in blessings, as the Greek has it) shall
reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows seems to cast away his seed: but
if he sow in locis irriguis, (as Eccles. 11. 1. Ezekiel. 34.26.) upon fat and
fertile places, he knows he shall receive his own, with usury. In some parts
of Egypt, where the river Nilus overfloweth, they do but throw in their seed,
and they have four rich harvests in less then four months. S. H. Blounts
voyag. 77.
Oh sow bountifully the seeds of piety and charity into Gods blessed bosom:
and then be sure to reap plentiful mercy, in thy greatest necessity: reap in
the month of mercy (as the Original here has it) that is, according to the
measure of divine mercy (see Levit. 27.16. Exodus 16.16.) proportionably to the
infiniteness of Gods mercy. Now the Scripture has three notable words to
express the fullness of Gods mercy in Christ, to those that sow in
righteousness, Ephesians. 2.7. the abundant riches of his grace, that are cast in
over and above, Romans 5.20. The grace of God has been more then exceeding:
there is a second (...), 1 Timothy 1.14. The grace of God was exceeding abundant.
It had a pleonasme before: yea, but here is a superpleonasme; here is good
measure, pressed down, Luke 6.38.
shaken together and running over shall God give into men's bosoms: Like as
when a poor man asked Mr. Fox for an alms, he (finding him religious) gave him
his horse: Or as Alexander gave one (that craved some small courtesy of him) a
whole city. And when the poor man said, It was too much for him to receive:
yea, Non quaero quid te accipere deceat, sed quid me dare. Sen. de benef. l. 2.
c. 16. (...).
but not for me to give, said he. So God gives liberally and like himself,
Jam. 1.5. He does not shift off his suitors, as once a great Prince did a bold
begging Philosopher. He asked a groat of him, and the king told him, it was too
little for a king to give. He requested the king then to give him a talent: the
king replied, It was too much for a beggar to crave. Certain it is, that God in
his spiritual blessings and mercies to us is wont to regard not so much what
is fit for his to ask or expect, as what stands with his goodness, and
greatness to bestow. If Israel had a hundredfold increase of his seed, those
that sow to themselves in righteousness, Genesis 26.1^.
by doing and suffering Gods will shall have much more: Even an hundredfold
here, and eternal life hereafter, Matthew. 19.29. so great a gain is godliness:
so sure a grain is righteousness: who would not then turn spiritual seeds-man?

break up your fallow ground,] sc. of your hearts, that ye sow not among the
thorns, Jee. 4.3. The breaking up of sinful hearts, is a singular means to
prevent the breaking down of a sinful nation. Hence the Prophet, though almost
out of hope of any good to be done, upon his desperate countrymen, resolves to
try one more exhortation to them: and as in the morning he had sowed his seed,
Eccles. 11.6.
so in the evening he withholds not his hand: for who can tell whether it
may not prosper? and whether in the midst of threats, they might not suffer a
word of exhortation, Heb. 13.22.
and whether it might not leave some impression, being delivered in few words?
Sow (therefore says he) to your selves in righteousness, etc. but first
break up your fallow ground,] Innovate vobis novale. Repent, and be renewed in
the spirit of your minds; in spirit and speech, in minds and manners, in
constitution and conversation, in the purpose of your hearts, and practice of
your lives. Old things are past, 2 Cor. 5.17.
let all things become new: turn up the turf, stock up, and stub up the roots
and weeds; get into Christ, and become a new creature. Till this be done, men
are in an undone condition, though they should spend their whole time in
gathering up pearls and jewels.

for it is time to seek the Lord,] High time, since your souls lie upon it.
Plowmen, we know are careful to take their time: so are all others, wise
enough in their generation. The wayfaring-man travelleth while it is light. The
Seafaring-man takes his opportunity of wind and tide. The Smith smites whiles
the iron is hot. The Lawyer takes his terme-time to entertain Clients,
dispatch suits. The men of Issachar were in great account with David, because
they had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles.
12.32. so are they with God, that regard and use the seasons of grace; that
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near: Esaias
55.6.
that put in the plough, set upon the practice of repentance, after a shower,
when the heart is best affected; after God by his Word and Spirit has taught
(so some render the Text) or rained righteousness upon them. Rain comes from
heaven: so does every good and perfect giving. Rain poures down plentifully,
Psalm. 68.9. thou did send a plentiful rain on thine inheritance: so do the
showers of righeousnesse on good hearts. Not a drop of rain falls in vain, or
in a wrong place, but by a divine decree, Job 28.26. so here. Seek it in time,
and we shall not fail of it. Only we must not set God a time when to come, but
wait upon him, who waits to be gracious. Elijah sent seven times ere the rain
came. Seek till God comes: Limit not the holy One of Israel. As he seldom comes
at our time, so he never fails in his own. Hold out therefore faith and
patience: for behold he comes on the clouds, on the wings of the wind, and
his reward is with him. To him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure
reward, Prove. 11.18.

Verse 13. Ye have plowed wickedness,] The former exhortation was even spilt
upon them: for they went on to plot and plough wickedness: they had their
necks in the devils yoke, and promoted his kingdom with sides and shoulders:
they let out the strength of their spirits for the furtherance of sin, and were
at no small pains to go to hell. as being the devils hinds and horses to draw
his plough, Prove. 21.4. Job 4.8. Even as I have seen, says Eliphaz, they that
plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. Ye have reaped iniquity,
says our Prophet, that is, dignum factis praemium, the reward of your
wickedness. And her iniquity is opposed to mercy in the former verse, as
wickedness also is to righteousness: or wickedness may be taken for their
Apostasy, Idolatry, and creature-confidence; and iniquity for the rest of their
enormities, proceeding from those former: for these wicked ones are never out
of action. Plaut. Capt. Act. 3. sc. 5.
Arant, serunt, occant, scelera, they plow, sow, and harrow mischi^^^ so that
would they but take the like pains for heaven that they do for hell, they could
not (lightly) miss of it.

Ye have eaten the fruit of lies,] That is, ye have been cozened, by your false
Prophets, and State-politicians; whose fetch it is to formalize and enervate
the power of truth, till at length they have left you an heartlesse and
saplesse religion. Ye have fed hungerly upon the murdering morsels of sin; and
that is the reason that there is so much ill blood amongst you. Your bread is
that panis meadacij Solomon speaks of, Prove. 20.17. full of grit and gravel,
made up with saw-dust (as they served the Martyrs) and mixed with lime, Turk.
hist.
as the treacherous Greeks dealt by the Western Christians, marching toward
the Holy Land.

because thou did trust in thy way,] In thy Calf-worship. Way is often put for
religion: and every action men do, is a step either to heaven or to hell: he
that walks uprightly, walks safely. These Idolaters were very confident of
their way: so are our Papists, and other heretics; as David George, that
pestilent Libertine, was fully persuaded, that the whole world would submit to
him. And Campian, Coster, and other zealous Papists tell us to our heads, that
our religion is error, our selves heretics, our end destruction: that one
heaven cannot hold us hereafte, one Church now, etc. Thus the way of a fool is
right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth to counsel (as no confident
fool will) is wise, Prove. 12.15.

and in the multitude of their mighty men.] This made them ready to boast, as
that young king of Hungary did, that though the sky should fall down upon
them, Sigismund. Turk. hist.
yet they were men enough, and strong enough, with their pikes to bear it up.
These Ephraimites liked their way of false worship the better, because backed by
a strong Army. That way the mighty men go, that shall be trodden: this is a
secret byasse, a strong poyse upon the spirits of most men, Rev. 13. when power
and authority was put into Antichrists hands, the whole world wondered after
him. But cursed be that man, that makes flesh his arm, etc. I will not trust
in my bow, Jer. 17.
my sword shall not save me, says David. There is no king saved by the
multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, Psalm.
33.16. See Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5.

Verse 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise among the people, etc.] Even among
those mighty men, wherein ye trusted, shall there be seditious tumults, that
shall soon bring all into a miserable confusion. Intestine commotions may undo
a people, as a man may die of an inward bleeding.

Ac veluti in magno populo cum saepe coorta est,
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus, etc. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1.

When the multitude is in a rage, they are like to a tiled house that is on
fire (says One) there is no coming near the house, the tiles do so fly about
your face: so it is in tumults, there is no coming near to talk to them, to
convince them: but they are ready to fly presently upon you. In Kets sedition,
Dr. Parker in his Sermon before the Rebels near Norwich, touched them for their
missiving so near, that they went near to touch him for his life. The rude rage
of the rebels was such, that some being disabled almost to hold up their
weapons, would strive what they could to strike their enemies: others being
thrust through the body with a spear, would run themselves further, to reach
those that wounded them deadly. Yea boys were observed to be so desperately
resolved, as to pull arrows out of their own flesh, Lise of King Edward the 6.
p 75.
and deliver them to be shot again by the archers on their side. There are none
so insolent and cruel as the vilest of the people, when they are got together
in a head. What havoc made the seditious in Jerusalem a little before the last
destruction of it? the Guelfs and Gibellines in Italy? Wat Tyler and his
accomplices here? That Rebel, Joseph lib. 2. cap. 11. and l. 6. cap. 11. Speed.
734. (...).
held up by the many-headed multitude, dared to say, that all the Laws of
England should come out of his mouth. The Hebrew word here used signifies an
inundation, or multitude of waters, which overrun their banks with violence
and roaring. The people are a most dangerous and heady water, when once it is
out: it is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food, Prove. 28.3. The
Septuagint render it, Destruction. Sal. Jarchi says, it signifies the voice
of those that cry, Fugite, Fugite, Away, Away, the enemy is at hand, etc. Some
say, to the same purpose, that it signifies clamorem meticulosorum, the crying
of those that are scared, Virg. Aen.
as when there is Luctu, ubique pavor, and plurima morti imago. See Am. 2.2.
Zeph. 1.15, etc.

and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled.,] Yea though they be munitions of
rocks. Thy terriblenesse has deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O
thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, that hold the height of the
hill: though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring
thee down from thence, says the Lord, Jer. 49.16. And again, all thy
strongholds shall be like fig trees, with the first ripe figs: if they be
shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater, who shall devour them
at a bit, Nah. 3.12.

as Shalman spoiled Betharbel] Shalman signifies peaceabley (says an
Interpreter) a man of a calm spirit: but he answered not his name: for he
exercised greatest cruelty. There is not a more troublesome sea, then that
which is called Mare pacificum. There is often Aliud in Titulo, aliud in Pyxidc.
Absalom signifies the Fathers peace: but he proved otherwise then was hoped.

Fallitur augurio spes bena saepe suo. But this Salman is by the best
Interpreters thought to be Salmanasar king of Assyria in this Prophets time.
Salman is vox truncata, a name cut off to the halves: a thing very ordinary in
all the learned languages, as were easy to instance. See Esaias 15.2. Bamoth for
Bamoth-Baal, Josh. 19.35. Chamath for Chamath-Dor. Hesiod puts (...) for (...),
Vide Lips. ep. 19. lib. 1.
Ennius has Fabric for Fabricius. This Salmanasar (or as Luther will have it,
some other great warrior called Salman, not elsewhere mentioned in Scripture,
but not unknown to the ten tribes) did cruel execution, it seems, upon
Betharbel, a city beyond Jordan, 1 Maccab. 9.2. like as Tamerlan (for a terror
to the Greek Empire, much whereof he afterward subdued) did at Sebastia; Turk.
hist. fol. 211.
where he made a merciless slaughter of all sexes and sizes; whereby he held
the whole East in such awe, as that he was commonly called, The wrath of God,
and Terror of the world. There are that think this Arbel to be the same with
that Arbela where Alexander defeated Darius, and won the Persian Monarchy. They
make it a city or country of Assyria, beneath Arpad, and hinted at by
Rabshakeh, 2 King. 18.34. See 2 King. 15.29. and 16.34. and 19.13.
Where are the gods of Hamath, and Arpad? sc. Salmanasar has utterly destroyed
them. Arbel is by some interpreted, the city of Bell, where Belus or Baal was
worshipped. By others, Beth-arbel is interpreted, The house of the insnaring
god, the god of policy, or subtilty: It seems to them, that the people of
this place had a god that they thought would ensnare and ensnarle all their
enemies: but it proved much otherwise.

For, the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.] Dashed against the
ground (so the word signifies) against the walls, (...). Sept.
or pavement. See Genesis 32.11. Psalm. 137.9. Esaias 13.16. Such is the savage
cruelty of war, when God lets it out. Such was the barbarous dealing of the
French in the Parisian Massacre, such the Sicilian Vespers, and at Merindoll;
where the paps of many women were cut off, which gave suck to their children;
Act. and Mon. fol. 868. ^
which looking for suck at their mothers breasts being dead before, died also
for hunger. Was not this to kill the mother with the children? which God
forbade by a symboll of taking the dam with the young, Deuteronomy. 22.6. and again of
killing the ewe and the lamb both in one day, Lev. 22.28. The Spaniards
murdered fifty millions of Indians in 42. years, as Acosta the Jesuit
testifies. Arsenoe was killed upon her children by her bloody brother Ptolomce
king of Egypt. And another of that name killed thirty thousand Jews, and
compelled the living to feed upon the flesh of the dead. When the Switzers
vanquished the Thericcuses in battle, Languet. Chron.
they banqueted in the place where they won the victory: using the dead bodies
of their Adversaries instead of stools and tables. The sight of such like
cruelties, common in war, might well make Zuing lius say, when he had been
abroad with the Army, Melch. Ad. in vit. 36.
that he had found more wickedness, and bad counsels and courses therein, then
ever he had known before, either by experience, or out of books. This passage
in Gods book (and the like, chap. 13.16. their infants shall be dashed-in
pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.) he could not be ignorant
of. The Prophet refers his hearers to a sad example of fresh-bleeding cruelty,
well known to them: that they might relent, repent, and prevent the like misery
upon themselves. This is the use we should all put such examples to, Luke 13.2,
3, 5. and 17.26.28. 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 8, 11.

Verse 15. So shall Bethel do unto you,] i. e. the idolatry that you have
committed at Bethel, by a Synechdoche of the place, this shall undo you. Or, So
shall he do unto you, O inhabitants of Bethel. Bethel shall be made a
Betharbel. They that take not example by others, shall be made an example to
others. Lege historiam, ne sias historia^

Because of your great wickedness:] Heb. the wickedness of your wickedness,
the iniquity of your sin, the foolishness of your madness, Eccles. 7.25. your
idolatry especially, that wickedness with a witness. Let us (by Gods example)
learn to lay load upon our sins, and not to extenuate, but to aggravate them
against our selves.

In a morning shall the king of Israel be utterly cut off.] This was fulfilled
in Hose^^ the last king of Israel, 2 King. 17. cut off in a morning, that is,
in a moment, as foam, or a bubble upon the waters. The morning-light lasts
not long, but shines on to the perefect day. Or, in a morning, when some hope
appears, and some comfort is expected, as Psalm. 30.6. it is but a lightning
before death. Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in an^^. Contrarily, the
Saints at evening-time have light, Zech. 14.7. See the Note there.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. WHen Israel was a child, then I loved him,] Or Because Israel was a
child, I loved him. Young things are lovely; young children especially, for
their innocence, and ignescency. Some sense it thus, Israel was a child, and
had nothing of worth, or lovely in him; yet I loved him freely, Deuteronomy. 7.7. Hos.
10.9. called him out of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, led him through the
deep, as an horse in the wilderness, Esaias 63.13. possessed him of the promised
land. Out of which though I shall shortly cast him for him ingratitudes: yet
there is hope of his restoration, by the Messiah my Son, whom when I have
called out of Egypt, he shall gather together again the dispersed of Israel,
and bring life and immortality to light by the Gospel. The foundation of which
restoration, he here makes to be his own free grace. (...). Luke 1.53.
He has helped his servant (or his child) Israel, in remembrance of his
mercy. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Joh.
3.16. Here then begins our Prophets first Evangelicall sermon, as Tarnovi^s
observes: who also reads the Text thus: Albeit Israel was a child, such a
forlorn outcast child, as is described, Ezekiel. 16. and 23. Yet I loved him,
and adopted him for my son: not for any defect on my part, (for I had an
only begotten Son, in whom I am well pleased:) or, for any desert on his part,
for I found him in his blood, in his blood, in his blood, Ezekiel. 16.6.
when I cast my skirt of love over him, and said unto him, Live. Yea and for
his salvations sake, I have called, that is, I have decreed to call out of
Egypt (whither he fled from Herod, and where he abode two or three years at
least) my child Jesus, whose office it is to save his people from their
sins. Epiphan. Mat. 1.21.
And although I might justly have deprived them of such a Savior for ever,
because when he came to his own, his own received him not, (yea, rejected him
to whom their own signs given to Herod, did so aptly and evidently agree) yet
out of Egypt, to show the constancy of my love to Israel, Mat. 2.
have I called (by mine angel, as Jacob by a messenger called his wives to him
into the field, Genesis 31.4.) My Son Christ, who is Gods Son, first by eternal
generation, Prove. 8.22, 23. Secondly, by personal union, Psalm. 2.7. And thus
God called out of Egypt, first Israel his people, and then Christ the Head of
his people; in whom at length this prophecy was fulfilled.

Verse 2. As they called them,] i. e. As the Prophets and Ministers (whose
names are here concealed, that the Word only may be glorified, as Acts 13.48.)
called to them, to come out of spiritual Egypt, out of darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among the Saints, by faith that is in Christ, Act. 26.18.

so they went from them:] They went a contrary way, as the child Samuel, when
God called him, ran to Eli: or rather as the wilful Jews, when God would have
gathered them, as the hen does her chickens, they would not. When God called
his natural Son out of Egypt, he came presently, Heb. 10.7. Psalm. 40.7, 8. not
so his adopted sons: for they turned upon him the back, and not the face, as
Jer. 2.27. they refused to be reformed, they hated to be healed. See chap. 7.1.
with the Note. Nay to make up the full measure of their sins, and to heighten
their contempt,

they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burnt incense to graven images,] Quasi agree
facturi Deo, as if they would despite God on purpose, and spit in his very
face: commit the like villainy in his presence, as the Irish Rebels lately did,
when they bound the husband to the bed-post, whiles they abused his wife before
him. See the Notes on chap. 2. and almost on every chapter where their idolatry
is cried out upon, and their extreme ingratitude.

Verse 3. I tauaght Ephraim also to go,] A child he was verse 1. and like a
child I dealt with him, teaching him how to set his feet, pedare to foot it,
as nurses do their little ones: he keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9.
he guides their feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.79. See for this, Deuteronomy.
1.31. and 32.11. Number. 11.12. So great is the goodness of God to his people,
that he deals with us as with his little children, nos sublevando,
submonendo, docendo, ducendo, regendo, tegendo, convocando, Tarnou.
condonando, portando, confortando, etc. says a learned Interpreter truly,
and trimly. He speaks unto us as unto children, Heb. 12.5. pattern diligit,
^mice dirigit, he loves us as a father, he directs us as a friend, guiding us
with his eye, leading us in his hand, setting us betwixt his knees, as some
interpret that text, Deuteronomy. 33.3. setting us upon his knees, as a father does
his darling, and rejoicing over us with joy, yea joying over us, with singing,
Zeph. 3.17. His affections are more then fatherly: Mr. Baine.
and his expressions are according. We are like infants (says One) newborn,
in a manner. They are kept by the loving parents from fire and water: they are
fed, laid to sleep, made ready, and unready, and shifted in their scapes, but
they know not who does all this for them. So does our heavenly Father by us in
Christ. But (he knows) little understanding have we of him. After this, he
teaches us to go, taking us by the arms,] to help our feeble knees. And taking
us up in his own arms, when we come to a foul or rough place: helping us over
the quagmires of crosses, and the difficulties of duties. And whereas we fall
seven times a day, and in many things fail all: he takes us up after that we
have caught a knock, and cherishes us in his bosom, etc. Montanus and Junius
carry the sense another way, as if the words were not a description of Gods
love to the people, but of their unthankfulness to God; rendering the words
thus: When as ^inform Ephraim, he takes them in his arms, that it, he sets
up idols, and, after the manner of impudent and shameless strumpets, he takes
the puppets in his arms, and embraces them before my face. But I like the
former sense better.

But they knew not that I healed them.] Not only held them, that they might
not fall, but healed them when they had fallen. Daring they would be sometimes
to stand upon their own legs, to prevail by their own strength, 1 Samuel 2.9. to
say with her in the Poet, Arachne apud. Ovid. Metam.
Consilij satis est in me mihi, etc. I am wise enough, and able enough, to go
on as if they were petty-gods within themselves, and had no need of nor
dependence upon me. Hence they hurt themselves, but I healed them. I forgave
all their iniquities, Psalm. 103.3.
I healed all their diseases, their bruises, and putrefying sores, that else
had not been closed, bound up,, nor mollified with ointment, Esaias 1.6. God left
not his people in their low estate, as some Physicians do their Patients: but
provided a sovereign salve, an horn of salvation, such as would cure any
disease, or maim, even the sin against the holy Ghost too: but that it is the
nature of it to rage and rave both against the physic, and the Physician.
Christ is both the one and the other: as being made unto us of God, Wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Quod sanitas in
corpore, id sanctitas in cord. He is Jehovah that heals, for he is Jehovah
that sanctifies. This Ephraim knew not, that is, out of pride and stoutnesse
they acknowledged it not, but sacrifice to their own nets, wits, endeavors,
etc. Of all things God can least endure to be neglected, or to have the glory
of his benefits transferred upon others (See chap. 2.8. with the Note.) When
men shall either say in the language of Ashdod, 1 Samuel 6.9.
It is a chance, or else, I have made my self thus and thus happy. This, though
the Saints should at any time do, yet God will pardon their frowardness, and
say, as Esaias 57.17, 18. I have seen his ways, (his waywardness) and will heal
him (nevertheless) and restore comforts to him.

Verse 4. I drew them with cords of a man,] Not of a beast: though they have
deserved to be hampered as unruly heifers, and to be yoked and ruled over with
rigor; to be tamed and taken down a link lower, yet I, out of my
Philanthropie, yea out of singular grace, have dealt civilly, nay courteously
with them, in an amicable and amiable way, and not as I might have done out of
my Sovereignty, and according to my justice. I drew them by the cords of a man,
that is, 1. Gently, and favorably; suiting my self to their dispositions,
(which are often as different as their faces) hiring them to obedience,
afflicting them in measure, with the rods of men, 2 Samuel 7.15. fitted to the
weakness of men: If God should plead against us with his great power, as Job
speaks chap. 23.6. it would soon grind us to powder; but he has no such
design: he corrects his children vel ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae,
Aug. Tract: in Joan. 124.
vel ad emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem necessariae
patientiae, says Austin, ad exercitium non ad exitium, says another Ancient,
to refine, and not to ruin them. 2. Rationally, by cogent arguments and
motives, befitting the nature of a man: able to convince them and set them down
with right reason, would they but consider, Deuteronomy. 32.29. would they but be
wise, and weigh things aright. This God wishes they would do: calls them to
reason the case with him, Esaias 1.18. pleads with them in a friendly way, Jer.
2.31. and then appeals to their own consciences, whether they have dealt well
with him, yea, or no, Esaias 5.3. making them read the sentence against
themselves, as did Judas the traitor, Matthew. 27.4. and those Pharisees, Matthew.
21.40. He bespeaks them, after most clear conviction, as Esaias 46.8. Remember
this, and show your selves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.
Most people are led on in a continued hurry of lusts, and passions, and never
bethink themselves, as 1 King. 8.47. never say so much as What have I done?
Orat. pre Quintio.
Si haec duo tecum verba reputasses quid ago? says Cicero to Nevius. Had
thou but bethought thy self of those few words, What have I done? thou would
never have been so covetous a cormorant. Oh could men have but so much power
over their passions and lusts, as to get alone and weigh Gods ways, much good
might be done upon them: But for want of this, Fertur equis auriga, etc. they
rush into all excess of riot, as an horse into the battle: yea they are so
far unmand, as to think that they have reason to be mad, and that there is no
small sense in sinning. I do well to be angry, even unto death, Jon. 4.9.

with bands of love,] Heb. thick cords, cart-ropes (as it is rendered, Esaias
5.18.) ropes of many wreathes, twisted together, and inter-twined with love,
that sweetest Attractive. So Jer. 31.3. With loving-kindnesse have I drawn
thee: and Esaias 63.9. In his love and his pity he redeemed them, and he bare
them, and carried them all the days of old. He gave them a law, the sum of
which was nothing but love; and multiplied mercies upon them without measure,
as is amply set forth by those holy Levites, Neh. 9. Now, mercy commands duty:
and every new deliverance is a new tie to obedience. Love should have love,
Publicans and sinners yield that, Matthew. 5.46. Yea, love should show it self
strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Jonathan would have died for his David; David for
his Absalom; Cos amoris amor.
Priscilla and Aquila, for Paul, Romans 16.4. Christ out of his love did die for
his people. Have I but one life to lose for Christ? said that holy Martyr. Let
men take heed how they sin against love, for this is the greatest aggravation
of sin: this is bestiall, this is like unruly horses in a teame, to break the
gears, to snap in sunder the traces, that should hold them. Such yokelesse sons
of Belial shall one day be held by the cords of their own sin, and whipped with
those cords of conviction, that they would not be drawn by. Shall the harlots
hands be bands, her words cords to draw men to destruction, and shall God
stretch out his hand all day long to them to no purpose? Shall he lose his
sweet words upon them, etc? Peter's heart burst, and he brake out in weeping,
when he saw Love sparkling in Christ's looks; Mar. 14.72.
and considered how he had burst asunder the bands of love, sinned against such
manifestations of mercy, wiped off all his comfortables for the present, drew
from Christ those piercing quick questions, Love thou me? yea but do love
me indee? O let the cords of Gods kindness draw us nearer to him, hold us
closer: to sin against mercy, is to sin against humanity: and as no surfeit is
more dangerous then that of bread: so no judgment is more terrible, then that
which grows out of love felt and slighted.

and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on the jaws, etc.] i. e. on
their neck: albeit it seems by that law, made for not muzling the ox that
treads, etc. that those creatures when they wrought, were muzled or haltred
up: and that halter fastened to the yoke that was upon their necks. The sense
is this, I unyoked them often, to give them meat, as the good husbandman does
that is merciful to his beast, he lifts up the yoke that lies hard upon its
neck, leads it to the manger, lays food before it, etc. So dealt God by this
people all along from the wilderness, and forward: not suffering them to abide
jugiter sub jug is Gentium, long under their enemies yoke: but delivering them
out of the hand of those that served themselves of them, Ezekiel. 34.27. Christ
also has delivered His out of the hands of those that hated them, and lay hard
upon them; as the devil is an hard taskmaster, that neither takes off the yoke,
nor lays meat: gives no rest or refreshment to his drudges, and dromedaries:
but acts them and agitates them day and night, etc. Now those that are His,
Christ brings them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may do works meet for repentance, that weigh just as much as
Repentance does, Acts 26.18, 20. and so find rest to their souls: Provided,
that they take and keep Christ's yoke upon them (not thinking to live as they
list more saying as those Libertines in Jeremy we are delivered to do all these
abominations) and learn of him to be meek and Iowly etc. Jer. 7.
Mat. 11.29. so shall they soon find Christ's yoke easy, Luth. in loc.
and his burden light Verse. 40. And of this easy yoke of Christ Luther
understands this text in Hosea; and thereupon discourses of the Laws rigor,
and Gospels relaxation, according to that of Austin, Lex jubet, gratia juvat:
the Law commands but the Gospel helps: God by his spirit assisting, and
further accepting pence for pounds, the will for the work, the desire for the
deed done etc. and laying meat before us, meat that the world knows not of,
hidden Manna, the convivium juge of a good conscience etc.

Verse. 5. He shall not return unto the land of Egypt] That is, he needs not run
to Egypt for help, (as King Hosea did) nor to the Assyrian, to whom they were
tributaries from the time of Menahem: for they wanted nothing, and less should
have wanted, if they would have been ruled by me.

but they refused to return.] He was not to have returned to the land of Egypt
or of the Assyrian who is his king; so some read the text. Others sense it
thus: When I threaten them with the Assyrian, they think to shift and shelter
themselves in Egypt: but I shall keep them thence, or find and ferret them out
there. God knows how to cross wicked men of their will, to spoil their plots.
Egypt shall prove no better then a broken reed running into the hand of him
that leans on it 2 King. 18.21. The Egyptian was ever an enemy to Israel: and
though for his own ends he gave goodly words, and seem reconciled: yet such
Reconciliations are but vulpinae amicitiae. But were he never so fast a friend,
yet sin-guilty Israel shall not have their an Asylum, nec stabile stabulum (see
Chap 9.3. with the Note) because the desire of the wicked shall perish Psalm.
112.10. They take counsel together, but it shall come to naught, they speak
the word, but it shall not stand Esaias. 8.10. Confer Esaias. 30.1.2. and 31.1.2.3.
Prove. 21.38.

but the Assyrian shall be his king] Will they, nill they, they shall be
carried captive to Assyria: and since they will needs be crossing of God, he
will cross them much more: he will walk contrary to those that walk contrary to
him Lev. 26.21. and be as froward as they for the hearts of them Psalm. 18.26.
They will not return to me, says the Lord, they shall not therefore return to
Egypt: they will not submit to my scepter, they shall therefore have the
Assyrian for their King, that proud cruel stout-hearted Prince Isay. 10.5.7.12.
who will tyrannise over their bodies, and over their cattle at their pleasure,
so that they shall be in great distress Neh. 9.37. (...)


because they refused to return] Heb. they disdained to do it, scorned the
motion, slighted the messenger. Sen: in Agamem. Plus est a vi^s se revocaesse
quam vitia ipsa necivisse Amb. in Psalm. (...)
By their sins they had run from God: by repentance they should have returned
unto him, and then the amends had been well-nigh made: for Quem poenitet
peccasse paene est innocens the penitent is in almost as good a case as the
innocent; Ambrose says he is in a better. But for these men, to all other
their sins to add obstinacy and impenitencie, as Herod to all his former evils
did the death of the Baptist, this was to heap up wrath against the day of
wrath Romans 2.5. The word here rendered (refused) is by the Seventy turned They
would not. That therefore thy returned not to God, it was the fault of their
will. True it is, they had no power to turn themselves: but the cause of that
inability too, was in themselves. They therefore neither could nor would
return: and both by their own fault and folly.

Verse. 6. And the sword shall abide on his cities] Heb. shall keep residence or
rush upon his cities. It can do no less; it cannot return into the scabbard,
rest or be still till the Lord, who put it into commission, call back again
his commission, Jer. 47.6.7. It is a dreadful thing when the sword abides on
a people; as in Germany that stage of war, Ireland still a land of divine ire
etc. England has some Halcyons at present, incredibili celeritate and temporis
brevitate a Pompeio confectum. Aug: de Civ. Dei. Mr. Burr.
praise be given to God: and let every good man pray with David, scatter thou
the people that delight in war Psalm. 68.30. The Pira^s war was dispatched by
Pompey with incredible swiftness, to his eternal commendation. And we have
cause to bless God (says a countryman of ours) that God has raised up
instruments for us, who have hazarded the shortening of their own lives for the
shortning of the war: who have done their work of late, as if they had took
it by the great etc. And the same Author observes, that it is a sad thing for
the sword to be in the field; but for the sword to be in the cities it is much
more sad: and he instanceth in Jerusale^ out of Josephus, Jos. de bell Jud: l.
7. c. 7.
where the number of the slain was eleven hundred thousand: We may further
instance in that unhappy city of Magdeburg in Germany, where so much cruelty
was exercised first by Charles the fifth, (much regrated by him at last in his
retired life, taking account of his actions) and since that in our memory by
Mounsier Tilly, who like a bloody villain put to the sword there twenty
thousand persons at least of all ranks, ages, and sexes: Mr. Clark life of K.
of swed. 23.
that great city also he burned down, utterly turning it into cinders excepting
an hundred nine and thirty houses etc. The like immanity was exercised by the
Popes champions upon the poor Protestants at Angrogue in France: where they
killed and burned without mercy: but could never set fire upon the two temples
there, nor upon the Ministers house, Act: and Moan 880.
which remained whole, the houses round about being all consumed with fire.

and shall consume his branches and devour them] His branches or his villages,
which are as branches of the greater cities. The trees of America (but
especially of Brasile) are so huge, that it is reported of them, Abbbots Geog.
p. 271.
that several families have lived in several arms or branches of one tree, to
such a number as are in some petty village or parish here. The greater cities
are as the body or-root of a tree, the villages as the branches. The scripture
often calls them mother and daughters, as Heshborn and all her daughters, That
is villages Number. 21.25. as the Chalde there explaineth it. See Ezech.
10.44.45.46.48.53. hence we read of a citieand mother in Isracl 2 Samuel 20.19.
Branches also are called daughters of the trees they grow from Genesis 44.23. The
word here rendered branches is by some rendered Bars, by others, Diviners or
Liers, as the word here used is interpreted Jer. 50.36. A sword is upon the
liars or diviners, and they shall dote: potest Augur Augurem videre and nou
ridere? says Tully of such diviners: that is, Can they one look upon another
and not laugh, considering how they gull people with their lies and fopperies?
The sword shall be upon such, as it was upon Balaam Satan's spelman, they shall
be a portion for foxes Psalm. 63.10. as those that Astutam vapido servant sub
pectore vulpem.

because of their own counsels] He that goes to school to his own carnal
reason, is sure to have a fool to his master; an ignis fatuus that will bring
him into the bogges and briers. The wisdom of the fiesh is enmity to God.
Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. See the Note on chap. 10. verse. 6.

Verse: 7. My people are bent to backsliding from me] they have a principle of
Apostacy in them, as those Galathians had, of whom the Apostle, I marvel
that you are so soon removed unto another Gospel Gal. 1.6. and as those old
Apostates in the wilderness, who so soon as Moses his back was turned almost,
cried out to Aaron, Make us golden Gods. This people was before accused to be
acted by a spirit of fornication, a certain violent impetus, a strong
inclination to whoredom, and to be apt to backslide with a perpetual
backsliding: all their recidivations and revolts were but a fruit of the bent
of their spirits, which were false and unsettled: not resolved whether yet to
turn to God, though they were beset with so many mischiefs: they hanged in
suspense and rather inclined to the negative then else. Suspensi sunt, so
Calvin, Pareus, and others, read this text. My people are in suspense, or in a
mamering whether to turn to me or not, they hang in doubt, as the same word is
rendered Deuteronomy: 28.66. God likes not that his people should stand doubtful as
S^^pticks; and adhere to nothing certainly: to be in religion as idle beggars
are in their way, ready to go which way soever the staff falls: but that
they should strive to a full assurance in what they believe Luke 1.4. to be
fully persuaded as ver. 1. and to a firm purpose of heart in what they should
practice Act. 11.23. Irresolution against sin or for God can hardly consist
with the power of Godliness: be not off and on with him, halt not, hang not in
doubt what to do; but follow God fully as Caleb did; come off freely as David,
who had chosen Gods precepts when he was solicited to have done otherwise Psalm.
119.173. And again, I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid
before me ver. 30. I have waighed them, and am resolved to keep them, I am come
to a full determination. Mr. Deodate senseth the words thus. They desire and
expect that I should turn in favor to them and relieve them: whereas they
should turn to me by repentance, which they will not do: and herein he
follows Arias Montanus. Thus those stiffnecked Jews in Jeremy expected that
God should still deal with them (however they dealt with him) according to all
his wondrous works chap. 21.2. presuming and promising themselves impunity; and
thus Judas also had the face to ask, Mat. 26.25.
as the rest did, Is it I? as resting upon Christ's accustomed gentleness, and
that he would conceal him still, as he had done certain days before.

though they called them to the most High] They, that is the Prophets as verse.
2. called them with great importunity, upon every opportunity, to the most
High, to God (in opposition to those Dii minutuli petty deities whom they doted
on. See chap. 7.16.) to come up to him, to have high and honorable conceptions
of Him, not casting him in a base mould, as those miscreants did, Psalm. 50.21.
but saying as David, and with a David-like spirit, Thous Lord art high above
all the earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods, and there-hence inferring,
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil Psalm. 97.9.10. I am God Almighty, walk before
me and be upright Genesis 17.1. The God of glory appeared to Abraham Act. 7.2. he
so conceived of God; and hence his unchangeable resolutions for God.

none at all would exalt him] Heb. together he exalted not, scarce a He, a
single man that would do it, that would lift up his head to listen to such good
counsel, (so some sense it) or that would exalt and extol the most High; who
though he be high above all praise as Neh. 9.5. and cannot be praised according
to his excellent greatness: Yet is he pleased to account himself exalted and
magnified by us, when, considering the infinite distance and disproportion that
is betwixt him and us, we lay our selves low at his feet for mercy, we set him
up in our hearts for our sole Sovereign, 2 Samuel 18.3.
we esteem him as the people did David more worth then ten thousand, we give
him room in our souls, and with highest apprehensions, most vigorous
affections, and utmost endeavors we bestow our selves upon him, as the only
Worthy. Now this is done but of a very Few, and well done but of fewer yet; so
drossy and drowsy are men's spirits, and so little is the Lord, li^ted up by the
sons of men. See the Prophet Esaias his complaint chap. 64.7.

Verse: 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim?] Here begins the second part of
this chapter, full of many sweet Evangelicall promises, and here, if ever,
Mercy rejoices against Judgment, (...) Cervix
or treads on the very neck of it, as St. James his word imports chap.
2.13. The Lord seems here to be at a stand, or at strife with himself about
the destruction of this people fore-threatened; which well might have been a
gulf to swallow them up, and a grave to bury them in for ever, being most
worthy to perish, as were the Cities which God destroyed in his wrath. Genesis 19.
Howbeit God in the bowels of his mercy earning and taking pity of his Elect
amongst them (for he had reserved 7000. hidden ones that had not bowed their
knees to Baal) spares to lay upon them the extremity of his wrath, and is
ready to save them for his mercies sake. Hear how father-like he melts over
them;

how should I expose thee O Ephraim? how should I deliver thee up O Israel? How
should I dispose the as Admah? how should I set thee as Zeboim] q. d. Justice
requires that I should lay thee utterly wast, and even rain down hell from
heaven upon thee as once upon Sodom and her sisters. But Mercy interposeth her
four several How Is (in the Original two only, expressed, but the other 2.
necessarily understood, and by Interpreters fitly supplied) four such
patheticall Interrogations as the like are not to be found in the whole book of
God, and not to be answered by any but God himself: as indeed he does to each
particular in the following words, My heart is turned within me, that is the
first answer, The second, My repentings are kindied together: The third I will
not execute the fierceness of my wrath: The fourth I will not return to destroy
Ephraim. And why? First I am God and not Man: Secondly the Holy One in the
midst of thee.

My heart is turned, or turns it self, within me] that is my mind is changed,
or at least is, in doubt what to do, in this business. This is spoken (...)
after the manner of men, and must be understood (...) agreeably to Gods
greatness. Here is mutatio rei non Dei, effectus non affectus, facti non
consilij: Repentance with man is the changing of his will. Repentance with God
is no more then the willing of a change: ill is not a change of his will, but
of his work. Confer Lam. 1.20. and 2.11. Am. 1.12. There are that render it, My
heart is turned against me, that is, against my former severe sentence of
cutting them all utterly off at one blow; Fiat Justitia, pereat mundus. Oh! I
cannot find in my heart to do it. For my

repentings are kindled together,] Simul aestuant viscera mea poenitentia. So
Tremellius: My bowels are altogether on a light fire with repentings, as Genesis
43.30. and 1 King. 3.27. Now repentings are as improperly attributed to God, as
bowels. There were a sort of ignorant Monks in Egypt, who started this foolish
and ridiculous question (which yet bred no small stirs there Anno Dom. 403.)
An Deus corporeus sit? Whether the Divine Essence be a body, having hands,
heart, bowels, etc? The ruder sort of them held it affirmatively. What
blasphemies Vorstius has vented, in that base book of his de Deo, I need not
relate. How God is said to repent, has been said already: Sure it is, Calvin.
that herein he graciously accommodateth himself to our rudeness, and speaks
as we are able to bear. It appears that fury is not in God, Esaias 27.4. Our
sins put thunderbolts into his hands, and it is, Non nisi coactus with him,
when he proceeds to punishment. His bowels are very ready to work in the ways
of grace, and mercy toward sinners: and the least act of faith in that mercy,
would certainly set bowels on work amain. This the Church in Esaias well knew,
and therefore prayed when deserted, Look down from heaven, etc. Where is thy
zeal, and thy strength? Esaias 63.15, 16.
the sounding of thy bowels and of they mercies toward me? are they restrained?
Doubtless thou art our Father, notwithstanding thine austerities. God seems
sometimes to lose his bowels, and then we must find them for him: to sleep, and
we must awake him: to hide himself, and then we must fetch him out (as the
woman of Canaan did by the force of her faith, Mark. 7.24, 25.) God will come,
but he will have the faithful prayers of his people to lead him. I came for
thy word, Dan. 10.9. etc.

Verse 9. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger,] Heb. the heat of
it Gods bowels kindled, and whatsoever might cause repentance came together,
and lay glowing as it were at his heart: and this cooled and even quenched the
heat of his wrath, (as the Sunbeams when they shine full upon the fire) so
that now he resolves not to execute the height of his heat, the extremity of
his fury, for then the spirit should fail before him. Ephraim is Gods dear
son, his pleasant child: whom when he hears bemoaning himself, as Jer. 31.18,
19, 20. he soon repents him of the evil, ans cries, -- Satis hoc, pro crimine
magno
Paulum supplicij lenem sun^^sisse parente^^.


I will not return to destroy Ephraim,] I will not undo him twice over, or
utterly ruin him: as those that have laid their enemy for dead, return to see
whether he be dead outright: or as soldiers that have once pillaged a city,
return after a while to take all that little that was left before, and to set
the rest on fire. God will not deal so hardly with Ephraim, though he might do
it. Reprobates indeed shall have an evil, an only evil, Ezekiel. 7.5. without
mixture of mercy; they must expect one plague upon another, as it fared with
Pharaoh, till God had dashed the very breath out of his body, etc. But for his
elect people, Has he smitten them, as he smot those that smot them? No, but in
measure, in the branches only: he stays his rough wind, etc. Esaias 27.7, 8.
(...). Hero.
And as Craesus his dumb son burst out into Kill not King Craesus. So when
enemies are ready to devour the Church, or Satan to swallow Gods child up in
despair, his bowels work; he can hold no longer, but cries, Save my child, save
my Church, etc. Why should the spirit fail before me, and the souls which I
have made? I have seen his ways, and (though bad enough) I will heal him, I
will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Esaias
57.16. 17, 18.


For I am God, and not man,] yea such a God, as the like is not, for pardoning
iniquity, and passing by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, Mic.
7.18. It Is natural to him, Exodus 34.6. it is usual, Neh. 9.17. there he is
called a God of pardons, as Esaias 55.7. he is said to multiply pardons. He has
commanded men to forgive an offending but repenting brother, seventy times
seven times in a day, Mat. 18.22. What then will himself do? For he is God
Almighty, and not man. Man is an angry vindictive, cruel creature: one man is
a Wolf, yea a Devil to another: unsociable, implacable, unmercifull, as those
were Romans 1.31. Beware of men, says our Savior to his disciples, Matt. 10.17.
absurd and wicked men, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. barbarous, and brutish, skillful to
destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31. Yea beware of good men, when enraged. What strange deaths
did David (soon after his foul fall, and not fully recovered) put the poor
Ammonites to, 2 Samuel 12.31. Further, men as they are unmercifull, so they are
unmindfull of their promises. But God is not a man that he should lie, Number.
23.18. What he has spoke with his mouth, he will make good with his hand. The
eternity of Israel will not lie, (as men will, Romans 3.4.) nor repent, (as men
do, whatever he may seem to do; see the note on the former verse) for he is not
a man that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. Men are mutable: the truest friend
is (...), and easily changeable creature, as the Heathen complained; all in
changeable colors, as Tertullian says of the Peacock; as often changed as
moved. Not so Almighty God. I am Jehovah, I change not, Mal. 3.6. See the Note
there, and remember still to retain high thoughts of God: not measuring him by
our model; as to think him to be as merciful as we are, as powerful as our
understanding can reach, etc. See Esaias 55.8, 9. and beg supernatural grace:
without which it is impossible for a finite creature to believe the infinite
Attributes of Almighty God.

the holy One in the midst of thee,] Though Israel had deeply revolted, set
up golden gods, and done wickedly as they could, so that there was no visible
Church amongst them, yet God was the holy One in the midst of them: Seven
thousand he had reserved that Eliah knew not of, 1 King. 19.18. and a Church
there was in Israel, when at worst. Like as there was in medio Papatu, in the
darkest midnight of damned popery: and at this very day, there are said to be
thousands of professed Protestants, Spec. Eur.
even in Italy it self: and in Sivil, a chief city of Spain, there are thought
to be no fewer then twenty thousand.

and I will not enter into the city.] I will not invade the city as an enemy,
to wast all with fire and sword, as once at Sodom. For why, there are holy ones
in the midst of thee (so Rivet expounds it by an enallage of the number) a
considerable company of righteous people, for whose sake I will spare thee,
Jer. 5.1.

Verse 10. They shall walk after the Lord,] powerfully calling them by his Word
and Spirit, going before them, and bringing up the Rere, Esaias 52.12. their King
shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them, Mic. 2.13 Time was,
when they fled from God, Hos. 7.13. and said, I will go after my lovers, etc.
chap. 2. Now they are of another mind, and other manners: they shall walk
after the Lord, non pedibus sed affectibus: they shall be carried after him
with strength of of desire, Rev. 14.4.
and delight, which he shall work in them: they shall follow the Lamb whither
soever he goes: Gods people are said in Scritpture to walk before him in godly
sincerity, to walk with him in an humble familiarity, to walk after him in an
holy conformity, yielding unto him the obedience of faith. As Israel in the
wilderness, so must we, follow God and the line of his Law, though it seem to
lead us in and out, backward and forward (as them) as if he were treading a
maze.

he shall roar like a lion,] By the preaching of the Gospel, he shall shake
heaven and earth. The voice of the Gospel is, Repent. Aut poenitendum, aeut
pereundum, except ye repent ye shall all perish. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: He that believes not, Mar. 16.16.
shall be damned, was a terrible voice. Of the Lion it is reported, that he
roareth so fiercely, that the rest of the creatures stand amazed: and that,
whereas his own whelps come dead into the world, he roareth over them, and
reviveth them. Plutar. in lib. de just. animal.
Afterward, when he meets with prey, he roareth for them to come about him.
Let this be applied to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Confer Jo^l 3.16.

then the children shall tremble from the West.] The children of grace, Deuteronomy.
14.1. shall join themselves in spirit to the communion of the Church from all
the ends of the world, where they have been scattered: they shall serve the
Lord with fear, rejoice with trembling. The Ancient Hebrews applied this
promise to the coming of the Messiah: only they dreamt of an earthly kingdom
of his, as did also the disciples, being sowred with the leaven of the
Pharisees. Others think it to be a Prophecy of the conversion, and calling of
the Jews, to be accomplished in the last days: as also of the general
spreading of the Gospel, and gathering of the Elect, far and wide from one end
of the heavens unto another. And this they call, the time of the Restitution of
all things.

Vorse. 11. They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt.] Trepide accurent, so
Tremellius: they shall run tremblingly. Fear causes have. Men delay and trifle
till God strikes their hearts with fear: then it is ecce ego, mitte me, Here I
am, send me, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, What will thou have me to do
Lord? etc. timor addidit ulas; as the doves when pursued by the hawk, scour
into their columbaries. As birds frighted, fly to their nests, and other
creatures to their holes, and harbors: so do those that are pricked at heart
with the terrors of the law, flee to the precious promises of the Gospel:
hiding themselves in the wounds of Christ crucified, and are relieved. All St.
Paul's care was, that when he was sought for by the justice of God, he might be
found in Christ, not having his own righeousnesse, Phil. 3.9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ.

and as a dove out of the land of Assyria,] i. e. out of what country soever,
where they shall be scattered, I will recollect them by my Gospel, which is
therefore called Gods arm, because thereby he gathers his Elect into his
bosom. Doves fly swiftly, Psalm. 55.6. and by flocks, Esaias 60.8. so shall the
Elect to Christ, both of Jews and Gentiles. By the children of the West, may
be meant these Western Churches, and withal the Northern parts. By Egypt, the
whole South. By Ashur, all the Eastern Tract, those large and mighty kingdoms
that lie Eastward from Judea, even to the Sunrising. Thus many shall come from
East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and ^acob in the
kingdom of heaven, Mat. 8.11. The molten-Sea stood upon twelve Oxen, which
looked to all the four quarters of the world: so did the twelve gates of the
new Jerusalem, etc.

and I will place them in their houses,] Not in strong garrisons, but in their
ownhouses; where they shall dwell securely under their own vines and fig trees:
for they shall have the Gospel of peace, and the peace of the Gospel, See 2 Samuel
7.10 Or thus, I will place them in their own houses, that is, in my Church
(says Polanus) which has its houses and places of receipt among all people
the whole world thorowout, where they may serve God, without fear, in holiness
and righteousness before him all their days. Thus the Apostles in their
travels, where ever they came, found brethren, etc. and having nothing, yet
they possessed all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. True tranquillity and sound security is
to be found no where but in Christ, Mic. 4.4. and 5.5. nor by any but by those
that hear him roaring, and calling them to the participation of his grace and
peace. Those that hearken to Christ's Oracles shall dwell in his tabernacle.

Verse 12. Ephraim composseth me about with lies,] They get about me as if they
would do me doubty service ( Psalm. 76.11. the saints are called a people that
are round about God: and Psalm 148.14. a people near unto him, and that
compasses his altar. See Rev. 4.4.) but all is but counterfeit: a mere
imposture, a loud lie, Psalm. 78.36 whereby they would cozen me of heaven, if
they could: putting upon me false coin silvered over a little; and
circumventing me, if it lay in their power. But what says Bernard, Sapi^ns
nummularius Deus est; Nummum fictum non recipiet. God is a wise Mint-man:
there is no beguiling him with counterfeit coin. Hypocrisy (that real lie) is
an odious, a complexive evil: for it has in it, 1. Guile, opposite to
simplicity, as intending to beguile God, which he cannot, and man, which he
fain would, and often does, to further his worldly and wicked designs, as Judas,
Herod, Matthew. 2.8. Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. 2. Falshoud, opposite to truth; as
only acting religion, playing devotion, compassiong God with deceit, as the
house of Israel here, deceiving him not by impotency only, and in the event;
but by imposture, and so in purpose; contenting themselves with a show, with a
semblance, Luke 8.18. with a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. and of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. rather ^eeming to be good, then seeking to be so. These are hells
freeholders: and other sinners are said but to have their part with them.
There are that thus interpret this Text; Ephraim compasses me, the Prophet
preaching mercy, and promising good things, they beset me, and gather close
about me, as desirous of my doctrine: but it is in mendacio, in hat^full
hypocrysic (see Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.) and when I cross them never so little, they
craftily conspire to prejudice my Ministry, to asperse my person, etc. To
preach says One, is nothing else but to derive the rage of the whole world
upon a man's self, to become the But-mark, yea the Center ad quod omnes lineae
dolorum tendunt, Meisner. in loc.
to which all the lines of lies and falsehoods do tend.

but Judah yet rules with God,] To serve God is to rule with him (as Livia
said, she ruled her husband Augustus, by obeying him) It is the greatest
liberty, Romans 6.18, 22. 1 Pet. 2.16. Abraham was a prince of God, Jacob
prevailed with God, and had power as a Prince, Genesis 32.28. Moses (as if he had
been Chancellor of heaven) overruled the business, and God is fain to
bespeak his own freedom, Exodus 32.10. Judah also is here said to rule with God,
to be potent with him; because God was sincerely served amongst them, and they
held fast their first integrity: the true religion was openly professed, and
the true worship of God incorruptly maintained in the Temple at Jerusalem. This
made Abijah (though none of the best) so boldly to boast, and he prevailed: so
that there fell down of Israel slain four hundred thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14.10, 17.
and yet the men of Judah that slew them, were but four hundred thousand ina ll,
verse 3. Isreal's Apostasy is here aggravated by Judah's integrity: they were
not under the temptation of evil example. Judah was the worse for them, and not
they for Judah.

and is faithful with the Saints.] Or, with the most Holy: he keeps the
faith to God, those Holy Ones, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (so some sense
it) as Josh. 24.19. Prove. 9.10. he is far from those false and fraudulent
dealings wherewith the ten Tribes seek to circumvent and beguile god. Or thus,
J^xlah is faithful with the saints of former ages: he holds to his old
principles, to the good old way, wherein Abraham and the other Ancients went
before him. He is also faithful; with such as are sanctified, the true priests
of God, consecrated to himself, and set apart for holy use: In opposition to
the ten Tribes, who went after those leaden priests made by Jeroboam of the
lower sort of the people, and well fitted to golden deities. Lastly, he is
faithful with the people of God, those good souls that left the ten Tribes and
went to Judah, to the true worship of God. With these Judah was faithful,
courteous, and communicative: embracing and encouraging them all that might be.
This was a singular commendaton.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. EPhraim feeds on wind,] Slender feeding; unless Ephraim were of
the Chamaeleon-kind: quippe nec cor auro satiatur nec corpus aura. Wind fills,
Esaias 55.10, 2 Cor. 9.10.
but feeds not. Ephraim had sowed the wind, chap. 8.7. but to what profit? He
that ministers seed to the sower, and bread to the eater, would here, surely,
neither give bread for food, nor multiply their seed sown, but send them to the
gods that they had chosen, and to their confederates whom they so relied upon,
from whom they should reap the whirlwind. (See the Note on chap. 8.7.) Wind, we
know, blows up storms and tempests: so does idolatry and creature-confidence,
the tempest of Gods wrath that will never be blown over.

and follows after the East Wind,] Which if he catch, a great catch he is
like to have of it. Eurus est ventus urens and exsiccans. The East Wind is
noted in Scripture for pernicious and hurtful to fruits and herbs, Genesis 41.6.
Ezekiel. 7.10. and 29.17. Hos. 13.15 violent it is also, and spares not men, Ion.
4.8. The Seventy render it, (...), a burning blast, as they do the former
words, Ephraim is an evil spirit, by a mistake of the points. Job speaks of
some that fill their bellies with the East Wind; they think to do so, but it
proves otherwise: they snuff up the wind with the wild-asse, but it tumors
them only, and proves pestilentiall. It is very dangerous for men to follow
after their own conceits and counsels. It may be worse to them upon their
deathbeds, when they are lanching into the main of Immortality, Euroaquilo.
then any rough East Wind, or then any Euroclydon, that wind mentioned, Acts
27.14. Vna erusque uotusque ruunt. Virg.
that has its name from stirring up storms, and is by Pliny called
Navigantium pestis, the Mariners misery. An empty body meeting with tempests,
will have much ado to bear up. If Ephraim first seed upon wind, and then fall
under the East Wind, it must needs go hard with him. The godly man, who is
filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. shall have him for a refuge
from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is
as a storm against the wall, Esaias 25.4. His prayer is that of Jeremy, chap.
17. verse. 17. Be not thou a terror unto me, O Lord: thou art my hope in the
day of evil. If the wind be not got into the earth, and stir not there, storms
and tempests abroad cannot make an earthquake: no more can afflictions, or
death, an heart-quake, where there is peace with God: Such a man's mind immota
manet, is as mount Zion which cannot be removed.

He daily increases lies and desolation,] This being the fruit and consequent
of those; for flagitium and flagellum sicut acus and filum, sin and
punishment are inseparable companions, Woe unto them for they have fled from me:
destruction unto them, because they have transgressed against me, Hos. 7.13.
See the Note there. To heap up lies, is to hasten desolation. A false witness
shall not be unpunished: and he that speaks lies shall perish, Prove. 19.9.
They tell us of a threefold lie, i. e. A merry lie, an officious lie, and a
pernicious lie. But the truth is, every lie is pernicious: and a man should
rather die then lie. He that lies in jest, may go to hell for it in earnest.
Jacob told his father an officious three-foldlie, and scarce ever had a merry
day after it, Genesis 27.19. God followed him with one sorrow upon another, to
teach him and us, what an evil and a bitter thing it is to cumulate lies, as
here, and how it ensnares and ensnarles us.

And they do make a covenant with the Assyrian, and oil is carried into Egypt.]
that is, all precious and pleasant substance was carried for a present, to make
roomth for them. Oil is instanted, as the chief staple commodity of the land,
(see Ezekiel. 27.17.) and in Egypt very scarce: this sin of theirs in seeking to
other nations, and relying on the arm of flesh, is often reproved and threatened
thorowout this Prophecy. See chap. 5.13. and 7.11. and 9.8. and 10.4 and 11.5.
To neach Gods Ministers to continue crying out against the prevailing sins of
the people, and never give over, till they see a reformation wrought amongst
them. Tle. 1.15.
The Cretians are always liars, etc. Rebuke them sharply, says the Apostle;
yea, be instant and constant, in season, and out of season, using the same
liberty in beating down sin, that men do to commit it. Chrys^stom told his
heaters at Antioch, that till they left their swearing, he would never leave
preaching against it.

Verse 2. The Lord has also a controversy with Judah,] Lest the Prophet
should be thought partial in the law, Mal. 2.9. (See the Note there) and lest
Ephraim should say of Judah, as once Oded did of Israel; Are there not with
them, even with them also, sins against the Lord? The Prophet answers by way
of concession, 2 Chro. 28.10
that there were so indeed; and that therefore God had a controversy with
them, a litigation, or disceptation: he was expostulating with them by words,
and some lighter strokes, notwithstanding he had commended them before, as
ruling with God, and retaining his pure worship. God would take his time to
deal with them too, for their many impieties, and especially for running to
Egypt for help, as they did in the days of Ahaz, and Zedekiah, see Esaias 30.2.
and 31.1. but because they were not yet so bad as the ten Tribes, nor so
desperately wicked, See chap. 4.15. and 5.5, 8, 12, 13, 14. and 6.11.
therefore the Lord was yet but pleading with them, he had not passed sentence,
he was not resolved upon their ruin and utter extirpation: as he was for the
ten Tribes, those foul Apostates and shameless covenant-breakers: concerning
whom he says, and is set upon it, I will punish Jacob according to his ways.]
See the like words, chap. 4. verse 9. with the Note. He calls them Jacob,
because they gloried much in him their Progenitour, as did likewise the
Samaritans that succeeded them, Job. 4.12. So did the Jews in Micah chap. 2.7.
But the Prophet Hosea answers them in effect (as there) by proving a
disparity. O th^^ that art named the house of Jacob, (that wilt needs be named
so, and therein pridest thy self) is the Spirit of the Lord ^raitned? (ye are
not surely straightened in him, but in your own bowels, Odlosum and impium dog^^^
An^^aptistarum. qui idea pueris ba^tis. mum negant, quia sensu and mente
careant. Luther. in loc. (...).
that ye express Jacob no better, that ye resemble him no more) Are these his
doings? was Jacob a man of your practices? No: for he left no means
unattempted, that he might attain the blessing: he strove for it with his
brother in the womb, afterward with the Angel, against whom with much
wrestling and raising of dust, he prevailed, as it follows in the two next
verses.

Verse 3. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, to have hindered him if
he could, of the first-birth-right; so desirous he showed himself, so soon, of
that desirable sireable privilege, and the pro^^ises annexed. Whence we may
learn (says One) that God takes care even of unborn babes, that belong to
him, and works strangely in them sometimes, as he did in the Baptist, Luke
1.44. the child leaped in the womb, by a supernatural motion; he leaped more
like a suckling at the breast, as the word signifies, then an unborn Embryo.
Mention had been made in the former verse, of the name of Jacob: here we have
the etymon, or reason of that name; He took his brother by the heel, or
foot-sole, as if he would have turned up his heels and got to the goal before
him. Hence his name was called Jacob, Genesis 25.26. that is, Calcanearius, or
Heel-catcher, as if he would have pulled his brother back; or presage of what
he should afterward do, viz. supplant Esau, and get the pre-eminence both of
birthright; and blessing; Genesis 27.36. and withal a fruit, an instance of Gods
free grace, in preferring Jacob when he could not yet do any thing that was
good) before Esan, though he were the elder, stronger, stouter, a manly child,
a man already, as his name imports, one that had every thing more like a man
then a babe. See Mal. 1.2. with the Note. And observe, that God here upbraideth
Jacobs degenerate brood, with his benefits toward him their forefather, whereof
they now walked so utterly unworthy.

And by his strength,] (...).
By his hard labor, say the Seventy^ but better, by, or in his strength, that
is, by the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. and by the power
of the Almighty, casting him down with the one hand, and bearing him up with
the other.

He had (...) with God.] Heb. he played the Prince with God, fortiter and
fideliter se gessit, he bore himself bravely, and had strength with God. He
does not lie down sullen and discouraged, but wrestleth with excellent
wrestlings; he held with his hands, when his joints were out of joint. He
wrestled in the night, and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one
leg, and prevailed, as it is in the next verse. This he did partly by his
bodily strength elevated, for he was a very strong man, as appears Genesis
29.10. by his rouling the great stone from the Wels mouth; but principally by
the force of his faith put forth in prayer, which can work wonders. Ephesians. 3.16.
Oh, its a sweet thing indeed to be strengthened with might, by the spirit, in
the inner man. Orqu^^ hic home, non est omnium! This is the generation of them
that seek him: Psalm. 24.6.
that seek thy face, this is Jacob: yea, this is Israel, for so God knighted
him, as it were, in the field for his good service: and new named him, G^^
3^.28. Neither were the faithful ever since called Abrahamites, or Isaakites,
but Israelites; for honors sake.

Verse 4. Yea, he had power over the Angel.] that Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1. the Angel of the great Council, as the Seventy render, Esaias 9.6. the Lord
Christ, (...)
who redeemed Jacob from all evil, Genesis 48.16. and is called Elohim in the
former verse^^ Jacob is reproved for asking his name, an argument of his
Majesty. God as he surmounteth all creatures, and has no parallel, so he
surpasses all notion, and is above all name. Plutarch. lib. de Is^d. and Of^id
The Africanes call him Amon, that is Heus, tu, quis et? Our best eloquence of
him, ^^ an humble filence: Or if we say any thing, to say as in the next verse
following, Jehovah, God of heasts, Jehovah is his momoriall.

and prevailed^] Sept. (...). He had power, or got the better, Christ yielding
himself overdome by the prayers of the Patriarch: for the effectual servent
prayer of a righteous man avails much, says St. James: there is a kind of
omnipotency in it, says Luther, of whom also that saying passed amongst his
friends, Iste vir pot uit, apud De^^s qnod vol^it, That man could do what he
would with God. The reason whereof is given by St. Hierom, in these words, Deus
ipse qui nulliscontra se viribu^superari potest, precibus viucitur, that is God
himself, who is otherwise insuperable, may be overcome by prayers: provided
that men persevere in prayer as Jacob did, Invictum vincunt vota pre^esque Deum.
holding out till the morning-light, and growing more resolute toward the later
end then he had been before.

He wept and made supplication.] Jacob did. (not the Angel, as Mercer and
Drusrus would carry it) His wrestling was by weeping, and his prevayling by
praying. Verbum, preces, and lachryma,
Misera arma sunt Ecclesia.
We read not till this Text, of his weeping for the blessing, (no more we do of
the earthquake in Hezekiah's days, till Amos 1. and Zach. 14.) But this we
know, that ardent prayer is a pouring out of the soul to God, not without a
shower of tears, or at least a storm of sighs. And as music upon the water
sounds farther, and more harmoniously then upon the land: so prayers with tears
are more pleasing to God, and prevalent with him. Christ could not but look
back to those weeping women that followed him to the cross, and comfort them.
Tears of compassion, and of compunction, when men love and weep, as Mary
Magdalen did, are very acceptable to God, who puts them into his bottle as
precious. There are tears of another sort, lachrimae nequitiae, tears of
wickedness, expressed either by hypocrisy or a desire of revenge: such were
Esau's tears for the blessing too, Genesis 27.38. but he went without it, because
a profane hypocrite: he cried out of discontent, and threatened his brother
Jacob: he complained of his fathers store, (Have thou but one blessing) of his
brothers subtilty, (was he not rightly called Jacob?) but not a word of his own
wickedness. He roared for the disquietnesse of his heart, but he did not, as
Jacob, weep and make supplication to his Judge, Hithchame^.
deploring his own wants, and imploring the supplies of his grace, quam unice
expetijt, as the main thing he desired.

he found him in Bethel,] that is the Lord found Jacob there, Genesis 28.18. but
especially, Genesis 35.14. confirming his promises to him and all his posterity.

there he spoke with us,] who were then in Jacobs loins, and promised that God
should be our God: but we have falsified with him, and turned Bethel into
Bethaven: abusing that place to idolatry and calf-worship, where we, in our
forefathers, had so many manifestations of divine mercy. Oh better he had never
spoken with us there. then that we should have so slighted his promises, cast
his words behind our backs, and wickedly departed from our God. Is this
Iacob-like, etc. There he spoke with us. What he spoke with Jacob, he spoke
with us: and we are to hold our selves no less concerned therein then he was.
See a like expression. Psalm. 66.6. See likewise, R^m. 15.4. and Heb. 13.5. what
God spoke to Joshua, chap. 1.5. he spoke to all Believers And that which he
spoke to his afflicted; Psalm. 102. He will regard the prayer of the destitute,
and not despise their prayer, that he spoke to us: for verse 18. This shall be
written for the generations to ^ome. The Hebrews have a proverb; Quae patribus
a ciderunt signum sunt filijs, What things befell the fathers, those were a
sign to their children: and thence it is, that the deeds of the fathers are
often attributed to the children. Let us labor to see our own names written upon
every promise: and secure our interest by searching for the conditions
whereunto the promises are annexed; and then put them in suit by faithful
prayer, saying with David, Remember thy word unto thy servant, whereupon thou
have caused me to trust.

Verse 5. Even the Lord God of hosts,] Lo, He it is who promised, who spoke
with us at Bethel: even that Jehovah who is himself unchangeable and Almighty;
whose promises are eternal, and infallible: who will perform with his hand,
what he has spoken with his mouth, to the thousandth generation of those that
return unto him. Concerning Gods name Jehovah, see the Note on Mal. 3.6.
Concerning his Title, God of Hosts, see the Notes on Mal. 3.17. Doct. 1.

The Lord is his memorial.] Jehovah is that nomen majestativum (as Tertullian
has it) that holy and reverend name of God, whereby he will be known, and
remembered, Psalm. 111.
Exodus 3.19. which place does notably illustrate this. True it is, that the
Jews to countenance their conceit of the ineffability of this name Jehovah, do
corrupt that Text: and, for this is my name Legnalam for ever, they read, this
is my name Legnalam, to be concealed. Where it is well observed by One, how
cross the superstition of men is to the will of God. They in a pretended
reverence to God, will not so much as mention this name; because they say, it is
a name that God so much glories in: and yet the Text says, this name is Gods
memorial: it is the name by which he would be remembered to all generations, as
that which sets forth his glory more then any other Name whatsoever. So that
when we would have a holy memorial of God (and to remember Him, Tam Dei
meminisse opus est quam respirare. Nazianzen.
is every whit as needful as to draw breath, says an Ancient) we need no
Images or other unwarrantable helps: the meditation of the Name Jehovah, and
the import of it, will be of singular use that way. Papists have their
pictures, and their memories, as they call them; Idolaters fain to themselves
diverse representations, and remembrances. Behind the doors also and the posts
have thou set up thy remembrances, Esaias 57.8. where Gods Law should have been
written, according to Deuteronomy. 6.9. and 11.12. and when as Gods Name should have
been remembered, Psalm. 135.13. and Psalm. 102.12.

Verse 6. Therefore turn thou to thy God,] The premises considered, Repent: and
so return to God from whom thou have deeply revolted. It is to thy God, to whom
thou art exhorted to turn; not to a tyrant, but to a God in covenant: yea it is
with thy God (as the Hebrew has it) with his good help, that thou shall turn.
(...).
Only cry unto him, Turn us Lord, and we shall be turned, draw us, and we will
run after thee, etc. Of turning to the Lord, see the Note on Zach. 1.3.

Keep mercy and judgment,] Those magnalia legis, those weightier matters of
the Law (as our Savior calls them, Matthew. 23.23.) which Ephraim had made
light of, chap. 4.1. He is therefore called upon to evidence the truth of his
turning to God, by bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, Matthew. 3.8. such
as are tantamount, and weigh just as much as repentance comes to. Optima and
aptissima poenitentia est nova vita, says Luther; The best and rightest
repentance is a new life, universal obedience to both Tables of the Law: Mercy
and judgment are here put (by a figure) for the duties of the second Table: as
constant waiting upon God for the duties of the first: for the Prophet here
observes not the order of nature, Donande. Condonands.
but of our knowledge, when he instanceth first in the second Table, as does
also the Prophet Micah, chap. 6.8. Mercy must be kept and exercised, by 1
Giving, 2 Forgiving: This God prefers before sacrifice, Hos. 6.7. This
Chrysostom says, is a more glorious work then to raise from the dead. And here
let those that would keep mercy (and not show it only sometimes, when they are
in a good mood) steep their thoughts in the mercies of God: and so strive to be
merciful, as their heavenly Father is, Matthew. 6. Judgment also must be kept,
and justice done, Esaias 56.1. after the example of God, who is said to exercise
loving-kindnesse, but withal judgment, and righteousness in the earth, Ier.
9.24. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, yea our God is merciful, Psalm.
116.5. the mixture of mercy and judgment is very comely: as in public
persons, Psalm. 101.1. (where we see, that David's ditty was composed of
discords, which made an excellent harmony) so in others of all sorts, Prove.
21.21. who are required to be mercifully just, and justly merciful in all
their enterdealings: according to that golden rule, given by our Savior, Luke
6.31. Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye to them likewise.
This is the standard.

and wait on thy God continually.] First, believe Him to be thy God, by a
particular individuating faith: and then thou will be easily drawn to wait upon
him, who waits to be gracious: or to draw near unto him, (as the Seventy here
render it) and come boldly to the throne of grace, Heb 4.16. for as the Ark of
the Covenant, (...).
and the Mercy-seat, were never separated: to neither is the mercy of God from
those that are in covenant with him, and can truly call him Theirs. Hope is
compared to a line (the same Hebrew word that signifies the one signifies the
other) and waiting on God is nothing else but Hope and Trust lengthened, or
drawn out. Sure it is that Trust in God at length will triumph: and all his
dispensations will appear beautiful in their season. Hold out therefore faith
and patience. Wait upon the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thy heart: Wait I say upon the Lord. Psalm. 27.14.
Ponder that sweet promise, Habak. 2.3. not delivered only, but doubled, and
trebled for more surety. And then consider first thy distance from God in
worth, and degree: next thy dependence upon him, thine undone condition, if he
desert thee: and then thou will be content to wait upon him continually, to
stay his leisure as David did for the kingdom, and as those in Esther did for
deliverance: to say with those good souls in the Acts, The will of the Lord be
done.

Verse 7. He is a merchant,] Heb. He is Canaan, that is, a mere natural man,
Ezekiel. 16.3. a money-merchant, who so he may have it, cares not how he comes by
it: he is more like a Canaanite then a Jacobite. Jacob said, I have enough my
brother; but Ephraim is sick of the plague of unsatisfiablenesse: and instead
of keep mercy and judgment, as in the former verse, he keeps false balances
in his hand, and false weights in his bag, Deuteronomy. 15.13, 14, 15. Lev. 19.36.
Prove. 11.1. and 16.11. and 20.10. See the Notes there, He that has his hands
full of the balances of deceit, and will not loose them to take hold of God,
will not part with his fat and sweet (as the Vine and Olive in Iothams Purable)
though it be to reign in heaven, how can it be expected that he should turn
to God, or that he should love to be his servant, Esaias 56.6?

when he loves to oppress.] To get gain, if not by fraud and cunning
contrivance, then by force, and by forged cavillation, as Luke 19.9. Sic
quaecunque potest art nocere, nocet: And all this he loves to do: he delights
in it; he not only is pleased with it, but pleads for it, and opposes with
crest and breast whatsoever stands in the way of his own heart; exercised with
covetousness, (as S. Peter's phrase is, 2 Pet. 2.14,) which he constantly
follows, as the Artificer does his trade. Let such Canaanites read that
flaming text, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. and take heed, lest while they get all they can, by
wrench and wile, lest while they count all good fish that comes to net, they
catch at length the Devil and all: lest they receive no less sums of curses,
then of coin; lest screech-owls of woe cry aloud, from the beams of their
chambers, etc. See the Note on chap. 7.1.

Verse 8. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich,] Sed mihi plande domi. I have
it howsoever, though I hear ill for it; though the Prophet inveigh against my
covetousness, yet I am rich, while he and his companions are poor, and
indigent:

yea I have found me out substance,] An idol, so the Vulgar renders it: Ephesians.
5.5.
and indeed, every covetous man is an idolater, and performs both outward and
inward service to his Mammon of unrighteousness, to his golden-calf. (...).
Substance he here craekes of, and rest to his soul (as the Seventy render it)
in opposition happly to the aerie notions (as he accounted them) of the Prophets
invectives against his covetous practices, and the terrors of his own
conscience, which he endeavored to corrupt and bribe: See to like purpose,
Esaias 57.10. Thou have found the life of thy hand, that is, a livelihood by thy
labor; therefore thou wast not grieved: thy heart is hardened, and thou art
insensible of thy sin-guiltinesse; thou set the gain against the guilt, and
then all is hall with thee. Felix scelus virtus vocatur; Tul. de divin. lib. 2.
Prosperous wickedness is accounted virtue. Leah, because fruitful, and
successful, rejoiced in that whereof she had greater reason to repent. So did
those Idolaters, Ier. 44.11. Dionysius, after the spoil of an idol-Temple,
finding the winds favorable in his Navigation; Lo, said he, how the gods
approve of sacrilege. It is no better that Ephraim here deals with the
Almighty: Surely says he, if God disliked my courses so much as the Prophet
would make believe,, I should not gather wealth as I do: but the world comes
tumbling in upon me, therefore my ways are good before God. This is an
ordinary paralogisme, whereby wicked worldlings deceive their own souls;
hardening and heartning themselves in their sinful practices, because they
outwardly prosper. But a painted face is no sign of a good complexion. Seneea
could say, That it is the greatest unhappiness to prosper in evil.

In all my labors,] so he calls his fraudulent and violent practices, as
making the best of an ill matter.

They shall find no iniquity in me.] Though they search as narrowly as Laban
did into Jacobs stuff: What can they find, or prove by me? Am I not able,
either to hide mine ill-dealings, or to defend them? Can they take the
advantage of the Law against me? Why then should I be thus condemned and cried
out of, as I am? Thus the rich man is wise in his own conceit, Prove. 28.11. and
covetousness is never without its cloak, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. which yet is too short
to cover it from God, who is not mocked with masks, or fed with fained words,
whereof the covetous caitiff is sull, 2 Pet. 2.3. witness Ephraim here, with
his pretenses, of innocence, In all my labors, that is, mine ill-gotten goods,
(the fruit of mine hard and honest labor, says he) they shall find none
iniquity, no crimen stellionatus, no craft or cruelty.

That were sin.] Piaculum esset, that were a foul business: far be it from
me to stain my trading, or burden my conscience with any such misdeed. I would
you should know, I am as shie of sin as another: neither would I be taken
tripping for any good. Thus men notoriously guilty, may yet give good words,
yea largely profess what they are guilty of, to be an abominable thing. And
this is a sure sign of a profane and cauterized conscience, of an heart that
being first turned into earth and mud, does afterward freez and congeal into
steel and adamant.

Verse 9. And I that am thy Lord God from the land of Egypt,] This seems to
be interlaced for the comfort of the better sort, that trembled at the former
threatenings: for as in a family, if the dogs be beaten, the children will be
apt to cry; so is it in Gods house. Hence he is careful to take out the
precious from the vile, and tells them, that he has not cast off his people
whom he foreknew: but would surely observe his ancient covenant, made even in
the land of Egypt toward his spiritual Israel

I will yet make them to dwell in tabernacles, etc.] i. e. I will deliver my
Church from the spiritual Egypt: and make her to pass through the wilderness
of the world, Diod^e.
in particular Churches, aspiring toward the heavenly Canaan: even as my people
dwelt in Tents in the wilderness, the remembrance whereof is celebrated in the
feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23.43. See Zach. 14.16. with the Note.

Verse 10. I have also spoken by the Prophets,] And not suffered you to walk in
your own ways, Esaias 30.20.
as did all other Nations, Acts 14.16. The Ministry is a singular mercy,
however now vilipended.

and I have multiplied visions,] whereby I have discovered thy present sins,
and imminent dangers, though thou have said, They shall find none iniquity in
me, etc. The wit of Mammonists will better serve them to palliate and plead for
their dilectum delictum, their beloved sin, then their pride will suffer them
once to confess and forsake it, though never so plainly and plentifully set
forth unto them.

and used similitudes by the ministry of the Prophets,] Heb. by the hand,
which is the instrument of instruments, (...).
says the Philosopher: so is the ministry of the word, for the good of souls.
It is called a hand, because it sets upon men's souls with the strength of God,
and a certain vehemence. Did not my word lay hold upon your fathers? Zach. 1.6.
See the Note there. It is said, Luke 5.17. that as Christ was teaching, the
power of the Lord was present, etc. The Gospel of Christ is the power of God,
Romans 1.16. It is his mighty arm, Esaias 53.1. Now it was ordinary with the
Prophets to use similitudes, as Esaias 5.2. Ezekiel. 16.3. which is an excellent way
of preaching and prevailing: as that which does noth notably illustrate the
truth, and insinuate into men's affections. Galeatius Carac^^olus, an Italian
Marquess, and Nephew to Pope Paul the fi^t, was converted by Peter Martyr
reading on 1 Corinthians. and using an apt similitude. Ministers must turn
themselves into all forms and shapes, both of spirit and of speech for the
reaching of their hearers hearts; they must come unto them in the most woing,
winning, and convincing way that may be. Only in using of Similies, they must,
1. Bring them from things known and familiar, things that their hearers are
most acquainted with, and accustomed to. Thus the Prophets draw comparisons
from fishes to the Egyptians, vineyards to the Jews, droves of cattle to the
Arabians, trade and traffic to the Egyptians. And thus that great Apostle, 1
Cor. 9 24. fetches Similies from runners, and wrestlers, exercises that they
were well acquainted with in the Isthmian Games, instituted by Thesus, not far
from their city. 2. Similies must be very natural, plain, and proper. 3. They
must not be too far urged: we must not witwanton it in using them: and let it
be remembered, that though they much illustrate a truth, yet Theologia
parabolica nihil probat. There are ^nterpreters of good note, that read this
whole verse in the future tense; and make a continuation of that promise in the
verse before. I will speak by the Prophets, sc. in the days of the Gospel, when
great was the company of those that published it, Psalm. 68.11. I will multiply
visions: See this fulfilled, Acts 2.17. with Joel 2.28. I will use similitudes,
teach in parables, and illustrate therewith grave sentences and doctrines, as
Christ and his Apostles did, and as the best Preachers still do, that they may
thereby set forth things to the life, and make them as plain, as if written
with the Sunbeams.

Verse 11. Is there iniquity in Gilead?] What in Gilead, a city of Priests?
(See chap. 6. ver. 8. with the Note) yea Gilead is a city of those that work
iniquity, a very Poneropolis, a place of naughty-packs, chap. 4.15. Now there
is not a worse creature on earth, then a wicked Priest, nor a worse place then
a wicked Gilead The Hebrew has it thus, Is Gilead iniquity? Or as Luther,
Drusius, and others, (...) certe vere, profecte.
Surely it is so. Confer Mich. 1.5. Gregory Nazianzen reports of Athens, that
it was the plaguiest place in the world for superstition. Our Universities were
so in times of Popery, and began to be so again, a few years since. Revera
Gilead est iniquitas, profecto vanitas sunt, they were grown so incorrigibly
flagitious, that they seemed to be as it were, transformed into sins image.
Some render the Text thus; Is there iniquity in Gilead? Are they only vanity
in Gilgal? They sacrifice, bullocks, etc. and set this sense upon it. What?
think you the men of Gilead, those beyond the river of Jordan, whom Tiglath
Pilesen poyled and l^d captives, that they only were guilty of idolatry, and
you not, because you remain at home, untouched of the Assyrian? Nay, says He,
the very entrance into the Country, Jun. and Trem.
Gilgal it self, so abounds with idolatry, that it is not to be doubted, but
in the rest of the parts of the kingdom, their altars are as thick as furrows
in the field, that is to say, innumerable. Some think this last clause, their
altars are as heaps in the furrows of the field (or of my fields, whereof I am
chief Lord, Sadai.
and wherein he should have served me, and not idols) has reference to some
superstitious way of theirs, of seeking God, by erecting altars in the furrows,
for the fructifying of their fields^ the Heathen did so to their Dij
Terminales: and the Papists still do so in their solemn Processions, erecting
crosses and crucifixes in the bounds of their fields, and thereby thinking to
get a blessing on their corn and pastures. Turnovius, notes here, that God in
the old Testament would therefore have but one Altar, whereon to offer
sacrifice, and that to be at Jerusalem only, to teach them that Christ, the
Antitype of all their sacrifices, should once be offered up upon the altar of
his Cross, a propitiation for their sins, Heb. chap. 9. and 10. This Altar
he also appointed to be in the Temple, that the sacrificers might believe the
gracious presence of God with them, and might worship him in spirit and in
truth.

Verse 12. And Jacob fled into the country of Syria,] Jacob, in whom ye glory,
was a poor forlorn fugitive, glad to run for his life, and to take hard on
for his livelihood, Genesis 28. and 29. This they were bound by the Law to make
confession of ever when they offered their basket of first fruits, and to say,
A Syrian ready to perish was my father, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.5. that, considering the
meannesse of their original, they might not boast of their ancestry; but
magnify, Gods, free grace in their present enjoyments; and say as that noble
Athenian General Aphicrates did, in the midst of all his triumphs, (...) from
how great baseness and misery, to what great blessedness and glory are we
exalted? King Agathocles, would be served in earthen vessels, to mind him of
his father, who was a poor potter. Willigis Arch bishop of Ments, Anno 1011.
being a Wheel-wrights son, hanged wheels, and wheel-wrights-tools round about
his bedchamber, and under-wrot in Capital Letters, Willigis, Willigis recole
unde veneris, Remember thine Original. Buch^l^er:
How low and mean were we of this Nanion at first? Brith signifies
blew-coloured, sc. with woad; Hence our name Britains: This was their fine
clothing: their food was barks of trees and roots. Holi^sh^d says, chat some
old men he knew, who told of times in England, that if the good man of the
house had a matris, or a flock-bed, and a sack of chafe to rest his head on,
he thonght himself as well lodged, as the Lord of the Town: for ordinarily,
they lay upon straw-pallets covered with canvase, and a round log under them
heads instead of a bolster they said, pillows were fit only for women in
childbed and in a good farmers house, it was rare to find four pieces of
Pewter: and it was accounted a great matter that a farmer should show five
shillings, or a noble together in silver, etc. There are that render the Text
thus: Thither fled Jacob nut of the country of Syri^, after Israel had served
for a wife, and for a wife had kept sheep.

Verse 13. Hither also by a Prophee did Jehovah, bring up Israilent of Egypt,
etc.] that is, Gilead served as a sanctuary unto Jacob, when be fled from
Laban, In Gilgal also God by Joshuah renewed his Covenant with your fathers
after he had brought them out of Egypt, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. A
horrible thing therefore it is, if well considered, that these two places
should now he so impured with idolatry; and become the nut^^^^s of evil, which
heretofore were the means of so great comfort to Gods people. Thus Junius,
P^lanus, and others. A witty interpretation, but somewhat forced.

And Israel served for a wife,] He had nothing to endow her with, he would
therefore earn her with his hard labor: wherein he showed singular humility,
patience, meekness, waiting upon Gods providence: none of all which graces
were found in his degenerate posterity, who yet prided themselves in their
father Jacob.

And for a wife he kept sheep.] q. d. Jacob, that he might obey his father, was
content to serve his Uncle; and to suffer a great deal of wrong from him: but
ye refuse to serve me though a liberal Lord, a bountiful Benefactour. He held
close to me in that hard service: but you abusing your liberty, enslave your
selves to false gods. He in his misery kept his confidence of the blessing: but
you in your prosperity, cast it clean away, etc. Luther upon this Text speaks
much about the blessing of a good wife, ^um qua perpetu^ rixan. dum.
(a commodity that cannot be too dear bought) and the plague of a scold that is
always railing and wrangling. The Heathen well says, that every man when he
marries, brings either a good, or an evil spirit into his house; and so
makes it either an heaven or an hell. Parcus well observes here, the great
use of Histories and holy examples, according to Romans 15.4. Plato thinks that
Historia comes (...), In Cratyle.
of stopping the flux of errors and enormities.

Verse 13. And by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt,] By Moses
that Prophet, by an excellency: as Aristotle is called the Philosopher, Tully
the Orator, Paul the Apostle, Calvin, the most learned Interpreter, etc. Moses
was a famous Prophet indeed, and a Type of Christ. Confer Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. and
34.10, 11, 12. Acts 3.22. and 7.35, 36, 37, 38. Theodoret calls him the great
Ocean of Divinity. (...).
Bellarmin, Gods special favorite, then whom Antiquity had nihil sapientius,
sanctius, mitius, none more wise, meek, and holy: Indeed, titles of honor are
not worthy of him. Howbeit he was but a mean man at first, Exodus 4.30. he took
his wife and his son and set them upon an ass; that was the best, and the
only beast that he had, for ought we read. It was not very likely that so poor
a Prophet should do so great a deed. But God loves to help his people with a
little help, Dan. 11.34. that through weaker means, his greater strength may
appear. His end here may seem to be the same as before, in setting forth Jacobs
meannesse, to take down the haughtiness of the people, proud of their Founders
and forefathers. A Prophet he is purposely called, and his name concealed, 1.
To show, that the work was done not by might nor by power, but by Gods Spirit;
Zech. 4.6. 2. To show what God will do for his people by the prayers and for
the sake of his Prophets, when they are most shiftlesse and hopeless. 3. To
let this unworthy people see how much God and done for them once by a Prophet,
how little soever now they set by such. This is Cyrus observation.

Verse 14. Excusserunt ex su^vissim^ pectore meo suevitatem.
Ephraim has provoked him to anger, most bitterly,] Heb. with bitternesses, or
unto bitter displeasure, or with bitter things, that is, sins that imbitter
Gods Spirit and put thunderbolts into his hands. As a Be stings not till
provoked, so neither does God punish, till there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
If Ephraim will provoke him to anger, (...).
(which he will not dare to do to his landlord) if he will put it to the
trial, whether God can be angry, as those did, Heb. 3.9. he shall know the
power of his wrath, Psalm. 90.11. he shall feel, to his sorrow, that it is an
evil thing and bitter, that he has forsaken the Lord, and that his fear is not
in them, Jer. 2.19. there will be bitterness in the end, Principium dulce est,
sed finis amoris amarus, Am^r amaror. Lust is a lie, as Amnon proved. Her end
is bitter as wormwood, though her lips drop as an honey-combe, says Solomon of
sinful pleasure, Prove. 5.3. It is like Jonathans honey, or Esau's pottage, or
Judas his thirty pence, which he would gladly have been rid of, but could not.
Those that provoke God shall one day hear, Do ye provoke me to anger? Are ye
stronger then I? they shall be taught to meddle with their match, and not to
contend with him that is mightier then they, Eccles. 6.10. they shall cry out
in the bitterness of their souls, as Lam. 3.15. He has filled me with
bitternesses, he has made me drunk with wormwood. And God shall reply, as Jer.
4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee: and this is
thy wickedness, because it is bitter.

therefore shall he leave his blood upon him,] God shall bring upon him
deserved destruction; he shall bring him into the fire, and leave him there,
Ezekiel. 22.20. the guilt of his sin shall remain upon his soul, and then
punishment cannot be far off. See Ezekiel 24.7, 8. with chap. 18.13. Josh. 2.19.
Or, the enemy shall leave him all bloody.

and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.] His Lord, not the Assyrian,
as some sense it, but his Liege Lord (whom he has reproached, by changing his
glory into the similitude of a calf, and other corruptible things) shall cry
quittance with him, as verse 2. cast utter contempt upon him, according to 1 Samuel 2.30. Romans 1.23.
and make him know that he is his Lord.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. WHen Ephraim spoke trembling,] Or, there was trembling, as there is
among the beasts of the field, when the Lion roareth. Ephraim whiles innocent
of the great offense, spoke with authority, and none durst budge against him:
for he had great power in his hand. Now, as the Philosopher told Adrian the
Emperor, who challenged him to dispute; Difficile est ei contradicere qui
potest aqua and igni interdicere: vel adversus (...) ^^^scribere, qui potest
proscribere. It is dangerous meddling with the Lions beard. N^^uchadnezzars
Majesty was such, that all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared
before him, Dan. 5.19. wheresoever his commands or armies came, there were very
great heart-quakes and concussions of spirit. Where the word of a king is,
there is power: and who may say unto him, What do thou^ Eccles. 8.4. Job was
no king: and yet whiles he was Jobab, that is, in a prosperous condition, The
young men saw him, Genesis 36.34.
and hid themselves: the nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to
the roof of their mouth, Job 29.8, 10 The people feared Joshuah ^ chap. 4.14.)
as they feared Moses, all the days of his life: for why? the Lord had
magnified him in the sight of all Israel. Natural conscience cannot but stoop
to the image of God in whomsoever. When Ephraim was first in the Throne, he
became formidable: but when h^^fell openly from God, he grew feeble: first he
was a terror, and then a scorn.

But when he offended in Baal, he died.] When by Jezabel (who did all under her
husband, she was King, and he Queen) Baal-worship was brought in, then Ephraim
fell from his dignity: then every paltry adversary trampled upon him, as the
Hare will do upon a dead Lion. See how Benhadad insulted over Ahab, 1 King. 20.
Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy children, even the
goodliest are mine. And the king of Israel answered and said, My Lord, O king,
according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have. Look how the worried
Curre falls upon his back, and holds up all four, as craving quarter: so did
this sordid Idolater, glad to crouch to his enemy: when God was departed from
him; he was even as a dead carcass. Morti vicinus jam magis atque magis. He
that departs from God (who is his life) by an evil heart of unbelief, Heb. 3.
subiecteth himself to all sorts of deaths, Natural, Civil, Spiritual, and
Eternal.

Verse 2. And now they sin more and more,] Heb. They add to sin: God in
his just judgment has given them up unto hardness of mind, and to their
hearts lust: that for all this sudden change, they repent not, but run more and
more into Idolatry. Not content to worship Baal, and such Heathen-Deities, They
make them molten images of their silver,] they laid their moneys together, to
make the golden-calves, or silver-shrines, as Acts 19.24. and other idolatrous
trinkets: they lavished silver out of the bag, and were at no small charge.
They multiplied their altars, chap. 10. and abused Gods gold and silver to
mystical adultery, chap. 2. All this they did Now, says the Text: most
unseasonably, and as it were in flat opposition to God; after he had sought to
reclaim them both by counsels, and corrections, and had hanged Ahab and his
house up in gibbets, as it were, before them, for their admonition. Surely it
is a just both presage and desert of ruin, not to be warned. See chap. 7.1.
with the Note,

And idols according to their own understanding,] i. e. according to their own
inventions, motu suo proprio; forsaking the Rule of the Word, they will needs
be scholars to their own Rea2on, though they are sure to have a fool to their
Master. That Is a good saying of Solomon, Prove. 3.5.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding, in matters of Gods worship especially: for there Deus damnat
quicquid arridet judicio hominum vel rationi, Calv. in loc.
that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God,
Luke 16.15.

all of it the work of the craftsmen,] And should men worship the work of their
own hands? what can be imagined more irrational and sottish? But it is a most
righteous recompense of their error. See Esaias 29.13, 14. God does blind and
blast such, Romans 1.27.
causing their madness to appear to all, and that they are men compact of mere
incongruities, solaecising in opinion, speeches, actions, all: nothing is more
irrational then irreligion.

they say of it, Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.] They, that is,
the king and his counselors, or the idolatrous priests by their appointment.
These were active to invite, and incite men to partake of those idolatrons
services. Should we be less diligent in calling upon others to kiss the Son,
with a kiss of love and homage? should we not be as serious and sedulous in
building stair-cases for heaven, as the wicked are in digging d^^^nts to hell?

kiss the calves.] That the custom of kissing in divine worship was used in
all Nations, is evident. They kissed either the idols mouth, or their own hand
(where the idol stood on high, so that they could not come at it) in token of
homage. See 1 King. 19.8. Job 31.27. Aderare est quasi applicare manum ad os.
So (after the example of Dioclesian) the Pope holds forth his foot to be
kissed by the greatest Potentates: whiles he sits as God, in the Temple of
God, etc.

Verse 3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud,] They shall vanish and
come to nothing: the morning cloud irradiated by the Sun, seems very gay at
first, but is soon dispelled by it, the dew lies very lovely upon the grass,
and seems to impearl it: but is soon dried up. See chap. 6.4. The chaff lies
hollow and high, but is soon dispersed before a whirlwind. See Psalm. 35.5. Dan.
2.35. Psalm. 1.5. The smoke rowls out of the chimney, as if it were some solid
substance, and would mu^^e the whole heavens, but is presently scattered;
Evaporat and evanescit, the higher it ascends, the sooner it vanishes. See
here how that is verified chap. 12.10. I have used similitudes by the ministry
of my Prophets, (four in a breath we have here) and be hereby advertised. 1.
Of man's weakness. 2. Of Gods power. 3. Of the swiftness of Ephraims ensuing
misery. 4. The severity of Gods dea^ing with Idolaters, he will leave no sign
nor remain of them: he will utterly remove them as a man takes away dung,
(...).
till it be gone, 1 King. 14.19. Sic transit gloria mundi. Life it self is but
a shadow, a dream, yea a dream of a shadow, Psalm. 144.4. profit, an
uncertainty, 1 Timothy 6.17. pleasure, a spirt, honor a blast, pomp a fancy,
Act. 25.23. the whole world a scheme, or notion that has nothing in it of any
firmness, or solid consistency. Why then should wicked worldlings brag, 1 Cor
7.31.
and look so big?? Why should the Saints be affected either with it is
allurements, or affrightments, and not cry out with that heroical Luther,
Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor, I care neither for Romes
favor, nor fury; I am neither fond of the one, nor afraid of the other, for
all is but fumus aut funus vanity and vexation?

Verse 4. Yet I am the Lord thy God, etc.] Yet for all the sorrow: and though,
I thus threaten thee: for since I spoke against thee, I do earnestly remember
thee still, etc. Jer. 31.20. It is easy to observe, all along this Chapter, an
interchange of menaces and mercies, as in the preceding verse and this; so
verse 8. and 9. verse 13. and 14. verse 16. and chap. 14.1. to show how soon
the Lord repents him of the evil, and how ready to show mercy to the worst that
return. If men could but find a penitent heart, he would easily find a
pitying heart: like as David would have been friends with Absalom after all the
unkindnesse, would he have been but better at last. To reduce Ephraim it was,
that this Chapter, like checquer-work, is made up of promises and threatenings;
that the tartness of the one might make him the better to taste the sweetness
of the other.

Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt,] See the Note on Chap. 12.9.
He was their God before, Genesis 17.7. but then he mainly manifested himself so to
be, when he brought them thence with a strong hand, and so declared himself to
be Jehovah, Exodus 6.2. yea I am ready to show thee the like mercy still: for I
remember (says he) the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown,
Ier. 2.2.

and thou shall know no God but me,] i. e. Effectually acknowledge, worship,
serve, love, none save me, Deuteronomy. 13.2. Gal. 4.9. Thou shall experience none
other: it is a blessed thing to be ignorant of false-worship; and not to be
insighted into, or versed in the depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24. Thou shall not
enquire how these Nations worshipped their gods, Deuteronomy. 12.30. Ahaz got hurt by
seeing the Altar at Damascus: Many that will needs see the Popish-service, are
ensnared thereby.

for there is no Savior beside me. [This is a Title that God much glories in.
See Esaias 60.16. and 63.1. Act. 5.31. and we should go often to him in this Name,
as Ier. 14.8. since he is able to save them to the utmost that come unto him,
Heb. 7.25. (...).
to save them perpetually, and perfectly. He is a sole Savior, a through
Savior, a Savior in solidum: and does not his work to the halves, as Papists
make it. How blasphemous is that direction of theirs to dying men, to say,
Join, Lord, mine obedience with those things which Christ suffered for me, etc.

Verse 5. I knew thee in the wilderness, in a place of great drought,] In
terra torridissima, where I gave thee pluviam escatilem and petram aquatilem as
Tertullian phraseth it, where I gave thee bread from heaven, set the flint
abroach, Tert. de patientiae. Psalm. 78.20, 24
kept thy clothes whole and fit, kept back thine enemies, led thee by a pillar
of cloud, sent thee in flesh at Even, and bread in the Morning, served thee as
never Prince was served in his greatest pomp. And will thou yet kiss the calf,
qui te nec servat, nec satiat, ut ego? who neither saves thee, nor satisfies
thee, as I have done? not suffering thee to lack any thing, Deuteronomy. 2.7? but
crowning thee with loving kindness, and tender mercies: insomuch as Moses
stands amazed at it, and cries out, Happy art thou O Israel! who is like unto
thee, O people saved of the Lord, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.29.

Verse 6. According to their pasture so were they filled:] Saturity bred
security; fullness, forgetfulness. This was a foul fault, and is much
complained of, Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14, etc. Psalm. 78.10, 11, etc. Acts 14.17.
God had brought them out of a place of great drought into large and fat
pastures, a land flowing with milk and honey, where he filled their hearts with
food and gladness, where he fed them among the ^i^^ies, daily and daintily.
But they, as if God had hired them to be wicked, basely abused his bounty to
luxury, and having fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, grew proud as
Sodom, and out of measure sinful; forgetting God and his will, Ezech. 16.49.
themselves and their duties, and running out into all excess of riot, though
they had been fairly warned, and commanded to the contrary, Deuteronomy. 8.10, etc.
Their heart grew fat as grease, and became as a foul stomach, which the more
you fill it, the more you spill it: or like fed horses, they grew fierce and
filthy, Jer. 5.7, 8. (...). Hippoc.
there was no hoe with them. See Ezekiel. 34 16, 18, 20. Whiles they were in the
wilderness God knew them, yea he knew their souls in adversity: They both knew
God, and were known of him. But now, God neither knew them so much, nor they
him: they lived not upon him now, as once in the wilderness; Gal. 3.
but being filled, yea filled (you have the word here twice together) to note
how they fell upon those allowed delights, and even glutted themselves, gorged
themselves, they flew upon them, as those in Saul's time did upon the spoil of
the Philistines: they fed without fear, as those Pseudo-Christians in Jude
verse. 12. they gormandized as those flesh-mongers before the flood, more like
beasts then men, (...).
as the Greek word signifies, Luke 17.27. And hereupon their hearts were
exalted,] P^osperity and plenty will easily blow up such a blab as pride, in
the best hearts, if care be not taken to the contrary, as Agur knew, and
therefore prayed, Give me a mediocrity, lest I be full and deny, and proudly
ask, W^^ is the Lord? and as Solomon felt, whose wealth did him more hurt then
his wisdom did him good, Eccles. 2. Prove. 30.9.
and as Hezeki^h experimented to his cost, Esaias 3^. ^ndeed of Iehosaphat it is
noted, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. that he walked in the s^st ways of David his father.
(for the truth is, David's first ways were his best ways: neither was he ever
so good and tender. as when he was hunted as a Partridge in the mountains) and
of Vespasian it is storied, Verspasianus unus accepto imperio melior factus.
that he was made the better man by being made Emperor: but he was a rare
bird, and had scarce his fellow again. It is the property of prosperity to
tumor the heart: and ubi uber, ibi tuber. See Psalm. 73.3, 6. and 1 Timothy 6.17.
they eat and are swelled as being poisoned with pride: they are are fatted, but
it is for the slaughter.

therefore have they forgotten me,] Non tam theoretice quam practice, they
remember there is a God, but they honor him not as God: they forget their
engagements to him, and through the pride of their countenance, they seek not
after him, Psalm. 10.4. they consider not their distance, their dependence, etc.
Now of all things God cannot abide to be forgotten, Esaias 1.2, 3. it is a sin
that he can hardly pardon, Ier. 5.7, etc. See the Note on chap. 8.14.

Verse 7. Therefore will I be unto them as a lion, as a leopard, etc.] Thus
still God proceeds to use similitudes by the ministry of his Prophets, as he
did before verse 3. Exodus 19.4. Dent. 32.10, 11. Mat. 23.37.
He here compares himself (who otherwhere is compared to an Eagle, bearing her
young upon her wings; to a Hen hovering over chickens, to a father cherishing
his children, etc) to a lion, yea to an old lion, which takes the prey but
seldom, and therefore is more ravenous of it, when taken; (See chap. 5.14.) to
a leopard, or panther, that diligently observes by the way, and lies in wait
for his prey, and uses subtilty, as not being so swift of foot: confer Ier.
5.6. To a Bear robbed of her whelps, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 57. Scal. exere. 208.
which are very dear to her. To any other cruel creature, verse 8. as the
Tiger that flies upon the very picture of a man, and teareth it, or if he
cannot come at it, teareth himself for anger. Neither is it for nothing (says
Rivet) that God compares himself here to all these together: but to show that
there was no hope of escape, neither could he that had avoided one danger, be
safe from another. So dreadful a thing is it to fall into the punishing hands
of the living God. Oh consider this ye that forget God: least he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Verse 8. I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of her whelps,] Surgit hic
oration. The Bear is more cruel then the Lion: for the Lion is said to spare
the prostrate: but the Bear falls foul upon all, yea upon dead carcasses. See
Amos 5.9. and confer 2 Samuel 17.8. Prove. 17.12. See also what work the two Bears
made upon the two and forty children, 2 King. 2.

and will rent the caul of their heart,] The pericardium, that fat heart of
theirs, verse 6. that hoof upon their hearts which the word could not pierce
through, that filthy foreskin that grew to their uncircumcised hearts.

there will I devour them like a lion,] Once more like a lion, ut immanis Ieo,
for the word is not the same as before, (...).
as a lion, that is, in heart, and that loves to suck the blood, and the fat
that is about the heart. There will I devour them, that is, in their cities,
and houses, where they hold themselves safest: as the lions dealt by those
mongrell-Colonies that made a mixture of religions, 2 King. 17.25.

the wild beast shall tear them.] when they but stir any where abroad; so
that there shall be no safety, no peace to him that goes out, or to him that
comes in, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. but -- crudelis ubique
Luctus, ubique pavor, and plurima mortis imago.
Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly
fear: for even our God (and not the God of the Jews only) is a consuming fire,
is a devouring Lion, is a furious Leopard, a raging Bear: yea put all the
dreadfulnesse of all the creatures in the world together, Heb. 12.28, 29
it is all to be found in the wrath of God, even the quintessence of all. hence
that of the Psalmist, Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to
thy fear, so is thy wrath, Psalm. 90.11. as who should say, Let a man fear thy
displeasure never so much, he is sure to feel thee much more, if once he fall
into thy fingers. Now a fearful man can fancy vast and terrible fears, as
ramping lions, ravenous leopards, fire, sword, racks, scalding lead, burning
pitch, running bell-mettle, all this in extremity, and that to all eternity:
and yet all these are but as a painted fire, in comparison of the
unconceiveable and unsupportable wrath of God.

Verse 9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self,] Heb. He, or, It has marred
thee, O Israel: that is, either thy sin of self-exaltation, and forgetfulness
of me, as verse 6. Or ty King, in whom thou trustedst, as verse 10. Or thy
Calf, whom thou worshippedst, has been the cause of thy confusion. Or thy
fained comforts, Consolatie fictlitia.
as Aben-Ezra will have it; thy soothing up thy self in sinful practices. Or,
One ^ath destroyed thee: Or, Somewhat has undone thee, but not without thee.
Whatever it is that has done it, it is not I, what hard thoughts soever thou
may have of me, because I appear thus dreadful to thee, as in the former
verse. Fury is not in me, but thou may thank thy self, and fault thy sin
as the mother of thy misery, as the cause of thy calamity; thou have destroyed
thy self, (...). Hom. Odyss. (...).
and thine own heart may say to thee, as the heart of Apollodorus seemed in a
dream, to say to him, when he was tortured by the Scythians; It is I that have
drawn thee to all this. It is the observation of a great Politian; England is a
mighty Animal, which can never die except it kill it self. Answerable whereunto
was the speech of the Lord Rich, to the Justices in the reign of Edward 6.
Never foreign power could yet hurt, or in any part prevail in this Realm, but
by disobedience, and misorder among our selves: that is the way wherewith God
will plague us, Interest of Princes. p. 55.
if he mind to punish us, etc. We use to say, No man is hurt but by himself:
Ye have not injured me at all, says S. Paul to the Galathians: you cannot do
it, unless I will. Act and Mon. fol. 1186. Gal. 4.12.
The devil can do nothing at us, if we give not way to him. And though there
were no devil, yet our corrupt Nature would act Satan's part against it self; it
would have a supply of wickedness (as a serpent has of poison) from it self;
it has a spring of its own to feed it. Nemo igitur sibi palpet de suo: quisque
sibi Satan est, says an Ancient. And it was no ill wish of him, that begged of
God, Domine, libera me a malo homine, meipso^ (...).
to deliver him from that naughty man, Himself: for he knew, that as in that
first Chaos, Genesis 1.2. were the seeds of all creatures: so in man's heart, of
all sins, and miseries that follow thereupon. God made man upright: but they
have sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. many shifts and sharking tricks.
Sin and shifting came into the world together, Genesis 3.12. The woman whom thou
gave me, etc. God must bear the blame of Adams sin: so must his Decree of
Reprobation, still be alleged as the cause of man's perdition. But this
covering is too short: for no man is destroyed because he is reprobated, but
because he is a sinner: neither are any damned because they cannot do better,
but because they will do no better. If there were no will, there would be no
hell: and this indeed will be the very hell of hell, Cesset voluntas propria,
and non erit infernus.
that they have been self-destroyers. The worm of conscience (say Divines)
that never-dying worm, is nothing else but a continual remorse, and furious
reflection of the soul upon it is own wilful folly, and now woeful misery.

but in me is thy help.] Heb. In me, in thy help, that is, (says Drusius) I am
in thy help, and thy help is in me: whatsoever help thou have, I am in it. We
can easily undo our selves; as a child can easily break a glass, that all the
men in the country cannot piece up again. But God both can and will help his,
though never so shattered: and repair that image of his, lost in Adam, that One
that destroyed Israel. Lord, says Augustine, Ego admisi unde tu damnare potes
me: sed tu non amisisti unde salvare potes me: that is, I have done enough to
undo my self for ever, but with thee there is enough for my safety here, and
salvation hereafter. God as he both can and will help his, that cry, Give us
help from trouble, for vain is the help of man: so he will then chiefly do it,
when they seem to themselves and others, Psalm. 60.11.
to be in an undone condition. Thou have destroyed thy self, in me is thy help:
His holy hand is reserved for a dead lift.

Verse 10. I will be thy king,] Thine eternal king, so Pagnine. As I have been
thy Prophet, verse 4.5. so I will be thy king; I will also be thy Priest, and
thy Redeemer, verse 14, that so thou may hear my voice, submit to my
scepter, and apply my death for thy deliverance from deaths dominion. Or, I
will be thy king, and not be born down by thy boysterousnesse, who call for
another king, and repinest against my righteous regiment. Thou would cast off
mine authority, but I will maintain it. The Lord is king, be the people never
so unquiet, Psalm. 99.1. he will reign over rebels in spite of their hearts:
and those that will not be his subjects, his willing people, shall be his
slaves, his footstool. The Geneva Bible reads it thus, Psalm. 110.1, 3.
I am: Where is the King that should help thee in all thy cities? R. Aben-Ezra,
Calvin, Oecolampadius, and others go the same way: only they render it, Ero, I
will be one and the same (according to that name of mine, I am that I am, Exodus
3.14. and before Abraham was, I am, Ioh. 8.58.) though you be off and on with
me, though you change often, yet I am Jehovah, I change not. I will be: What
will he be? The same that I said, I would be, thy Savior, thine Helper: Or, I
will be a stander-by, to see what will become of thee, and how thy king (in
whom thou trustest) will help thee: this last is R. Solomon Jarchi's
interpretation. Pareus will have it run thus, I will be, what? a lion, a
leopard, a bear, etc. and nothing shall alter my resolution.

Where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities?] Thou say (but
they are but vain words) I have counsel, and strength for war; I have a
King, and Princes, and strong cities. But alas, where are they? Let them
increase their Army, and come forth as he once said, Judge. 9.29. Vbi est Rex
tuus? ubinam? nunc servit te, etc. Where is the king? where is he? let him now
save thee in all thy cities, so Polanus renders it. Can they save thee, who
cannot save themselves? It is a Sarcasticall concession. See the like Deuteronomy.
32.37, 38. Judge. 10.4. Am. 4.4. And observe that Gods to deride and insult over
men in their carnal confidence; and his people are licenced to do so too, so
it be out of pure zeal, Psalm. 52.6, 7. and not out of private revenge.

and thy judges,] Or chief Officers, Princes, that are necessary to a King, and
are called his Comites, cousins, and counselors.

whereof thou said,] and wast set upon it: thou would needs have them,
contra gentes, as they say, and had soon enough of them. Strong affections
bring strong afflictions.

Give me a king and princes.] It was partly their ambition, and partly
discontent with the present government (as the present is always grievous)
that prompted them to this request; (...). Thucyd.
and they had it, but for a mischief. It is not always in mercy that prayers
are answered: for Deus saepe dat iratus, quod negat propitius, God often throws
that to his enemies, when they are over-importunate, which he denies to his
friends, in great mercy to their souls. They do best, that acknowledging him
the only wise God, pray, Not our, but thy will be done, etc.

Verse 11. I gave thee a king in mine anger,] As once before he gave them
Quails to choke them. A king, that is, all those kings they had since they fell
off from the house of David. These were Gods gifts, but giftlesse-gifts, which
he cast upon them in his anger, (...).
for a punishment both of the sins of David's ho use, and likewise of the
peoples rebellion. It was ab irato potius quam ab exorato Deo. Take him, (says
He, since you will needs have him) with all that shall follow after. The
hypocrite shall reign, that the people may ensnared, Job 34.30. Set thou a
wicked man over him, (says the Psalmist) and let Satan stand at his right
hand, Psalm. 109.6. See Dan. 8.23 Saul was an hypocrite, Jeroboam a wicked man,
so were all his successors in that Throne. Levit. 26.17. it is written as an
heavy curse of God; If you still trespass against me, I will set Princes over
you that shall hate you, mischievous, odious princes: odious to God, malignant
to the people.

and took him away in my wrath.] Heb. In mine immoderate wrath, that passed the
bounds. This is spoken of God after the manner of men; for he cannot exceed or
over-do: fury is not in him, Esaias 27.4. but here he threateneth to take away
king and kingdom together: as he did Hosea, by the Assyrian that carried them
all captive. Observe here, that better a bad Magistrate then none, for this
latter is the fruit of Gods utter indignation. Those Anabaptists that from this
Text inferred, that no Christian can with a good conscience take upon him
kingly dignity, should have observed, that as an evil king is reckoned as a
plague to a people, so a good king is to be held a special blessing to them.

Verse 12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up,] sc. in a bundle, or fardle, or
faggot, as the French has it. And like as all fardles are opened on a Fair-day,
so shall Ephraims iniquities be brought to light, and punished at the last day:
As the householder binds up the tares in bundles at harvest and burns them:
so shall it be in the end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his
Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all scandals, and them which
do iniquity: and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, etc. Matthew. 13.30, 41,
42. As the Clark of Assizes binds up the inditements of malefactors in
bundles, or seals them up in a bag for more surety: and at the Assizes, brings
his bag, takes them out, and reads them: so will it be at that last and great
day. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, says Job: and thou sowest up mine
iniquity, viz. as the writings, or informations of a process, which is ready
to be sentenced. See Deuteronomy. 32.34. Ier. 17.1. Hos. 9.9. Sinners shall one day
know, that Gods for bearance is no quittance; Job 14.^
that however he is silent for a season, and thereupon they are apt fondly to
conceit him to be such another as themselves, yet He will confute them, and set
their sins in order before their eyes, Psalm. 50.21. Their actions are already
in print in heaven: and God will one day read them aloud in the ears of all the
world. And then though their sin be hid for present, all shall out to their
utter shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. that last light of the day of
wrath shall reveal all, Romans 2.5. punish all, Hos. 9.9. Whatever God has
threatened, shall then be inflicted: whatever arrows are in the bow-string,
shall then flee, and hit, and stick deep. And the longer the Lord is in
drawing, the heavier they will light: Morae dispendium foenoris duplo
pensabitur, the longer He forbeareth, the heavier He punishes: So that there
shall be no cause, why sinners should say, Where is the God of judgment? Mal.
2.17. See the Note. God will enquire after their iniquity, and search after
their sin, Job 10.6.

Verse 13. The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him,] This
Commonwealth was before compared to a mother, chap. 1. and 3. And as a woman
that has conceived, is not for a while discerned to be with child, till she
biggen, and burnish, and grow near her time: so is it with sinners: see it
elegantly set forth by S. James, chap. 1.14, 15. The sorrows of a travailing
woman are known to be unexpected, exquisite, and inevitable: so shall Gods
judgments be upon the workers of iniquity, such as they shall never be able to
avert, to avoid, or to abide. This is set forth by an apt similitude, ordinary
in holy Scripture, Mic. 4.9, 10. Psalm. 48.7. Ier. 49.29. and 50.43, etc. And
whereas some might say, A travailing woman is soon delivered; her pain is
sharp, but short: she has hope, not only of an end but of a birth; the joy
whereof makes her remember her anguish no more, Ioh. 16.21. The Prophet
replieth, that it is otherwise with Ephraim.

he is an unwise son,] that will be the death both of his mother and of
himself. He has no list to help himself, and to get free of the straights and
petils of the birth, by passing through the narrow womb of Repentance, and being
born anew, God stands over him, stretching out his hands all the day long, to
do a midwives office, to take him out of the womb, as Psalm. 22.9. to cut his
navell, and wash off his blood, to salt him, and swaddle him, as Ezekiel. 16.4.
but he has no mind to come out of the filth of his sins, or to be washed from
his wickedness. Rather then be regenerated (without which there is no heaven
to be had, Ioh. 3.5. or freedom from deadly dangers upon earth) he will venture
to stay a while at least (as the Text here has it) in the mouth of the
matrix.] though it cost him a choking. (...)
Such Ephraims we have not a few, that proceed no further then to conviction;
debarring themselves of the benefit of a through conversion. These go as far as
Kadesh-barnea, they are nigh to Gods kingdom, they are almost persuaded to be
true Christians, they are come as far as the place of the breaking forth of
children, but there they stick and are stifled: they are never brought forth
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive remission of sins, and inheritance among the saints and sons of
God, Acts 26.18. Oh make much of the least beginnings of grace (says a
Reverend man) even those called repressing: since they prepare the heart for
conversion. There is a faith in the true convert, of no better perfection then
that in the Temporary, though he stay not there, as the other (being an unwise
sot) does etc. And although we bring forth good things (says Another) as
Sarah's dead womb brought forth a child; it was not a child of natures, but of
the mere promise, yet it cannot be denied, that a natural man (though he be
Theologically dead, yet he) is Ethically alive, being to be wrought upon by
arguments; and that grace does for the most part prepare naturals before it
bring in supernaturals: and if we hide our talent, we are not allowed to expect
the spirit of Regeneration; As if we die in the wilderness of preparatory
antecedaneous works, we never get to Canaan.

Verse 14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, etc.] Some read it
thus, Calvin. Tigurin. Isid. Clar. Danaeus. Drusius.
I would have ransomed them, etc. I would have redeemed them, etc. had they
been wise, or oughts, (as we say) had not their incurable hardness and
obstinacy hindered; had they put forth into my hands, as unto a midwife, etc.
But (alas) it is no such matter: therefore that that will die, let it die.

repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.] I am unchangeably resolved to ruin
them: Or, repentance should have been hid from mine eyes, my goodness toward
them should never have altered, etc. But let us rather look upon the words as a
most sweet and comfortable promise of a mighty redemption, and glorious
resurrection to the Remnant, according to the election of grace, whom God would
not have to want comfort, I will ransom them. Here therefore he tells his
Heirs of the promises, that he will bring them back out of captivity wherein
they ^ay for dead, as it were: and that this their deliverance should be an
evident argument and sure pledge of their resurrection to life eternal. To
which purpose the Apostle does aptly and properly allege it, 1 Cor. 15. and
thereupon rings in Deaths ears (out of this Text, and Esaias 25.8.) the
shrillest, and sharpest Note, the boldest and bravest challenge, that ever was
heard from the mouth of a mortal; Death, where is thy sting? Hell where is thy
victory, etc? Oh thanks be to God, who has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and thereby has made us more then conquerours, that is,
Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. But to return to the Text. Be it, says the Prophet,
that the Commonwealth of Israel, both mother and child must perish for want of
wisdom, as was threatened in the foregoing verse: yet let not the penitent among
them despair: for I the Lord Christ, will ransom them, by laying down a
valuable price (so the word signifies) from the power,] Ephdem.
Heb. hand: of the grave, or of hell, that though hell had laid hands on them,
yea closed her mouth upon them, as once the Whale had upon Jonas, yet I would
open the doors of that Leviathan, and fetch them thence with a strong hand.

I will redeem them from death,] by becoming their near kinsman according to
the flesh, whereby I shall have the next right of redemption. But how shall all
this be done? After a wonderful manner.

O death I will be thy plagues,] Not one, but many plagues, even so many, as
shall certainly do thee to death. The Vulgar renders it, Ero mors tua, O mors,
morsus tuus, O inferne. The Apostle for plagues has sting: for the plague has
a deadly sting, and so has sin much more; the guilt thereof is by Solomon
said to bite like a serpent, and sting like a cockatrice, Prove. 23.32. Now
Christ by dying put sin to death, Romans 1.25. Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 2.14. We read
of a certain Cappadocean, Sphinx. Phil. page 750.
whom when a Viper had bitten, and sucked his blood, the Viper her self died, by
the venomous blood that she had sucked. But Christ (being life essential)
prevailed over death: and swallowed it up in victory, as Moses his serpent
swallowed up the sorcerers serpents, or as Fire swalloweth up the fuel that is
cast upon it: yea by death, he destroyed him that had the power of death, the
devil; whose practice it was to kill men with death, Rev. 2.23. this is the
second death.

O grave (or, O hell) I will be thy destruction,] thy deadly stinging disease,
joined with the pestilence, Psalm. 91.6. Death to a believer is neither total,
nor perpetual, Romans 8.10, 11. Christ has made it to him, of a curse a
blessing, of an enemy a friend, of a punishment an emolument, of the gate of
hell the portall of heaven, a postern to let out temporal, but a street-door
to let in eternal life. And to assure all this; Repentance shall be hid from
mine eyes,] i. e. there shall be no such thing as repentance in me, for all
things that are at all are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do, Heb. 4.13. The meaning is, I will never change my mind for this
matter, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. Psalm. 89.34.
Confer Psalm. 110.4. Romans 11.29. Some render it (but not so well) Consolation
is hid from mine eyes, and so make them to be the words of the Church, q. d. I
see not this promise with mine eyes, but I receive it, and accept of it by my
faith.

Verse 15. Though he be fruitful among his brethren,] In allusion to his name
Ephraim, which signifies fruitful and flourishing, Genesis 41.52. Confer Genesis
48.16, 19, 20, etc. and 49.22. See the like allusions, Am. 5.5. Mic. 1.10.

An East-winde shall come,] which is violent and hurtful to the fruits of the
earth.

the wind of the Lord,] a mighty strong wind: meaning that most merciless
and impetuous enemy the Assyrian, sent by the Lord to avenge the quarrel of
his Covenant.

shall come up from the wilderness,] where the winds blow most fiercely,
because they meet with no resistance.

and his spring shall become dry, etc. This is a description of extreme
desolation, and it is explained and amplified in the next words.

he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.] He, that is, the
Assyrian, not Christ (as Hierom, Mercer, and Ribera will have it) who shall
take away from Death and Hell all matter of glorying. Not the fire of the last
day, as Lyra. No, nor Ephraim, as Pareus, and Tarnouius carry it: as if it were
a promise of their conquest in Christ over all their enemies, corporal, and
spiritual, dividing the spoil of the converted Gentiles, who shall come in to
them with all their desirable things, as some read that Text, Hag. 2.7. Confer
Am. 9.11, 12. Obad. 18. Zech. 14.14, 16, 20, 21. That this whole verse
contains a promise of Ephraim's reduction to the Church of God, I could
easily yield; reading it especially, as many good Interpreters do. For he shall
fructify among his brethren, after that an East Wind coming, a wind of Jehovah
coming up from the desert, his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall
dry up: the same shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels. This is a
similitude (say they) from a piece of ground all dried up and parched, that
nothing is able to grow: notably expressing the miserable and distressed estate
of this people; that as an easterly wind, and a tempestuous storm, has dried
them quite, and spoiled all their delightful treasures, made them the vilest,
and most contemptible of the earth. ( Marcellinus tells of an Emperor, Am.
Marcel. lib. 2.
that meeting with some of this Nation, and annoyed with the sight and stench
of them, cried out, o Marcommani, o Quadi, o Sarmatae, etc. O Marcoman's,
Quades, and Sarmatians, I have found at length a more loathsome and sordid
people then you.) All which notwithstanding, Ephraim shall flourish again, and
hold up their head among their brethren, sc. by the merit and spirit of Him who
ransometh them from the power of the grave, from the dint of death. This sense
of the words, is confirmed by that which follows in the next Chapter verse. 5,
6, 7.

Verse 16. Samaria shall become desolate,] Here many begin the fourteenth
Chapter, but not so well: for this verse evidently cohereth with the former,
and shows that Ephraim shall not only be plundered, rea peragetur.
but butchered by the Assyrian by their own default. Samaria shall become
desolate, or be found guilty (as the Chaldee has it, and the words may bear.)
How can she be otherwise, when as she has rebelled against her God,] she has
imbittered him, or bitterly provoked him to wrath, (as chap. 12.15. See the
Note there) who therefore sent in the Assyrian to desolate her: that bitter and
hasty Nation to march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling
places that were not theirs. Hab. 1.6.
This was a bitter affliction, but behold a worse:

they shall fall by the sword,] they shall lose not their land only, and the
treasures of all their pleasant vessels, as verse 15. but their dearest lives,
which to save a man will gladly part with all that he has, Job 2.4. or submit
to any servile employment, as the Gibeonites in Ioshuah's days did; who were
willing to take hard on as slaves and underlings, rather then to be cut off
with the rest of the Canaanites.

their infants shall be dashed in pieces,] Sept. (...), their sucklings, that
are ordinarily spared for their innocence, ignoscency, etc. See chap. 10.14.
with the Note: and consider that infants are not so innocent (though they have
yet done neither good nor evil) but that God may justly inflict upon them all
torments here, and tortures in hell, for the guilt of original sin that
cleaves to their natures. Howbeit this excuses not the barbarous cruelty of
his executioners, who shall be surely and suitably punished, Psalm. 137.8.

and their women with child shall be ripped up.] Of this kind of savage
inhumanity, see Am. 1.13. 2 King. 8.11. and 15.16. where you shall find that
the tyrant Menahem ripped the infants of Tiphsah out of their mothers bellies,
because their fathers opened not the gates unto him. The like cruelty was
exercised in the Sicilian Vespers, and Parisian Massacre, by those Romish
Edomites: maugre whose malice Ephraim is yet fruitful, the Church flourishes.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crescit. CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. OIsrael, return unto the Lord,] Vsque ad Dominum, as far as to the
Lord: give not the half but the whole turn; and take it for a mercy that you
are yet called upon to return, and may be received: that yet there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing. All the former part of the Prophecy had been
(most-what) Comminatory: this last Chapter is wholly Consolatory: the Sun of
righteousness loves not to set in a cloud. Ezr. 10.2.


return unto the Lord thy God;] He is yet thy God: no such argument for our
turning to God as his turning to us, Zach. 1.3. See the Note there Tantum velis
and Deus tibi praeoccurret. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat, etc.
The Fathers plenty brought home the Prodigal: he had but a purpose to return,
and his father met him, Esaias 65.24. See Joel 2.12, 13. Esaias 55.6, 7. Jer.
31.18. Hos. 3.5. Acts 2.38. This is the use we should make of mercy. Say not,
He is my God, therefore I may presume upon him: but, He is mine, therefore I
must return unto him: Argue from mercy to duty, and not to liberty, for that is
the Devils Logic, which the Apostle holds unreasonable, yea to a good heart
impossible, Romans 6.1, 2. His mercy is bounded with his truth, with which it
therefore goes commonly coupled in Scripture. It is a sanctuary for the
penitent; but not for the presumptuous.

for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.] i. e. Consumption is decreed, yet a
remnant reserved, Esaias 10.22, 23. Thou have fallen into great calamity, and
that by thine iniquity, which puts a sting into thy misery. This it is fit thou
should be sensible of: for conviction is the first step to conversion. But if
thou art fallen, will thou there lie and not rise again by repentance, and
return to him that smites thee? will thou not submit to his justice, and
implore his mercy? Here then is another motive to conversion; as indeed this
verse abounds with arguments to that purpose, as Pareus well observes. First,
thou art Israel, a Prince of God, who has greatly graced thee above all
people: Return to him therefore. 2 Thou have run away from him by thine
iniquity: ad turned upon him the back, and not the face: Return therefore. 3.
He is Jehovah, the Author of thy being, and well-being. 4 He is God, to whom
thou must either turn, or burn for ever: aut poenitendum, aut pereundum: he can
fetch in his rebels. 5 He is thy God in covenant with thee, and will accept of
pence for pounds, desires for deeds, sincerity for perfection. 6 Thou have
fallen by thine iniquity: and yet wilt fall further, and never rise again, as
Am. 8.14. if thou stop not, step not back by repentance, and stir up thy self
to take hold of God.

Verse 2. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord,] Confess your sins, beg
pardon, and promise amendment. Sue to God to give you those words that he bids
you Take: go to him in his own words, put his promises in suit: crave the help
of his holy Spirit, without which what can we do, Romans 8.26. Say to God as Job
37.19. Teach us what we shall say unto thee: for we cannot order our words, by
reason of darkness. David promises not only to pray, but to marshall up his
prayers, to put them in good array, so the word signifies, Psalm. 5.3. In the
morning will I direct my prayer, order it in the best manner: his words should
be, nec lecta, nec neglecta, neither curious, nor careless, but such as are
humble, earnest, and direct to the point, avoiding vain babblings. Here Is a
form prescribed in the Text (forms of prayer therefore are not so unlawful, as
some conceive them) words put into their mouths (as the phrase is 2 Samuel
14.3.) that they might not miss. Men must as well look to their words, as to
their feet, when they come before God: and see that their affections in prayer
be not without answerable expressions. Take with you such words, as may
testify that ye turn heartily to the Lord, and not from the teeth outward, as
they in the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.36, 37. Turn before ye begin to pray: for God
hears not sinners; since their incense smells of the hand that offers it,
Esaias 1.

Say unto him,] Mentally and vocally: with spirit and speech. True it is, that
prayer is not the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart: and God
has promised to answer his people before they call, Esaias 65.24. By calling
upon his Name, we neither inform him of what he knows not; nor move him to
show us more mercy then he intends. But yet prayers are necessary, as means
which God will have used, that we may receive what he of free mercy gives.
Besides, it prepares us holily to enjoy the things received; and makes us
ready, either to wait for them, or to want them: and to be content that he may
be glorified, though we be not gratified. And although God knows our
thoughts, and understands the mind of the spirit, as being the searcher of
hearts, Romans 8.27. yet he calls for the calves of our lips, the service of our
tongues, Jam. 3.9. guiding them now and then in a wonderful manner, far
beyond all natural apprehension: and strangely enabling his praying servants,
who do also find no small benefit by this practice of pouring out their hearts
before him, both for the preventing of distractions, and kindling affections,
and discerning their profiting in holy disires: for the more worthy effect
follows, where more fervent affection went before.

Take away all iniquity,] Few words, but full of matter: O quam multa, quam
paucis! What a short, but pithy prayer is this! Such was that of the Publican,
Gic. de Bruti epistola.
Luke 18.13. that of our Savior in his agony, when yet he is said to pray more
fervently: that also which he taught us to pray, Mat. 6.7, 8, etc. set in flat
opposition to Paganish battologies. This in the Text is not much unlike that
perfect pattern: for here they are taught to beg, Vt auferantur sua maleficia,
conferantur Dei beneficia: Take away all evil, and give good: and then to
restipulate thanks. So will we render, etc. Take away from us, as an
unsupportable burden, such as we cannot stand under, All iniquity, stain and
sting, crime and curse, power and punishment, that there be no after
reckonings: cross out the black lines of our sins, with the red lines of thy
Sons blood, that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world by this
Merit and Spirit, by his Value and Virtue; that true scapegoat, Joh. 1.29.
Heb. 9.28.
that carries the sins of his people into the wilderness.

and receive us graciously,] Heb. Receive good, that is, (as some interpret it)
Accept, out of thy fatherly favor, the true witnesses and effects of our
through conversion: But better they that thus sense it, Take good, to wit, to
bestow upon us, as Psalm. 68.19. with Ephesians. 4.8. And it is not improbable
(says a Reverend Writer) that the Prophet here secretly leads us to Christ
the Mediator, who first receives gifts from his Father, and then pours them
forth upon his Church, Act. 2.23. D. Reyn. in loc.


So will we render the calves of our lips,] Thy benefits shall not be cast away
upon unthankful persons: but we will present unto thee a sacrifice that will
please thee better then an ox or bullock, that has horns and hoofs, Psalm.
69.31. This cannot be done but by a sound Convert: for the Lepers lips must be
covered according to the Law: and the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to
the Lord. To the wicked God says, What have thou to do to take my Name into
thy mouth, etc. he likes not a good motion from an ill mouth, as that State
in the Story: The lip of excellency becomes not a fool, ( Prove. 17.7.) no
more then lying does a worthy man, that is renowned for his wisdom. It well
becomes the Saints to be thankful, to cover Gods Altar with the calves of
their lips. This expression implies (says One) That Gods people should not
offer their thankfulness to God of that which cost them nothing; but bring, 1.
A calf, do something to further Gods worship, or relieve the necessities of
others. 2. It must be a dead calf, that is, it must proceed from humble and
mortified minds. 3. A sacrificed calf: where is required, 1 An Altar, our
praises must be tendered in the mediation of Christ. 2 Fire, for the bare
throwing out of words, though in the name of Christ, will not serve without
feeling, ardency, and zeal. 3 We must lay our hands on the head of the calf;
that is, in all humility, confess our unworthiness of the blessings we give
thanks for, as being less then the least, Genesis 32.10.

Verse 3. Ashur shall not save us, etc.] q. d. He cannot if he would: he shall
not, if he could. The two great sins of this people were Creature-confidence,
and Idolatry: both these they do here abrenounce and abandon. The best
repentance, says Luther, is a reformed life. It is true say they, we have gone
to the Assyrian, (wherein we have dealt as the silly bird flying to the snare,
or as fishes, which to avoid the powle wherewith the water is troubled, swim
into the net.) We have taken our horses instead of our prayers, and gone about
to find out good. We have been so foolish, as to think that dumb Idols, that
cannot help themselves, should help us. But now we are otherwise resolved,
experientia edocti and poenitentia ducti: we find at length (that which we
should have believed sooner, without trying conclusions) that men of high
degree are but a lie, that horses are but a vanity, that an Idol is nothing,
and can give nothing. That power belongs unto thee, none else can do it: that
mercy belongs unto thee, none else will do it: therefore since in thee only,
the fatherless, that is, the friendlesse and shiftlesse find mercy, O be thou
pleased to do us good.

For in thee the fatherless finds mercy.] The poor pupil, the forlorn
orphan, that is left to the wide world, and lost in himself, cries out, Lord, I
am hell, but thou art heaven, Miseria res digna misericordia. Ruperti Imp. symb.
etc. I am an abject, oh make me an object of thy pity, Jer. 39.17. Because
they call thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeks after,
therefore I will restore health unto thee, etc. The proud Assyrian, and other
enemies, would be apt to insult over Israel: as afterward Cicero did: The
Jewish Nation, says he, show how God regards them, that have been so often
overcome by Pompey, Crassus, etc. But let Gods people be but fatherless
enough, let them withdraw their confidence from men and means, and cast it
wholly upon God, making him their Tutour and Protector, and they shall be both
preserved, and provided for. Deo confisi nunquam confusi. I will not leave you
orphans, says Christ, Job. 16. Hence the Church rests on God, in the fail of
other comforts, Psalm. 10.14, 17, 18. Psalm. 27.10. Hab. 3.17. Psalm. 102.13. The
prayer of the destitute he regards. The Hebrew word signifies a poor worthless
shrub in the wilderness, trod upon by beasts, unregarded.

Verse 4. I will heal their backslidings,] Relapses, we know, are dangerous:
and Apostasy little less then incurable, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Heb. 6.6. Bishop
Latimer, in a sermon before King Edw. 6. tells of one notorious back-slider that
repented: but beware of this sin, says he, for I have known no more but one
that did so. To fall forward is nothing so dangerous, as to fall backward with
old Eli. Hence Paul so thundreth against the Galathians, and Peter against
apostatizing Libertines, 2 Epist. 2.22. Omnipotenti medico nullus insanabilis
occurrit morbus Isidor.
But if Jehovah the Physician, (as he is called, Exodus 15.26.) undertake the
cure, and say, I will heal their backslidings, what can hinder? Christ in the
Gospel, cured the most desperate diseases: such as all the Physicians in the
country might have cast their caps at, Matt. 4.23, 24. and 8.16. He refused
none that came to him, Matt. 12.15. no not his enemies, as Malchus. Will he
then reject his Ephraim, a child, bemoaning himself, though not a pleasant
child, a towardly son, Jer. 31.18, 20. a back-slider indeed, but such an
one, as cries now, that God binds him, Job 36.13. No sooner does God cry,
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings, I will
love you freely: but Ephraim, melted with such a love, replieth, Behold we come
unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Ier. 3.22. O most happy compliance!
See the like, Zach. 13.9. with the Note there. They shall return even to the
Lord (from whom they had deeply revolted) and he shall be entreated of them,
and shall heal them, Esaias 19.22. They had begged of him to take away all
iniquity, verse 2. And He here (in answer) promises to heal their
backslidings, that compound of all iniquities, that fallingsicknesse, that often
hales hell at the heels of it, Heb. 10.38.

I will love them freely:] Ephraim might remember, and Satan would be sure to
suggest, that the Prophet had said before, Ephraim is smitten, or wounded, My
God will cast them away, or hate them. Mine anger is kindled against them,
Chap. 8.5. and 9.16, 17. Here therefore, upon their repentance, all this is
graciously taken off in one breath, and Satan silenced. Be it that they are
back-sliden, and sore wounded by their fall; I will heal their backslidings,
and make their broken bones to rejoice. Be it that there is nothing at all in
them that is laudable, or love-worthy, yet I will love them freely, ex mero
motu, of mine own free, absolute, and independent grace, and favor, out of
pure and unexcited love, without any the least respect to their merit, which is
nothing better then hell. Be it that they have bitterly provoked me to anger,
and (as angry people use to do) I have both threatened them, and punished them:
yet now mine anger is turned away from them.] I am fully reconciled unto them
in Christ, will clear up my countenance toward them, and remove mine heavy
judgments from them. Gods favor is no empty favor. It is not like the
Winter-Sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it shines, but gives little
heat or comfort. If he love a man freely, and out of the good-pleasure of his
will, cum spontaneitate (as he does all His, (...).
Ephesians. 2.8. making them accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.) such a man may
promise himself all the blessings of this and a better life. Excellent is that
of Bernard; Qui misit vnigenitum, immisit spiritum, promisit vultum, etc. Bern.
de Temp. Aug. Confess. lib. 5. c. 8. Psalm. 20.4.
He that sent his Son for thee, poured his Spirit into thee, promised to clear
up his countenance upon thee, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? What can he deny
thee? He that inviteth thee to feed upon the fatted-calf, will not only take
away all iniquity, but give good. That was the second Petition they preferred,
and they have it answered in the next verse, ad cardinem desiderij God not
only grants their prayer, but fulfills their counsel.

Verse 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel,] I will give good in abundance: and
and this is sweetly set forth in a sevenfold Metaphor, all answering to the
name of Ephraim, (which signifies fruitful) and to the ancient promises made
unto him: and all again opposite to the many contrary curses, threatened in the
former parts of the Prophecy, under Metaphors of a contrary importance, as
Pareus and (out of him) Tarnouius have well observed. As First, of solid and
fruit-causing dew, in opposition to that vanishing and barren dew, chap. 6.4.
and 13.3. Secondly, of the flourishing lilly, contrary to those nettles,
thorns, and thistles, chap. 9.16. and 10.8. Thirdly, of the well-rooted and
durable trees of Libanus, contrary to dry-roots, chap. 9.16. Fourthly, of
spreading and growing branches, instead of branches consumed, chap. 11.6. and
9.16. and 10.8. Fifthly, of trees yielding pleasant shade and repose, contrary
to chap. 9.3, 6. Sixthly, of corn to fatisfie hunger, contrary to chap. 8.7.
Lastly, of a Vine bringing forth excellent wine, Adricom. Brocard. Hierom.
contrary to chap. 9.16. and 10.1. And all these fruits, the fruits of Lebanon,
a most sertile mountain, the valleys whereof were most rich grounds for
pasture, corn, and vineyards.

as the dew unto Israel, he shall blossom as the lilly,] Quot verba tot lumina
imo flumina orationis. This Prophet abounds with similitudes, as is before
noted, (See chap. 12.10. with the Note there.) He begins here with a Simile
drawn from the dew of heaven; a mercy very much set by, in those hotter
countries especially, where from May to October they had no rain. The Chaldee
Paraphrase, and Hebrew Doctors, understand this Text concerning Christ, and
his benefits. Psalm. 73.1. Gal. 6.16. Ephesians. 1.3.
Truly, He is good to Israel, to the pure in heart. Peace and mercy, sanctity
and safety, all spiritual benedictions in heavenly things in Christ, shall be
upon the Israel of God. What the dew is to the herbs, fields, fruits, that is
Christ to his Israel. 1. The dew comes when the air is clear: so does Christ by
his blessing, Aristot. lib. 1. meteor. cap. 10. Plin lib. 2. cap. 60. and lib.
18. cap. 29.
when the light of his countenance is lift up upon us. 2. As the dew
refreshes, and cherishes the dry and fady fields, (hence it is called the dew
of herbs, Esaias 26.19. which thereby recover life and beauty) so does Christ our
hearts, scorcht with the sense of sin, and fear of wrath. 3. As the dew
allayeth great heats, and moisteneth, and mollifieth the earth, that it may
fructify: so Christ cools the Devils fiery darts, and fills his people
with the fruits of righteousness. He is unto them as a cloud of dew in the
heat of harvest, Esaias 18.4 and makes their souls as so many watered gardens,
Jer. 31.12. 4. As the dew falls in a narrow compass, without noise, and is
felt only by those (in the force of it) on whom it descends: so the grace of
Christ waters his faithful only; secretly and sweetly insinuating into
their hearts: the stranger medleth not with their comforts. See Joh. 14.17. The
cock on the dunghill knows them not.

he shall grow as the lilly.] which has its name in the Hebrew, from its six
leaves, and serves here, and elsewhere to set forth the great comeliness,
Cant. 2.1. (...).
sweet odor and true humility of the Church: for the lilly grows in valleys
(as Theophylact upon this Text notes) sweet it is but not great, and the more
it blossometh, the more it shoots upwards: to teach us heavenly-mindednesse.
It is also of a perfect whiteness, to mind us of innocence. Her Nazarites were
purer then snow, whiter then milk, Lib. 21. cap. 5.
Lam. 4.7. Lastly, Lilio nihil est foecundius, says Pliny, nothing is more
fruitful then the lilly, Et lachryma sua seritur, says the same Author, it
is sown in its own tears. Weeping Christians grow amain, etc.

and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.] i. e. As the Cedars of Lebanon, as the
Chaldee Paraphrast interprets it: or as the frankincense-tree, which takes
very deep rooting, so Cyril senceth it. The lilly (with its six white leaves,
and seven golden-coloured grains within it) soon fades, and loses both beauty
and sweetness: Romans 6.10.
but so does not Christ and his People. He can as well die at the right hand of
his Father, as in the hearts of his Elect, where he dwells by faith: whereby
they are rooted and grounded in love, strengthened with might, by his Spirit in
the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
so that the gates of hell cannot prevail against them. Immo^a manet, is the
Churches Motto; Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur, which is the Venetian Motto.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever, Psalm. 125. Winds and storms move neither Libanus, nor the
well-rooted Cedars thereof: which the more they are assaulted, the better they
are rooted So fares it with the Saints. Plato compares man to a tree
inverted. The Scripture often compares a good man to a tree planted by the
rivers of waters, that takes root downward, and bears fruit upward, 2 King.
19.30.

-- quae quantum vertice ad auras, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 4.

Aethereas, tantum radice ad tartara tendit.
Let us cast forth our roots as Lebanon: stand fast rooted in the truth, being
steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, and with
full purpose of heart cleaving close unto him, 1 Cor. 15. ult. being
established by his grace, Col. 1.11. Heb. 12.28. and 13.9. In the Civil Law,
till a tree has taken root, it does not belong to the soil whereon it is
planted. It is not enough to be in the Church: except like the Cedars of
Lebanon, we cast forth our roots, and are so planted, that we flourish in the
Courts of our God, and bring forth fruit in our old age, Psalm 92.12, 13, 14.

Verse 6. His branches shall spread,] Heb. shall walk, or expatiate; shall
reach out, and stretch themselves all abroad: so shall the Church be propagated
all the earth over: She shall flourish as the Palm Tree, which though it have
many weights hung on the top, and many snakes hissing at the root, yet it still
says, Nec premor, nec perimor, I am insuperable: I am like a green Olive Tree
in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever, and ever, Psalm. 52.8.

and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree,] that goodly tree, Lev. 23 40. that
retains her greenness in the depth of Winter: yea in that Universal deluge,
Noah's Dove met with an olive-leaf. The Lord has called thy name (says the
Prophet to the Church, Jer. 11.16.) A green olive tree, fair and of goodly
fruit. The Cypress is fair, but not fruitful; the fig tree fruitful, but not
fair and flourishing. But the olive tree is both fair and fruitful: her fruit
also is of singular use to mankind both for food, and physic, and light for
the lamp, Exodus 29.20. Lev. 6.15, 16. In one respect it is an emblem of peace,
it makes the face shine, Psalm. 104.15. and in the other, it is an emblem of
grace and spiritual gifts, 1 Job. 2.20. of increasing with the increase of God,
by the Spirit, and of reigning with him in eternal glory.

and his smell as Lebanon.] Whereby is meant, the sweet savor of the Gospel,
which spreads it self abroad in the ministry of the Word, and in the lives
of belcevers, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. who besides their continual offering up to God
spiritual incense and services in prayers, thanksgivings, alms, and
good-works, they perfume the very air they breath upon by their gracious and
savoury communication, Ephesians. 4.29. yea the very company they come into: as a
man cannot come where sweet spices and odours are beaten to the smell, but he
shall carry away the scent thereof in his clothes. Nihil nisi foetidain ^^
foedum exhalavit. River.
When the spirit of Christ blows upon them, and grace is poured into their
hearts, then their lips drop sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.13. and 4.16. then
also their good name is better then a precious ointment, Eccles. 7.1. (See the
Note there) when the wicked stink alive and dead.

Verse 7. They that dwell under his shadow shall return, Or, shall sit still,
shall be at rest. The Chaldee has it, They shall dwell in the shadow of his
Christ. See a like promise of refocillation and protection, Esaias 4.6. Es. 25.4.
Psalm. 35.8. The refuge and refreshment of the Church is whole from Christ:
under the shadow of whose divine grace shhe rests in her members, shaded and
sheltred under the hollow of his hand, when the blast of the terrible ones is
as a storm against the wall, Esaias 25.4. when indignation is kindled ( Esaias
26.20.) and when the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of
the land for their iniquity: then shall true converts have a chamber of rest, a
Pella provided them: or, at least be able to sing David's Requiem, Return to thy
rest, O my soul, hover and cover under Gods wing, run to his Name as a tower,
and be safe. Why art thou cast down, Prove. 18.10.
trust in God, trust in an angry God, in a killing God, as Job, believe him
upon his bare word, and that against sense, in things invisible; and against
reason, in things incredible. This is Faiths triumph, and this is the Saints
safety.

They shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine,] The Seventy and Latin
render it, They shall live with corn; that is, they shall have great plenty of
all things necessary, as Psalm. 87. and 142.14. But the other reading is better;
They shall revive as the corn, which suffering much from frost, hail, snow,
tempest, lies for dead, as it were, in Winter; but at the return of the Sun in
Springtide reviveth, Joh. 12.24. 1 Cor. 15.
and yields a great increase. In like sort, the Vine when pruned and lopped
spreads again, and is the more fruitful: So those that are viti vitae inserti,
set into the true Vine, though lopped and harrowed with sore and sharp
afflictions, yet can truly and triumphantly say, As dying, and behold we live,
as chastened, and not killed, etc. Their bodies also by death are not so much
rotted as refined, 2 Cor. 4.
and shall be conformed to Christ's most glorious body the standard, Phil. 3.
ult.

and the sent thereof as the wine of Lebanon.] which was noted for the best, as
Kimchi proves, and Athenaeus confirms. Among the Jews at this day, the women
when they speak of their dead husbands, say, His scent, or his memorial is as
the wine of Lebanon.

Verse 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do, etc. Heb. Ephraim, what have I
to do, etc. This some make to be the speech of God to Ephraim: as if Ephraim
here were the Vocative case, and God were brought in abhorring the motion of
parting stakes with idols, of sharing his glory with another. But because this,
God never did, (for what communion has light with darkness, Christ with
Belial?) and because the Chaldee Paraphrast, and from him the best Interpreters
supply [shall say] I take this latter to be the better translation. Here then
God promises, first, what Ephraim shall do, or rather, what he by his grace
will cause him to do: he shall utterly abominate and abandon his idols,
whereunto his heart had been joined, or glewed, chap. 4.17. Secondly, what he
will thereupon do for Ephraim: what special favor he will show him, and what
a gracious compensation he will make him, I have heard him, and observed him,
etc. Ephraim now grown penitent, shall say, (See the like ellipsis supplied,
Esaias 5.9.) with utmost indignation and aversation, with greatest heat of anger,
and height of hatred, shall he utter it. See the like, 2 Samuel 16.10. 2 King.
3.13. Matthew. 8.29.

What have I to do any more with idols?] Or sorrows, or buggs, those
Balaams-blocks, those mawmets, and monuments of idolatry, those images of
jealousy, that provoke to jealousy, Ezekiel. 8.3. those dunghill-deities that
can produce no good, hear no prayers, work no deliverance, bring nothing but
evil and anguish to us. What then should we rather do, then pollute those
images that we had perfumed, cast them away with detestation, as a menstruous
clout, and say unto them, Get ye hence, Esaias 30.22? Then will God soon say, I
have heard him thus bemoaning and befooling himself. God has a quick ear in
such a case; He has also an eye open to the supplications of his servants, in
all that they call upon him for, Jer. 31.18.
as Solomon tells us, 1 King. 8.52.

I have observed him.] Or fixed mine eyes upon him, with a most vigilant care,
and critical inspection. It would be wide with Gods Ephraims, and they would
want many things, if he should not see as well as hear, if he should not
seriously, Ephesians. 3.20.
and sollicitously consider and care for them, above all that they ask or
think, and without any monitour, aid and accommodate them. He is oft-times
better to them then their prayers: for why? The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, as well as his ears are open to their cry, Psalm. 34.15. The Vulgar
Latin renders it, Dirigam eum, I will direct him, as a Tutour, and Guardian
does his Pupil, his Orphan. See verse 3. He will also protect him, that nothing
may be wanting to his happiness.

I am like a green fur tree,] green all the year about, and of so large
branches, and broad leaves thick set, that neither Sun nor rain can easily come
at the wearied passenger, reposing himself under them. And whereas Ephraim
might say, Here Is repose, but where shall I have repast? It is added;

In me is thy fruit found,] q. d. The sir-tree is indeed green, and shady, but
withal barren: it bears no fruit, either ad esum, or ad usum. It boweth it
self down to the earth, so that a man may easily lay hold upon the branches,
says Rabbi David, and other Hebrews. But what shall he get by that more then a
green bower, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, etc? As an
Ancient speaking of Ahab, describes him sitting in his ivory Palace in
Samaria, in the time of the three years famine: He had every thing else, but
wanted bread: So Ephraim here, has shade, but can he live by that? what shall
he do for food? He shall not want for that, says God-Alsufficient: for

From me is thy fruit found.] Praesto est, (so some render it) Here it is
ready, and mouth-meet: Polan. Tremel. Tarnou. Tine Deo omnis copia est egestas.
Bern.
yea satis est (so others render it) it is enough of it, satisfactory, and
proportionable to thy necessity. Yea I would thou should know, that what
fruit soever thou have, or shall bear as an Olive or Vine, verse 6. and 7. it
is found in me, proceeds from me, the root of the matter is in me, as Job
speaks in another case.

Verse 9. Who is wise and he shall understand these things,] A patheticall
perclose, Conclusio gnomica. Exclamatio emphatica.
whereby the Prophet (Oratour-like) would leave a sting in the hearts of his
hearers, and so seal up, and fet on all that he had said before. Who is wise,]
q. d. I could wish there were more: but I see there are not many. Store there
are of fools, Stultorum plena sunt omnia, such dust-heaps there are in every
corner to be found, not a few, that either know not the will of God, or stumble
at it. But who has known the mind of the Lord? Who amongst you will give ear
to this? Who has believed our report? 1 Cor. 2.16. Esaias 42.23. Esaias 53.1. Jer.
9.12. Juven. sat. 13. Jer. 8.9. Psalm. 119.98, 99.
or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Who is the wise man that may
understand this? Lucerna accensa hominem quaerebat Aesopus. Jeremy was bidden
run to and fro to find a man that sought the truth, chap. 5.1. Rari quippe
boni. Not many wise, wise I mean to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. that make sure work
for their souls, and draw their wisdom from Gods holy word, from the Mine of
the Mystery of Christ. All others are foolish people, sottish children: they
have no understanding, be they never so shrewd and of deep reach for the world,
Jer. 4.22.
be they never so wise in their generation; the fox is so in his, and the devil
in his, 1 Cor. 9.24.
for when he was but young, he outwitted our first Parents, who yet were no
babies, simple and weak in understanding, as the Socinians affirm them to have
been, or else they would not (say they) have so sinned. A fond conceit, and
without footing in Gods holy word; where we find, that they were created in
Gods image, Ephesians. 4.
which consists in knowledge, righteousness and holiness, as says the
Apostle.

And he shall understand these things,] which none of the Princes of this world
know, 2 Cor. 2.8.
because their learning hangs in their light; and like Moles, they dig
dexterously under ground, but are blind above ground. Sapiens est cui res
sapiunt prout sunt, says Bernard. He is the wise man that savoureth things as
they are. And herein lies the whole wisdom of a man, says Lactantius, ut Deum
cognoscat, and colat, Lib. 3. cap. 30.
that he know and worship God aright, that with a practical judgment, he
ponder the word and ways of God, Arist. Rbst. cap. 11. Metap. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Ethic. l. 6. c. 7. and lib. 6. c. 5. Xenoph. de dict. and fact. Soc^at.
in order to salvation. This is that wisdom that dwells with prudence, Prove.
8.12. Aristotle in many places of his works, distinguishes between Wisdom and
Prudence. Wisdom he makes to be a right apprehending of truths in general:
Prudence, an applying them to particular cases, and uses. But Socrates said,
that there was no such difference: since He that knows good things to do them,
and evil things to avoid them, is to be held a wise man, and none else. They
may seem here, to be put for one and the same: since the wise man is said, not
to know, but to understand, judge, and powder, and the prudent to know:
teaching us, that God calls for a prudent wildom, and a wise prudence,
directing the soul to an orderly carriage, and an holy care, that godliness,
(which is the only wisdom) may run through our whole lives, as the woof does
through the web.

For the ways of the Lord are right,] Understand it not so much of the ways
of Predestination, providence, etc. wherein God walks toward us (which yet are
all right and equal) as of those ways of his Will, Word, and Worship, wherein
he requires us to walk toward Him. These are called the way of God, Matthew.
22.16. and the way of salvation, Acts 16.17. and the way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2.
and the right way, verse 15. and the way of righteousness, verse 21. Right
these ways are called, or strait. First, because they are conform to the Will
of a righteous God, which is the mensura mensurans, Non solum recta, sed and
regula.
the first rule of right, the standard. Secondly, because the matter of it is
holy, and just, and good, a doctrine of righteousness, that teaches us to
give God his due, and men theirs. It is also pat for every purpose, Psalm. 19 7,
8. Prove. 30.5. Of the Book of Psalms, Athanasius has observed, that they are
so penned, that every man may well think they speak de se, in re sua, of
himself, and to his own particular necessities. Thirdly, because it rectifieth
us, and transformeth us into the same image: it makes such as deliver up
themselves thereunto, to walk as patterns of the rule, as a transcript of the
word, that dwells richly in them, and works effectually, as a seed of
immortallity. Fourthly, Psalm. 125.5. Jer.
because it carries us on in a strait line unto a right end, without crooking,
or compassing about, Psalm. 19.8. and 25.4. Has vias qui teru, non terit. Pray
therefore as David did, Psalm. 13.29. lest breaking out into by-ways (all which
are highways to hell) or but stepping over the hedge, to avoid a piece of
foul way, we brush and bruise our selves to get in again, break our bones with
David, etc.

And the just shall walk in them:] Such as are just with a double
righteousness, Imputed, and ^mparted; that of Justification, and this of
Sanctification: these will choose the way of truth, Psalm. 119.30. and 25.12.
and be willing to walk honestly, Heb. 13.18. orderly and by rule, Gal. 5.25.
accurately, (...)
and to the utmost, Ephesians. 5.15. directly, and distinctly, eyeing the mark, and
propounding to themselves the highest pitch, and the best patterns: often
comparing themselves with the rule, laying their lives by the line, and
reforming their outstraies, Psalm. 119.59, 60. making it the main of their
endeavor, that all their deeds may be wrought in God, Joh 3.21. Lo this is the
just man's practice: and it is ^er^ ^opounded for a president.

But the transgressors shall fall therein.] They perish from the way, Psalm.
2.12. they stumble at the word and fall into perdition, as the Chaldee here
has it: and so show themselves to be transgressors, traitors, rebels, yea
reprobates. See 1 Pet. 2.8. they stumble at the word, being aisobedient,
whereunto also they were appoiinted. O fearful! A bridge is made (says a
Reverend Divine) to give us a safe passage over a river, but he who stumbleth
on the bridge is in danger to fall into the river. The Word is given us as a
means to carry us over hell to heaven: but he who stumbleth and quarrelleth at
this means, shall fall in thither, from whence otherwise he had been delivered
by it. Neither may we think the worse of the Word for this accidental effect
of it upon transgressors; since the fault is merely in themselves: As when a
lame man stumbleth in a plain path, the fault is not in the way, but in the
foot. Blear eyes cannot abide the light; nor children endure honey, when they
have sore mouths. The same Sun makes flowers smell sweet, but carrions stink
loathsomely. Moses saved the Israelite, killed the Egyptian: and Abigail's
voice, pacified David, but made Nabal's heart die within him as a stone.
Oecumenius tells us, Columbam vegetat, scarabaeum necat. De mirab. auscul.
that the fragrancy of precious ointments is wholesome for Doves, but kills the
Beetle. And Aristotle affirms, that oil of roses is deadly to Vultures, who
hunt after only dead men's carcasses. Christ himself, who is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, was set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel,
and for a sign to be spoken against, Luke 2.34. for a But-mark, against whom
his enemies should shoot the shafts of their gainsayings. To the Jews he became
a stumbling block, and unto the Gentiles foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. Let them
alone (says He, Mat. 15.14.
concerning the Pharisees, who were offended at his sayings) Let them stumble,
and fall, and be broken, and snared, and taken, Esaias 8.15. Christ in his
Ordinances, is to reprobates a rock of offense, 2 Pet. 2.8. but such a rock as
that, Judge. 6.21. out of which goes fire and consumes them. For if any love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, he is Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Behold they
have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.

Linea ducta mihi est, gratia, Christ, tibi. A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the
Prophecy of JOEL.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE Word of the Lord that came, etc.] See the Note on Hosea 1.1. with
whom, Hierom and some other Interpreters, make this Prophet a Contemporary, for
the likeness of Argument: and that common Canon of the Jew-Doctours, that the
Prophet who sets not down his time, is to be held of the same time, with him
that is placed before him. The Seventy set him not only after Hosea, but also
after Amos and Micah: Sedar Olam Zuta. Sic Funccius Genebrard.
and the ancient Hebrew Chronicle, called Sedar-Olam affirms, that Joel
prophesied together with Nahum and Habakkuk, in the days of king Manasseh:
which Drusius would prove out of Joel 3.5. Others, with more show of reason,
out of 2 King. 21.10. and 23.26. Joel might very well be one of those Prophets
that denounced Gods heavy judgments against Judah, for the sins and
abominations of Manasseh, whom some make to be his convert. For although at
first the Lord spoke to Manasseh, and to his people, but they would not hearken
(2 Chronicles. 23.10) yet the rod might set the word awork afterward: for Manasseh
when he was in affliction besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly (
verse 12.) and Joel might very well be to him a son of Pethuel, or of Gods
persuasion: God, by his ministry might speak to his heart, Hos. 2.14. set
before him an open door, Ostium Dei.
(another Etymon of the name Pethuel) Rev. 3.8. minister unto him an entrance
further and further into Christ's everlasting kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. If any think
it more likely that Joel prophesied under Josiah king of Judah, when that great
famine fell out which is described in like terms by Jeremy, chap. 14.1, 2.
compared with 2 King. 23.26. I shall not strive with him. But that this Joel
was the son of Samuel (here called Pethuel) a perswader of God, because what
he asked of God he obtained) as R. Solomon would carry it, I cannot imagine:
for that Joel was not a Prophet, 1 Samuel 8.1, 3, 5.
but a corrupt Judge.

Verse 2. Hear this ye old men,] Who, as ye are fittest to hear serious
discourses ( Aristotle excludes young men from his Ethick-Lectures, because
raw, and rash: Arist. Ethic.
green wood is ever shrinking, and warping) so ye are more experienced; and yet
not so wise, but that, by hearing, ye may become wiser, Prove. 1.5. Solon said,
he could never be too old to learn. Julianus the Lawyer said, that when he had
one foot in the grave, yet he would have the other in the school. (...). Solon.
David Chytraus, when he lay a dying, lifted up himself to hear the divine
discourses of his friends, that sat by him; and said, that he should die with
better cheer, if he might die, learning something.

and give ear all, etc.] Hear and give ear: draw up the ears of your minds to
the ears of your bodies, Si moribundus o^iam aliquid didicisset. Melch Ad. Jer.
13.15.
that one sound may pierce both. When these two words are joined together, as
they are often, the matter propounded, is either very dark, or very remarkable,
and commands attention, as Deuteronomy. 1.45. Esaias 1.2, 10. Jer. 13.15. Hos. 5.1.

all ye inhabitants of the land,] sc. of Judea, or all ye inhabitants of the
whole earth, q. d. I shall speak of so great a matter, as that I could wish to
be heard all the world over. And because all men love to hear news, I shall
tell you that, that was never known to fall out in any age. Rem novam
pollicetur emphaticoter^s quam more Rhetorico, says Oecolampadius. Prick up
your ears therefore and listen.

Has this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?] Was there
ever such havoc made by several sorts of vermin successively, for four years
together? This was the very finger of God, Exodus 8.19. all whose works (by how
small instruments soever) are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein, Psalm. 111.2. His extraordinary works especially, are to be noted and
noticed; the memory of them is to be transmitted to all posterity. This shall
be written for the generation to come, Psalm. 102.18. They shall come and shall
declare his righteousness, unto a people that shall be born, that he has done
this, Psalm. 22.31. Sed vae stupori nostro. There is a woe to such as regard not
the works of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands, Esaias 5 12.
that make of them but a nine days wonderment at best, and so pass them over.
Whereas every judgment of God should be a warning-peal to repentance. We be
like the Smiths dog, (says One) who the harder the Anvil is beaten on, lies
by, and sleeps the sounder. Like the hen (says Another) which loses her
chickens one after another by the devouring kite; and yet still continues to
pick up what lies before her: such a deep drowsinesse and drossinesse of
spirit, there is upon most of us.

Verse 3. Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their
children,] Heb. Cipher them up diligently, after the manner of A^ithmeticians:
reckon up the several years, Deuteronomy. 19.20.
with the several calamities thereof to your children and nephews; that they
may hear, and fear, and do no more so. Let your woes be their warnings, your
sufferings their standing-sermons; your corrections their instructions. See 1
Cor. 10.5, to 12. Greg. Mor.
Ruina majorum sit cautela minorum. Have thou marked the old-way (says Eliphas
to Job, Chap. 22.15, 16.) which wicked men have trodden, which were cut down
out of time: whose foundation was overflowen with a flood, (Heb. a flood was
poured upon their foundation) which said unto God, Depart from us, etc? He
speaks of those Antediluvian Atheists, buried in one universal grave of
waters. See Josh. 22.20. Neh. 13.26. Jude 5, 6, 7. and learn to keep a
Catalogue of Gods great works, whether of mercy or judgment; yea to polish and
garnish them for the use of posterity, not with vain affectation of wit, not
with pedantick pomp of words, but with sobriety, and holy gravity, as here:
such as may stick by our children, and leave impression.

Verse 4. (...). Zachala. (...) Eruca ab erodendo. Isidor. lib. 12. Orig c 5.
Lecusta quaft locae ustulans. (...).
That which the palmer-worm has left, has the locust eaten,] The palmer-worm
has its name in Hebrew from shaving. (because it shaveth off the fruits of the
earth.) In Chaldee from creeping: In Greek from crookning: In Latin from
gnawing. The Locust has its name in Hebrew from multitudo, wherewith the very
Sun is darkened: In Latin from burning places, where it spoileth: In Greek
from cropping the tops of corn, and plants, which as they fled, they fed upon.
The Canker-worm has its name in Hebrew from licking: In Chaldee from fleeing:
In Greek and Latin from feeding upon the flowers of apples and other fruits.
Comester some render it. Flemings call it, The preacher, a bombo quem polando
edit from the noise it makes as it flies. The Caterpiller has its name
Chasil, from wasting, because it utterly consumes all, not only fruits and
leaves, but tender boughs and branches: Vt ita crescat oration sicut ipsum
malum, to show that as their sin increased, so did their punishment. The Lord
of Hosts cannot possibly want a weapon wherewith to beat a rebel: neither may
wicked men expect that He should lay down the bucklers first. To that bold
question of Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord that I should obey him? God made a large reply, by his armies
of locusts, lice, slies, etc. till Pharaoh was forced to answer himself, The
Lord is righteous. What spoil has been made by these despicable creatures here
mentioned in other countries, Pliny records. Pierius testifies that the
Egyptians made the Locust an Hieroglyphick of Famine. Plin. l. 11. c. 29
And although we find not expressly set down in the holy History, when this
particular plague was executed, yet we need not doubt but it was done according
to Deuteronomy. 28.38, 39. See 1 King. 8.37.

Verse 5. Awake ye drunkards,] ye Ale-stakes, and Suckers (Heb. Shiccorim) that
pour in heady and intoxicating drinks, such as soon lay you to sleep, and
(besides) take away your heart, Hos. 4.11. rob you of your selves, and lay a
beast in your room. Portentosum sane potionis genus, says Pliny concerning
ale, Lib. 14. cap. ult.
that excessively drunk, makes men more sleepy then dormise: besides that
worse sleep of carnal security, Ephesians. 5.14. Romans 13.11. These therefore are
here called upon to be sober and watch, (See 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Pet.
4.7.) ye to weep and howl, to turn their laughter into mourning, and their joy
into heaviness. And why? For their sin they should have done (as that
drunkard in the Ecclesiastical History, that, touched with a sense of his sin,
wept himself blind) but here they are sarcastically called upon to weep for
their great loss, as they esteem it. Vinum merum nondum dilutum.


Because of the new-wine for it is cut off from your mouth,] As many things
fall out betwixt the chin and the challice, the cup and the lip: You made
account to have mouthed it, to have swilled your souls, as they say, and to
have swallowed it down your wide gullets. But behold, it falls out somewhat
otherwise: the caterpiller has been before you, and left you nothing better
then Adams-ale to tipple. This is cold comfort to the drunkard, whose Word is
that of the Vine in Jothams parable, Non possum relinquere vinum meum, Take
away my liquor, Aug. de temp. ser. 131.
you take away my life. Austin brings him in saying, Malle se vitam quam vinum
eripi, He had rather lose his life then his wine. And Ambrose tells of one
Theotimus, that being told by his Physicians, that much quaffing would make him
blind, Vale lumen amicum, said he, Farewell sweet eyes; if ye will not bear
wine, ye are no eyes for me. This drunkard would rather lose his sight then his
sin; his soul then his lust. Such kind of persons are like the Panther, which
is said to love the dung of man so much, as if it be hanged on high from it, it
will skip and leap up, and never leave till it have burst it self in pieces to
get it: and this is the way they take that creature. God will take these
natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.14. after
another manner. He will not only cut them short enough here, Grand sign.
Serag. 186.
but turn a cup of fire and brimstone down their throats, Psalm. 11.6. which
will be worse to them then that ladle full of boiling lead, poured down the
throat of a drunken Turk, by the command of a Bashaw.

Verse 6. For a nation is come up upon my land,] A nation, sc. of vermin, Sic
columella de apibus. Virgil. de piscib Hom. de muscis.
by swarms, as verse. 9. called afterward, an army chap. 2.11. and a people,
chap. 2.2. See the like Prove. 30.25, 26. Is come,] that is, shortly shall come.
Upon my land,] this glorious and goodly land, as it is called Dan. 11.16.
Tarnouius makes this by a mimesis to be the drunkards lamentation A nation is
come up, etc. Strong and without number.] yea therefore strong, because without
number: insuperable, because innumerable. Feeble they are, and yet formidable;
because set on by God Almighty, whose warriers they are, as the Roman spoylers
are called, Matt. 22.7. And perhaps the Assyrians may here be hinted at. I
doubt not but the literal sense is chiefly intended: Neither can I concur with
Oecolampadius, who holds it to be Propheta indignum, unbeseeming the Prophet,
to preach thus concerning worms and locusts: For concerning such poor creatures
deal the Prophets by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, in sundry other places,
Prove. 6.6. Am. 4.9. and 7.1. Nahum. 3.15. Whose teeth are the teeth of a lion.]
that is, they devour all that is in their way; as there is no standing before a
lion, no not before a moth, that has commission to crush a man, Job 4.19.

Verse 7. He has laid my vine wast] The Prophet proceeds in aggravating the
the calamity, that he might make the people the more sensible. There is nothing
in the world more stupid and more stubborn then a drunkard. Of such it is that
that saying of an Ancient is often verified, Ablatus est a peccantibus timor,
ne possit esse cautela, Fear is taken away from offenders, that there should
be no caution against it. Here therefore let the words of the wise be as goads
and as nails fastened by the Masters of the assemblies. Let them so preach
with Peter, that their hearers may be pricked at heart Act. 2, 37. may be galled
and sawed as it were Act. 7.54. may startle and tremble, as Act. 24.25. may
awaken out of that dead lathergy, 2 Timothy 2.26.
whereinto Satan has cast them, and recover out of his snare, who are taken
captive by him at his pleasure. True it is, we can hardly get men to believe
that hell is so hot, or sin so heavy, or the devil so black, or God so
unmerciful as the Preachers make him. The Lion, say they, is not so terrible as
he is painted; nor is our case so dangerous as is born us in hand. Sed nos
pergamus exaggerare, says Pareus here. Let Gods Ministers lay load upon men's
sins, and set forth to the full the miseries that will fall upon them. The
Prophets did so for temporal (as here most graphically and to the life) shall
not we much more for eternal punishments? Oh (says One) that I could get words
to gore your very hearts with smarting pain: that this doctrine might be
written in your flesh!

and barked my fig-tree] Take away the bark from the tree, and the sap can
never find the way to the boughs. These Vermin had barked the trees with
their teeth, cast the bark out of their mouths upon the ground, and made the
branches naked and all white as froth; so that the drunkards, deprived of their
sweet draughts, were brought ad efflationem animae (as the Calde here
expounds Chetsephah) to an yielding up of the ghost, yea, ad laqueum and
restim, as the Latins, to the very halter.

Verse 8. Lament like a Virgin] Our Prophet has done with his drunkards: and
now applies himself to the soberer sort, whom also he calls to deep and
downright mourning, in this case of common calamity; there being not any so
innocent and holy, but had some hand, if not upon the greater cart-ropes yet
surely upon the smaller cords that drew down dearth and judgment upon the land.

lament therefore like a Virgin] betrothed, but bereft of her espoused husband,
before she was married to him; So Piscator. Others understand it of her that
(lately a virgin, but now new-married) passionately loved her husband and
bitterly bewaileth his death; which some young women have taken so grievously,
that they have refused to live any longer; but have chosen to put an end to
their life and grief together, as historians testify.

girded with Sackcloth] Sacco non serico, with mourning weeds as a testimony
of, help to your humiliation. The dead we see, may be lawfully lamented: indeed
it is one of the dues of the dead. (...). Justa defunctorum.
It is fit that the body, when sown in corruption, should be watered by the
tears of those that plant it in the earth. Only we must not mourn in this case
as heathens Without hope. 1 These. 4.13. Our grief must not be excessive, either
for measure or continuance; Neither must we mourn so much for our friends
departed, as for our sins against God. In the former case baldness is
forbidden: in the later it is required Isa. 22.12. And Zach. 12.10.11.13. One
poor woman weeping over Christ shall be as deeply affected as all the people
were in that unspeakable loss of their good king Josiah, at Hadadrimmon in the
valley of Megiddo, where Jeremiah lamented, and all the singing men and singing
women spoke of Josiah in their lamentation, and made them an ordinance etc. 2 Chronicles. 35.24.25.

Verse 9. The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off] Periit libatio
and oblatio. This was the godly man's greatest grief, that there wanted matter
of testifying their thankfulness to God in his commanded worships: and that God
was so deeply displeased, as that he had deprived Himself and his Ministers of
the due allowance; so that they also mourned, and could not chreefully execute
their office, for lack of maintenance; for they were not of the Camelion-kind.

Verse 10. The field is wasted the land mourneth] The sacrifices are not only
cut off for present, but little hopes left for the future: for the field, that
common storehouse, that horreum unde hauriatur, is wasted: Shuddad Sadeh, there
is an elegant allusion in the Original: as in the following words a
Prosopopoeia not inferior to those of the Poets, as Luther and Vatablus here
note.

The land mourneth] By an ordinary Metaphor among the Hebrews, those things
are said to mourn that are wasted, defolated, corrupted and changed for the
worse. Lam. 2.8. the rampart and the wall are said to lament, Plutarch.
and to languish together. When Ephestion died, Alexander not only clypped his
horses and mules hair, but plucked down also the battlements of the walls of
the city: because it should appear that the walls and ramparts did mourn for
his death: So Esaias 24.7. The new wine mourns, the vine languisheth: all the
merry-hearted do sigh. It is fit that if the land mourn, and fail of her
increase, men should much more mourn and be moved with a sense of their sins,
the cause of such calamities. The earth lies under a curse of barrenness, at
its best Genesis 3.17. and was never so beautiful and cheerful since the Fall of
Adam. At this day it lies bedridden, as it were, waiting for the coming of the
Son of God, that it may be delivered from the bondage of corruption Romans 8.20.
But in times of dearth, it seems to mourn more then ordinary, yea to blush
and bleed.

the new wine is dried up] Or is abashed: as loath to look men in the face,
because not answerable to their expectation, See Esaias. 33.9.

the oil languisheth] Or, is sick. Corn, wine, and oil, are the maine supports
of man's life: all is gone.

Verse 11. Be ye ashamed O ye husbandmen] This Repetition of his former
exhortation is not needless: for man is a stout and stubborn creature: neither
goes any thing more against the hair and the heart with him, then to come
downward, and to be so soundly sensible of Gods judgments, as seriously to
repent. Hence St. James his extraordinary importunity in pressing this most
needful but much neglected duty, chap. 4.9, 10. He knew, and so did our
Prophet, that this work must be done, or else men are undone. Hence that heap
of words. Se^^ca.
Nunquam satis dioitur quod nunquam satis discitur. That can never be too much
taught, that is never enough learned.

Verse 12. The Vine is dried up, and the Figtree languisheth] God cutteth you
short of all things both for necessity and delight: and this is so much
inculcated, and iterated, that you may not slight it as a common occurrence:
but be deeply affected with it, as a sore affliction. Verba toties repetita
viva sunt, vera sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. Let no man think that this is a
superfluous tautologie, Aug.
or an idle repetition of the same thing. For, in sacred scripture there is not
a tittle in vain: there is not an apex whereon there hangs not a mountain of
fense, as the Rabbines use to say. By one and the same thing repeated, memory
is helped, affection is excited, and matters of moment are better minded, Phil.
3.1. Besides, Repetitio confirmatio est, says Ambrose, De bone Mart. c. 12.
The repeating of a matter implies 1 The infallible truth of it. 2 The
inexpressible excellency of it. 3 The profitable use of it. 4 The absolute
necessity of it. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum.

Verse 13. Gird your selves and lament ye Priests] Be you Pressed, and first in
the practice of humiliation: Be you an example of the believers in word in
conversation etc. 1 Timothy 4.12. a pattern of piety. Si vis ne flere etc. (...).
Horat. Judge. 9.18.
If others shall lament, you must begin to them: and say as Abimelech did to
his soldiers, What ye have seen me do, make have and do likewise: and as St.
Paul does to his Philippians, Those things which ye have both learned and
received, and heard and seen in me, do; Philip. 4.9.
and the God of peace shall be with you.

for the meat offering and the drink offering, etc.] your maintenance is
subtracted, and (that which should more affect you) the sacred service of God
is intermitted, and so the glory is departed, the daily sacrifice is neglected,
which the Jews counted and called The abomination of desolation. Phineas his
wife was not without natural affection 1 Samuel 4.21. but her spiritual
affections prevailed. Therefore in the declaration of her sorrow, that of her
father in law and husband is but once named: but twice it came in, The glory is
departed, The glory is departed. All comforts are but Ichabods to a good heart
without the ordinances: without the sincere milk of the word Gods newborn
babes cannot be quitted. Tom. 4. Oper. Lat. p. 424.
I could not live in Paradise without the Word (said Luther) as with the Word,
I could easily live in hell it self.

Verse 14. Sanctify ye a fast] Having humbled your selves, preach repentance to
others. That Is the best sermon that is dug out of a man's own breast. Sanctify
your selves first, and then prepare your brothren, says losiah to the Priests
of his time 2 Cron. 35.6. A religious fast (for that the Prophet intends here
by Sanctify) rightly observed and referred to religious ends, is both a
testimony of true repentance, and a furtherance thereunto: for it cames the
rebel flesh 1 Cor. 9. ult. which else will wantonize, and overtop the Spirit
Deuteronomy. 32.15. And it gives wings to our prayers, which before groveld on the
ground, as it were. Fasting inflameth prayer; and prayer sanctifies fasting.

sanctify therefore a fast, call a solemn assembly] Heb. a day of restraint
separating your selves as Zech. 8.19. from all fleshly delights; amercing and
punishing your selves in that sort by an holy revenge, as Psalm. 35.13. and
afflicting your souls with voluntary sorrows for your sins and miseries.

gather the Elders] both those qui canis and annis sunt tales, who are full of
days and so of sins; and also those, that are in place of authority: whose
offenses have sored higher on the wings of Example, and Scandal.

and all the inhabitants of the land] For as all are sin-guilty, so your
unanimity and charity will further the service. All should get together in this
case, and bring their buckets to quench a common fire: the more public and
general the humiliation is, the more pleasing and prevalent, Judge. 20.26. 2 Chronicles. 30.3, 13. Ion. 3.5, 7, 8.

into the house of the Lord your God] which house was a type of Christ, (in
whom God hears His) and had made many promises to prayers there put up in
faith, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. 2 Chronicles. 6.28, 29.

of the Lord your God] Yours still by virtue of the covenant: be sure to keep
faith in heart, when we are at the greatest under.

And cry unto the Lord] with the heart at least as Moses did at the red sea,
Moses egit vocis silentio ut magis audivetur.
when yet none heard him but the ear of heaven only; and as Hannah did when she
uttered no audible voice, and yet poured forth her soul to the Lord with such a
strange and unwonted writing of her lips, that Eli thought she had been drunk.

Verse 15 Alas for the day etc.] 1 Samuel 1.15.
Gr. Alas, Alas, Alas; the Vulgar Latin A, A, A, which a Lupide makes much
ado about, to little purpose.

for the day of the Lord] that is, The day of the greatest evils and miseries
then ever hitherto they had suffered, if repentance prevent not. That they had
suffered much already appears chap. 2.25. but those were but the b^ginnings
of their sorrows, if they yet went on in their sins.

for as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come] An Elegant Agnomination
there is in the Original: together with an allusion to that tremend title of
God Shaddai. The Jews (probably) boasted much and bare themselves over-bold
upon their interest in God almighty. The Prophet therefore tel's them that Gods
greatest power should be little to their profit whiles impenitent: for that it
should be put forth and exercised for their utter destruction. Aben-Ezra
interprets Shaddai a Conqueror, Others a Destroyer, which a Conqueror must
needs be. And hereto this text and that Esa. 13.6. do allude, when they say
Shod shall come from Shaddai, Destruction from the Almighty. Here also we may
learn when we are under affliction, to ascend to the first cause thereof Am.
3.6. as David did in that three years famine 2 Samuel 21.1. See ^am. 3.38.

Verse 16 Is not the meat cut off before your eyes?] Heb. before your eyes: and
so it appears to be the Prophets speech, and not a form prescribed by him to
the people, by adding the word (saying) to the end of the fourteenth verse Cry
to the Lord, saying, Alas for the day etc. And it is as if the Prophet should
say; Do ye not yet see what case you are in? Are ye so stupid and so stout or
sturdy, as not to stoop though starved almost? should not Vexation give
understanding; Are not the fiercest creatures tamed with hard hunger? Will not
men in such case buy or beg food of their deadly enemies? O brawny breasts! O
horny heart strings!

yea joy and gladness from the house of our God?] All Gods services were to be
performed with joy: but now, for want of corn and wine (which cheareth God and
man Judge. 9.13.) the daily sacrifice ceased, and all good hearts were thereby
sadded. See verse. 9 with the Note.

Verse 17 The seed is rotten under their clods] It lies buried or drowned with
excessive rain and moisture, corrupting the seed soon after it was sown: and
that which was not so marred, was afterward, when it came to be corn, dried up
with excessive heat.

The corn is withered.] So that the garners were desolated, the barnes broken
down for want of stuffing, and for that there was no use of them, since they
sowed, but reaped not, Mic. 6.15. The husbandman was called to mourning, Amos
5.16, for a threefold calamity that lay upon his tillage. First, Immoderate
rain, in or about seeding. Secondly, Locusts and other vermin at spring.
Thirdly, extreme drought after all, verse 19, 20. Thus God follows sinners
with one plague in the neck of another, (as he did Pharaoh, that sturdy rebel)
till he have made his foes his footstools To multiply sin, is to multiply
sorrow, Psalm. 16.4. to heap up wickedness, is to heap up wrath, Rom 2.5. I
will heap mischiefs upon them, Si quoties peccent homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempora inermis er^^. Ovid.
says God, I will spend mine arrows upon them, Deuteronomy. 32.23. which yet cannot
be all spent up, as the Poet feared of his Jupiter, that if he should punish
men for every offense, his store of thunderbolts would be soon spent and
exhausted.

Verse 18. How do the beasts groun]? The wild beasts groan in their kind. The
herds of cattell] home and tame beasts, as oxen, etc. are perplexed,] as not
knowing what to do: it is the same word with that, Esth. 3.15. God had hid his
face, (withdrawn his hand) and they were troubled, he takes away their breath,
(for lack of pasture) they die and return to their dust, as David tells us in
his Physics, Psalm. 104.29. Epiphaxius his Physiologer reports of the bird
called Charadius, that being brought where a sick man lies, if he look upon
the sick with a fixed and unremoved eye, there is hopes of recovery: but if he
look another way, the disease is deadly. Sure it is, that if God look in mercy
upon man and beast, they are cared and catered for, Psalm. 36.7. and 104.27. and
145.15, 16, etc. and the contrary. yea the flocks of sheep, etc. which yet can
bite upon the bare, live with a little, and get pasture, where the bigger
creatures cannot come.

Verse. 19. O Lord to thee will I cry.] I will, though others will not. I have
called upon others to cry mightily unto thee, and to meet thee by repentance:
but they ranquam monstra marina, as so many Sea Monsters, pass by my words
with a deaff ear, they refuse to return: thy hand is lifted up in threatening,
and will fall down in punishing, but they will not see, Esaias. 26.11. they will
not search, they will not have their eyes (like the windows in Solomon's
Temple) broad inward: the eyes of their minds are as ill set (for this matter)
as the eyes of their bodies, they see not what is within. But whatever they do,
1 King. 6.4.
my soul shall weep in secret for their pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore,
etc. ( Jer. 13.17.) for their insensiblenesse of their misery.

For the fire has devoured the pastures,] that is, the immoderate scorching
heat of the season. See Psalm. 83.14. Jer. 17.6. Or the blasting wind, as Lyra
expounds it; or the locusts, as Drusius, or God, (who is a consuming fire) by
any, or all these instruments of his wrath, as Tarnouius.

And the flame has burnt all the arees of the field.] This was dreadful; but
yet nothing to that conflagratio mundi, spoken of by St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3.12.
when the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements melt with
fervent heat on the heads of the wicked: who shall give a terrible account,
with the world all on alight fire about their ears.

Verse 20. The beasts of the field cry also unto thee,] Glocitant, a term taken
from Deer: they cry as they can, they cry by implication, imploring thine help,
each for himself. See Psalm. 149.9. Job 39.3. Psalm. 104.27. And should men be
silent?

For the rivers of the waters are dried up,] This makes the Heart bray after
the waterbrooks, yea shed tears as hunters say the Heart will, when hot and
hard-bestead for water. Hereto David seems to allude, Psalm. 42.5. My tears have
been my meat, etc.

And the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.] This had been
said before verse 19. The reason of such repetitions, see above in the Notes on
verses 11, 12. Neither let this last exaggeration of the common calamity, by
that which befell the bruit beasts, seem superfluous. For whereas the security
and obstinacy of most men is such, that they take little notice of present
pressures, but promise themselves peace and safety, whatsoever God by his
servants shall say to the contrary: it is but needful surely, that their
danger should be inculcated, and their calamity set out, and set on with utmost
importunity, and vehemence.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. BLow ye the trumpet in Zion,] Idem aliis verbis repetit, says Mercer
here. The Prophet repeateth the same as in the former Chapter; only in other
words, more at large, and after another manner: pressing the people further to
the practice of repentance by many sweet promises of the blessings of this, and
a better life. Our Prophet may seem to be of the same mind with Tertullian,
who said that he was nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, born for no other end,
but to repent, and to call upon others so to do. Tot autem verbis and figuris
ntitur, says Luther, he uses so many words, and figures, because he had to do
with a people that were harder then rocks, Jer. 5.3. as also, because there is
an absolute necessity of repentance. Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum, as our
Savior tells his Disciples twice in a breath, Luke 13.2, 5. The Prophet had
urged them hereunto from the evils they felt, or feared, chap. 1. Pain and
penitency are words of one derivation: God plagueth men that he may make them
cry Peccavi: not Perij only, I am undone, as Cain; but peccavi, I have done
very foolishly, as David. The seventeen first verses of this Chapter, are
Hortatory; the rest Consolatory. The day of the Lord comes; therefore Repent.
This is the sum of the exhortation. It comes, (...). Herod.
and that instantly; Give warning therefore: God loves to foresignifie, (says
the Heathen Historian) and to premonish, before he punish. He dealt so with
Cain, to whom he read the first lecture of Repentance, Genesis 4. as he had done
of Faith, to his father Adam, in the Chapter before. He dealt so with the old
world, with the Sodomites, Ninevites, etc.

Sound an alarm in my holy Mountain,] Ring the bells backwards, (as amongst us
they do) the house is on fire; the enemy is at hand.

Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble,] and take course to prevent, or
mitigate the ensuing mischief; to cut the cart-ropes of sin, that pull down
wrath upon the land.

for the day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand.] An end is come, is
come, is come, as Ezekiel has it, chap. 7.6, 7. I will overturn, overturn,
overturn, as the same Prophet has it elsewhere. Ezekiel. 21.27. and 10.
Should we then make mirth? as it is in the same Chapter: should we sleep upon
a mast-pole, dance upon a weathercock? go hallowing and hooping to the place
of execution?

Verse 2. A day of darkness, and of gloominesse,] Lest they should imagine it
to be some light matter, that has been, and is still threatened, he sets forth
to the life, the bitterness of that day, so lowering and lightlesse, that it
can hardly be called a day: a dark and doleful doomesday it will be to the
impenitent, infaustus and infelix, dismal and dreadful. What better can be
expected by those Tenebriones, that delight in the deeds of darkness, and are
acted by those Rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12.
the Devils, whom they follow as they are led, 1 Cor. 12.2. till they fall into
outer darkness, even that darkness beyond a darkness, (as the dungeon is
beyond, (...).
or below the prison) where they shall never see the light again, till they
see all the world on a light fire. Let those Lucifugae look to it, that love
darkness better then light: for, besides what they meet with here, they shall
one day have their bellies full of it in that dungeon of darkness. Exodus 19.15.


A day of clouds and of thick darkness,] Caused by that huge army of Locusts,
etc. coming in great swarms, Postera vix summos spargebar lumina montes Orta
dies. Virg. Lux subit, and primo feriente cacumina sole. Ovid.
and darkning the air.

as the morning spread upon the mountains,] i. e. long, lateque, far and near,
all the country over, and that in an instant: even as the Morning spreads
abroad upon a sudden over the tops of hills, though they be a great way off.
Hereby is imported, that the calamity here threatened, is such as they can
neither avert, nor avoid: Irretensibilis est, says Luther.

A great people and a strong,] So the Locusts are called. See Chap. 1.4, 5, 6.
not without some respect to the Chaldeans, that should afterward carry them
captive, as Hierom here glosseth.

there has not been ever the like,] sc. in the land of Judea, nor of the like
continuance. See chap. 1.2, 3.

even to the years of many generations.] Heb. of an age, and an age; so Deuteronomy.
32.7. Joel 3.20. This assures us of the greatness of this peoples sin, since
they were so signally punished: for God does not use to kill flies with
beetles, as they say.

Verse 3. A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns,] Such
waste these vermin shall make: like as it is said of the great Turk, that
wherever he sets his foot, there never grows grass again; he does so eat up
the countries where he comes with his huge armies. And the late Lord Brook,
Page 47.
in his discourse of Episcopacy notes, that that unhappy proverb amongst us
was not for naught, The Bishops foot has trodden here. In Biscay, a Province of
Spain, they admit no Bishops to come amongst them: and when Ferdinand the
Catholic K. came in progress hither, accompanied amongst others by the Bishop
of Pampelune, Heyl. Geog. page 55.
the people arose in arms, drove back the Bishop, and gathering all the dust,
on the which they thought he had trodden, flung it into the Sea. What fires they
kindled here in Queen Mary's days, devouring six or seven hundred at least of
Gods faithful witnesses in five years space: And what work they made in our
remembrance thorowout the three Kingdoms, to the imbroyling of all, and their
own utter ruin, I need not relate. That renowned Author afore-cited, had told
them time enought, L. Brooks discourse of Episcop. 39.
(but that they were destined to destruction) that if they forbear to touch the
supreme Authority of the Land, which they affected, it was but as once Mercury
spared Jupiters thunderbolts, which he durst not steal, lest they should roar
too loud, or, at least, burn his fingers.

The land is as the garden of Eden,] i. e. of all kind of pleasures and
delights. Eden inde, (...).
See Genesis 2.8. and 13.10. Strabo speaks spitefully of the land of Canaan, as if
it were a dry, stony, and barren country, not worth the seeking after.
Rabshaketh shows more ingenuity then this, Strabus and pravus Strabo (as one
therefore calls him) 2 King. 18.32. Tacitus commends it for a fertile soil:
so does Pliny: but above all, the holy Scripture sets it forth to be Sumen
totius orbis, Heidfeld.
a land flowing with milk and honey, etc. Exodus 3.15. Deuteronomy. 32.13.

and behind them a desolate wilderness.] Not such a wilderness as yielded
pastures, and habitations for shepherds, chap. 1.19, 20. but utterly desolate,
and therefore unhabitable, as under the Torrid Zone. No place can be so
pleasant, but sin can lay it waste. A fruitful land turns the Lord into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psalm. 107.34.
There is no foot-step left at this day of that gallant Garden, planted by God
himself: or if any, cecidit rosa, sit spina; the place remains in the upper
part of Chaldea, but not the pleasantness of the place. The like we may say of
Sodom, of Jerusalem, of Greece, of Asia the less, of Germany, Ireland, etc.
England has hitherto subsisted merely by a miracle of Gods mercy, and by a
prop of his extraordinary patience: The Lord continue it to the glory of his
Name, and the good of his poor people. Fiat, fiat.

Verse 4. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses: and as
horsemen,] i. e. the Locusts, and other Insects come on amain: they march with
much nimblenesse and swiftness. An horse is a warlike creature, full of
terror: (...). Pausan.
so swift in service, that the Persians dedicated him to their god, the Sun, as
the swiftest creature to the swiftest god. See Job 41.20. Prove. 21.31. In
Persia they do all, almost on horseback: they buy, sell, confer, but especially
fight on horseback to this day. So they did of old; and so did the Chaldeans,
from whom they took the Monarchy. These were horsemen, and not as horsemen:
this place therefore is properly and principally to be understood of the
locusts. Confer Rev. 9.7.

Verse 5. Like the noise of charets on the the tops of mountains,] Not only on
the tops of standing-corn, (as other Locusts, which therehence also have their
name (...)) but as the hurry of charrets in stony places, Rev. 9.9. For in that
book of the Revelation, the Penman borrows all the elegancies and flowers of
the old Testament, thereby to set out the story of the New in succeeding ages:
as herehence the Popish Priests are fitly called Locusts for their numerosity
and voracity, Rev. 9.3. They are also likened unto horses ( verse 7.) fed and
fierce to run, and rush into the battle, not without noise: Like the noise of a
flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, Eccles. 7.6. Or the rattling of the
jumping charet-wheels, Nahum 3.2.

as a strong people set in battle array,] In a bloody fight between Amurath the
third, King of Turkey, and Lazarus Despot of Servia, many thousands fell on
both sides. The brightness of the armor, and weapons, was as it had been the
lightning: the multitude of lances, and other horsemens-staves shadowed the
light of the Sun: arrows and darts fell so fast, that a man would have thought
they had poured down from heaven. The noise of the instruments of war, with
the neighing of horses, and outcries of men, was so terrible and great, that
the wild-beasts in the mountains stood astonished therewith: Turk. hist. fol. 200.
and the Turkish Histories, to express the terror of the day, vainly say,
that the Angels in heaven, amazed with that hideous noise, for that time forgot
the heavenly hymns, wherewith they always glorify God.

Verse 6. Before their face, the people shall be much pained,] This is a
confirmation of the former assertion: the people when they shall see those
swarms of Locusts, etc. mustering and marching in the air, they shall be much
pained (as a traveling woman is) pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them,
their faces shall be as flames, Esaias 13.8. for fear least they should light on
their country, and lay all wast.

all faces shall gather blackness.] Pallorem, palenesse, so Castalio renders
it: a blackish lead-like-palenesse, such as is on sooty-pots. (the Original
here is, has gathered a pot, Nigricantem colorem significat. Mercer.
that is by a metonymy, a pot-like-blacknesse) See Nah. 3.10. Jer. 30.6. Psalm.
68.13. where, by blackness (such as slaves and scullions contract by lying
among the pots, and smoky, and sooty chimney-corners) is set forth the
exceeding great fear, and affliction that Gods people are often in: and from
whence he graciously promises to deliver them that trust in him. Such shall
not be afraid -- whose heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. It was fear that
now caused (the natural heat and the blood retiring to the heart, to receive
it, as in a sudden surprise, the soldiers run to the Castle) palenesse and
blackness of face. It was hunger afterward, that burnt them, Deuteronomy. 32.24. and
made their visages blacker then a cole, (as Lam. 4.8.) or darker then
blackness, as the Original has it.

Verse 7. They shall run like mighty men,] Horribiles, fortissimi ut Gigantes.
They shall strike terror into others, Oecolamp.
as in the former verse: but themselves, as Giants and Conquerours, shall
overrun all, with incredible swiftness and prowess. Strong soldiers have
strong sinews: and thence their speedy marches, and quick dispatch. 2 Samuel 2.18^
Asahel was light of foot as a wild-Roe. Aehilles is every where by Homer
called Swift-footed. Alexander the Great, being asked how he so quickly
conquered so many countries? (...).
answered, (...), By my nimblenesse. Caesar, in omnia praeceps, says Lucan, he
passed the Alps, and was at Rome with a trice, as they say. His Word was,
Veni, vidi, vici, I no sooner came, but I overcame. He is said to have taken a
thousand Towns, conquered three hundred Nations, took prisoner one million of
men, and to have slain as many. What a deal was done by Joshua in a short space
at the conquest of Canaan? Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, is reported
to have won in the Indies, by his Captains and Commanders there, Tukr. Hist.
28. Kingdoms, in 28. Battles. Bajazet the Great Turk, for his swiftness and
fierceness, was surnamed Gilderun, or lightning. To such worthy Warriors,
ready and speedy, prompt and present, are these Locusts, Gods armed soldiers,
here compared, They shall run like mighty men, they shall climb the wall like
men of war, that cannot be kept out, that will not be worsted.

They shall march every one (Heb. man) on his way,] though many, yet they shall
not one hinder, or hurt another, but hold a comely equipage, keep rank and
file, observe the laws and rules of discipline, and so Conjuncti pollent etiam
vehementer inertes. They go forth all of them by bands, or gathered together,
says Solomon, Prove. 30.27. So do those Locusts in the Revelation: the Popish
Clergy under their King, the Destroyer, Rev. 9.11. Locusts they are fitly
called, for their numerosity and voracity. The Jesuits alone have sometimes
200000. scholars. And how they feed on the fat and drink the sweet where they
swarm, who knows not?

they shall not break their ranks] Or, writh and pervert their paths, Sic and
R. Abrab. in Comment.
as Aben-Ezra out of the Arabic idiom renders it. Hierom testifies that He
and others saw in Judea troops of Locusts flying in so even an order, ut ne
puncto quidem aut ungue teausverso declinent ad alteram, that you could not say
they brake rank at all; tanto ordine and dispositione jubentis Dei volitant,
says He, Psalm. 47.
so strict and beautiful discipline there is in Gods whole army, to whom
belong the sheilds of the earth, the Militia of the whole world.

Verse 8 Neither shall one thrust another] Or straiten another. The Greek word
(...) to press and persecute, seems to come from this Hebrew word Dakag. The
Prophet still alludeth to the manner of marshalling armies in such sort, as
that neither may the soldiers hinder one another, nor the enemy have any
advantage to break in upon them. Exercitus pulchre dispositus, and amicis
pulcherrimus videtur, and hostibus inexpugnabilis, says Zenophon; that is, In
Oeconom.
A well-ordered army seems both beautiful to their friends, and invincible
to their enemies.

They shall walk every one] Heb. Man, Mighty man q. d. (...) vir validus
Mesillah Via trita.
Each locust shall walk and stalk, as a strong lusty man in his trodden track,
in the path that God has put him into, and shall hold to it.

and when they fall upon the sword] Heb. the long sword, or javelin, they shall
not be wounded: as if they were unwoundable, or shot-free, as the Poet fabled
of Achilles, and as the Persians, vanquished by the Athenians at the field of
Marathon, cried out (...) Stobaeus.

We fell them, yet they fall not: we then wound,
And think them dead, but they are safe and sound.


Verse 9 They shall ^un to and fro] As soldiers do when they have taken a town
by assault, and have leave to plunder. En victoriam and hostilem insultationem,
says Mercer here. See the lively portraicture of Victory and Triumph.

they shall ru^ upon the (...)] After they have scaled it (as before) they shall
walk or run upon it as Conquerors, without fear of an enemy: Alexander the
great would do so.

they shall climb up upon the houses] No longer now the owners castles: for
they shall be ferrited out of their retiring rooms, or forced to do as
Sardanapalus the Assyrian Monarch did; who, straighted by the enemy, sacrificed
himself with his wealth and wenches to Vulcan in a wood-pile, (as One phraseth
it) in his royal palace.

they shall enter in at the windows, as a theef] whose property is 1. to climb
up some other way, and not to enter in by the door Ioh. 10.1. death also
gets in by the windows and that way enters into palaces Ier. 9.21. so does
Satan (that thief of the truth, as Basil calls him) wind himself into the
soul by the eyes, those windows of wickedness and loop-holes of lust. 2. to
rifle and ransack, and leave little enough behind him. What clean-work these
insets made, see before chap. 1.4. and take notice what great matters God
Almighty can do by the most contemptible creatures. Quid ciniphe vilius, says
Philo the Jew, what can be baser then a louse? and yet all the strength of
Egypt was brought down by that despicable vermin? Pliny in his eight book and
twenty fourth chapter tel's us out of Mr. Varro, that a great town in Spain was
undermined and overturned by conyes; Clara exitii documenta sunt ex
contemnendis animalibus. Plin. Munster. Cosmogr. An. Dom. 969.
another in Thessaly by Moles: a third in France undone by Froggs: a fourth in
Africa by Locusts: a fifth in Italy by Serpents etc. Who has not heard of
Hatto, that merciless Archbishop of Ments devoured by Mice, though he had
motted up himself against their invasion in an Island? God cannot possibly want
a weapon wherewith to beat his Rebels.

Verse 10 The earth shall quake before them etc.] Tragicis figuris calamitatem
amplificat, says Luther here. By such tragical terms the Prophets use to set
forth an horrible desolation, such as first the Assyrians and afterward the
Romans brought upon the Jews: the Turks and Saracens upon the Christian
churches whether there were any such earthquake or stupendous concussions of
the heavenly bodies as is here described, is uncertain. Strange forerunners
there were both in heaven and earth of the last destruction of Jerusalem, as
Christ also had foretold. In the days of Justinian the Emperor, Mr. Clark in
the life of Justinian page 67.
the Sun for the greatest part of an year gave so little light, that it was
but equal to the light of the Moon, the sky being clear without clouds or any
thing to shadow it: after which, there followed a great famine, and much war
and bloodshed.

the Sun and the moon shall be dark] Wondrous expressions to meet with their
wondrous stupidity. The Hebrew Doctors (and Oecolampadius much disliketh it
not) allegorize the text; and by the earth understand the common people, by the
heavens the Grandees, by the Sun and Moon the king and kingdom, as by the
Stars those of indifferent rank, all which are woe begone (as they say) by
reason of the present calamities: as when upon the death of Prince Henry, Great
Britain was said to be all in black; and as Demades was wont to say of the
Achenians, nunquam eos sapere nisi pullis vestibus indutos that they were never
so wise, Plu^arch.
as when they were in mourning weeds.

Verse 11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army] In the head of
his army, as Generals use to do for encouraging the soldiers. A General should
be like Quintilians Orator, Vir bonus, dicendi peritus, both valiant and
eloquent, as was Cato Censorius, Si actu ejus penitus ignorasses, per linguam
tamen militem esse diceres, ut quidam de Caesare.
Optimus Orator, Optimus etiam Imperator says Pliny: and Julius Caesar, and
Hunniades, who were Masters of speech as well as men of their hands: So was
Joab David's General, of whose speech to the army 2 Samuel 10.12. Pelican says,
Non potuit vox Duce dignior cogitari, A braver speech could not have been
uttered by the mouth of a mortal. But here God himself utters his voice
before his army: for the Lord is a man of war Exodus 15.3. a Victor of wars
(as the Chalde there has it) and what wonder since the voice of the Lord is
powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty. Psalm. 29.4. he sets on and
gives the signal of the battle to these Locusts, he puts spirit into them and
cries Courage, my hearts: and thence it is, that they are so valorous and
victorious.

for his camp is very great] His camp these Locusts are called, though they
knew it not. He hisseth for the Fly of Egypt and for the Be, that is in the
land of Assyria. And they shall come and rest all of them in the desolate
vallyes, etc. Esa. 7.18, 19. The Assyrian, is the rod of Gods anger, and the
staf in his hand. I will send him says the Lord, against an hypocritical
nation, to avenge the quarrel of my covenant. Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so etc. Esaias. 10.5, 6, 7. But it is here, as when
in applying of horse-leeches, the Physician seeks the health of his patient,
the leech only the filling of his gorge. Almighty God as he disposes and
orders membra culicis and pulicis, as Austin has it, the members of the
meanest creatures: so by the same power and providence, he over-ruleth all
their motions, to his own glory.

for he is strong that executes his word] Or, that thing is strong, that weak
Locust, set a work by God, shall do his will vigorously (and not faintly as
Jer. 48.10.) shall go through stitch with it, and none shall hinder it.

for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible] Tremble therefore and
humble under this mighty hand of God: let this earthquake work in you an
heart-quake, these horrible commotions and calamities draw from you a shower of
tears, or at least a storm of sighs for your sins: unless ye hold it better
to be carnally secured then soundly comforted.

who can abide it?] Or else avoid it, otherwise then by repentance? Am. 8.12.
Fly, Dr. Reinolds
says a Reverend man, from Gods anger to Gods grace. Blood-letting is a cure
of bleeding: and a burn a cure against a burn. Running to God is the way to
escape him: as to close, and get in with him that would strike you, does avoid
the blow.

Verse 12 Therefore also now says the Lord] Now though it be late first, and,
as you may think, Nunquam sero si serio.
too late. Now, though the dreadful day of the Lord be very near at hand: yea
though the Locusts be already come, as Kimchi senseth it. Oh that ye would know
at the last in this your day of grace, the things that belong to your peace,
before the gate be shut, the draw-bridg taken up, the taper burnt out etc.
Behold now is the accepted time: behold now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor.
6.2. The Apostle (after the Prophet Esaias) purposely beats upon the (...), as
if he should say, Now, or never; since thou may, the very next minute be cut
off by the stroke of death from all further time of repentance and acceptance.
Up therefore and be doing: It is the Lord himself that thus says,

Turn ye even to me,] Vsque ad me, altogether as far as to me: Stultitia semp^r
in ^p^t vivere. Sen.
give not the half turn only: begin not to repent, and then give over the
work. Some are ever about to repent, but they can never find time, and hearts
to set seriously about it, to do it in good earnest. Some wamblings they have,
as I may say, and some short-winded wishes, some kind of willingness and
velleity, but it does not boil up to the full height of resolution to return.
The Prodigal changed many places, ere he came home. Many came out of Egypt,
that yet never came into Canaan.

with all your heart,] with the heart, Jer. 4.14. Prove. 23.26. and with the
whole heart, in opposition to a divided heart, Hos. 10.2. a double heart, Jam.
4.8. a heart, and a heart, Psalm. 12.2. This whole heart, is elsewhere called, a
true heart, Heb. 10.22. a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. truth in the inwards,
Psalm. 51.6. where there is an unfeigned faith, 1 Timothy 1.5. laborious love, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. sound and cordial repentance, as here, undissembled wisdom, Jam.
3.17. such holiness as renders a man like to a crystal glass with a light
in the midst of it, doing the truth, Job. 3.21 and having his works full,
Rev. 3.1, 2. being a true worshipper, Joh. 4.24. an Israelite indeed, Ioh.
1.47. God, he knows to be just, and jealous: he will not endure corrivals, or
compartners in the kingdom. His jurisdiction is without peculiar: he will not
divide with the Devil. Be the gods of the Heathen good-fellows? says One; the
true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. He must
be served truly, that there be no halting; and totally, that there be no
halving

and with fasting, weeping, and with mourning.] with deep, and downright
humiliation, suitable to your sins as Ezr. 9.6. ye have inveterate stains; such
as will not be gotten out, till the cloth be almost rubbed to pieces. Satan
has entrenched himself in your hearts, and will not be gotten out, but by
fasting and prayer. Fasting, is of it self but a bodily exercise, and meriteth
nothing; for religion consists not in meat and drink (...) the belly full or
empty, Romans 14.17. Col. 2.23. But fasting is a sin^ular furtherance to the
practice of repentance, and the enforcing of our prayers. ^ee Ezr. 8.21. As
full feeding increases corruption, Ier. 5.7, 8. so religious A^stinence
macerateth, tameth, and subdueth the Rebel Flesh, 1 Cor. 9.27. giving it the
blew-eye, as there, and 2 Co^. 7.11. so that not the body so much, (...).
as the soul is made more active by emptiness. Fasting days are soul-fatting
days, they fit men for conversion as here, and make much to the humbling of
the spirit; hence they are called days of humiliation, and of self affliction,
Levit. 16.31. and 23.37.

and with weeping, [Drown your sins in a deluge of tears; cleanse your wounds
by washing in this precious water: quench hell fire with it, kill the wo^m,
fetch out sins venom: there is a healing property in these troubled waters.
Tears of vine-branches are said to cure the leprosy, and the Olive is reported
to be most fruitful, when it most distill eth. These April showers bring on
May-flowers, and make the heart as a watered garden; or as some faces appear
most oriently beautiful, when most bedewed with tears. Peter never looked so
sweetly as when he wept bitterly. David never sung more pathetically then when
his heart was broken most penitentially, Psalm. 6. and 51. when tears in stead
of gemmes were the ornament of his bed, as Chrysostom speaks. Mary Magdalen
(that great weeper) as she made her eyes a fountain to wash Christ's feet in, so
she had his wounds as a fountain to bath her soul in; yea she had afterward
the first sight of the revived Phoenix, whom she held fast by those feet, that
had lately trod upon the lion, and the adder, etc.

and with mourning.] This is added, as a degree beyond the former. Men may
fast, and yet find their pleasures, Esaias 58.13. weep out of stomach as Esau, or
complement, as Phryne the harlot, who was surnamed (...), weep-laugh, because
she could easily do either: and as among the Brasileans, Magirus in G^^gr. Vt
flerent oculos erudi resuos, Ovid.
tears are for a present salutation, and as soon gone, as if they had said, How
do ye? What is an humbling day, without an humbled heart? not only a religious
incongruity, but an high provocation; like Zimri's act, when all the
Congregation were weeping, before the door of the Tabernacle. Here therefore
the Lord calls to mourning, funerallmourning, Nudaque marmoreis percussit
pectora palmis. Ovid. In gloss. margin.
as the word signifies: with tabring upon the breast, Nah. 2.7. smiting on the
thigh, Jer. 31.19. beating on the head, face, and other parts, sicut
mulierculae in puerperio facere solent, says Luther there. See Esaias 32.11. and
22.12. Sorrow for sin must not be slight and sudden, but sad and soaking: the
heart must be turned into an Hadadrimmon, Zech. 12.10, 11. where the Prophet
seems in a sort, to be at a stand, for comparisons fit enough, and full enough,
to set forth their sorrow, who looking upon Christ whom they had pierced, felt
the very nails sticking in their own hearts, as so many sharp daggers, or
stings of scorpions. The good soul (say the Schoolmen) sees more cause of
grief for sinning, then for the death of Christ: because therein was aliquid
placens, something that pleases: but sin is simpliciter displicens, simply
displeasing. So that Gods mourners need not send for mourning women to teach
them to mourn, as Jer. 19.17. but rather have need to be comforted, lest they
should be swallowed up with overmuch grief, 2 Cor. 2.7. and lest Satan get an
advantage against them, verse 11. by mixing the detestable darnell of
desperation, Act. and Mon.
with the godly sorrow of a pure penitent heart, as Mr. Philpot Martyr speaks.

Verse 13. And rent your heart and not your garments,] i. e. not your garments
only, Schindler.
which was gestus perturbationis, among the Jews, a gesture usual with them,
to set forth the greatness of their grief and displeasure; as 1. At funerals,
and loss of friends, Tumpius Aeneas humer^^ abscinaere vestem Auxilioque
vocare Deos, and tendere palmas. Virg. Aeneid.
as Genesis 37.2. In case of blasphemy, as 2 King. 18.3. In time of common
calamity, Esth. 4.1. Godly sorrow for sin should exceed all other sorrows
whatsoever, both in intention, and extension: the whole soul sending continual
streams into it out of every faculty. And hence it is that the Prophet here
calls upon them to Ront, and as it were to discontinuate their hearts, Cor
integrum, cor scissum, the broken heart is the only sound heart: and to rent
the garment, and not the heart, is as very a juggle as that of Players, who
seem to wound themselves, but do not; and make a show of thrusting themselves
through their bodies, but the sword passes only through their clothes.
Stage Players can act to the life those whom they personate; yea outstrip them
in outward actions: so do hypocrites the true Christian. 2 Cron. 34.27
Does good Josiah melt at the menaces of the law, and weep, and rend his
clothes, and humble himself? wicked Ahab will, also in like case, 1 King. 21.27.
rend his clothes, put sackcloth upon his flesh, fast, lie in sack cloth, and
go softly and heavily, as sorrowful men and mourners use to do. Does the
Publican fix his eyes on the ground? those hypocrites in Esaias will hang down
their heads as bulrushes. Does holy Timothy weaken his constitution with
religious abstinence? the false Pharisee will not only weaken his
constitution, but wither and disfigure his complexion, (...),
that he may appear to men to fast, Matthew. 6.16. Such pains men will be at for
applause, for a little stinking breath; which yet cannot blow one cold blast
upon them, when they shall be frying in hell for their seemingnesse. Rent
therefore your hearts, says the Prophet: break up your fallow-ground,
circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the filthy foreskin of your
hearts, Jer. 4.3, 4. wash them from wickedness that ye may be saved, verse 14.
Be ye active, and voluntaries in your sorrows for sin. Virtus nolentium nulla
est; Fained and forced grief is nothing worth. Judas grieved, confessed,
restored, and yet miscarried. He went not forth, as Peter, to weep bitterly: he
did not cast himself: into heaviness, as Iam. 4.9, 10. It was fired out of
him, as sweet-water out of roses. It was squeezed out of him, as Verjuice out
of crabs. Gods people are commanded to afflict themselves with voluntary
sorrows, Lev. 16. to loath themselves for all their abominations, Romans 8.13.
Ezekiel. 16. to mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, to do it with their
own hands: and not to give over the practice of it, till they feel their hearts
to ache, and quake within them, yea to fall asunder in their bosoms, like drops
of water. See all this done by David, after he had numbered the people, 2 Samuel
24.10. Some shadow of it we have in the example of Epaminondas the Theban
General, who the next day after the Victory and Triumph, went drooping and
hanging down his head: and being asked, Plutar.
why he did so? he answered, Yesterday I felt my self too much tickled with
vainglory: therefore I correct my self for it to day. 2 Samuel 24.10. Expounded.
But we have a better example in holy David, whose heart smote him, says the
Text, and made him smart inwardly. He was not yet smitten, either by Gods hand,
or the Prophets reproof (as afterward) but his sanctified conscience did its
office of a faithful Monitour, and household Chaplain: his heart misgave him.
Bee-masters tell us, that those are the best hives, that make the greatest
noise. Sure it is that that is the best conscience, that suffers not a man to
sleep in sin. David's heart smote him. But for what? for numbering the people. It
was for his own sin, for a small, for a secret sin, for a failing in the manner
only. David knew that a man may dye as well of an inward bleeeding, as of an
outward hurt. The good soul is often afflicted for faylings in that holy duty
which others applaud and extol. And David said unto the Lord: he could not rest
till he had opened his mind unto him by confession and supplication, and so got
a vent to his troubled spirit: as when a sore is opened, there is ease
immediately. To God therefore he addresseth himself, not to men (as Judas did
and Papists do, and many amongst us being in pain of conscience will rather
shark for ease, then sue for pardon,) and acknowledges with aggravation the
iniquity of his sin, the sinfulness of it as Paul's expression is Romans 7.13.
Psalm. 32.3.
(for sin is so vile that he could call it no worse then by its own name) I
have sinned greatly in that I have done: his sin swelled like a toad in his
eyes, and he spat it out of his mouth with utmost indignation. He confesses
sorrowfully, but not desperately, as Judas: for he both cries for pardon. Take
away the iniquity (for as for the punishment how he stood affected see verse.
17. Let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and my fathers house) and
concludes himself Gods servant, yea proves himself so, (as some godly learned
think,) by those following words, For I have done foolishly; q. d. If I deserve
not to be called Gods servant in regard of my late sin (and indeed God calls
him but plain David verse. 12. Go and say to David, not to my servant David,
as at other times,) yet at least in regard of my later service of confession
joined with Reformation; for now I see I have done very foolishly, who once
thought I had done wondrous wisely and politickly.

and turn unto the Lord your God] Of turning to God see at large, the Note on
Zach. 1.3. Here it is prescribed as a remedy against Gods wrath, and pressed
again and again, to show the necessity of doing it, or we are utterly undone.
So elsewhere, Turn you, turn you, why will you dye? except ye repent, ye must
needsly perish. Aut poenitendum aut pereundum, Either you must turn on earth,
Ioh. 3.3.
or burn in hell: be born again, or ye cannot see the kingdom of God. Heaven
was too hot to hold the Apostate-Angel. And although the devil could get into
paradise: yet no unclean thing ever gat into heaven. No dirty dog may trample
on that golden pavement. The pure in heart only can see God, as whole eyes can
look upon the Sunbeams, and as transparent bodies receive the light. Turn you
therefore unto the Lord, If a man see a Lion or a burning fire before him, he
will make some shift to turn another way. So here: biasse, for there is no
safety in going forward: since our God is a consuming fire: and as a roaring
lion will tear, and rent the cawle of our hearts in sunder Hos. 13.8. if we
rent not our hearts, and turn unto him. By turning may well be here meant
Reformation, that Repentance from sin (as Humiliation before required, is in
scripture called Repentance for sin) for it is not enough to mourn unless we
mend also, to bewail our wickedness, but we must embrace better courses, Jer.
26 13. Esa. 1.16. Mat. 3.8. Romans 12.9, and 13, 11. Ephesians. 4.22. God for this
cause gives us the light of Nature and Scripture, besides other means, and
time enough. Had he given us but one Prophet only, and but forty days, as he
dealt by Nineveh, we should have done it as they did. How much more now that we
abound with leisure (read Jezebels sin and sentence Rev. 2.21.) and have so
many Prophets rising up early and speaking to us, Job. 13.4.
Turn ye again now every one from his evil way Jer. 25.4, 5. what will become
of us if we refuse to be reclaimed, hate to be healed. This one Prophet here
fills his mouth with arguments. First, it is not to a tyrant or a stranger that
you are exhorted to turn, but to the Lord your God, to him that is your head,
husband, father, who hates putting away, having once betrothed you to himself
in righteousness and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in tender
mercies Hos. 2.19. Next, This Lord our God is, for his sweet and patient nature
here set forth to be Gracious, and will therefore love you freely Hos. 14.4.
Merciful, and will therefore pity your misery: Slow to anger, or not apt to
snuff, but a master of his wrath Nah. 1.2. and one that can bear more then any
other whatsoever Mic. 7.17.

And, Bagnal Chemah.
of great kindnesse] or Much in goodness, doing good to the evil and
unthankful, as our Savior yokes them.

and repents him of the evil] A little punishment being enough to a father
for a great fault, Pro peccato magno paululum supplic^i satis esto patri Terent.
Where note, that Gods repentance is not a change of his will, but of his work
only: and so he repents for his people, when he sees their power is gone,
Deuteronomy. 32.36. when there is dignus vindice nodus, an extremity fit for divine
power to interpose: when the enemies are ready to devour the church or Satan to
swallow down Gods child in despair, his bowels work, he can hold no longer, but
cries Save my child, save my church etc Jer. 31.20. then he sends out his
Mandamus for deliverance, Psalm. 44.4. then he comes with his Non obstante as
Psalm. 106.8. Isay. 57.15 Now who would not return to such a God? and what heart
can resist such powerful Rhetoric? An heap of words we have here (taken for
most part out of Exodus 34.6.) and all to draw out faith, and encourage those
that have any mind to look toward God. It is no such easy thing to believe, as
fond folk conceit; and to comfort a conscience cast down in the sense of sin
and fear of wrath is no less difficult, says Luther, then to raise the dead
from the grave. If men fear they shall fail of mercy upon their return to God.
Either they will fall into dedolency or despair. But persuade them once of the
goodness of God, and it will lead them to repentance; Romans 2.4. Let them see
that in their fathers house is bread enough, and they will home immediately:
that God will abundantly pardon, and he shall have suitors great store. Esa.
55.7. The sweet and gracious nature of God should be as a perpetual picture in
our hearts; and an effectual motive to make men turn unto him.

Verse 14 Who knows if he will return and repent etc.] Hitherto the Prophet
had argued from Gods gracious disposition: now here from his courteous and
bounteous dealing with his converts.

who knows if etc.] This is not the speech of one that doubts and is
uncertain (as was that of D^vid 1 Samuel 12.22. who can tell whether God will
have mercy on me, that the child may live?) but of one earnestly affirming and
avouching, as was that of Mordecai Esth. 4.14. And who knows whether thou art
come to the kingdom for such a time as this? q. d. It Is sure thou art. And it
is no less sure that if men Turn to God, he will turn to them Zach. 1.3. and
that whithersoever he comes, ^e leaves a blessing behind him. His favor is no
empty favor: it is not like the winter-Sun, that casts a goodly countenance on
the earth, but gives little heat and comfort God ever comes with his
Cornu-copia in his hand: and his steps drop fatness. Then shall the earth
yield her increase, and God even our own God shall bless us, says the church
Psalm. 67.6. He will do it the rather, says our Prophet, that his people may
the more cherefully serve him, when they shall have a meat offering and a drink
offering, ^alvin.
et sic maneat int ger cultus ipsius, and so he may have his daily service
duly performed: for of this the saints are most solicitous: it is their desire
that God should be glorified, rather then that themselves should be gratified,
and their own turns served.

Verse 15. Bl^w the trumpet in Zion] that all may hear, and convene: those of
Jerusalem in the Temple, and the rest in their several Synagogues Lev. 23.31.
for that yearly fast was standard to the rest, kept upon extraordinary and
emergent occasions, as here, for the preventing of the fore threatened
judgment. Papists appoint set fasting-dayes as Lent, and Friday, in every week,
Eves of hollydayes etc. whether the times be clear or cloudy. A Lapide in loc.
A Lapide, also the Jesuit keeps a coil against Luther and the Centurists,
for decrying their Popish processions and public Letanies, which he thinks to
be here and elsewhere authorized. A discourse he gives us here too, about the
use and original of bells among christians, answerable to trumpets amongst the
Jews. A Symmist of his, Cenalis Bishop of Auranches, to prove their Pope-holy
Church the true Church, makes no mention at all either of Preaching or
Sacraments: but produces bells for a sufficient mark of the Catholke true
church: we have bells, says he, whereby our Assemblies are ordinarily called
together: but the Lutherans have claps of harquebuzes and pistolets for signs
whereby they congregate: Act. and Mon. fol. 828.
betwixt which and bells he makes a long Antithesis: and therehence infers,
that the church of Rome is the true church. A proper argument: and yet the man
pleases himself as much in it, as the second-Councell of Nice did in their
profound proofs for idolatry, Prideaux.
which (as One well says of them) were such as that the Images themselves (if
they were sensible) would blush to hear repeated.

Sanctify a fast] See the Note on chap. 1.14. Proclaim a religious abstinence
from all kind of sustenance (2 Samuel 12.17. John. 3.) for a season, either from
morning till evening, as Judge. 20.26. 2 Samuel 3.35. or from evening till evening
Lev. 23.32. or longer as Esth. 4.16. Act. 9.9. as the hand and wrath of God is
more or less felt or feared. But the least time that may be, is a whole day:
there is an old Canon, Turk: hist. fol. 777.
that our fasts should continue usque dum stellae in coelo appareant till the
stars appear in the sky. The very Turks in their solemn fasts eat nothing all
the day till night: yea so precise they are, that upon their fasting days they
will not so much as wash their mouths with water, till the stars appear: whith
makes their fasts (especially in the Summer, when the days be long and hot,)
to be unto them very tedious. Christians hold and teach that nature is by
fasting to be chastised, and not disabled for service: and that such as cannot
fast so long but they shall either endanger health, or be unfitted for the
spiritual duties of the day, may eat: provided, that they abuse not this
liberty to the satisfying of the flesh. Coloss: 2.23. 1 Timothy 5.23.

call a solemn assembly] See chap. 1.14. with the Note.

Verse 16. Gather the people, Sanctify the Congregation etc.] Let the Priests
Gods ministers see to it, that the people come together: and for the better
too, as much as in them lies. For they are to the people in place of watchmen,
of Sentinels, of Ambassadors, and in Christ's own stead, who seems to say unto
them as Psalm. 50.5. Gather my saints together unto me, those that have made a
Covenant with me by sacrifice, that they may meet me with entreaties of peace,
disarme mine indignation conceived against them, and quench the flame thereof
with their tears; not quench the spirit in their teachers by their crossenesse,
and backwardness to business of this nature.

assemble the Elders] Whether for age as Job. 15.10. or for place of authority
as Josh. 7.6. 1 Samuel 15.30. Ruth. 4.4. These must be chief doers and most
forward at fasts, as was Joshuah, Jehosapat, the King of Niniveh, Ezra etc. For
1 they are most guilty in regard of their years and their office which either
adds two wings to their, sins viz. Example, and Scandal, whereby facile
volant, non facile violant they sore much higher, and fly much further. 2 Their
presence, counsel, and countenance may be a great furtherance to the work. See
Ezekiel. 46.10. The Prince in the midst of the people, when they go in, shall go
in: and when they go forth, shall go forth. A Lapide says, A Lapide in locum.
that the Elder sort are to meet, because they are least lustful, and more
prayerfull. It should be so I confess: but how many old goats are there
abroad, that even hang over hell, which gapeth for them? and as the canker
soonest enters into the white rose, so does corruption easily creep into the
white head. He was a rare old man of whom we read, that being tempted to sin
said, Nay: least he should stain his white head.

Gather the children and those that suck the brests] For they are
church members, and to them also pertain the public dangers and calamities:
out of which times and cases, children and Novices are not to be tied to these
austerities of religion, (as our Savior shows Mat. 9.17.) as little, as new
wine is to be put into old vesels. Add hereunto, that the parents might by the
sight of their poor children (subject to Gods wrath by their default,) Ephesians.
2.3. Romans 5.12.
be brought to a further sense of their own sinfulness; and moved by their
cries and laments ut ferventius orent, and pl^rent, to cry and pray more
earnestly.

Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber] The new-married-man was by the law
allowed to cheer up his wife Deuteronomy. 24.5. and therefore exempted from warfare,
and other public employments abroad Deuteronomy. 20.7 and the wedding day is called
the day of the rejoicing of a man's heart Cant. 3.11. They were wont to have a
week of feasting at such times Genesis 29.27. Fulfill her week sc. of banquet and
bride-ale, as they call it. And it is noted as an absurd thing in Sampsons
wife, Judge. 14.17.
that she wept all the seven days of such a feast, when mirth was so much in
season. But is it a time for men to hang their hearts upon the merry pin, when
God calls them to hang up their Harps upon the Willow-trees? when the sword is
sharpened to make a sore slaughter, when it is fourbished and glittereth, and
contemns the rod, ( i. e. lesser and lighter judgments, that usually
fore-run it) should we then make mirth? Ezekiel. 21.10. Should men eat, and
drink, and marry, and be merry, when to morrow they may look to die, and are
already stumbling in the valley of the shadow of death? Such a thing the old
world may do, buried in security, and to be shortly therefore buried in one
universal grave of waters. But holy Noah was vexed at it: and Ambrose thinks
(not without reason) that during the time of the deluge, all the while that he
was in the Ark, he came as little at his wife, as Vriah did, while the Ark,
and Judah, and Israel abode in Tents, and Joab, and the Host encamped in the
fields, 2 Samuel 11.11. Nehemiah, though a great Courtier, Neh. 2.2, 3.
and the Kings Cup Bearer, could not but be sad, when it went ill with the
Church: all comforts then were but Ichabods to him, he had no joy of them.
Sorrow at such a time is better then laughter: for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better, Eccles. 7.3. The mad world is a perfect
stranger to the truth of this sacred Position, as having so far banished
sadness, that they are professed enemies to seriousness; and stick not to light
a candle at the devil (as they say) for sinful lightsomnesse. But woe be to
such mad Mirth-mongers, says our Savior, Luke 6.25. and after him, St. James
chap. 5.1, 5. and before them both, the Prophet Esaias chap. 22.12, 13, 14. and
the Prophet Amos chap. 6.4, 5, 6. What so lawful as the use of the
marriage bed, Heb. 13.4? and for whom more lawful, then for the bridegroom,
and bride? Yet in a common calamity, and in a day of restraint (as a fast day
is called, Joel 2.15.) married couples must abstain, 1 Cor. 7.5. where the
Apostle speaks of a public fast, as Peter Martyr observes. Pet. Mar. in loc
Hence Zech. 8.19. they separated themselves, at such a time. And it is spoken
of as a foul sin, Esaias 58.3. behold in the day of your fast, ye find
pleasure. All sensual delights, though never so lawful at other times, must
be then suspended and laid aside: As music, mirth, perfumes, Dan. 6.18. brave
apparel, Exodus 33.4, etc. all ornaments of the body, soft-lying, 2 Samuel 12.16.
all cheerfulness and outward joy, Judge. 20.26. 1 Samuel 7.8. The Roman Censor
punished one that showed himself out of a window, Live.
with a garland upon his head, in the time of the second Punick war.

Verse 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord,] Let not them be either
dull, Psalm. 103. Rev. 22.
or dumb, (as Popish Mass Priests with their dumb-shews at divine Service) but
as (for their dignity) they are the Lords Ministers, (as likewise the good
Angels are, and their (fellow servants) so (according to their duty) they must
be first in holy exercises: going in and out before Gods people in the
perfor^^nce of their trust, and that worthy work of theirs, 1 Timothy 3.1. for the
which (...), are to be very highly esteemed in love, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Let
Ministers therefore pray hard for their people, as did Aaron, Samuel, Paul,
etc. Let their prayers (at ^asts especially) be well watered with tears (those
effectual Orators, that cry to God for mercy, Psalm. 39.12. as blood does for
vengeance, Genesis 4.16.) as theirs were Judge. 20.23. and Judges 2.5. and 1 Samuel
7.6. and as Ezra, chap. 10.1. and ^remy, chap. 9.1. and 13.17. and why? but for
corruption in Magistrates, Ministers, All sorts; a general defection drawing
on a general desolation. Oh let Gods two faithful witnesses be clothed in
sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. teaching Gods people with many tears and temptations,
Act. 20.19, 20, 31.
both publicly and from house to house: yea, not ceasing to warn them night
and day with tears, to redeem their own sorrows by sound repentance. It is said
of Athanasius, that by his tears, as by the bleeding of a chaste Vine, he cured
the leprosy of that tainted Age. And of Luther, that by his prayers and tears
he had prevailed with God, that Popery should not overrun his country, Act.
and Mon. In vita Luth.
during his days. When I am dead, said He, let those pray that can pray.
Melancton, his Colleague, writes, that he constantly prayed with abundance of
tears: for he knew, that as Music upon the waters, sounds farther, and more
harmoniously then upon the land: so prayers joined with tears, find much
respect with Christ; who could not but look back upon the weeping women, and
comfort them, though he was then going to his death.

between the porch and the altar,] This was that void place; where the Priests
prayed after the sacrifices were offered, Ezekiel. 8.16. As in man, there is Body,
Soul, and Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. so in the Temple at Jerusalem, 1. between
Solomon's Porch, Act. 3.11. and the Altar of burnt-offering, was the outer great
Court, 2. Chron. 4.9. where the people met for preaching and prayer. Next,
there was the second Court, for the Priests only: and here was the Altar of
incense, Luke 1.9, 10. Thirdly, the most Holy place, for the High Priest to
enter once a year, Number. 17.10. The first is here spoken of, the outer Court,
where the priests might be best heard to pray, and seen to weep; and the
people might comport, and say Amen; the want whereof St. Paul counts no small
loss, 1 Cor. 14.16.

and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, etc.] Other exercises there were
usually performed at public fasts; as Reading the Scriptures, Jer. 36.5, 27.
expounding and preaching, Neh. 8.4, 8. examining, censuring, and punishing such
sins as then most reigned, Neh. 9.2. Ezr. 9.2. Josh. 7. and 22. Binding
themselves to God by a Covenant of better obedience, Nehem. 10.18, 29, 30.
Contributing to good uses, Esaias 58.7. and 2 Chronicles. 31.3, 4. But the chief
business and duty of the day was, as here, Prayer to God for pardon of sin,
and removal of shame, and other punishment: whence also it was called, A day
of Atonement, or Expiation.

Spare thy people, O Lord, etc. Brevis oration, sed tota affectibus ardens,
says Mercer, A short prayer, but very affectionate: So are all
Scripture-forms: they have fullness of matter, in fewness of words. Quam
multa, quam paucis! How much in a little! as Tully said of Brutus his
Laconicall Epistle. See Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. Hos. 14.2. Luke 18.13. Matt. 6.9,
10, etc. which is both a prayer, and a pattern: as the standard is the exactest
measure. Why then should any man fall out with forms, and call them idols,
odious as swines-flesh, etc? Why should they say, that the use of the Lords
Prayer is the Note of a formalist? Is not this to speak evil of good, etc.

and give not thine heritage to reproach:] Suffer us not, for our sins, to be
forced by famine, to beg bread of our enemies the Ammonites, and Moabites: for
that will reflect upon thee Lord, and turn to thy dishonor, as if thou had
no care of thine heritage, could not maintain thy servants. See a like prayer
to this, Number. 14.11.12, 16, 17, etc. and Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27, 28. and learn to
deprecate shame and reproach as a fruit of sin, and a piece of the curse,
Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. 1 Samuel 2.30. Beg of God; 1. To keep thee from reproachful
courses, such as may expose thee to the scandal of the weak, and scorn of the
wicked. David is much in this petition. 2. To hide thee in a pavilion from the
strife of tongues, Psalm. 31.20. either to preserve thee from aspersions, or so
to oil thy name, that they may not stick. 3 To give thee good repute and report
among the best. 'Twas God gave Solomon honor; and he promises it to all his,
as a reward of religion, Prove. 22.4.

that the heathen should rule over them:] It is an heavy hand of God upon his
people, when Pagans or Papagans have dominion over them, Neh. 9.9, 10, 27, etc.
Psalm. 79.1, etc. and 80.1, 2, etc. and 137.1, 2, etc. Lam. 1.2, 4, 5. They are
bloody in their positions, and dispositions. See Romans 1.31. their government is
tyrannical, such as the Spaniards is over the poor Indians, the Turks over
Greece, the Rebels over the English in Ireland, etc. The Saints also are, 1.
Conscientious, and cannot yield to their unlawful commands, as the three
children. 2. Zealous, and cannot but contest, as Steven, Paul at Athens, the
Martyrs. 3. Friendlesse, and destitute, Matt. 10.16. as Paul before Nero, Christ
before Pilate, forsaken of all. Pray therefore as here, and prevent such a
mischief, by shunning Ierusalems sins of ignorance, ingratitude,
incorrigiblenesse, formallity, etc. and by putting our necks under the yoke of
Christ's obedience, observing from the heart that form of doctrine which he has
delivered unto us, Romans 6.17.

wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?] q. d. Why
should they cast our religion in our dish? why should they twit us with thy
neglect of us? why should thy name be blasphemed, and thy power traduced, as it
were on a public theater? This was that which most galled these good souls,
(as it had often done David before them) that God, with whom they quartered
arms, should be reproached for their sakes, and through their sides; and his
glory defaced. This was as a murthering-knife in David's bones, Psalm. 42.10. and
worse to him then all the evil that he had suffered from his youth up. Our
nature is most impatient of reproach: for there is none so mean but thinks
himself worthy of some regard: and a reproachful scorn shows an utter
disrespect which flows from the very superfluity of malice. You shall find
some (says Erasmus) that if death be threatened can despise it: but to be
belied or reproached, they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain. Gods people
can bear wrongs best of any: compel them to go a mile, thei'le be content, if
it may do good, to go two, yea as far as the shoes of the preparation of the
Gospel of peace will carry them. But if wrong be offered to God, if he be any
way dishonored, or his Name bored through by blasphemies, O what a stomach they
have presently, and how blessedly blown up are they, with a zeal of Gods
glory, which even eats them up.

Verse 18. Then will the Lord be jealous (or, Zealous) for his land] Then dicto
citius straight upon it; no sooner shall you repent (as is prescribed,) but the
Lord will be jealous etc. Of Gods jealousy for his people, see the Note on
Zech. 1.14. and 8, 2. And of the happy effect of fasting turned to feasting,
see the Note on Zach. 8.19. See also Judge. 20.23. Ezra. 9.6. Dan. 9.20. 2 Chronicles. 20. Bacah turned into Berachah: besides the constant experience of these
and former times, of the happy success and unmiscarrying returns of holy
fasting and prayer: no instance to the contrary. God usually answers his
humbling people, as here, according to the desire of their hearts: neither so
only, but according to the request of their lips also. Aug. Confess. l. 5. c. 8.
Psalm. 21.2. he fits his mercy ad cardinem desiderii: and lets it be to his,
even as they will. They say Spare thy people, and accordingly he will pity or
spare his people, says the Prophet. They would not have God to give his
heritage to reproach by inflicting famine upon them, as if they served an hard
master that would affamish them. To this God gives a full answer in the next
verse, Behold I will send you corn etc. Again, they desire God to take care of
his own great name, and to vindicate it. I will, says God, by doing greatest
things for you Verse. 20. and by causing the blasphemers to return and discern
that their Rock is not as your Rock, themselves being judges: and that to ask,
where is now their God? Deuteronomy. 32.
is as great folly, as if one should say, betwixt the space of the new and old
moon, Where is now the Moon? when as it is never nearer the Sun, then at that
time. There are some Interpreters of good note, that read this verse not in the
Future, but in the Preter tense, thus, Then was the Lord zealous for his land,
and pitied his people, Mercer. Leveleus.
sc. when once he saw them seriously to repent, he did all this that follows
for them. Neither makes it any thing against this interpretation, that the
repentance of this people, their assembling and fasting etc. is not recorded.
For no more is it that Moses went to Pharaoh according to Gods command, to
threaten those swarms of flies Exodus 8.20. or that Esaias took his son
Shear-iashub, and went to Ahaz to confirm and comfort him, as God had
commanded Esaias. 7. which yet we doubt not but the Prophet did. This is an
ordinary Aposiopesis.

and pity his people] Or, spare them, pardon them. The word signifies to show
mercy to him whom by all right thou may justly destroy Ezekiel. 5.11. 1 Samuel
15.3. Oh the divine Rhetoric, and omnipotent efficacy of Repentance! This is
the rainbow, which if God sees shining in our hearts, he will never drown our
souls. Fulgent.
Dat poenitentiam and post a indulgentiam, He gives his people to repent, and
then spares them as a man spares his own son that serves him. But it is
otherwise with those that partake not of the divine nature: Mal. 3.17.
they are fierce, and implacable, as is the devil, who works effectually in
them, as a smith does in his forge. Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany came
in the midst of a sore winter upon his bare feet, to the gates of the castle
of Canusium, and stood there fasting from morning to night for three days
together, waiting for the judicial sentence of the Pope, and craving pardon of
him; which yet he could not obtain by his own or others tears, or by the
intercession of any Saint, save only of a certain harlot, with whom the Pope
was then taking his filthy pleasure. The Emperor mistook, who thought that
the Pope could be pacified by fasting and prayer. This God required another
kind of sacrifice, then these.

Verse 19. Yea the Lord will answer and say unto his people] He will say it in
answer to their prayers (see the Note on verse 18.) Fear not my people, that ye
shall be a reproach among the Heathen:

for Behold I will send you] as a token of my love, and a pledge of better
blessings.

Corn and wine and oyle] all that heart can wish or need require, a sufficiency
of outward comforts, and (if not a superfluity, yet) an honest affluence as
Psalm. 23.5, 6. and boldness to conclude from temporals to spirituals, as there
David does; because bestowed in mercy and as an answer to prayer: for God never
said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain (he scorns that) whether it be
for Bona throni, or Bona scabelli, as Austin distinguishes, Good things of
this life or a better, upper springs or nether springs, though we ask but the
one (as here) yet we shall have both. Nay take two, says He, as once Naaman
did to Gehezi; take thy backburthen, take even as much as thou can bring
faith to bear away. God deals with his servants as the Prophet did with the
Shunamite, when He bad her ask what she needed, and she found not what to ask,
he sent for her again, and makes her a free promise of that she most wanted,
and desired, a son 2 King. 4.16. So, often God is pleased to do for his servants
exceeding abundantly above all that they ask or think. David asked but life of
God, and He gave him length of days for ever, and ever, Psalm. 21.4. This
people prayed that God would not (for that turn) give his heritage a reproach
among the heathen; and He graciously promises that he will never any more make
them a reproach etc. (so they continue penitent (for (...) here signifies
perpetuity, as Mercer notes: and not for a time only, as Lyra would have it.

Verse 20. But I will remove far off from you the Northen army] sc. of
vermin, of those destroying creatures that came from to the North. Ab Aquilone
nihil boni, was a Proverb amongst this people. God promises here to free them
of that mischief: and to disimpester the country of those noisome Insects.
Gratiae privativae plures sunt quam positivae, says Gerson, Gods privative
favors to us are more then his positive: hence man's happiness is usually
called salvation, which properly betokens the privative part thereof. Little
do we consider or understand from how many deaths and dangers we are daily and
hourly delivered. It is good to keep a catalogue of Gods providence, and to
transmit them to posterity, such as was that of the Gun-powder-plot; and
before that, of the Reformation begun by Henry the eight, and carried on by his
son, to the ridding of the land of those popish Locusts; Which Reformation how
imperfect soever, to be done by so weak and simple means, yea by casual and
cross means, against the force of so puissant and politic and adversary, is
that miracle, which we are in these times to look for. An out-lander speaks
thus of it, Ecclesiae Anglicanae reformationem desperasset aetas praeterita,
admiratur praesens, obstupescet futura. This was the Lords own work; Sculiet.
det. 2. d Ep. dedi^.
and it is marvelous in our eyes. Oh that the same Lord would be both Author
and Fmisher! and as he has in good part cut off the names of the idols out of
the land, so that they shall be no more remembered; so he would cause the
Prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land, that he would send
all false doctrine and heresy packing to hell from whence they came. Fiat, Fiat.

and will drive him into a land barren and desolate] Or, dry and forlorn, where
he shall perish for want of food. The body of this Army shall be driven into
the wilderness, the vantagard into the lake of Sodom toward the East: and the
rereward into the Mediterranean Sea, toward the West; for the Western Ocean was
hardly known to the Hebrews: as neither was it to the Romans, till the days
of Julius Caesar.

and his stink shall come up, and his ill savor etc.] sc. by reason of their
dead carcasses covering the earth, and infecting the air. The old Hebrews
understood this text concerning the destruction of the devil in the days of
the Messiah. Oh that God would once destroy that firstborn of the devil, that
King of Locusts, Abaddon, the Pope, and dung his vineyard with the dead
carcasses of his incurable accomplices, that their stink might ascend, and their
ill savor come up into all men's nostrills. Matthew Paris (an ingenuous Papift)
speaking of the court of Rome long since, said, Hujus faetor usque an nubes
fumum teterrimum exhalabat, Her filthiness has sent up a most noisome stench
to the very clouds of heaven, as Sodoms did. And Theodorcus Vrias (another of
her good sons in Germany) complained Anno 1414. that the Church of Rome was
become ex aurea argenteu^, ex argentea ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut
in stercus abiret, of gold silver, of silver iron, of iron earth, and that she
would next become of earth dung, etc. She is so already, and stinks alive worse
then any carrion, rotting in its slime. Oh that God would once put into the
hearts of the kings of the earth to loath her, and burn her, for an old
stinking baud, as is prophesied they shall, Rev. 17.16.

because he has done great things.] Heb. he has magnified to do, he has made
great spoil and havoc, he has revelled in the ruins of Gods poor people, and
so has hastened his own destruction, and their deliverance. The Saints are
many times more beholden to their enemies outrages then to their own deserts,
or duties for deliverance. Some Interpreters, as Castalio, Leveley, etc.
understand the Text, of God: and render it, Quia magnisice aget, for the Lord
shall do great things, as it is also in the following verse: there being here
the same anomaly, or change of person, as is Esaias 22.19. And I will drive thee
from thy station, from thy state shall he pull thee down.

Verse 21. ^ tellus culta.
Fear not O land,] O red earth, or O tilled land, that have layen bedridden, as
it were, under the heavy curse of God, ever since the fall of Adam: and wast
never beautiful, or cheerful since that time, Genesis 3.17. Thou that have
lately been under that great and very terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2.11. who
has made bloody wails upon thy back, and laid thee as a desolate wilderness,
verse 3. to thy great grief and terror: Cheer up now, and fear not. Thine
inhabitants are Poenitents, and Repentance has turned their crosses into
comforts; as scarlet pulls out the teeth of a serpent; as wine draws a
nourishing virtue from the flesh of vipers, as the Philosophers-stone, they
say, turns all into gold. See 1 Pet. 1.7. God will turn all thy sadness into
gladness: neither shall thou any more lie to those that manure thee, (as the
Scripture phrase is, Habak. 3.17.) that is, disappoint, and frustrate their
expectation: but thine enemies shall be found liaers unto thee, Deuteronomy. 33.29.

for the Lord will do great things,] Spem mentita seges. Virg. Victum seges
aegra negabat. Horat.
Magnificentius aget Deus: far greater things God will do for thee, then the
Locust has done against thee: so that thou shall gain by thy losses, and say,
Periissem nisi periissem, I had been undone, if I had not been undone.
Wherefore be glad and rejoice with inward and outward joy. And because Fear is
a passion opposite to Joy, (for fear has torment, 1 John 4.18. and that was a
rare mixture in those good women that returned from our Saviors sepulcher with
fear and great joy, Mat. 28.8. See Psalm. 2.11.) therefore, Fear not, O land,
quit thine heart of that cowardly passion, and be as merry as mirth can make
thee; for the Lord has done great things for thee, whereof thou have good
cause to be glad. Faith in Gods Power quelleth and kills distrustful fears:
filling the heart with unspeakable joys, 1 Pct. 1.8.
and full of glory.

Verse 22. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field,] q. d. Ye shall have no cause
to fear for the future: though hitherto ye have suffered hardship, Chap. 1.18.
Beasts and birds do in diem vivere (as Quintilian says of them) and take no
further thought then for present sustenance. But by a prosopopoeia, (as before
the land, so here) the beasts that till it are forbidden to fear want; for God,
the great Housekeeper of the world, will provide them their meat in due
season, Psalm. 104.27.28. and several meats according to their several
appetites. He will hear the heaven, the heaven shall hear the earth, the earth
shall hear all kind of fruits, both natural, as herbs of the field, and
grass of the wilderness, and such as are sown and planted, as wine, oil,
figs; so that neither man nor beast shall want any thing ad esum, vel ad usum,
but have plenty without penury, etc. It shall be said of Judea, as Solinus
says of Spain, In Hispania nihil infructuos^m, nibil sterile, that there is no
unfruitfulnesse in any part of it: or, as it is said of Campania in Italy, that
it is the most fruitful Plat of earth that is in the Universe.

the fig tree and the vine,] that before had been barked, and wasted, chap.
1.7, 12. do yield their strength.] i. e. their utmost fruits; which they could
not do without God, into whom therefore the Prophet Hosea rightly resolves the
genealogy of corn, wine, oil, etc. Hos. 2.22. It is no otherwise with us in
spiritual regards. For though we have grace, yet we cannot bring forth that
grace to act, without new grace: like as trees, though they be fitted to bear
fruits, yet, without the influence of the heavens, Aug. Enchir. chap. 32.
they cannot put forth that fitness in fruit. Nolentem praevenit Deus ut
velit: volentem subsequitur, ne frustra velit. Verse 23. Be glad then ye
children of Zion,] ye righteous Ones, Psalm. 32.11. and none else: for joy is
the Just man's portion, and none have any reason to rejoice but such: nay they
are flatly forbidden it, Hos. 9.1. See the Note there. Let Israel rejoice in
him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful in their king. Let the
Saints be joyful in glory. Gaudeant in re, gaudeant in spe, Psalm. 139.2.5.
gaudeant de possessione, gaudeant de promissione, says Bernard. If Plato
could tell the Musicians, Philosophers knew how to dine and sup without them,
they could be merry without a fiddler: how much more may Zions children? Be it
that there is a cord in the sin of the wicked. (to strangle their joy with)
yet the righteous sing and are merry, Prove. 29.6. In the greatest fail of all
outward comforts, they can rejoice in the Lord their God, as here, and as David
at the sack of Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.6. and Habakkuk, amidst all the miseries of
the world, and malice of Satan, Habak. 3.17. It is in the Lord their God that
they rejoice; it is an holy and spiritual joy, not profane and carnal, as is
the worldlings, who feeds upon ashes, etc. Esaias 44.20. rejoices in a thing
of naught, Am. 6.13. his joy is no better then a little counterfeit complexion,
crackling of thorns, etc.

For he has given you the former rain moderately,] as a pledge of his love,
and as a fruit of the Covenant. Moderate showers ye shall have, neither too
much, nor too hasty: rain of righteousness, in such measure and moderation,
as shall be needful.

and he will cause to come down for you,] The vanities of the Heathen cannot
give rain, Jer. 14.22. nor can the heavens yield showers. God therefore must be
waited upon, Jam. 5.7. and prayed unto, (...).
verse 18. and the thundering Legion so famous in Church History. He must not
have cause given him to complain of men's brutishness and inadvertency, as Jer.
10.13, 14.

the former rain,] that fell in October, when they had sown; (...).
Saint James calls it the morning-rain, chap. 5.7. and the latter rain.] Heb.
the gathering rain, because it fills and fits the corn for ingathering: as
falling about May, and a little before their harvest. In the first] not month,
but primo quoquo tempore, as soon as is fit. See Zech. 10.1. with the Note.

Verse 24. And the floors shall be full of wheat] Such fatness shall Gods
footsteps drop, that your houses shall be full of all precious and pleasant
riches: Prove. 24.4.
so that you shall, (as rich men love to do) de pleno tollere acervo. Only
take heed you have not, as that rich fool aenimam triticeam, a wheaten soul,
that your abundance get not within you, as the Pharisees did, Lvke 11.41. (so
that they did not more possess, then were possessed by what they had) that ye
set not your hearts upon your riches, Psalm. 62.11. (...).


-- difficile est opibus non ^radere mentens. Mortial.
and the fats shall overflow.] There shall be plenty of all things, (as Prove.
3.10.) the fruits and effect of that rain promised before. And does not God
daily turn water into wine, when of water falling upon the vine, and concocted
by the heat of the Sun, he produces the grape whence wine is pressed?

Verse 25. And I will restore to you the years, etc.] I will so make up your
former losses, that there shall remain no sign, nor sense thereof. See a like
promise, Zech. 10.6. they shall be as though I had not cast them off, with the
Note there. See also Esaias 60.10.

my great army,] sc. the locusts: see above verse 2, 5, 11. Magaleh chesoth
Matteh cheloth. Kimchi.
God is Lord of Hosts, and (as the Rabbines well observe) he has the upper and
lower troops; as his horse and foot ready pressed.

Verse 26. And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied,] which, what a great
blessing it is, see Hagg. 1.6. with the Note, and Eccles. 6.1, 2. with the Note.

and praise the Name of the Lord your God,] Not haunch up Gods creatures, as
swine do swill: but, tasting the sweetness of the Creator in them, lift up
many an humble, joyful, and thankful heart to Him. This was better then the
former blessing: for naturally fullness breeds forgetfulness of God, Deuteronomy.
32.15.

That has dealt wonderously with you,] Heb. ad mirificandum, sc. in so sudden
and strange a change of his hand, whereby he has made himself marvailous as he
delights to do by working wonders, such as man's power connot perform, nor
reason reach unto.

and my people shall never be ashamed] As they have been among the heathen ver.
19. and as those are that pray to no purpose. Deo confisi nunquam confusi.
Their faith is unfeigned, and therefore their hopes unfaileable Romans 5.5.

Verse 27. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel] These temporal
blessings shall seal up my love to you and presence of grace with you. True it
is that no man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them Eccles.
9.1. because all things come alike to all verse. 2. But yet from this text we
may comfortably conclude, that if the good things of this life make us more
cheerful, thankful, hopeful: if Mercy excite us to duty, and the sense of
Gods love makes us love God, his ways, and people, with a desire to love them
more, then we are loved of God, who is in us of a truth 1 Ioh. 4.10, 19. and we
may know it too. For if instinct of nature teach dammes to know their young
ones, and the young their dammes: shall not Gods spirit teach us to know him,
that he is in the midst of us; not by his omnipresence only, but by his
gracious presence? yea that he is the Lord our God, and none else; and that,
while we hold us to this anhcor-hold of the faithful soul, we shall never be
ashamed Psalm. 31.1. That was a brave speech of Luther, and one of those that a
man would fetch upon his knees from Rome or Jerusalem to be author of them,
Joh. Manl. loc. com. page 145.
Ipse videret ubi anima mea mansura sit, qui pro ea sic solicitus fuit, ut
vitam pro ea posuerit, Let Him see to it where my soul shall rest, who took so
much care for it, as that he laid down his life for it.

Verse 28. And it shall come to pass afterwards] sc. In the days of the
Messiah (which is called the world to come Heb. 2.5.) but especially after his
Ascension: see Ioh. 7.37. Act. 2, where this prophecy was fulfilled, and this
place taken for the first text preached on by the Apostles, verse. 17. to the
conversion of three thousand souls at one sermon. For together with the word
there went forth a power, Luke 7. 2 Timothy 1.7.
even that Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, here promised to be
powered out, not distilled only (see the Note on Zech. 12.10.) and that upon all
flesh. Spirit upon flesh, the best thing upon the basest: yea upon all flesh,
without respect of persons, or difference made of sex, age, or condition:
provided that they know and acknowledge themselves to be but flesh Gen, 6.3.
corrupt and carnal ( animas etiam incarnavimus, Bern.
as an Ancient complains) and that whatsoever is of the flesh is flesh. Ioh.
3.6. (for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?) that whole Man is in
evil, and whole evil in Man; neither can it be gotten out in any measure,
till the heart be mollified and made tender as flesh Ezeh. 11.19. and 36.26,
27. which cannot be done till men be taught of God, and drawn out of darkness
into his marvelous light: till they be spiritualized, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and transformed into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of
the Lord.

and your sons and your daughters shall prophesie] This was fulfilled Act. 2.
as St. Peter shows. For the new Testament is but the old unfolded and
fulfilled: as was also typified in the two Cherubims of the sanctuary, looking
intently into the Propitiatory (Christ Romans 3.25.) but with their faces turned
one toward another Exodus 25.20. See Act. 26.22. It was fulfilled, I say, in
that visible descension of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles and the rest Act.
2. Act. 8.15, 17. and 10.44. So that this makes nothing at all for the
Enthusiasts raptures and dotages: the true offpring they are, Funcc. Chronol.
of those ancient Euchites or Messalanii, who, leaving their trades, gave
themselves to much sleep, and called their dreams and fantasies prophesies,
Anno Dom. 371.

your old men shall dream etc. your young men shall see visions] i. e. God will
no less open his will unto them then he did of old to the Prophets by dreams
and visions: for, by the conduct of the Spirit, they shall be led into all
truth and holiness: they shall be all a royal Priesthood 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev.
1.6. full of all goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish
one another Romans 15.14.

Verse 29. And also upon the servants] they shall be the freemen and women of
Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 7.22. by as full a measure of Gods free and noble Spirit
bestowed upon them as upon their Masters and Mistresses. The Trent Translation
has it, upon my servants and my handmaids. But there is no such pronoun in the
Original, though it is true, that all that have the spirit are his; and the
contrary Romans 8, 9. Ephesians, 1.13. The scope of the text is (as Mercer well
notes,) to show that ut gratuitum and commune Christi beneficium, sic and
spiritus, as the benefits of Christ are free and common to all his people, so
is the Spirit. And surely, next to the love of Christ in dwelling in our
nature, we may well wonder at the love of the holy Ghost, that will dwell in
our defiled souls, and act in them, as he does. For there are diversity of
gifts, but the same Spirit 1 Cor. 11.4. as the diverse smells of flowers come
from the same influence: and the diverse sounds in the organ, froin the same
breath.

Verse 30. And I will show wonders in the heavens] Prodigia beneficia
credentibus, a Lapid.
malefica and horrifica incredulis, says Cornelius a Lapide, who interprets
the text, of those signs and wonders that shall precede the day of judgment:
and for confirmation here of alleges chap. 3.2. together with Mat. 24.29.
Luke 21.25. And had he looked a little higher into those chapters, and taken in
all the troubles that befell the Church from our Saviors ascension to his
second coming, together with those horrible calamities and confusions that
shall befall the wicked, for contempt of the Gospel, and persecution of the
professors thereof, he had done right, in mine opinion. It is ordinary with the
Prophets to set forth horrible commotions by such figurative expressions, See
Ier. 4.23. etc. Isay. 13.10. Rev. 6.12. Those that have received the Spirit of
Adoption, must not dream of a delicacy, but expect persecution. Christ came to
send fire on the earth Luke 12.49. Neither may Persecutors hope to escape
unpunished, but look to be pursued by divine justice. See the Note on Rev,
6.15. How heavy was the hand of God upon Jerusalem that slaughterhouse of the
Saints; and afterward upon the Ten Persecutors of Rome? 1 Nero (whom
Tertullian rightly calls Dedicatorem damnationis Christianorum, quippe qui
orientem fidem primus Rema cruentavit, the first bloody Persecutor of the
Christian religion) lost thirty thousand of his subjects by the pestilence, had
his army utterly routed and cut off in Britanny: both the Armenia's revolted
from him: the Senators rose up against him, and compelled him to be his own
deaths-man. 2 Demitian was butchered by his soldiers. 3 Trajan dyed of a
dropsy. 4 Severus dyed miserably here at York. 5. Maximinus, with his son,
was cut in pieces. 6. Decius dyed in a far country. 7. Valerian was flayed, by
Sapores king of Persia, who took him prisoner. 8. Aurelian was slain by his own
men. 9. Dioclesian poisoned himself. 10 Maximian hanged himself. What should I
speak of Julian, Anastasius, Heraclius etc. The French persecutors, Francis the
second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, the Guises etc. Philip the second
of Spain, who returning out of the Low countries, fell into a storm, and
suffered shipwreck to the great danger of his life? Hist. of Gennc. of Trent.
417.
He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out
Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do, with all his might. He afterward
died miserably of the lousie disease. Q. Mary died of a tympany, or else of
grief of heart for K. Philip's unkind departure, Speed.
foreign losses, Callice surrendered, hurt done by thunders from heaven, and by
fire in the royal navy, extreme dearths raging, her conceptions failing etc.
What heavy judgments befell diverse particular persecutors of those times,
Poole, Gardener, Bonner, Morgan, Story, Burton, see Acts and Mon. 1902. 1904.
etc. 1915. George Eagles (alias Trudge-over the world) having hid himself in a
cornfeild, was, Mr. Leigh his Saints Encouragement Ep. to Read.
for money descried by one Ralph Lurdain, and burnt at Chelmsford: where
afterward the same Lurdain was hanged for stealing an horse.

blood and fire etc.] Signs terrifying, and testifying the wrath and
displeasure of God for the sins of men, and such a face of the whole Fabric
of the Universe: as that all the parts thereof may seem to have conspired for
the destruction of mankind. Before the wart betwixt Pompey and Caesar, the sea
seemed to be bloody, -- Superique minaces
Prodiglis terras implerant, ethera, Lucan: lib. 1. monstra enumerans quae
bellum civila praecesserunt.
pontum
Ignota obscurae viderunt sydera noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, coeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces --
Fulgura fallaci micuerunt crebra sereno,
Et varias ignis denso dedit aere formas.
Before Caesar's death not only drops of blood fell from heaven, but also pits
and pooles flowed with blood. -- puteique cruore Mutati In the year of grace
874. Claudian. lib. 1. in Eutrop. Funcc. chron.
at Brixia, in the entrance of Italy, rained blood for three days and three
nights together. In the year 1505. there appeared in Germany upon peoples
garments, and women's rocks as they were spinning, diverse prints and tokens of
the nails, of the sponge, of the spear, of the Lords coat, and of bloody
crosses etc. Maximilian the Emperor had and showed the same to Francis
Mirandula; who wrote thereupon his book called Staurostichon, wherein are these
verses, Nonignota cano, Act. and Mon. fol. 769.
Caesar monstravit: and ipsi
Videmus: innumeros prompsit Germania testes.
It is not many years since a shower of blood fell about Gloucester, if our
intelligence deceived us not. Such prodigies are usually sad presages, nec
inania terriculamenta haec esse, In lsc.
res ipsa testatur, says Gualther here: and event proves that these are no
vain fray-bugs. By fire here, understand those terrible flaming apparitions in
the air, lightenings, comets etc. portending lamentable calamities. Such there
were to be seen (as I have heard from eyewitnesses) on that very night wherein
the Powder Plot was detected and defeated, in a very terrible manner. And such
were those Meteors in the likeness of fiery serpents, that fell here Anno 788.
before the Invasion of the Danes: whereunto we may add the new-starre that
appeared in Cassiopeja in November 1572. Camd. Elisah.
and continued sixteen months: soon after which Charles the 9 of France
(Author of the Parisian Massacre) died of exceeding bleeding at several parts
of his body, inter horribilium blasphemiarum diras. says the Historian,
cursing and swearing. And lastly that prodigious Comet Anno. 1618. forerunner
of the German wars, and our late troubles; whatever is yet behind to be
suffered by us. Certainly if the sorcerors of Egypt were amongst us, they would
wonder at men's stupendous stupidity, and tell them that these extraordinary
occurrents in heaven and earth were the very finger of God, for their warning.

and pillars of smoke] Heb. palms of smoke (so Cant. 3.6.) by similitude,
because tall, and straight as palme-trees; which also lift up themselves under
their burden, and will not be held down. Smoaky vapors mounting upright are
fitly compared thereunto, Elationes fumi, so Tremellius,

Verse 31. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood] by
strange and stupendous Eclipses: such as was that of the Moon for 12. nights
together, a little before the last destruction of Jerusalem: and that of the
Sun this present 29 day of March 1652. wherein I writ these things, but could
scarce see to write, or forbear to behold: for though busy enough to bring
this work to an end, if God please, yet I cannot say as the Duke of Alva did to
the king of France, who asked him whether he had observed the late great
Eclipse? No, said he I have so much to do upon earth, that I have no leisure to
look toward heaven. Of this days Eclipse I may well say as Lucan does of
another, Ipse caput medio Titan cum ferret Olympo,
Condidit ardentes atra caligine currus;
Involvitque Lucan. lib. 1.
orbem tenebris, gentesque coegit
Desperare diem. --
I heartily pray it do not presage a dreafull eclipse of the Sun of Christ's
glorious gospel amongst us; that this bright Sun should go down at noon over
our heads, and our earth be darkened in the clear day Amos 8.9. And let every
good soul pray that that dismal day may never arise unto us, wherein it shall
be said, that this glory is departed from our English Israel.

-- nobiscum, Christ, maneto:
Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam.
and the moon into blood,] that is, into redness, as it was likewise on the
15. day of this instant March, in the morning: Two such Eclipses so near
together, having seldom been seen. I fear we may have cause, ere the year come
about, to sing sadly with the Poet; Signa dabant luctus superi haud incerta
futuri: Ovid. Metam. lib. 15.

Saepe faces visae, solis quoque tristis imago:
Caerulus and vultum ferrugine Lucifer atra
Sparsus erat, sparsi lunares sanguine currus.


Before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.] i.e. the great day of
general judgment; called here, the great day, because the great God will on
that day do great things, and determine of great matters: and the terrible day,
because it is a day of anger, and of wrath, Romans 2.5. Rev. 6.17. yea the day of
the declaration of the just judgment of God, according to the Gospel, Romans
2.5, 16. It is elsewhere called, That day by an appellative proper, Mar. 13.32.
Luke 21.34. Mat. 7.22. That day of note, wherein God will break filence,
execute judgment upon all, and convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15. Enoch
foretold this great day, before Noah did the deluge: this day is longer before
it comes; but shall be more terrible when it is come. Whether it shall come in
the year of our Lord, 1657. Alsted. Chronol. p 494.
(as some have gathered out of the numerall letters of these two words, Mundi
Conflagratio, and because the year of the World 1657. was the year of the
Flood,) let time determine: I have nothing to say to it.

Verse 32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoeveer etc.] Lest any good soul
hearing the former heavy menaces, should say with the disciples, Mark 10.26.
Who then can be saved? Or, with these Despondents in Jeremy, chap. 2.25. There
is no hope, the Prophet concludes with this comfortable Coroliary, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord,] yea, that but names the name of Christ
in faithful prayer, desiring and endeavoring to depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy
2.19. the same shall be delivered,] He shall have safety here, and salvation
hereafter. Rom 10.13. Watch ye therefore, and pray always (says our Savior)
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass, and to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21.36. with 25 Something God
will yield to the prayers of his people, when he seems most bitterly bent,
and unchangeably resolved against them, Matthew. 24.20. and when the tribulation
is so great, that it is not likely that any flesh shall be saved, verse. 21, 22.
Prayer, says One, is the best lever at a dead lift; provided that it be the
prayer of faith; for Mercy is the Mother, Faith the Midwife of deliverances.
Hence it follows.

for in mounth Zion and in Jerusalem,] where the pure word of God was preached,
Esaias 2.3. and men's hearts purified by faith, Acts 15.9. shall be deliverance,]
from all evils and enemies, Psalm 76.3. There brake he the arrows of the bow,
the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah. There? where? In Salem, in
Zion, verse 2. where Gods people were praying. This Moab knew, and therefore
more feared a praying people, then a numerous army, Numb. 22.3. This the Queen
Mother of Scotland knew, and therefore said, that she feared-more the fasting
and prayers of John Knox, and his disciples, then an army of twenty thousand
men. Spec. bell. sacri.
Let Gods suppliants but call upon him in the day of their trouble, and he will
deliver them, that they may glorify him, Psalm. 50 15. He will deliver them,
yea and honor them: with long life will he satisfy them, and show them his
salvation, Psalm 91.16. Holy Merlin, Chaplain to the Admiral of France, at the
Parisian Massacre, had the performance of this promise among many others: For
understanding the danger they were all in, he prayed in the Admirals chamber
(and by his command) a little before the Murderers brake in: and, by a
singular providence, escaped into an Hay-mow, Epitom. hist. Gullick.
where he lay hid for a fortnight, and was miraculously fed by a hen that came
daily, and laid an egg hard by him.

as the Lord has said,] and Gods suppliants have steadfastly believed, and do
therefore put his promises in suit. In the want of other Rhetorike, let
Christians in their prayers burden God with what he has said, sue him upon his
own bond, urge this with repetition; Lord thou have promised, thou have
promised, and they shall find that he cannot deny himself: and he can as soon
deny himself, as his promises. His covenant he will not break: nor alter the
thing that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89.34.

and in the remnant whom God shall call.] Those holy brethren that shall
partake of the heavenly calling to glory and virtue, Heb. 3.1.
whether they be Jews, or Gentiles. Faithful is he that calls them, who
also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. And although they are but a remnant, which is
but a small to the whole piece, an hand-full to an house-full, a fold to a
field, a little, little flock, Luke 12.32. yet being the caled of Jesus Christ,
Romans 1.6. and such as call upon him in truth, they are not only his called,
(...).
but chosen and faithful, Revel. 17.24. They are also heirs of that promise,
Mic. 5.7. which shall be fully made good to them, that (as for their
propagation) this remnant of Jacob, shall be in the midst of many people, as
a dew from lehovah, (the dew is engendered, and distilled from the Lord
immediately:) so (for their growth and increase) they shall be as the showers
upon the grass, as the sprouting up of grass and herbs in the wilderness,
that tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of men, to come with
watering-pots to nourish them (as herbs in gardens do) but these have showers
from heaven, that give the increase.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. FOr behold in those days, and in that time,] In is di^bus illis
ipsis, and in hoc tempore ipso, In those very self-same days, and in that
self-same time. sc. In the time of the Messiah, in the days of the Gospel;
when God shall deliver Jerusalem, and call the remnant of Gentiles, and so
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, of the whole Jsrael of God,
preaching liberty to the captives, Esaias 61.1. and proclayming the everlasting
Jubilee, Joh. 8.36. In those happy days, I say, Jer. 23.5, 6. Woe to the wicked
enemies of the Church, it shall go ill with them. They are sure to be broken
with a rod of iron, to be dashed in pieces like a potters vessel, Psalm. 2.9.
dashed against Christ the King, who as He is Pierum rupes, a Rock of refuge to
his people (such as was that to Moses, Exodus 33.22.) Sic Val. Max de tribunali
L. Cassij.
so He is, Reorum scopulus, a Rock of revenge to Persecutours, to split them to
pieces, such a rock as that out of which fire arose, Judge. 6.21. the fire of
Gods jealousy, Zach. 1.14. which burns unto the lowest hell, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
Let them, therefore, have grace, (as the Apostle from this ground advises,
Heb. 12.28, 29.) Let them, at least have so much wit for themselves, as Pilats
wife had in a dream, to take heed of having any thing to do with just men. Let
them do as Tertullian counseled Scpula, Si non nobis, tibi: si non tibi,
Carthaginiparcas.
God will reduce the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, which shall be as a cup
of poison to all the people round about, as a burdensome stone, as an harth of
fire, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6. (See the Notes there) Their destruction must needs go
along with the Saints salvation, Philip. 1.28, 29. Esaias 8.9. Prove. 11.8. The
Jew-Doctours collect from this and other like places in the Prophets, that when
the Messiah comes, he shall recollect the Jews into the land of Canaan:
where they shall get the better of their enemies, and have a most flourishing
Commonwealth, and glorious Church. For this, they daily expect the visible
appearance of the Messiah; Buxtorf: Synag. Jud. cap. 13. Sanbed. c. 11.
often throwing open their windows to behold, and crying altogether to God, Let
thy kingdom come, let it come quickly, even in our days, quickly, quickly,
quickly. That he stays so long, is for our sins, say they, which are many. See
the Notes on Zach. 14.2, 3.

Verse 1. I will also gather all nations] that are adverse to my Church, that I
may have my peniworths of them, and do execution upon them with ease (troubling
those troublers of his Israel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. licet videantur plures and
potiores) as he dealt by Jehosaphats enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20. and leaving them no
more place to escape, then those have who are environed in a valley by a potent
enemy, who has gotten them into a pound, as the proverb is. And this God will
do in the valley of Jehosaphat, (a valey, says Lyra, Adrichomius, and
Montanus, betwixt Jerusalem and Mount Olivet) in the very view of the Church,
that the righteous may rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, and wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked. So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward
for the righteous, (see verse 4.) Chaldeus R. Salmon Mercer.
verily, he is a God that judges in the earth, as in the valley of divine
judgment, (so some render Jehosaphat here, as if it were an appellative)
called verse 14. the valley of decision, and the words that next follow seem to
favor, and I will plead with them (judicio agam) judicially plead with them
there, for my people: which word also God uses when he foretells the
destruction of Gog, and Magog in Ezekiel. So that the valley of Jehosaphat
(says Mercer) is the place wheresoever God shall please to punish the enemies
of his people. As for that conceit of Lyra and others: who gather out of this
Text, that this valley near Jerusalem, shall be the very place where Christ
shall sit to judge the world at the last day: and for confirmation, allege
Acts 1.11. Mercer judges it to be a cl^idish conceit: and Luther asks where
all mankind shall have room to stand in so small a valley? Though others judge
it not unlikely that it shall be thereabouts, because Jerusalem is in the
middle andabout the center of the earth: and besides, it will be the more for
the glory of Christ, to sit there as Judge where himself was judged. But it is
probable he will sit in the air, (near the earth) whither the Elect shall be
rapt up to meet the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. that the devils may be subdued and
sentenced in the air, where they have ruled and played Rex, Ephesians. 2.2. and
that the wicked may be doomed on the earth, where they have offended.

for my people, and for my heritage Israel,] All was His: and the wrongs done
to them, were done to Gods self: as the injury done to the Subject, is said to
be done to the Sovereign, his crown and dignity. See Acts 9.4. Matthew. 25.45.
So that ye cannot tread upon the least toe, in Christ's mystical body, but the
head cries out from heaven, Why hurtest thou me? The Saints sufferings are his,
Col. 1.24. their reproach his, Heb. 13.13. Manet compassio, etiam cum
impassibilitate, Bern.
Christ retains still compassion, though free from personal passion: and
though without feeling, yet not without fellow-feeling. He does condolere
proportionate ad miseriam, as Pareus renders the Apostle, Heb. 5.2. condole,
(...).
and that proportionably to his peoples misery.

and for mine heritage Israel,] Israel, (...), says Mercer, the people of Gods
purchase, that comprehend all his gettings, and are much more dear to him then
Naboths inheritance was to him: He sets them before his face for ever, Psalm.
41.12. as loving to look upon them; yea, upon the very walls of the houses
where they dwell, Esaias 49.16. They are his portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. his
inheritance, Esaias 19.25. the dearly beloved of his soul, Ier. 12.7. his glory,
Esaias 46.13. dear to God, though despised of, and dispersed in the world. He may
suffer them to be Anathema secundum dici (as Bucholcer said) but not secundum
esse.

whom they have scattered among the nations,] The Jew-Doctours refer this to
Titus and Adrian the Roman Emperors. The first carried 97000 of them captives,
says Josephus. The second drove them utterly out of Jewry; and by Proclamation
commanded them, not so much as look toward that land, from any tower or high
mountain. But all this was for their sedition and other wickednesses. And ever
since they have continued a disjected and despised people, See Deuteronomy. 28.64.
exiled out of the world, as it were by a common consent of Nations, specially
for their inexpiable guilt in murdering Christ, and persecuting his people:
Concerning whom therefore, this Text is to be understood. See how Christians
were soon scattered abroad thorowout the regrons, Act. 8.1. Iam. 1.1. 1 Pet.
1.1. where they are called Strangers of the dispersion. Afterward, the Heathen
Persecutours relegated and confined them to Isles, and mines: and scattered
them into corners. So did the Pope and his Agents: forcing them to flee for
their lives, etc.

And parted my land] As Salmaneser did to his new colonies: as Senacherib also
designed to do, had not God prevented him: as the Pope takes upon him to do,
those countries whom he counts heretical. He gave this land (in Hen. 8. his
time) Primo occupaturo to him that could first seize it. He declared John King
of Navarre, a schismatic, an heretic, an enemy to the sea Apostolic, and
gave his kingdom to the Spaniard, Guicciard. lib. 11.
because he took part with the French, and would not suffer the Spaniard to
march through his kingdom against the French. And what work he has lately made
in the Palatinate and other parts of Germany, who knows not?

Verse 3. And they have cast lots for my people] Impiously and imperiously
domineering over them: as those rude soldiers that cast the dice upon our
Saviors Coat, at his passion. It was ordinary to divide by lot the enemies
they had taken in fight Nah. 3.10. Obad 11. Lam. 3.53. Judge. 5.30. but at base
rates thus to sell Gods people ignominiously, and that to satisfy their lewd
lusts, this was unsufferable.

and have given a boy for an harlot,] Heb. that boy, as afterward, that girl,
with an emphasis; a son and daughter of Israel, those earthly angels, Angli
quasi Angeli, as Gregory the Great once said of the English-boyes presented to
him. Thou have slain my children and delivered them, to cause them to pass
through the fire, said God, not without very great indignation, to their
idolatrous parents, Ezech. 16.21. His they were more then theirs: by virtue of
the covenant he had made with that people. Hence Deuteronomy. 14.1. Ye are the
children of the Lord your God: and can he bear with your misusages? Should he
deal with our sister as an harlot? said they with a courage (as the great Zaijn
in Zonah imports) Genesis 34.31. So here, should they give a boy, (such a boy)
for an harlot? that is, for the hire of an harlot, and to gratify such
abhorred filths? In the reign of Henry 2. of France, Anno 1554 many precious
sons of Zion were burned there for religion, not without the indignation of
honest men, Hist. of Counc. of Trent. fol. 387.
who knew that the diligence used against those poor people was not for any
piety or religion, butto satiate the covetousness of Diana Valentina the Kings
Mistress, to whom he had given all the confiscations of goods, made in the
kingdom, for cause of Heresy.

and sold a girl for wine, Prove. 4.17.
that they might drink.] the wine of violence: drink, and be drunken, and spue,
and fall, and rise no more, Ier. 25.27. Worthy therefore to be served as that
drunken Turk was by that severe Bashaw, who caused a ladlefull of boiling lead
to be poured down his throat. God will turn a worse cup down their wide gullets
one day, Psalm. 11:
Quorum vivere est bibere, and whose profane proverb it is, Bibere and sudare,
est vita Cardiaci: But what an heathenish baseness is that of the Papists
(besides an horrible abuse of Gods holy ordinance) that at Rome, a Jewish maid
may not be admitted into the stews of whoredom, unless she will first be
baptized. De contin. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Espensaeus (a modest Papist) writes it, not without detestation.

Verse 4. Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tire, etc.] Or, what are ye
to me? I value you not, but look upon you as vile persons, how great soever in
the world? See Dan. 11.21. Or, what have I to do with you? what wrong have I
done you, that ye invade my land, and molest my subjects? It is an idle
misprision to sever the sense of an injury done to any of his members, from the
head? and it was a malapert demand of the devil, What have I to do with thee, O
Jesus the Son of the living God? whilst he vexed a servant of his. But there
is an old enmity betwixt them and their seed, Genesis 3.15. and it will never be
extinct, while the world stands. Israel had given Tire and Zidon as little
cause to quarrel them, as once they had done Moab, whom they had assured, that
they would not meddle nor molest them. Howbeit, Moab was distressed, or irked,
fretted, vexed at them, Numb. 22.3. carried with Satanicall malice against Gods
people, because of a different religion; and sought their ruin. Lo this was
the case of Tire, Zidon, and Palestine, near neighbors, but bitter enemies to
the Church. Bats fly against the light: malice breaks all bonds: and vents it
self by utmost inhumanity. Mercer understands by those nations, verse 2, 3.
the open and professed enemies of the Church: and by these neighboring peoples
here mentioned, those more subtle adversaries, that pretend love, and can draw
a fair glove upon a foul hand: but will take the first opporunity to do the
Saints a mischief, and to spet their poison at them. This is an old stratagem
of the Devil, still practiced by the Renegado Jesuits amongst us.

Will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me, etc.] Number meritum
mihi refertis, an etiam infertis? so some render it. Whilst ye afflict my
people, is it to be avenged on me, for an old injury I have done you? or is it
rather to pick a quarrel with me, who have done you no wrong? Surely, whether
it be this, or the other, I shall handle you according to your deserts.

swiftly and speedily will I return your recompense.] Repent e vestigio,
^ieere.
while you will say, what is this? I will execute my fierce wrath upon you, and
you shall soon feel what it is despitefully to spit in the face of heaven, and
to wrestle a fall with the Almighty. See Obad. 15. God cannot bear long with
sins of this high nature. He resists the proud persecutours.

Verse 5. Because ye have taken my silver, etc.] Sacrilege is a second sin
they here stand charged with. Ye have taken, that is, taken away, (by which
obfervation, ye shall easily reconcile the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.19. with the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.8. says Tarnouius here) my silver and my gold, Aurum
Thelosanum.
vessels consecrated to mine use and service: or mine, that is, my peoples,
whom ye have robbed: but it shall not thrive with you; it shall prove as the
gold of Toulouse, fatal to them that had any part of it: or as Achans wedge,
that cleft his body and soul asunder

these ye have carried into your Temples,] or Palaces, even my goodly pleasant
things. my desirable goods, either to adorn your houses, or your idols, to
your own bane, as Belshazzar. It is surely a snare to a man, Prove. 20.25.
who devoureth dedicated things: that bowseth in the bowls of the Sanctuary.
And it was a sad complaint of Luther, that even in the reformed Churches,
Parishes and Schools were robbed of their due maintenance: as if they meant to
starve us all. Luth. in Genesis 47.
The like says Gualther in his Homily upon this Text: Non desunt
pseudo-evangelici, says He, There want not such false-Gospellers amongst us,
who restore not the Church her wealth, pulled out of the Papists fingers: but
make good that saying of One, Possidebant Papistae, possident Rapistae; Papists
had Church Livings, and now Rapists have gotten them: like as a good Author
observes upon the battle of Montlecherye, Comin. l. 1. c. 4.
that some lost their livings for running away, and they were given to those
that ran ten miles further.

Verse 6. The children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem,] The
precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2. with whom you were
anciently confederate in the days of Solomon, 1 King. 5. and seemed to be then
their prosperity-proselytes.

have ye sold unto the Grecians.] that is, to the Gentiles in general, for so
Saint Paul often uses the word Grecians, as contradistinct ot Jews; who were
barbarously sold, as if they had been bruit beasts, and that into the farthest
countries, that they might never ransom themselves, nor return to their native
soil again. This was singular, yea savage cruelty, which the merciful God
cannot abide, but will severely punish, Iam. 2.13, 14. Esaias 47.6. thou did
show them no mercy; upon the ancient have thou very heavily laid the yoke. See
the Babylonian cruelty graphically described, and accordingly recompensed, Ier.
51.34, 35, etc. The Spanish cruelty to the poor Indians is unspeakable. They
have made away 50 Millions of them in 42 years, as Acosta the Jesuit
testifies; and that under pretense of converting them to the faith. They
suppose they show the wretches great favor, World encompost by Sir Fr: Drake.
when they do not (for their pleasure) whip them with cords, and day by day
drop their naked bodies with burning bacon. Such a devil is one man to another,
when set awork by the devil, and spurred on by him. But shall they thus escape
by iniquity? In thine anger cast down the people, O God. He will do it: Psalm.
56.7.
for those words are not more a prayer, then a prophecy.

Verse 7. Behold I will raise them out of the place, etc.] Seem it never so
improbable, or impossible, I Will do it, says God, and you shall see it. Behold,
I Will fetch home my banished, though they may seem to be as water spilt on the
ground. I Will make those dead bones live: and raise my self a name and a praise,
by out-bidding their hopes, and marring your design of utter extermination.
Ribera understands the words concerning the resurrection of the dead at the
last day: because the Hebrew word properly signifies, to raise one out of
sleep. Some think it is meant of the Apostles and Martyrs, fetched out of
banishment; as was John out of Pathmos, Athanasius, Erasm. in vita Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, (who yet in his last banishment, by reason of the barbarous usage
of the fouldiers that led him along, hired for that purpose, sweetly and
blessedly breathed out his last) the English Exiles in Queen Mary's time,
whereof many returned and did excellent service here. Calv. in loc.
But I doubt not, says judicious Calvin, but God intends here a spiritual
gathering together of his people into one body, by the bond of faith: and this
was principally fulfilled after the death of Christ, who died for that Nation:
And not for that Nation only, bus that also he should gather together into
one the children of God, that were scattered abroad, Joh. 11.51, 52. so that
those whom God has gathered together and caused to return ( non pedibus vel
navigio, for that needs not, to Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother
of us all) from the lands of the East, of the West, of the North, and of the
South, Psalm. 107.2, 3.
shall praise the Lord together, as the Psalmist has it.

and will return your recompense upon your own head,] God delights to
retaliate, to bloody and decitufull men especially; as were easy to instance
in the Egyptians, Adonibezek, Polybius.
Agag, Attilius Regulus, the Roman General, who dealt most cruelly with the
Carthaginians, and was shortly after as cruelly dealt with by them, when fallen
into their hands. Here at home in K. Edw. the sixths time, the remembrance of
Somerset much moved the people to fall from Northumberland (who had wrought his
death) in his greatest attempts, and to leave him to his fatal fall: whereat
also they openly rejoiced, and presented to him handkerchiefs dipped in the blood
of Somerset, Life of Edw. 6. by Sir I. H.
for whom they thought he suffered rather late, then undeserved punishment. So
certain it is (says the Histarian) that the debts both of cruelty and mercy go
never unpaid.

Verse 8. And I will sell your sons and your daughters,] And so the scene
shall be soon altered, and a strange vicissitude easily observed. But when was
this done? or was it ever done? Ego putarim factum, etsi scriptura non dicat
quando, says Tarnovius: I suppose it was done, though the Scripture say not
when. Others fly to Allegories, and understand the Text of the conversion of
the Gentiles. I like their way best, that say. That which God did for the
Churces sake, the Church it self is said to do it. For their cruelties to the
Jews, God delivered these Nations up into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar first,
(who had a hard tug of it, and had therefore Egypt given him for his wages) and
afterward by Alexander the Great, who took Tire, and rased it. And this was
that great service spoken of, Ezekiel. 29.18. wherein every head wasmade bald, and
every shoulder bare, in filling up that strait of the Sea, which separated it
from the Continent, before it could be taken. But taken it was, together with
Sidon, and Philistia; and their children sold as far as Sabaea, which was then
counted the utmost part of the known earth, Mat. 12.42. Luke 11.31. being part
of Arabia the Happy, or, (as some will) the Desert. All this was done for the
Jews sake, though the world little considers it. It was enough for them, that
they knew it to be so, according to this Prophecy: and that God did hereby show
his high esteem of them, by avenging them of their enemies, and by thus giving
men for them, and people for their life, Esaias 43.4.

for the Lord has spoken it.] And will therefore surely do it: neither could
their Apollo deliver them out of Gods hands; though, to prevent his forsaking
of them, when besieged by Alexander, the Tyrians chained and nailed that Idol
of theirs to a post, that they might be sure of it. But all would not do.

Verse 9. Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles,] Oration tota est figurata, says
Pareus: All this following discourse is figurative; Hortatio sarcasmon habens,
says Mercer. It is an Ironicall challenge to all Gods enemies, to do their
worst to Christ and his Church: Somewhat like that Judge. 9.29. Increase thine
Army and come out (which seems to be the challenge that Gaal sent to Abimelech,
by some messenger) Or that of Rabshakeh, Esaias 36.8. I will give thee two
thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders on them: Or that,
Esaias 8.9.10.

prepare war,] Heb. sanctify war: that is, laying aside all other
business, give your selves wholly to it: (like as at holy services they were
called upon, Hoc agere, to mind the business in hand, and nothing else) as
Scanderbeg did; out of whose lips, whiles he was fighting, the very blood would
ftart; so earnest he was at it.

wake up the mighty men] the Giants, the champions, such as were Goliath the
Gittite, David's band of worthies, Achilles, Albertus Marquess of Brandeburg,
who for his valor was called Achilles Teutonicus. Put what metal you can into
these your Mighties, that they may do their utmost. But withal know that they
shall soon meet with their matches, viz Gods Mighty Ones mentioned verse 11.

let all the men of war draw neare] that they may join battle, and not stand
daring and facing one another: as the two armies of Christians and Turks did in
the days of Baldwin the second, king of Jerusalem for three months together,
Turk. hist. fol. 27.
and then rose and returned without any notable thing done. Speed 963.
It is the ancient and manfull fashion (says our Chronicler) of the English
(who are naturally most impatient of lingering mischiefs) to put their public
quarrels quickly to the triah of the sword. Praestat semel quam semper was
Cesars motto: and his property was Credere nil actum, dum quid superesset
agendum. Lucan.


Verse 10. Beat your plowshares into swords] Come with the best preparation you
can make, that ye may seem (as they say of a traveling Turk) to be so many
walking armouries. Voyage into Levant.


let the weak say I am strong] Come forth full and whole, young and old, weak
and strong, all that are able to bear arms, without excuse. It is an ancient
custom in Scotland, in cases of importance, to command the fire-crosse to be
carried, that is, two firebrarnds set in fashion of a cross, and pitched upon
the point of a spear, Life of Ed^. 6. p. 20.
and proclamation is thereupon made that all men above 16 years of age, and
under 60 shall come into the field to oppose the enemy. Those were desperate
boys in Kets conspiracy, that at the battle nere Norwich pulled the arrows
out of their own flesh, Ibid. 75.
and delivered them to be shot again by the archers on their side: and those
other wounded and weakened, no less desperately resolved, who being disabled
almost to hold up their weapons, Ibid. 72.
would strive what they could to strike their enemies: others being thrust
thorough the body with a spear, would run themselves further on, to reach
those that wounded them deadly. The enemies of the truth will make hard shift
but they will bear arms against Christ: and, though feeble, Scito quia ab
ascensore sun d^mone perurgetur Sern.
yet will say I am strong, a Satana impulsi and armati, says Mercer here, as
being pricked on, armed and agitated by the devil, that old manslayer:
according to that of Bernard, See thou thy persccutor outrageous, marvel not:
but know, that the devil rides him, makes him run.

Verse 11. Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen] Come and fetch your
bane, whereof, by your forwardness to come uncalled, ye may seem to be
ambitious: Judgments need not go to find you out: for you associate your selves
that ye may be broken in pieces Isa. 8.9. as at Armageddon Rev. 16.16. Come on
therefore, since you will needs be so mad, and take what befalles you. Who
would set the briars and thorncs against me in battle? I would go thorough
them, I would burn them together, Esaias 27.4. See Zech. 14.2, 3. (with the
Notes) Ezech. 38.4, Gnushu pro chushu.
16, 17. etc. Rev. 19.17, 18. The word here Englished Assemble, is by Iarchi
rendered Festinate Hasten: by others conglobamini cluster together, that ye may
be the sooner cut off, that the mouth of Gods sword may have its full bit, that
he may make an utter end, and your affliction may not rise up the second time.
Nah. 19.

thither cause thy mighty ones to come down] i. e. Vel Angelos vel alios says
Mercer, either thine Angels (called Gods mighties Psalm. 103.20. Esaias. 10.34.
Psalm. 68.17. where these Mighty Ones are said to make Sion as dreadful to all
her enemies, as those Angels made Sinai at the delivery of the law) or other
thine officers and executioners, that by thy command they may fall on, and
destroy these Heathen-armies, see verse. 13. the answer to this prayer of the
Prophet and the power of prayers which Luther fitly calls bombardas and
instrumenta bellica Christianorum the great ordnance and warlike weapons of
Christians.

Verse. 12. Let the heathen be wakened] Here begins Gods answer to the Prophets
prayer. The heathen, though at ease Zach. 1.11. and fast asleep, must be
arrowsed and assembled to the valley of Jehosaphat, where God the righteous
Judge (at the Prophets request reminding him of his promise, I am come for thy
words says He to Daniel, chap. 11.12.) gets up to the Tribunal, and there
sits to judge all the heathen round about. Let not us doubt of the like
success of our suites: but, when wronged, run to the Judge of heaven and earth
who will do us right, so we pray over the promises, as here, and not faint,
though he hear long with us. This, our Savior has taught us, by that famous
parable of the unjust Judge and the importunate widow Luke 18.2, 3. etc.
wherein we may take notice of many excellent encouragements to pray down our
enemies. 1. He was a Judge only; but God is our Father also. 2. He was an
unrighteous Judge: But, is there unrighteousness with God. Romans 9.14, 3. He,
as he feared not God, so he cared not for man: but God is (...) properly and
peculiarly loving to man above other creatures, Tit. 3.4.4. He avenged the
widow, as wearied out with her: and merely to be rid of her: And shall not God
do as much for us, out of his love to righteousness and hatred of wickedness?
Psalm. 45.7.
5. It was troublesome to him to be sued unto: but God is displeased with us
for nothing more, then for our backwardness and bashfulnesse, Ioh. 16.24. Quid
est cur nihil petis? what meanest thou to ask me nothing? said Se verus to his
favorite. 6. the unjust Judge had no care of his credit: but God is most
tender of his glory; and delights much in that title of his, O thou that
hear prayers.

Verse 13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe] It even hangs for
mowing, as we say: the enemies are ready ripe for ruin: down with them
therefore that they may not shed in the field, and seed again: let this valley
of decision be unto them a valley of excision: let it be as a wine press to
those bunches and branches of the grapes lopt off the vine. Lacus iste locus
coedis See Rev. 14.18, 19. Mat. 13.39. There is a stint set to men's sins Genesis
15.16. Zech. 5.8, 11. Mat. 23.32. with the Note there. What more beautiful to
behold then a field before harvest, then a vineyard before the vintage? and yet
how sudden an alteration, when workmen once take it in hand.

for the wickedness is great] Here is that plainly, that before was expressed
parabolically. The scripture often expounds it self in the same text: and is
every where its own best Interpreter.

Verse 14. Multitudes, Multitudes in the valley of decision] Or Concision, (as
Hierom and Tremellius) or of threshing, as Piscator, in reference to
Iehosaphat, who once threshed the Moabites and Ammonites there. These
multitudes are thither summoned (Turbae, Turbae adeste) or are there laid
dead, even heaps upon heaps, with those Philistines Judge. 15.16. So Aben-Ezra
senseth it, and thence the name of the valley of Concision or decision: to show
that there God, having passed a definitive sentence upon the Churches enemies,
and a very severe one too, such as was that kind of punishment, to put men
under harrowes of iron etc. 2 Samuel 12.31. Am. 1.3. would now finish the work
and cut it short in righteousness. Romans 9.28. idque cito and certo, as sure
and as soon, as if that day of slaughter were at next door by.

for the day of the Lord is neere] Lyra understands it of the last day, which
cannot be far off. And Diodate was of the same mind. For upon the next words

Verse 15. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened] he sets this note, Signs
which shall go before the last judgment, Mat. 24.29. Luke 21.25. See the Note
above on chap. 2.13. The Prophets, by such forms of speech, use to decipher
greatest calamities when all things look dark: as it fares also with them that
are under spiritual desertion Esaias. 50.10. who yet are exhorted there to trust
in the name of the Lord, and stay upon their God: to cast the anchour of hope,
as Paul and his company did in the shipwreck Act. 27.20. when they saw neither
Sun nor moon for many days together, and no small tempest lay upon them: all
hope that they should be saved, being taken away.

Verse 16. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion] Out of his church he shall
terrify his enemies as the Lion does the rest of the creatures by his dreadful
roar: so that they are amazed thereat, and have no power to stir from the
place. Lyra interprets it of that terrible Discedite Go ye cursed that shall
be uttered by Christ at the last day. A sentence that breaths out nothing
better then fire and brimstone, stings and sorrows, woe, and alas, torments
without end, and past imagination.

and the heavens and the earth shall shake] The heavens with thunder, the earth
with earthquake, to the terror of the wicked, but comfort of the godly. Hag.
2.6.

for the Lord will be the hope (or, harbor) of his people] they shall have a
good bush on their backs in the greatest tempest: they shall not be afraid
though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be cast into the midst
of the sea, Psalm. 46.2. -- fractus si illabatur orbis, Hora^.

Impavidos ferient ruinae
O the force of a lively faith! and the privy armor of proof that believers
have about their hearts! O the dignity and safety of Gods people in the worst
of times, Hab. 3.18, 19. Happy art thou o Israel: who is like unto thee, O
people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, the sword of thine
excellency: and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places Deuteronomy. 33.29.

Verse 17. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God] you shall experiement
that, which, during your deep afflictions, ye made some doubt of: and were
ready to say as Gideon did to the Angel, If the Lord be for us, why is it thus
with us? or, as your unbeleeving forefathers in the wilderness, Is God amongst
us? as if that could not be, and they athirst.

dwelling in Zion] Defending my people, and dispensing my best blessings to
them. The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion. Psalm. 134.^.
The blessings that come out of Zion, are far beyond those that otherwise come
out of heaven and earth.

then shall Jerusalem be holy] with a double holiness, Imputed and Imparted:
the profane being purged out here in part, but heareafter in all perfection.
This our Savior sweetly sets forth in those 2. parables of the tares, and of
the draw-net. Mat. 13. Or, It shall be holy, that is dear to God, and under
his care, favor and protection from the dominion, direption, and possession of
profane Heathens.

and there shall no strangers pass through her any more] either to subdue her
and prejudice her (as the proverb runs of the great Turk, that wherever he sets
his foot, no grass grows any more, such havoc he makes) or to fasten any
filth or contagion upon her See Rev. 21.27. where St. John alludeth to this
text: as all along that book he borrows the elegancies and flowers of the old
Testament to set out the state of the New, in succeeding ages. If this promise
be not so fully performed to us as we could wish, we must lay the blame upon
our sins, whereby the Reformation is ensnarled, and our prosperity hindered.
Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save: neither his ear
heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated betwixt you and
your God: and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear Esaias.
59.1, 2. Nothing intricates our actions more then sin: this is that devil in
the air, that hinders our happiness: this is that Makebate Hell-hag,
Trouble-town: charm this devil, and make him fall from his heaven (which is
to do hurt) and we shall inherit the promises. The godly man only prospers.
Psalm. 1.3.

Verse 18. The mountains shall drop down new wine] By these hyperbolicall
expressions is promised plenty of all things pertaining to life and godliness;
such a golden age, as the Poet describes. Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina
nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella. Ou Metam.

Where it must be observed, that spiritual good things are promised under the
notion of temporal, as of Must, Milk, etc. Ob populi infantiam, by reason of
the infancy of that people of that time. The mountains, i. e. the most barren
places: shall drop down (...), without our labor, shall yield plentifully, New
wine strong consolations and Scripture-comforts for strong Christians. And the
hills shall flow with milk, that unadulterated sincere milk of Gods word for
his babes 1 Cor. 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.2.

And all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters,] Sanctuary-waters,
wholesome doctrines, such as have a healing, cooling, quenching, quickening
property in them, Esaias 44, 3. and a fountain shall come forth,] viz. Baptism,
that laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. that fountain opened, Zach. 13.1. that
pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, that washes away sin, Rev.
22.1. Acts 22.16.

and shall water the the valley of Shittim.] That dry valley in the borders of
Moab, near to Jordan, Number. 25. Josh. 2.
and not far from the dead Sea. Here it was that the Israelites defiled
themselves with the daughters of Moab (as Jarchi notes) but shall be purified
and sanctified with the washing of water, by the word, Ephesians. 5.26. Tarnovius
renders the Text, Qui irrigabit vallem cedrorum, which shall water the valley
of cedars, those choicest trees planted in the paradise of God, Psalm. 92.13.
For (says He) as the Tabernacle was built and garnished of old with
Shittim-wood, for the most part, Exodus 25.5. and 26.15. and 27.1. and 30.1. so
is the spiritual temple, with these spiritual cedars.

Verse 19. Egypt shall be a desolation,] By Egypt and Edom, are meant all
Christ's adversaries, whether they be professed open enemies as were the
Egyptians, or false brethren as the Edomites. Romists have been both, and shall
therefore be desolated, Rev. 17.16. with 11.8.

For the violence against the children of Judah,] From the very cradle of the
Church, Exodus 1. yea sooner: for Esau in the very womb justled his brother
Jacob, and offered violence against him, that he might lose no time.

because they have shed innocent blood in the land.] The Saints blood is
called, innocent blood; 1. Because their sins are remitted. 2. Because they
are causelessly killed. And this is a land-desolating sin. The innocent blood
spilt by Manasseh, brought the captivity: the Marian times, our late troubles.
The blood of the Martyrs, shed by Turk and Pope (whom the Jew-Doctors
understand by Egypt and Edom here) shall be the ruin of them both.

Verse 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever,] Perpetuitas Ecclesiae declaratur,
says Mercer: The perpetuity of the Church is declared, and assured. The blood
of Martyrs is the seed of the Church. Christ is with his to the end of the
world: and those Roman persecutours who sought to root out Christian Religion,
and erected pillars in memory of what they had done, or rather attempted that
way, what got they thereby but perpetual ignominy, besides the irrepairable
loss of their souls, bodies, and fortunes? Tu vero, Beza.
Herodes sanguinolente, time. The Church as the Palm Tree, spreads and
springs up the more it is oppressed: as the bottle or bladder, Duris ut ilex
tonsa bipennibus. Horat. Cur. 4.4. Plin. l. 18. c. 16.
that may be dipped, not drowned: as the oak that takes heart to grace from the
maims and wounds given it, and sprouts out thicker: as Fenugreek, which the
worse it is handled, the better it grows, as Pliny says. No fowl is more
preyed upon then the pigeon; no creature more killed up then sheep: yet are
there more pigeons then birds of prey, more sheep then slaughter-men, etc.

Verse 21. Optatus.
For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed,] i. e. I will clear
their consciences from dead works, from the stain and sting of all sin, that
they may not question their right to these precious promises; but boldly take
the comfort of them: I will say unto them, Such were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified. Be of good cheer
therefore, since your sins, your bloody sins are forgiven you. Or thus, I
will cleanse their blood, that is, I will declare that the blood of the godly
which the world thought to have been justly spilt, was indeed innocent blood,
and that they were slain without cause. This I will do, partly by rooting out
and damning their enemies, and partly by clearing their innocence, and
crowning their constancy. Thus Mercer, Levely, etc.

for the Lord dwells in Zion.] This is the last promise, but not the least.
It refers, says Danaeus, to Christ taking our flesh; by the which he dwelt
among us, being God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. and Joh. 1.14. The word
was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory thereof, etc. This
is reserved to the last place, as the causa and cumulus felicitatis: especially
since he dwells with his Church for ever, as it is in the precedent verse,
and makes her a true Jehovah Shammah, as she is called, Ezech. 48.35.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophecy of AMOS.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE words of Amos,] Not of that Amos who was father to Isaiah, (as
some Ancients, for want of Hebrew, mistook it) but a man of meaner rank: 2 Cor.
11.6.
rude in speech, but not in knowledge, tam sensuum nomine quam simplicitate
verborum clarus, as Hierom says of Didymus. The Jews firname him, (...), The
Stammerer: as if he had been a man, not only of a low, but of a letsome
language; one that had an impediment in his speech, (...), Vt Michael Balbus.
as Mark 7.32. and this they gather from his name Amos, which signifies a
burden, as if this herds-man had had bovem in lingua, a clog upon his tongue:
and could not utter himself freely. But let this pass for a Jewish tradition.
True it is, that Amos is by interpretation a burden: and no less true, that
the words of Amos are onerosa prophetia, the burden of the word of the Lord to
Israel by Him, (See the Note on Mal. 1.1.) who is a vehement Prophet laden with
reproofs and threatenings, Comminationibus ac reprehensionibus. Onustus.
(as Luther says of him) such as the land was not able to bear, said that
Malecontent Amaziah, who had sell in aure, his gall in his ears, as they write
of some creatures. But truth must be spoken, however it be taken: neither may
Gods Ministers meddle with toothlesse truths only, (as Balac bid, Am. 7.10.
Neither curse nor bless at all) but bind heavy burdens, if need be, upon the
shoulders of obstinate sinners, that may cripple their iron sinews, and make
them buckle under the sense of Gods unsupportable displeasure.

who was among the herdmen of Tekoah,] He was no Prophet, neither was he a
Prophets son; but an herdman and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, chap. 7.14. 1
Cor. 1.27.
and extraordinarily called to this high office, by Him who chooses the
foelish things of the world to confound the wise: and the weak things of the
world, to confound the mighty, who enabled the dumb Ass to forbid his Masters
madness, 2 Pet. 2.16. and sent this downright Net-herd to deal with a
brutish people, worse then the Ox an Ass that have no understanding, Psalm.
32. Esaias 1.3. Job 10.4. and who had changed the glory of the uncorruptible God
into a four-footed calf, and creeping things, Romans 1.23. Tekoah is said to be
six miles from Bethlehem, twelve from Jerusalem, Kimchi in loc. and in cap.
3.10.
seituate in the tribe of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 11.6. Quinquius that learned Hebrew,
therefore is utterly out, in saying that Tekoah was a great townin the tribe of
Asher.

which he saw concerning Israel,] He not only heard these words, but saw them
in a vision: he had them by revelation from God. See the Note on, Hos. 1.1.

concerning Israel,] (...) Herodot.
Or, against Israel, that is, the ten revolted tribes, who had many Prophets
sent them, to foretell their captivity. God loves to foresignifie.

In the days of Vzziah, etc. At the same time with Hosea, and Isaiah, and
Micah, when Procas Sylvius was king of the Latins, and Sardanapalus of the
Assyrians, as Hierom says.

and in the days of Jeroboam,] the second; not that funestum Iudaeis caput,
that Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 2 Kin. 14.20, 25. and 2 Chro. 26.6, 7, 8, etc.
who caused Israel to sin. Under the reign of these two kings Judah and
Israel were in great prosperity: and, bewitched therewith, applauded themselves
in their impiety, as Psalm. 73.5.6. This Prophet therefore is sent to rouse them
and rub them up, to tell them their own, and what they should trust to.

Two years before the earthquake.] That notable earthquake, famous and fresh
in most men's memories. Whether it sell out just then when Vzzia^ attempted to
offer incense, and was therefore smitten with leprosy, 2 King. 15.5. as some
Ancients affirm: or whether at that instant, when Esaias in a vision saw the
Lord in his glory, and the posts of the door moved, Esaias 6.4. as some Rabbis
tell us, I have not to say. It seems to be foretold, chap. 3.5. and so terrible
it was, that people fled from it, Zach. 14.5. See the Note there. Josephus
makes mention of it, in the ninth Book of his Antiquities, chap. 11. and
tells us, that half a great hill was removed by it out of its place, and
carried four furlongs another way: so that the highway was obstructed, and the
kings gardens utterly marred. God, by such extraordinary works of his, sh^weth
his justice and displeasure against sin, Psalm. 18.8. Esaias 13.23. as also his
special mercy to his praying people, as at Antioch, in the year 529, and at
Bern Anno 1584; near unto which city a certain hill, carried violently beyond
and over other hills, is reported by Polanus (who lived in those parts) to have
covered a whole village that had 90 families in it; one half house only
excepted, Polan. syntag. 841.
wherein the master of the family with his wife and children were earnestly
calling upon God. Oh the terror of the Lord! and oh the power of prayer!

Verse 2. And he said, The Lord will roar,] This is spoken for the terror of
the wicked, as the like was Joel 3.16. for the comfort of the godly. See the
Note there. The word, as Moses, saves the Israelite, slayes the Egyptian; and
is, as the fragrancy of precious ointment: of which Oecumenius tells us,
Columbam vegetat, scarabaeum necat. Oecum.
that it refreshes the Dove, but kills the Beetle. See 2 Cor. 2.16. with the
Note. The Prophet here tells Idolatrous Israel to their teeth, that God will no
longer deal fairly with them as a shepherd, but fiercely as a lion: he will not
only roar upon them, but rent the caul of their hearts: as the lion, together
with his roar, lays his paws upon the prey. And that ye may know that these
are not bugbear terms, devised on purpose to affright silly people, and that
I shoot not Fot-guns at you.

the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, etc.] That is, all your bravery
shall down: all your wealth and wordly greatness shall wither: the top of your
Carmel, the Zenith of your prosperity shall be blasted, and the scene soon
altered. All this the Prophet used to shepherdy, Navita de ventis, de tauris
narrat orator. Bucholcer.
expresses accordingly, Artis suae usus sermonibus (as it is natural for all
Artists to do) but with a great deal of life and boldness. Verbis vivis,
animatis sententiis, and spiritus fervore flagrantissimus, as One says of
Savanarolas Meditations upon Psalm. 51.

Verse 3. For three transgressions of Damascus and for four,] For their seven,
that is, several sins, not a few: for their many and bony provocations, for
their progress in sin, without mean, or measure. The Jews here note, that
for three faults God will pardon a man, but let him beware of the fourth: God
will not always serve man for a sinning-stock, but break off his abused
patience, and proceed to punishment. Lo all these things works God twice and
thrice with man, Job 33.29. but let him not thereupon grow over-bold: lest he
pay for his presumption. Sin iterated is greatly aggravated; as ciphers added
increase the sum: and though it may sleep a long time, yet it is but as a
sleeping-debt not called for of many years, required at length: as Saul's sin
in slaying the Gibeonites, was not punished till forty years after: as Ioabs
killing of Abner, slept all David's days, etc. Now, lest Israel looking upon
Syria yet flourishing, should promise themselves like impunity, they are here
thus threatened.

I will not turn away the punishment thereof,] but pay them home for the new
and the old; yea, for the old by occasion of the new; for their obstinate and
incurable wickedness, I will punish them seven times more, and seven times
more, and seven to that, Lev. 26.24. etc. and so hang them up, as it were, in
gibbers, for a warning to Israel, that they may wash their feet in the blood of
these Heathens, and redeem their own sorrows.

because they have threshed Gileaed,] i. e. the Gileadites whom they had taken
captive, and thus cruelly entreated. See 2 King. 13.7. and 10.32. where it
appears, that all this was done, not without the Lord: which yet is no excuse
to Hazaels cruelty. That Conquerours were wont to use this kind of torment and
punishment, see 2 Samuel 12.31. But that David should do so, is some wonder: he
was hardly recovered of his late foul fall: and thence happily, so much
harshnesse. Certain it is, that the merciful God abhors cruelty toward his
creature; and severely punishes it: such as was this of Hazael toward Israel,
foretold by Elisha, 2 King. 8.12. and afterward of Ptolomie Lathurus King of
Egypt, who slew 30000. Jews at once: and forced the rest to eat up their dead
carcasses. Joseph.
So that barbarous Duke of Alva, roasted some of his prisoners to death, starved
others, and that even after quarter: saying, though he promised to give them
their lives, Hist. of Netherl. Grimst.
he did not promise to find them meat. Dio tells us of the Jews that dwelt
about Cyrene, in the days of Trajan; that they slaughtered a great sort of
Romans and Greeks after a miserable manner; sawing them down the middle from
the crown of the head, tearing their flesh with their teeth, smearing
themselves with their blood, Eio in vit^ Trajan.
and wearing their skins for coverings, etc. so that 200000 people perished
there: and besides in Egypt, and Cyprus, 240000, by the like abhorrid cruelty,
and about the same time, by the same hands. Beware of men, Mat. 10.

Verse 4. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael,] Sin does as
naturally draw judgments, to it, as the lodestone does iron, or turpentine
fire: and heinous sins, heaviest judgments, devouring plagues: Such as are
the fire of war, Psalm. 78.63. pestilence, Lev. 10.3. foreign enemies, Number.
21.28. Jer. 48.45. homebred conspiracies, Judge. 9.15, 20. besides the fire of
hell, whereof all miseries here are but typical. Let men kiss the Son
therefore, lest Gods anger be kindled: and get the spirit of judgment, and of
burning, that they may dwell with everlasting burnings. For even our God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.

Verse 5. I will break also the bar of Damascus,] i. e. their power and
might, all strength defensive, or offensive, and so make way for the enemy
into the city, give him a fair entrance without resistance. It is God that
orders the battle, and renders men's attempts vain, or prosperous, Esaias 54. ult.
Jer. 50.9. whencesoever the sword comes, it is bathed in heaven, Esa. 34.5.

and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven.] Campus idoli, the plain,
or valley of idols (so Mercer renders it) that is, of Syria given to idolatry;
or Damascus, a very Poneropolis, and therefore ripe for ruin.

and him that holds the scepter,] A plain periphrasis of a king, (called often
by Homer, (...), Scepter-bearer) or of him that was to succeed in the kingdom.
The French call him Dolphin, the Spaniards, Jnfant, etc. Our Henry the second,
Daniel.
crowned his eldest son Henry, while he was yet alive, and put the Scepter
into his hand: which made his ambition quite turn off his obedience.

from the house of Eden,] Or, of pleasure, the kings palace, a very paradise.
God denies not great men their lawful pleasures, for refreshment, amidst
their weighty businesses, etc. but yet they must remember St. James his charge
against the Grandees of his time, Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, Jam.
5.5.
and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts. as in a day of slaughter, or
of good cheer. And that of Abraham to Dives, Jam. 5.5.
Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things etc. Luke
16.25. which text Gregory the great could never read, but his heart aked with
fear, (...).
lest it should be his own case. It is well observed, that Philedoni Lovers of
pleasures are set as last and worst of those wicked ones, 2 Timothy 3.4. Solomon
is blamed for spending thirteen years in building his house, and planting
those paradises about it, Eccle. 2.5.

and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir] A place of Media,
Strabo. l. 17.
called by other Authors Cyrrha, or (as others think Cyrene in Egypt, or
Afrrica. This was fulfilled 50. years after by Tiglath Pileser.

says the Lord] who spoke the word and it was done Psalm. 33.9. and 148.5. And
what wonder, when his Fiat only made the world, and he can as easily unmake
it, if he please.

Verse 6. For three transgressions] See the Note on ver. 3.

of Gaza] One of the five chief cities or Satrapies of the Philistines; an
ancient name, Lib. 1. de. situ erb. cap. 11.
Genesis 10.19. Deuteronomy. 2.23. 1 Samuel 6.17. and not so first called by Cambyses,
making it his Magazine, when he marched against Egypt, as Mela would persuade
us.

I will not turn away] Or I will not convert them, as some render it (so verse
2.9. etc.) i. e. non reducam ad misericordiam suam, I will show them no mercy:
but they shall have an evil, an only evil Ezekiel. 7.5. without mixture of
mercy. This is punishment enough.

because they carried away captive the whole captivity] This cruely God
singleth out (as before) as a singular sin that shall be surely punished. Now
that is called a whole or perfect deportation, when none escapes; but all of
all sorts, sexes, and sizes, are carried away, as by a sweeping rain, or
universal deluge. Jer 13.19 Judab shall be carried away captive all of it: it
shall be wholly carried away captive. Whether this were Judah or Israel that was
so inhumanely dealt with by the Philistines, we find not. Something like it we
read 2 Chronicles. 21.16, 17. Joel. 3.6. See the Note there.

to deliver them up to Edom] Or to shut them up in Edom, their most inveterate
deadly enemy; to whom the Philistines delivered or sold them on this condition
or bargain, that they should hold them there in perpetual and irrevocable
slavery.

Verse 7. But I will send a fire] i. e. an enemy, says Drusius, which, as a
fire, shall consume all. This was fulfilled by Vzziah 2 Chronicles. 26.6. whence it
was afterward called Gaza which is desert, Act. 8.26.

which shall devour the palaces thereof] built likely in the blood of the poor
afflicted, and having sin at the bottom, which blew up all at length, as the
voice from heaven said to Phocas, Cedren: hist. page 543.
who likewise laid his foundation in blood. See the Note on verse 4.

Verse 8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashed] These other four
Satrapies of the Philistines ( Gath is not mentioned, because happily Time had
now triumphed over it, so that it lived by fame only) were the worse likely,
and fared the worse for Gaza's ill neighborhood: like as Hamath did for
Damascus Zech. 9.2.

and I will turn mine hand] Not in mercy as Zech. 13.7. but for further
miscief; I will have a double blow at Ekron, where Beelzebub the Grandiabolo is
worshipped, Iterabo plagam: and when I have done with the rest, I will begin
again with Ekron; Acheronta movebo.

and the remnant of the Philistines] This is dreadful, but due to them, and
just upon them for their savage dealing with Israel verse 6. This was fulfilled
by Hezekiah conquering all that country 2 King. 18.8. See Josephus lib. 9.
cap. 13.

Verse 9. For three transgressions of Tyrus] That crown of the sea Esaias. 23.8.
media insuperabilis unda, till Alexanders time, who joined it to Continent, and
afterward ruined it. Charged it is here, as those before, 1. with incurable
obstinacy. 2. with extreme cruelty.

because they delivered up the whole captivity] which either themselves had
taken, or that had fled to them for refuge in some common calamity: but were
betrayed by them into the hands of their bitterest enemies. See verse 6. and
acknowledge the truth of that divine proverb. The tender mercies of the wicked
are cruel: they help their clients no otherwise, then the wolf in the fable
helped the sheep of his cough, by sucking his blood.

and have not remembered the brotherly covenant] that passed of old betwixt
David Solomon, and Hiram their king. Or rather, that between Jacob and Esau and
their respective posterity, which the Tyrians should have promoted by laboring
a reconciliation betwixt these dissenting brethren: but they contrariwise blew
up the coals, and rather stirred up more strife then stinted it. They called
not to mind what unity and amity ought to be between people so near allied: and
what good offices they should therefore have done for them. Protinus indigni
fraternum rumpere foedus. Horat.
Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother. This is Gods argument
to Israel Deuteronomy. 23.8. Should not the Tyrians have said the like to the
Edomites, and so sought to have pacified them, rather then gratified them in
their hereditary hatred, and deadly feud etc. they put themselves amongst those
worst of men, which, given over of God, though they know the law, how that they
which commit such things are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but
also take pleasure in those that do them Romans 1. vlt.

Verse 10. Therefore I will send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus] This was
fulfilled shortly after in the war that Salmanasar waged against the Tyrians,
whereof see Joseph: lib. 9. chap. 14. Or in Nebuchadnezzars war with them,
whereof read Ezech. 29.18. Jer. 27.3. and 47.4. Joseph: cont. Appion. lib. 2.
Or Alexanders, Curt: lib. 4. Justin. lib. 11. It is good for men to tremble at
Gods judgments whiles they hang in the threatenings, as Josiah did: and not to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord, as Ananias and Sapphira did Act. 5.9. by putting
it to the proof, whether he will be dicti sui Dominus as good as his word.

Verse 11. For three transgressions of Edom etc.] i. e. of the Edomites, the
Rabbines understand the Romists those false-brethren the Popes bloodhounds.
See the parallel made by D. Tailor in his sermon called the Romish Edomite.

because he did pursue his brother with the sword] First when he drove him from
house and home for fear of his life, which he threatened to take from him Genesis
27. and afterward came against him (returning homewards) with four hundred
cutthroates at his heels Genesis 32.6, 8. to smite the mother with the children,
ver. 11. Next in his posterity, those sworn swordmen of the devil: that denied
Gods Israel passage in the wilderness, coming out against him with much
people, and with a strong hand Number. 20.20. to his great discouragement Number.
21.4. And ever after, bote him an aching tooth, and waited him a shrewd turn;
joining with the enemy, and taking all advantages of mischief. See 2 Chronicles.
28.17. Psalm. 137.7. Obad. 10.11. Malice is commonly hereditary, and runs in the
blood. And (as we use to say of Runnet) the older it is, the stronger.

and did cast off all pitty] Heb. corrupted his compassions, forgot his
brotherhood, banished natural affection out of his bosom, and put off all
humanity. The Rabbines tell us, that out of the profaneness of his Spirit Esau
put away his circumcision, by drawing up again the foreskin with a Surgeons
instrument. Whether this were so or not, I have not to say: but that he
corrupted his compassions (if any ever he had) violated the law of nature, and
abolished the bowels of a brother, the brotherly covenant, this text assures
us; even all the affections, duties, and respects of blood and nature by which
he was bound. His grandfather Abraham could say to his nephew Lot, Let there be
no difference between thee and me; for we are brethren, Genesis 13.8. This one
consideration was retentive enough, cooler sufficient to his choler: it was
even as the Angel that stayed his hand when the blow was coming, Genesis 22. It
should have been so with Edom: good blood would not have belyed it self: But he
had lost his brotherly bowels, and even put off manhood: he had wiped out all
stirrings of good nature, as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it
upside down, as the scripture speaks in another case: 2 King. 21.13.
or as when a man emptieth wine out of a cup, the sides are yet moist: but when
it is rinsed and wiped, there remains not the least taste or tincture.

and his anger did tear perpetually] i. e. He in his anger did tear, as a
beast of prey, Psalm. 14.
and rage without intermission. The enemies of the Church do so still: such is
their implacable hatred against God and his truth: they eat up Gods people as
they eat bread, yea they tread down and tear in pieces, as if there were none
to deliver. At the Town of Bar in France, when it was taken by the Papists,
all kind of cruelty was used, says Mr. Fox: children were cut up, and the guts
of some of them and hearts pulled out, which in rage they tare and gnawed with
their teeth. The Italians likewise which served the king there did for hatred
of religion break forth into such fury, Act. and Mon. fol. 1951.
that they did rip up a living child, and took his liver being as yet red hot,
Erasm. epist. lib. 16. ad obtrectator.
and eat it as meat. Erasmus tells of an Augustine friar, who openly in the
pulpit at Antwerp wished, that Luther were there, that he might bite out his
throat with his teeh. And Friar Brusierd in a conference with Bilney brake out
into these angry words: But that I believe and know that God and all his saints
will take revengement everlasting on thee, Act. and Mon. 914.
I would surely with these nails of mine be thy death. Psalm. 74.19. Genesis 49.7.
Pray therefore with David, Deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove to these
destroyers etc. Cursed be their anger, for it is fierce: and their wrath for it
is cruel.

and kept his wrath for ever] Though himself was mortal, yet his wrath, might
seem to be immortal: as was Hanibals against the Romans, and our Edward the
first against the Scots: against whom being about to march, he adjured his son
and Nobles, Dan. hist. fol. 201.
that, that if he died in his journey into Scotland, they should carry his
corpse with them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be enterred, till they
had absolutely subdued the country. Anger may rush into a wise man's bosom,
but should not rest there. Aug. ep. 87.
Eccle. 7.9. for it corrupts the heart, as vinegar does the vessel wherein it
long continues; Of the Athenians it was said, that their anger was (...)
everlasting; but that was but small to their condemnation. Thou shall neither
revenge nor remember ill turns Lev. 19.18. where servare is put for servare
iram to keep, Ar. Rhetor. l. 9. c. 1.
for to keep ones anger: to show that there is nothing that a man is more ready
to keep; as being a vindictive creature; Arestotle says (but absurdly) that
it is more manly to be revenged, then to be reconciled: and this the world
calls manhood: but indeed it is doghood rather. The manlier any man is, the
milder and more merciful, as David 2 Samuel 1.12. And Julius Caesar, when he had
Pompey's head presented to him, (...). 1 Cor. 6.7.
wept, and said, Non mihi placet vindicta sed victoria, I seek not revenge but
victory. And the Apostle purposely disgraceth revenge of injury by a word that
signifies disgrace, loss of victory, or impotency of mind. Thunder, hail,
tempest, neither trouble nor hurt celestial bodies: no more does anger, great
minds. Edom was short-spirited, soon kindled, and not easily appeased; his
wrath kept no bounds, as the word here used imports: his coals were coals
of Juniper, fierce and long lasting: his fire not elementary, but culinary;
nourished by low and unworthy considerations: a fruit of the flesh, and such as
excludes out of heaven Gal. 5.20, 21. It was not the passion, but the habit of
hatred which St. James calls the devil Jam. 4.7. and St. Paul counsels
men not to give place to that devil: and for that end, not to let the Sun go
down upon their wrath Ephe. 6.26. See Ezech: 35.5. where Edom is charged with a
perpetual hatre, and therefore threatened with blood, and desolation, as here.

Verse 12. But I will send a fire] A fierce enemy, ut supra. The inhabitants of
Teman and Bozra, together with other the posterity of Esau, were famous for
power and policy Obad. 8.9. Ier. 49.7. Esa. 34.6. But there is no wisdom,
might nor counsel against the Lord Prove. 21.30, 31. He can make fools and
babies of the Churches enemies: he can fire out their malice etc.

Verse 13. I will not turn away the punishment thereof] Or I will not turn and
reduce him to my self by repentance, that I may show him mercy, as Lam. 5.22.
Ier. 31.18. but harden his heart, and hasten his destruction.

because they have ripped up the women with child] Immane facinus, and vicinis
indignum, says Mercer, A cruel fact, and the worse, because done by so near
neighbors, and allies; thus to kill two at one blow, and those also innocent
and impotent, and such as they ought to have spared by the law of nature, and
of nations: and all this, merely out of covetousness and ambition.

That they might enlarge their border] but first root out the little ones, that
else might hereafter claim and recover their fathers possessions. So at the
Sicilian vespers they ripped up their own women that were with child by the
French: that no French blood might remain amongst them. See the Note on Hos.
13.16. and learn to detest covetousness, that root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.
Better converse with a Canibal, then with a truly covetous caytiffe: and more
courtesy you may expect.

Verse 14. But I will kindle a fire etc.] with mine own hands (not only send a
fire, as before verse. 10.12.) as Charles 5. Emperor of Germany, Parei medul.
1. hist. prof. page 907.
(when it was told him how that Farnesius the Popes General had ravished
certain Ladies) brake out into these hot words: If I had the villain here, I
would kill him with mine own hands: neither was he ever heard to speak any
thing with so great anger, in all his days.

with shooting in the day of battle] Cum clangore, velululatu with noise of
trumpets and soldiers, so terrible, happily, as that in the bloody fight betwixt
the great Turk Amurath 3. and Lazarus Despot of Servia: where the noise was so
great, Turk: hist. 300.
that the wild beasts in the mountains stood astonished, and the birds fell to
the earth amazed thereat.

with a tempest] i. e. with incredible swiftness, and all on the sudden: and
so the more terrible, because impetuous.

Verse 15. And their king shall go into captivity] Where he may find as little
favor as Zedekiab did with Nebuchadnezzar, Valerian with Sapores the Persian,
Bajazet with Tamerlan the Scythian: and not so much as Gilimer king of Vandals
with Bellizarius, of whom he requested (and obtained) these three things, a
loaf, a sponge, and an harp: a loaf to relieve him, a sponge to wipe his
weeping eyes, and an harp to cheer him up in his captivity.

He and his Princes together] Lords and losels shall fare alike: the sword
spares neither: And in hell Potentes potenter torquebuntur Mighty men shall be
mightily tormented.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. FOr three transgressions etc.] Or Malicious wickednesses with an high
hand committed, and heaped up to that height. See chap. 1.3.

because he burnt the bones of the king if Edom] A wicked man, but yet a man:
(...).
and God (who is a lover of mankind) shows himself sensible of the injuries
and indignities done but to his dead body: such an enemy he is to cruelty to
his creatures. That Mesa king of Moab bore a special edge against the king of
Edom, sought to break thorough the army to him but could not, and afterward
sacrificed his son and heir whom he had taken in that sally made upon the king
of Edoms quarters, we read 2 King. 3.26, 27. There are some that think that at
another time, overcomming the Edomites, he dig'd up the bones of that king out
of his sepulcher, he burnt them to lime, that is prorsus, perfectissime and
absolutissime as some sense it, to ashes and cinders as Esaias. 33.12. or (for
greater revenge, and contempt,) Targnm.
be whitelimed the walls of his palace therewith, as Genesis 11.3. Psalm. 69.23.
Esaias. 22.21. Thus, in that horrid massacre of Paris, they cut of the Admirall's
head (whom before they had murdered) and presented it to the Q. mother; Speed.
1161.
who, balming it, sent it for a present to the Pope, who thereupon caused the
Massacre to be pictured in the Vatican hall: under one side is Colignij and
sociorum caedes, On the other, Rex Colignij caedem probat. Il Mercuri^ Italico
92.
The king himself (viz Charles 9.) beholding the bloody bodies of those then
massacred: and feeding his eye on so woeful a spectacle, breathed out this
bloody speech Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui. How sweet is the smell of a
slain enemy: Spec: belli sacri.
another hel-hag said upon a like occasion, that she never beheld so goodly a
piece of tapesstry, as the faces of those butchered Saints. This insulting over
the dead is, that piece of cruelty which the church complains of Psalm. 79.2.
Cornelius a Lapide upon this text cries out of it as an inhumane and shameful
thing both because the honor of sepulture is the last dues of the dead; and
also because this is to fight with dead carcasses. (...), Justa de functorum.
Yet this has been practiced by one Pope against another, and by many of the
Popes Champions here in England, who unburied and burnt the bodies of Paulus
Phagius, Peter Martyrs wife, and many others: Cardinal Wolsey had a purpose
(had he not been prevented by death) to have taken up King Henry's body at
Windsor, Act. and Mon. 1905.
and to have burnt it. How much better Charles the fifth (yet no friend to the
Reformation, but a prudent Prince) who entering Wittenberg as a Conqueror, and
being importuned to dig up the dead bodies of Luther, and other Reformers,
refused to violate their graves, and sent away Melancthon, Pomeran, and some
other eminent Preachers unhurt, not so much as once forbidding them to publish
openly the doctrine that they professed? Act. and Mon. 1784.
Cambyses hears ill among all men for his digging up the dead body of Amasis
King of Egypt, and causing it to be whipped and brickt; and Sylla for the like
cruelty to C. Marius. Of all fowl we most hate and detest the Crows; Herodot.
lib. 3. Plin. l. 7. c. 50.
and of all beasts, the Jackal's (a kind of ^oxes in Barbary) because the one
digs up the graves, and devours the flesh, and the other picks out the eyes of
the dead. Hinc moraliter disce, says a Lapide, Learn hence also what a
baseness it is to tear and deface the good names of those that are dead: to
fly-blow their names is worse then to burn their bones to lime. And yet among
many other men of mark that might be instanced, Melancthon mortuus tantum non
ut blasphemus in Deum cruci a^^igitur, says Zanchius: not Papists, but
Lutherans laid blasphemy to his charge after his death, whom all Christendom
worthily honored for his learning and piety. Zanch. Miscell.


Verse 2. But I will send a fire,] See Chap. 1.4.

and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth,] A city so fair and large that it
has a plural name, which signifies cities, by way of excellency: as Athens
was called the Greece of Greece; (...).
Rome, the Epitome of the world, etc.

and Moab shall die with tumult,] with all these together, on an huddle, as it
were: they are here set down by an elegant Asyndeton, to set forth the
suddenness and terror of the judgment threatened. They shall be stormed, and
have no quarter given them. Here Osiander notes, that it is one of the many
punishments of sin, for a man not to die in his bed, but in battle. It was
promised to Josiah, 2 Chro. 34.28
he should die in peace. True it is, he died in battle: but he died before that
general desolation that followed shortly after. (for indeed, with him died all
the prosperity of that people) And besides, his weeping and humiliation had
altered the very nature of the trouble, and made war to be peace to him.

Verse 3. And I will cut off the Judge,] i. e. the king, who sometimes sits
himself in Judgment, Acts and Mon.
as K. Hen. 8. did here, at the condemnation of Lambert Martyr: as the King of
Persia does often at this day. The Preachers Travels. 63.
I have seen him (says a traveller) many times to alight from his horse, only
to do justice to a poor body. The Grand Signior himself sits one day in the
week to receive the poors petitions, and punish the faulty Grandees about him.
For as he styles himself, Awlem Pe^awh, that is, the worlds refuge: so he would
have the world to take notice, that such as lament unto him, The Grand Sign.
Serag. page 148.
shall be sure to have redress and succor from him, although his Ministers
fail them, or abuse them, through their injustice: Hence, few Visiers die in
their beds.

from the midst thereof.] i. e. of Kerioth, the chief city where the Court
was kept, as Kimch^ says, with a great deal of pomp and pride. We have heard
of the pride of Moab. See Ier. 48.7, 11, 14, 18. Zeph. 2.8, 10. It was their
national sin, and forerunner of their fall.

Verse 4. Ideo deteriores quia meliores esse debebant. Zach. 1.19.
For three transgressions of Judah,] who were therefore worse then the
abovementioned Nations, because they ought to have been better. Beset they
were with enemies round about, who dealt cruelly with them: and this should
have made them to cleave more close to God: these horns pushing and scattering
them, should have pushed them home to him: but it proved otherwise. For Judah
also is found to to be incorrigibly flagitious, guilty, as the former, of three
transgressions and of four, etc. worse in them then in others, because in Judah
was God known, and to them were committed the Oracles of God, whom they might
hear eftsoons screeking out unto them, when they were putting forth their hands
to wickedness, Oh do not this abominable thing. But they tanquam monstra
marina, as One says, Jer. 44.4.
like so many Sea Monsters passed by Gods words with a deaf ear.

They despised the law of the Lord,] They would none of his counsel: they
liked well to live in Gods good land, but not to live by Gods good laws: like
those in the Gospel, they rejected the counsel of God within themselves, Luke
7.30.
and that with scorn and disdain, as the word here used signifies. See the
Note on Hos. 6.6.

and have not kept his commandments,] though holy, just, and good, though
such, as if a man keep them, (be it but Evangelically, si faciat, etia^si non
perficiat) he shall live in them, by a life of grace, as the flame lives in the
oil, or the creature by his food: Though in keeping thereof (how much more for
keeping thereof?) Live. 18.5.
there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11.

and their lies caused them,] that is, their idols (as the Vulgar well renders
it) and their will-worships: their new inventions, and good intentions, thereby
to serve and please God. These are properly called lies: because contrary to
the law of truth (whereto they are here opposed) and to David's practice, who
did the truth, 1 Ioh. 1.6. and could safely say, I hate and abhor lying: but
thy law do I love, Psalm. 119.163. and ver. 104. Through thy precepts I get
understanding: therefore I hate every false way.

after the which their fathers have walked.] So that they are a race of Rebels,
a seed of evildoers, and do fill up the measure of their fathers sins, till
wrath come upon them to the utmost. This is no small aggravation, Ezekiel. 20.30.
Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after
their abominations. See Acts 7.51. Must I be provoked by you from one
generation to another.

Verse. 5. But I will send a fire upon Judah.] They shall also bear the
punishment of their iniquities, yet is it not said as ver. 2. that Judah shall
die with tumult, etc. God will make a difference in his dealings with his own
and others, his sons and his slaves, these shall totally and finally be
consumed at once, Nah. 1.9. not so the Saints. The remnant of the Philistines
shall perish, Am. 1.8. But of Judah a remnant shall be still reserved, for
royal use, Isai. 11.11, 16.

Ver. 6. For three transgressions of Israel, etc,] The ten Tribes come in last:
lest they (with whom his main business lay, and to whom he will henceforth
apply himself) should conceit themselves privileged, because for present
prospered: lest they should read, or hear the menaces of Gods mouth, as men do
the old stories of foreign wars, that nothing concern them.

because they sold the righteous for silver,] Even Gods own pasture-sheep, that
had golden-fleeces, precious souls: these they made sale of for a little money,
which ever was, and still is a common medler; and drives the bargain, and
business to an upshot. Money, says One, is the worlds great Monarch, and
bears most Mastery: whence it is, that the Hebrew word Adarcon, used for money,
1 Chronicles. 29.7. Esaias 8.27. comes of Adar, strong, or mighty, and Con, to
prepare: to show that a moneyed man is a mighty man, as this world goes.
Unless we may say of money, as one does wittily of Sardanapalus, the last of
the Assyrian. Monarchs: Sardanapalus, says He, had a terrible name. Sar notes
a Prince, Dan a Judge, Niphal an overthrower, or Conqueror: no otherwise
appliable to him, but that his Luxury was the overthrow of both Sovereignty and
Judgment. So is money mighty and well prepared, but it is to blind the eyes of
the wise, and to pervert the matters of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.10. who because
not so well underlaid as his adversary, lies long languishing many times at
Hopes hospital; as that lame man did at the pool of Bethesda, but might not be
sped, because (for want, belike, of stirring Angels) he could get none to put
him into the Pool immediately after the Angel had stirred it. That was a sad
complaint made by the Prophet Habakkuk, chap. 1.4. Behold the law is slacked,
and judgment does never go forth: for the wicked does circumvent the
righteous, viz. by his bribery and baseness, therefore wrong judgment
proceeds. A Judge is to retain the decency and gravity of the Law; yea of the
Lawmakers, with whom their is none iniquity, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Nec prece, nec precio, should be the Magistrates
Motto: he should be above all price or sale.

and the poor for a pair of shoes,] For a cup of wine, Joel 3.3. for handfulls
of barley, or pieces of bread, Ezekiel. 13.19. for a thing of nothing, so base
they were grown at length: a very small deal of gain would win them over. See
chap. 8.6. At first, a little matter would not hire them: it must be silver,
and a considerable sum too; as an harlot, that requires at first no small
reward: but afterward prostituteth her self light-cheap to all comers. Sin
seems modest and maidenly at first: but meddle not, for it sooneth woadeth an
impudency in men's foreheads, and debaucheth them.

Verse. 7. That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor:]
Covetousness is craving, and cruel: it rides without reins, as Balaam did
after the wages of wickedness; and cares not whose head it rides over, to
compass commodity. Yea it pants after the dust of the earth, on the head of
the poor, as desirous not only to lay them in the dust, Anhelant.
but to lay them a-bleeding, and a-dying there. They gape over the head (or
life) of the poor, in the dust of the earth (so some read the words) as
devising to destroy them. A poor man's lively hood is his life, Mar. 12. ult.
Luke 8.43. for a poor man in his house is like a snail in a shell; crush that
and you kill him. These cormorants earnestly desired, and endeavored to bring
dust upon poor men's heads (the garb of those that were in heaviness, Job 2.12.
Ezech. 27.30. Lam. 2.20.) by their oppressions and injustice; yea to bring them
down to the dust of death, to set them as far under ground, as now they were
above. Lo this they do as greedily, and as greatly desire, as serpents and
other hot creatures covet the fresh air, to cool their scorched entrails. See
Ier. 14.6. Job 5.5. and 7.2. It is said of Saul the persecutour, that he
breathed out threatenings against the Church, Acts 9.1. as a tired Wolf, that
wearied with worrying the flock, lies panting for breath. So Bonner whipped the
poor Martyrs, till he was breathless. Some Interpreters note out of Joseph Ben
Gorion, Gorionides hist. c. 44.
that there was an old custom, that those that were accused before the Judges,
should be arrayed in black, and have their heads covered with dust. And hence
they conceive the sense to be this. That pant, i. e. that earnestly desire that
such poor men may be accused by the rich, Drusius. Mercer.
of whom they may receive gifts to pervert judgment. And this they think to be
confirmed by the following words.

they turn aside (or pervent) the way of the meek,] that is, the cause,
business, judgment of the modest, and self-denying poor, the subject of rich
men's injuries, (for most part) and unreasonable oppressions, Jam. 2.6. A crow
will stand upon a sheeps back, pulling off wool from her side: she durst not do
so to a wolf, or a mastiffe. Even reasonlesse creatures know whom they may be
bold with: so do wicked oppressors. Veterem ferendo injuriam invitas novam.
The meek by pocketting up one wrong, invite another. Ye have condemned and
killed the just: and he does not resist you, Jam. 5.6. Ye not only rob, but
ravish the poor, that are fallen into your nets, Psalm. 10.9. ye do even
whatsoever you please to them, as One Martyr said of John Baptist, that he was
put to death, Acts and Mon.
as if God had been nothing aware of him.

and a man and his father will go in, etc.] by an horrible (if not incestuous)
filthiness; such as Heathens by the light of nature condemned and execrated, 1
Cor. 5.1. The Indians abhor it; showing themselves in respect of the incestuous
Spaniards amongst them, as the Scythians in respect of the Grecians, whom they
so far excelled in life, as they were short of them in learning. Am I a dog,
said Abner to Isbbosheth, 2 Samuel 3. that is, so impudently and excessively
lustful as a dog is, so scalded in his own grease, Romans 1.27. Some libidinous
sensualists put off all manhood, become dogs, worse then dogs: following their
harlots, styled in Scripture, saltbitches, Deuteronomy. 23.18. such as having
abandoned both the fear of God, and shame of the world, care not whom they
admit, father, son, any one, every one.

to profane my holy name.] As if I were Author, or Fautour of such cruelties
and villainies. This is to take Gods name in vain, Prove. 30.9. yea this is to
blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20. by breaking down the banks of blasphemy, and causing
the enemies of the truth to speak evil with open mouth, as they did in David's
days 2 Samuel 12.14. And in Paul's days, Romans 2.24. And in Origens days, Nunc
male audiunt castiganturque vulgo Christiani; De opisicio. Dei prooem.
quod vitia sub obtentu nominis Dei celent, etc. says He, Christians and their
religion hears ill among Heathens, by reason of their impious and impure
lives, and their conversation not becoming the Gospel of Christ, Philip. 1.27.
Of such carnal Gospellers it may be truly said, as Diogenes said to Antipater
(who being vicious wore a white cloak, the ensign of innocence) that they do
virtut is stragulam pudefacere put honesty to an open shame, bring contempt
upon God and his ways etc.

Verse 8. And they lay themselves down upon clothes] i. e. table-carpets, or
bedcoverlets laid under those that sit at meat: whether on the ground, with
their legs gathered under them (as the Turkish Bashawes do to this day, and the
Trojans of old- stratoque super discumbitur ostro) or at beds or tables, Turk.
hist. fol. 231. Virg. Enead. lib. 1. Horat. 1. Car. od. 27. Vide Lambin. ad loc
and Lips. lib. 3. Antiq. lection.
leaning on the left elbow Esth. 1.6. and 7, 8. Ioh. 13.28. Et cubito remanete
presso.

laid to pledge] These should have been restored and not detayned beyond the
time prescribed Deuteronomy. 24.12, 13. Exodus 22.26, 27.

by every altar] It was their fashion to feast in their Idol-temples 1. Cor.
8.10. and 10.21. See Horat. Oda. 37. lib. 1. And this in imitation, belike of
Gods people, who were commanded to feast before the Lord, in the place that he
should choose to place his name in. See Deuteronomy. 14.23.26. 1 Samuel 1.3, 4. etc. And
here Paucis verbis multiplex scelus arguit, says Gualther, in few words he
accuses them of much wickedness.

and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God] A God they
have of their own devising, a wodden God, and such as if he had but a pair of
horns clapped on his head, might make an excellent devil, (as the Major of
Dancaster told the wise men of Cockram in Q. Mary's days, that came to
complain of the Carver for making them an ugly Crucifix) Next they drink wine
in the house of their God, Act. and Mon.
besides their drink offerings (which David's soul hated Psalm. 16.4.) they had
their drunken compotations in their Idoll-temples, Heyl. Geog. 449.
as now they say in the Isle of Sardinia after mass done, they fall to
drinking and dancing in the midst of the Church: singing in the mean time
songs too immodest for an Alehouse. Lastly,

they drink the wine of the condemned] or of such as they have fined or
mulcted, for not coming along with them to the Idol-temples. Diodate renders
it, the wine of the amercements, that is bought with such money as they have
unjustly amerced and condemned the innocent in. There are that here understood
that wine that was wont to be given to malefactors led to execution Prove. 31.6.
to cheer them up: but these wretches drank it off from them. The former sense
is the better.

Verse 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them] It is not usual with God to
hit men in the teeth with what he has done for them Jam. 1.5. unless in case
of unthankfulness, as here. Then indeed people shall hear of what they have
had; and be taught the worth of good turns by the want of them. Good turns
aggravate unkindnesses: and our offenses are not a little increased by our
obligations. Hence this approbation; and it is as if God should say: This
people has not only done the evils aforementioned, but also after the
receipt of mercies without measure and many miraculous deliverances; as if I
had even hired them to be wicked: and as if that were to pass for truth which
the snake in the fable said to the country man, that had showed it kindness,
Summum praemium pro summo beneficio est Ingratitudo. Speed 622. ex Parisien.
In the year 1245. the Pope was denied entrance into England: it being said
that the Pope was but like a mouse in a fachell, or a snake in ones bosom, who
did but ill repay their hostess for their lodging. God had done exceeding much
for this perverse people: and this they now hear of with stomach enough, as
well they deserved. At Athens, if a servant proved ungrateful, for his
manumission, his master had an action (...) against him: Val. Max. lib. 2. cap.
1,
and might recover him again into bondage. Lycurgus the Lacedemonian lawgiver
would not make a law against Ingratitude: as holding it monstrous not to
requite a kindness, not to acknowledge a good turn. The old Romans decreed
that such as were found guilty of this fault, should be cast: alive to the
Cormorant, to be pulled in pieces and devoured. Our Savior f^^ly yokes
together the evil, and the unthankful Luke 6.35. and God here sums up all
this peoples sins in this One, as the Epitome of all the rest.

yet I destroyed the Amorite] when once his iniquity was full Genesis 15. when he
had filled the land from corner to corner with his uncleanness Ezrh. 9.11.
then sent I my hornets before them, which drove them out before them. But not
with their sword nor with their bow. Josh. 24.12. See this thankfully
acknowledged by this Church, after she had paid for her learning, Psalm. 44.2,
3. with 9.10.

whose height was like the height of the Cedars etc.] For stature and strength
they seemed insuperable, Number. 13.28. etc. But God soon topt them and tamed
them, he took them a link lower, and made them know themselves to be but men.
Psalm. 9.20. or if trees, cedars, oaks (as Plato says of man, that he is but
arbor inversa) yet,

I destroyed his fruit from above, and his root from beneath] I left him little
enough to be proud of: less then Nebuchadnezzar, who had a stump left, and was
reserved for royal State again Dan. 4.15. God cut off these Amorites, that
is, all the seven nations, head and tail, root and branch, old and young
together Deuteronomy. 7.2. Josh. 6.21. (Behold the severity of God,) as if he had
forgotten that forepart of his back-parts Jehovah, Jehovah, gracious, merciful
etc. and had taken up that Emperors Motto, Fiat justitia, pereat mundus, Let
Justice be done, though never so many be undone.

Verse 10. Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt] which lies lower then
Judaea: as does also mystical Egypt then Jerusalem, which is above, which is
the mother of us all. To what great preferments and privileges Gods people are
now brought up by Christ, See Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. and cry out with that noble
Athenian (...) from how great miseries to what great mercies are we advanced?
Act. 26.18.
Even from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God: that we may
receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among the Saints etc. And shall we
then again break Gods commandments? Ezra, 9.14. Or say, We are delivered to
do all these abominations Ier. 7.10. Would not the heaven sweat over us, and
the earth cleave under us, yea hell gape for us upon such an entertainment of
divine bounty.

and led you forty years through the wildernesse] led you all along in my hand
as an horse in the wilderness, that ye should not stumble Isay. 63.13. Led
you, and fed you, daily and daintily, sending you in Angels food, and then
setting the flint abroach that you might not pine and perish in that vast
howling wilderness Deuteronomy. 32.10. (...).
Besides that, I there bore with your evil manners, Act. 13.18. as a mother
bears with her child's frowardness, or as an husband bears with his wives
crossenesse, which he knows he must either tollere, or tolerare, cure or cover.

to possess the land of the Amorite] to fit you for such a mercy, to humble
you, to prove you, and to do you good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.16. God knows
the height of our spirits, and the naughtiness of our natures etc. how ill
able men's brains are to bear a cup of prosperity: and how soon their hearts
are lifted up with their estates, as a boat that rises with the rising of the
water. God therefore usually brings his people into the wilderness, and there
speaks to their hearts: he holds them first to hard meat, Hos. 2.14.
and then puts them into full possession.

Verse 11. And I raised up your sons for Prophets] The Ministry is worthily
instanced, (...).
as a singular mercy Psalm. 147.19, 20. Other nations had their Prophets such as
they were Tit. 1.12. Tragedians and Comedians were said (...) to labor in
teaching the people, and were highly esteemed of the Athenians: insomuch as
that after their discomfit in Sicily, they were relieved out of the public
stock, Rous his Archaen. 90. (...). 2 Pet. 1.21.
who could repeat somewhat of Euripides. But what were these to Isreal's
Prophets, those holy men of God who spoke as they were moved, acted, and as it
were carried out of themselves by the holy Ghost, to say and to do what God
would have them? yea those holy children, such as Samuel and Jeremy (for of
them especially the Rabbines understand this text) who devoted themselves to
the work betimes, being more forwardly then either Athanasius the boybishop, or
Cornelius Mus, who (if we may believe Sixtus Senensis) was a Preacher at twelve
year old: and such one an as with whom all Italy was in admiration.

and of your young men for Nazarites] The Chalde has it Doctors or Teachers;
it being the office of these holy Votaries, to teach the people. Heathens also
had a kind of Nazarites, as Lucian sets forth in his Dea Syria (Habent and
vespae favos, simiae imita^tur homines) and the Turks at this day have their
Dermislars, Turk. hist. fol. 473.
and their Imailers, whom they call the religious brothers of love: Epicurus
his hoggs they might better term them, says the Historian. Bellarm. lib. 2.
de Monach. cap. 5.
The Papists would prove their Monks to be Christian Nazarites: but the
abolishing of that order is declared Act. 21.25. and Monks are so far from the
abstinence of the Nazarites, that they eat of the best, and drink of the
sweetest that Sea and Land can afford. So far also from the singular
sanctimony of the Nazarites, whereof see Lam. 4.7. that the Poet sung truly of
them, Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effraenis Monachus. --
They may better profess themselves successors to the Scribes and Pharisees;
who may seem (says One) to have fled and hid themselves in the Monks and
friars. Vitae sanctimonia and vo^o singulari ab aliis Separati.
Now the Pharisees pretended to succeed the ancient Nazarites, as their very
name imports, but they were (as likewise the Popish Monks) a generation never
instituted by God nor brought in by the Prophets, but only a humane invention,
and through their own boldness: whence Chemnitius upon the tenth of John takes
thieves there to be the Pharisees. An Interpreter here shows, how God has
now made all his people Nazarites i. e. separated and sanctified unto himself
by making them paterns of piety, as the Rechabites holy, harmless, undesiled
of dead works, and evil works, Ephesians. 5.18 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Jude 23.
from whom they are bid to stand off, 1 Timothy 6.5. as also not to be drunk with
wine wherein is excess, but to be filled with the Spirit: abstaining from all
appearance of evil, hating the garment spotted with the flesh etc. See the
Notes on Numb. 6.

Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel?] If it be not testified against
me, as Mic 6.3. and if ye cannot, then read the sentence against your selves,
Mat. 27.4.
as Judas did, that ye may appear to be subverted and self-condemned Tit. 3.11.
God loves to fetch witness from men's own consciences for the justifying his
proceedings: and to convince them clearly, that he is no way wanting to them,
but they to themselves. A cunning carver can cut the similitude of any
creature, but not on a rotten stick. What could god do more to his Vineyard
then he had done ( Es. 5. How often would I have gathered thy children, as an hen
her chickens etc. Mat. 23.27. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee? Ier. 4.14. God is so far from being guilty of Isreal's misery as that
(besides other undeniable arguments of his love, as bringing them out of Egypt,
destroying the Amorite etc.) he had raised them up Prophets and Nazarites,
given them his word, Sacraments, all good helps to mollify their hearts; and
then appealeth to their consciences by this Rhetorical interrogation, Is it
not even thus? so to wring from them a confession of the truth, in spite of
their teeth.

Verse 12. But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink] Opponit jam Propheta
pessimam gratiam etc. says Gualther. Here was the ill requital they made the
Lord for all his benefits; they corrupted his young Nazarites (as Buzzards
snatch up young lapwings) and silenced his Prophets, or enjoined them at least
to meddle with toothlesse truths only, to preach placentia: threatening them if
they did otherwise (for so the Original imports) that so they might sin
without control, and go to hell without hinderance. This God heavily here
complains of, as an horrible Ingratitude. To render good for evil is divine,
good for good is humane: evil for evil is brutish, but evil for good is
divelish.

Verse 13. Behold I am pressed under you etc.] A country comparison (such as
this Prophet is full of) plain but pithy; to show how God is pressed and
oppressed with peoples sins, wearied as it were Esaias. 43.24. and his patience
even worn out; so that he can forbear them no longer, Isay. 42.14. but like a
traveling woman, that bites in her pain, as long as she is able, at length
cries out; so here, God has much ado to forbear killing men in their sins:
as he was ready to have a blow at Moses, when he met him in the Inn, and could
hardly hold his hands; he even groans under the pressure as a cart seems to do
under an extraordinary load laid on it, till it creake and crack again: He
seems to screeke out to sinners as Jer. 44.4. Oh do not this abominable
thing? And (when he cannot be heard) to sigh out, Ah sinful nation, a people
laden with iniquity etc. Esaias. 1.4. as Fasciculus temporum Anno. 884. bitterly
bewailing the iniquities of those times cries out, Heu, heu, Domine Deus etc.
That ninth age is much complained of by many Waters. God has as much, nay more
cause to complain of ours, considering his pains with us and patience toward
us, to so little purpose and profit. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. many
Interpreters make these words not a complaint, but a communication; rendering it
thus, I will press or straighten your place as a cart full of sheaves
presses, sc. either the ground whereon it goes, or the corn which it
thresheth out of the husk Esa. 28.27, 28. or as the creature that lies under
the wheels of it is crushed in pieces. It was a memorable saying of Mr.
Bradford Martyr, He that will not tremble in threatening, shall be crushed in
pieces in feeling. These perverse Israelites would not be warned by any
threatening, therefore they were pressed to some purpose in that sore famine,
and straight siege of Samaria. Obsidione vos premam says the Chalde here,
Samariana.
I will so beleaguer your city, that there shall be no escaping. Look how a
laden cart onustum sibi, so laden that another sheaf can hardly be laid on, so
sticks in straight places, that it can neither go forward nor backward: so will
I bring you into those distresses, that you shall not know how to avoid or
abide them. (...).
(Confer Psalm. 4.2. Prove. 4.12. 2 Cor. 4.8.) I will distress my distressers:
and press with such piercing afflictions, as shall make you sigh and screech
out another while, Oh it is an evil thing and a bitter to forsake the Lord etc.
Jer. 2.19. Oh he is worse then mad, that would buy the sweetest sin, at so
dear a rate.

Verse 14. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift] men are apt to
bless themselves when God curses Deuteronomy. 29.19. and to bind upon impurity in a
common calamity; to make fair weather when such a tempest is up, as shall
never be blown over. Or, if worse come, then, as all creatures run to their
refuges Prove. 30.25. Psalm. 104.18. Prove. 18.11. Dan. 4.14.11. Judge. 9.50, 51.
(the hunted hare runns to the form, to the bushes that she formerly haunted,
but now those cannot save her) so men in misery bethink themselves of and
betake themselves to creature comforts, and refuges, either natural or
artificial as here, but these all serve them as Absoloms mule did her master,
hanging betwixt heaven and earth, but rejected of both. Let a man be as swift
as Asahel, God can easily overtake him; Life of Edw. 6. by St. Ioh. Heyw.
his sin will find him out, and he shall but in running from his de^^^ run to
it: as the Historian speaks of those Scots defeated by the English at
Muscleburough fled, that they so strained themselves in running for their
lives, that, they fell down breathless and dead. Surely as the coney that
flies to the holes in the rocks does easily avoid the dogs that pursue her:
when the hare that trusts in the swiftness of her legs is at length overtaken
and torn in pieces: So those that trust in God shall be secured: whereas those
that confide in themselves or the creature, shall be surprised, and come to an
ill end. David ran to God in distress and was releeved. Saul goes to the
witch, and from thence to the swords-point, Judas to the Pharisees, and thence
to the halter.

the strong shall not strengthen his force] but be made weak as water. None of
the men of might have found their hands Psalm. 76.5. their hands are palsied,
their sinews cracked and cripled. It is God that both strengthens and weakneth
the arms in the day of battle Ezekiel. 30.24.

Verse 15. Neither shall he stand that handles the bow] Arcitenens, though he
can do it never so dexterously: yet if he trust in his bow Psalm. 44 6. God will
break it Ier. 49 35. Herodot. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 5. c. 26.
or otherwise render it unusefull: as it befell the army of Senacherib in
Egypt, of Maximus against Theodosius, and the French in the battle between our
Edward the third, and their king Philip: who being enraged with a defeat,
Daniels hist. 237.
resolved presently to revenge it: being elevated with an assured hope of
triumphant victory. But it fell out otherwise: for there fell at the instant of
the battle a piercing shower of rain which dissolved their strings, and made
their bows unusefull etc.

neither shall he that rides the horse] though it be as good an one, as Cain
is fained by Dubertas to have managed, or as Alexanders Bucephalus, or Julius
Caesar's great horse, serviceable, and full of terror. A horse is so swift,
that Job says he eats up the ground: (...) Pansan.
and the Persians dedicated him to their God the Sun, as the swiftest creature
to the swiftest power-divine. But as the sun in heaven can neither be outrun,
nor stopped in his race: so neither by men nor means can God be frustrated, or
his anger avoided. the Canaanites had both horses and charrets, the Israelites
had neither: and yet they found an horse a vain thing for victory etc. Psalm.
33.17. and 147.10.

Verse 16. And he that is couragious] Heb. strong of his heart, a Cucurdelion,
as one of our kings was called, Egregie cordatus homo, one of a Roman
resolution to vanquish, or die: they were wont to say of cowards in Rome, that
there was nothing Roman in them. But let a man be as bold as Brutus, whom One
pronounced, Romanorum ultimum, the last of the Romans, as if after, Rome had
brought forth no courageous man and worthy of her self. Let him be courageous
among the mighty, such as were those Lion-like chieftaines among David's
worthies, Scanderbeg, Zisca, Huniades, who was in that unhappy battle at Varna
(by a just hand of God upon him for joining with that perjured Popish king
Ladis^aus) beaten out of the field.

and forced to flee away naked in that day] escaped narrowly with his life: as
he did also another time, when after a slaughter of 34000. Turks, he was
compelled to save himself by flight: and all alone by uncouth ways to travel
three days and nights, without meat or drink: and afterward being on foot and
disarmed (which is here meant by naked: confer Esaias. 20.3. Mich. 1.8. 1 Samuel
19.14. Turk. hist. 310. Mr. Clarks Life of Hunniad. page 98.
he fell into the hands of two notable thieves, who despoiled him of his
apparel etc. and on the next day he light upon a shephard of whom he for Gods
sake craved something to eat, and obtained bread and water and a few onions, as
the Turkish history has it.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. Hear this word that the Lord has spoken etc.] Here begins the
second sermon tending to confirm what had been affirmed in the former, and
evincing the equity of the judgments there threatened for their hateful
ingratitude, and other horrible offenses, condemned and cried out upon by the
very Heathens.

hear this word] Verbum hoc decretorium this notable word; (...) So Mat.
22.21. (...).
there are three articles in the Original: and there is not the least tittle
in the text upon which there hangs not a mountain of sense, say the Rabbis;
this neck-verse. that the Lord has spoken] And shall he not do it? who ever
waxed fierce against God, and prospered? Ioh. 9.4.

against you O children of Israel] By his word, Christ many times secretly
smites the earth Es. 11.4. that is, the consciences of carnal men glued to the
earth: He sets a continual edge upon the word, and consumes them by his
rebukes, till he have wearied them with his secret buffets and terrors: and
then in the end casts them into a reprobate sense, as he did the Pharisees, who
were toties puncti and repuncti, minime tamen ad resipiscentiam compuncti.

against the whole family] The Dodecaphylon, all the twelve tribes, Malcol^n.
in Act. Apost.
the whole house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come
forth out of the waters of Judah Isay. 48.1. God stands not upon multitudes
Psalm. 9.17. nor matters, whether it be against a nation that he speaks and
acts, or against a man only, Job 34.29.

which I brought up from the land of Egypt] This they often hear of by way of
exprobation, as chap. 2.10. God seeming to repent him for their detestable
unthankfulness, as David did of the kindness he had showed unworthy Nabal, in
safegarding his substance 1 Samuel 25. and to complain as Frederick the third
Emperor of Germany did, that of those courtiers whom he had advanced, Valor.
Max. Christian. Camd. Elis.
he found scarce any that proved faithful to him, but the worse for his
courtesy: or as Q. Elisabeth, that in trust she had found treason.

Verse 2. You only have I known] That is, owned and honored, culled and
called, chosen and accepted to be my people, when I had all the world before me
to choose in Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. and nothing to move me thereto but mine own mere
grace, even the good pleasure of my will. (...).


therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities] Not passing by the least
without a sensible check: the least, I say, that is allowed and wallowed in:
and that because of the disloyalty and treachery that is therein. Other men's
sins are rebellions against God: but the saints sins are treacheries, because
against the covenant. Let such therefore look to themselves, and walk
accurately, or they shall be sure to rue it. (...). Ephesians. 5.15.
God will be sure to plow his own ground, whatsoever becomes of the wast: and
to weed his own garden, though the rest of the world should be let alone to
grow wild. His own he will not fail to punish. 1. In case of scandal, as
David. 2. For sins unrepented of, though not scandalous. Oh the bloody wails
that God has left upon the backs of his own dear children for such sins!
Bastards may escape scot-free: but sons shall pay for it. Ingentia benesicio,
slagitia, supplicia. The punishing Angel is bidden begin at Gods Sanctuary,
Magdeb. Praefat. ad Cent. 5.
Ezekiel. 9. He will be sanctified in all that draw near unto him, Levit. 10.3.
Sanctified I say, either actively, or passively: either in the sincerity of
men's conversation, or in the severity of their visitation: at which time, his
Articles of enquiry will be very strict and critical against his own professed
people, who are therefore worse then others, (and shall therefore speed worse)
because they ought to be better.

Verse 3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?] God permits his people
to walk together with him in an humble familiarity: but then they must take
care that familiarity breed not contempt: and that they conceit not that he
will connive at their iniquities, or that their holy services will bear them
out i^ any known sin. He is just and jealous of his glory, wherein he should
be no small loser, if he did wink at any besides involuntary sailings, and
unavoydable infirmities; for which there is a pardon of course, if sued out. If
I shall walk with you, says God, as a father, friend, husband, you must agree
with me, consent, and conform to me, idem velle, and idem nolle, will and nill
the same that I do: or else I shall walk with you no otherwise then as a severe
judge, or cruel enemy, Levit. 26.24. as a lion, with the prey that he has
taken, as the fowler with the bird he has caught, or the hunter with the wild
beast he has gotten into his snare.

Verse 4. Will a lion roar in the forest, when, etc.] It is said of the Lion,
that he sets up a double roar: P^ut. lib. de indust. anima.
first, when he descrieth his prey, next when he seizes it, Then, says
Plutarch, he roareth, or rather belloweth like a bull, that other beasts may
come to him, and take part with him. It is not for nothing that the lion
utters his voice: much less that Almighty God thundereth, and threatens by
his Prophets, your sins without repentance will be your ruin, according to
those threatenings: though you are so sturdy, or at least so stupid, as to fear
them no more, then Behemoth does the iron weapons, Jeb 40.
which are esteemed by him as strawes, or bull-rushes. Shall the wrath of a
King be as the roaring of a lion, Prove. 19.12. and as the messengers of death,
Prove. 16.14. and shall Gods menaces be slighted? will vile men imagine him a
God of clouts? One that howsoever he speaks heavy words, will not do as he
says? intends them no otherwise, then in terrorem, for fray-bugs? Surely they
will find it far otherwise: and it must be concluded, that being already
sentenced, either their beds are very soft, or their hearts very hard, that can
sleep securely in so deplorable a condition: Surely Gods predictions shall have
their accomplishment, 1 Samuel 3.19. and 15.29. Believe them therefore: Stand in
awe and sin not, since he that despises the word, shall be destroyed: but he
that fears the commandment, shall be rewarded, Prove. 13.13. See the Note
there.

Will a youg lion cry out of his den?] q. d. Is it for nothing that God so
terribly threatens? Is there not a cause? as David said in another case, 1 Samuel 17.29. Surely, as in the Revelation we never read that heaven opened, but
some great matter followed: so here; Has the Lord spoken it, and shall he not
do it? Never think it. Oh think of God as of one not to be thought of: as One,
whose wisdom is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose power is his
Truth, and all himself. He is the God of Amen, Psalm. 31.6. faithful, and true:
he can as soon die as lie: neither can he be hindered or resisted, as Angels,
men, and devils may. In the creature there is an essence, and a faculty,
whereby they work: as in fire is the substance and the quality of heat. Now
between these, God can separate, and so hinder their working; as in the
Babylonish fire. In the Angels there is an essence, and an executive power: God
comes between these often, and hinders them from doing what they would. Not so in
God; who is most simple, and entire, armed with power irresistible to tame his
rebels: Every morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not: but
the unjust knows no shame, Zeph. 3.5. the fool passes on and is punished,
Prove. 22.3.

Verse 5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, etc? Think you, that all
things are carried here by blind fortune, and not by a particular providence,
as if -- mundo nullus inesset,
Rector, and incert^ fluerent mortalia casu?
Will you say of the evils you have suffered, in the language of Ashdod; 1 Samuel
6.9. 1 Cor. 10.
It is a chance? Is that Heathen-Idol Fortune any thing in the world, more then
a blasphemy, spued out by the devil against the divine providence? Can a
sparrow fall to the ground, or any the least bird into a snare upon the earth,
without your heavenly Father, Matthew. 10.29. Birds flying seem to be at
liberty; yet are guided by an overruling hand. They fall sometimes into a gin:
and do not you thereupon conclude, that some fowlers hand is in it? Lo you are
ensnared, and insnarled by your enemies: and can you not discern that it is the
Lord who has done it? Lam. 3.37, 38. Act. 17.25, 28. Eccles. 9.12. For man
knows not his time (nor his chance, ver. 11.) as the fishes that are taken in
an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of
men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly (but providentially) upon
them.

Or shall one take up a snare from the earth, etc.] No wise fowler will take up
his nets, till he have gotten his prey: No more will God withdraw his hand, or
call off the enemy and the avenger, till he have his design: till he has
either reformed or ruined you.

Verse 6. Shall a trumpet be blown,] sc. out of a watchtower in time of war,
to sound an alarm, and to say, Hannibal ad portas, the enemy is at hand, the
Philistines are upon you.

and the people not be afraid,] or run together to make resistance? Jer. 5.22.
Psalm 114.7.
Will ye not then tremble at my threats, says the Lord? Tremble thou earth at
the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. Fear is an
affection of the soul, shrinking in it self from some imminent evil. God is the
proper object of it, whence he is called Fear in the abstract, Psalm. 76.11.
and those that come on his errand should be received with reverence, yea with
fear ^and trembling, as was Titus, 2 Cor. 7.15. and before him Samuel, by those
Elders of Bethlehem, 1 Samuel 16.4. as suspecting it was the purpose of some
judgment that brought him thither. Come thou peaceably? said they. It is a
good thing to stand in awe of Gods Messengers, and to tremble at his
judgments, whilst they yet hang in the threatenings. It appears by this
Prophet, that carnal security was grown epid emicall, and had overspread the
land, chap. 6.2, 3. Some there were that said, God had not sent the Prophets to
denounce those evils, but that they had done it of their own heads, as we say.
Others doubted of the certainty of those evils denounced, chap. 6.3. against
whom He here disputes by these foregoing similitudes; and in the next words
plainly asserteth the Divine providence, and the authority of the Prophets,
Gods privy-Counsellours.

Shall there be evil in a city,] Understand it of the evil of punishment. See
Lam. 3.37. Esaias 45.7 Mic. 1.12. Eccles. 7.14. 1 King. 9.9. and 21.29. See my
Treatise called, Gods love tokens, page 3, 4. etc.

and the Lord has not done it?] Although God does it not but only as it is
bonum Justitiae, good in order to his glory. That which we are here advertised
is, that it is not Luck and Fortune that does toss and tumble things here
below: but that God sits at the stern, and steers the affairs of the world. The
Gentiles indeed, held Fortune as a goddess: representing her by a Woman
sitting upon a Ball, as if the whole world were at her command; having with her
a razor, as if she could at her pleasure cut off and end man's happiness;
bearing in her right hand the stern of a ship, as if she could turn about all
things at her pleasure, and in her left hand the horn of abundance, as though
all plenty came from her. This was abominable idolatry, to be shunned by
Christians: yea the very name of Luck or Fortune, is to be spet out of their
mouths with utmost detestation. It repented Austin that ever he had used that
wicked word, Fortuna. Aug. Retract.


Verse 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing,] i. e. Hardly any thing. He
lo-veth to foresignifie, to warn before he wound: and this merely out of his
Philanthropie. Howbeit sometimes, and in some cases, he is more sudden and
still in his revenges: that he may thereby, First maintain his honor and
glory, the eyes whereof are by some sins extraordinarily provoked, as Acts
12.23. And secondly, to teach men not to continue in sin, no not for a
moment: since they may be presently cut off from all further time of
repentance, acceptance, and grace for ever: This made Austin say, that he
would not be an Atheist, no not one half hour, to gain all the world. See Luke
17.32. and 12.20. Pharaoh had warning of the first and second plagues, not so
of the third: and again, of the fourth and fifth, but not of the sixth: and yet
again, of the seventh and eight, but not of the ninth. And when neither
warning, nor no-warning would do good, then came that sweeping plague; Tandem
prototocos ultima plaga necat.

But he reveals his secret to his servants the Prophets.] Gods Prophets then
are his meniall servants: not his underlings, or inferior hinds, but of
noblest employment about him. Every faithful Minister is servant to the king
of heaven ( Act. 27.23. whose I am, and whom I serve: this the Devil denied
not, Act. 16.16, 17.) yea his Steward Ambassador, Herald (as here) by whom he
proclaims war, but first proffers pardon, and proposes conditions of peace. A
practice usual, not only among the people of God, by his appointment, Deuteronomy.
20.10. but also among the Heathens, as Histories inform us. The Romans had
their Lex Facialis: by their Heralds they sent to such as had wronged them,
Caduceum and Hastam, as Ensigns of peace and war, that within thirty days
they might take their choice: within which time, if they did them not right,
the Herald presently denounced war against them, casting forth a dart in
token thereof. Alexanders course was; when he sat down before a city, to set up
a torch: to show that if they would come in, and submit before that torch were
burnt out, they should have hearing. Tamerlan hanged out first a white flag,
then a red, and lastly a black. And the Turks at this day, Turk. hist. 344.
first make to their enemies some offer of peace; how unreasonable soever it
matters not. Gods offers in this kind are all of grace, and for our good. If
it were otherwise, what need he give warning? and why does he not as Absalom
did; when, intending to murder Amnon, he spoke neither good nor evil to him?
Well might the Lord say, Fury is not in me, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self. As I live, I desire not the death of a sinner, etc. If he did, why might
he not rush suddenly upon such and confound them at once, as he did the
reprobate Angels, even in the very act and first moment of their sin? Why
comes he first in a soft still voice, when he might justly thunder-strike us?
and why sends he his Heralds to proclaim war, but yet with articles of
peace and reconciliation open in their hands? Chrysostom.
Why was He but six days in making the world, and yet seven days in unmaking
and destroying one city, Jericho? Was it not to show that the Lord is merciful
and gracious, slow to anger, and of great kindness? And this he has commanded
his Prophets to make known, Psalm. 103.8.
that the goodness of God may lead men to repentance. As, if they turn his
grace into wantonness, and pervert his patience to presumption, Romans 2.4.
their commission is to declaim against such practices with all authority, Tit.
2.15. and to proclaim hellfire, in case men amend not. Necessity is laid upon
them so to do, and woe be to them if they preach not law as well as Gospel; that
when they return up their commission, they may report the matter, saying,
Behold we have done as thou have commanded us, Ezekiel. 9.11. True it is, that
perverse people question the Prophets, and quarrel them for this plaindealing:
as Ahab did Eliah for a troubler of Israel, and Amaziah our Prophet Amos, for a
trumpetter of rebellion. But this is as great folly, as if some fond people
should accuse the herald, or the trumpet as the cause of their war: or as, if
some ignorant pesant, when he sees his fowls bathing in his pond, should cry
out of them, as the causes of foul weather.

Verse 8. The lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken,
who can but prophecy?] Who that knows the terror of the Lord, can dare to
do otherwise, when he commands it? Shall men fear fire, water, bears, lions,
etc. and not the great and terrible God? If he roar upon his servants, and say
as to Jeremy he once did. Thou therefore, gird up the loins of thy mind, and
arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at their
faces, lest I confound thee before them: We must roar against men's sins, and
be instant, Jer. 1.17.
though they roar against us for so doing, and threaten never so much. Micaiah
will not budge for a Kings authority, when once he had seen the Lord in his
Majesty; nor Paul for an Angels, Gal. 1. the rest of the Apostles for the
Sanhedrims, Acts 4.19. and 5.25, etc. When the Emperor threatened Basil with
imprisonment, banishment, death, he answered; Let him threaten boys with such
fray-bugs: I am resolved: neither menaces nor flatteries shall silence me, or
draw me to betray a good cause or conscience. If I deal not plainly and
faithfully with your souls, said Bernard, Bern. de tempore. 99.
Vobis erit damnosum, mihi periculosum. Timeo itaque damnum vestrum, timeo
damnationem ineam si tacuero. i. e. it will be ill for you, and worse for me.
The truth is, you would be betrayed, and I should be damned, if I should hold
my peace. Let me be accounted proud, pragmaticall, any thing, Luth. ep. ad
Staple.
rather then found guilty of sinful silence, when the Lord calls me to
speak, says Luther. These were men whose hearts were fraught with the
reverentiall fear of God; and therefore found themselves necessitated to be
faithful: besides the love of Christ constrains them, 2 Cor. 5.14. so that
they could do no less, they could not but speak, etc. Act. 4.19.

Verse 9. Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, etc.] that is, in the courts of the
Philistin-princes, and of the Egyptian kings, who are here attested and
invited, to judge betwixt God and his vineyard, to pass an impartial
sentence, and to say whether Isreal's sins deserved not all the judgments
that God by his Prophets had denounced, yea and greater too. Holy Ezra
acknowledges as much, chap. 9.13. But because that many were ready to say, as
those in Jeremy, Jer. 2.35.
Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me: behold I will
plead with thee, (says the Lord) because thou say, I have not sinned. Yea
thy sworn-enemies shall give true evidence against thee, and judge of the
justice of my proceedings with thee, that I may be justified, and every mouth
stopped.

Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria,] that there-hence ye may
be eyewitnesses, and have a full prospect of their lewdness; which will be to
you a pleasant spectacle; that out of their tragedies you may frame comedies.
Samaria was a city set upon an hill: and as it self, so its wickedness could
not be hid. Carnal people are very inquisitive into the miscarriages of
professors: and ready to search more narrowly thereinto then Laban did into
Jacobs stuff. What a jear made Ammianus Marcellinus of the pride and luxury of
some of the primitive Bishops? Averroes, of the Papists Breaden-god? the Turks,
of the Papists Asinus palmaris? the Jews, of their clipping the crucifix, and
weeping over it in the Pulpit? as also the swearing that is so common amongst
Protestants; together with that mad conceit of some, that he that cannot swear
with a grace, Profecto aut hoc non est Evangelium: aut nos non sumus Evangelici.
wants his tropes and figures befitting a Gentleman? This and such like
unchristian practices, made learned Lineker when he read Christ's Sermon in the
Mount, cry out; Certainly, either this is not Gospel, or we are but bad
Gospellers: It is a lamentable thing, that it should be commonly reported that
there be such abominations found in the Church as are hardly heard of among the
Heathen, 1 Cor. 5.1. -- pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Why should it be told in Gath, or published in the palaces of Ashdod? 2 Samuel
1.20.
why should Egyptians condemn Israelites, as the Scythians once did the Greeks,
and the heathen Indians now do the beastly Spaniards that tyrannize over them?
Why should there be any successors to those Heretics mentioned by Bellarmine,
and called, Christianocategori, Accusers of Christians; because by their
unchristian conversation they delivered up Christ and his people to be
buffetted, De Eccles. triumph. l. 2. c. 11.
and spitted on by their enemies? See the Note on Hos. 7.16. This shall be
their derision in the land of Egypt.

and behold the great tumults] Or the humming-noises, the garboiles, the
violent irruptions upon the poor oppressed, causing them to cry out as those
that are crushed or broken in pieces.

and the oppressed in the midst thereof] whether by force or fraud oppressed:
whether it were (...) or (...) The Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 These.
4.6. This the Heathen shall take special notice of, and say with Calocerius
the Conful Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum, The Christians God is a
righteous God indeed.

Verse 10. For they know not to do right] They have done wrong so long
together, against knowledge and conscience, that now they are given up to a
reprobate sense, to an injudicious mind, (...). Romans 1.
having sinned away that light they had, and lost that little knowledge they
had learned out of the law of Moses concerning good works: this they have
wickedly blotted out of their own minds; as also those common notions of good
and evil, that glimmering of divine light left in the natural man; this in a
defiled conscience is wholly extinct. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
No, not they, as appears by what follows, they eat up my people as they eat
bread Psalm. 14.4. These Cannibals, like pickrels in a pond, or sherkes in the
sea, devour the poorer as they the lesser fishes. And though they cannot but
know this to be evil, condemned by the light of nature, and much more of
scripture, yet they do it, and will do it: their eyes being put out with the
dust of covetousness, and their hearts so exercised therewith 2 Pet. 2.14.
that they can say as that wretched fellow did, We are masters of our
consciences, we can do what we will, for all them: and as Balaam resolved at
length, to curse, whatever came of it.

who store up violence and robbery in their palaces] Till the screech-owles of
woe cry aloud from the walls, and the beams out of the timber make answer Hab.
2.11.12. till their cursed boards of evill-gotten goods witness against them,
and eat their flesh as it were fire Jam. 5.3. till very Philistines and
Egyptians cry shame on them, and say as the Indians did of the cruel Spaniards,
that they carried themselves neither like Christians nor men, but like devils;
that it had been better the Indies had been given to the devils of hell, then
to them; and that if the Spaniards went to heaven when they were dead, they
would never come there. Let no man think to thrive violentia and vastitate, by
rapine and robery: to treasure up sin is to treasure up wrath Romans 2.5. which,
as a fire, will devour their palaces, and it shall not be quenched, Ier. 17.27.

Verse 11. Therefore thus says the Lord] And he says it in great have and
heat; as appears by that concise kind of expression that he here uses after
the manner of those that are through-angry, Aposiopesis, ut Ques ego etc.
and therefore say not much, but mean to do the more.

an adversary round about the land] A distresser at every corner: that as all
the borderers have beheld thy wickedness, so shall they thy wretchedness, by
reason of the enemy and the avenger, who shall meet thee at every turn: and
leave thee neither hope of better, nor place of worse.

and he shall bring down thy strength from thee] Thee in the feminine gender:
At for Atta ex ^^agna perturbatione. Chiskuni.
happily because they should be so infeebled, and impoverished: Or else, to
express the heat of Gods anger against them, as Number. 11.15. where meek Moses
being in a great passion of anger and grief together, says to God, If Thou (in
the feminine) deal thus with me, kill me I pray thee, out of hand etc. he was
so out of measure moved, that he could not fill up his speech, nor utter the
last syllable.

thy strength] Thy strongholds, or thy riches, those treasures of wickedness
wherein thou trustest Prove. 10.2. and verse 15. The rich man's wealth is his
strong city. It is called his strength because he confideth in it, 1 Timothy 6.17.
and because he is enabled by it, to bring about his designs.

and thy palaces shall be spoyled] They shall be blown up, because their
foundation was laid upon fireworks, their mortar mixed with blood, their
materials raked together by rapine and robbery, their furniture, and those
ill-gotten goods therein hid and hoarded, shall be given hosti non haeredi, not
to thine heir but to thine enemy for a booty. An inheritance may be hastily
gotten at the beginning: but the end thereof shall not be blessed Prove. 20.21.
As the partridge sits on eggs and hat^^eth them not: so he that gets
riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days and at
his end be a fool Jer. 17.11. A poor fool God will make of him, ere he has
done with him, as he did of Balaam, Achan, Ahab, Gehezi, the rich man Luke 12.
and 16.

Verse 12. As the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion] by a
countrey-comparison (as before often) the Prophet sets forth the fewness of such
as shall escape the enemies hands. 1 Samuel 17.35.
Is it but a little that a shepherd dare pull out of the jaws of a Lion. Few
David's or Lysimachusses, that dare look such fierce creatures in the face.
Something a shepherd in this case may adventure to do, that he may not be made
to stand to the loss Exodus 22.13. Gen 31.39. But it is not much: quibus non est
lectus integer, Tarnou. Kimchi.
neither are they many, that shall make escape, and those few shall be of the
poorer sort too, that have scarce a corner of a bed to lie on: or such as are
sick-abed and not cared for by the enemy, not counted worth the killing. Or
such as are in good health, but glad to hide themselves for fear of the enemy
under any bed or bench-hole, as is usual in the sack of a city.

and in Damascus in a couch] Or in the corner of a couch. Now Samaria and
Damascus are joined together; because they were both desolated about the same
time, by the same enemy, and for the same cause, viz. their invading Judaea in
an hostile manner 2 King. 16.7.9. Esaias. 7.4. See the like Esaias. 8.4. and 17.3.

Verse 13. Hear ye and testisie etc.] ye my Prophets and all true believers.
The Septuagint add o ye Priests, whose lips were to preserve knowledge, and to
present it to the People. All that were thereunto commissionated by the Lord
God the God of Hosts, are here straightly charged to hear and to charge,
testify, or contest (See 2 Timothy 4.1.) and what they have received of the Lord
to deliver the same to the whole house of Jacob: not stealing away the word
from them Jer. 23.30. or shunning to declare unto them his whole counsel Act.
20.27. but faithfully handling the law Ier. 2.8.

Verse 14. That in the day that I shall visit etc.] Tell them so from me, says
God: say to these wicked, Woe be unto them, it shall be ill with them Esaias.
3.11. The jelous Lord of Hosts will surely visit the iniquity of Idolatrous
fathers upon their children, to the third and fourth generation Exodus 20.5. See
Ier. 3. Ezekiel. 16. Hos. 2. As they have their day of defection, so has He of
Visitation; his season, his harvest for judgment, Mat. 13.30. What then will
they do when God rises up: and when he visits, what will they answer him?
Job. 31.14.

I will also visit the altars of Bethel] At first there was but one altar 1
King. 12.32, 33. and 13.2. but afterward they multiplied, as in Peter's at
Rome, there are said to be now above an hundred altars Hos. 8.11. and 10.1.
there is no end of will worship: but, like the Ierusalem-Artichoke, plant it
where you will, it overruns the ground and choakes the Heart. Now as God loved
the gates of Zion where he was solemnly worshipped, more then all the dwellings
of Jacob Psalm. 87.2. and as the walls of good people (whose houses are little
churches) are continual before him, Esaias. 49.16. So he heartily hates places
and monuments of Idolatry: and lays them wast as he has done our Abbeys and
Monasteries Zisca overthrew three hundred of them in Bohemia: and among the
rest the famous Monastery called the Kings-Court, a mile from Prague: Zisca 's
life by Mr. Clark.
in the walls whereof the whole Bible was most exquisitely written in letters
of gold; but little read or regarded by those filthy Abbey-lubbers, of whom
Luther testifies that they were tam desperatae malitiae etc. so desperately
debauched that they durst adventure upon any villainy whatsoever.

and the horns of the altar etc.] which were held the holier parts thereof.
This was fulfilled by good Josiah many years after 2 King. 23.15. 2 Chronicles.
34.4.6. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Time can be no prejudice to Gods
proceedings: neither is his forberance any quittance.

Verse 15. And I will smite the winter-house with the summer-house] Heb. upon
the summer house, I will lay them both upon one heap: they shall one dash
against the other. To have change of houses or of rooms in one house fit for
the several seasons is not unlawful, so we set them not up by wrong-dealing,
nor set our hearts upon them: Haec sunt quae nos invitos faciunt mori.
for so we are apt to do (as Charles 5. Emp. told the Duke of Venice who had
showed him his stately palace) and this brings a curse.

and the houses of Jvory] i. e. decked and enameled, checkered and entrayled
with Jvory, Eboratas. Lively.
as some sense it. Ahab had made him an Jvory house. Heb. an house of tooth, i.
e. of Elephants-tooth: so did other kings (likely) after him. The
Porphyrogenity in Constantinople were borne in a room made of Porphyry, a
precious stone etc. All must down together.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. Hear this word ye kine of Bashan] Obesae and been pastae, ye fat
bawsons (as we use to call them) ye that are Baeotum in patria, crassoque sub a
ere natae. Ye that have hearts as fat as grease, and delight not in Gods law
Psalm. 119.70. Ye that cover your faces with fatness, Job. 15.27. till both
your eyes stand out with it Psalm. 73.7.8. (as fullness breeds forgetfullnesse
Deuteronomy. 32.15. the fed hawk forsakes his master) as untamed heyfers full-fed, ye
have been unruly and refractary, means of much mischief to my poor afflicted,
as was Iezabel to Eliah, Herodias to the Baptist, Eudoxia the Empress to
Chrysostom, Theodora to Bellisarius that brave and noble Captain, and others;
Poor Tegedine suffered many years captivity in misery and irons, by the Turk,
for one word in a sermon, which distasted a proud and petulant woman without
the least cause. What cruel persecutions raised the Q. Mother of Scotland about
the beginning of the Reformation there? the Q. Mother of France Katherine de
Medices, for thirty years together? Q. Mary here, being wholly possessed by the
Bishops, as Alexandra was by the Pharisees, of whom Josephus testifies that
she had the name, but they had all the power of the kingdom? Oh these kine of
Bashan, these wanton and wicked women (for so I understand the text after the
Jew-Doctours Vatablus, Lyra, Lively etc.) when once they get the reins in
their hands, there is no hoe with them: when once the devil gets passage per
costam ad cor (as Gregory speaks) by the rib to the heart, what may he not
effect? when the hen is suffered to crow, what hope is there of good? David
complains of strong bulls of Bashan Psalm. 22, 12. but those he might better
deal with, then with these cursed cowes of Bashan that thrust with side and
shoulder, and pusht the diseased with their horns, till they had scattered
them abroad, Ezekiel. 34.21.

that are in the mountains of Samaria] Ladies of the Court, accustomed to high
titles, such as I (that am non aula sed caula natus and educatus, no courtier
but carter rather, and used to call a spade a spade) care not to complement.

which oppress the poor, which crush the needy] As did, much about the same
time, Iezabel in Israel, and Athaliah in Judah: and (besides the
abovementioned) Dame Alice Piercy K. Edward the thirds concubine, an impudent
woman; who so far wrought upon the kings impotencies, and presumed on his
favor, that she imprisoned Sr. Peter Lamare Speaker in Parliament, Daniel. 257.
and intermedled in courts of Justice, and other offices; where she her self
would sit to effect her desires: which though in all who are so exalted are
ever excessive, yet in a woman, most immoderate: as having less of discretion
and more of greediness. I have spoken before of Diana Valentina King Henry the
second of France his mistress, Hist. of Council of Trent. 387.
to whom he had given all the confiscations of goods made in the kingdom for
cause of heresy, whereby many poor Protestants were oppressed, and needy
crushed and quashed to pieces: for a poor man in his house is like a snaile in
his shell: crush that, and you kill his heart.

which say to their masters] Or, Lords, that is to their husbands: as Sarah
called her husband Lord Genesis 18.12. She in obedience, but these in craft and
counterfaisance: that they may the sooner subdue them, and have what they will
of them.

Bring and let us drink.] q. d. Fac nobis potestatem in hos aut illos, says
Mercer: that is, Give us authority over such and such, that we may pick their
bones, drink their tears, enrich and feast our selves of their spoils, make no
more scruple to undo them by force or forgery, then to eat a meals-meat when
hungry, or then the luxurious Italians (who have twenty distinct species of
liquor, Il Mercuri^ Italico.
to please the Gusto) do, to take off a cup of the most delicious, which they
profanely call Lachrymae Christi.

Verse 2. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness,] He has sworn for more
assurance, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. it being hard to persuade secure sinners of the
certainty and infallibility of the threatenings: which yet will as surely befall
them without repentance, as the coat is on their back, or the heart in their
bodies. And, by his holiness, he has sworn; that is, by himself, (as having
none greater to swear by) confer Genesis 22.16. Jer. 51.14. Esaias 45.23. and 62.8.
where God swears by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Exodus
17.16. He is brought in laying his hand upon his throne; and swearing to root
out Amalek. And so some in this place think, that by Gods Holiness, is meant
heaven, Mercer.
the habitation of his holiness, and of his glory. But Drusius dislikes that,
Esaias 63.15.
because swearing by heaven is condemned by Christ, Mat. 5. If God be holiness
it self, let him be sanctified in righteousness, Esaias 5.16. and let men swear
(when called to it, and not till then; the Hebrew word here used is passive,
and signifies to be sworn, Neshbang.
rather then to swear) in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, Jer. 4.2.

Behold the days come,] certo and cito, surely and suddenly: even those
dismal days of blackness and darkness, of greatest calamities. See chap.
5.18, 20. And let this prediction be to you as the knuckles of a man's hand, to
write you your destiny; or as a prophet to read it unto you.

That he will take you away] i. e. Ye shall be taken away, and hurried into
another country: like as Esaias 8.4. He shall take away the spoil of Samaria, i.
e. It shall be surely taken away, so Luke 12.20. They do reqire thy soul, (...).
that is, it shall be required of thee.

with hooks,] Heb. with thorns, which were wont to be used in fishing, till
ironhooks were more frequent. See Job 40.21. Ezekiel. 29.4. and 19.4. They brought
him with hooks, that is, with chains, nto the land of Egypt. Those that were
overcome, were wont to be linked and langold together; and so led captive by
their Conquerours.

and your posterity with fish-hooks.] Heb. that which is last of you; your
children, and nephews, as Dan. 11.4. it is foretold of Alexander the Great,
that none of his race shall succeed him, but strangers. See enemies compared to
fishers, Jer. 16.16. Habak. 1.16. and note, that hereby is intimated, that
these insolent Dames shall be no more like fat kine, that abide in their
pastures: but as fishes hanging on the hook, that are easily pulled up, and
quickly carried away with little labor, but much delight to the fisher. See a
like comparison from swimming, ( Esaias 25.11.) the motion wherein is easy and
not strong: to show, that God can subdue his stoutest adversaries, with
greatest facility.

Verse 3: And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow,] Qua data porta
ruitis, ye shall be glad to get out at any breach to save your lives, which now
hang in suspense, Deuteronomy. 28.66. yea to ride one upon the back of another for
have, as kine do in a narrow strait. Or, ye shall be led into captivity, after
the taking and disman^'ling of your cities. See Ezekiel. 12.5, 12.

And ye shall cast them into the palace.] Or, ye shall cast away the things of
the palace. Ye shall cast them, that is, your children and nephews, ( verse. 2.)
into the palace: either that ye may not see their destruction, as Genesis 21.16.
or that they might with greater celerity, provide for their own safety. That
was a singular example of the Vindelici (now called Suevians) subdued by Drusus
the Roman General under Augustus, but not without great resistance: Heyl.
Geog. 289.
the women throwing their young children at the Romans instead of darts. These
were monstrous mothers, mad-cows indeed.

Verse 4. Come to Bethel and transgress,] Do so, if you think (...) good: and
since you are so set upon it, go on, despair, die and be damned: That that will
perish, let it perish, quoniam vobis stat sententia, since you are resolved, and
there is no removing of you, take your own course, at your own peril. Here then
we have a most bitter sarcasme, wherein God in seeming to command sin, shows
his utmost dislike of it: for he is not a God that loves wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with him, Psalm. 5.4. See the like Ironicall expressions, Jer.
7.21. Ezech. 20.39. Eccles. 11.9. Numb. 22.20. Esaias 29.1. and 8.9. and 47.12.
Judge. 10.14. 1 King. 18.27.

At Gilgal multiply transgressions,] that your madness may appear to all men.
See Hos. 4.15. with the Note. 1 Timothy 4.15.


and bring your sacrifices every morning,] Like Apes imitate the daily
sacrifice: and do those self-same things to your idols, which I have commanded
to be done to my self alone; and in other places, that should be done at
Jerusalem only. Do all this, and try what will come of it: will you try a fall
with God? will you despitefully spet in the face of heaven? Do ye provoke me to
anger, says the Lord? do ye not provoke your selves to the confusion of your
own faces? Jer. 7.19.

and your tithes after three years.] that so ye may seem to keep my Law
exactly, Deuteronomy. 14.28. and to be wanting in no duty, either of piety, or
charity. Waspes also have their honey-combs: idolaters a form of devotion,

Verse 5. And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven,] which I have
flatly forbidden to be done, Lev. 2.11. Neither leaven nor honey (which has a
leavening property in it) might be burnt in any offering made by fire: to show
how God hates hypocrisy; which, as leaven, sowreth, swells, impureth, both
us and our services. Out with it therefore, 1 Cor. 5.7. God indeed permitted
his people to offer leavened bread with the peace offerings, Lev. 7.13. ut
offenderetur, Deum far nostram infirmitatem, says Alsted, to show that God
bears with our infirmities. But those leavened loaves were not to be burnt
upon the altar: they were only for food to be eaten.

and proclaim and publish the free-offerings,] that you may not seem in any
thing to come short of my most forward worshippers: nor to be without your holy
convocations solemnly proclaimed. Atque ita omnino in caepta idololatria
strenue pergite, and so show your selves thorow-idolaters: Tarnou.
as the Historian says of our Rich. 3. that knowing it was no good policy to
play the villain by half-deal, he resolved to suffer never a rub to lie in his
way, that might hinder the true running of his bowls. Dan. Hist. 218.


for this likes you.] Heb. so ye love. Idolatry is mavelous pleasing to
corrupt nature: as is to be seen in little ones delighting in babies. The whole
world wondered after the beast. The Papacy with its pomp and pleasure is an
alluring, tempting, bewitching religion. Rev. 13.3.
The great whore with her cup of fornications may easily boast, Aelian. hist.
as that harlot in Aelian did, that she could soon get scholars from Socrates;
not he from her. But what an odd or rather sad thing is it, that men should so
like that which will be their bane? and that God should be put to complain, as
here, and Jer. 5.31. My people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the
end thereof? Polybius says, that whereas man is counted the wisest of all
creatures here below, to him he seems to be the foolishest: for other things
love and seek their own preservation, Solus homo ab aevo ad aevum peccat fere
in ijsdem and punitur. Man only persisteth in sin, and is punished, as if he
were ambitious of destruction.

Verse 6. And I have also given you cleanness of teeth,] so that you need not
spend time in picking them, as those that are full-fed: for I have cut you
short enough, and held you to hard allowance: as those that would tame wild
creatures, keep them empty and waking: but you have been, and so continue,
untamed and untractable, incorrigibly flagitious, incapable of repentance. Your
diseases are complicate, yea they are so ingrained, that they are not easily
stirred, much less destroyed by any potion I have yet given you. In vain have
I smitten your children: they received no correction, Jer. 2.30

In all your cities,] One as well as other, lest you should say as those
Philistines, It was a chance (...) and as the Rabbines tell us, that the
idolatrous priests told Jeroboam, 1 Samuel 6.9.
that the drying up of his hand fell out merely by accident.

and want of bread in all your places,] Thus the Scripture often interprets it
self, and is ever its own best gloss. Some think that by want of bread here,
is meant dearth of corn; as by cleanness of teeth, scarcity of flesh: and that
by all your places, we are to understand, all your houses. This fell out in the
times of Elias and Elisha, 1 King. 17. and 2 King. 6.21. and 8.1. and God would
not have it to be forgotten, but is justly angry that they remained so
irreformable. That dearth in Elias his days, lasted above three years: and
might (likely) be as extreme, as that here in England, (about the year 700.) of
three years continuance: and so violent it was, that not only many died daily
for hunger, but great numbers joining hand in hand, forty or fifty in a
company, Godw. Catal. p. 465.
threw themselves headlong into the Sea. A like three-yeers famine also we
read to have been in Bohemia and Polonia, Anno 1312. so great, that children
devoured their parents, and parents their children: some fed upon the dead
carcasses that hanged in gibbets, Balth. Exner. Val. Max. 135
etc. Wolves also were so famished, that they fell upon all they met, and fed
upon them.

yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.] Ye have lost the fruit of
your afflictions, and all mine hammers hitherto have but beat cold iron.
Perdidistis sructum afflictionis. Aug.
The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed, the Founder melts in vain, for
the wicked are not pluck away, sc. from their wickedness: his dross is yet
with him, his great scum still in him. Ezekiel. 24.6, 12, 13. it is woven into the
very texture of his heart, and cannot be separated. Reprobate silver shall men
call him, because he returns not to God that smites him, Jer. 6.29, 30. Esaias
9.12, 13.

Verse 7. And also I have withheld the rain from you, etc.] And so have
punished you with thirst and drought, as well as with dearth and famine: and
because I have found you wells without the water of piety, 2 Pet. 2.17.
therefore I have refused to rain upon you, as I threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24.

En quia jam vobis sunt ferrea pectora, Bill. Anthol. lib. 2.
reddit
Coelum etiam vobis durius aere, Deus.
When there were yet three months, etc.] When you could worst of all want it
(see Joel 2.23. with the Note) for the watering of the seed, and opening of the
earth.

And I caused it to rain upon one city,] It rains not then by hap-hazard:
neither are the seasons of the year (whether barren or fruitful) ruled by the
course of nature, or influence of the stars, but by God, Act. 14.17. It is he
that gives rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons. He covers the heaven
with clouds, he prepares rain for the earth, he makes grass to grow upon the
mountains, and standing corn in the fields, Psalm. 147.8. He weighes these
waters by measure: so that not a drop falls in vain, or in a wrong place; but
by Divine decree, Job 28.26. for the fatning of the earth, allaying the heat,
nourishing the herb and tree, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Esaias 44, 14. producing unto us the
appointed weeks of harvest, Jer. 5.24. that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater, Esaias 55.10. This the poor Pagans ascribed to their god
Jupiter, whom they therefore styled (...). Him they confessed the greatest of
all, calling him (...): the Overseer of their trading, hence (...): the keeper
of their houses, hence Jupiter Herceus, etc. Of (...), a wall, or hedge.
this they did to the great shame of many Atheists amongst us, who hold that
all things come either by benign nature, or blind adventure.

One piece,] sc. of the same field, was rained upon, and fructified (this was
near to a miracle; as when Gideons fleece was wet and no place else: and again,
every place else, and not Gideons fleece, Judge. 6.37.) and the piece whereupon
it rained not] It, that is, the cloud, but by Gods appointment: for He it is
that fills those bottles of the sky, and emptieth them again, where and when
he pleases, either in mercy, as Joel 2.23. Zach. 10.1. Lev. 26.4. or for a
judgment, as Joel 1.17. Genesis 17.11, 12. 1 Samuel 12.18, 19. In the year of grace
1551. a great multitude of men and cattle in Germany were drowned and
destroyed; decidentibus subito nubibus, ac effusis certatim aquis, says
Bartholinus; by excessive showers and immoderate waters, pouring down upon
people as by spoutes. This was the very finger of God, who will one day rain
upon the wicked, snares, fire, and brimstone, Barthol. lib. 2. de Meteor. c. 2.
Psalm. 11.6.
and an horrible tempest. Heb. a burning tempest: like as now out of those very
clouds where-hence he raineth, he does oftsoons scatter sudden fires unto all
parts of the earth, astonishing the world with the fearful noise of that
eruption.

withered] It must needs do so: and so must Gods own Vineyard the Church, when
he shall command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it, Esaias. 5.6. that
is, his ministers, that they drop no doctrine upon it, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Ezekiel. 21.2.
Am. 7.16. fitly resembled to rain in regard 1. of cooling heat, 2. quenching
thirst, 3. clensing the air, 4. allaying the winds, 5. mollifying and
mellowing the parched and heat-hardened earth, 6. causing all things to grow
and fructify. This rain of righteousness goes sometimes by coasts, as here:
God tying up the tongues of his faithfullest laborers, and witholding their
showers, though they be clouds thick, and full, and likely enough to drop down
in abundance. See Ezekiel. 3.26, 27. Hos. 9.7. Prove. 16.1. Pray therefore, oh pray
earnestly, both ministers, for ability and liberty to drop their word toward
the holy places, and prophecy. Ezekiel. 21.2. and People, that he would fill
their ministers as full of good matter as ever Elihu was Job. 32.18. and then
be with their mouths Exodus 4.12. yea stretch out his holy hand, and touch them
Ier. 1.9. performing that piece of midwifery Prove. 16.1. that they may freely
utter their conceptions, and come to their hearts in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel of peace Rom 15.29. In the Island of St. Thomas on the
backside of Africa in the midst of it, is an hill: and over that, Abbots
Geog: 251.
a continual cloud wherewith the whole Island is watered. This is our
happiness for present. Oh that we knew but this gift of God, and were
answerably thankful and fruitful: Joh. 4.
Oh how cursed a generation are those that repine at it saying, Never was merry
world, since so much preaching etc. How shall such miscreants one day wish to
have but one drop fall from these full clouds to cool the heat and horrors of
their consciences, but shall not obtain it.

Verse 8. So two or three cities wandred] Necessity is an hard weapon: and want
of water will make men wander far, and part with any thing for it: as
Lysimachus did with his kingdom, sacrificing his estate to the service of his
life. Oh that we were as solicitous for our souls etc. Those good souls Psalm.
84.7. went from strength to strength, traveled many a mile, to see Gods face
though but in that dark glass of the ceremonies. The good Sunamite went every
sabbath and new mood to the Prophet. Our forefathers were unweariable in making
out after the means, which we vilipend, and make no reckoning of etc.

to drink water] raine-water: for in those countries (as Hierome testifies who
lived there many years, and therefore knew the situation and nature thereof)
they have but few springs, Mercer in verse 7.
and no considerable rivers, but only lordan: and are therefore glad to keep
raine-water in cisterns for all uses: being much afflicted with thirst and
drought, if it rain not.

but they were not satisfied] either because there was not enough to be had: or
by a singular curse of unsatisfiablenesse, See Hag. 1.6. with the Note.

yet have ye not returned unto me] usque ad me, so far as me. You have made
some faint overtures and essays of returning, but they have not reached out
unto me: they have not amounted to the full measure of a sound conversion.
Plectimur, may you well say, Salvian.
nec tamen flectimur: corripimur, sed non corrigimur etc. God rained not upon
us that we might return unto him, and learn righteousness Esaias. 26.10. that we
might power out a prayer when his chastening was upon us verse. 16.18. But we,
alas, have done nothing less: we have turned every one to his own way: and
done what in us lies to defeat God and undo our selves by our incorrigiblenesse
and uncureablenesse.

Verse 9. I have smitten you with blasting and mildews etc.] This, by
immoderate rain: that, by drought caused by an East Wind, that ventus vrens
and exsiccans. God cannot possibly want a weapon to tame a rebel.

when your gardens and your vineyards increased] Or were trimmed and tricked
up. Taxat nimium eorum studium says Mercer. The Prophet here taxes their
overmuch pains taken, and cost cast away in multiplying and dressing their
hort-yards, and Vineyards: when in the mean while, they neglected the sincere
service of God: and suffered their own hearts to lie like the sluggards field,
that was all grown over with thorns and briars, Prove. 24.31. that is, with
lusts and sins, under which lurketh that old serpent.

the palmer-worme] which is worse then the locust, as Hierom notes: for the
locust feeds only on the tops of the ears of corn as he flies (and thence
has his name in Greek) but palmer-wormes stick close to the fruits or flowers
they light on: (...).
and will not off, till all be consumed. It is the last and worst of evils,
says He: and leaves nothing behind it: omnia corradit and converrit, makes
clean work. See Joel. 1.3, 10, 11, 12. etc. with the Notes.

yet have ye not returned unto me] No not yet: but have rejected the remedy of
your recovery: see verse 8.

Verse 10. I have sent among you the pestilence] that evil angel Psalm. 78.49.
that (...) eminent hand of God, as Hippocrates calls it: that destruction
that walks in darkness, and wastes at noon day, as the Psalmist styles it.
In prognost. Psalm. 91.6.
This God sent: for it is a messenger of his sending, an arrow of his shooting
2 Samuel 24.15. and may better be called morbus sacer, then the falling
sickness; as being an extraordinary hand of God, such as was that Sudor
Anglicus in the days of Edward the sixth, Sennert. de febrib. l. 4. c. 15.
the sweating sickness that raged very violently for forty years together
here in England (as Sennertus testifies) and slew so many, that strangers
wondered how this Island could be so populous as to bear and bury such
incredible multitudes. No stranger in England was touched with this disease:
and yet the English were chased therewith, not only here but in other countries
abroad: Life of Ed. and by Sr. Io. Heyw. page 126.
which made them like tyrants both feared and avoided, where ever they came. So
long as the ferventnesse of this plague lasted, there was crying Peccavi
Peccavi: and some pretenses of turning to the Lord. The Ministers were sought
for in every corner (says Mr. Bradford) oh you must come to my Lord, you must
come to my Lady etc. Thus, when he slew them, then they sought him: Psalm.
78.34.36.
and they returned and enquired early after God: Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues. As the fox,
when taken in a snare, looks pitifully; but it is only that he may get out: as
Ice melts in the day and hardens again in the night; or as Iron is very soft
and malleable whiles in the fire, but soon after returns to its former
hardness.

after the manner of Egypt] In the way to Egypt (so some read it) as you were
trudging down to Egypt for help against enemies, or for corn in time of famine
(for Egypt was the worlds granary) I have stretched my net over you: Egypt has
gathered you up, Memphis has buried you, Hos. 9.6. But taking the words as we
translate them, After the manner of Egypt, i. e. so as I plagued the Egyptians,
when you were amongst them (See Exodus 12.29.) Exodus 9.15.
with mortality of men and murraine of cattle. The plague of Athens is
graphically described by Thucydides: Lib. 2. bell. Pelopon. Metam. l. 7. Georg.
l. 3.
whence Ovid and Virgil are thought to have borrowed their descriptions of the
pestilence. The plague of Italy is set forth in lively colors by Dionys:
Halycarnass: lib. 11. Antiq. That of Constantinople, by Nicephorus and
Sigebertus.

your young men have I slain with the sword] Juvenes a juvando says Varro:
because they are able and apt by arms to defend the commonwealth, and to help
it at a dead lift. In Hebrew they have their name a delectu: because they are
chosen to fight and do business, as fittest for the purpose Exodus 17.9. 2 Samuel
6.1. These God had slain with the sword which cutteth its way thorough a wood
of men, and heweth down the youngest and strongest; spares neither Lord nor
loscll, as they say: is dispatched with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood Esaias. 9.5.

and I have made the stink of your campes] by means of the slain, both men
and horses that lie unburied, and poison the air; See Joel. 2.20. Esaias 34.3.

and yet have ye not returned] Nec sic tamen: Vide contumaciam, says Mercer
here. Obstinate men will sooner break, then bend. Monoceros interimi potest,
non capi.

Verse 11. I have overthrown some of you] Some and not all: thus, in the midst
of judgment he remembered mercy, he did not stir up all his wrath Psalm. 78.38.
he let fall some drops, but would not shed the whole shower of it: for he
remembered that they were but flesh etc. Some he hanged up in gibbets, as it
were, for example to the rest: as St. Jude says he dealt by Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the cities about them, thrown forth for an instance of divine
vengeance to all succeeding ages Jude. 7. and as Herodotus tells us, (...),
that the sparkles and ashes of burnt Troy served for a lasting monument of
Gods great displeasure against great sinners. See the like threatened to
Babylon Esaias 13.19.20.

as God overthrew Sodom] As Jehovah from Jehovah rained hell out of heaven upon
them Genesis 14.24. De praepar. Evang. l. 5. c 23. Vide Socrat. hist. Eccles. l.
2. c. 30.
that is, God the Son from God the Father: and so Eus^bius observes that the
Father here says of the Son, that he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah: he
condemned them with an overthrow 2 Pet. 2.6. he overthrew them and repented not
Jer. 20.16 he overthrew them in a moment, and no hand stayed on them Lam. 4.6.
And yet worse shall be the condition of those that despise the grace of the
Gospel, which is the great sin of these last times Mat. 11.24. yea the devils
will keep holy day as it were, in hell, in respect of such sinners against
their own souls.

and ye were as a sire brand] Ambustus and fumigans titio smutchy and smoaky,
and scarcely escaping with the skin of your teeth Job. 19.20. as Lot out of
Sodom, as the man of Benjamine out of the army 1 Samuel 2.12. as the young man
that fled naked away at Christ's attachment Mar. 14.52. or as Hunniades narrowly
escaping with his life from the battle of Varna; where he had like to have
fallen with that perjured Popish king, as good Jehosaphat had for joining with
Ahab. It is as if God should say: There are not many of you that are left, and
have your lives for a prey: howbeit they are ill bestowed upon you, for any
good use you have made of my forbearance. Let favor be showed to the wicked,
yet will he not learn righteousness, Esaias. 26.10. and if thou deliver him
once, yet thou must do it again: and when all is done that can be done. A man
of great wrath shall suffer punishment Prove. 19.19. and so (to be sure of it)
shall a man of great stomach and stubbornness, that refuses to return as
these of whom the fifth time it is here complained.

and yet ye have not returned etc.] O prorsus obstinati! says Tarnovius here:
Act. 7.51.
Prorsus indurati et contumaces, says Mercer. Ye stifnecked and uncircumcised
in heart and ears, do ye thus always resist the holy Ghost: will ye needs be
like horse and mule uncounsellable, untractable? will ye, after conviction,
needs run away with the bit in your mouths and take your swinge in sin etc. If
so resolved, yet stay says the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.9.10.
and take this along with you, Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: your
preservation from one evil shall be but a reservation to seven worse Lev. 26.
as it fared with Pharaoh, Senacherib and others: God will surely subdue, or
subvert you.

Verse 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee o Israel] Thus? how? Non nominat
mala ut omnia timeant says Ribera. He tells them not how, that they may fear
the worst: even all that is written and unwritten. It was the very policy of
Julius Caesar never to extenuate or deny to his soldiers the danger of an
enemy, but rather to raise up thoughts of valor by aggravating the contrary
forces: and this way he did (not seldom) hyperbolically rhetoricate, says the
story. Now the Lord need not do so: since his judgments are a great deep,
neither can any man know the power of his anger: Psalm. 90.11.
let a man fear it never so much, he is sure to feel it a great deal more, if
he once fall into his fingers. Is it nothing to drink the dregs of Gods
displeasure, when it is eternity unto the bottom? Is it nothing to launch into
an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and to swim naked in it for ever? Oh do
any thing rather then be damned, and as Lewis King of France cast the Popes
bulls into the fire saying, Speed 496.
he had rather they should burn then himself fry in hell for obeying them: Or
as Mary Q. of England restored again all the Ecclesiastical livings assumed
to the crown, Idem.
saying that she set more by the salvation of her own soul, then she did by
ten kingdoms: So let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord that he may have mercy upon him, and
to our God, that he may multiply pardon. Esaias 55.7.

and because I will do this unto thee] which (had I not wished thee well) I
would never have told thee. Ideo minatur ut non puniat.
But God loves to fore-signifie: and therefore threateneth evil that he may
not inflict it: he would gladly be prevented by our humble addresses unto him,
and by our entreaties of peace. Hear him else.

prepare to meet thy God O Israel] Turn and try; thou can not likely lose thy
labor: or if thou should, yet thou have lost many a worse. Let Ephraim but
bemoane himself, and God will soon melt over him Ier. 31.20. Let Gods prodigals
return to their merciful father, and he will meet them halfe-way, and receive
them with all sweetness. Tantum velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret. Do as those
Jer. 3.17. Alexanders Macedenonians being sensible of his displeasure laid by
their arms put on their mourning attire, Plut. in Alexandro.
came trooping to his tent, where for almost three days they remained with
loud cries and abunance of tears testifying their remorse for offending him,
beseeching his pardon which at last they gained. And Guicciardin tells us, that
Lewis 12. of France (when he entered Genoa in his triumphant charret with his
sword naked) resolved to make a prey of their riches, Guice. lib. 7.
and an example of many of the chief amongst them, and to leave the rest to his
soldiers mercies. But being met first by the chief, afterward by the
multitude, Parel Med. hist. prof. 754.
making great lamentation for their folly, with abundance of tears and cries,
his wrath was appeased toward them. The like we read of Henry 7. Emperor
toward the citizens of Cremona; of our Edward the third, Daniel. hist. 240.
toward the Inhabitants of Callice. And in Cades conspiracy here, after that
26. of the chief rebels were executed, the multitude naked in their shirts met
the king on Black Heath, Speed 851.
humbly praying mercy: which they obtained.

Verse 13. For ^o, He that forms the mountains etc.] q. d. If my mercy move
thee not to an humble submission, let my Majesty: and for that end consider and
tremble at my Nomen Majestativum my transcendent excellencies, as they are here
displayed, descried, and described (for thy learning) with a great deal of
solemnity and state; to the end that thou mai'st not expect evils, but prevent
them (as Demosthenes counseled his countrymen.)

He that forms the mountaines] At first (doubtless) with the rest of the
Universe: (though some held they were cast up by Noah's flood) see Psalm. 90.1,
2. by his mere Fiat without tool or toil Esaias. 40.28. This the blind Heathens
saw, Plutarch de Iside and O^yr.
and thus hieroglyphically set forth: In Thebe a town of Egypt they worshipped
a God, whom they acknowledged to be immortal: And how painted they him? In the
likeness of a man blowing an egg out of his mouth: to signify that he made
the round world by his word.

and creates the wind] The worlds beesome (as Rupertus calls it) wherewith
God sweepeth his great house, and whereby he sets forth his inexpressible
power. See for this Psalm. 18.11. and 148.8. Job. 28.25. Ier. 10.12. Senec: lib.
5. Not: quaest. cap. 18. And although we cannot tell whence it comes, or
whither it goes Job. 3.8. (...)
yet can we (with Cruciger) contemplate the footsteps of God in this and other
creatures: saying with Paul, that God is so near unto us, that he may be almost
felt with our hands.

and declares unto man what is his thought] what language he has in his
heart, quid sermocinetur, quidve cogitet. Drus.
what he talks within himself, as the rich fool did Luke 12.17. Jesus knew
the Pharisees thoughts: yea thou understandest my thoughts afarr off says
David Psalm. 139.2, even before I conceive them. Hierom and Theodotion refer
the affix to God, Eloquium suum. (...).
The Seventy read thus, Who declares unto man his Christ sensu pio et egregio
says Mercer, sed alieno: for Ma-sicho they read Meshichio; perperam.

that makes the morning darknesse] As he did at Sodom whereon the Sun shon
bright in the morning; but ere night there was a dismal change. So in Egypt
Exodus 10.22. so in Jury at Christ's death Mat. 27.45. Let this learn us to
bless God for the light both natural Genesis 1.4. and supernatural 2 Cor.
4.4.5. and to pray; that our Gospell-sun may not set at noontide, nor our
light be put out in obscure darkness: but rather that he would make our
darkness, morning (for so the words may be read here) by clearing up those
truths to us, that yet lie in part undiscovered: Oh cry after Christ, as the
poor man in the Gospel, Lord, that mine eyes might be opened! Oh that thou
would give me sight and light! Sun of righteousness shine upon my dark soul.

and treads upon the high places of the earth] As being Higher then the
highest, Excelsus super Excelsos Eccles. 5.8. terrible to all the kings of the
(...) those dread sovereigns) Psalm. 76.12. the most high God Genesis 14.18. and
22. that has heaven for his throne, and earth for his footstool: yea those
highest places of the earth, the tops of mountains, and rocks inaccessible. But
who is this King of glory?

The Lord, the God of Hosts is his name.] Give therefore unto the Lord (O ye
mighty) give unto the Lord, Psalm. 29.1.
glory and strength: Give unto the Lord the glory due to his name, worship the
Lord in the beauty of holiness, etc. Exalt ye the Lord our God, Psalm. 99.5.
and worship at his footstool: for he is holy.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. HEar ye this word] A new sermon, as appears by this new Oyer: not
unlike that of S. Paul, Act. 13.16. Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give
audience: or rather, that of Diogenes, who cried out at Athens, (...), Hear O
ye men. And when as (thereupon) a great sort of people resorted to him,
expecting some great matter, he looked about him, and said, (...), I called
men, and not varlets. They were no better surely that our Prophet had to deal
with; Isai. 1.4.
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers,
children that were corrupters: they had forsaken the Lord, provoked the Holy
One of Israel, they had increased revolt. Hence this onerosa prophetia, this
word, this weighty word, this burdensome prophecy.

which I take up against you,] (...), hinc (...) onus
Heb. lift up, being scarce able to stand under the burden of it. See the Note
on Mal. 1.1. And it is against you, not for you: but that is your own fault: for
do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Mic. 2.7. Excellently
Austin, Adversarius est nobis, quandiu sumus and ipsi nobis, etc. The word of
God is adversary to none, but such as are adversaries to themselves: neither
does it condemn any, but those that shall be assuredly condemned by the Lord,
except they repent. But we have in a readiness to revenge all disobedience,
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.6. and if any man will hurt Gods faithful
witnesses, for discharging their duties, fire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed, Rev 11.5. for Elisha has his sword as well as Jehu and
Hazael, 1 King. 19.17. And when Elisha unsheatheth and brandisheth his sword,
it is a fair warning that the sword of Jehu and Hazael are at hand. See Hos.
6.5. Jer. 1.18.

even a lamentation.] Heb. a very bitter lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14. like those
of Jeremy for Judah, or of the mourners in Jerusalem, Ezech. 9.4. or of Christ
weeping over that city, Luke 19.41, 42. Or of Paul bewailing his wretched
countrymen, Romans 9.3. and 10.1. or of the two witnesses clothed in sackloth,
Rev. 11.3. the habit of mourners: or of Athanasius, who by his tears (as by the
bleeding of a chaste vine) sought to cure the leprosy, and prevent the misery
of that tainted age. Heu, heu, Domine Deus, was the cry of the ancient
Christians. Flete nefas magnum, nam toto flebitis orb. Their books are like
that in Ezekiel written on both sides, Cardan.
and there was written therein, lamentations, and mourning, and woe, Ezekiel. 2.10.
This of Amos was a sad song, a doleful ditty, a lamentable prophecy of
Isreal's utter destruction, as it follows in the second verse, where
(Prophet-like) he speaks of it as already done, notwithstanding their
present prosperity and tranquillity. And have not Englands Turtles groaned out
for a great while, the sad and lamentable tunes of woe and misery to this
sinful nation: and plainly foretold what we have felt already, and have yet
cause enough to fear. Ah! great be the plagues that hang over England, Act. and
Mon. 1667.
(said Mr. Philpot Martyr long since) Happy shall that person be, whom the Lord
shall take out of this world, not to see them, etc. And the like said Rogers
our pr^to-martyr Bradford, Ridley, Lever, etc. besides the concurrent
predictions of Gods faithful servants a-late, whose hearts and tongues he has
so guided, as that they all as one man, have denounced heavy judgments, and
taken up loud lamentations against us. Now, as before great storms, cocks crow
loud and thick: so is it here; and so it should be, Exodus 32.31, 32. Jer.
18.20. Joel 2.17. else God will be displeased, Ezech. 13.5. and 22.30, 31.

Verse 2. The virgin of Israel is fallen,] i. e. Though of the spouse of God,
she be become the devils adulteress, Jer. 3.1. Hos. 1.2. yet she will needs
be counted and called a virgin still: as Sardis, she has a name to live, but
is dead: as the Romish crew cry themselves up the only Church Catholic, and
therein (like Oysterwives) do much out-crie us. Rev. 3.1.
But what says the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy, chap. 18.13? Ask ye now among
the Heathen; who has heard such things? The Virgin of Israel has done a very
horrible thing. And the Virgin of Rome may well say as Quartilla the strumpet
in Petronius does, Iunonem meam iratam habeam, si unquam me meminerim virginem
fuisse. Petron. Satyr.
I can hardly remember my self a maid. Israel may also be called a virgin,
because she yet subsisted and flourished in her first liberty and splendor,
till taken and defloured, as it were, by the Assyrian. And in this sense we
read of the virgin of Babylon, Esaias 47.1. of Egypt, Jer. 46.12. of Zidon, Esaias
23.12. and now of Venice, whose Motto is, Intacta maneo, I am still a maid: as
having never yet fallen into the enemies power. Tournay, a town in France, was
ever counted so invincible, that this sentence was engraven over one of the
gates, Iannes ton me perdu ton pucellage, Thou have never lost thy maidenhead.
Yet was it yielded up to our King Henry 8. with 10000. pound sterling, Speed
sol. 1001.
for the citizens redemption. The Virgin of Israel sped not so well.

She is fallen,] That is, she shall fall, surely, suddenly, utterly.

she shall no more rise,] i. e. return out of captivity, and be restored to her
pristine splendor: yet some think otherwise.

she is forsaken upon her land,] Projecta est, prostrata jacet, she is thrown
hard upon her ground, and as it were dashed against it, like an earthen pot
against a rock: and all this, because she had left off righteousness in the
earth, Verse 7. Those that forsake God, shall be forsaken of him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

there is none to raise her up.] God will not; and then, man cannot. Behold,
says Bildad, God will not cast away a perfect man; neither will he take the
ungodly by the hand, Job 8.20. he will bring them into trouble, and there leave
them, Ezekiel. 22.20. and 29.5. His own he will not leave: or if he do, yet
forsake them he will not, Heb. 13.5. and if men do, he will relieve them the
rather. Because they called thee an outcast saying, This is Zion, whom no man
seeks after; therefore I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee
of thy wounds, says the Lord, Jer. 30.17.

Verse 3. The city that went out by a thousand,] i. e. that had a thousand
inhabitants passing to and fro through the gates (See Genesis 34.24. and 23.10. for
men love not to be cooped up, or confined to a place, as the Duke of Venice
is, but to be traveling and trading) Or, that can send out a thousand, fit to
bear arms.

Shall leave an hundred,] Here Is a woeful decimation, purporting a very great
paucity of people: such as was threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.62. a tenth man only shall
be left, if that. Behold the severity of God, and betray not the lives of
others, by an impenitent continuance in sin. Turn to God, if but for your
poor brethrens sake, that are in danger, or in durance. Hezekiab's reason to
repent is very remarkable, 2 Chronicles. 30.9. For if ye turn again to the Lord,
your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that lead
them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the Lord your
God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye
return unto him.

Shall leave ten.] Not take ten in an hundred and leave the rest, as the Roman
Generals used to do in the Army, in case of a mutiny. This was fulfilled in
that three years siege of Samaria, 2 King. 18.10. as afterward the like fell
out at Jerusalem, which could hardly be repeopled in Nehemiah's time, and at
this day is but thinly inhabited: there being not an hundred households of Jews
to be found there. In our Countries, of the abundance of people comes dearth,
which makes many malcontents to mutter: but in many parts of Turkey, for
want of men to manure the ground: most of the poor being enforced with victuals
and other necessaries to follow their great Armies, in their long expeditions:
of whom scarce one of ten (says mine Author) ever return home again, there by
the way perishing, Turk. hist. 1153.
if not by the enemies sword; yet by the wants, intemperatenesse of the air, or
immoderate pains-taking.

Verse 4. For thus says the Lord,] Or, Truly thus says the Lord:
Notwithstanding the former terrible sentence, which the Prophet could not
denounce with dry eyes: but takes up a lamentation, though less concerned in
it, and might well say, as One did in another case: Tu quibus ista legis,
in^ertum est, lector ocellis, M. Fox of the L. Jane Gray.

Ipse quidem siccis dicere non potui.
All Gods threatenings (for most part) are conditional, Ier, 18.7. and 26.2 sc.
if men repent not. As if they do, they may live in his sight, and be accounted
worthy (such is Gods great goodness) to escape all those things, that shall
befall the impenitent, Luke 21.36. The Gospel is post naufragium tabula, and
has its reward too, Heb. 11.6.
Heb. 11.6. sc. of grace and mercy. Do this and live, says the Law. Seek the
Lord, and live, (...).
says the Gospel. He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, (and that
is the force of the Hebrew word here used, which signifies to euquire, to make
serious search, and scrutiny, to seek him out, (as the Seventy have it) when he
is withdrawn; to seek him as a Student does sciences, a worldling gold, a
hungry man meat, etc. as a man studiously turns over a Commentary, to find out
the sense of a Text, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8. 1 Samuel 25.6.
Esaias 34.16. Do this, says God, and ye shall live: not only have your lives
for a prey, but live merrily, happily. Now we live, says the Apostle: that is,
we rejoice; and Thus shall ye say to him that lives: that is, has a
comfortable life, and a confluence of blessings. But besides all this, ye
shall live for ever: and aterna vita, vera vita, eternal life is the only
life properly so called. Life (in what sense soever taken) is a sweet mercy:
Aug.
A living dog is better then a dead Lion, says Solomon: and Joseph is yet
alive, says Jacob, (he does not say, Joseph is Lord of Egypt) I will get down,
Eccles. 9.4. Genesis 46.28. Romans 6. ^lt.
and see him before I die. But eternal life is (by a specialty and with an
accent) the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord: and this gift he will
freely bestow on all that so seek him as not to be satisfied without him: as
Moses, who would not be put off with an Angel, but said, If thy presence go not
with me, carry us not up hence, Exodus 33.15. and as Luther, who when great
gifts were sent him, refused them, and said, Valde protestatus sum, me nolle
sic satiari a D^o. I deeply protested, that I would not be satisfied with these
low things; Melch. Ad.
but that I would have God, or nothing. This was one of those brave
Apophthegmes of his, concerning which One well says; A man would fetch them
upon his knees from Rome, or Jerusalem, rather then be without them.

Verse 5. But seek not Bethel, etc.] Make not lies your refuge, idols your
Oracles: they that observe lying vanities, do (by their own election) forsake
their own mercies ( Jon. 2.8.) Verse 9.
But I (says the Prophet, who had now paid for his learning, and was yet under
the lash) will sacrifice to thee alone, will seek thy face and favor, not at
Bethel, or Gilgal, but in the place where thine honor dwells: not at Hull,
Sichem, or Loretto, but in the true Reformed Churches, in the beauties of
holiness, in the midst of those seven golden candlesticks, in the hearts and
houses of his faithful people; concerning whom He has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, etc, 2 Cor. 6.16. and when they walk within their
houses with a perfect heart, I will come unto them, Psalm. 101.2. I will there
command my blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3. See chap. 4.4. and
Hos. 4.15. with the Notes.

For Gilgal shall surely go into captivity,] An elegant agnomination in the
Original, Hagilgal. galloh ijgleh.
such as the Prophets are full of, and this plain Prophet, among the rest. See
chap. 8.2. Ministers may sometimes rhetoricate: and it had need to be an
elaborate speech, that shall work upon the conscience.

and Bethel shall come to naught.] Heb. shall be Aven, as elsewhere it is
called Beth-aven, Hos. 4.11. and 10.5. Against Beersheba he says nothing:
because that name afforded him not the like elegancy, as Mercer thinks: or
because that city belonged to Judah, 1 King 19.3.
and so was not destroyed with the ten tribes, as Hier^m holds. Seek not
these places says the Prophet, for help and succor in distress: but say as
Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from these hills: truly in
the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

Verse 6 Seek ye the Lord, and ye shall live,] Mercer.
See verse 4. Sic eadem saepe surdis and obstinatis inculcantur. The often
pressing of a duty imports; 1. The excellency. 2. Vlpian. P.
The necessity. 3. The difficulty of doing it: else what need so many words?
Perquam durum est, sed ita lex scripta est, says the Civilian. Hard or not
hard, it must be done, or men are undone. lest he break out like fire] Lest he
go through you and burn you together Esaias. 27.4. lest ye be utterly burnt with
fire in the same place 2 Samuel 23.7. that is in hell (as some expound it) which
the Prophet calls tormenting Tophet, Esaias. 30,33. and Plato calls (...) a
fierylake: so terrible, says Bellarmine, that one glimpse of it were enough to
make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monk: to live
after the strictest rule that may be.

Verse 7. Ye who turn judgment to wormwood] Ye Grandees and governors of the
people, that turn the sweetest thing into the sowrest, (as corruptie optimi
pessima) right into wrong-dealing; that follow the administration of Justice as
a trade only, with an unquenchable, and unconscionable desire of gain; not
caring what becomes of righteousness, but leaving it off in the earth, or
rather not leaving it at all upon earth (Terras Astraea reliquit) but chasing
it out of the world as much as in you lies: whiles you cast it down to the
ground, and tread it under foot Dan. 8.12. whilst you oppress the just, crush
the needy etc. chap. 4.1. See the Note there. Some read the text by way of
exclamation thus; O ye that turn judgment etc. q. d. What strange creatures
are you? what monsters of men? what public scourges? what scabs? Esaias. 5.7.
God looked for judgment, Judices instar scabrei m^lesti sunt oppressis
Piscater in loc.
but behold oppression (In the Original it is, behold a scab) for
righteousness, but behold a cry: such a cry, as enters into the ears of the
Lord of sabbath.

Verse 8. Seek him that makes the seven starres] Once again, seek him: that
is, Return to him by true repentance: and by faith take hold of his strength,
that ye may make peace, and ye shall make peace with him Esaias. 27.5. To stand
out it boots not: since it is He that made Boots and Orion etc. that is, of
infinite power: and does whatsoever he will in heaven and earth; who only does
wondrous things Psalm. 72.18. See chap. 4.12.13. Chimah and Chesil, that is
Pleiades and Orion are twice mentioned together in Job. Noted stars they are,
and known to shepherds and such like; Am^s, likely, was but such an
Astronomer, as heardsmen use to be. Those that writ of these stars tell us,
that Chimah comes of Chamah, to love ardently; because of the fellowship and
working together that appears in them. They be seven stars that have all one
name: because they all help one another in their work, which is to bring the
spring; and like seven sisters or lovers, so are they joined together in one
constellation, and in one company. We see (says One) that God will have the
sweetest works in nature to be performed by mutual help. The best time of the
year comes with these seven stars (hence we read of their sweet influence
Job. 38.11.) and the best time of our life comes, when we enter into true
love and fellowship. As for Orion, it is the starr (says the same Author) that
brings winter: and his bonds cannot be loosed. It binds the earth with frost
and cold, that the fruits thereof might be seasoned and made kindly against the
Spring: neither can the Spring come till Orion have prepared the way. God will
have us suffer before we reign. The word Chesil here used signifies in the
Chaldee, to perfect: because by suffering and offering violence to our selves
we enter into perfection. Luke 13.32. If we would have a pleasant Spring of
graces in our hearts, we must first have a nipping winter: the spirit of
mortification must be like the cold starr Orion to nip our quick motions in the
head, and to bind all our unclean desires, and burning lusts that they stir
not in us: and unless we do thus, the seven stars of Comfort shall never
appear to us.

and turns the shadow of death: tenebras ferales and letales. Psalm. 23.4.
that is, the thickest, darkness, into the morning] into the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day Prove. 14.18. This severing of
night from day, and day from night, this mutual and orderly succession and
course of the night after the day, and the day after the night, the lengthening
and shortening of the days in summer and winter, the wonderful eclipses, and
other occurrents of that nature, are works of Gods power, and providence, not
to be slighted but improved to true repentance. We are to mark the countenance
of the sky, and to discern the face of heaven: that every day and night
winketh at us, and beckneth to us, to remember the wisdom, power, justice, and
mercy of God lined out unto us in the brows of the firmament. The heavens
declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his handiwork. Psalm. 19.1.
The creatures are Regij professores, says One, Catholic preachers says
Another, real Postills of the Divinity, says a third. Clemens Alexandrinus
says, that the World is Dei scriptura, the first Bible that God made for the
instruction of man. Antonius Eremita told a Philosopher (who objected to him
his want of books) that the Universe was to him instead of a well-furnisht
library, Aug. de doct. christ. l. 1. Niceph. l. 8. cap. 40. Lib. 2. de Arca
cap. 3.
every where ready at hand. Hugo affirms, that every thing utters these
three words, Accipe, Read, Fuge, Receive mercy, Return duty, Shun sin,
together with that hell that it hales at the heels of it. Much a man may learn
out of the book of Nature, with its three leaves Heaven, Earth, and Sea: but
there he must not rest. For, as where the Naturalist ends, the Physician
begins: so where Nature fails and can go no further, there Scripture succeeds
and gives more grace Iam. 4.6. Psalm. 19.1, 2, 7, 8. The Caldee Paraphrast takes
this text allegorically: as if the sense were; God changes his hand toward
the sons of men at his pleasure, prospering them one while, crossing them
another: so that they walk in darkness and have no light Esaias. 50.10. yea they
walk through the vale of the shadow of death Psalm. 23.4. Not through a dark
entry or churchyard in the night time, but a valley, a large, long vast place:
not of darkness only but of death; and not bare death, but the shadow of
death, that is the darkest and most dismal side of death, in its most hideous
and horrid representations. And yet if God be with his David's in this sad
condition, no hurt shall befall them, butmuch good.

Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. That calls for the waters of the
sea] that is, for great armies, says the Chaldee. But better take it
literally, of the generation of rain, the chief author whereof is God: the
material cause is the sea sending up vapors: The Isntrumental cause is the
Sun, by the beams whereof God draws the vapors upwards, sends for them, as
it were, into the middle region of the air, there thickeneth them into clouds,
and then resolves them into rain This Kimchi illustrateth by the simile of a
boiling pot whereout vapors and fumes ascending to the colder potlid are
turned into drops of water. See Genesis 2.6.

The waters of the sea] 1 King. 18.44. A little cloud arose out of the sea like
a man's hand. And presently the Prophet said to Ahab, Prepare thy charet and get
thee down, that the rain stop thee not. And it came to pass in the mean
while that the heaven was black with clouds etc. Humorem magn^ tollunt and
aequore ponti
Nubes, qui in toto terrarum spargitur orb, Lucret. lib. 6.

Cum pluit in terris --
The Naturalists observe that it snowes not in the sea, because it sends up hot
vapors, which presently dissolve the snow.

the Lord is his name] His memorial Hos. 12.5. See the Note there: He is not
an idol to be dallied with and deluded.

Verse 9. That strengthens the spoiled against the strong] Victorem a victo
superari saepe videmus. God can quickly change the scene, turn the scales Ier.
37.10. though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans, and there
remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his
tent, and burn this city with fire. In a bloody fight between Amurath the third
King of Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Servia many thousands fell on both sides.
In conclusion the Turks had the victory, and Lazarus was slain. Amurath, after
that great victory with some few of his chief captains, taking view of the
dead bodies, which without number lay on heaps in the field like mountains, a
Christian soldier sore wounded and all blood seeing him, in staggering manner
arose (as if it had been from death) out of an heap of slain men, and making
toward him, for want of strength fell down diverse times by the way as he came,
as if he had been a drunken man. At length drawing nigh unto him, when they
which guarded the kings person would have stayed him, he was by Amurath himself
commanded to come nearer, supposing that he would have craved his life of him.
Thus this half-dead Christian pressing nearer unto him, as if he would, for
honor sake, have kissed his feet, suddenly stabbed him in the bottom of his
belly with a short dagger which he had under his coat; of which wound that
great king and conqueror presently died. The name of this man was Miles
Cobelite, who, Turk. hist. fol. 200.
before sore wounded, was shortly after in the presence of Bajazet ( Amuraths
son) cut into small pieces: So in that memorable fight between the Swissers and
the Dolph^n near to Basile, when Burcardus monk a nobleman and a great
soldier, Lavat. in Prove. 27.14
grew proud of the victory, and put up his helmet that he might behold what a
^laughter they had made: one of the half-dead Swissers rising up upon his
knees, threw a stone at him, which hitting right gave him his deaths-wound. At
the battle of Agincourt, where our Henry 5. won the day, Speed 795. ex hypod.
Nerstr.
the French were so confident of a victory, that they sent to king. Henry, to
know what ransom he would give, and etc. Henry comforting his army with a
speech, resolved to open his way over the enemies bosom, or else to die. After
which, such was the courage of the English, notwithstanding their great wants,
as he that ere while could scarcely bend his bow, is able now to draw his
yard-long arrow to the very head.

so that the spoiled (or spoil) shall come against the fortresse] And take it
by assault. Deus loca, quantumvis valida, vasta facit. Prove. 21.30.
There is no strength against the Lord.

Verse 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate] In domo judicij, says the
Chalde: for the gate was the place of judgment, verse 12.15. Deuteronomy. 17.5, 12,
15. Those then that did not approve and applaud the oppressions and
wrong-dealings of the Judges, and rich bribers, but cried out against such, and
took the same liberty to rebuke them that they did to commit them, these were
hated cane pejus and angue, worse then any toad. Thus Ahab hated Micaiah, the
Sodomites Lot, the Jews Jeremy, their successors Christ, the Baptist Steven,
Paul, etc. Melch. Adam.
thus those of Geneva hated Farellus their faithful minister, tried him for
his life, banished him out of their territories: Thus afterward some of them
hated Calvin, calling him Cain: yea calling their dogs Calvin, in derision and
detestation of him. And thus Bishop Ridly lamenting the state of England, even
of thy greatest Magistrates says He, some (the Kings highness excepted)
evermore unkindly and ungently against those that went about most busily and
wholesomely to cure their sore backs, spurned privily, and would not spare to
speak evil of them, even to the Prince himself: and yet would they toward the
same preachers outwardly bear a jolly countenance, and fair face. As for
Latimer, Lever, Bradford, Knox, their tongues were so sharp, they ripped in so
deep in their galled backs to have purged them, no doubt, of their filthy
matter, Act and Man. fol. 1616.
that was festered in their hearts, of insatiable covetousness, of filthy
carnallity and voluptuousness, of intolerable ambition and pride, of ungodly
lothsomenesse to hear poor men's cases, and to hear Gods word. And these men,
of all others, these Magistrates then could never abide etc. Thus He, and much
more to the same purpose. They were then sick of a Noli me tangere, and so
(alas) they are still. How few Vespasians to be found, of whom Quintilian
testifies that he was patientissimus very, One that would patiently hear the
naked truth of things: not toothlesse truths only, but such as touched to the
quick? How few David's that loved Nathan the better ever after (for dealing so
plainly and faithful with him) and made him of his cabbinet-councell? How few
Q. Elisabeths, who called often for her Deering by whom she was barely told of
her faults: though the Bishops (those Court-parasites) would never suffer him
to preach more before her? The Q. of Navarre would not harken to such ministers
as disliked that fatal French match (that gave opportunity afterward to the
Parisian Massacre) in regard of the diversity of religions: Epitom. hist.
Gallic.
but inclined rather to those that smoothed her up, and told her that it would
lay the foundation of a lasting and most happy peace. And generally of those
French Reformed churches it was observed, that for some years before that
bloody massacre, they affected a frothy flashy kind of Preaching: and cared not
for that that came home to the conscience. See my common place of Admonition.

and they abhor him that speaks uprightly] Auget orationem, says Drusius:
The Prophet grows in his expression of their wickedness: for to abhor is
more then to hate; See Prove. 6.16. Serpens si serpentem comederit fit draco.
Hatred (as they say of the Crocodile) grows as long as it lives: Sin is of
an encroaching nature. If a Serpent devour a Serpent (says the Proverb) he
becomes a Dragon. Hatred of the truth, as runner the elder it is the
stronger: the Pharisees for instance; who did not only inwardly swell and boil
with hellish hatred of Christ, his works, and doctrine: but also outwardly
belched out against him the basest blasphemies: and in their pertinacious
working, constantly persecuted him, even to the most reproachful death of the
cross. This is merces mundi, the worlds wages to Gods faithful witnesses.
They make a man an offender for a word, (yea for speaking uprightly) and lay a
snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing
of naught, Esaias 29.21. An expectas ut Quintilianus ametur? said He: Do thou
think that plain-dealing Quintilian should be loved? It is not likely. To
preach, says Luther, the truth, which is according to godliness, is nothing
else but to derive the rage of the whole world upon a man's self.

Verse 11. Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor,] Panting
after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, Chap. 2.7. See there, and
Psalm. 109.16. Some render,, Ye fire the poor; others, ye plunder them: so the
Chaldee, and Hierom. (...).
The Seventy have it, Ye smite them with fists. But better, Ye foot it upon
them, and make them sell their commodities under-foot (as we phrase it) to pay
your heavy taxes, and satisfy your greedy covetousness.

and ye take from him burdens of wheat,] Heb. the finest wheat, and best
winnowed: these ye force him to make money of, (...).
for your use; glad to feed upon the offall-wheat himself.

Ye have built houses of h^wen stone,] squared and polished, Domos rasiles and
politas. Sept
thinking to flourish, and frollick: but the screech-owls of woe crying aloud
from the stones, out of those walls, shall mar your mirth, Hab. 2.11.

but ye shall not dwell in them,] For either ye shall be prevented by death,
and sent to dwell with devils: or be carried away captive, and a stranger
possess your new-buildings, Deuteronomy. 28.30.

Ye have planted pleasant vineyards,] As He in the History, that having a cup
of new-wine in his hand, expressed out of the grapes of his new-planted
vineyard, was set upon and slain by a wild-boar, before he could drink it, and
gave occasion to that proverb, Erasm. Adag.
Multa cadunt inter caelicem supremaque labra; Many things fall betwixt the cup
and the lip, betwixt the chin and the chalice. Hereunto agrees that story in
Mr. Buroughs upon Hosea. Burr. on Hos. 1. page 379.
I had, says he, certain information, from a reverend Minister, that in his
own town there was a wretched worldling, who had a great crop of corn. A good
honest neighbor of his walking by his field, says, Neighbor you have a very
fine crop of corn if God bless it: yea, says he, I will have a good crop,
speaking contemptuously: and before he could come to get it into the barn, it
was so blasted, that the corn of the whole crop was not worth six pence. God
has many ways to defeat the wicked man's expectation, and the hope of unjust
men perishes, Prove. 11.7. Etiam spes valentissima perit, so some render that
text, he shall die or miscarry, in the very height of his hopes and
expectations.

Verse 12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins,] I
know them, and can easily set them in an order before your eyes, Psalm. 50.21.
bring them out (as they did the vessels of the Sanctuary) by number and by
weight: Ezra 8.34.
make you answer for all with flames about your ears, lay open your many
transgressions, and mighty sins; Fortia peccata.
The Hebrew has it, your bony, or big-boned sins: huge, heinous, and
monstrous, capable of all manner of aggravations. All these I know, says God,
they are all in Print in heaven, and I will one day read them aloud in the ears
of all the world. Fac ergo confitendo propitium, quem taeciendo non facis
nescium, says Austin. Make therefore God thy friend, by confessing thy sins to
him, which thou caust not by any means conceal from him.

they afflict the just,] they pinch and distress him by their oppressions,
which are often here laid in their dish, as an abomination to the Lord; for he
is merciful. See Chap. 2.6.

they take a bribe,] Cophe^.
A ransom to blind their eyes, as 1 Samuel 12.3. or a pacification of their
pretended displeasure against heinous crimes brought before them. Olim didici
quid sint munera, said a worthy man, Once I have learned long since, how
dangerous a thing it is for men in place to meddle with gifts. A public person
as he should have nothing to lose, so nothing to get: he should be above all
price, or sale, etc.

they turn aside the poor in the gate.] that is, in the place of Judicature:
This makes many that go to law, to be at length of Themistocles his mind; who
professed that if two ways were showed him, one to hell, and the other to the
bar, he would choose that which went to hell, and forsake the other. Another
said, that he wondered much at two sorts of men: viz. those that go to sea,
and those that go to law: not so much that they did so at first, but that,
after trial, they would ever go a second time.

Verse 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence,] (...).
According to that old and good rule, Either keep silence, or speak that which
is better then silence. There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak,
Eccles. 3.7. and it is a singular skill to time a word, Esaias 50.4. to set it
upon its circumferences, Prove. 25.11. so to speak, and so to do, as those that
shall be judged by the law of liberty, Iam. 2.12. He that would be able to
speak right and forcible words, must first learn how and when to keep silence.
It is not good casting pearls before swine: nor pulling a Bear, or mad dog by
the ear. It Is the true ambition of a Christian, to study to be quiet, 1 Thessalonians.
4.11. (...).
to meddle with his own business, to affect rather quietness from the wicked
world, then acquaintance with it, and to pass through it with as little noise
and notice as he can. Not but that Gods faithful servants must cry aloud, and
not spare; lifting up their voices like a trumpet, etc. Esaias 58.1. and casting
away the inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvus, which sounded a retrait, when they
should have sounded an alarm. But this must be done with godly discretion.
Zeal should eat us up, but not eat up our widome, (says One) nor should
policy eat up our zeal. The Apostles professed that they could not but speak
the things that they had heard and seen: they must either vent or burst. And
yet holy Paul, (who was full of the spirit of judgment and of burning, Esaias
4.4. (though he preached at Ephesus (where he lived two years and more
together) that they be no gods that are made with hands: yet he made no
particular invective against their great goddess Diana, whereon they so
impotently doated, Act. 19.26, 37. He that has a good mixture of zeal and
prudence, is like a ship well ballasted, that sails with a prosperous gale: but
zeal without discretion, is like fire on the chimney-top; or like mettle in a
blind horse; or the devil in the demoniack, that cast him sometimes into the
fire, and sometimes into the water. What a storm of persecution raised Bishop
Abdias in Persepolis, by his intemperate zeal, not bridled with discretion; as
the Poets fable that Minerva put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, lest he should
fly too fast? And it was some disadvantage to Paul, when in the Council
(though provoked and unjustly smitten) he called the high priest whited wall:
he was glad to excuse it by his ignorance. We may not be too bold, or too
forward to speak in a good matter, to such as hate him that rebukes in the
gate: and abhor him that speaks uprightly, verse 10.

for it is an evil time.] by reason of an evil and adulterous generation, that
make it so. It is a day of evil, as Psalm. 41.1. that is, of difficulty and
danger, to those that dare speak out: Such as were Tiberius his times. That
Tiger laid hold with his teeth on all the brave spirits that could speak their
minds fitly, and durst do it freely. He put to death a certain Poet, which in a
Tragedy had inveighed against Agamemnon; suspecting himself to be intended.
Senec.
Freedom of speech used by the Waldenses in blaming and reproving the vices,
dissolute manners, life, and actions of great ones, made them looked upon and
persecuted as heretics, Girardus.
and enemies to the Sea Apostolic, as Manichees, Catharists, what not?

Verse 14. Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live,] See verse 4. and 6. Oh
Seek, seek, seek, says our Prphet: as some of the Martyrs cried out, Pray,
pray, pray; Mr. Sanders, and Mrs. Askew, repeated those words two several
times together, Mr. Marsh once, adding, Never more need. To seek God, is to
seek good, and to find life: for with him is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.
To seek evil, is to seek the devil, who is that evil one: it is as Solomon
says in a like case, (...).
a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prove. 21.6.

and so the Lord the God of Hosts shall be with you,] to assist and accept you
in seeking good: to protect and provide for you in shunning evil. Deal
courageously therefore, and God shall be with the good, 2 Chronicles. 19. ult. as
your sevenfold shield, (...).
and exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. See the note there.

as ye have spoken,] Vt praedicatis and jactitatis, as ye boast and bear your
selves bold upon: saying as Mic. 2.11. Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil
can come upon us. But that is as you make it: for ye are upon your behavior.
The fault is not in God, but wholly in your selves, if ye live not happily,
reign not everlastingly. -- at Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus Cogi posse
negat. -- Horat. ep. 2.
God is far from men's hearts; and therefore far from their help: for can two
walk together, except they be agreed? Chap. 3.3.

Verse 15. Hate the evil, and love the good,] God does so: you must also, or
else never look for his gracious presence with you: for idem velle, atque idem
nolle, ea demum vera est Amicitia; Cicer^.
True friends do both will and nill the same things. Minutius Foelix says,
that he and his friend Octavius did so. The like did Basil and Nazianzen,
Jonathan and David: Corporibus geminis spiritus unus erat. All Gods people, as
they partake of the Divine nature, so they live the life of God, Ephesians 4. and
have the same both sympathies and antipathies (as I may so speak) abhorring
that which is evil, cleaving to that which is good, Romans 12.9. God, they know,
hates evil worse then he hates the devil: for he hates the devil for sins
sake, and not sin for the devils sake: so do they, looking upon sin as the
most loathsome thing in the world, the very vomit of the devil, which (so far
as they are regenerate) they do infinitely loath to lick up. And for that which
is good, whether things or persons, these they heartily love: not only with a
love of Desire, as Psalm. 42.1, 2. but also of Complacencie, as Psalm. 73.25, 26.
herein resembling Almighty God; not as an image does a man, in outward
lineaments only, but as a son does his father, in nature and disposition;
being daily more and more conformed to the heavenly pattern, and transformed
into the same image from glory, to glory, by his Spirit.

and establish judgment in the gate.] which hitherto ye have not done, verse.
10, 12. Perform the duties of your own particular places: be good Justicers as
well as good men. It is said of Galba and of our Rich. 3. that they were bad
men, but good Princes: but I hardly think it. Some good parts they might have,
and some good acts they might do; but good Princes they could not be, unless
they did hate the evil and love the good: but so does not any bad man, for want
of better principles. Make the tree good and the fruits will be good: and the
contrary; Evil men may be some way useful to the Public, and do good offices
for the Church, and yet perish, because not in a good manner, upon a good
motive, and for a good end, Rev. 12.16. the earth helped the Woman: and yet,
chap. 16.1. the vials of Gods wrath were poured out upon the earth. A good
Magistrate, as he sits in Gods place, (the judgment seat is called the Holy
place, Eccles. 8.10.) so he loving what God loves, and hating where God
hates, can boldly write over it, that Distich, that is said to be written
over the Tribunal in Zant, in letters of gold; Hic locus odit, amat, punit,
conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos.


It may be that the Lord.] Or, out of doubt, the Lord God of Hosts will be
gracious, etc. He is surely ready, were men but ripe, and right for mercy: it
sticks only on their part, and not on his: he waits to be gracious, Esaias
30.18. Oh unworthy we, that cause him so to do. Currat poenitentia, ne
praecurrat sententia. They are but a remnant that shall have mercy: Chrysolog.
a few that shall find favor: Oh labor to be of those few that shall enter
into life, Luke 13.24.

Verse 16. Therefore the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord, says thus,] Therefore?
wherefore? because neither promises of mercy, nor menaces of misery, will work
upon you, stand forth, and hear your doom, your sentence of condemnation, and
it begins, Acts and Mon.
as is usual, In nomine Dei: neither can you say, as that Martyr did, when
wrongfully sentenced, ye begin in a wrong name. To assure the matter, the
Prophet here heapeth up three Majesticall names of God: that they might tremble
and turn, considering the greatness of Him with whom they here have to do,
being glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders Exodus 15.11.

wailing shall be in all streets etc.] A general outcry, as once in Egypt,
when in every house there was a dead corpse: or, as at the taking and sacking of
Troy there was Luctus ubique, pavor, and plurima mortis imago. Virg.


And they shall say in all the highways, Alas, Alas,] Man is a creature apt
to overgrieve for crosses: and to fill the air with moanes and complaints of
his misery. The latin word Aeger for a sick person, is judged to come from
(...) the doleful expression of his grief. The Greek word (...) is as much as
(...), Not ever. We are soon weary of suffering, and would feign see an end of
it: and therefore cry out for help. The Hebrew word here used Ho, Ho, is the
same with our Oh, Oh; it is dolentis particula, it is ejulantis, the broken
speech of one in great dolor and durance. Nature need not to be taught to tell
her own tale, when in distress, then men are apt to be eloquent, even beyond
truth: they add, they multiply, (...). Aristoph. 1 Cor. 10.13.
they rise in their discourse, like him in the Poet, I am thrice miserable, nay
ten times, nay an hundred, ten hundred times: whereas they should correct their
excessive complaint; with that other (...), Alas, Alas: but why Alas? Nothing
has befaln us but what is humane, common to men, and our betters.

and they shall call the husbandman to mourning] For the marring of his corn by
the enemy, or by the vermin. Others read it thus, Jarchi Livelejus.
The husbandmen shall send for those that are skillful in lamentation, to
mourning, and wayling.

and such as are skillful of lamentation] An ordinary practice in those
Eastern parts (as now also in Jreland) to hire artificial mourners at
funerals to sing doleful ditties. Vt qui conducti plorant in funere. See Jer.
9.17. Mat. 9.23. Horat. de art Poet. Sic Homer. de Hectore sepulte Gellius
lib. 2. cap. 20.
with the Note. Of the lawfulness of this custom the Prophet speaks not.
Many things are mentioned in scripture and made use of, but not approved, as
Usury Mat. 25.27. dancing Mat. 11.17. Theft, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. injustice Luke 16.1.
the Isthmian games, 1 Cor. 9.24. etc.

Verse 17. And in all vineyards shall be wayling] where used to be great
jollity and revell-riot in time of vintage Psalm. 4.8. The calamity shall be
common, the scourge overflowing: and all sorts shall have their share See
Joel. 1.5, 11, 13.

for I will pass through thee says the Lord] as a fire in a thick wood Iam.
3.5. or dry stubble Joel. 2.5. Nah. 1.10. I will go thorough them, I will burn
them together Esaias. 27.4. make a short work with them Romans 9.28. So fearful a
thing it is to fall into the punishing hands of the living God Heb. 10.31. to
stand in his way, when his sword is in commission, and He says to it, Sword go
thorough the land, cut off man and beast from it Ezekiel. 14.17. Let this be
thought on by those secure ones that live, as if they were out of the reach of
Gods rod: Ezech. 21.13.
for what if the sword contemn even the rod? and be drenched in the gall of
these sturdy rebels? what then?

Verse 18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord] The day of his
visitation when he will go thorough us, as you Prophets would make believe.
Where is the promise of his coming? Let him make speed and hasten his work,
Esaias. 5.19. Jer. 17.15.
that we may see it. Let him increase his army and come down Judge. 9.29. Such
jearing and daring spirits there are still abroad. But do they provoke the Lord
to anger? are they stronger then he? The great and terrible day of the Lord
will come time enough to their cost; they need not accelerate it. Can they
stand to his trial? Job. 26.14
or abide the thunder of his power?

to what end is it for you] when God shall answer you, as he did a far better
man, out of the whirlewind and say, Job. 38.2, 3. 1 Pet. 4.18.
Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up now thy
loins like a man etc. Where then shall the ungodly and the wicked appear?
what hills will they call upon to fall on them, when the elements shall fall
upon them like scalding lead, or burning bell-mettall; and yet all this be but
the beginning of their sorrows? Now therefore be not ye mockers, lest your
bands be made strong, Esaias. 28.22. God can easily hamper you, if he once take
you in hand.

the day of the Lord is darkness and not light] No interchange of light: an
evil, an only evil, without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5. a black and dismal
day of one mischief upon another, in a continued series. Affliction shall not
rise up the second time Nah. 1.9. but ye shall totally and finally be
destroyed: wrath shall come upon you to the utmost, 2 These. 2. This is
illustrated in the next verse by an apt Similitude.

Verse 19. As if a man did sly from a lion etc.] And so by running from his
death, should run to it: by seeking to shun the shelves should split against a
rock, Incidit in Scyllam etc. Alsted. Chronol. page 480.
as Nicodemus Frischline (that famous Poet, Orator, and Philosopher)
endeavoring to escape out of close prison, by casting himself out at a window,
the rope broke, and he perished by falling headlong upon a rock: So fares it
with those that fear not God. Aliud ex alio malum, One mischief treads on
the heels of another, as Jobs messengers. The clouds return after the rain
Eccle. 12.2. as in April-weather, one shower is unburthened, another is brewed:
and deep calls upon deep at the noise of the water-spouts Psalm. 42.7. Evil
shall hunt the violent man to destroy him Psalm. 140.11. your sins shall find
out, out as a blood-hound, Number. 32.23. as it did that Popish Priest in London,
who having escaped the fall of Blackfriars Anno. 1623. (where Drury had his
brains knocked out of his head, together with his sermon) and taking water,
with a purpose to sail into Flanders, was cast away (together with some
others) under London Bridge; Jac. Revius de vit. Pontif. 312.
the boat being overturned. And as Philip the second King of Spain, who going
from the Low Countries into Spain by sea, fell into a storm in which almost
all the Fleet was wracked, his housholdstuff of very great valve lost, and
himself hardly escaped: Hist. of Counc. of Trent. 417.
He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out
Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do. But the hand of God was upon him
in an extraordinary manner: Caros. Scribonde inflit. Princ. cap. 20.
for beside the invincible Armado here defeated, to his great heart-break (for
his pretended patience was but as the fever called Epialis wherein men are cold
without, but hot as fire within) he fell into that most loathsome lowsy disease,
called Phthiriasis, whereof at length he dyed.

and a Bear met him] A Bear robbed of her whelps (which she licketh into
form, and loves above measure) is a very fierce and fell creature. To meet
her in such a rage is to meet death in the very face: and yet that danger may
be sooner shifted and shunned, then the heavy wrath of God avoided or averted,
without true and timely repentance: there is no way to run from him but by
running penitently to him: as in a tempest at Sea, it is very dangerous to
strike to the shore: the safest way is to have sea-room, and to keep in the
Maine still.

or went into the house] To shelter himself from the Bear: as every creature
in danger runs to its harbor Prove. 30.26. Psalm. 104.18.

and leaned his hand on the walles] As being breathless in running, and glad
to stay himself on what he can next lay hold on. Man, like the vine, must have
somewhat to lean on: if it be but a broken reed, or bulging wall Psalm. 62.3.
he shifts and sharks in every by-corner for comfort, as the Papists (stung by
the Friars sermons) do by pardons and pennances, Prove. 23.32.
which are but palliate cures.

for a serpent bites them] the guilt of sin abiding, biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder.

Verse 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness etc.] q. d. How say ye
now: when thus beset with mischief on all hands, such as ye can neither avoid
nor abide, must ye not needs subscribe to the truth of what I said verse 18.
and do here again repeat (that you may the better observe it) with greater
emphasis, and earnestness? you shall not have the least glimmering of comfort,
ease, direction or good counsel. To what end then should you desire this
dreadful day of the Lord? Are you in have to be undone.

Verse 21. I hate, I despise your feast-dayes] wherewith ye think to stop my
mouth, and to make me your debtor: saying as that Roman Emperor when his
enemy came against him, Non sic Deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret, we have not
so served the Gods, that they should serve us no better, then to give the enemy
the better of us. The feast-dayes, Antonin. Philosoph refer. Vulcat. Gallic. in
Avidio Cassio. Jer. 32.35.
and solemn assemblies you so much bind upon are yours and not mine: I never
commanded them ( viz as you now use them) neither came they ever into my mind.
So far am I therefore from accepting your sacrifices, as that I hate, I
despise, I will not smell: an elegant Asyndeton, importing Gods utter distaste
of what they did (The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more
when he brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21.27.) and assuring a sudden
vengeance, as in that quick and smart passage, Go, preach, baptize, He that
believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. Willworship and out-sidenesse in
religion is very odious to the Almighty: and stinks worse in his nostrils, then
any ill vapor from the vilest dunghill does in ours: or as those poisonous
smells that ascended up once from the five cities of the plain, and brought
down from him a counterpoyson of fire and brimstone. Rome also (that spiritual
Sodom) shall be destroyed in like sort, with a terrible fire Rev. 17.16. and
18, 8, 9. for her detestable will-worships, superstitions and Idolatries, which
no other nitre can possibly purge. Rev. 13.18. the whole number of the Beast,
whatsoever is numbered to belong unto him, is but the number of a man, humane
inventions and will-wisdome; men will have it so: and this is the sum of all
Popish religion. When the wit of man will be over-pleasing God with better
devises then his own, will needs despite him with seeming honors, it turns
to madness, and ends in mischief.

Verse 22. Though ye offer me burnt offerings etc.] So long as ye stick in the
bark, please your selves in the external performance, rest in the work done,
think to expiate your sins by your duties, and to set off with God for your
bad deeds by your good, and to get a license thereby to live as you list:
though ye offer me burnt-offerings (which were wholly burnt in sacrifice to God,
and so were ordinarily most acceptable.)

I will not accept them] Nor shall you be a button the better for them, but the
worse. Esaias. 66.3. yea though ye added wine, oil, and incense, that there
might be a savor of rest in it. The very Heathens could say, that Gods favor
is not to be gained by multitude of sacrifices, but by the integrity of those
that offer them.

neither will I regard (or look at) the peace offerings of your fat beasts]
whether sheep or oxen, or another distinct creature, bigger then an ox called
in the Arabic dialect gamus, as Aben-Ezra affirms, the French call it
Buffle, and we the Buffe or wild-Oxe: All would not do; God would neither see
nor hear, as it follows.

Verse 23. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs] No more pleasing to
me then the grunting of an hog, or the braying of an ass, because hatelesse,
heartlesse: for as every sound is not music, so neither is ever musical sound
melodious to God. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet to
our ears, as that which comes from the depth of the breast. Sing with grace in
your hearts, is the best tune to all the Psalms: which are therefore called
spiritual songs Col. 3.16. both because they are indicted by the Spirit, that
are to be sung with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. and because they being so sung,
do make us more spiritual in the use of them: whilst we sing David's Psalms
with David's heart.

for I will not hear the melody of thy viol] Or of thine organe, harp,
citterne, Inte, bag-pipe, for so some render it, with respect to the Etymology
of the word Nebel. The Greek rendereth it Of the Psalteries: what need we
trouble our selves much about those things whereof we can neither have proof
nor profit: at least not profit enough to pay for the pains? God will not
hear either their voice or instrument-musick, because the heart was wanting.
Non vox sed votum, non Musica chordula, sed Cor. The deeper and hollower the
belly of the lute or violl is, the pleasanter is the sound: the fleeter, the
more grating and harsh in our ears: think the same of God: and see how
exceeding offensive to all his senses, yea to his very soul hypocrisy is Esaias.
1.11, 12, 13. etc.

Verse 24. But let judgment run down] Heb. roll down freely, plentifully, and
plainly, ut devolutus monte praecipiti torrens, as the great billows of the
sea, Livius. Columella.
or as waves rolling over rocks, so let judgment and equity be constantly and
vigorously administered and executed.

and righteousness as a mighty streame] that comes with a force, and bears
down all before it. Fiat justitia, ruat orbis, Let justice be done what ever
come of it. The Sun might as soon be turned out of his course, as Fabricius out
of the track of Truth and Justice, says the Historian. How much better might
this have been said of Job, Moses, Phineas, Nehemias, etc. famous in their
generations for brandishing the sword of justice against the friends of Baal,
Balaam, and Batchus, for turning the wheel over all such roaring monsters, such
lewd and lawless Belialists, as, hardened with impunity, dare oppose with
crest and breast whosoever or whatsoever stands in the way of their wicked
lusts and practices. Oh this was better then burnt-offerings without this: this
was that Actual, Magisteriall, and Majesticall kind of devotion, that pleased
God far better then an ox that has horns and hoofes.

Verse 25. Have ye offered unto me sacrifices etc.] i. e. To me only, and not
to other Gods also? did ye not begin betime to play the idolaters? and do ye
not fill up the measure of your fathers? Mat. 23.32. They sojourned in Egypt,
and brought thence a golden calfe: Jeroboam sojourned there, and brought home
two; which were no sooner up but you were down upon your knees, where still you
continue at your mawmet-worship. Is it not even so, o house of Israel? And was
it not even so in the wilderness, (...).
where and when I bore with your evil manners about the time of forty years
Act. 13.18. (for full forty it was not, but 38. only and some few months) and
was provoked by you ten times Number. 14.22. when I had but newly brought you out
of Egypt chap. 3.1, 2. So that your Idolatry is hereditary; and therefore the
more ingrained and to be abhorred. God alone is to be worshipped Exodus 20.2, 3.
1 King. 18.21. truly that there be no halting, and totally that there be no
halving. Be the Gods of the heathen good-fellowes, says One: the true God is a
jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. For indeed he is the
One Deuteronomy. 6.4. and Only God, Psalm. 86.10. besides whom Psalm. 18.32. without
whom 1 Samuel 2.2. and beyond whom 1 King 8.6. there is none other Deuteronomy. 4.39.
nor any like him 2 Samuel 7.22. nor any with him Esaias. 44.24. he is the only
Lord, and besides Him there is none other Joel. 2.27.

Verse 26. But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch] That Idols were wont
to be carried upon men's shoulders we may see Esaias. 46.7. Baruc. 6.3. and 2.5.
That Moloch or Malcom was the abomination of the Ammonites, (who called him
their king, as the Israelites called the true God Es. 44.6. and 33, 22.) See 1
King. 11.5. that the Israelites should do thus in the wilderness (where they
had Gods tabernacle erected) carrying about them privily some portable chapels
or pictures of these Idols (as some hold they did, Romans 1.23. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
and Josephus seems to say as much) was monstrous wickedness, and the guise
of men given up to a reprobate sense.

and Chiun your images] that is, your notable image, the plural for the
singular, as often; especially in names of dignity. Hierom here for Chiun has
Rephan; confer Act. 7.43. and the Commentatours thereon. Aben-Ezra thinks that
by Chiun is meant the planet Saturn, called chivan in the Arabic. And other
Hebrews by the starr of your God (that is, the starr which is your God. See
Esaias. 21.9.) understand Mereury.

Verse 17. Therefore will cause you] Idolatry is a land-desolating sin.

beyond Damascus] and not only so, but also beyond Babylon Act. 7 by the way of
Damascus, by Tiglath Pileser sent for by Ahaz, for that purpose Es. 8.4. King.
15.29.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. In utramv is aurem dorin.
WOe to them that are at ease in Zion] that lie sleeping on both sides, and
slighting the former menaces, as Leviathan does the ironweapons Job. 41.27.
that live as if ye were out of the reach of Gods rod: and as for all your
enemies, ye puff at them, saying: We shall not be moved, we shall never be in
adversity, Psalm. 10.5, 6. To these sleepers in Zion, God here sends forth his
summons (the word Hoi signifies as well Heus as Vae, Ho, as Woe, Esaias 55.1.
Zach. 2.6. Ho, ho, come forth) that were quiet and still, Zach. 1.11. lulled
asleep by Satan, or rather cast into a dead lethargy: Sampson-like their
enemies are upon them, and they fast asleep the while: Ishbosheth-like they
stretch themselves upon their beds of ivory, till they lose, not their precious
lives only, but their immortal souls. Security ushereth in destruction: those
that are at ease in Zion, shall be raised by a dreadful Woe rung in their
ears, that shall make their hearts fall down, and their hairs stand upright. In
the froth of carnal security and sensual delights is bred that worm of
conscience that never dies, Mar. 9. and here begins to grub and gnaw: like as
while the Crocodile sleeps with open mouth, the Ichneumon, or Indian Rat
shoots himself into his bowels: after which he never is at ease, as having his
entrails daily devoured: so that one while he will be in the water, and anon
after on the land, till life fails him.

and trust in the mountain of Samaria,] Are carnally confident and secure, as
good David also was, when gotten upon his strong mountain, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
(...). Septuag.
but was soon confuted: Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. The best
are apt by rest, to contract rust: and being full-fed to wax wanton, Deuteronomy.
32.15. To affect more mundi delicias quam Christi divitias, as One says, the
worlds dainties then Christ's comforts: to trust in uncertain riches, then to
rely upon the living God, who gives them all things richly to enjoy. This must
be looked to: 1 Timothy 6.17.
for it has a woe hanging at the heels of it, Jer. 17.5, 6. Psalm. 52.7, 9.

which are named chief of the Nations,] Heb. expressly named, declared,
notified, celebrated, chief,] the head, or first fruits; the head and height,
Principium, id est, praecipuum gentium: So Amalec is called the first of the
Nations, Numb. 24.20. happily they held themselves so: Justin. lib. 2.
as the Egyptians afterward boasted much of their Antiquity, and the Chinois
at this day do of their excellency, and perspicuity above other Nations. Many
wicked ones are of great renown in this world, Psalm. 73.4, 6. and stand much
upon their titles and terms of honor: who yet in the next generation shall be
utterly forgotten, Psalm. 109.13. for that their names are not written in
heaven, Rev. 17.8. and look how much they have glorified themselves, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and ignominy shall be given them, Rev. 18.7.

To whom the house of Israel came.] The whole house of Israel, viz. the two
tribes to Zion, the ten to Samaria, Vel sacrorum causa, vel judiciorum, says
Drusius, as to places of worship, and besies, courts of Justice. Others sense
it thus, The house of Israel came unto them, that is, the Israelites invaded
those nations, that once held Zion and Samaria, and succeeded them therein: not
by any strength of their own, but by Gods mighty hand and outstretched arm,
which they (ungrateful wretches) acknowledge not: but came in for themselves,
so Ribera renders it, (...)
Quasi sibi tantum nati, se solos esse aliquid, as if they were the only
proprietaries, the sole owners of all; and owed no service to any chief-Lord.
Such insolency grows from security. See Job 21.23.

Verse 2. Pass ye unto Calneh and see,] Take a voyage to, and a view of those
most famous bordering cities, Calneh, or Selencia in Mesopotamia on the East,
(whereof see Genesis 10.10. the beginning of Nimrods Kingdom) Hamath the great, or
Antiochia, (now Aleppo, a famous Mart-town) on the North. Then go down
Southward to Gath of the Philistines, which was of all the five satrapies
potissima and potentissima, and is therefore called Metheg-Ammah, 2 Samuel 8.1.
with 1 Chronicles. 18.1. because, being a town of great strength, it was, as it
were, the bridle, whereby the whole country about was kept in awe: It was
afterward known by the name of Diocaesarea. Away to these neighboring cities,
and see in them, as in so many Optick-glasses, how much more God has done for
you then for them in every respect; the greater is your guilt, and the deeper
will be your judgment in the end, for abuse of these rich mercies (of a
fertile soil, a large Empire, etc.) to security, oppression, and other
detestable vices and villainies.

be they better then these kingdoms?] sc. of Judah, and Israel? which were
certainly multis nominibus laudatissima, very fruitful and pleasant countries,
(...).
Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. Numb. 14.7, 8. whatsoever Strabo spitefully reports to the
contrary, Lib. 7.
being therein worse then Rabshakeh, Esaias 36.17.

Or their border greater then your border,?] sc. till the Babylonians, Syrians,
and Assyrians took part of your country from you, and cooped you up, cut you
short. And now that you are so straightened for room, does not the Lord recompense
you in multitudes of people? Judea was not above 200. miles long, and 50. miles
broad, say Geographers: and yet what huge armies brought they into the field?
Observe then says the Prophet, the great things that God has done for you
above other Nations, and walk accordingly: or else take lessons out of their
losses, and damages, and know that the case will be your own, Aliorum perditio
vestra sit cautio: Learn by other men's harms, to beware.

Verse 3. Ye that put far away the evil day,] Woe to you that would do so, if
you could; that fondly persuade your selves there is no such danger in
evil-doing, as the Prophets pretend: but that all shall be hail and well with
you, though ye walk in the imagination of your hearts, to add drunkenness to
thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and to heap up sin as high as heaven, Quae longinqua sunt,
non metuuntur. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 5.
Rev. 18.5. This cursed security and hope of impunity, is the source of much
wickedness in the world. See Prove. 7.19, 20. Matthew. 24.48. with the Notes. It
is a sad thing when men shall say, as Ezekiel. 12.27. The vision that he sees is
for many days to come: and he prophesies of the times that are far off.
This Atheistical conceit accelerates the judgment, verse. 28. Therefore say
unto them, Thus says the Lord God, there shall none of my words be prolonged
any more: but the word which I have spoken shall be done, says the Lord God.
Val. Man.
Tarditatemque supplicij, gravitate compensabo.

and cause the seat of violence to come near.] Amota Justitiae sella: setting
aside the care of justice, together with the fear of God, for whom ye ought to
have reserved the chief room in all your public meetings, as the Ethiopian
Judges are said to do. Atque vi an geritur res, might overcomes right: and
robberies are daily done by authority. See Psalm. 94.20. The throne of iniquity
shall not have fellowship with God: neither will he take the wicked by the
hand, whatever those corrupt Vice-gods do, 2 Pet. 2.3.
(as we may in the worst sense, best term them) whose judgment now of a
long-time lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. The evil day that
they put far away, will suddenly surprise them, and then what will they do
when God rises up? and when he visits, what will they answer him? Job 31.14.

Sed quam caecus inest vitijs amor? omne faturum, Claudian. l. 2. in Eutrop.

Despicitur, suadentque brevem praesentia fructum, etc.
Verse 4. That lie upon beds of ivory,] which was a commodity far fet (even out
of India) and dear bought; Ezekiel. 27.15.
precious, and sumptuous. The wealthier sort used to deck their houses with
such kind of beds decked with ivory ( lectis eburatis, as Plautus phraseth it)
as Esth. 1.6. with gold and silver: hence their houses are called houses of
ivory, chap. 3.15. and 1 King. 22.39. See Plin. lib. 33. cap. 11. Herat. l. 2.
Sat. 6. Here then is condemned their luxury, and abuse of Gods good gifts, with
neglect of the weal-publike, and contempt of judgments threatened.

and stretch themselves upon their couches,] Pandiculantur in suis cubilibus,
so Rabbi Solomon. (...).
Others render it, redundantibus ac diffluentibus. Woe to them that delight in
overlong and large coverlets, curtains, etc, superfluously hanging down on all
sides upon the very ground; so Kimchi. The Seventy and Vulgar render it, Woe to
those that wantonnize upon their couches, melting in sensual pleasures.
Compare 1 Timothy 5.6. Jam. 5.5. God grudgeth not his people an honest affluence,
Psalm. 23.4. Lascivientes, Deliciantes.
but grants them all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Howbeit he
requires them to be sober and watch: not making provision for the flesh, to
live after the lusts thereof, but walking decently as in the day; not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, etc. Romans 13.13,
14.

and eat the lambs out of the flock,] E grege, id est, egregios ac optimos, the
very best and fattest morsels, pampering their paunches; swinish belly-gods.

and the calves out of the midst of the stall.] The French call them
high-grasseveals. Veaux de haute graisse.
Nothing would down with them but tid bits, (...), dainty and goodly, Rev.
18.9. Those Abbey-lubbers of the Romish Synagogue are compared to fed horses,
pampered in their cloisters (as war-horses in their stalls or stables) and
prepared unto battle, Rev. 9.7. Lawful it is, I grant, at some times to eat
of the fat, and drink of the sweet, and to please the appetite, Neh. 8.10.
Deuteronomy. 4.26. to gratify it with what it likes and lusts after. But yet it
must still be remembered, that it is a finne to feed without fear; and a shame
for a servant of God, to be a slave to his palate. Eat such things as are set
before you, says Christ to his disciples, (...).
be it never so homely, if wholesome, Luke 10.8. And Genesis 9.3. after, Every
moving thing that lives shall be meat for you, it is added, even as the green
herb have I given you all things, that is, soberly and without curiosity, to
take and make use of such meats as are at hand, as Dr. Willet interprets it.
And this, Nature seems to teach man, in giving him so narrow a mouth, throat,
and belly: Hexap. in loc.
whereas to swine she has given a wide mouth, a very thick neck, a large
belly, and but a very little brains: that they might the sooner grow fat,
Chrysostom. Theatr. natu. 354.
and take no other thought but for the belly says Bodine.

Verse 5. That chant (or quaver) to the sound of the viol,] That sing division
with much variation of their voices, and many distinctions of diverse tones,
Particularizant, they sing their parts in consort.
modulations fractions. The Hebrew root-word signifies the single grains of
grapes, that remain after the vintage: or the particular berries, Lev. 19.10.
Our word parting, answers to the Hebrew peret. It is their wanton and
unseasonable music (emasculating, dissolving, and drawing out their spirits)
that they are here threatened for. This abuse of Music (given to men for better
purposes) is elsewhere condemned, chap. 5.23. Esaias 5.12. Exodus 32.18. Eccles.
2.8. God made not man more avium minurire to sport on earth, as Leviathan does
in the sea: to spend his whole time (as the people of Tombutum in Africa are
said to do) in singing and dancing: and, when he is cast out of one paradise,
to make himself another. It is charged as a foul fault upon those sensualists
in St. James, that they had lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton,
Jam, 5.5.

and invent to themselves instruments of music, like David.] Whose example,
likely they pleaded, to patronize their fidlings, and chaunting of ribald
songs. But his music and theirs agreed like harp and harrow, as the proverb
is. Two may do the same thing, and yet it not be the same; because not from the
same principles, and for the same purposes: as we see in Cain and Abel, the
Pharisee and the Publican, David and these singsters, who did nothing less
then help forward their devotion by Music, as did David: and as did our late
holy Esty, who when he sat and heard a sweet consort of Music, D. Halls Art of
div. Medit.
seemed upon this occasion carried up for the time beforehand, to the place of
his rest, saying very passionately; What music may we think there is in heaven?

Verse 6. That drink wine in bowls,] Non in scyphis, cyathis, aut calicibus,
not in cups, pots, or chalices, but in vessels of price, and of largest
receipt, that they may be counted and called (as young Cicero was) Tricongii,
such as can drink whole-ones, and no small-ones neither. (The Seventy and the
Chaldee render it, In phials, others in goblets) Diotimus of Athens, for his
excellive drinking, was termed (...), Tun-dish. Ailian. lib. 2. cop. 41.
Alexander the Great gloried that he could drink down any man: and one time
inviting many to supper, he provided a crown of 180 pound to be given to those
that drank most: and forty one of the company killed themselves with drinking
to get that crown. Darius king of Persia, caused this to be engraven upon his
tomb; I was able to drink much wine, and to bear it bravely. Was not this to
glory in his shame? had he no way else to show his valor? Athen^^^.
Did he never take notice of that Persian law; that it should not be lawful
for their King to be drunk but only once a year, when they sacrificed to the
Sun, Idem.
whom they took to be the greatest of the gods? How much better Bathsheba, in
her Lemuels-lesson. It is not for Kings, Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink
wine, nor for Princes, strong-drink: lest they drink and forget the law, etc.
Prove. 31.4. And if not for kings, much less is it for others to be drunk with
wine wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5.18. lest with Nabal, and the rich glutton, they
drink deep of the wine of Gods wrath: and have the full vials of his vengeance
poured upon them for ever.

and anoint themselves with the chief ointments,] After the manner of the
Jewish Nation, whereof see 2 Samuel 12.20. Eccles. 9.8. Luke 7.38, 46. Psalm.
23.5. and 104.15. Mat. 6.17. They spare for no cost, or pains to please all
their senses. And such a prodigal pleasure-monger was that rich citizens
son, mentioned in the second part of the Theater of Gods judgments: who to
please all his five senses at once, allowed to the delight of every several
sense a several hundred pound. For which end 1. Theat. of Gods judgments part.
2. page 110.111.
He bespake a curious fair room richly hanged, and furnished with the most
exquisite pictures, to please the eye. 2. He had all the choysest Music that
could be heard of, to give content to the ear. 3. He had all the Aromatickes
and odoriferous perfumes, to delight his cent in smelling. 4. All the Candies,
Preserves, Junkets, even to the stretching of the Apothecaries or
Confectionaries art, to please his taft. 5. And lastly, a beautiful and fair
strumpet lodged with him in a soft bed, and the daintiest linen that could be
compassed to accommodate his touch: and all these this Epicure (more then ever
Sardanapalus did) enjoyed at one instant. He spent thirty thousand pounds in
three years, and swore after all, that if he had ten times more then ever he
had, he would spend it all to live one week like a God, though he were sure to
be damned in hell the next day after.

they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph] i. e. of the Israelites
Psalm. 80.2. and 77.16. Amos. 5.6. Joseph is mentioned and put for all the rest,
because he was famous amongst his brethren, Aug. de doct. Christian. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
vel ob mala quae pendit, vel ob bona quae rependit, both for the evils that he
suffered, and for the good turns that he returned. Time was when poor Joseph
was ill handled by his merciless brethren; and could not be heard, though he
used many entreaties, Genesis 37.23, any 42, 21. They when they had cast him into
the pit, there to pine and perish with hunger, sat down to eat, and so to ease
themselves of any remorse of conscience, that might be wrought in them. See 1 Samuel 22.8. (...)
They should have been sick at heart (as the word here signifies) for the
affliction (the confraction, the breaking to shivers) (of Joseph: poor Reuben
was so, as far as he durst show it: and Joseph forgot not his kindness, when
he came to his greatness. God (who is all bowels) will never forget those that
forget not his afflicted; but commiserate and relieve them, as they have
opportunity and ability.

Verse 7. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first] Heb. in the head
of those that go captive: as they have been first in the degrees of honor, and
of sin, so shall they be now of punishment, according to that saying of the
Centurist^, Ingentia beneficia, Magdeburg. Esa. 50.11.
ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia. This they shall have of Gods hand, they
shall lie down in sorrow: yea many sorrows shall be to these wicked ones,
Psalm. 32.10. these merciless men shall not have the least mercy showed them,
Iam. 2.13. God will surely set off all hearts from such (as he did from Haman,
for whom in his misery not one man opens his mouth once to intercede) and he
will punish magnum luxum magno luctu, as One says, great luxury with great
necessity.

and the banquet of them that stretched themselves] They shall neither have
mind nor money to make feasts, that were wont to lay on in all sorts of
superfluities. That prodigal abovementioned was by a just hand of God reduced
to extreme penury, and cast off by all his former acquaintance. Sen^^^.
That luxurious Roman Apicius (the expenses of whose kitchen amounted to more
then two millions of gold,) having eaten up his estate, and fearing poverty
poysoued himself: leaving behind him ten books, of direction how to furnish
and set forth a feast with all manner of varieties, which now he could sooner
talk of then take of. The word here rendered banquet is taken for a funeral
feast Jer. 16.5. and so some think the sense here is; Lively.
they shall be carried captive into a far country, and there be deprived of
the honor of burialls; which is a judgment elsewhere threatened Jer. 22.18,
19. Aben-Ezra renders it, facesset canticum the song of the wanton shall be
set packing: and for this he alleges, that in the Arabic dialect, the root
word here used, signifies to lift up the voice, either for joy or grief; The
Seventy render it, the neighing of horses: as noting their immoderate lust
according to Jer. 5.8. And this sense Ribera commends.

Verse 8. The Lord God has sworn by himself] Heb. by his soul, which is
himself: since whatsoever is in God, is God. So chap. 4.2. Gen 22.16. Heb.
6.16.17. Or, He has sworn by his soul, that is Serie and ex animo Seriously
and heartily. Among the Heathens ex animi sui sententia was instead of an oath.

says the Lord God of hosts] who has power enough in his hand to perform
what he has so solemnly assured.

I abhor the excellency (or, the pomp and pride) of Jacob] So Basil speaking
of the Western Church, Odi fastum istius Ecclesiae says He, I hate their
pride. This he elsewhere calls (...) the Western brow (from the forehead,
that seat of pride and arrogance) which at length occasioned that lamentable
separation of the Eastern or Greek church from communion with the Latin:
Field. Gerson. Carlton.
the other four Patriarks dividing themselves from the bishop of Rome. Pride
is an odious evil; fitly compared by One to a great swelling in the body,
which unfits it for any good service: and is apt to putrify, and break, and run
with loathsome and foul matter: so does Pride disable the soul from doing
duty, and at last breaks forth into odious deeds, abominable to God and Man.
There are that by Excellency or Glory here understand their glorious Temple,
and other privileges, wherein they so much gloried. See Psalm. 47.5. But Mercer
thinks it rather meant of the ten tribes then of the two, whose crown of pride
is elsewhere taxed Esaias. 28.1. Hos. 7.10. The pride of Israel testifies to his
face, it breaks out in his forehead, as a great master-pock.

therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein] Heb. with the
fullness thereof: both persons and things are all forfeited, and shall be
seized by the enemy; be the city of Samaria never so rich a Cargazon, so full a
Magazine of Men and means, I will shut them up (so the word signifies) after
a strait siege, into the enemies hand, who shall make a spoil of them.

Verse 9. And it shall come to pass, if there remain, ten men etc.] that is
many, as Zech. 8.23. Levit. 26.26. because ten is the utmost of single number
q. d. Though a considerable company escape the enemy, yet pestilence or some
other destruction shall put an end to them.

they shall dye] See this fulfilled 2 King. 17.5. In which common calamity what
an happiness had they, that belonging to the election of grace could
confidently say as Hab. 1 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God,
mine holy One? Occidere potest, non laedere.
We shall not dye (or if we do, death may kill us but cannot hurt us) O Lord
thou have ordained them for judgment, and O mighty God thou have established
them for correction. The wicked are killed with death Rev. 2.23. undone by it:
Hos. 2.15.
to them it is no other but a trap-dore to hell; as to the Saints it is as the
valley of Achor, a door of hope, the very daybreak of eternal brightness.

Verse 10. And a man's uncle shall take him up] Him, that is every one of the
ten a forementioned, being now dead of the plague, shall his uncle or dearest
friend take up on his own shoulders, for want of the ordinary mercenary
officers (called by the Latins Vespillones, Libitinarii, Pollinctores) their
best friends shall be forced to bury or burn their dead corpses. So Seneca in
Oedipo.

-- portat hunc aeger parens
Supremum ad ignem, matter hunc amens gerit,
Properatque ut alium regerat in eundem regum.
To bring out the bones out of the house] for burial as 1 Samuel 31.15 the flesh
being first burnt. Bones are a part of a man's body; and therefore to be
committed to the earth, or laid up in a safe place as Joseph's were Exodus 13.19.
Josh. 24.32. and with his, the rest of the Patriarks doubtless Act. 7.16 This
is one of the dues of the dead 1. (...).
In honor of God who made man's body with admirable art Psalm. 139.5. and as it
were by the book verse 14.15, 16.2. Next because the dead body was sometime a
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and an instrument of many holy actions 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. and 2 Cor. 6.16. 3. because it shall be raised one day and conformed to
Christ's glorious body the Standard Philip. 2.21. We know, says the same
Apostle, that when Christ, our life, shall appear, we shall appear with him
in glory: like as in the transfiguration, that body of Moses which was hid in
the valley of Moab, appeared with Christ in the hill of Tabor.

and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house] To him that burns
the dead, as before, that assisteth a man's uncle to interr him. The Jews did
not usually burn but bury: yet sometimes they did Jer. 34. and 1 Kings. 31. and
at this time they were forced by the raging pestilence to do it (as Hierome
here notes) for the preventing of stench and further infection.

Is there yet any with thee?] sc. left alive: or has death made a clean
riddance? Or thus: Are there yet any more dead corpses, which I may carry
forth for the burial?

and he shall say No:] Or, And he shall say An end, a total consumption: they
are all dead, and gone. A sad verdict.

then shall he say, Hold thy tongue] sc. bear it patiently, Has, St.
fret not, murmr not, it is Gods doing Psalm. 39.9. Hold thy peace at the
presence of the Lord God Zeph. 1.7.

for we may not make mention of the Name of the Lord] This is vox desperantis
the voice of despair and despondensy: and it is as if he had said: it is
bootlesse to pray; for God is set to plague us, and will not be pacified;
Surely there is no hope: but we are all Free among the dead, like the slain
that lie in the grave whom God remembers no more, Psalm. 88.5. neither helps
it us to remember or mention him any more. Men under sharp afflictions are apt
to think that there is left them neither hope of better nor place of worse, as
the Church in the Lamentations. Others sense it otherwise: but to me this
seems the likeliest.

Verse 11. For behold the Lord commandeth] Calamities, and they come: the
Chaldeans, and they are at hand with their battel-axes, but it is he that gives
them their commission, and bids them Fall on.

and he will smite the great house with breaches etc] i. e. aequo pulsat pede
etc.
he will destroy rich and poor together; pale death will knock at both their
houses with an even foot, as in time of plague, earthquake or the like
Epidemicall evil. The grave is the Congregation house of all living Job.
30.23. whereinto men chop often before they think: as a man that walks in the
snow may into a marle-pit. The mortal scyth is master of the royal scepter:
and it mowes down the lillies of the crown, as well as the grass of the field.
Death is the only king against whom there is no rising up, as Augur phraseth
the most absolute predominance Prove. 30.31. it levelleth Lords and Losels, and
lays all wast: breaking down the greater houses and cleaving the lesser, with
an utter extermination of all. Search you therefore, search you, O nation not
desired; before the decree come forth etc. Zeph. 2.1, 2. After-wit here helps
not: repentance, though true may come too late in respect of temporal
judgments, as in Moses Deuteronomy. 1.37. and David 2 Samuel 12.10.

Verse 12. Shallhorses run upon the rock?] Is it possible they should do so,
and not first break their hoofs, and then their necks? will the rider therefore
venture there? were it not matchless madness in him?

will one plow there with oxen?] Sure he will conceive it too hard a tug, and
too vain a labor. Hierom renders it Bubalis, with wild-oxen: which, not
accustomed to the yoke, are like to make but wild work wherever they are
plowed with. Now as there is no good horse-racing upon a rock, nor fit plowing
there: so neither must you ever hope to escape unpunished, or to keep up your
Commonwealth unshattered, so long as ye deal thus preposterously, perversely,
and absurdly, Prove. 14.14. That of Virgil is not much unlike: Atque idem jungat
vulpes, Eclog. 3.
and mulgeat hircos.

for ye have turned judgment into gall, etc.] Or, into poison: the Chaldee
renders it, into the head of hurtful serpents. The word seems to signify
the poison of serpents, which is in the head. See Hos. 10.4. with the Note.

and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock.] Or, Wormwood, as if ye were a
kin to that Star in the Revelation that is styled Wormwood, Revel. 8.11.
Bellarm lib. 4. de Pontif. Romam.
that great Antichrist, who would make the world believe, that he has power de
injustitia facere justitiam, ex nihilo aliquid, ex virtute vitium, that is, of
injustice to make justice, of nothing to make something, of virtue vice, to
dispense with any of the ten Commandments, In Extrav.
to make new articles of the Creed, to dispose of all kingdoms at his pleasure,
and what not? Pope John 23 says, that he may grant a dispensation against the
law of Nature and of Nations, Caranza Sum. Conc: sess: 13.
against St. Paul, and St. Peter, against the four Gospels, etc. The Council of
Constance comes in with a Non-obstante against Christ's own institution,
withholding the cup from the Sacrament: and the like for priests marriages,
prayers in a known tongue, singing of Psalms, etc. When the Cardinals meet to
choose a Pope, they make a vow, whosoever is chosen, he shall swear to such
Articles as they make. And Sleydan tells us, that the Pope is no sooner
chosen, but he breaks them all, and checks their insolences, as if they went
about to limit his power, to whom all power is given both in heaven and earth,
both in spirituals and temporals. And indeed, he is called the Beast, in
respect of his civil power, and the false-prophet in respect of his spiritual:
and the Star Wormwood, because being himself in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of perdition, he turns all judgment into gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into wormwood. See Chap. 5.7.

Verse 13. Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought] In the creature, says a
Lapide, which is a mere Nothing: in your wealth and strength (called horns in
the next clause) which are an uncertainty, an obscurity, as the Apostle deemed
them 1 Timothy 6.17. and have no solid subsistence, says Solomon, Prove. 23.5.
(...).
though the foolish world call them substance, and goods: Indeed it is only
opinion that sets the price upon them, as when gold is raised from twenty
shillings to two and twenty, the gold is the same: estimation only raises it.
It is said of the people of the East Indies in the Isle Zeiilon that having an
apes tooth got from them, which was a consecrated thing by them, they offered
an incredible mass of treasure to recover it. Such things of naught, are
highly prized and pursued by the worlds (...) by worthless persons, (...).
Act. 25.23.
such as Anthiocus was in all his state Dan. 11.21. and Agrippa in all his pomp
(or as the Greek has it, in all his phantasy or vain show) and as these
voluptuaries in the text, who had their wine and their music, fat calves, and
choycest ointments wherein they held themselves happy verse. 4.5, 6. but the
Prophet tells them that in rejoicing in these low things, they rejoiced in a
thing of naught: they fed altogether upon ashes, a deceived heart had turned
them aside, so that they could not deliver themselves from these empty
vanities, nor say (as wise men would have done,) Is there not a lie in my right
hand. Esaias 44.20.

Which say, Have we not taken to us horns,] yet, no doubt: but such as God by
his Carpenters can soon cut off, Zech. 1.20, 21, or without them, by his own
bare hand, Psalm. 75.11. But what an arrogant brag is here? Have we not taken?
and to us? and horns? and by our own strength? Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God
did nothing; they were all the doers: so small a wind blows up bubble, Sic
leve sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum
Subruit, aut reficit. --
It is a notable witty expression of Luther; By men's boasting of what they have
done, says He, Hac ego feci, haec ego feci, This and that I have done, Luth.
in Psalm. 127.
they become nothing else but faeces, that is dregs: if themselves were any
thing, they would not thus rejoice in a thing of nothing: they would not crack
in this sort.

Verse 14. But behold, I will raise up against you a nation, etc.] which shall
be a cooler to your courage, a rebater to your swelth, a means to take you a
link lower, and to stain the glory of your pride. I tell you not what a nation
it is, that you may imagine the worst: but you will find their quiver is an
open sepulcher, they are all mighty men, and no less merciless, Jer. 5.16, 17.

and they shall afflict you (or crush you) from the entering in of Hamath unto
the river of the wildernesse] from one end of your land to the other; that as
ye have filled it from corner to corner with your uncleanness Ezra. 9.11. so
there may pass over it an overflowing scourge to wash the foul face of it, as
once the old world. Hamath was before noted to be Antiochia, which was one of
the bounds of the land of Israel to the North-East.

the river of the wildernesse] is else where called the river of Egypt, as some
will have it, See Number. 34.5, 8. Deuteronomy. 3.17. Josh. 13.3. and 15.47. 1 Chronicles.
13.35. where the wilderness was Joel. 1.20. I cannot but concur with Kimchi,
who by the river of the valleys here, understands the dead sea, comparing
this text with 2 King. 14.25. and Deuteronomy. 3.17. It being common in Scripture to
call lakes and great rivers by the name of Seas, Luke 5.1. with Number. 34.11.
Josephus. Galenus.
The dead sea also is in Humane Authors called the lake Asphaltites the lake
of Palestina, of Sodom, etc. It lies to the South-west: and is elsewhere made
the bound of the Promised land, Number. 34.3. Josh. 15.2.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. THus has the Lord God showed unto me,] sc. in a Prophetical vision:
this being the first of those five that follow, to the end of the Prophecy:
all foretelling the evils that should befall this people, to whom Amos is again
sent, as Ahijah was to Jeroboams wife with heavy tidings, and as Ezekiel was
afterward to his rebellious countrymen, with a roll written full of
lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Ezech. 2.10.


and behold he formed grasshoppers,] Or, locusts, forerunners of famine, Joel
1.4. (See the Note there) or, (as some will) of the Assyrians, whom the divine
justice made a scorpion to Israel, as Israel had been a scourge to Judah. When
the Israelites were in their flourish, as the grass or wheat is in the
beginning of the shooting up of the latter grows, they had been first mowed
by Benhadad, king of Syria: but, growing up again under Jeroboam their king,
they were devoured by Pull and his Army, as by so many greedy locusts.

In the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth,] For in those fat
and fertile countries they used Luxuriem segetum tener a depascere in herba.
Virg. Georg. 1.
Now if the latter growth were eaten up too, what else could follow but extreme
famine?

It was the latter growth after the kings mowings.] Or, sheep-shearings, as
some read it: but the former is better: and Diodate here notes, that it is
thought that the kings did take the first crop, in esum and usum jumentorum, to
keep their war horses, and for other services: leaving the latter mowings for
other cattle, who were taught to say, After your Majesty, is good manners.

Verse 2. When they had made an end of eating,] Not the corn only, but the
grass, to the very roots; besides a pestilent stench left behind them; when,
I say, they had done their worst. Prayer is the best lever at a dead lift: as
is to be seen, Jam. 5.18. upon the prayer of Elias the heaven gave rain, and
the earth brought forth her fruit, after three years and a halfs drought; when
it might well have been thought that root, and fruits, and all had been dried
up, and that prayer had come too late. But that is seldom seen: as all Gods
people can say experimentally. But what shall we think of Jamblicus, Lib. 5.
cap. 27.
a Heathen Author, who has such a commendation of prayer, which might well
beseem an experienced Christian? He calls it, Rerum divinarum ducem and
lucem, copulam, qua homines cum Deo conjunguntur, the guide and light of divine
duties: the band whereby men are united to God. Nay he proceeds and says,
that prayer is clavis instar, qua Dei penetralia aperiuntur, instead of a key,
wherewith Gods cabinet is opened: and much more to the same purpose: All this
the Prophet knew full well, and therefore sets to work in good earnest: and as
when a cart is in a quagmire, if the horses feel it coming, they will pull the
harder, till they have it out: so He.

Then I said, O Lord God forgive, I beseech thee,] Sin, he knew, was their
greatest enemy; the mother of all their misery. Of that therefore he prays
for pardon, and then he knew all should be well: as when the sore is healed,
the plaster falls off. Of Christ it is said, that He shall save his people
from their sins, Mat. 1.21. as the greatest of evils: and the Church in Hosea
chap. 14.2. cries, Take away all iniquity. Feri Domine, feri, says Luther, nam
a peccatis absalutus sum. Smite me as much as thou please, now that thou have
forgiven my sins.

By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.] Here is much in few. It is Jacob,
thy confederate: and he is down upon all four: and he is but small, low and
little, and (as some render it) Quis stabit Jacobo? Behold, He whom thou love
is sick, Ioh. 11.3. They that are thine by covenant, are at a very great under:
trodden on by the bulls of Basan, as a poor shrub of the wilderness, so the
Psalmists word imports, Psalm. 102.17. Why should thou be as a man astonished,
(that knows not whether he had best help or not?) or as a mighty man that
cannot save? Jer. 14.9.
Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us; and we are called by thy Name: leave
us not. Thus the Prophets indeed prayed for their unkind countrymen: so did
Paul, Athanasius, Luther. I have obtained of God, said He, that never whilst I
live shall the Pope prevail against my country: when I am gone, let those pray
that can pray. And indeed, he was no sooner gone, but all Germany was on a
flame: Act. and Mon.
as when Austins head was laid, Hippo was soon surprised by the enemy; and when
Pareus's, Heidelberg.

Verse 3. The Lord repented for this: it shall not be, says the Lord.] Here
was mutatio rei, non Dei: facti, non consilij: a change not of Gods will, but
of his work; therefore (by way of explication) it follows, it shall not be
says the Lord. To speak properly, there can be no repentance in God, 1 Samuel
15.20. but this is spoken after the manner of men: and it notably sets forth
the power of faithful prayer, able after a sort, to alter Gods mind, and to
transfuse a dead Palsy into the hands of Omnipotency, Exodus 32.10. where God
is fain to be-speak his own freedom: and Moses is represented as the great
Chancellor of heaven.

Verse 4. And behold the Lord God,] whose Asterisk, or starry Note this behold
is, says Tarnovius, stirring up to attention. Another compares it to an hand
in the margent of a book, pointing to some notable thing. Another to the
sounding of a trumpet before some proclamation: or to the ringing of a bell
before the sermon of some famous Preacher.

the Lord God called to contend by fire,] that is, by parching heat and
drought, causing dearth, as Joel 1.19. For which purpose, God called his
Angels, those ministering spirits that execute his judgments upon the wicked
(as they did once upon Sodom) to contend for him (a metaphor from civil courts)
to plead for him by fire, to destroy the perverse Israelites by fire and
brimstone, Esaias 66.16. Ezech. 38.22.
as they had done Sodom and Gomorrah (so some interpret it according to the
letter) or by the woe of war, compared to fire, 2 King. 14.26. Esaias 26.11. as
being a misery which all words (how wide soever) want compass to express: Or,
by immoderate heat and drought, as before: so great, that it devoured the great
deep,] as that fire of the Lord in Eliah's time licked up the water that was in
the treuch, 1 King. 18.38. See Esaias 51.10.

and did eat up a part.] Or, it devoured also the field: Not only the waters,
in and under the earth, that serve to make it fruitful, but a part of the
earth it self: which was altogether above and against the common course of
nature. Kimchi.
Some render it, and did eat up that part, or that field, sc. that mentioned
verse 1. the Kings field; that as the King had chiefly offended, so he should
be principally punished. Drusius.
Other, interpret it by chap. 4.7. One piece was rained upon, and the piece
whereon it rained not, withered.

Verse 5. Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee.] See verse 2. and
persevering in prayer for the public, remember to plead, not merit but misery,
Psalm. 79.8, 9. and with all humility to acknowledge that it is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed: because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3.22.

Verse 6. The Lord repented for this,] As he is gracious, Exodus 22.27. and
quickly repents him of the evil, Joel 2.13. Redire nos, non perire desiderat.
I said, Chryselog.
I would scatter them into corners, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. Mercy could not
behold such strange wrath and cruelty, and not weep her self even sick, as it
were.

this also shall not be, says the Lord.] So ready is he to yield himself
overcome by the suits of his servants. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus. See
verse 3.

Verse 7. This he showed me, and behold,] See verse 4.

The Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumb-line, etc.] Here he was set, or
stood firm, (as the word signifies) as not to be removed from his purpose, by
any entreaties: he was fully resolved upon their ruin, and it should be done
exactly, ad amussim, by line and by rule, as it were, and with so much justice,
and most exquisite diligence, that against it should lie no manner of
exception. It is said of the Areopagites in Athens, that their sentence was so
upright, that none could ever say he was unjustly condemned of them. How much
more true is this of the righteous judgment of God, who must needs therefore
be justified and every mouth stopped? Mat. 22.12. And he was speechless,
because self-condemned Tit. 3.11. and had not what to request.

with a plumb-line in his hand] To show that he would accurately examine their
actions, and punish their pravities. (See Lam. 2.8. and 2 King. 21.13.) not
sparing them as heretofore. A heavy sentence surely Psalm. 130.3.

Verse 8. Behold I will set a plumb-line] I will call them to a strict account
and show them no favor Jer 16.13. I will now actually execute my justice which
I have hitherto suspended; and pay them home for the new and the old; bringing
upon them an evil, an only evil, without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5.

I will not again pass by them any more] A metaphor from men that pass by
such things as they slight and count inconsiderable: winking at small faults as
not worthy to be reckoned upon. Hence Mic. 7.18. God is said to pardon iniquity
and pass by transgression: as elsewhere he is said to bind them up in a
bundle, to seal them up in a bag, to cast them behind his back, to remove them
as far as the East is from the West, Psalm. 103.
so that he beholds no sin in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel Number. 23.21.
The Church, privy to her own infirmities, calls her self black Cant. 1.5. but
Christ calls her fair all over chap. 4.7. She says, God has punished us
less then our sins, Ezra 9.13. He says, She has received double for her sins
Isa. 40.1. Too much says God; too little, says She. O beautiful contention?
But this is a privilege proper to the communion of Saints, with whom God will
not deal according to the rigor of his law (as he does with the wicked) but
according to his prerogative.

Verse 9. And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate] The Edomites also
came of Isaac: but by a Synechdoche the Israelites only are here and ver. 16.
to be understood. Like as elsewhere Heber is put for the Israelites only Number.
24.24. and Joseph, for Ephraim Rev. 7.8. Some think that the high places of
Isaac are here mentioned, to show that they were erected by the people in an
apish imitation either of Beersheba where Isaac worshipped, or of mount Moriah
where Isaac should have been offered: And that Isaac is here written with Sin
and not tsadi to show that God held himself not adored, but derided by those
high places of irrision, or those ridiculous ultars, which therefore he
threateneth to desolate, and lay wast.

and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword] as a prelude to
the utter extermination of all by the Assyrians. See this fullfilled 2 King.
15.10. and chap. 17. Jeroboam was very prosperous and victorious: yet designed
to destruction. Aug. Mat. 6.30.
It is said of wicked men, that foenea quadam felicitate temporaliter floreant,
they flourish to day as grass, and to morrow are cast into the oven: and as the
mettle whereof men make glass is nearest melting when it shines brightest, so
are graceless persons nearest destruction, when at greatest luster. The Turks
observing that few of their Visiers die in their beds, Grand Sig. Serag.
have this proverb amongst them, that the greatest man is but as a statue of
glass.

Verse 10. Then Amaziah the Priest of Beth-el] Observing that the prophet had
foretold a desolation, and not prayed as before that it might be averted:
because he saw God was fully resolved, and their destruction determined.

Amos has conspired against thee in the land] Thus Eliah was the Troubler of
Israel, Jeremy a feedsman of sedition, Christ an enemy to Caesar, Luther a
trumpet of rebellion, all Contra-remonstrants, antimagistraticall. As Athaliah
cried Treason, Treason, when her self was the greatest traitor: and as in
Nero's days Sedition was unicum crimen little qui crimine vacabunt, Lipsiu^.
laid ordinarily to the charge of those that were most free from it, so was it
here. Amos bath conspired etc. whereas Amos might well have said as Latimer
did, 3 Sermon. bef. K. Ed. 6.
As for sedition, for ought that I know, methinks I should not need Christ, if
I might so say. Religion is an utter enemy to rebellion: and as there are few
conscionable Christians, (Prophets especially) that have not passed under this
calumniation: so he cannot be rightly esteemed such an one, that deserves it.
But Amazia's honor and incomes were now at stake: as he well perceived when he
heard Amos say, Go not up to Bethe-el etc. the high places of Isaac shall be
destroyed: and hence, his zeal against the Prophet, like as Erasmus told the
Electour of Saxony, that the Pope and his shavelings were therefore so sharp
set against Luther, because he lifted at the triple crown; and sought to bring
down the monks fat paunches.

the land is not able to bear all his words] his burdensome prophesies (See
Mal. 1.1. with the Note) much less can I endure them, or any faithful servant
of thine, true to his trust. Such a lying accusation we read of Esth. 3.8. made
by haughty Haman against the innocent Jews, that they kept not the kings
laws, and that therefore it were good policy to weed them out, as not to be
longer endured. So Francis King of France, desiring to excuse to the
Protestant-Princes of Germany his cruel persecution of the Lutherans in his
Kingdom, wrote to them that he looked upon them all as Anabaptists, and as
enemies to civil government: and therefore used such severity against them.
This gave occasion to Calvin to write his admirable Institutions, to vindicate
our religion from that soul aspersion: Saultet. Annal. 454.
the like divelish policy was afterward used to blanch over that horrid French
massacre. For it was given out, that the Protestants had conspired against the
King, the Queen Mother, the kings brethren, the king of Navarre, and the
Princes of the blood. There was also coin stamped in memory of the matter, in
the forepart whereof with the kings picture was this inscription, Virtus in
rebels: Cambd. Elisab. 163.
and on the other side, Pietas excitavit justitiam: Piety has stirred up
justice. Here was a fair glove drawn upon a foul hand: and this they learned
of the devil, who was first a slanderer and then a murderer: as those that
have a mind to kill another man's dog, make the world believe he was mad first,
that they may do it with the better pretext.

Verse 11. For thus Amos says, Jereboam shall die by the sword etc.] When did
Amos say so? he said indeed that the house of Jeroboam should be smitten with
the sword ver. 9. and this Amaziah maliciously transferreth to the person of
Jeroboam, the more to enrage him against the Prophet: whom therefore he names
once and again, to create him the more displeasure. That Jeroboam died by the
sword, we read not, but that his son Zechary was slain, and his house
destroyed in the next generation we find 2 King. 15. according to Amos his
Prophecy. But to color this calumny, some truth shall be admingled.

and Israel shell surely be led away captive] This indeed the Prophet had often
affirmed, (though not in any of those three last visions) and it proved too
true: but because Amos says so, he must pass for a traitor against the
majesty both of the king and of the people. What an impudent sycophant was
this? The king and people are pretended: and what good subject can endure it?
but that which irked him was, that his own authority was by this plain-dealing
Prophet impaired, and his gain like to be lessened, if the superstition of
Bethel were thus decried. It is said of Phlugius and Sidonius (authors of the
Interim in Germany) that among other points of Popery therein defended, they
spoke much for Chrisme and extreme unction, ut ipsi discederent unctores,
Melch. Adam.
that thereby they might hold fat bishoprics. Such arguments prevail much
with all self-seekers, whose covetousness and ambition usually ride without
reins, and over whose neck it mattereth not.

Veese 12. Also Amaziah said unto Amos] After he had maliciously misinformed
the king, but prevailed not; so God would have it, in whose heart is the kings
hand, and who rebukes even kings for their sakes, saying, Do my Prophets no
harm. O thou Seer] Fair words; the better to insinuate. Mel in ore, verba
lactis:
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
Some think he calls the Prophet thus by way of jeare, quasi fatidicum aut
fanaticum, as a fortune tellers or distracted. Others, that he gives the
Prophet good words, and seems to give him good counsel, as fearing the
people, (...) ligam fecit.
with whom Amos was in some credit: and therefore the king was told of a
conspiracy against him in the midst of the house of Israel, verse. 10.

Flee-thee away into the land of Judah] Age. fuge: as a friend wrote to
Brentius, when he was in danger to be surprised by the Emperors Agent, Melch.
Adam. in vita Brent.
Fuge, fuge Brenti cito, citius, citissime, Fly for thy life, have, have,
have. So the Pharisees (for no great love, be sure, but only to be fairly rid
of him) came and said to Christ, Get thee out and depart hence: for Herod will
kill thee Luke 13.31.

into the land of Judah] This he speaks scornfully, q. d. we are not good
enough for you? you are so strict etc. Mercer.


and there eat bread, and prophecy there] Invidiose omnia and contemptim
dicit: If you stay hear, you may hap to starve for it. Away therefore into
your own country: and there make thee a living by prophesying. He seems to
measure Amos by himself: as if he were of those that prophesied, for an
handful of harly, and a morsel of bread, Ezekiel. 13.19. Mic. 3.11. and as a
certain Popish Priest confessed concerning himself and his symmists, We preach
the gospel said he, tantum ut nos pascat and vestiat, only to pick a living
out of it.

Verse 13. But prophecy not any more at Bethel] Take heed of that: lest, by
diffusing too much light amongst us, thou mar our markets, and hinder the
sale of our false wares. This was the naked truth of the business: though
something else was pretended, and the kings interest pleaded.

for it is the kings chapel, and the kings court] Touch these mountains and
they will smoke, Truth is a good mistress, but such of her servants as follow
her too close at heels, may hap to have their teeth struck out. Ahab hates
Michaiah: and Herod, John Baptist, and the Pope Savanarola, for their plain
dealing, laying them fast enough for it. (...).
Great ones love it (...) they must hear pleasing things: or, if told of their
faults, it must be done with silken words, as She said. They are usually beset
with their Aiones and Negones as One has it, Bucloc.
that will say as they say: and mirifica est sympathia inter magnates and
parasitos, and there is a wonderful sympathy betwixt kings and
court-parasites, as was betwixt Ahab and the false prophets. Few Vespasian^ are
to be found (of whom as it was said, that he was the only One who was made the
better man by being made Emperor, so) Quintilian commends him for this, that
he was patientissimus very most patient of truth, though never so sharp.
Jeroboam was none such: or at least Amaziah the Priest of Bethel would make the
Prophet so believe, when he tells him it is the kings court, an ill air for
truth to breath in. Nihil veritate gravius, nihil assentatione suavius.

Verse 14. Then answered Amos and said to Amaziah] With no less courage, So
Ioh. 1.19.21.
I suppose, then Paul and Barnabas used to the stubborn Jews Act, 13.46. or
Basil to Valent the Emperor, or Johannes Sarisburiensis to the Pope Anno 154.
or Bishop Ridly, when offering to preach before the Lady Mary, and receiving a
repulse, he was brought by Sr. Thomas Wharton her servant to the dining place
and desired to drink. Which after he had done, he paused a whille looking very
sadly: and suddenly brake out into these words. Surely I have done amiss: why
so? quoth the knight: for I have drunk, said He, in that place where Gods word
offered has been refused: whereas if I had remembered my duty, I had departed
immediately and shaken off the dust of my shoes; Act. and Mon. fol: 1270.
for a testimony against this house. These words were by the said Bishop spoken
with such a vehemence, that some of the hearers afterward confessed the hairs
to stand upright on their heads.

I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son] Neither born, nor bred a
Prophet: neither have I rashly or ambitiously put my self upon this tremend
employment: my call thereto was extraordinary. The Prophets scholars were
called their sons 2 King. 2.3, 5, 7, 15. Esa. 8.18. Mar. 10.24. 1 Cor. 4.14, 17.

but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sicomore fruit] Of mean condition,
and hardly bred; so that I could live with a little, and needed not to turn
Prophet ventris causa, for food sake. When one said to the Philosopher, If you
will but please Dionysius, you need not feed upon green herbs, he presently
replied, And if you can feed upon green herbs, Melch. Adam.
you need not please Dionysius. Nature is content with a little, grace with
less. It is not for a servant of God to be a slave to his palate: Luther made
many a meal of a herring.

Verse 15. And the Lord took me, as I followed the flock] As he took Elisha
from the plow-taile, the Apostles from casting and mending their nets etc.
Asinos elegit Christus and idiotas, sed ^culdvit in prudentes: simulque dona
dedit, and ministeria, he called them to the office, and withal he gifted
them. He called also learned Nathaneel, and Nicodemus, a Master in Israel:
lest, if he had called none but such as were simple, (says Ioh. de
Turrecremata) it should have been thought, they had been deceived, through
their simplicity. But it is Gods way to choose the foolish things of the world,
to confound the wise; and things that are not, to bring to naught things that
are, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29.

and the Lord said unto me,] He often inculcates the Name of the Lord, to show
that there was a necessity of his prophesying: for who can safely disobey such
a commander. See chap. 3.8. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. The Philosopher could
tell the Emperor, who challenged him to dispute, that there was no contesting
with Him that had twenty Legions at his command.

Go prophecy unto my people Israel.] Keep within my precincts, and thou shall
be sure of my protection: be true to thy trust, and I will see to thy safety.
If thou have not fine manchet (as Bucer said to Bradford, encouraging him to
bestow his talent in preaching) yet give the poor people barley-bread, or what
ever else the Lord has committed unto thee. Having therefore such a call from
heaven to this work, Act. and Mon. 1454.
with what face can thou hinder me therein? with what countenance will ye
appear before the judgment seat of Christ (said Dr. Taylour Martyr to Stephen
Gardener, Lord Chancellor, who had thus saluted him, Art thou come, thou
villain? how dare thou look me in the face for shame? know thou not who I
am, etc?) How dare ye for shame look any Christian man in the face, seeing you
have forsaken the truth, denied our Savior Christ and his word, Ibid. 1387.
and done contrary to your own oath and writing. And, if I should be afraid of
your Lordly looks, why fear you not God, the Lord of us all? who has sent us
on his errand, which we must deliver, and truth be spoken, however it be taken,
1 Cor. 9.16.

Verse 16. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord,] Hear, thou despiser
and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in thy days, a work which thou will
in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto thee, Acts 13.41. But whether
thou will hear, or forbear, believe or otherwise, thy doom is determined, and
shall be pronounced. Hear, therefore, and give ear: be not proud, Ezekiel. 3.27.
for the Lord has spoken it. Oh that thou would give glory to the Lord, and
confess thy sin! Oh that thou would submit to Divine justice, implore his
mercy, Jer. 13.15, 16.
and putting thy mouth in the dust, say as once that good man did, Veniat,
veniat, verbum Domini, Melc. Ad.
and submittemus, ei sexcenta si nobis essent eolla. Let the Lord speak, for
his servant hears! But because there is little hopes of that, stand forth and
hear thy sentence, and the evil that shall befall thee, as sure as the coat is
on thy back, or the heart in thy body. For has the Lord spoken, and shall he
not do it?

Thou say prophecy not,] By a bold countermand to that of God in the former
verse. Go, prophecy, etc. But we to him that striveth with his maker: Esaias
45.9.
let the potsherd strive with the p^tsherds of the earth, let men meddle with
their matches, Eccles. 6.10,
and not with him that is mightier then they.

and drop not thy word,] which is as sharp as vinegar, and nitre. Or, though it
were as sweet as honey, yet it would cause pain to exulcerate parts, when
dropped upon them.

against the house of Isaac.] though commanded so to do verse 9. Toothlesse
truths would be better disgested.

Verse 17. Therefore thus says the Lord, Thy wife, etc.] Thou shall be sure
of thy share in the common calamity, which thou will not hear of; but thou
shall hear and be ashamed, etc. Esaias 26.11. So little is gotten by thwarting
with God, and seeking to frustrate his counsel. With these froward pieces, God
will show himself froward: and if they walk contrary to him, he will also walk
as cross to them: he will tame such sturdy rebels, as he did Pharaoh, Psalm.
16. Lev. 26.
and that way raise him a name: all they shall get by him is but more weight of
punishment; as when Jeboiakim had burnt Jeremies roll of curses, all that he
gained, was that the roll was renewed, and there were added besides thereunto,
many like words, Jer. 36.32. See the like, Ier. 20.2. 1 King. 13.4. and 22.25.
Acts 5.38, 39. Dum devit^tur impletur.
The counsel of God (says Gregory) whiles shunned, is executed: the wisdom of
man may wriggle, but cannot escape.

Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city,] a common strumpet, Kimchi.
for a punishment of thy spiritual harlotry; Rev. 2.20
together with thy seducing my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto idols.

Or, Per vim stuprabitur.
thy wife shall be an harlot,] that is, she shall be ravished by the enemy
before thy face; so Theodoret, Calvin, Mercer, etc. See Esaias 13.16. Lam. 5.11.
The Irish rebels bound the husband to the bed-post, whiles they abused his wife
before his face.

And thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword,] because thou have
taken my sons and my daughters, and these have thou sacrificed unto devils to
be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou have slain my
children, and brought them forth to the murderer? Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. that thou
have sent so many souls to hell, Peremptores potius quam parents. Bern.
and nuzled up thine own sons and daughters in ignorance and superstition,
being therein, rather a parricide then a parent?

Thy land shall be divided by line,] thy purchases shall be parted among the
enemies: Virg. Eclog.
thine ill-gotten riches shall be made a spoil to the soldier. Impius haec,
etc.

and thou shall die in a polluted land,] i. e. In Assyria, filled with the
uncleanness of the inhabitants, from corner to corner, as Canaan was, Ezra
9.11. Lev. 26.38. Here thou shall die for thine abominable idolatries, to thy
great regret. Seldom do such escape the visible vengeance of God, as by
virulent tongues, or violent hands persecute his true Prophets. Whether Amos
for his boldness was first scourged by Amaziah, and then wounded to death by
his son Vzziah (as some will) is uncertain.

and Israel shall surely,] though thou would not believe it, verse 11.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. THus has the Lord God showed unto me,] viz. in this fourth vision,
whereby (for better assurance, and to shake them out of their desperate
security) Isreal's utter ruin is again foretold, by a lively type, which is
here, 1. propounded; 2. expounded, verse 3, 5. that he may run that reads it,
and none may fall, but with open eyes. Hab. 2.2.


And behold a basket] made up happily in the form of a dog, as the word Calub
seems to import.

of Summer-fruits,] Heb. of Summer; that is, of that which the summer
affords: toward the end of it especially, when fruits ripen, and even fall
into the hand of the gatherer. The summer it self has its denomination from a
root that signifies to awaken: Schindler. Pagnin.
because then the fruits and flowers, that seemed to be asleep all winter-long,
do awake, as it were, and show themselves.

Verse 2. Amos, what see thou?] This the Lord asks, to stir up attention
and affection in the Prophet; who might happily need as much to be arroused, as
Zachary in like case did, chap. 4.1. with whom it fared as with a drowsy
person, who though awaked and set to work, is ready to sleep at it.

and I said, A basket of Summer-fruit,] Apples, says Jerome, figs, say others:
and why not as well grapes ripened in the Summer-sun-shine? Rev. 14.20. and
19.15.
Whereby the Holy Ghost in the Revelation, describes such as are ready ripe
for the wine press of Gods wrath? Nahum compares them to stubble, laid out in
the Sun a-drying, that it may burn the better, (...)
Nah. 1.10.

The end is come upon my people,] An elegancy in the Original beyond
Englishing: the Latin Interpreters have (some of them) assayed the like, but
they fall far short of it. The Old Testament is full of such Agnominations:
and God seems delighted with them. See Jer. 1.11, 12. and 48.2. and 47.43,
44. Lam. 3.47. Amos 5.5. Mic. 1.10, 14. Zeph. 2.4. Exodus 2.10. Genesis 3.20. and
4.1, 25. and 5.29. and 17.5. and 21.5, 6, etc. There is a pedantique style, and
a majestic: an effeminate eloquence, and a manly. This latter is lawful, and
may very well become the man of God; who yet must not wit-wanton it in
weightiest matters; but shun those more gay and lighter flashes, and
flourishes, wherewith the emptiest Celles affect to be most fraught: as they,
who for want of wares in their shops, set up painted blocks to fill up vacant
shelves, as One well expresses it.

The end is come upon my people,] Exitus and exitium. As the summer is the end
of the year, and the time of ripening fruits: so, now that this people are ripe
for ruin, An end is come, is come, is eome, it watches for them, behold it is
come, Ezekiel. 7.6, 7. even the precise time and term of their final overthrow.

I will not again pass by them any more.] See chap. 7.8. God can pass by,
that is, pardon his people better then any other, Mic. 7.18. Ephesians. 6.
(like as they that are born of God, and partake of the Divine nature, can bear
wrongs best of any: compel them to go a mile, they will be content, if it may do
good, to go two: yea as far as the shoos of the preparation of the Gospel of
peace will carry them.) But as the Saints of God may not be therefore injured
(which was Iulians jearing cruelty) because they are meek: so must not God be
presumed upon and provoked; because he is merciful. There is mercy with him,
that he may be feared, says the Psalmist: for abused mercy turns into fury:
and opportunities of grace are often so headlong, that if once past, they are
irrecoverable. Woe be to that people, or person, to whom God shall say, I will
not again pass by you any more.

Verse 3. And the songs of the temple shall be howlings,] Heb. shall howl,
shall be turned into the black-santis, as they call it, (cantus in planctum
laetitia in lachrymas) such as I hate, chap. 5.23. and feel it grating mine
ears, as an harmonia discors.

there shall be many dead bodies in every place.] Either through pestilence,
or sword. Others read it thus. In every place it shall be said, Proijce, sile,
Out with them, Make no words: an earnest Aposiopesis (See chap. 6.10. with the
Note.) q. d. Patiently acquiesce in the just judgment of so mighty a God. Or,
throw these dead bodies into pits, and say nothing: lest we be sequestered as
unclean by the law. It is no small misery to be under hard and heavy crosses,
and yet to be forced to dissemble and suppress them; to bite in pain, and to
digest grief, as horses do their choler, by biting on the bridle. I was dumb
with silence, says David, I held my peace even from good, that is, from just
defense, but my sorrow was stirred thereby; my sore was exulcerate, renewed,
(as the Greek there says) and increased, Psalm. 39.2. Give sorrow a vent, and
it will wear away.

Verse 4. Hear this, ye that swallow up the needy,] that soop them up, as
drink, (our word soop, seems to come of the Hebrew Shaaph) that would make but
a breakfast, nay but a bit of them: that would swallow them at once down their
wide gullets, and do, for that purpose, pant and even faint, as well-nigh
windlesse, after them, to devour them. Hence they are called, Man-eaters,
Cannibals, Psalm. 14.4. See chap. 2.7. with the Note.

even to make the poor of the land to fail.] Heb. the meek of the land. Poverty
should meeken and tame men's spirits: howbeit some are humbled, but not humble:
low, but not lowly. Those that are both, are often oppressed by the Great Ones of
the earth: and even devoured, as the lesser fish are by the bigger. Ye have
condemned and killed the just, says St. James to the wicked rich men of his
time, and he does not resist you, chap. 5.6. He only commits his cause to
him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. and indeed he need do no more then
so: for God is the poor-mans king, as James the fifth of Scotland was termed
for his charity: yea, he is the worlds refuge, Awlen Penaugh, as the great Turk
vaingloriously styles himself, and would have the world to take notice, that
such poor people as lament to him, shall be relieved by him, although his
ministers fail them, or abuse them, through their injustice, to make the poor
of the land fail. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy,
now will I arise, says the Lord. I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him, Psalm. 12.5. Neither does God say it only, (though that were
sufficient) but swear it too in this chapter, yea in this text (the two next
following verses are put in as by a parenthesis) and these Cormorants are
called upon to hear it, and not to pass it by with a deaf ear, tanquam monstra
marina, as such kind of creatures use to do.

Verse 5. Saying, when will the New Mood be gone, etc.] O, what a weariness it
is I and ye have snuffed at it, Mal. 1.13. See the Note there. This ye have
said, or thought at least: and God knows the language of your hearts. He
presses upon no man; neither will he accept of that service that is pressed,
out of people, as verjuice out of a crab. All his saints are free-hearted Psalm.
110.3. all his soldiers volunteeres: The sabbath they call Desiderium dierum.
they welcome the sabbath, as that holy man did, who went forth to meet and
salute it with Veni sponsa mea, Come my sweet spouse, I have dearly longed for
thee. They also pass it over with singular delight, Esaias. 58.13. walking into
Christ's garden of spiritual duties, whereof there is so great variety for the
good soul to breath it self in and not be sated: Cant. 2.
and then are taken into Christ's wine-cellar, 1 Cor. 2.
and (after an holy manner) inebriated with divine consolations: such as the
cock on the dunghill knows not, such as pass all carnal men's understanding.
They find no more relish in holy days and duties, then they do in the white
of an egg or in a dry chip: the work they do at such times, for fashion-sake
or fear of law etc. is dead work, as the Apostle calls it: they sit in the
stocks when they are at prayers, and come out of the Church when the tedious
sermon runs somewhat beyond the hour, as prisoners do out of a jayle etc. they
cannot tell how to wear out the sabbath, which therefore they wish over, and
constantly violate either by corporal labor, or else (which is as bad, or
worse) by spiritual idleness. Full ill would these men addere de profano ad
sacrum, (as the Jews say we should do,) Buxtorf. Synag. Jud.
pronouncing those happy, that begin the sabbath with those of Tiberias, and
end it with those of Tsepphore (the former began it sooner then others, the
later continued it longer. Full ill would they have liked our King Edgars law,
Act. and Mon.
that Sunday should be solemnized from Saturday nine of the clock till Monday
morning. Full loath would these men be to beg David's office out of his hand, of
being a doore-keeper in Gods house: that is, to be first in and last out. And
what would they do to keep an everlasting sabbath in heaven, that are so
troubled, and even tired out with so short an attendance on the Lord's Day: not
without a world of wilful distractions, such as spoil and fly-blow their
performances, so that they stink in the nostrils of the Almighty.

and the sabbath] Not the sabbath of the seventh year (called Shemittah
Remission Levit. 25.) as some would have it meant: but the weekly sabbath,
which the unrighteous Mammonists here cry out of, as if on that day the Sun
proceeded a flower pace then on others; and they greatly grutcht lucellum suum
Dei cultui cedere that God should be served, to their disadvantage. Their
fingers therefore itch to be setting out corn: and they as dearly desire it as
David did once to come and appear before the Lord. O rus, quand^ te aspiciam?
Horat.
As He had his, when shall I come, by way of wish Psalm. 42.3. so they had their
When shall we fell corn? when shall we set forth wheat? Surely as David's soul
longed sore to go forth unto Absalom 2 Samuel 13.39. so that he could have found
in his heart, but for stark shame, to have gone himself and fetched him home:
so was it with these gripple corn-masters, these frumenti corrasores and veluti
corrosores Prove. 11.26. They had a good mind to have been doing on the
New-moones and sabbaths, Exodus 20.8. and 34, 21. Lev. 23.3. Neh. 10.32. and
13.15. etc. Number. 10.1. 2 Samuel 20.5.
but that they were flatly forbidden by the law, made on purpose for these
lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9. these masterless monsters, these yokeless
Belialists, to be to them as chains and shackles, to confine them (as Solomon's
command did Shimei, that they may not leap over the pale after profit and
pleasure, or if they do, they may dye for it,) Esaias 66.23. it is prophesied
that, in the restitution of the church from one new mood to another, and from
one sabbath to another (as often as they come) without tire-somenesse, all flesh
shall come to worship before the Lord, they shall call the sabbath a delight,
the holy of the Lord, honorable, Esaias. 58.13. be rapt and ravished in spirit
Rev. 1.10. be in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the holy Ghost all
the day long, Epist. 3. ad Magnes.
(...), as Ignatius has it. Sabbatize spiritually, rejoicing in divine
meditations. This well practiced would take men off from the worlds tastelesse
fooleries (as his mouth will not water after homely provisions, that has
lately tasted of delicate sustenance) It would also blessedly free them from
those many foolish and hurtful lusts 1 Timothy 6.9. those heavy sorrows and
self-created miseries, wherewith covetous caytiffes pierce them selves
thorough, gall and gore-their own hearts and trouble their own houses verse.
10. taking no more rest, then if upon a rack, or bed of thorns.

making the Ephah small and the shekel great] Selling by small measures, but
for great rates: which was directly against the law Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14. and that
golden Rule of right, the standard of equity, the royal law of liberty Mat.
7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets: this is the sum of what they have said, for
duties of the second table.

and falsifying the balances by deceit] Heb. preverting the balances of
deceit, that is (by a metonymie as Job. 22.6.) making those that were right,
deceitful. See Prove. 20.10, 23. with the Notes there. Such falsifiers are
counted no better then Canaanites Hos. 12.7. and shall have small joy of their
cursed hoards of evil gotten goods.

Verse 6. That we may buy the poor for silver etc.] Thus the poor always pay
for it: the modest and mild poor, especially as ver. 4. Hence Poor and
afflicted are put for one and the same Zeph. 3.12. and to want, and to be
abased Philip. 4.12. they that want shall be sure to be abased and abused by
the wretched rich, who will ever go over the hedge where it is lowest, and
catch the poor by drawing him into the nets Psalm. 10.9. that is into their
debts, bonds, and mortgages, and at length making such their bondmen, by abuse
of that permission Lev. 25.39. See chap. 2.3.

yea and sell the refuse of the wheat] Quisquilias, the husks, more fit for
pigs or poultrey; hardly man's meat, and yet held good enough for the poor:
deciduum p^^^ gamenta, the offall.
although their flesh was as the flesh of their brethren, and their children,
as their children Neh. 5.5. however they used them. How far were these rich
wretches from considering the poor as David's blessed man Psalm. 41.1. and as
Dr. Taylour the Martyr did; whose custom was once in a fortnight at least to
go to poor men's houses, look into their cupbords, see how they fared, and what
they lacked: Act. and Mon.
that he might either make or procure them a supply from such as were better
able?

Verse 7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob] i. e. by himself the
matter of Jacobs chief boasting, there being no God like unto their God (their
enemies themselves being judges Deuteronomy. 32.31.) neither any nation so great as to
have God so nigh unto them as Israel had, in all things that they called upon
him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7. So that this oath of God grates upon their Ingratitude for
such imparallel privileges, and it is uttered in great wrath, as appears by
the following angry Aposiopesis (wherein the Apodosis is not set down but
understood.)

If I ever forget any of their workes] forget to punish them. These oaths cum
reticentia are very dreadful. Psalm. 95.
Take heed lest by stubbornness we provoke God to swear in his wrath that we
shall not enter into his nest. Take heed lest a promise of entering being left
us, and a profer made us, we should seem to come short of it, Heb. 4.1. (...)
to come lag or late, a day after the fair, an hour after the feast. God is
now more quick and peremptory then ever in rejecting men that neglect so great
salvation Heb. 2.3. the time is shorter, he will not wait so long as he was
wont to do. Mar. 16.16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: he that believes not, shall
be damned. Surely God will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness:
Romans 9.28.
because a short work will he make in the earth. The time is short, says the
Apostle 1 Cor. (...)
7.29. a metaphor (say some) from a piece of cloth rolled up, only a little
left at the end. Let us therefore fear (as the same Apostle infers upon the
consideration of Gods oath Heb. 3.18. with 4.1.) and let our fear not weaken
but waken our diligence in well-doing, lest he swear and repent not, lest be
come to a resolution and decree (Gods oath is nothing else but his inviolable
and invariable decree) to cast us off, as he did Saul, for his wilful
disobedience 1 Samuel 15. Saul lived long after his utter rejection, and men
could see no alteration in his outward condition: but God had sworn, as here,
never to forget any of his works. Now says Samuel to him (and it is fearful)
the Eternity of Israel (the Excellency of Jacob) will not lie, nor repent: for
he is not a man that he should repent. 1 Samuel 15.29.
Do not think this a case that seldom comes: it is done every day upon some or
other, says a great Divine: but woe be to that man upon whom it is done: it
had been much better for him that he had not been born, Mat. 26.24. Oh consider
this all ye that forget God. lest he swear by his excellency, Surely I will
never forget any of your works.

Verse 8. Shall not the land tremble for this?] q. d. So great are the
oppressions here exercised, that the very axletree of the earth is even ready
to crack under them. Amaziah, that hedge-priest of Bethel, had said of our
Prophet, that the land was not able to bear all his words, chap. 7.10. but
Amoz more truly affirms, that the land trembled under their many and mighty
sins, and could bear them no longer: the earthquake fell out about this time
Am. 1.1. and it was a just wonder, that the earth had not opened her wide
mouth, and swallowed them all up quick into hell as Numb. 16.31, 32. Called
therefore (...).
and as it did a great part of the city of Antioch Anno. 527. for their
horrible heresies and blasphemies there held and broached by her bishops.

and every one mourn] i. e. smart, till they mourn. National sins bring
national plagues. The Hebrews hold that there is not a worse sin then
Oppression: St. James says, that it it cries to heaven, and enters into the
ears of the Lord of sabbath Jam. 5.4. who will not fa^le to hear, for the is
gracious Exodus 22.

and it shall rise up wholly as a slood] i. e. The land shall rise up, shall
seem to do so, when it is sloated and over-covered with water: as the sluggards
field is said to rise up or ascend with thorns, that is to be overgrown
therewith. Here then is threatened an overflowing scourge, an universal
destruction covering the face of the country, as Nilus does a great part of
the land of Egypt every year, leaving much mud behind it: whereof see Pliny
and other Authors. Mercer thinks the words would be best read by
interrogation, as the former, thus, and shall it not rise up wholly as a flood?
q. d. shall it not be turned into a large lake, as once Sodom and her sisters
were for like cruelties to the poor? Ezech. 16.

Verse 9. And it shall come to pass in that day etc.] Here the Lord
threateneth (says Mr. Diodate) to encumber the land with horrible and
mournful calamities, when it shall be least thought of. Earthquakes,
inundations, sudden and dreadful darknesses are sure effects and signs of
Gods heavy displeasure against men's sins Psalm. 18.8, 12. Lively.
Mat. 24. Luke 21. Jocl. 2.10. as Another notes. See a like text, Jer. 15.8,
9. and promise contrary to this threat Job. 18.5, 6.

I will cause the sun to go down at noon] A sudden change, as was at Sodom:
the Sun was fair risen upon it that very day that it was destroyed in, Genesis
19.23, 24. as at Babylon, when surprised by Cyrus, they could not at first
believe their own calamity: as it was with Jerusalem often, and shall be with
Rome Rev. 18.7, 8. She says in her heart, I shall see no sorrow. Therefore
shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning and famine etc. to
confute their fond conceit of an eternal Empire. For when they shall say Peace
and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3. Philosophers say,
that before a snow, the weather will be warmish: when the wind lies, the great
rain falls: and the fair weather made before him, till the instant that he
was drowned in the sea. Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and other tyrants were smitten
in the height of their pride, and ruff of their iollity. Jerusalem had three
years great plenty before her last destruction, of which some interpret this
Text. Those seven once flourishing Churches of Asia, how glorious and
resplendent were they till they had sinned away their light? The same might be
said of many others: and who knows how soon it may be said also of us? who
knows whether we be not even now, upon the very Tropikes and turning-points of
time? Surely Gods patience toward us quo diuturnior eo minacior, the longer it
lasts the more evil is toward us, if we abuse it. If in a land of light we
love darkness better then light, we may soon have enough of it. Solemn in
Britannia non occidere nec resurgere retulii Tacitus. In vit. Agricol.
Tacitus tells us that at some time of the year, the Sun seems neither to
rise nor fall in this country: but so lightly to pass from us in the night,
that you can scarce discern day from night. Of England for this many years it
may be said, as Solinus does of the Rhodes, Polyhistor.
that it is semper in Sole sita ever in the Sun. How long it shall be so, He
alone knows that knows all. Walk whiles ye have the light: and pray that God
would discloud these gloomy days with the beams of his mercy, and not cause
our Sun to go down at noon, nor our land to be darkened in the clear day. Oh
stop this Sun of righteousness posting (as it may seem) from us (when the
blind man cried lustily, Jesus though journying stood still) stay him by your
importunities, as those two did at Emaus and say, Vespera jam venit; nobiscum,
Christ maneto,
Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam.


Verse 10. And I will turn your feasts into mourning] Whether your idolatrous
feasts and temple-musick whereby you vainly conceit to be secured from danger,
saying, Is not the Lord amongst us? what evil can come unto us. Or your common
feasts, whereat you have songs to cheer you up, and so to put sorrow from your
hearts, and evil from your flesh, nourishing your selves as in a day of
slaughter, or good cheer Jam. 5.5. All shall be turned into mourning, funeral
mourning, see ver. 3.

and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loynes] for a token of your great
grief, as the custom then was, and is still for mourning-weedes. The Hebew
word sack is the same in almost all languages: which shows that the Hebrew is
the mother of all the rest, says Mercer.

and baldness upon every head] you shall pull off your hair for grief; Or,
because they had learned of the Heathens their neighbors, in token of
lamentation, to shave their heads Ezech. 7.18. Jer. 48.37. and beards too Isa.
15.2. which yet was forbidden them to do, Lev. 19.27. and 21, 9. unless it
were to show their sorrow for sin Esa. 22.12.

and I will make it as the mourning of an only son] which was very bitter Jer.
6.26. Zech. 12.10. The loss of a loving yoke fellow is more grievous then that
of a son: but to father and mother together nothing more bitter then luctuosa
foecunditas ( Laeta's case in Hierome) to bury many children, and especially to
bury all in One.

and the end thereof as a bitter day] Thereof, that is, either of that land, or
of that lamentation, there shall be bitterness in the end. So the Poet Nunc
and amara dies, and noctis amarior umbra est; Tioul. lib: 2.

Omnia jam tristi tempora fell madent.
How could it be otherwise then extreme bitter with this people, when heaven
and earth conspired to punish them? neither had they the good word of God
(called the word of his patience, Rev. 3.10.
written on purpose that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures
might have hope Romans 15.4. that out of those breasts of consolation we might
suck and be satisfied, Esa. 66.11.) to succor them and keep from swooning
Psalm. 119.92. And this was the greatest plague of all the rest: and is
therefore reserved to the last place, deterrima tanquam colophon, as a most sad
catastrophe.

Verse 11. Behold the days come] Behold it; for it is a just wonder: the Lord
creates a new thing in the earth, when Israel should want the word; Israel to
whom were committed the oracles of God, Israel to whom God had spoken by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which had been since the world began, Luc. 1.70.
in a sweet succession: See my True treasure page 3.4. He made known his ways
to Moses, his acts and monuments to the children of Israel. Psalm. 103.7.
Yet even these who had the cornu-copia of Gods word shall now suffer a famine
of it: they shall have cause to ^ry out, We see not our signs, there is no
more any Prophet, neither is there amongst us any that knows how long, Psalm.
74.9. the word of God shall be precious, 1 Samuel 3.
and they shall be hard put to it to come by it; Amaziah and his accomplices shall
not need to pack away the Prophets, as chap. 7.12. and to bid them go preach
elsewhere: the law shall be no more, the Prophets also shall find no vision
from the Lord Lam. 2.9.

that I will send a famine in the land] Heb. I will let it out (sc. out of my
treasury of plagues where I have it ready, and desirous to be a broad) and turn
it loose, (...) Septuag.
which before I kept up, as a wild beast, that it might not hurt nor destroy in
all mine holy mountain: now it shall out amongst you, and the devil with it,
Rev. 12.12. with hell at the heels of it.

not a famine of bread] though that is very grievous, Lam. 1.11, 19. and 2.12,
20. and 4.4, 9. and 5.16. and puts people to many hard straits and extremities
(as were easy to instance) even to the eating of one another.

nor a thirst for water] a torment more intolerable then the former. Lysimachus
to save his life parted with his kingdom for a draught of water.

But of hearing the word of the Lord,] which is pabulum animae the souls proper
food, such as she cannot live without: but when God sees his oracles
vilipended and lying under the table, it is just with him to call to the enemy
to take away. It was so with those seven churches of Asia among many others; as
also with those of Africa that vast Continent (thrice as large as Europe) in
all which there is not any region entirely possessed by Christians, but the
kingdom of Habassia: for as for the large region of Nubia, which had from the
Apostles time (as it is thought) professed the Christian faith, it has again
above an hundred years since forsaken it, and embraced instead of it, partly
Mahumetanisme, and partly Idolatry; and that by the most miserable occasion
that might be, viz. famine of the word of God, for lack of Ministers. For, as
Alvarez has recorded, at his being at the king of Habassia's court, Hist.
Ethiop. cap. 37.
there were Ambassadors out of Nubia, to entreat him for a supply of ministers
to instruct their nation, and to repair Christianity, gone to ruin amongst
them; but they were rejected.

Verse 12. And they shall wander from sea to sea,] Trouble themselves to no
purpose, take pains (as Esau did for venison, but lost his labor) run to all
coasts and quarters to seek the word of the Lord.

and shall not find it] And why, they despised it when it was in their power;
they rejected the counsel of God against themselves with those Lawyers, Luke
7.30. He would have gathered them, but they would not be gathered; he would
have purged them, but they would not be purged; Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. they are
therefore miserable by their own election: as Saul was, who slighted Samuel
whiles he was alive, and would have been full glad of his counsel when he was
dead. He that would not once worship God in Samuel, worships at length Samuel
in Satan; and no marvel. Satan was now become his refuge, and preaches his
funeral: his Vrim now was darkness, his Prophet a ghost: O woeful condition.
But what should a parent do when the child loathes and spils his victuals?
snatch it from him, and lay it out of his reach. Samaria felt this worser
famine, when carried captive especially: so did Jerusalem, after Malachi, whose
prophecy the Jews fitly call Chathimath Chazon the sealing up of vision. Bath
Chol, or the Echo from heaven they had now and then after this time, Mat.
2.17. Joh. 12.28 they had also the writings of Moses, and the Prophets
interpreted after a sort by the Scribes and Pharisees, whom (whiles they sat
close in Moses chair, and kept it warm) men were bound to to hear, Mat. 23.2,
3. which because Dives did not, he suffered hunger and thirst in hell for ever,
Luke 16.24. And had he been granted the liberty of hearing again upon earth but
one more sermon, how far would not he gladly have gone for it? and how, as
for life, would he have listened to it? But this could not possibly be, for out
of hell there is no redemption, Psalm. 49.8, 9. and when the night of death once
comes, men can work no more. Night is a time not of doing work, but of
receiving wages; up therefore and be doing, whiles it is yet day, Joh. 12.35,
36. seek ye the Lord while he may be found, Esaias 55.6. seek him seasonably,
seek him seriously: Then shall ye seek me and find me, when ye shall search for
me with all your heart, Jer. 29.13. That was a dismal doom that our Savior
passed upon those stiff-necked Jews and uncircumcised in heart and ears, (as
Saint Steven rightly styles them, Act. 7.51.) that were as good at resisting
the Holy Ghost as ever their fathers had been before them. Ye shall seek me,
and yet shall die in your sins: whither I go ye cannot come, Joh. 8.21. Ye
shall wander up and down for meat, making a noise like an hungry dog, and
grudge that ye be not satisfied, Psalm. 59.14, 15. Do not the miserable Jews do
so all the world over to this day, expecting their Messiah? quem tantis
ululatibus exposcunt, throwing open their windows to behold him, and praying
for the rebuilding of their Temple thus, Templum tuum brevi, valde cito,
Buxtorf. Synag. Ind. cap. 13.
valde cito, in diebus nostris citissime, nunc aedisica templum tuum brevi,
etc. Merciful God, great God, bountiful God, beautiful God, sweet God, mighty
God, thou God of the Jews, now build thy Temple, do it shortly, suddenly,
quickly, very quickly, very quickly, very quickly, even in our days, now, this
day before the next, etc. Ah poor creatures! they would not, when time was,
know in that their day the things which belonged to their peace; therefore to
this day they are hid from their eyes, and wrath is come upon them to the
utmost. Luke 19.42.
Alterius perditio tua sit cautio, Let their harms be our warning, not to
stand out the day of grace, not to surfeit of the word, lest we suffer a famine
of it; not to retain the snuffes of our sins, lest they dim our candlestick:
a removal whereof, except we repent, may be as certainly foreseen and foretold,
as if visions and letters were sent us from heaven, as once to Ephesus telling
them so, Rev. 2.5. And indeed it has been the opinion, and is still the fear
of some not unconsiderable Divines, that Antichrist, before his abolition,
shall once again overflow the whole face of the West, and suppress the whole
protestant Churches. Now if ever this come to pass, (as justly we may fear it
will) what may we thank but our detestable lukewarmnesse and loathing of the
heavenly Manna, our not receiving the love of the truth, that we might be
saved? for which cause if God shall send us strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 1^.
even the efficacy of error, that we should believe a lie, that being
infatuated we should be seduced, and being seduced be damned, as Austin
glosseth that text, whom can we blame for it?

Verse 13. In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst,]
When God depriveth a people of his Ordinances, and so withdraws his gracious
presence from them, what wonder though temporal judgments come rushing in as
by a sluice? Persecute and take him, (said David's enemies) for God has forsaken
him, and there is none to deliver him, Psalm. 71.11. The Philistines are upon me,
says Saul, for God has forsaken me. Behold, I am cast out from thy presence,
said Cain (that is, from my fathers house where thine ordinances are
administered) and therefore every one that finds me shall slay me, Genesis 4.14.
In that day of the want of the word, in the day of spiritual famine and thirst,
behold aliud ex alio malum, another thirst shall seize upon the choycest and
fairest; as flies settle upon the sweetest perfumes, when they are cold, and
corrupt them.

Shall the fair virgins] whom all men favor for their comeliness, (...),
beauty is of it self lovely and attractive, it needs no letters of
commendations: but God is no respecter of persons, and beauty abused is like a
fair house with an ill inhabitant, said Diogenes: like a jewel of gold in a
swines snout, said Solomon, Prove. 11.22. Some are Helena's without, but
Hecuba's within, painted sepulchers, Egyptian temples; like Aurelia Orestilla,
of whom Salust says, that she had nothing in her praiseworthy but her beauty:
Fair she was and foolish, not (...), beautiful and wise, as it is reported of
Aspasia Cyrus his concubine. Athenaeus.
Now these fair maids, together with the choice young men, best able to endure
thirst a long season,

shall faint for thirst,] Heb. shall be over-covered with grief, shall be
troubled and perplexed, shall faint and swoon, shall find by experience that
all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field, that
even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall.
But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount
up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk
and not faint. Esa. 40.30, 31.

Verse 14. They that swear by the sin of Samaria] i. e. by the calfe set up at
Bethel, not far from Samaria. This calfe is called the sin or guilt of
Samaria, Esa. 40.6, 7.
to show the abomination of it; for which cause also Paul calls it sinful sin,
Romans 7.13. as not finding for it a worse Epithet: and Antichrist for like
cause he calls That man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3. to note him Merum scelus,
says Beza, merely made up of sin. Now to swear by this of Samaria, was to
deifie it: to swear by any thing besides the true God, is to forsake him, Jer.
5.7. which is an hateful wickedness, Jer. 2.12, 13. as in Papists who
familiarly swear by their Hee-Saints, and She-Saints; and so sacrilegiously
transfer upon the creature that which pertains to God alone.

and say, Thy god, O Dan, lives,] God only lives, to speak properly, 1 Timothy
6.17. but to say that Dan's Deunculus lived, (being no better then a dumb and
dead idol) and to sweat by the life of it, Spec. Eur^p.
(as the Spaniards do now in the pride of their Monarchy, by the life of their
king) this is horrible impiety. As for that of Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25.26.
Now therefore my Lord, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, the former
was an oath, the latter was not an oath, but an asseveration or obtestation
only, conjoined with an oath.

and the manner of Beersheba liveth] that is, the forms and rites of
worshipping in Beersheba (another nest of idolatry, Chap. 5.5. and Hos. 10.13.)
as the Chaldee paraphraseth it. Durandus has written the Romish Ritual, the
way of worship used in that Synagogue of Satan: Mercer renders it, Vivet
peregrinatio Beerseba, the way or passage of Beerseba lives. Beerseba had an
idol, and was the way to Dan and Bethel: hence this superstitious oath drawn
out to the full length, By the sin of Samaria, by the god of Dan, and by the
manner of Beersheba: like as the great Turk Mahomet promising his soldiers the
spoil of Constantinople for three days together, if they could win it, for
confirmation of his oath solemnly swore by the immortal God, and by the four
hundred Prophets, by Mahomet, by his fathers soul, by his own children, Turk.
hist. 345.
and by the sword wherewith he was girt, faithfully to perform whatsoever he
had to them in his proclamation promised.

even they shall fall and never rise up again] Fall, fatally, ferally,
irrecoverably, as old Eli did when his neck was broken, but first his heart.
The ten tribes for their idolatry and contempt of the word never returned out
of captivity. From the famine foretold what could follow but irreparable ruin,
though for a time they might flourish, See Prove. 29.1. with the note. Of that
spiritual famine let us be most impatient, and say as Luther did, I would not
live in Paradise without the word: but with it I could make a shift to live in
hell it self.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. I saw the Lord] This Seer, Chap. 7.12. saw the Lord in a vision; for
otherwise God is too subtle for sinew or sight to seize upon him. We cannot
look upon the body of the Sun, neither can we see at all without the beams of
it: so here,

standing upon the Altar] Or, firmly set sc: to do execution upon that Altar,
sc: that idolatrous Altar at Bethel forementioned, and formerly threatened by
another Prophet, 1 Kin. 13.1.2. The Rabbines say, God was seen standing upon
that Altar, as ready to sacrifice and slay the men of that age, whose
idolatries and other impieties he could no longer bear with. And hence it is
happily, that he is brought in standing; like as Act. 7.55. Jesus at Stevens
death was seen standing at the right hand of God, where he is usually said to
sit. Stat ut vindex, sedet ut judex.

And he said] sc: to the Angel that stood by, Zeck. 3.7. or to the enemy
commissionated by him, or to some other creature, for they are all his
servants, Psalm. 119.91. neither can he want a weapon to tame his rebels with.

smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake] Smite with a courage,
as Ezeck. 9. Angels give no light blows. Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts
shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn
down, and the haughty shall be humbled: Esa. 10.33, 34.
And he shall cut down the thickest of the forests with iron, and Lebanon shall
fall by a Mighty one: that is, by an Angel shall he smite to the ground that
mighty army which was like a thick wood, see Esai. 37.36. Psalm. 78.25. and
89.6. So at our Saviors Resurrection, an Angel, in despite of the soldiers
set to watch, rolled away the gravestone, and sat upon it. And as a mighty
man, when he sits down, shakes the bench under him, so did He shake the
earth: and for fear of him the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men, Mat.
28.2, 4. Down with this Idol-Temple, down with it, says God here, even to the
ground.

and cut them in the head, al of them] cleave them down the middle, so that
every post may be sure to fall, being divided from the top to the bottom: and
let this act be a sign to them all of what I intend to do to their persons; as
many of them as by this gate have entered into this Idol-Temple and Altar. A
deep cut in the head is dangerous and deadly, Genesis 3.15. Psalm. 68.22.

and I will slay the last of them] I, by mine agents and instruments, as before:
for it is but one hand and many executioners, that God slayes men with. Job
could discern Gods arrows in Satan's hand, and Gods hand on the arms of the
Sabaean robbers. The sword is bathed in heaven, before it is embrewed in men's
blood, Isai. 34.5. The Lord kills and makes alive, says holy Hannah, 1 Samuel
2.6.

He that flees of them shall not flee away.] See chap. 2.14. with the Note,
and say, Behold the severity of God. Romans 11.12.


Verse 2. Though they dig into hell, etc.] No starting-hole shall secure them
from the wrath of God, and rage of the creature, set a work by him. Hell and
destruction are before the Lord, Prove, 15.11. yea hell is naked before him, and
destruction has no covering, Job 25.6. He has a sharp eye, and a long hand,
to pull men out of their lurking-holes; as he did Adam out of the thicket, 2
Chro. 33.11
Manasseh from among the thorns, Jonah from the sides of the ship, the Duke of
Buckingham in Rich. the thirds time, etc. Be sure, says Moses, your sin will
find you out, Speed.
Number. 32.23. and Gods hand will hale you to punishment.

Though they climb up to heaven,] That is, (by an hyperbole) to high and strong
places: as the Babel-builders, the Benjamites that fled to the Rock Rimmon, and
there abode four months, Judge. 20 47. the gibing Jebusites, that were so
confident of their strong-hold of Zion, that they flouted David and his forces,
2 Samuel 5.8. the proud Prince of Tire, and others.

thence will I bring them down] From their loftiest tops of Pride and
creature-confidence which God loves to confute and defeat: as I might instance
in Nebuchadnezzars, Xerxes, Haman, Sejanus, Bajaezet, that terror of the
world, and (as he thought) superior to fortune, yet in an instant, with his
state, in one battle overthrown into the bottom of misery and despair: Turk.
hist. 287.
and that in the midst of his great strength. The same end awaits the Pope
and his hierarchy- ruet alto a culmine Roma, that Jupiter Capitolinus shall be
one day unroosted by him, who casts the wicked down to the ground Psalm. 147.6.

Verse 3. And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel] In densis
sylvis, inter spelaea ferarum, Lawful enough it is in some cases to hides
David did often, and Elias, and Christ, and Paul, 2 Cor. 11.32. and Athanasius,
and diverse other Saints. Tertullian was too rigid in condemning all kind of
hiding in evil times. Lib. de suga on persecution.
But to hide from God, who searches Jerusalem with lights, and to whom the
darkness and the light are both alike, Psalm. 139.12. to whom obscura clarent,
muta respondent, silentium confitetur, this is base, and bootlesse. Carmel
shall not cover them, nor any other starting-hole secure them from divine
justice. The poor Jews were pulled by the Romans out of privyes and other
underground places, where they had hid themselvss, as Josephus writes: and so
were those Samaritans served by the Assyrians, who ferreted them out, and
slaughtered them.

and though they be hid from my sight,] as they think; but that cannot be: for
He (like the Optic virtue in the eye) sees all, and is seen of none.

in the bottom of the sea,] which, how deep and troublesome soever, is to God
a Sea of glass like unto Crystal: corpus diaphanum, a pervious, clear, Rev. 4.
transparent body, such as he sees through, and has the sole command of.

thence will I command the serpent. For there is that crooked serpent
Leviathan, there are also creeping things innumerable, Esaias 27.1. Psalm. 104.26.
to arrest wicked men as rebels and traitors to the highest Majesty, and to
drag them down to the bottom of hell. All elements, and creatures, shall draw
upon them, as servants will do upon such as assault their Lord. Rebellisque
facta est, quia homo numini, creatura homini, as Austin truly and trimly
avoucheth.

Verse 4 And though they go into captivity, etc.] And so may hope the worst is
over, (Surely the bitterness of death is past) yet it shall prove otherwise:
The hypocrites hope is as the giving up the ghost, says Job, and that is but
cold comfort: 1 Samuel 15.32.
Or, as the spiders web, spun out of her own bowels; and, when the beesome
comes, swept to the muck-hill.

before their enemies,] whose custom was to drrive their captives before them,
Lam. 1.5. young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks
uncovered, Esaias 20.4. Or, before their enemies, that is, before they are taken
captive by the enemies, by a voluntary yeeldance, in hope of quarter for their
lives. The Jews indeed had a promise from the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 21.9. That
if they went out and fell to the Chaldeans that besieged them, they should have
their lives for a prey, but the ten tribes had no such promise made them: They
were strangers from the covenants, Ephesians. 2.12. and therefore could look for no
mercy. Loammi, and therefore Lo-ruhamah, Hos. 1. the Ark and the Mercy-seat
were never sundred.

thence will I command the sword] See Esaias 13.15, 16. Jer. 9.10. and 43.11.
Ezekiel. 14.17.

and I will set mine eyes upon them,] Emphaticote^on est q^am si dixi^set
Oculos pluraliter. Mercer.
Heb. eye, viz. the eye of my providence, that oculus irretortus, whereby I
will look them to death, and take course that nothing shall go well with them:
see a little below, verse. 8. Jer. 21.10. Psalm. 34.16. In Tamerlanes eyes sat
such a Majesty, as a man could hardly endure to behold: and many in talking
with him became dumb. He held the East in such awe, as that he was commonly
called, Turk. hist. 211.236.
The wrath of God, and terror of the world. Augustus Caesar frowned to death,
Cornelius Gallus: and so did Queen Elizabeth, Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord
Chancellor. Gods enemies are sure to perish at the rebuke of his countenance,
Psalm. 80.16. and, if he but set his eyes upon them for evil, and not for good,
all occurrences shall certainly work together for the worst unto them.

Verse 5. And the Lord God of Hosts is he, etc.] Here the Prophet proves what
he had said in the foregoing verses, by an argument drawn from the wonderful
power of God, which profane persons are apt to question, that they may harden
their hearts against his fear. Consider says He, first, that He is the Lord
God of Hosts, and (as the Rabbines well observe) he has the upper and lower
troops ready pressed, as his horse and foot, to march against his enemies. Next,
that he touches the land, as it were with his little finger, and it shall
melt, like the fat of lambs before the fire: it shall crumble to crattle,
moulder away, and be moved, because he is wroth, Psalm. 18.7. and shall men be
unmoved? shall they be more insensible then the senseless earth? The people
of Antioch, though many of them gave their hands for Chrysostoms banishment,
yet terrified by an earthquake (which wrought in them an heart-quake, as it had
done in the Jailer, Acts 16.) they immediately sent for him again. But thirdly,
the tremend power of God appears in this, that

The land shall rise up wholly like a flood, and it shall be drowned, as by the
flood of Egypt,] God can flote it, and flood it at his pleasure. See chap. 8.8.
Water is naturally above the earth, as the garment above the body says David:
and would (but for the power and providence of God) prove as the shirt made for
the murdering of Agamemnon, where the head had no issue out. Let God be seen
herein, and men's hearts possessed with his holy fear: who can so easily pull up
the sluices, let in the Sea upon them, and bury them all in one universal grave
of waters. Fear ye not me, Jer. 5.22.
says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand
for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and
though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though
they roar, Lib. de mirabil.
yet can they not pass over it? This Aristotle admires, and David celebrates
in his Physics, (as One calls that 104 Psalm) verse 6.9. and all men should
improve, to affright their consciences from provoking to anger so great a God.

Verse 6. It is he that builds his stories (or spheres) in the heaven,]
Surgit hic oration. The Prophet here rises in his discourse: and as Chrysostom
said of St. Paul, Tricubitalis est, and coelos transcendit; Low, though he
were, and little, yet he gat up into the third heaven: so may we of Amos,
though but a plain-spoken and illiterate heardsman, yet in setting forth the
power of God, he mounts from earth to heaven, and shows himself to be Virum
bonum, dicendi peritum, an exquisite Orator, according to Quintilians
character. God this Great Architect, and publike-workman, (as the Apostle after
Plato, whom he seems to have read, calls Him, (...).
Heb. 11.10) has without tool or toil, Esaias 40.28. builded his stories in the
heaven (which is three stories high, 2 Cor. 12.2.) wherein (as in a theater, or
molten looking-glass, Job 37.18.) his Majesty most clearly shines, chap.
4.13. and 5.8. See Psalm. 104.3. every sphere and star twinkling at us, and
as it were, beekning to us, to remember his omnipotency (whereof that rare
Fabric is a notable work and witness) and not to think to escape his
judgments, if we go on in sin. For although he be higher then the heavens,
Job. 8.11. yet his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men, Psalm.
11.4. and verse 6. Upon the wicked He shall rain down snares, fire and
brimstone, etc.

and has founded his troop (or bundle) in the earth,] that is, the other three
elements say some: the Sea, which together with the earth makes one Globe, say
others: the Universe (says Mr. Diodate) which is like the fabric of a
building: of which the earth being the lower part, and only unmovable, has
some resemblance of a foundation.

He that calls for the waters of the Sea, and pours them out, etc.] See the
Note on chap. 5.8.

Verse 7. Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me,] The emphasis lies
in this last word, Unto me, who am no respecter of persons, but in every
nation, Act. 10.3.4.
he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.) Unto
your selves indeed you seem some great business, because Israelites; to whom
pertains the Adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, etc. Rom, 9.4. To
others also you seem a great nation, yea a wise and understanding people, as
having God so nigh unto you, and so set for you, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7. and 33.29. But
tell me, Quis te discrevit? Who made you to differ? and what have ye more then
others, that ye have not me to thank for? You look upon the Ethiopians with
scorn, as an ignoble and servile people: as likewise upon the uncircumcised
Philistines, and unhallowed Syrians. But wherein are you beyond them, if you
look back to your Original, and consider my dealings with them and you? It is
nothing else but self-love that makes you thus insolent; and teaches you to
turn the glass to see your selves bigger, Others lesser then they are. You
foolishly set up your Counter for a thousand pound; and are in some sense like
those Ethiopians, or Negroes, Heyl. Geogr.
so much slighted by you; of whom it is said that they paint the devil white,
as being a color contrary to their own. But much more to blame are you, that
being Gods peculiar people, and partakers of so great privileges, you do no
more change your evil manners, then the Ethiopians do their black-hue Jer.
13.23. you are no where white but in your teeth, as they: good a little from
the teeth outward. I am near in your mouths, but far from your reins, Jer.
12.2. Such an one was that stigmaticall Cush the son of Iemini mentioned in the
title of the seventh Psalm, (perhaps Saul the son of Kish the Beniamite is
intended) non tam cute quam cord Aethiopicus, of black and ill conditions: and
therefore to God no better then an Ethiopian, or any other Pagan people.

have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt] q. d. I grant I have;
and you glory very much in it: whereas you should rather glorify me much for
it, and walk worthy of such a deliverance; for every blessing is a binder, and
every new deliverance a new tie to obedience. But what singular thing have I
herein done for you more then for Philistines and Syrians, whom yet you look
upon as dogs and outcasts?

have not I also brought up the Philistines from Caphtor,] i. e. from
Cappadocia (called an Island Ier. 47. because it bordered upon the sea) or,
Turk. hist. 843.
as some will have it from Cyprus, a rich Island, called therefore Macariah,
that is, Blessed.

and the Syrians from Kir] Syros e Kiro, from Cyrene a country of Asia, as
Beroaldus thinks. It is mentioned Esa. 22.6. Chron. lib. 4. cap. 6.
as subject to the king of Assyria: and thither the Syrians were translated by
Tiglath-Pileser 2 King. 16.9. but when either these or the Philistines were
brought back again to their own countries, we read not in scripture, or
elsewhere at this day. 1 Chronicles 4.22.
These are ancient things, (as it is said in another case) and are here
alleged as well known to the Israelites, who are nipt on the crown as they
say, and pulled from that perilous pinnacle of self-exaltation, whereupon they
had unhappily peirked themselves.

Verse 8. Behold the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdome] Be it
Ethiopia, Palestina, Syria, or Israel, but especially Israel Amos 3.2. not his
eye only his (...) his jealous eye (as ver. 4. for evil, and not for good: but
both his eyes, yea his seven eyes, for he is (...) All eye, to look through and
through the sinful kingdom, to judge and punish, to inflict tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, because of
his privileges, and also of the Gentile Romans 2.9. The sin of Judah is written
with a pen of iron, with the point of a diamond Jer. 17.1. and Israel is
therefore worse then others because he ought to have been better. His whole
kingdom is a kingdom of sin, a merum scelus, a very Poneropolis, as that
place in Thracia was called, Theopomp.
whither Philip had assembled all the infamous persons and men of evil
demeanor. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? Mic. 1.5.
their capital sins were most in their capital cities; and thence overflowed
the whole kingdom: called therefore here a sinful kingdom, wholly given to
Idolatry (as Athens was Act. 17.16.) which is that sin with an accent, that
wickedness with a witness, Exodus (...).
32.21. 1 King. 12.30. and 15, 3, 30. that land-desolating sin. Jer. 22.7, 8,
9. Psalm. 78.58, 59, 62.

and I will destroy it] See here the venomous nature of sin, and shun it, else
we shall prove traitors to the state, and have our hands if not upon the great
cartropes, yet upon the lesser cords, that draw down vengance upon the land.
And here some one sinner may destroy much good Eccle. 9.17. how much more a
rabble of rebbels, conspiring to provoke the eyes of Gods glory?

saying that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob] A remnant shall be
left for royal use, See Jer. 30.11.
reliquas faciam reliquias, and so make a manifest difference, remembering my
promise Lev. 26.40. which is a special text touching the rejection and
conversion of the Jews, as is also this in some men's judgments. For here (say
they) is a threatening of extreme desolation with some comfort enterlaced of a
remnant to be reserved: amongst whom it is further promised 1. that the
kingdom of David thorough Christ shall be set up as glorious as ever it was
before, in the most flourishing times of David or Solomon ver. 11.2. Next,
other nations shall join with them and be made partakers of one common
inheritance ver. 12. So does James Act. 15.16, 17. expound it. 3. Thirdly there
is promised the fruitfulness of their land ver. 13. the inhabiting in their
own country, ver. 14. and the perpetuity of their abode there, ver. 15. But
all this others think to be, optabile magis quam opinabile, little better then
a golden dream.

Verse 9. For lo I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel] It is not
without Gods command and good leave that evil spirits and men can sift the
saints, as Satan desired to have done Peter. He desired it, as a challenger
desires one of the other side to combat with: so he begged leave to sift Job,
and so he tempted David to number the people, but it was by Gods permission. Up
therefore and pray that ye enter not into temptation Luke 22.31, 46. or that ye
may come clear out of it, Romans 16.20.
and more then conquerours, even Triumphers: the enemy is stinted: yea Christ
will tread him under your feet shortly.

and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations] The ten tribes among
the Assyrians (who were Emperors of the whole East) and whither since they are
scattered, whether into Shina, Tartary, West Indies, or other countries, is not
known. The whole twelve-tribes (those also that once instantly served God day
and night Act. 26.7.) are now woefully disjected and dissipated: being cast out
of the world, Aug. in Psalm. 58.
as it were, by a common consent of Nations, and generally slighted and hated.
The Romans permitted other nations to call themselves Romans, after they had
conquered them: but so they would not suffer the Jews upon any terms to do:
lest there should be some blot stick to the glory of the Romans by that odious
and sordid people. The Pope uses them as spunges, the Turk as slaves, etc.

like as corn is sifted in a sieve] Or, by a fann; to the same sense as that
Zach. 13.9. for as here a sieve, so there fire serves to denote Affliction
with the use of it: sc. to purge Gods people, specially of those two
troublesome choke-weeds, High-mindednesse and Earthly mindedness, Cribratione
Dei non perditur sed purgatur frumentum, says Zanchy, Gods good corn is not
lost, but made clean by the sifting they suffer. Jer. 23.28.


yet shall not the least grain (Heb: stone) fall upon the earth] As the chaf
and dust shall: Augustine. Mat. 3.12.
for what is the chaf to the wheat? says the lord, Improbi nobiscum esse
possunt in horreo, sed non in area. Christ has his fan in his hand, and will
surely discriminate: he will take out the precious from the vile, he will drive
the chafe one way and the wheat another: and take care that not the least
grain of weighty wheat, that had good tack in it, (as a stone has, though but
a little stone) shall be lost. He will turn his hand upon the little ones, and
secure them Zech. 13.7.

Verse 10. All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword] The flagitious,
presumptuous persons, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
that bless themselves when I curse them, saying, We shall have peace though
we walk every man in the imagination of his heart, and take his full swinge in
sin. Such sinners in Zion Esa. 33.14. such sacrificing Sodomites Esa. 1.10.
such profligate Professors shall die by the sword: either by the hand of the
enemy, or which is worse, gladio spiritali says Mercer, by the spiritual
sword, being blinded and rejected by God; so that their preservation is but a
reservation to a greater mischief. Whereas, on the other side, some of Gods
elect might in a common calamity perish by the sword, but then (Josiah-like)
they died in peace, though they fell in battle: their death was right precious
in the sight of the Lord, and a plentiful amends made them in heaven.

which say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us] Or, for our sakes, by
our default. If affliction do find us out, yet we have not deserved it:
Begnaden^ propter nos.
common occurrences we cannot be against. Thus the wicked man flattereth
himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful Psa. 36.2.
In all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me: that were sin Hos. 12.8.
Yet thou say, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me:
behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned Jer. 2.35.

Ver. 11. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David] A most sweet
conclusion of the Prophecy by sundry Evangelicall promises after so many very
severe and sharp menaces: the Sun of righteousness likes not to set in a
cloud. In that day, that happy day whenever it shall dawn, that Christ shall
come: for the Prophets knew not the certain time when, but made diligent
enquiry as far as they might with sobriety 1 Pet. 1.11. and well knew that the
Law, which they preached and explained, was an introduction to a better hope
Heb. 7.19. which they saw afar off and saluted Heb. 11.13.

will I raise up the Tabernacle of David] that is, the kingdom of the house of
David says the Chaldee Paraphrast: meaning, of the Messiah, whom the sounder
sort of Rabbines from this text call Ben Niphlei, the repairer of the breach,
Galatin.
the restorer of paths to dwell in: Now the Church is here called the
Tabernacle of David, because that once stately Palace of David was by many
desolations reduced to a tent, as it were, and that ready to drop too. The
Branch grew out of the root of Jesse, when that goodly family was sunk so low,
as from David the king to Joseph the carpenter. Besides, all was out of order
both in Church and State, when Christ came.

and close up the breaches thereof] Heb. wall up: by unwalling (as the Hebrew
has it Number. 24.17.) all the children of Seth: by subduing the sons of men, the
godly seed to the obedience of faith: by bringing into captivity every haughty
thought etc. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. (that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow
Philip. 2.10.) and getting a full conquest by the preaching of the gospel,
which shall quickly close up all ruptures, and raise up all ruins, by chasing
away terrors and false-worships, doctrines of devils, and traditions of men,
whereby the Scribes and Pharisees had made the commandment of God of none
effect.

and I will build it as in the days of old] in those purer times of David and
the other holy Patriarchs, who made up but one and the same Church with us,
and were saved by the same faith in Christ Jesus, that Lamb of God slain from
the foundation of the world, Rev, 13.8. Mine antiquity is Jesus Christ said
Ignatius the Martyr. As we prefer the newest Philosophy, so the ancient'st
Divinity, says Another.

Verse 12. That they may possess the remnant of Edom,] That they which are
called by my name, which are called Christians, viz. the Apostles and their
successors to the end of the world, may possess together with Christ (to whom
the Father has given the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the earth for his possession) the remnant of Edom; those few of them that
receive the faith, who are but as a remnant to the whole piece, an handful to a
houseful. Psalm. 2.^.
And not of the Edomites only, those inveterate and hereditary enemies to the
Israel of God; but of all the heathen which are called by name, who beseech and
are baptized into Christ's name, being content to receive his mark, and to
profess his Religion, which formerly they were perfect strangers to. These and
those first Preachers of the Gospel, and Planters of Churches (being Israelites
by birth) are said to possess by inheritance, because Christ was pleased to
make use of their ministry; and upon these his white horses to ride abroad the
world, conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.1, 2. In a like sense it is promised,
Esa. 14.2. that the house of Israel shall possess their proselytes in the land
of the Lord for servants and for handmaids, and take them captives whose
captives they were, and rule over their oppressors. Such a change shall the
Gospel make.

says the Lord that does this] For indeed none else could have done it.
Effectual conversion is his work alone, God persuade Japhet, etc. Noah may
speak perswasively, but God only can persuade. Rebecca may cook the venison,
but Isaac only can give the blessing. Paul may plant, etc. Deus potest facere,
nec solet fallere.

Verse 13. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the plowman, etc.] The
Gospel of peace brings with it the peace of the Gospel, and with peace, plenty,
with the horn of salvation the horn of plenty, a confluence of outward comforts
and contentments, Bo^us Deus Const^n^ tantis terren^ implevit mu^^^bus q^anta
^p^^re nullus ^uderet D^ C D. l. 5.25 Elizabetha glori^sissima and foeliciss
soemina Thuan. Hist. lib. 124.
as in Solomon's days, and Constantines, (whom God prospered and blessed beyond
all that he could have wished, says Austin) and Q. Elizabeth's, whom, for her
care to propagate the Gospel, He made to be the happiest woman that ever swayed
scepter, as her very enemies were forced to acknowledge: so liberal a paymaster
is the Lord, that all his retributions are more then bountiful; and this his
servants have not ex largitate, sed ex promisso, out of his general
providence, but by virtue of a promise, which is far sweeter. The Masorites
have observed, that in this verse are found all the letters of the Hebrew
Alphabet (as also in 26 more verses of the Old Testament) to note, say the
Calvinists, that in the kingdom of the Messiah, there shall be great abundance
of all things, and plenum copiae cornu: or, if that should fail, yet plenty of
all spiritual benedictions in heavenly things, In instauratione casulae
Davidicae co^apsae Merc. Amama.
Ephesians. 1.3. and contented godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6. which has an autarkie, a
self-sufficiency; so that having nothing a man possesses all things, 2 Cor.
6.10. This the Prophet expresses in the following words by many excellent
hyperbole's though (to say sooth) Christus and regnum ejus non patiuntur
hyperbolen. All words are too weak to set forth the worth of Christ and his
kingdom.

the plowman shall overtake the reaper] In signis hyperbole, says Mercer: no
sooner shall harvest be ended, but seeding shall succeed, and that promise
fulfilled, Levit. 26.5. all businesses belonging to the tillage of the ground,
and the inning of the fruit, shall have their fit and suitable seasons; where,
under the name of corporal blessings spiritual also are to be understood: and
indeed those blessings out of Zion are far beyond any other that come out of
heaven and earth, Ps. 134.3.

and the treader of grapes, him that sows seed] precious seed, Ps. 126.5.
sowing-seed (as one englisheth it) drawn out of the seed basket, and cast all
along upon the land: the meaning is, that the vintage shall last so long, that
the seeds-man shall scarce have time to do his business, for waiting upon the
wine press.

and the mountains shall drop sweet wine] Or juice of pomegranates, more
delicious liquor then that which the Italians profanely call Lachrymae Christi,
or that which at Paris and Lovaine is called Vinum Theologicum, or Vinum Cos,
that is, ^oloris, odoris, saporis optimi, the best in the country for color,
savor and taste, to please the palate.

and all the hills shall melt] sc. with milk, honey, oil, as Joel. 3.18. the same
almost with this. And the heathen Poet has the like, -- Subitis messor
gaudebit aristis: Claudian. lib. 1. in Ruffin.

Rorabunt querceta favis stagnantia passim
Vina fluent oleique laeus. --


Ver. 14. And I will bring again the captivity of my people] There is an
elegancy in the original that cannot be englished, and God seems delighted
with such Agnominations, as has been before observed: to show the lawful use
of Rhetorike in divine discourses, Act. 26.18.
so it be not affected, abused, Idolized. This promise is fulfilled when
believers are by the gospel brought from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and be set free
from the tyranny of corruption, and terror of death Heb. 2.14.15. Colos. 1.13.
Luke 1.74. Zach. 9.11. Psa. 68.19.

and they shall build the wast cities] Restore the sincere service of God, as
those noble Reformers did in all ages; fetching the Church, as it were, out of
the wilderness, where she had long lain hid Rev. 12.6. and whence she is said
at length to come leaning upon her Beloved Cant. 8.5.

and they shall plant vineyards] That is, particular churches.

and drink the wine thereof] Have the fruit and comfort of their labors in the
Lord, which they shall see not to be in vain 1 Cor. 15.

they shall also make gardens, and eat of the fruit] while they shall see their
people to be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 1.8. but far off flourishing, Psalm. 92.13. actuosi and fructuosi Esa.
51.3. The Popish Commentatours (as it is the manner of many of them to mar
and bemire the text with their absurd glosses) by cities here would have men to
understand the state of married people, by vineyards their Prelates, and by
gardens Monks. Is not this to wrest the scriptures, and so to set them on the
rack, as to make them speak more then ever they intended? Is it not to compel
them to go two miles when they are willing to go but one? Is it not to taw
them, and gnaw them, as Tertullian says that Marcion the heretic (that Mus
Ponticus as he therefore calls him) did, to make them serviceable to his vile
purposes?

Verse. 15. And I will plant them upon their land] as trees of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified, Esaias. 61.3, 11. being
well rooted and no worse fruited, Philip. 1.6.

and they shall no more be pulled up] None shall pull them out of Christ's hand;
for he and the Father are one. None shall separate them from the love of God in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. they shall be sure of continual supplies of sap and
safety, Joh. 10.29, 30.
being kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 2 Pet. 1.3. The
paradise of God was so planted, that it was watered on all sides with most
noble rivers, to keep it flourishing: how much more will the Lord do this in
his heavenly garden the Church? See Psalm. 92.13, 14. when it comes to be
transplanted especially.

says the Lord thy God] Thy God, O Prophet, who will ratify and verify what
promises soever thou have uttered in his name. Or thy God, O people, now
reconciled unto thee in Christ, Ioh. 26.17. and therefore ready to heap upon
thee all things needful for life and godliness.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Of the Prophecy of OBADIAH.
Verse 1. THE vision of Obadiah,] The same, say some, that hid the Lords
Prophets and fed them by fifty in a cave, when sought for to the slaughter, by
wicked Jezabel, 1 King. 18.4. whereupon himself also received a Prophets
reward. That is (says Lyra) was endued with the spirit of prophecy. Hierom
adds, that he was buried at Samaria, (called afterward Sebaste by Herod, in
honor of Augustus) and that there his Sepulcher was yet to be seen. The
Rabbines say, that this Obadiah was that widows husband, whom Elisha relieved,
by multiplying her oil, 2 King. 4. Others (with more show of reason) conjecture
that this was that Obadiah mentioned 2 Chronicles. 34.12. a faithful Levite, set by
Josiah to oversee the Artificers, who repaired the Temple in the eighteenth
year of his reign: Jer. 49. Ezech. 25. Psalm. 137.7.
and so was contemporary to Ezechiel and Jeremy, with whom also he consents
in many passages: and besides, he makes mention of the Babylonish captivity,
and the Edomites cruelty to the Jews at that time. But let him be who he will,
(for where the Scripture has no tongue, we need not find ears: but may well
content our selves with a learned ignorance) his doctrine he entituleth not a
Burden, because he concludes it comfortably, but a Vision which is more
general: it being his scope to comfort the people of God, that were under
great affliction.

Thus says the Lord God concerning Edom,] If Obadiah were himself an Edomite,
but a Proselyte to the Church (as some Rabbines have reported him) his vision
should have taken the better with his cruel contrymen, to bring them to
repentance. But whether he were or not, they should have observed his
authority: and that his doctrine came Cum privilegio, and that it was the Lord
God, the Tremend Trinunus that spoke by him; and that he was according to his
name, a servant of the most high-God, which showed unto them the way of
salvation, Acts 16.17. Sed surdo fabulam: the Edomites were so fleshed in
blood, and such inveterate enemies to the Church, that there was little good to
be done upon them. Howsoever, to leave them without excuse, and, if possible,
to rouse them out of their security, He says,

We have heard a rumor from the Lord,] We, that is, I and my fellow-Prophets
(who are a secretis to the Lord, Amos 3.7.) have heard for a certainty, that
the Edomites are devoted to destruction. And that this was no vain rumor, but
accordingly accomplished, see Jer. 25.9, 21. Mal. 1.3.

and an Ambassador is sent among the heathen.] An herald at arms sent by
Nebuchadnezzar, say some, to stir up his Chaldeans against the Edomites:
Others, make this Ambassador to be Christ, or a created Angel, or a divine
instinct, or, lastly, the Prophets. Whosoever he is, he does his work very
vigorously.

Arise ye, says he, and let us rise up against her in battle.] Let us join
our forces, and do our utmost against Idumea. After this sort also shall Gods
warriors stir up themselves one day, and one another, against the Romish
Edomites, those Pseudo-christians Antichristians, when God shall once put into
their hearts, to hate that old withered whore of Babylon, to make her desolate
and naked, to eat her flesh, and burn her with sire, Rev. 17.16, 17. The Alarm
was long since given them (not unlike this in the Text) by Francis Petrarch in
these words. Babylon altera, nempe propinquior atque recentior, adhuc stat:
cito itidem casura; si essetis viri. De rem. utriusque sort. de al. 118.
There yet stands a nearer and newer Babylon then that of old: but it should
not stand long, were you but Men. Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in
battle. The Jews at this day call the Hierarchy of Rome, the wicked kingdom
of Edom; and for Dumah, Esaias 21.11. they read Roma, by a very easy (but
willing) mistake. See Dr. Taylours sermon, called The Romish Edomite.

Verse 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen.] That is, vile,
despicable, and abject, as Psalm. 119.141. I am small and despised: nothing is
more ordinary then to despise the day of small things, Zech. 4.10. Augustine.
(...). Hesiod. Godw. Catal.
And whereas God is said to be Magnus in magnis, nec parvus in minimis, he had
always kept down these profane Edomites, shutting them up in mount Seir, a
craggy barren country (not unlike Ascre Hesiods country, or Landaffe in
Wales, which is said to be a place, neither pleasant, fertile, nor safe) and
not suffering them to attain to any fame, or almost name among other Nations.
Were it not that they are mentioned in the Bible (and never there for any
goodness neither) it would hardly have been known that there ever had been
such a people. Wherefore then should Edom be so intolerably insolent, as verse
3? swell to such an height of pride, play such bloody pran^s, as he is here
accused of? especially since God is taking a course to make him yet lesser and
lower then yet he is, Esaias 23.9.
by those armies of his that are coming upon him, to stain the pride of all
his glory.

Verse 3. The pride of thine heart has deceived thee,] so as to make thee
think thy self some great business, when its no such matter; and that thou
can secure thy self in thy strongholds from thy strongest enemies: but
herein thy pride has befooled thee, and put the same trick upon thee that the
serpent did once upon the first woman, Genesis 3.13. (the same word is there used
as here) who complained, when she was in the transgression. The serpent has
deceived me, etc. 1 Timothy 2.14.
He is still the King of all the children of pride; and thereby cheateth them,
(...).
ravisheth them of their right reason, and renders them the direct objects of
Gods hatred and heavy displeasure, Jam. 4.6. he sets himself in battle
array against them. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens (says Zophar
concerning the proud person, Job 20.6.) and his head reach unto the clouds: yet
he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, shall
say, Where is he? There is a deceitfulness in sin, Heb. 3 13. a lie in all
these outward vanities, Jon. 2.8. they were never true to those that trusted in
them. But the proud person feeds upon ashes, he feeds himself with false
hopes: a deceived heart has turned him aside, put him into a fools paradise,
that he cannot deliver his soul, Esaias 44.20.
get out of his golden dreams, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
His case is not unlike that man's, who lying fast asleep upon the edge of a
steep rock, dreams merrily of much happiness and safety: but upon the sudden
starting for joy, breaks his neck, and tumbles headlong into the bottom of the
sea.

thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock] In a rocky mountainous country
(as the Highlander in Scotland out of the reach of my rod, as thou fondly
fanciest: in Arabia Petraea, where thine enemies cannot come at thee; and where
thou think thy self no less safe and out of harmes-way, then Moses was,
when God had put him into the cleft of the rock, and covered him with his hand
Exodus 33.22. or Elias when he stood in the mouth of the cave 1 King. 19.13.

whose habitation is high] Heb: his habitation is high; by a change of the
person out of an holy disdain o^ Edoms pride and creature-confidence, as if he
were extra jactum, out of gunshot, above danger.

that says in his heart, Who shall bring me down?] Aequalis astris gradior,
and cunctos super
Altum superbo vertice attingens polum, Atreus in Thieste apud Senec.

Demitto superos, summa votorum attigi etc.
My roof receives me not, it is air I tread: Ben: Jons.

At every step I feel my advanced head
Knock out a starr in heaven --
Such great swelling words of vanity speaks the proud man, 2 Pet. 2.18.
such big bubbles of of words, s^squipedalia verba, Who shall bring me down?
who is the Lord? who is lord over us? etc. Such haughty expressions such lofty
language is a forerunner, a presage of imminent destruction, as here. A bulging
wall is not far from a downfall. While the word (Is not this great Babel etc.)
was yet in Nebuchadnezzars mouth, he was deprived of his kingdom, and driven
from men etc. Dan. 4.31. Megasthenes the Persian (an ancient writer) reports
that the Chaldeans relate, that Nebuchadnezzar returning home laden with
victories, fell mad; and being in a fanatic vein, foretold the destruction of
Babel, whether he foretold it or no it is sure he occasioned it, by confiding in
it, and by robbing both God of his glory, and his ancestors (the first
founders) of their honor: for he only enlarged it, Psalm. 129.1.
and built the palace entirely: and now he says? Who shall bring me down? etc.
That will I, says God, in the next words. Aesop being asked by Chilo (one of
the seven wise men of Greece) what God was doing? answered, He brings down
the proud, and lifts up the lowly. See the like Psalm. 147.6.

Verse 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle] Or, as the Arabic text has
it, ad aquilam hard by the Eagle; Could thou fly as high a pitch as that
bird, which is said to sore out of sight, and build thy nest aloft, as He does,
on the highest mountains, and tallest trees, that the serpent may not come at
his young.

and though thou set thy nest among the starrs] i. e. upon such high hills as
reach to the upper region of the air. Cicero. 1. de Oratore.
Of Ithaca, ( Ulysses his country) the Orator says, that it was in scopulis
quasi nidus affixa, set as a nest among the rocks. And Paulus Aemylius the
Roman General pulled down the castles at Athens, saying that they were
tyrannorum nidi: and our Henry 8. commanded the Abbeys here to to be
demolished, saying, that those crowes-nests were to be destroyed, ne iterum ad
cohabitandum convolent that they might never breed again amongst us. Lucifer
and his Antitype Nebuchadnezzar spoke of ascending into heaven, above the
heights of the clouds, and of the setting their thrones above the stars of
God Esa. 14.13, 14. See the like language, or bigger from the Prince of Tire
Ezekiel. 28.2. with the issue, much like this that here follows.

thence will I bring thee down] Down with a vengeance: as he did Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, Edom, Attilas, Gensericus, Bajazet etc. The Philistines
flouted Jonathan and his armor-bearer and said, Come up to us, and we will
show you a thing: that is, we will give you your payment before we part with
you: they held it impossible to get up that sharp steep craggy rock where they
kept garrison. But Jonathan clambred over that rock on his hands, and feet; and
put them to the rout 1 Samuel Plut. in Alexand. Curt. l. 7.
14.13 An exploit of as great or rather of greater valor, then that of
Alexander the great, for which he is so crowned and Chronicled by Plutarch, and
Curtius: the story is this. Arimazes having garrisoned a very strong rock,
(held almost inaccessible, and to which there was but one only passage) in the
Sogdian country, with thirty thousand men: and being sent unto by Alexander to
yield up his hold, derided him and asked whether Alexander could fly?
whereunto Alexander returned this answer, I will make thee know ere thou art a
night elder, that the Macedonians can fly. Hereupon he picked out three hundred
of the boldest men he had: and by great promises prevailed with them the next
night, to climb up the backside of the rock to the top of it; which
accordingly they did: and killing the guardes, took the garrison, letting in
Alexander, who nailed Arimazes to a cross.

says the Lord] who will surely do it: how improbable, or impossible soever
you may judge it.

Verse 5. If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night] Or, what? have thieves
come to thee? have robbers been here? O, sure it is worse then so with thee:
they would never have made such clean work, as they say, but have left somewhat
behind them, they would never have played the Harpyes in this sort, and taken
all before them, etc. Thus the neighbor nations stand wondering at this woeful
desolation, and sarcastically insulting: Now to be mocked in misery is no small
grief to the party. Thus the Prophet pricks them by a Rhetorical Addubitation,
the better to affect their minds with an effectual fear of no ordinary or easy
calamity, but such as will be wonderful, and incredible: so that they that
hear of it will say,

how art thou cut off?] Or, how silent art thou? what? did thine enemies set
upon thee per amica silentia Lunae? did they take thee napping, that they shred
thee thus? Have they dealt by thee, as Sr. Francis Drake (in his travels) did
by the Spaniard whom he found sleeping on the bank of a river with many wedges
of gold lying by him. He never waked the man, but eased him of his charge; Or
rather as Epaminondas did by the watchman, whom he found fast asleep: he thrust
him through with his sword; and being chid for so severe a fact, replied, Talem
eum reliqui, qualem inveni, I left him but as I found him.

If the grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes:] Surely
they would: Deuteronomy. 24.21. there would likely be a gleaning of grapes after the
vintage is done Isa. 24.13. two or three berries in the top of the uppermost
bough; four or five in the outmost fruitful branches Esa. 17.6. It is hard
but some make escape out of the battle to bring the ill news. Edoms ruin
therefore and desolation was most deplorable and irreparable, since none was
left alone: but all both men and means raked and racemated.

Verse 6. How are the things of Esau searched out?] Or (as Drusius reads it)
How are the posterity of Esau searched out? the men to the slaughter, the
wealth to the spoil? what cunning and daring soldiers were these to pry into
every corner for prey, and to pull them out of every lurking hole, where they
might have been circumvented and butchered, in those dark and strait places;
This shows surely that they were both armed and animated by God himself.
Confer Joel. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. but especially Jer. 49.10, 11. where you have the
full of that, which is here but abridged: and therefore this verse has not so
much as an Athnach in it, for distinction.

how are his hid things sought out?] i. e. his treasures and Jewels which have
their name in Hebrew from hiding: because men use to secret and secure them
with utmost care and diligence, See Mat. 13.44. hence they are called treasures
of darkness Esa. 45.3. See Job 3.21. Abundance of this was found at
Constantinople, taken by the Turks: Turk. hic^. 345. 347.
so that the soldiers divided it among themselves by hat-fuls, wondering at
their wealth, and deriding their folly, that possessing so much, they would
bestow so little in defense of themselves and their country, lost by their
tenacity and nigardice: And the same is reported of Heidelberg. Joseph cont.
Appron. l. 1. Antiq. l. 10. c. 10.
This that is here threatened against Edom, was accordingly executed in the
fifth year after the destruction of Jerusalem, says Josephus; Nebuchadnezzar
in the 23. year of his reign invading and wasting Idumea. Ill-gotten goods
prosper not. Men rake together riches, and know not who shall gather them Psa.
39.7. But, let no man go beyond and defraud another: for God is the avenger of
all such 1 These. 2 Cor. 4.2. Prove. 10.
4.6. They do best that renounce with St. Paul, those hidden things of
dishonesty: not walking in craftiness, nor making have to be rich; for
treasures of wickedness profit not: and when God comes by his judgments to
turn the bottom of the bag upwards, as Joseph's steward once did, all our
secret thefts will out. See Eccle. 12.16.

Verse 7. All the men of thy confederacy] which therefore should be true to
thee, but prove treacherous: so vain it is to trust to that broken reed of
carnal combinations, Many friends are like deep ponds, clear at the top, and
all muddy at the bottom: the causes they will be, but not the companions of
calamity. Like they are says One, to crows which flock to a dead carcass,
not to defend it but to devour it: and no sooner have they bared the bones, but
they are gone. David complains of such Psalm. 55.13, 14, 15. and Jeremy of his
unkind countrymen of Anathoth chap. 11. But for Edom, it was no great pity,
considering their perfidy both to God (because they had transgressed the laws
moral and municipall, changed the ordinances, that is, the law, of nations and
broken the everlasting covenant, that is, the law of Nature, which is that
light that lighteneth every man that comes into the world Ioh. 1.9.) and also
to their brethren the Israelites their extreme inhumanity, as it follows
ver. 10.11. They had therefore but their own measure meted again to them: as
they had forgotten the brotherly covenant, Am. 1.9, 11. so they met with those
that paid them home in their own coin: neither were they any more pittyed,
then Haman when the king frowned upon him, or Sejanus when he fell into the
displeasure of Tiberius; his friends showing themselves most passionate against
him, saying that if Caesar had clemency, he ought to reserve it for men, and
not cast it away upon monsters.

al brought thee even to the border] And there left thee at the worst:
pretending to help thee, but betraying thee indeed to the enemy: and helping to
cast thee out of thy country, under a show of courtesy.

the men that were at peace with thee] Heb: the men of thy peace, the
Ammonites, Moabites and other neighbour-nations from whom thou fearedst no
hurt: these, to ingratiate with the king of the Chaldeans.

have deceived thee] Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen. Ovid.
(...). Socr.
This made a certain Heathen cry out, Friends, there is no friend to be found:
and Another, to pray God to deliver him from his friends; for, as for his
enemies he could better beware of them.

they that eat thy bread] Heb. thy bread-men, thy fellow-commoners, convictores
and consalanei, others amici, that are seldom either satisfied, or sure.

have laid a wound under thee] The Hebrew word signifies both a wound and a
plaster: they would secretly wound them, lay a wound under them; and yet seem
willing to bind up their wounds, and heal them, by applying a plaster: such
dawbing there is in the world, Fide, deffide. Cavebis autem si pavebis.

there is none understanding in him] that is, in Edom. and this seems spoken
by way of Apostrophe to the Israelites, whose comfort is intended in this whole
Prophecy. It is as if it had been said, Edom holds himself wise, but will show
himself a very sot, destitute of common sense: such as takes not notice that
these are the wounds with which he was wounded in the house of his friends: the
wit^al is either insensible of it: or else well content with it, till he has
bought his wit, and begins to open his eyes; but not till the pains of death
are upon him, as it is said of the Mole.

Verse 8. Shall I not in that day says the Lord etc.] Edom was famous for
wisdom, as appears by Eliphaz the Temanite, and other of Jobs friends who
were Idumeans: and Rabshakeh could say, that counsel and strength are for wa^r
Esa. 36.5. what a price did Agamemnon sat upon Nestor? and Darins upon
Zophirus? Scipio did nothing without his Polybius, and ascribed most of his
victories to his advise. Prove. 20.18.
Every purpose is established by counsel; and with good advice make war, says
Solomon. Romani sedendo vincnnt passed for a proverb of old. The Romans,
conquered by sitting in counsel: and Cyreas got more cities by his wisdom,
then, Pyrebus by his puissance. But where no counsel is the people fall Prove,
11.14. and this was Edoms case in that day, that is, at that time when their
confederates betrayed them to their enemy, and desolation was at next door
by. God destroyed their wise men: he either cut them off, or infatuated them.
Deus, quem destruit, dementat. When God intends to undo a man (say the Dutch)
he first puts out his eyes, and befools him, Pliny says of the Eagle, that
setting upon the Heart, he lights upon his horns, and there flutters up and
down, filling his eyes with dust, born in her feathers: that at last he may
cast himself from a rock, and become a prey. God blinds the understanding,
and expectorateth the wisdom of those whom he designeth to destruction. Surely
the Princes of Zoan are fools, the wise counselors of Pharaoh are become
brutish, they have also seduced Egypt -- The Lord has mingled a spirit of
perversities in the midst thereof, etc. Esaias 19.11, 12, 13, 14.

Verse 9. And thy mighty men, O Teman,] thy Giants, thy Champions, that durst
look death in the face upon great adventures in the field: these were now
dismayed, and dispirited; their courage was quailed, and even broken with fear,
as the word signifies: so that as Saul, when the Devil had preached his
funeral, made haste and fell with the fullness of his stature all along on the
earth, as being sore afraid, 1 Samuel 28.20, so shall it be with the mighties of
Teman, that is, of Edom: for Teman was nephew to Esau, and son to Eliphaz,
Genesis 36. and of him, some city, or part of the country took its denomination.
The Chaldee and the Vulgar Latin take the word Teman appellatively, and render
it thus. Thy mighty men shall perish from the South: or, those that dwell to
the Southward of thy country, and so are more remote from the Northern
Chaldees; yet they shall no sooner hear of their coming, but they shall
tremble, and forget their prowess.

to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.]
Heb. every man, be he never so manly, and magnanimous. Of the mount of Esau] of
Idumea, which was mountaneous, and therefore fitly called Seir, that is, rough
and rugged, nay be cut off by slaughter.] so that they shall live by fame
only, and hardly that.

Verse 10. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob,] For thine open
violence, Hence tachmas, the vulture, who lives by rapine, Levit. 11.10.
thine iniquity, rapine, injury done by force, and in public view, set upon
the top of a rock, that all might behold it, Ezekiel. 24.7.

against thy brother,] thine own mothers son, Psalm. 50.20. This is no small
aggravation of thy sin, that it is in germanum Iaeob, thy nearest Allies.
Edom had other sins not a few: but this was the chief, and is therefore here
and elsewhere chiefly alleged, as the cause of their utter ruin, Ezech. 25.
and 35. Amos 1. Mal. 1. Nothing is more hateful to God then unnaturalness. A
brother is born for adversity, Prove. 17.17. his birth binds him to it: and he
must first offer violence to himself, that is unkind to his distressed brother:
he must tear the dictates of nature out of his own heart. And however at other
times brethren may jarre and jangle: yet at a strait, and in a stresse, good
nature (if there be any remains of it) will work: and good blood will not belie
it self: Israel was charged for this cause not to abhor an Edomite, because he
was his brother, Deuteronomy. 23.7. and yet the Edomites used them as discourteously
in their passage to Canaan, as the Moabites and Ammonites did, Number. 20.20, 21.
they were also their perpetual enemies, and of a devilish vindictive spirit
toward them, to the very last: hence their ensuing doom.

shame shall cover thee,] for thy violence covering thee as a garment, and for
thy pride compassing thee as a chain, Psalm. 73.6. The face of such as are
ashamed is wont to be covered with blushing, the blood flushing to the outward
parts to relieve them, and, as it were, to hide their shame. Hence the Hebrews
say, that those that blush for shame, are covered with shame, Mic. 6.10. Psalm.
69.8. and 35.26. and 109.17, 29. Job 18.22. Those that shame the counsel of the
poor, because the Lord is his refuge, Psalm. 14.6. shall themselves be covered
with confusion here, and be raised up at last day to shame and everlasting
contempt, Dan. 12.2.

And thou shall be cut off for ever. Aeteruum, ex ima decisus stirpe, peribis.
Esaias prophcieth the same irreparable ruin to Edom, chap. 34.10. and so does
Ezechiel, chap. 35.9. That which Jeremy speaks of seventy years continuance
only of their serving the king of Babel, chap. 25.11. it is not meant of an end
of their captivity, but of the Babylonish Monarchy.

Verse 11. In the day that thou stoodest on the other side,] Over-anent;
curiously cying, and maliciously promoting, by thy virulent tongue, and violent
hands, the downfall of Israel. Nemo curiosus quin malevolus, says an Ancient.
These Edomites fed their eyes with their brethrens miseries, as with a pleasant
spectacle. At first perhaps, they were only lookers on: but afterward they
stood against them in battle (when they saw them worsted) and took part with
their enemies. See Esth. 8.2. Psalm. 9.6. Ephesians. 6.11. The Samaritanes afterward
served them in like sort, as Josephus reports: especially when Antiochus
tormented the Jews, they wrote to him to excuse themselves as no Jews; and
(offering him their service) basely styled him, Antiochus the mighty God.

In the day that the strangers carried away captive, etc.] Edoms malice is here
aggravated by the circumstance of time they took to express it: viz. when Gods
people were at worst, and when their extreme misery should have moved pity.
This was a Dog-like, Devil-like practice, to fall upon those that are down
before; to add affliction to the afflicted, Psalm. 69.26. to push the wounded
out of the Heard, as they say Deer do. Of such barbarous and savage usage David
often complains, and Job, and Jeremy, and Jesus, Psalm. 22. such shall one day
cry out at Gods bar, as Joseph's brethren did, Genesis 42.21. and find no mercy,
Jam. 2.21. no more then cruel Haman did, Esth. 7. it being just with God to
set off all hearts from him, who had been so unreasonably merciless. This Job
well knew, and therefore so studiously purges himself of this heinous
wickedness, chap. 31.29. Ausonius also out of Pitaccus Mytelenaeus affirms
him to be a beast and worse, that makes himself merry in another man's misery.
The beastliest among bruit creatures, even swine, seem to be affected with the
outcries of their kind. Men only, more brutish then they, triumph in the
calamities each of other, and are not moved with their outcries, albeit as
bitter as that of Hezekiah, Esaias 38.14. O Lord, I am oppressed, help me. This
Solomon calls oppression of an high nature, Eccles. 4.1. See Psalm. 142.4.

and forreiners entered into his gates,] having taken the city: then did the
Edomites set fire to the Temple, 2 Esdr. chap. 4. verse. 45. Citizens in a siege
fortify their gates, and defend them to the utmost; for if the gates be
gained, the city is lost: as it was at Jerusalem, and as it had like to have
been at the city of Coccinum, in the Island of Lemnos, which the Turks had
surprised on the sudden, but that they were happily prevented by the courage of
one Marulla, a maiden of that city, who seeing her father slain in the gate,
took up the weapons that lay by him: and, like a fierce Amazon, notably
revenged his death, desperately fighting in defense of her country, Turk. hist.
412
with those few that were in the gate at the first, and so kept the Turks out,
until the rest of the citizens, moved with the alarm, came to the gate.

and cast lots upon Jerusalem,] i. e. upon the plunder of Jerusalem: according
to the custom of old soldiers, Number. 26.56. See this fulfilled, 2 King. 24.
and 25. See also more of this practice, Nah. 3.10. Joel 3.3. and how grievous
it is to the ingenious, hear Andromache, O foelix una ante alias Priameia virge,
Hostilem ad tumulum, Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 3.
Troiae sub moenibus altis
Jussa mori, quae sortitus non pertulit ullos,
Nec victoris heri tetigit captiva cubile.


Even thou wast as one of them.] The emphasis lies in the word Thou: as in
that of Julius Caesar, (...) vov (...). Di^ Cass.
beholding Brutus among the Conspiratours that took away his life: What? Thou
my son Brutus? Even Thou, brother Edom, whom we spared in our passage through
the wilderness; when we destroyed other Nations, Deuteronomy. 2. Thou, who have from
David's days (for most part) been our vassal and tributary. Hierom applies
this to Heretics; Mercer to that Arch-heretike Antichrist, an utter opposite
to Christ, yet a pretended friend (as was Judas) a servant of Gods servants (if
you will believe him) but a most bloody persecutour of the Church, in whose
ruins he yet revelleth, and will do, till Christ shall punish him, with his
sore, and great, and strong sword, Esaias 27.1. and dung his vineyard with the
flesh of that wild-bore.

Verse 12. But thou should not have looked on the day,] Unless it were with
weeping eyes. Ijsdem quibus videmus oculis flemus. Men have the same organ of
seeing and of weeping: that when they behold a doleful object, they might weep
over it: not as the Crocodile does over the dead body which she had slain
before, and afterward devoureth: but with true tears of compassion, Genesis 4.6.
weeping with those that weep. God takes it ill here, that any should once look
upon his afflicted people, unless it be to pity and relieve them. He observed
Cains lowering upon his brother: and the Jews wagging their heads, Mat. 27.39.
Rabshakehs lofty looks, Genesis 31.2.
Esaias 37.23. Labans change of countenance, etc. Men may not look at liberty,
and as they list. Vultu saepe laeditur charitas. It was not for nothing
therefore, that in Queen Elizabeth's days, at a meeting of the borderers in the
Marches, betwixt England and Scotland, about goods unjustly taken, Came Elisab.
279.
security was given and confirmed on both sides by oath, (according to custom)
and proclamation made, that no man should harm other, by word, deed, or look.

when he became a stranger,] and fell under a strange punishment, as Job
speaks, chap. 31.3. that is, a rare and unheard of misery, monstrosum
exilium, Tremellius renders it. This was threatened, 2 Chronicles. 7.21. and
accordingly fulfilled, Lam. 1.9. Israel became the worlds wonderment, a famous
instance of Gods severity against a people of his wrath, and of his curse.
Aben-Ezra renders it, In his strange day, such as he had never seen the like
before. Others, when he was banished his own borders, and became a stranger at
home: when God seemed to look strange upon him, and to stand aloof, or as a man
astonished, that knows not whether he had best help or no, as a mighty man that
cannot save, Jer. 14.8, Acts and Mon, 1423.
9. John Baptist was beheaded in prison without any law, right, or reason, as
though God had known nothing at all of him, said that Martyr.

neither should thou have rejoiced over the children, etc.] For this is to
be sick of the devils disease, (...), and such are assured, that they shall
not go unpunished, Prove. 17.5. God will soon see it, and be displeased, and
turn the current of his wrath, upon such an offendour, Prove. 24.18. as he did
here upon Edom, for looking with liking on the calamity of his brother, for
rejoicing at the downfall of his enemy.

Neither should thou have spoken proudly.] Heb. Magnified thy mouth,
blustering and breathing out big threats, setting up thine horn on high and
saying, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof, Psalm. 137.7.
Diripite, ex imis evertite fundamentis. Buchanan.
Such a Pyrgopolynicas was Nebuchadnezzar, Esaias 10.13. and Alexander the great,
and Antiochus, that little Antichrist, Dan. 7.8. and that great Antichrist of
Rome, bellowing with his bulls, and menacing hell to all that adhere not to
him. See Rev. 13.5, 6. and a like phrase to this, Ezekiel 35.13.

Verse 13. Thou should not have entered into the gate, etc.] But have looked
upon them as my people, though under a cloud of calamity; which will soon blow
over. To enter therefore into their gates for prey, and spoil, is to burden
your selves with that burdensome stone, that shall break you: to drink of that
poisonous cup that shall bane you: to lay your hands upon that harth of fire,
that will burn you, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6 Look to it, hands off, keep you far from
so evil a matter, lest it prove as that gold of Toulouse, a mischief to all
that meddle with it. Aurum Tholosanum.


thou should not have looked,] See Verse 12. The repetition shows the
heinousness of the sin. The Holy Ghost does not open his mouth in vain
(whatever Job did, chap. 36.16.) nor multiply words without reason.

In the day of their calamity.] This is thrice mentioned: to show how sensible
God was of this savage dealing of theirs with his poor people, who now lay
under the strokes and stripes of a displeased mercy. The Hebrew word here
rendered calamity, signifies a fog, vapor, or mistie cloud, Genesis 2.6. Job
36.27. and by a Metaphor, it is put for affliction and misery, as it is also in
Latin.

Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris, Ovid. Athanas.

Nubecula est, cito transibit said that Father.
Verse 14. Neither should thou have stood in the cross-way] To intercept
those poor fugitives. Who sought to save themselves by flight, since they could
not by fight. But alas, Vna salus victis, Virg.
nullam sperare salutem. Seeking to shun the shelves, they ran upon a rock.
Mischeivous Edomites waylaid them: and either slew them, or drew them back to
prison, as in the next words.

neither should thou have delivered up] Or shut up close prisoners the
Residue, Heb: Serido (the same almost with the English, the letters only
transposed) those poor few that were yet undevoured by the sword. This was
greatest cruelty of all: And see the Edomites progress in it, and what
Proficients they prove. Nemo repent fit deterrimus. Sin proceeds by degrees:
neither is any man at his worst at first. First they looked at the churches
calamity, and then they laughed, and then they insulted and spoke big words,
and then they plundered, and lastly they butchered some, and imprisoned other
some. Did not Gods enemies do all this amongst us, in our late unnatural
commotions? wherein, besides the many massacres made every where, it was a like
difficult thing, in those parts where they prevailed, to find a wicked man in
their prisons, or a good man out of them.

Verse 15. For the day of the Lord is near etc.] The wicked plotteth against
the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him: for
he sees that his day is coming Psa. 37.12, 13. the particular day of his sore
punishment, a type and pledge of the general judgment, that great day of the
Lord, as it is called Rev. 6.17. and 16.14. because the great God will on that
day do great works, and determine great matters, Jud. 19. But as some men's
sins go before to judgment, (as it were, by a special sessions preceding and
anteverting the great Assizes) so should Edom, and his neighbor Nations taste
all of Nebuchadnezzars cup and whip Jer. 25. and this day is said to be near
upon them, though it came not of above an hundred years after: so is the
coming of Christ to judgment near, though we presume not to set the time as
some have done, deceiving and being deceived.

as thou have done, it shall be done to thee] God loves to retaliate, and to
oppose frowardness to frowardness Psalm. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety
Levit. 26.18.21. severity to cruelty, as he did to Adonibezek, Agag, Zeba and
Zalmunna Jud. 8.19. and Edom here, and Ezech. 35. And the heathens held this
but meet, as appears by their fables and stories of Phineus Quid fodis
immeritis natis sua lumina, Phineu?
Poena reversura est in caput ipsa tuum. Ovid.

So of Diomedes king of Thrace, Justum est ai^ Rhadamanthus quod quis injuste
alj^s intulit idem subeat and patiatur. Arist. Ethic.
cast by Hercules to be devoured by his own dogs which he had so often fed with
man's flesh. The like might be said of Perillus and his brazen bull, whereof
himself had the handsell. Herein they said no other thing, then what God had in
the old law decreed Levit. 24.19. and Christ in the New has confirmed Mat.
7.2. for a terror to evill-doers, who shall have like for like returned unto
them, and be filled with their own ways Prove. 14.14. See Lam. 4.21. The
Rabbbines conceive all this to be spoken of the Romans (whom they call
Edomites) Sure we are God will be even with that Romish Antichrist, and render
him his own in kind, when he once takes him in hand, as Rev. 18.6. etc. Rev.
13: 10.

Verse 16. For as ye have drunk upon mine holy mountaine] As you O Edomites,
have rejoiced and revelled in the ruins of Zion, carousing and carolling in
her calamity, so shall many nations, and you among, yea above the rest (for
your excessive perfidy and cruelty) drink deeply of the cup of Gods fury, which
has eternity to the bottom.

and they shall be as though they had not been] This clause makes against that
other sense that some set upon the text, viz. The Heathen shall drink, feast,
and triumph over thee, O Edom, whom they have subdued: yea they shall drink so
stoutly that they shall swallow thee up, and all thy substance, leaving thee
nothing Praeter coelum and coenum, as that Roman prodigal boasted he had done
to himself. Their exposition seems more probable, who here begins the
Consolatory part of the Prophecy? and make this verse an Apostrophe to the
afflicted Jews thus. Aben-Ezra Tremell. Mercer. Levely^ Tar^^^.
Like as ye my people have drunk your part of the cup of affliction (an
ordinary Metaphor, not in Scripture only, as Ezekiel. 23.32. Ier. 49.12. Mat.
20.22. but also in Heathen Writers, in allusion perhaps to the cup of poison
given at Athens to Malefactors, or (as some think) to the manner of their
feasts whereat the Symposiarch, or ruler of the feast ( Ioh. 2.) gave order
what, and how much, every one should drink) so shall all the Heathen drink, and
that continually: yea they shall not only sip of the top, that which is
sweetest and clearest; but the dregs and sediment too, they shall both drink
and swallow down; till such time as it has wholly swallowed them up, so that
they shall be as though they had not been. See for confirmation of this sense,
Ier. 25.25. and 49.12. And pray for the ruin of Rome, so long since foretold by
Sibylla. Tota eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. The Prophecy is
fulfilled already in Edom; whose very name is lost, more then what the
Scripture reports of them. The Chaldees cut off abundance of them, together
with the Moabites, Ammonites, and other neighbor nations. After that, Judas
Macchabeus, and his nephew Hircanus slew a great sort of them: and then,
lastly, the Romans and other Princes rooted them utterly out. See Joseph. Lib.
1. Antiq. cap. 10. 1 Maccab. 5.65. 2 Mac. 10.16, 32.

Verse 17. But upon Mount Zion shall be deliverance,] God will turn again
their captivity as the streams in the South. He stirred up the spirit of Cyrus
to send them home: he restored unto them both Religion and Liberty: he did all
that could be done for them, by sending his Son amongst them in the fullness of
time, made of a woman, etc. made also unto all his people, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Jesus has
delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Neither is there any other
Name, whereby heaven is to be had, but only by the Name of Jesus.

and there shall be holiness,] Holiness to the Lord, as Zach. 14.20. See the
Notes there. All the Lords people shall be an holy nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. Every
inhabitant of the city of God shall be partaker of holiness, both imputed and
imparted; that, for justification, being inherent in Christ, imputed to us;
this, for sanctification, imparted by Christ, inherent in us.

and the house of Jacob shall possesse' their possessions.] They returning from
Babylon shall not only recover their own possessions, out of the hands of the
Edomites, Samaritans, and Syrians, by virtue of an Edict from king Darius; but
they shall also possess the Edomites themselves, and their territories: when
converted to the faith of Christ, they shall bring their wealth unto the
Church, and (as it is faid of Tyrus, Esaias 23.18.) feed and clothe therewith the
Saints of God.

Verse 18. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, etc.] The house of Jacob are
the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin: the house of Joseph are the ten tribes of
Israel, whereof Ephraim was the head. The sense is this, those two tribes,
together with such of the ten as joined themselves to them, either before, or
after the captivity, shall invade Idumea, burn it, and subdue it, as fire does
stubble fully dry. This was done by Hircanus, and Judas Macchabeus, who
compelled the Edomites to be circumcised: and so wholly possessed those parts,
Joseph. 13. Ant. 17.
that there were not any relics of them remaining; no not so much as one
(...) (as the Septuagint render it) or, (...) (as some read them,) any to carry
corn after the camp, or fire before it, according to the custom of the Greeks
and Easterlings: which torch-bearer might as little be violated, as an
Ambassador; but here, he should be cut off with the rest, and not so much as
a messenger left to relate the overthrow. The Edomites were so utterly rooted
out by Hircanus, Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 3.
that they thenceforth ceased to be Edomites, and became Jews. Those of them
that were converted, by the preaching of the Gospel, ceased to be either
Edomites or Jews, and became Christians. The Apostles burning with the zeal of
Gods glory, and love to men's souls, devoured and wasted the infidelity, idols,
and vices of the Gentiles, wherever they came preaching. Hence Chrysostom
says, Peter was a man made all of fire, walking among stubble: Paul was
insatiabilis Dei cu^tor, an insatiable servant of Christ. And to the like
purpose it was, that to one that desired to know what kind of man Basil was, it
is said, there was presented in a dream a pillar of fire, with this Motto,
Talis est Basilius, Such an one is Basil. And old Latimer, when he was demanded
the reason why so little powerful preaching? answered, Deest ignis, the spark
of the spirit is wanting. Howbeit this Prophecy, as it began to be fulfilled at
first by the Apostles, and the Apostolical persons that came after them; so it
is daily, and shall be continually to the worlds end fulfilled by the faithful
preachers of Gods holy word, who are clothed with a spirit of judgment and of
burning, Esaias. 4 4. and out of whose mouth proceeds fire, Rev. 11.5. to purge
the gold, and to consume the stubble.

Verse 19. And they of the South shall possess the mount of Esau,] Those of
the South, that is, the tribe of Judah. For Iudaea was divided into five parts,
Josh. 15. whereof one was Southward, toward the coast of Edom, ver. 21. Another
was in the vale or plain, near unto the Philistines, ver. 33. Here then Obadiah
shows, that the Jews shall not only recover their ancient inheritances, but
also much enlarge the same: whereby he signifies, that the Church of Christ
shall grow so very great, that Jewry shall be too narrow for them (see Zach.
10.10) the ancient bounders shall not receive them. See Number. 24.17. Esaias 11.14.
The Gospel was soon spread, not only to the neighbor nations, but to all the
ends of the earth: the Edomites, Philistines, etc. are only mentioned, as
being better known and more adverse to the Jews, then other nations were.

and they of the plain, the Philistines,] i.e. those five Lordships, Gath,
Gaza, Ascalon, Ekron, and Azotus, all which country (called Sarona, Acts 9.)
Augustus gave to Herod the Ascalonite; and, after his death, to his sons;
dividing it into Tetrarchies, Luke 3.1.

and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria,] All
which Hircanus subdued, and destroyed their Temple built in mount Garizim.

and Benjamin shall possess Gilead,] that is, shall propagate and extend his
habitation beyond Jordan: and in respect of his exceeding great multitude,
shall be compelled to hold and possess Gilead, all the country betwixt Jordan
and mount Libanus. Thus Hierom with the Hebrew Scholiasts, and many others: who
do also note, that under these earthly felicities heavenly are described: and
that all this is chiefly accomplished under Christ, when as the faithful are
made heirs and lords of all things by Him, who is their Head. See Ezekiel. 37.16,
etc.

Verse 20. And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel, etc.] i.e.
the multitude of the Jews carried captive to Babylon, returning at length into
their own country, shall possess all the places of the Canaanites, all the
Maritine cities, all the tract of ground as far as Sarepta, which is betwixt
Tire and Zidon, therefore called Sarepta of Zidon, 1 King. 17.19. Here dwelt
the Canaanites, whom Asher could not expel, Judge. 1.31, 32. See Mat. 15.22.

and the captivity of Jerusalem which is in Sepharad,] that is, either in some
city of Assyria, or in the utmost bounds of the Babylonish dominion, (as some
interpret the word Sepharad, by taking it asunder) or as far as Apharad, (so
the Septuagint) that is, Euphrates. The Hebrew Doctors, as by Canaanites here,
they understand the Dutch, and by Zarephath, France, so by Sepharad they will
needs have Spain to be meant, subdued say they by Nebuchadnezzar, after other
his great conquests, and by him planted with Jews, carried captive from
Jerusalem. With such bold and frivolous fancies do these poor deluded creatures
fondly feed themselves. They are generally light, aeriall, and fanaticall
brains, says One: apt to work themselves into the fools-paradise of a sublime
dotage. They not only expect a corporal restitution to their own country,
Blounts voyage.
but also a sovereignty over all other nations, and possession of their
Provinces, says Another: they believe that the Messiah is not yet come,
Buxtorf. synag. c. 5.
because the Christian Empire is not yet destroyed: and therefore they pray
daily for the overthrow of the Roman Empire. Out of the East it is that they
expect their Messiah, whither the Spanish Jews fled, (when they were banished)
and are exceedingly multiplied: for those do they hold to be this captivity of
Jerusalem here mentioned, Spec. Europ.
viz. of the tribe of Judah; and the other in Germany, and Italy, to be of the
tribe of Benjamin: who in honor of the more noble tribe, and to correspond
with them the better, do learn the Spanish Tongue: which those still retain, in
hope, belike, to be one day Lords of that large and rich country.

Shall Possess the cities of the South.] i. e. shall return to their own
Southerly cities and provinces. And this Prophecy of recovering the holy land,
is to be taken in a spiritual sense: and it imports, that all those that are
Israelites indeed, Jews inwardly, shall flee to the Church of Christ, Romans 9.

Verse 21. And Saviors shall come up on mount Zion,] Judas Macchabeus, and
Hircanus in the history: as in the mystery, the Apostles and other of Christ's
Ministers, who are here and elsewhere called Saviors (a very high style)
because God makes use of their Ministry (as he does likewise of the Angels)
for the good of them that are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. and by their help,
the faithful are saved. Hence those expressions, 1 Timothy 4.16. thou shall save
thy self and those that hear thee, Iam. 5.20. he shall save a soul from death,
Job 33.24. Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have received a ransom.
See also Mic. 5.6. Jude 23. 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9, and 4.1. and 9.22. Let Ministers
hence learn their dignity, and their duty. Christ has communicated to them
many of his own most honorable titles, as Light of the world, Doctor,
Pastor, Savior Redeemer, etc. True it is, He alone is the principal Savior
(and therefore it follows in the closure of this shortest, Brevissimus sed
difficilimus Propheta. Mer^er.
but most difficult Prophet, the kingdom shall be the Lords) He, to speak
properly is the sole both Sovereign and Savior of his body the Church. Sed
servatores dicuntur, says Mercer, but they are called Saviors, because they
preach the word of this salvation, and are isntrumental to Christ in that
great work; like as the Apothecary is to the skillful Physician, in curing his
patient of a deadly disease.

to judge the mount of Esau,] Antichrist with his adherents: all other Infidels
also, and Atheists, condemned here by Christ and his faithful Ministers, Ezekiel.
20.4.
as rebels against God, and sinners against their own souls. Will thou judge
them, son of man? will thou judge them? cause them to know their abomination,
and to judge themselves worthy to be destroyed; that judging themselves, they
may not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. but of Esauites may become true Iacobites: as
Iether, by nature an Ismaelite, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. is, for his faith and piety,
called an Israelite, 2 Samuel 17.25. Lo thus to judge the mount of Esau, ought to
be the ambition of Christ's Ministers, for to gain them to Christ, by
convincing the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, that is, of
the mischief of sin, the necessity of justification by Christ's merit, and of
sanctification by his Spirit. This is to be both Judges and Saviors; as those
Judges of old were, whereunto the Prophet here seems to allude. This is to
save people with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Joh. 16.^.
Jude 23. This is to proclaim Christ King, and to set the Crown upon his head,
as Cant. 3.11. with that glorious acclamation, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord
is our lawgiver, the Lord is our King, and He will save us, Esaias 33.22.

The Kingdom shall be the Lords.] Not only the Kingdom of Power, over all
creature, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. and Grace in the hearts of his people here (called
often the kingdom of heaven in the Gospel) but also of Righteousness, and of
Glory hereafter, to be chiefly exercised at that Great and dreadful day.

Now to this King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be honor
and glory, for ever, and ever. Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.


A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of JONAH.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. NOw the word of the Lord came] Heb. And the word] For with that
particle And, the Hebrews sometimes begin a discourse, as Ezekiel. 1.1. Levit.
1.1. an elegancy proper to that tongue. Howbeit Hugo Cardinalis makes this
And, not an inceptive particle, but a copulative to many other things that were
in the Prophets mind. Others conceive it to be continuative of some other
history not now extant: or at least connexive of this history with the course
of his ordinary calling, and Prophetike employment among the ten tribes, to
whom he prophesied together with Hosea, 2 King. 14.25.
Amos and others, but with little good success, in the reign of Jeroboam the
second, a Prince more prosperous then pious. Jonah prophesied of his
prosperity, and victories: whereof when no good use was made by the house of
Israel; their calamity and captivity was likewise foretold by Hosea, Amos, and
Esaias: and hence some conclude, that Jonas was the first of all the Prophets,
whose writings are extant: For he lived, say they, before the battle of Joash
King of Israel with the Syrians, about the end of the life and prophes^e of
Elisha, 2 King. 13.14, etc. and 14.25.

unto Jonah the son of Amittai,] Jonah signifies a Dove, but Jonah had too
little of the dove in him: plenus enim fuit effraenatis mot^bus, says One, as
passionate a man of an honest man, Luther. D. Harris
as you have lightly heard of, says Another. Whether he was that mad fellow
(as those much more mad Captains called him, 2 King. 9.11.) that was sent to
anoint Iehu, or else the widow of Sarepta's son, raised by Eliah, (as the
Hebrews will have him to be) I have not to say. But that he was a servant of
the Lord, we find, 2 King. 14.25. and a type of Christ, Mat. 12.40. concerning
whom he prophesied, Augustine.
non tam sermon quam sua quadam passione, far more plainly, then if he had by
voice foretold his death and resurrection. And whereas the Grandees and
Potentates of the world get them a great name by the death and danger of many
others; Jonas his omnibus superior est, says an Interpreter, Jonah surpasses
them all in this, that by his sermon at Niniveh he preserved that great city,
wherein were so many thousand persons, and so much cattle chap. 4.11. That he
was called and sent thither by God, it appears by this text, Oecol. in l^c.
and Oecolampadius observes it. He was not, says he, of them that run before
they are sent; but being sent, he refused to run, because of the hardness of
the task laid upon him as did likewise Moses and Jeremy, till better tutoured.
There is less danger in refusing to run when sent, then in running unsent. But
when God calls a man to the ministry, let him not doubt or despond, though
at first he find not so much encouragement. Magna semper fecerint, qui Deo
vocante docuerunt, says Luther. They have always done great things that have
followed Gods call, as did Jonas at Niniveh, and does still in the Church of
God: for among others, Cyprian that famous Martyr confesses, that he was
converted from idolatry and Necromancy, by hearing the history of the Prophet
Jonas read and expounded to him by Cecilius, whom he thencesorth called novae
vitae parentem, the father of his christian life.

Verse 2. Arise, go to Niniveh] Haec est vocatio Prophetae says Oecolampadius:
This was the Prophets call, which he should have obeyed without hucking or
shucking delays or disputes, conferring, or consulting with flesh and blood
Gal. 1.16. True it is, that in humane governments, where reason is shut out,
there tyranny is thrust in. As in the Papacy (where the whore sits upon them
Rev. 17.1. that is, uses them vilely and basely; sits upon their
consciences, as Rachel did upon her fathers images) though their superiors
command the Friars a voyage to China or Peru, without dispute of delay they
must presently set forward: to detract or disobey in this case is held breach
of vow, Spec. Europ.
equal to sacrilege: This is intolerable tyranny. But where God calls or
commands (as here,) to ask a reason, is presumption; to oppose reason, is
rebellion. Paul durst not but be obedient to the heavenly vision Act. 26.19.
(...).
Jonah declined his Apostleship (as a Father calls it) but it had like to
have cost him a choking: whereof when in danger, he could confess that They
that observe lying vanities (as he had done to his cost) forsake their own
mercy, are miserable by their on election. John. 2.8.
As for the expression here used, Arise go, it is hortantis particula, and
studium notat: it is an encouraging and exciting particle. Up and be doing. Be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.12. Surge, age, sum Pater --
Said Mantuan to the Pope, exciting him to take up arms against the Turk. There
is a curse to him that does the work of the Lord negligently Jer. 48.10. and a
Command to do it with all our might Eccles. 9.10.

Nineveh that great city] Built by Ninus, and by him so named: as Adrianople,
Constantinople, Charlestown etc. A great city it was indeed, never any so
great: as consisting of three cities, and having more people within the walls,
then are now in some one kingdom, says an Author. It was sixty miles about,
says Diodorus Siculus ( Bunting says Alcaire at this day is no less: Paulus
Venetus says Quinsay in Tartary is an hundred miles in circuit, but we are
not bound to believe him. It is enough that Cambalu the chief city there is 28.
miles in compass) Nineveh was three days journey in Jonah's days, fortified
with a wall of an 100. Turk. hist. fol. 75.
foot high: and that also beautified, and beset with 1500. towers, each of them
erected to the height of 200. foot. Thus far Diodorus: who also tells us that
this great city received one ruin by the river Tigris, which at an innundation
bra^^ out upon the wall, and threw down twenty furlongs thereof. See Nah. 1.9.
Its la^t destruction was undertaken and ended by Nebuchadnezzar, as the Jews
in their Chronology testify. Herodotus says, by Cyaxares, not by Astyages,
Herod in Clie.
as Hierome mistaketh him. If Sardanapalus were king of Nineveh, when Jonas
cried against it (as Corn. a Lapide contendeth) it was much that such an
egregious voluptuary should so soon be wrought upon, as chap. 3. But He and his
people soon relapsed to their former impiety; and were therefore destroyed, as
Nahum had foretold: So that it may now be said of Nineveh as once it was of
another great city in Strabo, magna civitas, magna solitudo. That great city is
become a great desert. See Zeph. 2.15, It is nothing now but a sepulcher of it
self, a little town of small Trade, where Nestorius his sectaries have taken
their shelter, at the devotion of the Turk. It is become like that other
Niniveh mentioned by Eusebius quae est parvum quoddam in angulo Arabico
oppidum, Lib. de loc. Ebraic.
which is a certain little town in a corner of Arabia.

and cry against it] Cry aloud with open mouth, and full throat, sic clames, ut
Stentora vincere possis. Isa. 51.1.
The voice said Cry: but what should he cry? Cry that their wickedness is come
up before me (so some) but that is not all: Cry, as chap. Hben-Ezra.
3.5. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, for their wickedness is
come etc. their iniquity will be their ruin: tell them so from me Esa.
31.10.11.

their wickedness is come up before me] Their pride, Am. 5.12.
cruelty and other many and bony sins, as Amos has it. Of their idolatry we
read not, and yet we doubt not: they declared their sins as Sodom Es. 10.9.
they set them upon the cliffs of the rocks Ezekiel. Jer. 3.4, 5.
8. they did wickedly as they could, and filled not only the earth with their
abominations, but the heaven also with the noise and stench thereof, to the
annoying of Gods senses, and the vexing of his soul; more then any filthy
drunkard does those that are sober, with his hooting and spewing. See Genesis
4.10, and 18, 20. Rev. 18.5. with the Notes.

Verse 3. But Jonah rose up to flee etc.] i. e. He made have (more have then
good speed) to disobey God. Homo est inversus decalogus. The natural man
stands acrosse to the will of God: being abominable, disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate Tit. 1.16. Jonas was a spiritual man; and should
have discerned all things 1 Cor. 2.15. But this spiritual man was mad Hos. 9.7.
(as they that are cured of a frensy, will yet have their freakes, and frantic
tricks sometimes) he cast off the yoke, and turned, for the time, runnagate
from the Lord; who met him at half-turn, and brought him back again, though by
weeping-crosse. Of the black-birds dung is made the lime whereby he is taken:
so here. They that would excuse Jonas, and say that he sinned not, Dei scriptis
injuriam faciunt, says Luther, they wrong the scriptures. The best have their
infirmities: as the snow-like swan has black legs: and as no pomegranate is
without some rotten grains. David saw such volumes of corruptions, and so many
Errata's in all that he did, that he cries out, Who can understand his errors?
Cleanse thou me from secret faults, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 11.
Psalm. 19.12.

to flee unto Tarshish] Tarsus in Cilicia, St. Paul's country Act. 21.39. and
23.3. rather then the city Tunis in Afrike, as Vatablus will have it, or the
East Indies, as others. Tarshish sometimes signifies the maine Ocean, as Psalm.
48.8. (whence some take it here for the sea) but that may be by a metonymie of
the adjunct: because Tarsus stood upon the Ocean-shore, and was a fit haven
whence to hoise up sail into sundry countries.

from the presence of the Lord] Ab ante Domini from the special and spiritual
presence of God wherein he had hitherto stood and ministered. For from Gods
general presence (whereby he fills all places) and is not far from any one
of us Act. 17.27. (not so far surely, as the bark is from the tree, the skin
from the flesh, or the flesh from the bones) Jonas knew he could not flee.
Blind Nature saw and could say. -- quascunque accesseris oras,
Sub Jove semper eris. --
God is a circle, said Empedocles, whose center is every where, whose
circumference is no where. Why the Prophet fled, many causes are assigned by
Interpreters: as Amor patriae, timor humanus etc. his fear of the Ninevites,
his love to his Israelites, his conceit that it would be to little purpose to
preach to heathens, since he had prevailed so little at home etc. The very cause
was that which we find chap. 4.2. I fled to Tarshish: for I knew that thou art
a gracious God etc. and I feared, lest I should thereupon be counted a false
Prophet. So much there is of Self found in the best: who when once they are got
out of Gods way, they may run they know not whither, and return they know not
when.

and went down to Ioppa] Heb. Iapho; a sea-town in the tribe of Dan. Josh.
19.46. distant about 50. miles from Geth-Hepher ( Jonas his town 2 King.
14.25.) which was in the tribe of Zabulon toward the lake of Tiberias. (...)
Sinners are no small paines-takers. There is the same Hebrew and Greek word
for wickedness and toilesomenesse. Would sinners be at the same pains for
heaven, (...).
that they are at for hell, they could not lightly miss of it.

and he found a ship going to Tarshish] They that have a mind to commit sin,
shall easily meet with an occasion: the Tempter, who feels their pulses and
knows which way they beat, will soon fit them a penniworth: He has a wedge
of gold to set before Achan, a Cozbi before Zimri. Indeed it is the just man's
happiness, that no evil shall happen to him Prove. 12.21. that is (as Mercer
interprets it) non parabitur ei; and dabitur occasio iniquitatis, Non
causabi^ur, aptabitur.
God shall cut off from him the occasions of sin, remove stumbling blocks out
of his way; either not lead him into temptation, or not leave him in it.

so he paid the fare thereof] Forsan ut citius navy solveret: Mercer.
perhaps to make the mariners hasten the more. Jonas might better have obeyed
God and gone to Nineveh on free-cost. But wit is best when it is bought, they
say. How many be there, who perish at their own charge; as Phocion the Athenian
paid for the poison that dispatched him.

to go with them to Tarshish from the presence etc.] i. e. out of Gods
blessing, into the worlds warm Sun. All wilful sinners are runnagates from
the Lord; factique sunt a cord suo fugitivi, says Teritullian: feign they
would also run (if they knew how, or whither) from their own consciences. But
if they belong to God, Conscience shall be awakened to do its office: and they
shall one day say with her, I went out full, and the Lord has brought me home
again empty, why then call ye me Naomi; call me Marah: for the Almighty has
dealt very bitterly with me Ruth 1.20, 21.

Verse 4. But the Lord sent out] Heb. cast forth, sc. out of his treasuries
Psalm. 135.7. where-hence he sends at his pleasure mighty great winds which he
(the only Aeolus) holds in his fist, hides in his repositories, checketh
them as he sees good, weighs them in his hand Job 28.25. sends them out as his
Posts, makes them pace orderly, appoints them their motion, whether as
messengers of mercy Number. 11.13. Genesis 8.1. Exodus 14.21. or as executioners of
justice Exodus 10.13. Job 1.29. hurting men's houses, cattle, corn, persons: yea
hurrying and hurling the wicked into hell Job 27.21.

a great wind into the sea] whither they that go down in ships see Gods great
wonders in the deep. For he commands and raises the stormy wind, which
lifts up the waves thereof etc. Psa. 107.23, 24, 25. etc. Did it not so in a
marvelous manner here in 88. and again in that other 88. some few years
since? Had not Jehosaphat his ships broken at, Ezion-geber 1 King. 22.48. Val.
Max. Christian. p^ 132.
and Charles the fifth at Algeire by two terrible tempests, which destroyed
almost all that goodly Fleet? The very mariners acknowledged this wind to be
an effect of Gods justice, and therefore thought fit to implore his mercy: for

there was a mighty tempest in the sea] which is troublesome of it self and
never still; though sometimes it seems so: but by blustering and big winds is
made out of measure troublesome, such as was that (...) Luke 8.23. Inhorrait
mar^ Virg.
and that Eur^clydon Act. 27.14. which Pliny calls Navigantium, Pestem, the
mariners misery.

so that the ship was like to be broken] Heb. thought to be broken. Gr. (...).
was in danger to be broken: the mariners made no other reckoning: they looked
upon all as lost. God reserveth his holy hand for a dead lift usually: and
loves to help those that are forsaken of their hopes.

Verse 5. Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man to his God]
Forced by the present necessity, first these stout fellows were surprised with
fear: neither could they look pale death in the face with blood in their
cheeks. Death is the king of terrors Job 18.14. Natures slaughter-man, Gods
curse and hels purveyour Next they cried every man to his God. This was a
lesson of Dame Natures teaching, sc. that there is a God, and that this God is
to be called upon, and especially in distress. Those fools of the people that
said there was no God, could not (when hardly bestead) but look up to heaven
and cry out for help. (...)
All people will walk every one in the name of his God Mic. 4.5. These mariners
or salt-men (so called, either because they dealt in that commodity, or else
because they rowed in the salt sea) had their several gods, according to their
several countries, and these they now called upon, whom till now perhaps they
little enough cared for; seamen aae not over-pious, for most part. And yet of
the Turkish mariners I have read, that every morning they salute the Sun with
their general shouts; and a Priest saying a kind of Letany, Blunts voy. p. 76.
every prayer ending with Macree Kichoon that is, be Angels present: the people
answer in manner of a shout Homin, that is Amen. But it is remarkable, that
these in the text, though they cried every man to his God, yet, Serve. in Georg.
lib. 1.
lest they might all mistake the true God, they awaken Jonah to call upon his
God. This uncertainty, attending idolatry, caused the Heathens to close their
petitions with that general Dijque Deaeque omnes. But (thirdly) as they cried
to their gods, so (according to that rule Ora and labora.)

they cast forth the wares that were in the ship] Not doubting to sacrifice
their goods to the service of their lives. Skin for skin, and all that a man
has etc. so Act. 27.18 19, 38. Let us lose any thing for eternal life Luke
16.8. and 9.25. Mat. 18.8 suffer any hardship for heaven: we cannot buy it too
dear. A stone will fall down to come to its own place, though it break it self
in pieces by the way: so we, that we may get to our center, which is upward etc.

but Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship] Into the bottom of it,
bither he had betaken himself before the storm; not considering that God had
long hands to pull him out of his lurking-holes, and bring him to judgment.

and he lay and was fast asleep] It Is likely, that he had not slept of many
nights before (through care, fear and grief, those three vultures that had
been gnawing upon his inwards) and therefore now sleeps the more soundly. Or
rather it was carnal security: his heart being hardened by the deceitfulness
of sin Heb. 3.13. He had hardened his heart against Gods fear, and wilfully
withdrawn from his obedience: hence this spiritual lethargy, this deep sleep
in sin; not unlike that of the Smiths dog, whom neither the hammers above him,
nor the sparks of fire falling round about him can awake: though the water-pot
and spear be taken from the bolster, the secure person stirrs not: though the
house be on fire over his ears, he starts not. Their senselessness God will
cure in his Jonas's, by sharp afflictions. Cold diseases must have hot and
sharp remedies. The lethargy is best cured by a burning ague: God will let his
presumptuous people see what it is to make wounds in their consciences, to try
the preciousnesse of his balm: such may go mourning to their graves. And
though with much ado they get assurance of pardon, yet their consciences will
be still trembling as David's Psa. 51. till God speak further peace, even as
the water of the sea after a storm is not presently still: but moves and
trembles a good while after the storm is over.

Verse 6. So the ship-mas^^ came unto him] God might have come himself with his
drawn sword, (as Baanah and Rechab did upon sleeping Ishbosheth) and taken off
his head: or have sent an evil Angel to arouse him in a fright: or have thrown
him into the burning lake, as Agrippa did his dormouse into the boiling
caldron. But such is not Gods manner of dealing with his people, though he be
deeply displeased. Jer. 10.24.
Correct them he will, but with judgment not in his anger, lest they be burnt
to nothing. Instruct them also he will ( Corrections of instruction are the way
of life Pro. 6.23.) by one means or other; as he did here Jonas by a rude
mariner: and as long before he had done Abraham and Sarah by Abimelech an
Heathen Prince, to shame them

what meanest thou O sleeper] Heb. Genesis 20.
what is come to thee? what a senseless stupidity has seized thee. Are we all
in danger, and do thou sleep? as the Philosopher (in danger likewise of
shipwreck) said to one that made light of it, Do we all stand upon our lives,
(...)
and do thou play the fool? The spiritual sleeper, in like sort, may he be
but warm in his own feathers, regards not the danger of the house. He is,
says One, a mere mute and cipher, a nullity in the world, a superfluity in the
earth, Jeremies rotten girdle, good for nothing, or like the branches of a
vine, Ezech. 15.3.

arise, call upon thy God] For our gods will do nothing for us. The gods of the
heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands: they have mouths but
speak not, etc. Psalm. 115.4. But if Gods Israel trust in the Lord, he will be
their help, and their shield, v. 9. Forasmuch as there is none like unto him,
Ier. 10.6. neither is their Rock as our Rock, our enemies themselves being
judges, Deuteronomy. 32.31.

if so be that God will think upon us,] The Chaldee has it, will be merciful
unto us: The Hebrew word signifies, will clear up, and behold us with a serene
countenance; granting us a calm, and taking care that we perish not So shall
we acknowledge him to be Haelohim, that God by an excellency. Q. Elizabeth
(that Regina Serenissima) for her merciful returning home certain Italians that
were taken prisoners in the 88 Invasion, was termed Saint Elizabeth by some at
Venice: who also affirmed to the English Ambassador there, that though they
were Papists, yet they would never pray to any other Saint, but that Saint
Elizabeth.

Verse. 7. And they said every one to his fellow] when Jonas had now prayed, and
yet the tempest continued (for we know that God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31.
no not a David or a Jonah, if he regard iniquity in his heart, Psalm. 66.18. how
should the plaster prevail whiles the weapon remains in the wound?) they
resolve to try another course for the safeguard of their lives. Man is (...), a
creature that would fain live, said Esop; and what man is he that desires
life, and loves many days that he may see good, says David, whereunto Austin
answers, Quis vitam non vult? Hom. 4.
who would not be master of such an happiness?

Come and let us cast lots] And so put the matter into Gods hands, Pro. 16.33.
He disposes of lottery, so it be rightly undertaken, not superstitiously,
curiously, rashly: but as trusting in God, and not tempting him.

that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us] Some extraordinary
cause they knew there was of this extraordinary tempest. Sinful men strike not
their dogs, much less their children, without a cause. A Be stings not, till
provoked; neither does God punish his creatures, till there be no other remedy,
2 Chronicles. 36.16. Good therefore is the counsel of the Prophet, Lam. 3.39, 40.
Why is living man sorrowful, a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search
and try our ways ( find out the sin that God strikes at) and turn again to
the Lord; turn and live.

so they cast lots,] They should have also prayed, as Act. 1. and 6. saying as
Saul, 1 Samuel 14. Give a perfect lot: wicked men also are bound to pray, Psalm.
14.4. but although they do not, God can get himself glory by their profane
lottery; as he did by Nebuchadnezzars, Ezekiel. 21.20, 21.

and the lot fell upon Jonah] Secret sins will out at length, and be brought
into judgment, Eccles. 12.14. Saeculi laetitia est impunita nequitiae. Aug.
Surely the bitterness of death is past, said Agag, but he found it otherwise.
1 Samuel 15.
Janah thought himself out of the reach of Gods rod, etc. Wicked men's faults
shall be written in their foreheads; and they forced to answer for all at last
with flames about their ears.

Verse 8. Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause, etc.] He confessed not till
urged, and necessitated. Sin gagges people, and prompts them to hide their
faults, as Adam; or at least to mince, extenuate, shift them upon other persons
and things, as Eve. Sin and shifting came into the world together; and Satan,
that old manslayer, knowing that there is no way to purge the soul but upwards,
holds the lips close, that the heart may not disburden it self, God by this
means is often put to his proof, and must bring the malefactor to trial; who
refusing ordinary trial, must therefore be pressed, Jer. 2.35.

what is thine occupation?] For that thou have one, we take it for granted. At
Athens every man was once a year, at least, to give account to the Judges by
what art or trade he maintained himself. By Mahomets law, the Grand Signior
himself must use some manual trade; Solomon the Magnificent made arrow-heads;
Mahomet the great horn-rings for archers, etc. That which the mariners here
enquire after is, whether Jonas his occupation be honest and lawful? whether he
labored the thing that was good, Ephesians. 4.28. For if any man overreach or
oppress his brother in any matter, by the use of any ill arts, he shall be
sure to find, that the Lord is the venger of al such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. though
happily they lie out of the walk of humane justice, or comes not under man's
cognizance.

and whence come thou?] Art thou not of an accursed country? and is not thy
people a people of Gods wrath, as England was in the time of the
sweatingsicknesse, Lifeo^ Edw. 6. by S. J. H.
pursuing the English wherever they came; which made them like tyrants both
feared and avoided of all nations? How the Jews are at this day hated and
shunned as an execrable people, is known to all.

what is thy country, and of what people art thou?] Notanda brevitas, says
Hierome here, Note the brevity of the^e questions, nothing short of those in
Virgil so much admired.

-- juvenes quae causa subegit
Ignotas tentare vias? quo tenditis? inquit,
Quod genus? V^rg. Aene. ^^
unde domo? pacemne huc fertis, an arma?
Note also here, how these Pagans proceed not to execution, till they have
fully inquired into the matter. This was far better then that ugly custom of
some people in Europe, mentioned by Eneas Sylvius: that if any one amongst them
be suspected of theft, or the like crime, he is presently taken and hanged up.
Then, three days after they examine the business; and (...) the party be
found guilty, they suffer his body there to hang till it rot down: or if
otherwise, they bury him in the Churchyard, (...) Sy^. Europ. cap. 20.
and keep a funeral-feast at the public charge.

Verse. 9. And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew] i. e. a true Believer, as was
Heber the Patriarch, Genesis 10.21. and, after him, Abram the Hebrew, as he is
called, Genesis 14.13. This name of Hebrews, as it was the first title given to
Abraham and his seed, so it indureth one of the last, 2 Cor. 11.22. Philip. 3 5
Epistle to the Hebrews, title.

and I fear the Lord God of heaven,] That Is mine occupation: I serve God with
my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, as Paul has it, Romans 1.9. every
faithful Minister is servant to the King of heaven, Act. 27.23. (this the devil
could not deny, Act. 16.16, 17.) neither is he of his meaner or inferior
servants, of his Underling, sbut of the noblest employment: Ministers are his
Stewards, Ambassadors, Paranymphs, or Spokesmen, etc. and this is their
occupation, or their work; far beyond that of Solomon's servants.

which has made the sea, and the dry land,] This troublesome sea that now so
threatens you: and that dry land which you would so fain recover. These, with
all their contents, are his creatures: neither did he make them, and then seave
them to Fate or Fortune; as a carpenter leaves the house he has built to
others, or a ship-wright the ship: but he orders and rules them at his
pleasure, and will unmake all again, rather then his shall want help in one
season, Psalm. 124.8. and 134.3. This was part of Jonah's confession, and but
part of it: for he told them (no doubt) how ill he had dealt with this great
and good God, running away by ^ealth from his masters service, and detrecting
his yoke; and that therefore he was justly apprehended, and adjudged to death.
To this purpose was Jonas his confession, quae ei salutis fuit exordium, says
Mercer, which was the beginning of his safety and salvation. Now his hard heart
is broken, and his dumb mouth opened, not only to confess his offense, but to
aggravate it: in that being not only an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a member of the
true Church, but a Prophet, a Doctor in Israel, he should deal so perversely
and perfidiously. It is a sweet happiness when sin swells as a toad in a man's
eyes, and he can freely confess it in the particulars, and with utmost
aggravation; laying open al his transgressions in all his sins, as Moses
phraseth it, Lev. 16.21. Affliction sanctified will bring a soul to this, as
here it did the Prophet: like herein to that helve Elisha cast into the water,
that fetched up the iron that was in the bottom.

Verse 10. Then were the men exceedingly afraid] Heb. with great fear; when
once they had heard the business, and weighed the particulars of his message
to Niniveh, of his miscarriage, and of his present misery, together with the
danger that themselves were in for his sake: how much more for their own, as
being conscious to themselves of far more and greater sins then Jonas had
to answer for, etc. This put the Mariners into a great fright. And as all fear
has torment, they could not be at quiet, till they had further questioned him,
saying;

Why have thou done this?] Lo, he that would not be subject to Gods command, is
now liable to the censures, conviction, and condemnation of rude barbarous men:
which, being humbled in the sense of his sin, he does patiently endure
without grudging. Danaeus his Note here is, that concerning themselves and
their own sins against God, these good fellows spoke nothing what ever they
think; but demand of the Prophet, why have thou done this? as if he were the
only misdoer.

because he had told them] As willing now to give glory to God, and take shame
to himself: this is the property of a true penitentiary. See Psalm. 52. Title
(where David stands to do penance in a white sheet as it were) and Augustines
Confessions. Hypocrites deal with their souls, as some do with their bodies:
when their beauty is decayed, they desire to hide it from themselves by false
glasses, and from others by painting: so do they their sins from themselves by
false glosses, and from others by excuses. But as the prisoner on the rack
tells all; and as things written with the juice of limmons, when held to the
fire are made legible: so when God brings men into straits, when he roasteth
them in the fire of his wrath, then if ever, they will confess against
themselves, and so give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. by putting themselves into
the hand of justice, in hope of mercy.

Verse 11. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee?] q. d. Thou art
a Prophet of the Lord, and know how he may be pacified. Thou art also the
party whom He pursues: say what we shall do to thee to save our selves from
thy death, that even gapeth for us? from this Sea, which else will soon swallow
us up? for the Sea works and is tempestuous; so Kimchi reads the Text;
making these last also to be the words of the Mariners. Thou see that there
is no hope, if thine angry God be not appeased. Woe unto us, who shall deliver
us out of the hands of these mighty Gods? 1 Samuel 4.8. If the Sea be thus
ragefull and dreadful, as verse 15. if it thus work and swell more and more,
as we see it does, thereby testifying that it can now no longer defer to
execute Gods anger, tell us what we shall do in this case and strait. What?

Verse 12. And he said unto them,] More by Gods inward revelation then by
discourse of reason; not as rashly offering himself to death, but as freely
submiting to the mind of God, signified by the Lot that fell upon him, calling
for him to punishment.

Take me up, and cast me forth into the Sea,] Eximia sides, says Mercer.
Before, we had his repentance, testified by his confession with aggravation.
Here we have his faith, whereby he triumphs over death in his most dreadful
representations, (Take me up, says he, with a present mind and good courage)
as also his charity, whereby he chose rather to die, as a piacular person, then
to cause the death of so many men for his fault. Like unto this was that of
Nazianzen, who desired, Jonah-like, to be cast into the Sea himself, so be it
all might be calm in the Public: that of Athanasius, who by his sweat and
tears, as by the bleeding of a chaste vine, cured the leprosy of that tainted
age: that of Ambrose, who was far more sollicitous of the Churches welfare
then of his own: that of Chrysostom, In 1 Cor. 11. (...) etc.
who says, That to seek the public good of the Church, and to prefer the
salvation of others, before a man's private profit, is the most perfect Canon of
Christianisme, the very top-gallant of Religion, the highest point and pitch of
Piety.

so shall the Sea be calm unto you,] Not else: for I have forfeited my life by
my disobedience: and my repentance (though true, and so, to salvation never to
be repented of) comes too late, in regard of temporal punishments: 2 Cor. 7.10.
as did likewise that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.26. and of David, 2 Samuel 12.10. such is
the venomous nature of sin in the saints ('it is treachery, because against
covenant) and such is the displeasure of God upon it, that he chastises his
here, more then any other sinners, Lam. 4.6. Dan. 9.12. and whoever else escape,
they shall be sure of it, Amos 3.2. The word here rendered calm, signifies
silent; for the Sea, when troubled, (...), est maris agitatio. E^^ stach. in
Hom. Hiad. H.
roareth hideously: so that the roaring of the devils at the painful
preconceit of their last doom of damnation is set forth by a word that is taken
from the tossing of the Sea, and the noise thereupon, Iam. 2.19. The devils
believe and tremble, or shiver, and shudder, with horrible yellings.

for I know that for my sake, this tempest is upon you.] If Jonah were a type
of Christ, in that being cast into the Sea, a calm followed: yet herein he
differed, that Christ suffered not for his own offenses, 1 Pet. 2.24. and 3.18.
but bore our sins in his own body on the tree, and died, the just for the
unjust.

Verse 13. Nevertheless the men rowed,] Heb. dug: for so they that row seem
to do with their oars, Virg. Aeneid. Vastum sulcavimus aequor.
as with spades. Hence also the Latin Poets say, that Boatmen cut, plow,
furrow the waters. Infindunt pariter sulcos, -- The Seventy render it (...),
they did their utmost endeavor with violence, to bring the ship to shore, and
to save Jonah: and not as those bloody Emperors, Tiberius, Caligula, and
Claudius, who took delight in the punishment of offenders, and used to come
early in the morning into the marketplace, to behold their executions. Non
nis^ coactus, Vtinam literas nescirem.
said that better Emperor, when he was to subscribe a sentence of death: and,
Oh that I could not write mine own name, said Another upon the like occasion.

but they could not,] They did but strive against the stream, for the Lord had
otherwise determined it: and Voluntas Dei necessitas re^: who has resisted his
will?

for the Sea wrought and was tempestuous against them.] As verse 11.
Praesentemque vires intentant omnia mortem.

Verse 14. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord,] Not unto their false gods, but
unto the true Jehovah: of whom they had learned something by what they had
seen, and heard from Jonah. Vaetorpori nostro.

We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee,] A most ardent and affectionate
prayer. A natural man may pray from the bottom of his heart, out of a deep
sense of his wants: but he cannot give thanks from the bottom of his heart;
because void of the love of God, and joy of faith. Danaeus notes from these
words, that Judges ought to pray before they pass sentence of death upon any.

Let us not perish for this man's life,] which we take away, but full sore
against our wills. Wilful murder was ever accounted an heinous crime among
the Heathens also. Abels innocent blood had as many tongues as drops, to cry
to heaven against Cain. Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy brothers bloods. And 1
King. 9.26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth. Murder ever
bleeds fresh in the eye of God: and to him, many years, yea, that eternity that
is past, is but yesterday. Full well then did these men so earnestly deprecate
the guilt of innocent blood, which they knew would lie and light heavy.

and lay not upon us innocent blood,] Innocent as to us; for he has done us
no hurt, but much good by his piety and patience: whence it is that we are so
loath to part with him, after this sort especially.

for thou, O Lord, have done as it pleases thee.] Thou have appointed him to
this death, and now call for him, as we easily collect by the circumstances;
Sic quicquid superi voluere, peractum est. Ovid. Metamor. l. 8.


Verse 15. So they took up Jonah,] Not against his will, but in a sort offering
himself to condign punishment. The Mariners had tried all ways to save him:
till they saw they must either destroy him, or be destroyed with him. So deal
many with their beloved sins, (...), Dixit Caligula.
which they are loath to mortify, they see they must either kill or be killed,
Romans 8.13. either turn from them to God, or burn for ever in hell. Jonas his
charity is exemplary, who yielded to perish alone, rather then to have others
perish with him, and for him: the Devil and his imps desire to draw company the
same way with themselves; and say as that wretch of old, When I die, may the
earth be all fired.

and cast him forth into the Sea,] Thus deals God by his servant Jonah;
formerly faithful in his office, and able thereunto, and therefore sent to
Nineveh. Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, Prove. 11.31.
here they are sure of their payment, neither can all their good deeds bear out
one prepensed wickedness, Ovid. Metam. Nec horret iratum mare. Horat. lib. epod
or a lesser fault that lies unrepented of: as were easy to instance in Moses,
Miriam, David, others: And all this proceeds from love displeased.

and the Sea ceased from raging.] Heb. stood from its wrath, or indignation.
Nec maris ira manet. The Sea having found what it sought for, and now possessed
of the prisoner it pursued, rests quiet and content: Vide hic mare and disce
sapere, says One, See the sea here, and learn obedience to thy Creator, since
winds, waves and all are at his beck and check. See Mat. 8.23.

Ver. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly] Heb: with a great fear,
They feared before. ver. 10. with a natural fear: but now they feared
Jehovah, they began to bear an awful respect to the divine Majesty, of whose
power and goodness they were by this miracle clearly convinced, and as it may
seem, to the true faith effectually converted.

For They offered a sacrifice to the Lord] They sacrificed spiritual
sacrifices presently, (that holocaust of themselves Romans 12.1. that broken
heart that lies low and hears all that God says, giving thanks to his name
Heb. 13.15.) and resolved to cover Gods altar at Jerusalem upon their safe
arrival, as the Chaldee here paraphraseth.

and made vows] That the true God should be their God (as Jacob the father of
vows promised Genesis 28.21.) and that they would bestow cost on the Temple, on
the poor Saints, to feed and cloth them, as Isa. 23.18. etc.

Verse 17. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish] A whale Mat. 12.40. which is
a great fish indeed. Pliny tells of one taken that was six hundred foot in
length and 360. in breadth, Plin. lib. 32. cap. 1.
when they swim and show themselves above water annare insulas putes, says the
same Author, you would think them to be so many Islands: so many mountains,
says Another; who also adds, Lib. 9. cap. 2.
that when they grow old, they grow to that bigness and fatness, that they
keep long in a place. Insomuch as ex collectis and condensatis pulveribus
frutices erumpere cernantur, Sphinx Phili^.
the dust and filth gathered upon their backs seems to be an Island, which
whiles shipmen mistake, and think to land at, they incurr a great deal of
danger.

Such a great fish God prepared Either at first, when in creating of whales,
creavit vastitates and stupores, as One says: Or He now commanded this great
fish to be ready to ship Jonas to the shore: and to afford him an Oratory in
themeane while.

and Jonah was in the belly of the fish] where Interpreters note a concurrence
of these four miracles. 1. That he was not there consumed, but that the
concoctive faculty of the fishes maw was so long time kept from doing its
office. 2. That he could in such a close prison breath and live; without the
common use of air and light. 3. That he was not killed up with intolerable
stench in so loathsome a jakes. 4. That he could there frame such an excellent
prayer, or rather song of thanksgiving: For Jonah was the true Arion whom the
Poets feign to have been a minstrell cast into the sea by the mariners, and
saved by a dolphin.

three days and three nights] Part of them at least: as Christ was in the
grave Mat. 12.40. where, in the history of Jonas, (...).
he descrieth the mystery of his own death, burial and resurrection: teaching
us thereby to search the scriptures, to search them to the bottom: as those
that dig for gold, content not themselves with the first or second oar that
offers it self, but search on till they have all. The Rabbines have a saying,
Epist. 3. ad Volusian.
that there is a mountain of sense hangs upon every Apex of the word of God.
And so great is the depth of the holy scriptures, says Augustine, that I could
profit daily in the knowledge thereof, though I should set my self to search
them from my childhood to decrepit old age, at best leisure, with utmost study
and a far better wit etc.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. THen Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God] i. e. Praised God with this
Canticum eucharisticum, this gratulatory song as Tremellius calls it. That he
prayed in the ship, in the sea, in the whales belly, we doubt not; but that he
chiefly intends to show his thankfulness for the return of prayers, and the
sweet support he felt in the whales belly, we do as little doubt; See ver. 2,
6, 7. yea that this was the substance (though now better methodized) of what he
prayed and praised in the bowels of the fish, we have cause to believe from
this very verse: and therefore also his deliverance is set down ver. 10. after
his doxologie. The word here rendered prayed signifies also sometimes, to give
thanks, as 1 Samuel 2.2. and who knows not that thanksgiving is a special part
of prayer? This therefore: Jonah having prayed, and perceiving that he was
heard, and by the goodness of God preserved safe in body, and sound in mind,
he grows strong in faith, Romans 4.
giving glory to God: and being fully persuaded that he should yet walk before
him again in the land of the living.

out of the fishes belly] where though he might seem buried alive, and free
among the dead, yet he enjoyed Gods gracious presence, and those strong
consolations, that made him live in the very mouth of death, and say in effect
as blessed Bradford did, Act and Mon. fol. 1476.
I thank God more of this prison and of this dark dungeon then of any parlour,
yea then of any pleasure that ever I had. For in it I find God my most sweet
God always.

Verse 2. And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction] His lips did not move
in affliction, like a creaking door or a new cart-wheele, with murmuring and
mutinying against God and men: Psalm 73.9.
he set not his mouth against heaven (as the howling wolf when hunger-bit)
neither did his tongue walk through the earth, cursing the day of his birth,
Lam. 3.29.
and cutting deep into the sides of such as were means of his misery. But
putting his mouth in the dust, if so be there might be hope, he cried by
reason of his affliction. The time of affliction is the time of supplication:
no time like that for granting of suites Zech. 13.9. Gods afflicted may have
what they will of him then, such are his fatherly compassions to his sick
children: he reserveth his best comforts for the worst times, and then speaks
to the hearts of his people, when he has brought them into the wilderness
Hos. 2.13. This Jonah experimented, and therefore said, I cried out of mine
affliction unto the Lord.

Ad Dominum asslicto de pectore suspirando. And he heard me] How else am I
alive amidst so many deaths? here is a visible answer, a real return: Oh
blessed be God who has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me Psalm.
66.20. Surely as the cloud, which rises out of the earth many times in them
and insensible vapors, falls down in great and abundant showers: so our
prayers, which ascend weak and narrow, return with a full and enlarged answer.
This was but a pitiful poor prayer that Jonas here made, as appears ver. 4.
and so was that of David Psalm. 31.22. For I said in mine have I am cut off from
before thine eyes: Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications,
when I cried unto thee. It would be wide with us, if God should answer the best
of us according to our prayers, yea though well watered with tears: since Ipsae
lacrymae sixth lacrymabiles etc. we had need to weep over our tears, sigh over
our sobs, mourn over our griefs etc. Jonah was so taken with this kindness
from the Lord his God, that he repeates it and celebrates it a second time.

out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice] The whales belly
he calls hels-belly, because horrid and hideous, deep and dismal. Thence he
cried as David did De profundis, and was heard and delivered. Yea had hell it
self closed her mouth upon a praying Jonah, it could not long have held him:
but must have vomited him up. A Mandamus from God will do it at any time, Psa.
44.4. and what cannot faithful Prayer have of God? there is a certain
omnipotency in it, said Luther.

Verse 3. For thou had cast me into the deep] A graphicall description of his
woeful condition, which yet he remembers now as waters that are past and is
thankful to his Almighty Deliverer. See the like in David Psa. 116.3. and
learn of these and other Saints, to acknowledge the uttermost extremity of a
calamity, after we are delivered out of it. For hereby thy judgment will be
the better instructed and the more convinced: thine heart also will be the more
enlarged to admire, and thy mouth the wider opened to celebrate the power,
wisdom, and mercy of God in thy deliverance. As if this be not done, God will
be provoked either to inflict heavier judgments, or else to cease to smite
thee any more with the stripes of a father, and to give thee up for a lost
child.

for thou had cast me into the deep] Not the mariners, but Thou did it:
and therefore there was no averting or avoiding it. Thou had cast me with a
force, as a stone out of a sling, or as that mighty Angel Rev. 18.21. that took
up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with
violence etc.

In the midst of the seas] Heb: in the heart of the sea's: so Mat. 12.40. So
shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
And Deuteronomy. 4.11. we read of the heart of heaven that is, the middle of it, as
the heart sits in the midst of the body as king of that Isle of Man. Now
if it were so grievous to be cast into the main Sea, what shall it be to be
hurled into hell, by such an hand, and with such a force into that bottomless
gulf, whence nothing was ever yet boyed up again?

and the floods compassed me about] Aquarum confluges The Sea, whence all
floods or rivers issue, and whereto they return ( Homer calls the Ocean (...)
a river by the figure Miosis) Danaeus here notes that out of that gulf of the
Sea, (...). Iliad. (...).
which of Plato is called Tartarus, that is, hell, the waters do flow into the
veins of the earth (as it is Eccles. 1.7.) losing their saltness in the
passage. Here Jonah cried out as Psa. 69.1.2. Save me, O God: for the waters
are come in unto my soul. I fink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I
am come into the deep waters, where the floods overflow me. It was only his
faith that held him up by the chin: and, like blown bleathers, bore him alost
all waters.

all thy billows and thy waves passed over me] All: so it seemed to Jonah,
that God had powered out all his displeasure upon him: but he suf^ereth not his
whole wrath to arise against his people: neither remembers iniquity for ever.
Thy billows or surges, not the seas but thine. God seemed to fight against
Jonah with his own hand. David likewise in a desertion complains that all Gods
waves and floods were gone over him Ps. 42.7. In this case (for it may be any
ones case) let us do as Paul and his company did (in that dismal tempest Act.
27. when they saw neither sun nor star for diverse days and nights together)
cast anchor of hope, even beyond hope: and then wait and wish for day. God will
appear at length, and all shall clear up: he will deliver our souls from the
nethermost hell.

Verse. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight,] Thus those straits brought
him to these disputes of despair, as they did likewise David, Psalm. 31.22. the
Church in the Lamentations Chap. 4.22. and others, apt enough in affliction to
have hard conceits of God, and heavy conceits of themselves. Whiles men look at
things present, whiles they live by sense only, it must needs be with them as
with an house without pillars, tottering with every blast; or as a ship without
anchor, tossed with every wave. They must therefore thrust Hagar out of doors,
and set up Sarah; silence their reason, and exalt Faith, as did Jonas here;
Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight: Here you may take him up for a dead
man; here he inclines somewhat to that of Cain, Genesis 4.13, 14. and surely they
that go down to this pit (of despair, as Hezechiah speaks of the grave)
cannot hope for Gods truth, Esa. 38.
as long as there they stay.

yet I will look again toward thine holy Temple] Here he recollects and recovers
himself: as the same soul may successively doubt and believe, not
simultaneously: and faith, where it is right, will at length outwrastle
diffidence, and make a man more then a conqueror, even a Triumpher. When sense
says such a thing will not be, Reason says, It cannot be, Faith gets above
and says, Yea, but it shall be: what talk you to me of Impossibilities, I
shall yet (as low as I am, and as forlorn) look again toward Gods holy Temple
of heaven; yea, that here on earth, where God is sincerely served, and whereto
the precious are annexed. Faith is by one fitly compared to the cork upon the
net: though the lead on the one sinks it down, yet the cork on the other keeps
it up in the water. The faithful soon check themselves for their doubtings and
despondency, as Jonah here; as David chides David, Psalm. 43.5 and as Paul says
of himself and his fellows, that they were staggering, but not wholly
sticking, 2 Cor. 4.8.

Verse. 5. The waters compassed me about even to the soul] that is, usque ad
animae deliquium, till I labored for life, and was as good as gone.

The depth closed me round about] see the Note on verse. 3. and further observe,
that Gods dear children may fall into desperate and deadly dangers, see Psalm.
18.3. and 88.3. and 116.3. And this for 1. prevention, 2. purgation, 3.
probation, 4. preparations to further both mercies and duties. Let us not
therefore censure our selves or others as hated of God, because greatly
distressed; but encourage our selves in them, as did David at Ziklag, 1 Sach.
30.6. The right of the Lord shall change all this.

Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. The weeds were wrapped about mine
head] Alga as Alligando. The weeds which the fish had devoured, or whereunto
the fish, wherein I was, had dived and lain down amongst them. Or this might
befall Jonah in the bottom of the sea, before the fish had swallowed him: for
weeds easily wrap about those that swim, or are drowned.

Verse. 6. I went down to the bottomes of the montains] that is, of the
promontories, or rocks of the sea, where the waters are deepest. Thus Mercer
after Kimchi. The channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the
world were discovered, Psalm. 18.15. The mountains are said to be under water,
Prove. 8.25. because their foundations are there placed.

the earth with her bars was about me for over] As if resolved there to keep
me close prisoner; that though the fish had disgorged me, yet I should never
have got to land. The shores are set by God as bars to keep the sea within
his bounds, Job 38.8, 10, 11. Jer. 5.22. Here then all the creatures seemed to
set against poor Jonas, and (which was more then all) the Creator too: so that
he might sigh and say, as in the Poet, In me omnis terraeque aviumque marisque
rapina est: Martial.

Forsitan and coeli --


Yet have thou brought up my life from corruption] i. e. from the place where I
was likely to have lain and rotted. (...).
Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses: when things are at the worst God
appears, as it were out of an engine. In the mount will the Lord be seen
Ezekiel. 37.11. etc. 2 King. 19.3. he stays so long sometimes that he hardly
finds faith on earth Luke 18. and yet comes at last to the relief of his poor
people: viz. when they are ripe and ready for it. He is a God of judgment, he
knows how and when to deal forth his favors: and even waits to be gracious
Esaias 30.22. See Esa. 28.24, 25, 27, 28.

O Lord my God] sc. by the mean and merit of thy son, in whom alone it is,
that thou Lord art my God, and that I can call thee Abba Father. It is well
observed by an Interpreter, that in this short history of Jonah are all things
contained, which may make to the sound and saving knowledge of God and his
will, of our selves also and our duties.

Verse 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord] And could say
as the Church in Esaias when at lowest, Esa. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. As
there is in the creatures an instinct of nature to do their kind: so there is
of grace in the Saints, to run to God. Yea in the way of thy judgments, O
Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to
the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired thee in the night: yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early etc. Esa. 26.8, 9. Oh Lord,
says Habacuc, art not thou from everlasting my God and mine holy One. It was a
bold question, but God approves and assents to it in a gracious answer, ere
they went further; Hab. 1.12.
We shall not die (say they obruptly) O Lord thou have ordained them (the
Caldeans) for judgment: but us only for chastisement. Here was the triumph of
their faith, and this was that which held up Jonas his hope though with
wonderful difficulty, held head above water. He remembered the years of the
right hand of the most High Psalm. 77.10. he called to mind his songs in the
night season ver. 6. his former experience, a just ground of his present
confidence. He remembered the Lord, his Power and Goodness, those two pillars,
the Jachin and the Boaz that support Faith; and this fetched him again when
ready to faint. I had even fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 27.13.

and my prayer came in unto thee] q. d. Though I was so faint I could scarce
utter a prayer, yet thou harknedst and heardest, as Mal. 3.16. thou made hard
shift to hear, (as I may say) thine ears were in my prayers, as S. Peter has
it, 1 Pet. 3.12. thou felst my breathing, when no voice could be heard, Lam.
3.56. thou heldest not thy peace at my tears, Psalm. 39.12. quando fletu agerem
non afflatu, yea thou heardest the voice of mine affliction, Genesis 16.11.

Into thine holy Temple.] Whether we take it of the Temple at Jerusalem (a type
of Christ) Jonah's prayer was accepted for Christs-sake: and proved to no less
purpose, though made in the Whales belly, then if he had been pouring it out in
Gods holy Temple. Or, if we understand it of Heaven, the habitation of Gods
holiness, and of his glory, his orisons were come up thither, for a memorial
before the Almighty, Act. 10.4. and like pillars of incense pierced into his
presence, Can. 3.6. neither would they away without their errand, but lay at
Gods feet, til he should command deliverance out of Zion

Verse 8. They that observe lying vanities] That listen to sense and reason in
matters of God, and make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof,
as Jonah had done to his cost, till, having paid for his learning, he descried
them all to be but lying vanities, or most vain vanities, empty Nothings.

forsake their own mercy.] Are miserable by their own election, because sinners
(in a special manner) against their own souls, as were Corab and his
accomplices, Number. 16.38. as was Pope Silvester, who gave his soul to the Devil
for seven years enjoyment of the Popedom: and as are all those wilful wicked
persons, that refusing to be reformed, and hating to be healed, choose to spend
the span of this life after the ways of their own hearts, though they thereby
perish for ever. These are those fools of the people, that prefer an apple
before Paradise, a mess of pottage before the inheritance of heaven, their
swine before their Savior, turning their backs upon those blessed and bleeding
embracements of his, and cruelly cutting the throats of their own poor souls,
by an impenitent continuance in sin: so losing, for a few bitter-sweet
pleasures, or paltry profits in this vale of tears, for an inch of time, that
fullness of felicity at Gods right hand, thorough all eternity. It is written
of them who tame the Tiger, that when they have taken away the young one,
knowing that presently they shall be pursued by the old Tygresse, they set
looking-glasses in the way by which they flee: whereunto when she comes and
sees some representation of her self, she lingreth about them a good space,
deceived by the shadow, and detained in a vain hope to recover the young
again: Meanwhile the hunter most speedily posteth away with his prey.
Semblably deals Satan with the men of this world (says mine Author) He
casts before them the deceitful lusts of profit, pleasure, and preferment (the
worldlings Trinity) those lying vanities, being none other then shadows and
semblances of good: yet are men so delighted with these, that they dote about
them, having no care to pursue the enemy, for recovery of that image of God,
the Divine nature, that Satan has beguiled them of. He sets them to the
tree of knowledge, that they may not taste of the tree of life. He puts out
their eyes with the dust of covetousness, and shuts their ears against the
instructions of life, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and God should heal them, Mat. 13.15. In all which there is not any
thing more to be lamented then this, that people should love to have it so,
Jer. 6.31. be active in their own utter undoing, Hos. 13.9. wittingly and
willingly forsake God the fountain of living waters (their own mercies, as he
is here called, and elsewhere, Psalm. 144.2.) and hew themselves out cisternes,
broken cisternes that can hold no water, Jer. 2.13.

Verse 9. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving,] q. d.
Let others do as they think good: let them make a match with mischief till they
have enough of it. Let them walk till they have wearied themselves, in the
ways of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes: but let them know (I
speak it by woeful experience) that for all these things, God will bring them
to judgment, Eccles. 11.9. The best that can come of sin is Repentance: and
that is not in man's power, but in Gods gift, 2 Timothy 2.25. If he had not melted
mine hard heart, and brought me back to himself with a strong hand, I had pined
away in mine iniquities, and perished for ever. But now having been so
miraculously delivered from so great a death, I will sacrifice unto the Lord
with the voice of thanksgiving. I will set up my note and sing aloud unto God
my Savior, who has thus beyond all desert, delivered such a miserable wretch,
rebel, and runagate as my self.

I will sacrifice] Heb. I will slay, sc. those birds and beasts in use for
feasts and sacrifices at Jerusalem. with the voice of thanksgiving.] Heb. of
confession, that is, I will confess and acknowledge God to be what he is, to
do what he does, and to give what he gives. Now to offer a sacrifice, at such
a confession, or thanksgiving, added much to the solemnity thereof; and made it
more, honorable in it self, and more acceptable to God. To these gratulatory
sacrifices the word slaying is attributed, as here: to show, that even in
gratulation, expiation must be made: and that by the blood and sacrifice of
Christ all our offerings are accepted in heaven.

I will pay that I have vowed,] Not my general vow only as a Covenanter, to
devote my self to his fear and service all my days; but those particular,
personal, voluntary vows made in my distress: such as was that of Jacob,
Genesis 28.20. Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.11. David, Psalm. 132.1, 2 etc. In affliction men
are wondrous apt to promise great matters, if they may but be delivered. See
Psalm. 78.36. Pliny in an Epistle to one of his friends, that desired rules from
him how to order his life aright; I will, says he, give you one rule, that
shall be instead of a thousand. Vt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos
futuros esse profitemur infirmi. That you be sure to be the same when well,
that you vowed to be when you were sick. But this is few men's care. See Jer.
34.10, 11. Sons of Belial break these bonds (as Sampson did the green withes)
and cast away those cords from them; if they could at least. being worse herein
then those Mariners, chap. 1, then Saul, that made great conscience of
violating his vow, 1 Samuel 14. then Turks and Papists, who are superstitiously
strict this way Jonah knew it to be as bad, if not worse, then perjury, to vow
and not to perform, Number. 30.3. and that God is the avenger of all such, Deuteronomy.
23.21. He therefore, not merely for fear of punishment, but chiefly for hatred
of that sin says, I will pay that I have vowed,] The Hebrew word Ashallemah
seems to imply two things. First, that his vow, till paid, was incomplete, it
was an imperfect thing; the better part of it was yet wanting. Next, that till
that chare were done, he could not be at peace within himself, he could not be
quiet: for vows are debts: and debts, till they be paid, are a burden to an
honest mind, and do much disease it.

Salvation is of the Lord.] Salus omnimoda, as the Hebrew word (having one
letter more then ordinary in it) imports: Jeshugnathah.
all manner of salvation full, and plentiful deliverance, is of the Lord; who
is therefore called, the God of salvation, unto whom belong the issues from
death, Psalm. 68.20. A quo vera salus non aliunde venit. This Jonah speaks, as
he does all else in this holy Canticle, not by reading, or by rote, but out of
his own feeling, and good experience: his whole discourse was dug out of his
own breast, as it is said of that most excellent 119. Psalm, that it is made
up altogether of experiments; and it therefore has verba non legenda sed
vivenda, words not so much to be read, as lived, as One said once of it. Dives
thought that if one went from the dead to warn his wicked brethren, they would
never be able to resist such powerful Rhetoric. Behold, here is Jonah raised
from the dead, as it were, and warning people to arise, and stand up from dead
courses and companies, that Christ may give them light: why do they not then
get up and be doing at it, that the Lord may be with them? Shall not the men of
Nineveh rise up in judgment with this evil generation, and condemn them,
because they repented at the preaching of Jonas: Mat. 12.41.
but these do not, though they have many Jonas's, that both preach and
practice, non verbis solum praedicantes sed and exemplis, as Eusebius says
Origin did, that live sermons and not teach them only?

Verse 10. Dci dicere est facere. Aug.
And the Lord spoke unto the fish, [He spoke the word and it was done: He is
the great Centurion of the world, that says to his creature, Do this, and he
does it. Yea, he is the great, great Induperator, to whom every thing says.
Iussa sequi tam velle mihi quam posse necesse esse. Lucan.
I am wholly at thy beck, and check. Jonah spoke to God, and God to the fish.
It may be said of faithful prayer, that it can do whatsoever God himself can
do: since he is pleased to yield himself overcome by the prayers of his people,
and to say unto them cordially, as Zedekiah did to his Courtiers colloguingly.
The king is not he that can deny you any thing. Prayer is of that power, that
it can open the doors of Leviathan, as we see here, (which yet is reckoned as
a thing not feisible, Job 41.14.) yea of the all-devouring grave, Heb. 11.35.
If the Lord, pricked on by the prayers of his people, set in hand to save them,
and shall say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back, bring my
sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, Esaias 43.6. they
shall come amain, and none shall be able to hinder them: Come therefore (with
those good souls in Hosea, who had smarted for their folly, as well as Jonah)
and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, Hos. 6.1, 2.
and he will heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days
will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight. A time we must have to be in the fire, in the fishes belly, as in
Gods Nurturing-house; but he will take care that we be not there overlong:
what is two or three days to eternity? Hold out faith and patience: Yet a very
little, little while, Heb. 10.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

and it vomited up Jonah upon the dry land.] And here Death was defeated and
wiped: it was much more so, when it had swallowed up Christ; Quantum in
devoratione mors laetata est, tantum luxit in vomitu; Hieron.
and little dreamt that it self should have been thereby swallowed up in
victory. But then was fulfilled that of the Prophet, O death, I will be thy
death. And as there so here in a proportion, and as a type, omnia jam inversa,
says Mercer, all things are turned the other way. Before the fish was an
instrument of death; now, of life, and serves Jonah for a ship to bring him to
dry land. This fish uses not to come near the shore, but to sport in the great
waters: howbeit now he must, by special command, vomit up Jonah upon the dry
land. Why then should it be thought a thing incredible with any, that God
should raise the dead? The Sea shall surely give up the dead that were in it:
and death and hell deliver up the dead that were in them: Acts 26. S. Sen. Not.
quaest. l. 3. c. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
and they shall be judged every man according to his works, Rev. 20.13. This,
some of the Heathens believed: as Zoroastres, Theopompus, and Plato. And the
Stoikes opinion was, that the world should one day be dissolved by fire or
water: and all things brought to a better state, or to the first golden age
again. But we have a more sure word of Prophecy: and this that is here
recorded may serve as an image and type of our preservation in the grave, and
our resurrection from the dead, by one and the same Almighty power of God.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. AND the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time.] Jonah is a
sinner, but not a castaway. God lays him not by as a broken vessel, treads
him not to the dunghill, as unsavory salt: but receives him upon his return
by repentance, and restores him to his former employment, gives him yet a name,
and a nail in his house; yea sends him a second time on his message to Nineveh;
and counting him faithful puts him again into the ministry, who was before a
runagate, a rebel, etc. But he obtained mercy, etc. 1 Timothy 1.13. as did
likewise the Apostles, after that they had basely deserted our Savior at his
passion; and Peter after he had denied him. See Ioh. 20.22, 23. and 21.15, 16,
17. Quem poenite; peccasse, poene est innocens. Sen Agam.
The poenitent are as good as innocent. Return ye backsliding children (says
the Father of mercies) and I will heal your backslidings, Ier. 3.22. The
Shulamite returning, is as lovely in Christ's eye as before: and all is as well
as ever betwixt them, Cant. 6.4. There is a natural Novatianisme in the
timorous conscience of convinced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for
sins of Apostasy and falling after repentance: But had they known the gift
of God, and who it is that says to them. Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee, they would have conceived strong consolation.

Verse 2. Arise go unto Nineveh,] Begin again, and take better heed: as the
Nazarite was to do, that had defiled the head of his consecration, Numb. 6.9,
12.

unto Niniveh that great city] See the Note on Chap. 1.2. There was no city
since, by the estimation of Diodorus, had the like compass of ground or
starelinesse of walls; the height thereof being an hundred foot, the breadth
able to receive three carts a-row, adorned with fifteen hundred turrets. Some
think (as Annius and Berosus) that those three cities spoken of, Genesis 10.
Rehoboth, Calah and Resen were all included in Niniveh, and they conceive it
thus: that when Nimrod had built Babylon, Ninus, disdaining his government,
went into the fields of Ashur, and there erected a city after his own name.
Raphael Volaterranus says, it was eight years in building, ten thousand men
working at it. Quintilian says, that great Millain, ancient Ravenna, brave
Bouonia, noble Naples, and other great cities of Italy are but towers to Rome:
but what was Rome to Niniveh? and yet Lipsius has written a treatise of Romes
greatness, and when the Emperor Constantine came to Rome, and beheld the
companies that entertained him, he repeated a saying of Cineas the Epirote,
that he had seen so many kings as citizens: but viewing the building of the
city, he thought naturam vires omnes in urbem unam effudisse, that nature had
showed the utmost of what she could do, in that one great city. See more on
verse. 3.

and preach unto it the preaching] Heb. Proclaim unto it (or, against it) the
proclamation that I say to thee, that I have formerly put into thy mouth, and
do now so again, sc: that their wickedness is come up before me, and I am even
upon the way toward them to punish it grievously. Flagitium and flagellum sunt
sicut acus and filum, Who ever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4.
This wicked men must be boldly told, Esa. 3.11. however they take it; neither
may Gods ministers steal away the word, Jer. 22.30. or keep back from the
people any part of Gods counsel, Act. 20.27. handling the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth commend themselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. as becomes his Ambassadors.

Verse. 3. So Jonah arose, and went unto Niniveh] He went not home first, to bid
them farewell, as Luke 9.61. neither went he another way, as once: it was enough
of that once, and he had learned obedience by the things that he had suffered.
To Niniveh he goes, though a mere and a mean stranger, unknown, unregarded, and
with an harsh message; such as he might fear would cost him his life from that
fierce and furious people. But Jonah fears nothing now but disobedience: and
seems to say, Luth. Epist.
as afterward Luther did, Inveniar sane superbus, excors and modo impij,
filentij non arguar, Let me be called and counted proud, mad, any thing, every
thing that naught is, so that I be not found guilty of sinful silence, and of
betraying the trust committed unto me, by a dastardly deserting the cause of
God. Jonah was now of another spirit, J^^levit post me. (...). Romans 8.
and fulfilled after God, as Caleb, Number. 14.24. for why? he had now received
not a spirit of fear, and of bondage, but of power, and of love, and of a sound
mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. his spirit of grace had sanctified to him his afflictions,
which else would have been but as hammers to cold iron; as they were to
Pharaoh, Ahaz, the railing thief, etc. Aben-Ezra says that as soon as ever the
whale had vomited up Jonah, he got up and took the direct way to Niniveh: that
if God should command him thither again he might be ready, and show his
forwardness. It is a very good sign, when men are the better for what they
suffer: when thereby the iniquity of Jacob is purged, and this is all the fruit
the taking away of their sin, Esaias 27.9.

according to the word of the Lord] His call and command which Jonah had
formerly cast behind him, Sed Piscator ictus sapit, There shall be only fear to
make you understand the hearing, Esaias 28.19. Esaias stood off till frighted; but
then he offers his service: Here I am, send me, Chap. 6.8.

now Niniveh was an exceeding great city] Heb. a great city of God, or to God;
which some interpreted dear to God, Deo ch^r^ and curae.
and such as he would not destroy. Others a city not idolatrous, though
otherwise vicious: Others, a city which God himself accounted great, Animo
magno ^ihil magnum.
and looked upon as such. But if to a great mind nothing is great, as Seneca
says, what can be great to him who is great, Ps. 77.13. greater, Job. 33.12.
greatest, Ps. 95.3. greatness it self, Ps. 145.3. and to whom all nations are
but as the drop of a bucket, or dust of the balance? behold, he takes up the
Isles as a very little thing, Esaias 40.15. Oecolampadius applies it to the
Church of the Gentiles, that city of the living God. They do best that take it,
as we read it, for an exceeding great city: like as elsewhere tal mountains and
cedars, are called mountains of God, (...). Homer.
Psalm. 36.7. and cedars of God, Psalm. 80. etc. and excellent wrestlings, are
wrestlings of God, Genesis 30.8. See Genesis 23.6. So the Greeks and Latins call
great things divine: God being the measure of all true greatness: Niniveh as
it was a very great city (of fifty miles compass as Herodotus and Diodorus) so
Jonah is often told so; that he might come to it well prepared and resolved:
since he was to have a great task, and an hard tug of it. See Verse. 2. and Chap.
1.2.

Of their days journey] Not such a journey as a traveller could dispatch in no
less time; but suh as a Preacher pedetentim obaembulando by leasurely walking,
Theodocet.
might in three days go through: See Verse. 4. This is added to set forth
further the greatness of the city.

Verse. 4. And Jonas began to enter into the city] Having seen God, he now fears
no colors, dreads no danger; as neither did Moses, Michaiah, Esaias, Chap. 6.
Paul, Act. 21. Luther going to Worms, etc. Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.18. we forewarne them to flee from the
wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. we pull them out of the fire of hell, as firebrands,
Jude 2.3.

a days journey] One of the three days, Verse. 3. Not all the three in one
day, for haste, as Hierome would have it.

and he cried and said,] Not fearfully muttering his message, but delivering it
with a courage, Boanerges like, able almost to make his hearers hearts fall
down, Mr. Full^^.
and hairs stand upright, as One says of Master Perkins.

Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be overthrown] The word properly notes a
sudden, inevitable, and perpetual destruction, such as was that of Sodom and
her Sisters, Gen 19.25. Ier. 20.16. Es. 13.19. Am. 4.11. Now we must not think
that Jonah said no more then is here set down: that he expressed no condition,
such as was that, Rev. 2.5. Except ye repent, or that like a mad man he ran up
and down the city (as one did once about Jerusalem, and another lately about
London) repeating and thundering out these words only, inconditis and ineptis
clamoribus, Am. 3.7.
with harsh and hoarse outcries. God therefore threatens that he may not
punish, and all his threats are conditional, Ier. 18.8. if they repent, he will
also. This, if Jonah expressed not, yet the Ninivites understood; for else they
would never have repented but despaired (as Judas with his poenitentia
Iscariotica) and defied Jonah as an evil messenger sent against them. They
might well enough think that if God had not meant them mercy, he would never
have forewarned them, never have given them forty days respite: the
Septuagint cannot be refused for rendering it three days (though some have
attempted it) It is probable that Jonah omitted nothing that pertained to the
preaching of repentance, though here we have it set down in some only. The
Hebrews tell us, that the Mariners also went to Niniveh; and telling what had
befallen Jonah at sea, confirmed his doctrine, and sentence against the
Ninivites, who thereupon repented. But these, as they affirm without reason, so
they may be dismissed without refutation.

Verse. 5. So the people of Niniveh believed God] See the mighty power of Gods
holy word. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. to the laying flat those walls
of Jericho, making the devil fall as lightning from the heaven of men's hearts,
Luke 10.18. These Ninivites though rich, great, peaceable, prosperous, profane
above measure, (as great cities use to be) etc. yet, at the preaching of Jonah
they believed God, and repented of their evil ways: whether truly and
seriously I have not to say. There is an historical faith, an assent to the
truth of what God speaks, and trembling thereat, Jam. 2.19. there is also a
natural and moral repentance wrought by natural conscience: such as was that of
Pharaohs, Saul, Ahab, Alexander the Great; when, having killed Clitus, he was
troubled in conscience, and sent to all kind of Philosophers (as it were to so
many Ministers) to know what he might do, to appease his conscience, and
satisfy for his sin. There are very good Authors that hold this conversion
of the Ninivites to have been sound and serious (and for this they allege that
of our Savior, Mat. 12.41.) flowing from a lively faith in God, which is the
root of all the rest of the graces, the very womb wherein they are received;
the fountain also and foundation of all good works, as the Apostle Peter
hinteth when he says, 2 Pet. 1.5. add to your faith virtue, which is nothing
else but faith exercised.

and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth] These were the fruits of their
faith, and, though but bodily exercise^ and external performances, yet they
might serve both to evidence, Jejunium and saccus armae poenit entiae. Hieron.
and to increase their inward humiliation. True it is, that hypocrites and
heathens may do all this and more, as Ahab, those Psa. 78.34, 36. and Isa.
58.3. The Romans in a strait ad Deos populum and vota convertunt, commanded
the whole people with their wives and little ones to pray and pacify the gods,
to fill all the temples, Live. l. 3.
and the women to sweep and rub the pavements thereof with the hairs of their
heads etc.

from the greatest etc.] See the Note on Joel. 2.16.

Verse 6. For word came unto the king of Nineveh] I can hardly believe that
this was Sardanapalus (as some will carry it) but some other better Prince,
that ( Vespasian-like) was patientissimus very, Quintilian.
one that had those about him that would tell him the truth of things, and he
was content to hear it, and submit to it. Like enough it is, that this was but
harsh news to him at first hearing: but when he had well considered it, and
taken advise upon it, he set upon a reformation. Our Chroniclers tell us of a
poor Hermit that came to Richard the first Anno 1195. and, preaching to him
the words of eternal life, bad him be mindful of the subversion of Sodom, and
to abstain from things unlawful. Otherwise, said He, the deserved vengance of
God will come upon thee. The Hermit being gone, the king at first seemed to
sl^ght his words. But afterward falling sick, he more seriously bethought
himself: and waxing sound in soul as well as body, he grew more devout and
charitable to the poor, Hovedon 428. Speed 542.
rising early and not departing from the church till divine service were
finished etc. If the king of Nineveh had ever heard of Jonah his being in the
wh^les belly, it might well be some inducement to him to believe his preaching,
it might do him no less good then John Friths book called A preparation to the
cross, brought in a fish's-belly to the University of Cambridge a little
before the Commencement, did to some good people here, that had hearts to make
use of it. One grave Divine gave this Note upon it in a sermon before the
Parliament, Mr. Jeremy Dike
above twenty years since, That such a book, should be brought in such a
manner, and to such a place, and at such a time, when by reason of peoples
confluence out of all parts notice might be given to all places of the land, in
mine apprehension it can be construed for no less then a divine warning, and
to have this voice with it, England prepare for the cross.

he arose from his throne] Laid aside his state, as the great Turk also does,
at this day, when he enters into his temple to pray. Jer. 13.18 Say unto the
King and to the Queen Humble your selves, sit down: for your principalities
shall come down, even to the crown of your glory. This great king could not but
know himself to be a great sinner: and that his sins had done much hurt. 1. by
Imputation: for plectuntur Achivi, Horat.
the people often pay for their Rulers follyes, as in David's days, 2 Samuel 24. 2.
by Imitation: for Magnates are Magnetes, they draw many by their example: and
as bad humors flow from the head to the body; so do bad Rulers corrupt the
rest. This conscious, and (as some think) conscicucious King therefore rises
up from his throne, Jud. 3.20. Zarnou.
(as Eglon that unweildy king of Moab had once done to hear Gods message by
Ehud) and qui paulo ante sedebat superbus in folio, nunc jacet humilis in solo,
he lies low, and puts his mouth in the dust Lam. 3.29. laying aside all
cogitation and pride of his kingly majesty: together with all soft and
sumptuous raiment (that nest of pride, as One calls it.)

he laid his robe from him] Paludamentum suum, says Tremelius; but that is a
cloak which the Roman Emperors used to put on when they went forth to battle,
and therefore not so proper here (as Piscator thinks) since there was no
visible enemy, which makes the Ninevites repentance the more remarkable. Mercer
renders it Chlamydem suam, his imperial cloak; the Chaldee his precious
garments. The word signifies his sumptuous and gorgeous attire, his cloak of
State, no less costly (perhaps) then that of Alcishenes the Sybarite, sold to
the Carthagians by Dionysius for 120. Athen^us.
talents: or that of Demetrius of Macedon, which none of his successors would
wear propter invidiosam impendij magnificentiam for the exceeding great
costlinesse thereof. This robe or purple and other ornaments the King of
Nineveh laid aside, as was fit, in this day of restraint, as a fast day is
fitly called. So the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by
the mount Horeb, where they had made a golden calf Exodus 33.6. For the Lord had
said to Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, ye are a stifnecked people: I
will come up into the midst of thee, and consume thee: therefore now put off
thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. ver. 5. that I
may determine how to dispose of thee: and this is spoken after the manner of
men, who judge by the outward actions as Genesis 18.21. and 22, 12. for otherwise,
God knows all his works from the beginning of the world Act. 15.18. But he
speaks this here as if he would hereby judge of their repentance, whether it
were true or false. The Prophet Esaias objects it to those of his time for a
foul fault, Behold in the day of your fast, ye find your pleasure chap. 58.3.

and covered him with sack-cloth] And so, as Chrysostom has it, quod non
poterat diadema, id saccus obtinuit: sicut ferrum potest quod aurum non potest.
Sackcloth could prevail more then silk: as iron can do what gold cannot.

and sat in ashes] In cinere Illo, so Vatablus renders it: in that ashes
wherein he used to sit, when he most mourned. Our sorrow for sin should be the
deepest of all sorrows Zech. 12.11, 12, 13. See the Note there.

Verse 7. And he caused it to be proclaimed] by sound of trumpet as Joel 2.12.
or otherwise as 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4, 18, 19, 20. and 22, 6, 7. at which times he
that obeys not, is culpable before God and man Lev. 23.29.

by the decree of the King and his Nobles] who all unanimously consenting to so
good a work, iis quibus praeerant, praeibant became a president to their
inferiors; who looked upon them (no doubt) as their looking-glasses, by which
most men dressed themselves. When Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue
believed, Tertull.
many Corinthians believed also Act. 18.8. The Primitive Christians were wont
to pray that their emperors might have good counselors. Of a certain Prince
in Germany it was said, that Esset alius, si esset apud alios, Bucholc.
He would havs been a far better man, had he had better servants and officers
about him.

let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock taste any thing] The whole action of
Fasting has it is name both in Hebrew and Greek, (...).
from abstinence and forbearance of meats and drinks: a toto if it may be, at
least a tanto and a tali, as Dan. 10.2, 3. and as it might be here, till the
forty days were expired; besides, that one or more solemn days of total
fasting, wherein neither man nor beast etc. But why is the beast abridged of
sustenance? both to testify and increase the peoples humiliation by their
lowings and bellowings. Alexander the great, at the death of his favorite
Ephestion, clipped his horses and mules hair, and cut them short, Plutarch.
in token of his great grief: he pulled down also the battlements of the
walls, that they might seem to mourn with him. So Virgil speaking of the
general grief for Caesar's death says.

Non vlli pastos illis egere diebus
Frigida Daphni boves ad flumina, Eclog. 5.
nulla nec amnem
Libavit quadrupes, nec graminis attigit herbam.
Let them not feed, nor drink water] But what they get of themselves without
man's care, who is to be wholly intent and taken up in Gods service; and so to
begin the heavenly life here, the sweetness whereof makes him forbear both
meat and thirst. Besides, they took pride in their palfryes, covering them
with purple and rich trappings. See Judge. 8.26. they catered for the flesh by
fatting cattle and other creatures to please their palate. This they were now
forbidden to do by an edict from the king, who interesseth himself in matters
of religion; as did also Artexerxes Ezra. 7.26. (for which Ezra sees cause to
bless God) and Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 3.29. which the scripture commends, and
records as a work of his repentance.

Verse 8. But let man and beast be covered with sack-loth] Let all best means
be used for the humbling of the heart: without which, what is an humbling day
but a religious incongruity (says One) and a very high provocation: like
Zimri's act when all the Congregation were weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle? The beasts covered with sackcloth were as an house hanged with
blacks, to move men to mourn the more. Chrysostom tells us of a custom in
his time, (and it is still in use amongst us) that when great men were buried,
their horses followed the hearse clothed in black; as seeming to mourn for
their masters. The coursest weeds are fittest for fasting-dayes: to show that
but for shame, we would have none, as having forfeited all: and that we look
upon our better apparel, but as finer covers of the foulest shame.

and cry mightily unto God] Cry with a courage; Let the beasts roar lustily
and rend the clouds as it were with their clamours: want of food will make them
do so. And as God can so speak, as that the bruit beasts shall understand him,
Joel. 2.11. Am. 5.8. and 9.4. John. 2. ult. so can they, after a sort, so speak
or moan, Gnorebh.
that he can understand them Joel. 1.20. Hos. 2.21. Ps. 147.9. he hears the
young ravens that cry unto him, though but with a hoarse and harsh note: whence
also they have their name in Hebrew. Much more will He hear men that cry unto
him, if they cry mightily with intention of spirit, and extention or rather
contention of speech: if they set up their note, as the noise of many waters
Rev. 19.6. if they thunder and threaten heaven, as Nazianzen says his sister
Gorgonia did: Preces fundi. mus, coelum tundimus, misericordiam extorquemus.
Tert. (...). Jam. 5.16.
if they bounce hard at heaven gates, and resolve to wring mercy from God by an
holy violence, as Tertullian says the good people of his time did. The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much: but then it must be
the working, stirring, labourfull prayer, as the word signifies; that strives
and struggles, and strains every vein in the heart (as Elias seemed to do by
that posture in prayer of putting his head betwixt his legs 1 King. 18.42.)
that sets awork all the faculties of the soul, and all the graces of the
spirit: that stirrs up dust as Jacob did: makes a man sweat, as our Savior;
who being in an agony prayed the more earnestly Luke 22.44. not without strong
crying and tears, and was heard in that he feared Heb. 5.7. For such a prayer
when a man cries to God (...) mightily or with all his strength, (...) it
avails much, it can do any thing; as Paul using the same words says, I can
do all things through Christ who streng theneth me Philip. 4.13.

Yea let them turn every one from his evil way etc.] For else Prayer profits
not, Humiliation is to no purpose without Reformation; Repentance for sin,
without repentance from sin: (...).
there must be fruits meet for repentance, answerable to amendment of life,
tantamount as repentance, and that weigh just as much as it: for, Optima and
aptissima poenitentia est nova vita, says Luther, the best and truest
repentance is a new life: and if gods people will humble themselves, and pray
and seek his face, and withal turn from their evil ways, then he will do
much for them 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

and from the violence that is in their hands] Heb. In the hollow of their
hands, where it lay hid as it were, but not from God, who here bids them turn
from their wrong-dealing and rapacity. This was their special sin, (ut in
magnis imperijs and emporiis magnae sunt rapinae) therefore are they charged to
relinquish it. It is a speech, says Mercer, like to that of our Savior, Go
tell my Disciples and Peter etc. Tell them all, but be sure you tell Peter. So
here: turn from all your evil ways: but especially from the violence that is
in your hands. See Es. 59.6. Ezech. 23.27. Psalm. 7.4. The Hebrews understand
this text of restitution to be made of evillgotten goods, or wrongfully
detained from the right owners. This say they, must be done: or the party can
be no more renewed by repentance, then a man could be legally purified by the
washing of water, when he continued to hold in his hand an unclean thing. That
of Austin is well known, The sin is not remitted, till that which has bin
ill-gotten from another be restored. And that of Father Latimer, Non remittitur
peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug.
Restore, or else you will cough in hell, and the Devils will laugh at you.
Gravel in the kidneys will not grate so upon you, as a little guiltiness in
this kind will do upon your consciences. The same Latimer tells us in a sermon
of his before K. Edw: 6. that the first day that he preached about Restitution,
there came one and gave him twenty pounds to restore: the next time another,
and brought him in thirty pounds: another time another gave him two hundred
pounds ten shillings. The Law for restitution see Number. 5.6, 7. the party must
not only confess but restore, or he is not a true convert. And this will well
appear when death comes to draw the curtain, and look in upon a man. Hence
our Henry the 7. in his last will and testament, after the disposition of his
soul and body, Speed 995. Turk. hist. fol. 767.
he willed restitution should be made of all such moneys as had unjustly been
levied by his officers. And the like we read of Selymus the grand Signiour in
the Turkish history.

Verse 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent] This is the speech of one
that doubts, and yet despaireth not: like that of David praying for his sick
child, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me that the child may live
2 Samuel 12.22. We are staggering, says Saint Paul, but not wholly sticking 2
Cor. 4.8. They that go down to the pit (of despair, as well as of the grave
Es. 38.18.) cannot hope for thy truth: but are hurried headlong into hell, as
the Gergesites swine were into the sea. The Prophet Jonah was peremptory, that
by such a day Niniveh should be destroyed: These men therefore had good reason
to doubt, if not of the pardon of their sins, yet of the saving of their city.
All their hope is, that this that Jonah denounced was not Gods absolute decree,
but only his threatening, and that conditional too; viz. except they
repented. This if they could do, and heartily, they knew not but that mercy
might be yet had. Keep hope in heart, or the work will go on heavily Psalm. 43.
ult. Hope is the daughter of Faith: but such as is a staff to her aged mother.
See the Note on Joel. 2.14. Of God repenting I have spoken elsewhere.

Verse 10. And God saw their works] i. e. He noted and noticed them to others.
Or, he saw them, that is, he approved of them. Videre Dei, est approbare. Let
God but see Repentance (as a rainbow) appearing in our hearts and lives, and he
will never drown us in destruction. But unless God sees turning, he sees no
work in a fast, says One upon this very Text. God may say to impenitent
fasters, says Another, as Isaac did to his father, Behold the fire and wood,
but where is the lamb? Or as Jacob did concerning Joseph, Here Is the coat, but
where is the child? Get thee behind, said Jehu to the messengers, what have thou
to do with peace? Confessions and humiliations are our messengers: but if the
heart be not broken, if the life be not amended, what peace? The Talmudists
note here, that God is not said to have seen their sackcloth and ashes, but
their repentance and works, those fruits of their faith; truth in the inward
parts, which God eyeth with singular delight Ier. 5.3. as the work of his own
spirit Ephesians. 8.9. August.
Certum est nos facere quod facimus; sed ille facit ut facimus, and he is
pleased to call his grace in us, our works, for our encouragement in
well-doing: and freely to crown it in us, without any merit on our part.

That they turned from their evil way] To which they were by nature and ill
custom so wedded and wedged, that they could never have been loosened, but by
an extraordinary touch from the hand of heaven. The conversion of a sinner from
the evil of his way is Gods own handiwork Jer. 31.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. Ezech.
6.9. Plato went three times into Sicily to convert Dionysius the tyrant, and
could do no good on him. Polemo, of a drunkard, by hearing Xenocrates, is said
to have become a Philosopher: But what says Ambrose to him? De Elia and jciun.
cap. 12.
Si resipuit a vino etc. If he repented of his drunkenness, yet he continued
an Infidel; he was still temulentus sacrilegio drunk with superstition: He
recovered of one disease, and died of another, as Benhadad did: he gave but the
half turn, Psalm. 9.17.
and therefore turned at length, and nevertheless into hell. We conceive
better of these Ninivites: though foam are of opinion, that their repentance
was but fained and forced, as was that of Pharaoh and Ahab, as appears (say
they) by the sequent history, by their dealing against the Jews, and by Nahum.

and God repented] This was mutatio Rei non Dei, as is above noted.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly] Mirablilis homo profecto fuit
Jonas, says Winckleman here, as strange a man was Jonas of an honest man, as
you shall lightly hear of. Well might David caution Psa. 37.8. Cease from
anger and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to do evil. A fretfull
man is easily drawn to evil. David was (once at least) displeased at Gods
dealing: which was no whit for his credit, or comfort 2 Samuel 6.8. Discontented
he was, not at Gods lenity, as Jonah, but at Gods severity, against Vzziah: and
that all the peoples joy should be dashed and damped with such a sad and sudden
di^aster. How much better minded was he when dumb, not once opening his mouth,
because God did it, Psalm. 39.9? The Greeks give this Rule, Either say nothing,
or say that which is better then nothing. O that you would altogether hold your
peace, and it should be your wisdom, (...).
said Job to his friends, Job 13.5. Silence sometimes comes to be a virtue; and
never more then when a man is causelessly displeased. Prima semper irarum tela
maledicta sunt, says Salust. Angry people are apt to let fly, to mutter, and
mutiny against God and man; as here. Reason should say to choler, that which
the Nurse says to the child. Weep not, and you shall have it. Plut.
But either it does not: or if it do, yet the ear (which tastes words, as the
mouth does meat) is often so filled with gall (some creatures have fell. in aure)
that nothing can relish with it. See Exodus 6.9. If Moses his anger was pure,
free from guile, and gall, Exodus 32.19. yet Ionah's was not so. It is surely
very difficult to kindle and keep quick this fire, without all smoke of sin.
Be angry, and sin not, is, says One, the easiest charge, under the hardest
condition that can be. Men, for most part, know not what they do in their
anger; this raises such a smoke. Put fire to wet straw and filthy stuff, and
it will smoke and smutch you quickly; yea scorch you and scald you, when once
it breaks out. Levit. 13.5. we read of a leprosy breaking out of a burning:
seldom do passions burn but there is a leprosy breaking out of that burning.
It blistereth out at the lips: hence the Hebrews have but one and the same word
for Anger and foaming at the mouth, Esth. 1.18. Zach. 1.7. Ketseph. Spuma. Hos.
10.7.
They have also a Proverb, that a man's disposition is much discovered, Bechos,
bechis, becagnab; by his cup, by his purse, and by his passion: at which time,
and in which cases. A fool utters all his mind, Prove. 29.11. ( all his wrath,
(...) a fool, and (...) suddenly, rashly, is from the same root. De sera unmin:
vindict.
say the Seventy) and that suddenly, rashly, as the Hebrew intimates: but a
wise man keeps it in till afterward, Prove. 29.11. Ahashuerosh when he felt
himself enraged against Haman, walked into his garden, Esth. 7.7. And Platarch
tells of one Archytas, that, displeased with his servants for their sloth, he
flung from them, saying, Valete quoniam vobis irascor, I will leave you; for
that I am angry with you. The very first insurrections of inordinate Passions
are to be crushed, the first smoke of them to be smothered, which else will
fume up into the head, and gather into so thick a cloud, as we shall lose the
sight of our selves, and what is best to be done: Cease therefore from rash
anger and stint strife betime. The beginning of it, says Solomon, is as when
one lets out water: therefore leave off contention before it be meddled
with, Prove. 17.14. Storms rise out of little gusts: and the highest winds are,
at first, but a small vapor. Had Jonah stopped, or stepped back, when he felt
himself first stirred, he had not so shamefully over-shot himself, nor heapt up
so many sins, as he did in the following intercourse with Almighty God. He
was naturally hot, and hasty: and so were those two brethren the sounes of
thunder; they had quick and hot spirits, Luke 9.55. Now, where there is much
untowardnesse of nature, there Grace is the more easily overborn: sour wines
need much sweetning. Gods best children, though ingrafted into the true vine,
yet carry they about them a relish of the old stock still. It is thought by
very good Divines, that Jonah feeling his own weakness in giving place to
anger, thought to strive against it, and so addressed himself to prayer, verse
2. but transported by his passions of grief and rash anger, while by prayer he
thought to have overcome them, they overcame him, and his prayer too: so true
is that of the Apostle; The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God,
Jam. 1.20.

Verse 2. And he prayed unto the Lord,] i. e. He thought to have done so; but
by the deceitfulness of his own heart, he quarreled with God; and instead of
wrestling with him, as Jacob, he wrangled with him. The words seem to be rather
a brawle then a prayer; which should ever proceed from a sedate and settled
spirit, and hold conformity with the will of God. Could Jonah be in case to
pray, when he had neither right conceptions of God, nor bowels of mercy to men:
but that millions of people must perish rather then he be held a false Prophet?
Say there were something in it of peace for Gods glory, which he thought would
suffer; as if God were either mutable, or impotent. Say that there were in this
outburst, something of affection to Gods people, who had then no greater enemy
to fear, then these Ninevites; whom therefore Jonah would have had destroyed
according to his prediction: yet cannot he be excused for falling so foul upon
God, and upbrayding Him with that which is his greatest glory, Exodus 33.28, 19.
with Exodus 34.6, 7. The truth is, nothing makes a man eccentrick in his
motions, so much as headstrong passions, and private respects. He that brings
these into Gods presence, shall do him but little good service. The soul is
then only well carried, when neither so becalmed that it moves not when it
should, nor yet tossed with tempests to move disorderly, as did Jonah here, and
Job, in that peevish prayer of his, chap. 6.8, 9. See also Jer. 20.7, 8.

I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, etc.] that is, my thought: for
whether he worded it thus with God till now, it appears not: but God hears
the language of men's hearts: and their silence to him is a speaking evidence.

when I was yet in my country.] And had Jonah so soon forgotten what God had
done for him, since he came thence? Oh what a grave is oblivion! and what a
strange passage is that (and yet how common?) Then believed they his words,
they sang his praise. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his
counsel, Psalm. 106.12, 13. Jonah did not surely wait for Gods counsel, but
anteverted it. Idcirco anteverti, says he in the next words, ( Therefore I
fled before) and thought he had said well, spoke very good reason. It is the
property of lust and passion, so to blear the understanding of a man, that he
shall think he has reason to be mad, and that there is great sense in sinning.
Dogs in a chafe bark at their own masters: so do people in their passions let
fly at their best friends. They set their mouth against the heavens, and their
tongue walks through the earth, Psalm. 73.9. Jonah in his heat here, justifies
his former flight, which he had so sorely smarted for, Et quasi quidam
Aristarchus, he takes upon him to censure God for his superabundant goodness,
which is above all praise.

For I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, etc.] This He knew to
be Gods name, Exodus 34.6, 7. but withal he should have remembered, what was the
last letter in that Name; viz. that he will by no means clear the guilty. See
Nahum 1.2, 3. The same fire has burning heat and cheerful light. Gracious is
the Lord, but yet righteous, says David, Psalm. 116.5. his mercy goes ever
bounded by his truth. This Jonah should have considered; and therefore trembled
thus to have upbraided God with that mercy by which himself subsisted: and but
for which he had been long since in hell, for his tergiversation and
peevishness. But mercy rejoices against judgment, and runs as a spring,
without ceasing. Jam. 2.
It is not like those pools about Jerusalem that might be dried up with the
tramplings of horse and horsemen. The grace of God was exceeding abundant, 1 Timothy 1.14. It has abounded to flowing-over, as the Sea does above the hugest
rocks. See this in the present instance. Jonah adds sin to sin, (...).
and does enough to undo himself for ever: so that a man would wonder how God
could forbear killing him, as he had like to have done Moses, when he met him
in the Inn. But He is God, and not man: he contents himself to admonish Jonah
of his fault, as a friend and familiar, velut cum eo colludens, jesting with
him, as it were, and by an outward sign, showing him how grievously he had
offended. Mercer.
Concerning these Attributes of God here recited, see the Note on Joel 2.13.
and say with Austin, Laudent alij pietatem: Dei ego misericordium. Let no
spider suck poison out of this sweetest flower: nor out of a blind zeal make
ill use of it, as Jonah does, for a cloak of his rebellion: lest abused mercy
turn into fury.

Verse 3. Threfore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from me,] A
pitiful peevish prayer, such as was that of Job, and that of Jeremy above
noted: to which may be added Sarah's hasty wish for God to arbitrate betwixt
her and her husband: Moses his quibling with God, till at length he was angry,
Exodus 4.10, 14. Eliah's desire to die out of discontent, etc. What a deal of
filth, and of flesh, clogs and cleaves to our best performances? Hence David so
prays for his prayers, and Nehemiah for pardon of his reformations. Anger is
ever an evil counselor; but when it creeps into our prays, it corrupts them
worse then vinegar does the vessel wherein it stands. Submit your selves
therefore to God (as Jonah should have done) resist this devil (of pride and
passion) and he will flee from you: Jam. 4.7.
as by giving place to impatiency ye give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26. who
else (by his vile injections, or at least by his vain impertinencies) will so
flie-blow and mar our duties that we may well wonder, they are not cast back
as dirt into our faces. Sure it is that if the holy Ghost had not his hand in
our prayers, there would not be the least goodness in them: no not
uprightness and truth, without which Christ would never present them, or the
Father accept them.

for it is better for me to die then to live] sc. in that disgrace that I shall
now undergo of being a false prophet, not henceforth to be believed. Lo, this
was it that troubled the man so much, as it did likewise Moses, Exodus 4.1. They
will not believe me; for they will say, The Lord has not appeared unto thee.
But God should have been trusted by them for that, and his call obeyed
howsoever, without consults or disputes; careless of their own credit, so that
God might be exalted. True it is, that a man had better die with honor, then
live in disgrace, truly so called. It were better for me to die, 1 Cor. 9.15.
says holy Paul, then that any man should make my glorying void. Provident we
must be (but not over-tender) to preserve our reputation: learning of the
unjust steward by lawful (though he did by unlawful) means to do it: for our
Savior noted this defect in the children of light, that herein they were not
often so wise as they should be, Luke 16.8. But Jonah was too heady and hasty in
this wish of his death; because his credit, as he thought, was cracked, and he
shoulld be looked upon as a liar. But was the Euge of a good conscience nothing
to him? was Gods approbation of no value, nor the good esteem of his faithful
people? It was enough for Demetrius, that he had a good report of the truth 3
John. 12. what ever the world held or said of him. What is the honor of the
world but a puff of stinking breath? and why should any Jonah be so ambitious
of it, as that without it he cannot find in his heart to live. Life is better
then honor. Joseph is yet alive, says Jacob. To have heard that Joseph lived
a servant would have joyed him, D. Hall. Cont.
more then to hear that he died honorably. The greater blessing obscureth the
less. He is not worthy of honor, that is not thankful for life. St. Paul's
desire to be dissolved that he might be with Christ, which is far far the
better Phil. 1.3. was much different from this of Jonah

Verse. 4. Do thou do well to be angry?] Or what? art thou very angry?
Nunquid recte? Summon the sobriety of thy senses before thine own judgment:
and see whether there be a cause. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
with mine own? Mat. 20.15.
Is thine eye evil because I am good? Shall I not show mercy on whom I will
show mercy? Or enviest thou these poor Ninivites their preservation, for my
sake? Cannot I provide for mine own glory, and for thine authority by other
means and ways then thou imaginest? Have patience Jonah, and rest better
satisfied with my dispensation. Be swift to bear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
For, I wot well, the wrath of man works not the righteonsnesse of God. Jam.
1.19, 20.
This thou will see and say as much, when come to thy self, for now thou art
quite off; and being transported as thou art, Nil audire voles, Hora^.
nil discere, quod levet aegrum.

Hierome seeks to excuse Jonah's anger: but God here condemns it, as not
well: and Jonah himself, partly by not answering again, and partly by recording
the story, seems to say of himself as Father Latimer does in another case; I
have used in mine earnest matters to say, Sermon. 3. Sund. in Advent.
Yea, by Saint Mary, which indeed is not well. Anger is not altogether
unlawful, so it be well carried; It is, says one, a tender virtue: and as it
is not evil to marry, but good to be wary, so here. Let a man ask himself this
question, Do I will to be thus angry? and is mine indignation rightly regulated
for principle, object, measure, end? If it be not, the spirit of God will be
grieved in the good soul, and sensibly stir, Ephesians. 4.30, 31. yea, thou shall
hear the correcting voice thereof within thee, saying, Do thou well to be
thus angry? Should not all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away, with all malice? And should ye not be kind one to
another, and (...) hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you? Ephesians. 4.31, 32.

Verse. 5. So Jonah went out of the city,] As not yet knowing what God might do,
though he found him inclinable to show them mercy upon their repentance. Or he
might think happily, that these Ninivites were only sermon-sick, penitent indeed
for the present, but it was too good to hold long: these seemingly righteous
men would soon fall from their righteousness, and then be destroyed, though
for present somewhat favored of God. Mercer reads the text in the
preterpluperfect tense, and makes it an hysteron proteron thus, exierat autem
Jonas; but Jonas had gone out of the city, sc. before he had showed himself so
hot and hasty against God, and brawled with him as above. Others think, that
when he saw which way the squares were like to go, he flung out of the city in
a great pelt: and if God had fetched him again with a flewet on the ear (as
Queen Elizabeth did the Earl of Essex her favorite, Camb. Elisa^.
when being crossed by her of his will ^he uncivilly turned his back as it were
in contempt) he had done him no wrong: But God is long-suffering, etc. He
considers whereof we are made, and with what strong corruptions we are beset.
He knows that sin has a strong heart, and will not easily be done to death:
that nothing cleaves more pertinaciously, or is more inexpugnable then a strong
lust; whether it be worldliness, wantonness, passionatenesse, pride,
ambition, revenge, or the like: these Jebusites will not easily be driven out;
these sturdy rebels will hardly be subdued; these stick closest, as a shirt
does to a leprous body; and cannot be done off but with great ado. Now if
Jonah be of a choleric constitution, and soon kindled; if this evil of his
nature have been confirmed by custom (a second nature) if Satan stir up the
coals, and say to him as the people did to Pilat, Do as thou ever have done:
God graciously considers all this, and bears with his evil manners.

and sat on the east side of the city] Quite out of the precincts; where he
might see their ruin, and not suffer with them. Faux after he had laid his
train, and ser it awork to fire the powder at such an hour, was to have retired
himself into Georges fields, and there to have beheld the sport. That Jonah was
so uncharitable as to wish and wait the overthrow of Niniveh, and not that they
would rather return and live, admits of no excuse. But that expecting its
overthrow (according to that God had threatened by him) he secured himself by
separating from those sinners against their own souls, was well and wisely done
of him. See Esa. 48.20. and 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 16.4. Lot did so from
Sodom, (...).
the people from Core and his accomplices, John and his disciples from Cerinthus
the heretic: he sprung out of the Bath from that blasphemer, lest he should be
punished with him: so the Church of Jerusalem packt away to Pella, etc. ^^sob.
l. ^. c. ^.


and there made him a booth] A sorry something, wherein to repose himself, till
the indignation were over-past. Ministers as good soldiers of Jesus Christ
must suffer hardship, be content to dwell in tents, or to lie in huts, till
they come to the heavenly palace, where they shall have a better building, 2
Cor. 5.1. yea, a throne in that city of pearl, whose master builder is God,
Heb. 11.13. Turk his^. fol. 3.1^.
Mean while let them not seek great things for themselves: but as the Turks
never build sumptuously for their own private uses, but content themselves with
simple cottages how mean soever, good enough say they, for the short time of
our pilgrimage here: so much more should Christians, and especially Ministers;
whose reward (how little soever upon earth) is great in heaven. Let them live
upon reversions: and though their dwelling be but mean, a booth or little
better, yet they shall have stately mansions above: Man. 5.12.
and in the mean time, if they can but say as that Heathen did, (...), God
dwells here with me, this house of mine is a little Church, a tabernacle for the
God of Jacob; oh how happy are they in that behalf, even above the great Turk
with his Seraglio, (which is two miles in compass) yea, with his whole Empire,
Turk. hist.
which (says Luther) is but a crust cast by the great housekeeper of the
world to his dogs.

and sat under it in the shadow] Having food and reyment says the Apostle, let
us therewith be content. (...).
Where the word rendered raiment signifies any covering over head, if it be but
an haircloth. Some say it signifies domicilium an house: others say that houses
are not named, for that they were not any where to fix: Estius. Vt Hamax^^^
but to be ready to run from place to place, and to leave house and all behind
them: or as soldiers burn their huts when the siege is ended, that they may go
home to their houses; being discontentedly contented in the mean while: so
should we, glad to hover and cover under the shadow of the Almighty by the
grace of faith, quae te pullastrum, Christum gallinum facit, which makes Christ
the hen, and thee the chicken says Luther.

till he might see what would become of the city] whether God would not ratify
his word by raining down hell from heaven upon it, as once he did upon sinful
Sodom: or overwhelme it with the river Tigris, as once he did some part of it,
says Diodorus Siculus, Diod. lib. 2.
so that twenty furlongs of the town-wall were thrown down by it. And the
Prophet Nahum threateneth, that with an overflowing flood God would make an
end of the place thereof, chap. 1.8.

Verse 6. And the Lord God prepared a gourd] sc. after that his booth was dried
up, and the leaves withered, God by his providence, and not without a miracle
(because without seed, and so suddenly) furnished Jonah with this gourd or
ivybush, or white vine, or the plant called Palma Christi, or Pentadactylon,
because it resembles a man's hand with five fingers: something it was, but
what, is not certainly known. Kimchi thus describes it: Est herba longis and
altis frondibus umbrosa. It is an herb or plant that yields good shade with
its long and large leaves. And many years before him, one Rabba son of Hanna
said, that it grows by the waters side, is commonly set for shade-sake, before
tavern doors: and that oil is made of the seeds of it.

and made it to come up over Ionah] Not only to refresh him, (who having been
so lately in the whales-belly was happily more tender-skinned then before, and
not so well able to endure the heat of the Sun) but also to make way to that
reproof he afterward gave him ver. 10. Hoc enim exierno signo, says Mercer,
for by this outward sign, God sporting with him, as it were, clearly
convinces him of his impatiency, and admonishes him of his duty: and this He
thinks was not done till the forty days wore over.

to deliver him from his grief] from his headache, caused by the heat of the
Sun; which yet he cursed not as the scorched Atlantes are said to do. Or to
exhilarate and refresh his spirits after his self-vexing: for the hasty man
never wants woe, and the envious person, because he cannot come at another man's
heart, feeds upon his own. Esa. 5.7.
Now though God chide him for his fault, yet as a father he tendereth his
infirmity, and takes care that the spirit fail not before him and the soul
that he had made. And it is as if he should say: Jonah goes on frowardly in
the way of his heart; I have seen his ways and will heal him: I will lead
him also, and restore comforts unto him Esaias 57.16, 17, 18 As it is a rule in
Physic, still to maintain nature.

so Jonah was exceeding glad] Heb. rejoiced with great joy, that is, supra
modum, he was excessive in all his passions, which speaks him a weak man.
Some think he rejoiced the more in the gourd, as conceiving that God thereby
voted with him, and for him. This was also Leahs error, when rejoicing in that
whereof she should have repented rather, she said Genesis 30.18. God has given me
my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband, and she has borne me a
fist son. So much mistaken are the best sometimes: and so bladder-like, is man's
soul; that filled with earthly vanities though but wind, and gone with a wind,
it grows great, and swells in pride and folly: but if pricked with the least pin
of piercing grief, it shriveleth to nothing.

Verse 7. But God prepared a worm] All occurrences are to be ascribed not to
Nature, Fate, or Fortune, but to God: who as he is Great in great things, so is
he not little in the least. Maximus in magnis, nec parvus in minimis.
He prepared first the gourd, and then the worm, and then the wind. He was the
great doer in all. He so attempereth all, that his people shall have their
times and their turns of joy and sorrow. These two are tied together, said the
Heathen, with chains of Adamant: hence also Ageronia's altar in the temple of
Volupia. Flut.
See the circle God usually goes in with his, Psalm. 30.5, 6, 7. etc. to teach
them that all outward comforts are but as grass or flower of the field, which
he can soon blast or corrode by some worm of his providing. Moneo te
iterumque iterumque monebo, says Lactantius, I warn thee therefore, and will
do it again and again, that thou look not upon those earthly delights as
either great or true to those that trust them: De opisicio Da. ad Them.
but as things that are not only deceitful, because doubtful but also
deadly, because delicious. There is a worm lies couchant in every gourd to
smite it, a teredo to wast it, besides the worm of conscience bred in that
froath and filth, for a perpetual torment.

and it smot the gourd that it withered] Plants have also their wounds,
diseases and death, Lib. 17. cap. 14.
says Pliny. The gourd being gnawed at the root, and robbed of its moistness
withered. Sic transit gloria mundi. But the righteous shall flourish like a
palmtree tree (not like this palm-crist) Psalm. 92.12. Now the palm tree though
it have many waights at the top, and many snakes or worms at the root, yet it
still says, Alciat: Emb.
Nec premor nec perimor, I am neither born down, nor dried up: but as Noah's
olive drowned, kept its verdure; and as Moses bush fired but not consumed; so
fares it with the righteous, persecuted but not forsaken etc. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
and at death a crown of life awaites him, Quanta perennis erit, an
immarcescible crown, Sr. Thom. Bodlye 's posy.
an inheritance undefiled and that withers not, Pet. 1.4. that suffers no
Marasmus, but is reserved fresh and green for you in heaven; like the palm tree
which Pliny says never loses his leaf nor fruit: or like that Persian tree,
whereof Theophrastus says, that at the same time it does bud, blossom and
bear fruit.

Verse 8. God prepared a vehement East-wind] The winds then blow not where
they list, at random I mean, and without rule: but are both raised and laid
again by God at his pleasure. He prepared, and sent out of his treasures, Jer.
10.13.
this

violent East-wind^ Heb: silent: R. Selomoh.
so called either because it silenceth all other winds with its vehemence: or
because when it blows, men are made silent or deaf with its dinn, so that
their tale cannot be heard. There are that by silent here understand a still,
low, gentle East Wind, that cooled not the heat of the avre inflamed by the
Sun, but rather added to it, and set it on: (...) the Greeks interpret it: and
this suites well with that which follows.

and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah] Vssit and laesit Psalm. 121. So the
Poet, -- seriente cacumina Sole. Chrysostom cannot but wonder, that whereas
all fire naturally tends upwards, the Sun should shoot his beams downwards,
and affect these lower bodies with his light and heat. Whereby if he be
troublesome to any Jonah, (...)
it is because God will have it so (for he is a servant, as his name in Hebrew
imports) without whom neither Sun shines nor rain falls Mat. 5.45. Mat.
13.6.21. Rev. 7.16. and 16.8.9. 1 Pet. 4.12.
and who by afflictions (set forth in Scripture by the heat of the Sun)
brings back his straglers Psalm. 119.97.

that he fainted] Though the head of man bath a manisold guard upon it, as
being overlaid first with hair, skin and flesh, like the threefold covering
of the Tabernacle; and then encompassed with a skull of bones like boards of
Cedar; and afterward with diverse skins like silken curtains: Obtectue fuit
maerore (...). Sept.
and lastly enclosed with the yellow skin which Solomon calls the golden ewer
Eccle. 12.6.

yet Jonah fainted and wished in himself to die] Ita ut ab animo suo peteret
mori, he required of his soul to go out of his body, Egredere o anima mea, as
Hilarion said, but in a better sense he called for death, as his due: being,
belike, of Seneca's mind, that Nature has bestowed this benefit on men, that
they may bereave themselves of life, whenever they please: not considering
that God is Lord of lise and death, neither may any one lay down his life but
when He calls for it: as a soldier may not leave his station, but at the
command of his captain.

it is better for me to die then to live] Not so Jonah, unlessed you were in a
better mind. You should rather say as Martinus on his sickbed did, Sever.
Epist. 3. Bernard.
Domine si adhuc populo tuo sum necessarius, Lord if I may yet be serviceable
to thee, and useful to thy people, I refuse not life and labor. Or as Mr.
Bolton on his deathbed desirous to be dissolved, when he was told by some
standers by, Mr. Bagshaw. in the life of Mr. Bolton.
that though it was better for him to die then to live, Yet the Church of God
would miss him: He thus sweetly replied with David 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If I shall
find faevour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again etc. but, if
otherwise, loc here I am, let him do what seems good in his eyes. A good man
is born for the benefit of many, as Bucers Physicians said to him: neither may
he desire to die out of discontent, Mel. Ad. Non sibis^sed multerum utilitati
esse natum.
as Jonah did for a trifle, wherein he was crossed; and rather then which to
have been deprived of, Niniveh that great city, by his consent, should have
been destroyed. That he never after this would return to his own country, but
was so sick of the fret that he died of the sullens, as some Hebrews say, I
cannot believe. See the Note on ver. 3. Eneid. lib. 1.


Ver. 9. Do thou well to be angry for the gourd?] What? so soon blown up for
a thing of nothing? Tantaene animis coelestibusira? -- Dijne hunc ardorem
mentibus indunt
Euriale? Ae^neid. lib. 1.
an sua cuique deus fit dira libido? Ibid. lib. 9.

Knew not Jonah that to be angry without a cause, was to be in danger of the
judgment? Mat. 5.22. that it was a mortal sin, and not venial, as Papists
falsely conclude from that text; which sets not forth a different punishment of
rash anger, but a diverse degree of punishment? that it is the murder of the
heart, as our Savior there shows, and the sountaine of the murder both of
the tongue, and of the hand? will he be like the foolish be, who loses her
life to get revenge? See the Note on ver. 4.

and he said] Before he said nothing when reproved for his rash anger ver. 4.
and that was best. Now he chats against God, laying the reins in the neck of
his unruly passions, and running riot. Who can understand his er^ours? and who
can tell how often a servant of God may fall into a foul sin, if strongly
inclined thereto by nature, or violently tempted by satan and his instruments?
Of Judah indeed it is expressly noted, that he knew his daughter-in law Tamar
again no more Genesis 38.26. But what shall we say to Lots double incest? to
Sampsons going down again to Gaza Judge. 16? to Abraham's twice denying his
wife? to John's twice adoring the Angel Rev. 19.10. and 22.8? Let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall: and let Gods people see that there be no way
of wickedness found in them, that they allow not, wallow not in this guzzle:
since hereby they loose not their jus haereditarium, but yet their jus
aptitudinale, not their title but yet their fitness to Gods kingdom: and
perhaps, their fullness of reward there 2 John 8.

and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death] A fearful out-burst:
resist passion at the first rising up: else who knows whither it may transport
us? Passions, says One, like heavy bodies down steep hills, once in motion move
themselves: and know no ground but the bottom. Jonah (says Another upon this
text) slights admonition, rises up in an animosity against it to a desperate
degree of anger: such wild beasts are surious passions when we give them the
reins. Thus He, Surely as the Lion beats himself with his own tail: and as
sullen birds in a cage beat themselves to death, so could Jonah in this rage
find in his heart to do: and he shames not to tell God as much. It was
therefore no ill wish of him that desired God to deliver him from that naughty
man Himself, Domine libera me a malo hemine meipso.
from headlong and headstrong passions, which may not only dissweeten a man's
life but shorten it. The Emperor Nerva died of a sever contracted by anger.
Valentinian by an irruption of blood. Wenceslaus King of Bohemia in a rage
against his cup bearer fell presently into a palsy, whereof he died. What
disease Jonah died of I know not: but this I know, that in his heat he did and
said enough here in this text, to have made Almighty God resolve as he did once
against those muttering Mutineeres in the wilderness, As truly as I live,
says the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you: Number.
14.28.
Thou shall surely dye Jonah; out of thine own mouth will I judge thee etc. But
God chose rather to glorify himself in Jonah's salvation, then in his deserved
destruction. Dat igitur poenitentiam, and post a indulgentiam (as that father
prayed) He therefore first gives him repentance, and then pardon, as appears
partly by his recording of these passages, and so shaming himself, as it were,
before all the world: and partly also by his closing up his Prophecy with
silence: not striving with God for the last word, as Peter did with Christ, and
would needs carry it, till the event of things confuted him, and he was glad
to seek a corner to cry in Mat. 26.35. with 75.

Verse 10. Then said the Lord] He did not roar upon Jonah, nor run upon him
with a drawn sword, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:
but gently said unto him, that he might the more admire his own impotency and
Gods lenity; Job 15.26.
both which he studiously describes all along this Prophesy; a good sign of
his sound repentance.

Thou have had pity on the gourd] Here is the end scope and application of the
parable; whereby it apeareth that God prepared not the gourd so much for the
ease and use of Jonah's body, as for a medicine to his soul, convincing him of
the iniquity both of his ways and wishes, by an argument drawn from the less
to the greater: and confuting him by a comparison. Thou, a sinful and wretched
man, have had pity Or spared, and art sorry it perished. The gourd a sorry
shrub, a mean mushrome, and none of thine neither, but as lent thee: Alas
master, said they it was but borrowed.

for the which thou have not laboured] And so can not be so fast-affected to
it. (...). Ethic. l. 4.
For all men love their own works rather then other men's, as parents and poets,
says Aristotle: proving thereby, that those which have received their riches
from their parents are more liberal, then they which have gotten them by their
own labor.

neither made it grow] Thou have neither planted nor watered it, or any way
added to it, by thine industry: for that also was no part of thy pains but
mine. Not that God labors about his creatures; for he does all his work
without tool or toil Esa. 40.28 but this, as many other things in Scripture,
are spoken after the manner of men, and so must be taken.

which came up in a night] Heb: was the son of a night, not without a miracle?
though Pliny speak of the quick and wonderful grouth of this shrub.

and perished in a night] Cito oriens, cito itidem moriens, quickly come, and
as quickly gone; a fit emblem of earths happiness. Surely man walks in a
vain show; faenea quadam foelicitate temporaliter florens: Aug. Ep. 120.
they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. They
are but Hemerobij: their life is but a day (and such a day too, as no man is
sure to have twelve hours to it) as this gourd was but of one days
continuance, a it came up in a night, so it perished the next; cito crevit,
cito decrevit, repent prolatus, repent sublatus, of very small continuance.
Tarnou.


Verse 11. And should not I spare Niniveh] I who am all-bowels: I who am a
sin-pardoning God Neh. 9.31. none like me for that Mic. 7 18. I, Ego
emphaticum. Mercer.
who am the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort 2 Cor. 1.4. whose
property and practice it is to comfort those that are cast down 2 Cor. 7.6. I,
who am so transcendently gracious, that thou have even hit me in the teeth with
it ver. 2. should not I be affected with the destruction of Niniveh?

that great city] See Notes on chap. 1.2. and chap. 3.3, 4. yea I will spare
it, since it is ten thousand times more worth then that gourd of thine so much
pitied.

wherein are more then sixscore thousand Persons] more then twelve myriads of
innocent infants that cannot discern etc. but live a kind of sensitive life,
as not yet come to the use of reason, and are therefore matched and mentioned
with beasts. And also much cattle (a part of my care) which have had their
share, as they could, in the common humiliation; and shall therefore share in
the common preservation. And have thou an heart to repine at this, and not to
be set down with so good reason? Jonah is now sad and silenced: and although we
hear no further of him, yet methinks I see him (Job. lik) laying his hand upon
his mouth in an humble yeeldance: yea putting his mouth in the dust, and saying
Once have I spoken, Job 40.5.
but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no further. Teach me, and
I will hold my tongue: for thou have caused me to understand wherein I have
erred. Job. 6.24.25.
How forcible are right words etc.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of MICAH.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THe word of the Lord etc.] See the Note on Hos. 1.1. to Micah the
Morasthite to distinguish him from Micaiah the son of Imlah, who prophesied in
Ahabs days, above an hundred years before this. Micah the Morasthite, so
called from the place of his birth or abode which is made famous by him (as
Abdera was by Democritus, Hippo by Austin) and not He by it; Ambrose says hi^
name signifies, Quis iste? who is this? who? (says that Father in answer) Not
one of the common sort, but an elect vessel to carry Gods name to his people.
Hierome from his title Morasthite interpreted, calls him Cohaeredem Christi
Coheire with Christ, of whom and his kingdom he sweetly Prophecieth: and may
therefore be called the Evangelicall Prophet; as was Esaias, his contemporary
with whom he has many things common: and this one thing above him, that he
names Bethlehem Christ's birthplace chap. 5.2. for the which (as well as for
his boldness Ier. 26.18.) he was famous in the Church Mat. 2.6. Ioh. 7.42.

in the days of Iotham, Ahaz. Hezekiah] Ahaz stands between Iotham and
Hezekiah, as thistle or thorn between two lillyes or roses. Manasseh comes
after, and degenerates into his grandfather Ahaz. To his time Micah attained
not, much less to Josiahs, as Isidore has it: for betwixt Iotham and Josiah
were an hundred and twenty years at least. It is probable that Micah
Prophesied forty years, if not more: wherein he saw many changes, and met with
many molestations: had cause enough to cry out with his Colleague, Who has
believed our report? My leanenesse, my leanenesse etc. Yet held he on his
course; as being of Latimers mind, who speaking in one of his sermons of a
minister that gave this answer why he left off preaching? viz. because he saw
he did no good; this says Latimer, is a naughty, a very naughty answer.

which he saw] sc. with the eyes of his mind, for the use of the Church;
whereto this prophecy comes commended, first as the word of the Lord, and
secondly, as extraordinarily revealed to this Prophet.

concerning Samaria and Ierusalem] Samaria seems to be first named because
most guilty before God. They are yoked together, because there was scrace ever
a better ( Aholah and Aholibah sisters in sin) and one the much worse for the
others neighborhood. Jerusalem would take it in high scorn (likely) to be
matched with Samaria (so much slighted and shunned by her Ion. 4.9.) as Papists
now do to be set by Protestants, Turks by Christians (the word of a mussulman
bears down all other testimony amongst them) But this Prophet is very bold (as
it is said of Isay his coaetaneus Romans 10.20) binds them both up in one bundle,
and spares not to show Judah their transgressions, and the house of Jacob
their sins.

Verse 2. Hear, all ye people,] He begins as Esaias, in a lofty and stately
style, pouring himself out in a golden flood of words (as Tully speaks of
Aristotle's Politics) and calling for utmost attention and affection: as
knowing that he had to do with men more deaf then sea monsters, and more dull
then the very earth they trod on; which is therefore here commanded to hearken,
since men (that habitable part of Gods earth Pro. 8.31) will not hear and give
ear: wherein they are worse then the insensible creatures Psalm. 119.91.

and let the Lord God be witness against you] Here he turns his speech to
the refractary Jews: speaking to God as a righteous judge and swift witness,
Judex, Judex, vindex, against them if they hearkened not to his message, nisi
pareant, ideoque pereant.

the Lord from his holy temple] that is, let him testify from heaven Psalm.
11.4, that he is displeased with you, and that I have carefully sought your
soules-health. Or, from his temple at Jerusalem wherein ye glory, and where ye
think ye have him as fast bound to you, as the Tyrians had their idol Apollo,
whom they chained and nailed to a post, that he might not forsake them, when
Alexander besieged their town, and took it. The Heathens had a trick when they
besieged a city, Macrob. lib. 3. cap. 9. Virg. Ae^. 2.
to call the Tutelar gods out of it by a certain charm, as believing that it
could not otherwise be taken. In a like sense whereunto some have interpreted
the following verses here.

Verse 3. For behold the Lord comes out of his place] that is, say they out
of Iudaea and his temple there, leaving it to the Chaldaeans and Assyrians. See
Ezech. 3.12. and chapters 9.10, and 11. where God makes diverse removes from the
Cherubins to the threshold, from thence to the Eastgate, from thence to mount
Olivet, quite out of the city chap. 11.23 and when God was gone, then followed
the fatal calamity, in the ruin of the city. But by Gods coming forth out of
his place here, I conceive is meant his descending from heaven to do justice on
this hypocritical nation, Esaias 26.21, and because hypocritis nihil stupidius
hypocrites resting on their external performances and privileges will hardly
be persuaded of any evil toward them Mic. 3.11. Is not the Lord, say they
amongst us? none evil can come upon us; therefore we have hear an emphaticall
Ecce, Behold the Lord comes: he is even upon the way already, and will be
here with the first. He will come down as once at Sodom, when their sin was
very grievous Genesis 18.20. when they were overcharged with the superfluity of
naughtiness; God came from heaven to give their land a vomit; And so he would
do here: for Unregenerate Israel was to God as Ethiopia Am. 9.7. as the Rulers
of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah Esaias 1.10.

and tread upon the high places of the earth] the High and mighty Ones, that
having gotten on the top of their hillocks as so many Ants, think themselves so
much the better and safer, repose confidence in their high places and
strongholds, as Nebuchadnezzar did in his Babel, Edom in his clifts of the
rocks, munitions of rocks, Obad. 3. the rich fool in his heaps and hoards Luke
12. these, with their false confidences, God will tread down in his anger, and
trample them in his fury, as the mire of the streets: he will bring down their
strength to the earth, and lay their honor in the dust. Isa. 63.3, 6.

Verse 4. And the mountains shall be molten under him] This is to the
self-same sense: Though men swell in their own eyes, to the hugeness of so
many mountains: and though gotten upon their hill of ice, they think they shall
never be moved, Psalm. 30.6, 7. yet when God with his devouring fire, and
everlasting burnings comes in presence, these craggie mountains shall soon
dissolve and melt as wax, they shall be as waters, poured down a descent, they
shall flow as a land-flood, etc. By which similitudes, and familiar comparisons
is notably set forth the irresistible wrath of God for the affrighting of
hard-hearted sinners, that they may take hold of his strength, and make peace
with him, Esaias 27.5.

The valleys also shall be cleft.] The poorer sort also shall have their share
in the common calamity. God will neither spare the high for their might, nor
the base for their meannesse, but Lords and losels together, shall be as wax
before the fire, etc.] Wax is a poor fence against fire, sticks and stubble
against a strong torrent: so humane force, against divine judgments.

Verse 5. For the transgression of Jacob is all this,] Lest they should think,
either that these things were threatened in terrorem only, and would never be
inflicted: or else that they had not deserved such severity, but that God
should pour out his wrath rather upon the Heathen that knew him not, and upon
the families that called not on his name. The Prophet here shows that Jacob
was become a just object of Gods indignation, by his transgressions or
rebellions, and the whole house of Israel by their sins: there was a general
defection, and therefore they must expect a general destruction. I or why? the
just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity, he will not
acquit the guilty: morning by morning does he bring his judgments to light, he
fails not: but the unjust knows no shame, will take no warning, which is a
just both presage and desert of his ruin.

What is the transgression of Jacob?] say they in a chatting way; like these
miscreants in Malachy, that so worded it with God, chap. 1. and 3.

Is it not Samaria?] says the Prophet, in answer to that daring demand of
theirs. So, what are the high places of Judah?] viz. the superstitions and
carnal confidences thereof? Is it not Jerusalem? says the Prophet. Are not
their capital cities become their capital sins? Read we not of the calf of
Samaria, Hos. 8.5. and did not her kings set up idols at Dan and Bethel, and
Gilgal. and Beersheba? As for Jerusalem, had she not turned the very Temple
into an high-place, by resting in her ceremonial services, and sacrifices? Did
not some of her best kings wink at the high places? And Ahaz, that stigmaticall
Beli^list, shut up Gods Temple, and set up strange worships? How then could
these frontlesse fellows ask, What is the transgression, etc? and What are the
high places etc? The Prophet goes not behind the door to tell them, that the
best of them were no better then a rabble of rebels against heaven: and their
chieftains were most in fault, though they least liked to hear of it. Samaria
is a very Poneropolis, and Jerusalem is little better: they both are even
transformed into sins image: the Prophet here speaks of them, as if they
were not only sinful, but sin it self; as Tully says of one Tubulus a Roman
Preter, that he was so desperately wicked, Haraporcorum, vel colluvies
rabidorum canum. Aug.
ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitij esse videre^^r; that he passed not for a
man, but for a Vice, so flagitious were his practices: or as Austin says of
this present evil world, That it is nothing else but a stie of filthy hogs, or
a kennell of mad dogs.

Verse 6. Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field,] i.e. like as
when stones are gathered out of a field, they are laid together on heaps: so I
will take course that where Samaria now is, there shall be nothing to be seen,
but heaps of stones and rubbish. God is the true (...): for thou have made of a
city an heap, of a defenced city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city,
it shall never be built, Esaias 25.2. Of Rome it was long since prophesied: Tota
eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma faisses.

O that God would hasten that day: Scipio foresaw it, and wept, sc. when he saw
Carthage set all on a light fire by himself. In the greatness of the Turkish
Empire are swallowed up many kingdoms and countries: besides all those
Churches and places so much spoken of in Scripture, the Romans only excepted:
yet no doubt for their many and mighty sins, Time shall triumph over this so
great a Monarchy, when it shall but then live by fame, as others now do. Turk.
hist. pref. Cedren.
Jam seges est ubi Troia fuit. Though thou build thy walls as high as heaven
(said the Oracle to wicked Phocas) yet sin that lies at the foundation, will
one day over-turn them.

and as plantings of a vineyard,] that is, it shall be made a place fit for the
planting of vines: it shall be utterly rased and harased. -- Vni mihi pergamo
restant Incola captivo quae bove victor erat. Bacchus amat colles.
A Lapide observes the fitness of the expression here used, in that Samaria
was situate on an hill that bore vines: and before it was a city, it had been
a vineyard: God threatens to make it so again, and so to stain the pride of
all its glory: see what a trouble-town sin is. Surely did people but know
what it will once cost them, and cause to them, they durst not but be innocent.

and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley,] that is, into a by
corner. Elapidation is necessary to a vineyard, Esaias 5.2. there being no
possession that requires more pains and care, as Cato has observed.

and I will discover the foundation thereof.] I will not leave a stone upon a
stone, nor any foot-step of so stately a city, that has so long time been a
cage of unclean birds, an Augean stable of abominable idolatries. God, as he
has loving respects to the places of his servants birth and abode, Psalm. 87.6.
Esaias 49.16. so he sets the marks of his wrath upon those places where foul
sins have been perpetrated, as upon our Abbeys and Monasteries, whose very
foundations are laid naked.

Verse 7. And all the graven images thereof,] Upon these the jealous God will
execute vengeance: so to show his hatred of idolatry. The stones of the altars
he will make as chalk-stones, that are beaten in sunder: the groves and the
images shall not stand up, Esaias 27.9. As for those that worship them, and
repent not of the works of their hands, Rev. 9.20. they shall smart surely for
their idolatries, as did those of old in the wilderness: and the more
ingenuous of their posterity acknowledge at this day, that there is no
punishment befalls them, Moses Gerand.
in which there is not still an ounce of that golden calf. True it is, that the
Samaritan superstition which was grosser at first, (and for which they were
carried captive by the Assyrian) was afterward refined by Manasseh a
Jew-priest, that in Alexanders time made a defection to him, and brought many
Jews with him: but that saved them not from utter destruction.

and all the hires thereof shall be burnt with fire,] Her rewards given her by
her sweet-hearts, Hos. 2.5, 12. and 9.1. her vowed presents and memories, (as
Papists now call them) her moneys and donaries shall be set on a light fire.
God will confute their vain confidences, as he did those Popish rebels of
Norfolk in Edward the sixths time, who brought into the battle the Pix under
his canopie, and with all his trinkets, crosses, banners, candlesticks,
memories, etc. Acts and Mon. fol. 1190.
which in the end could neither help themselves, nor save their friends from
the hands of their enemies.

for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, etc.] Ill gotten goods thrive
not. Few harlots are found to be rich. Indeed we read of Phryne, a notable
strumpet, that she offered to rebuild the walls of Thebes on condition that
this might be engraven on them; (...), and Alexander pulled them down, and
Phryne set them up again, but it would not be accepted. Flora also the Roman
harlot was very rich: and so is the whore of Babylon at this day, by her
trading with the merchants of the earth: but this will not hold long, Rev.
18.10. In one hour shall her judgment come: and in one hour so great riches
shall come to nothing, verse 17. England was wont to be counted and called the
Popes Ass; for bearing his burdens: and his puteus inexhaustus, his pit of
treasure, whence he drew at pleasure. Polydor Virgil was sometime Collectour
of his Peter Pence here, etc. But Henry 8. casheered and cast him out hence;
depriving him of his harlot-hire. And well he had done, had he not given
occasion to those that came after to complain. Possidebant Papistae, possident
jam Rapistae, etc.

Verse 8. Therefore I will wail and howl,] Good men are usually more deeply
affected with the wretched estate of wicked persons, then they themselves are.
Thus Samuel mourned for Saul's rejection; Daniel was astonished and troubled at
the import of Nebuchadnezzars dream, chap. 4.19. Habakkuks belly trembled, Hab.
3.16.
and his lips quivered at the consideration of the judgments that were to come
upon the Chaldeans. Do we so (says Mr. Perkins) at other men's smartings.

I will go stripped,] tam mente quam vest, renting off my garments, and casting
them from me, as if bereft of my wits: Pro demente vel insano quidam accipiunt,
says Calvin here. See Esaias 59.15. with the margent, and Esaias 20.2.

I will make a wailing like the dragons,] which sucking the Elephants blood,
till he fall down dead upon them, and oppress them with his huge bulk, make an
horrible howling: so horrible (says Palacius out of Pliny and Solinus) that
they amaze, yea kill those that hear it. Fides sit penes autores.

and mourning as the owls,] Heb. as the daughters of the owl, or of the
ostrich: young ostriches cast off by their dammes, Job 39 14. Lam. 4.3. and
hungerbit howl pitifully, as do also the young ravens for like cause, Psalm.
147.9. Of the ravens of Arabia it is recorded, that full gorged, they have a
tuneable sweet record: but empty, screech horribly. By these similitudes here
used, the Prophet would express his grief to be unexpressible.

Verse 9. For her wound is incurable,] Or, she is grievously sick of her
wounds; Or, her wounds are full of anguish, neither is there any to pour in
balm of Gilead, to allay it: Speed. 432. Camd. in Middlesex.
any to lick it whole, as the Lady Elinor did her husband Prince Edwards wound,
traitorously given him in the holy land, by an Assassine, with a poisoned knife.

for it is come unto Judah,] viz. Samaria's wound and Plague is come, i. e.
shall shortly come, though now they live, as if out of the reach of Gods rod,
or as if they had a protection.

he is come unto the gate of my people.] Sennacherib (fleshed with former
successes at Samaria, which had been carried captive by his father) came up to
the very gate of Jerusalem, as an overflowing scourage: and thought to have
cut off all the Jews at once: as if they had had all but one neck. He came up
over all his channels, and went over all his banks. He passed through Judah, and
over-flowed, reaching even to the neck: and that stretching out of his wings
filled the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel, Esaias 8.8. But Immanuel soon took a
course with him, Esaias 37.33. so that though he came to the gates, yet he
entered not into the city: nor shot an arrow there, nor cast a bank against it.
Look upon Zion, says that Prophet, the city of our solemnities, and see if
Jerusalem be not still a quiet habitation, Esaias 33.20. Walk about Zion, says
the Psalmist, and go round about her, tell the towers thereof. See if any be
missing since Sennacherib came up against them. Mark ye well her bulwarks: are
they diminished? consider her palaces: are they at all defaced? Psalm. 48.12,
13. What if Jerusalem be wicked? yet Sennacherib is insolent. If therefore
Jerusalem shall be smitten with the rod of Sennacheribs fear, Sennacherib shall
be smitten with the sword of Gods revenges, who of all things cannot endure a
presumptuous and self-confident vaunter: but will deal with his people, not
according to his ordinary rule, but according to his Prerogative. Surely Israel
has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of hosts, though
their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel, Ier. 51.5.

Verse 10. Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all,] sc. in their sight
and hearing, (though at home, weep your fill, verse 8.) lest the daughters of
those uncircumcised triumph, 2 Samuel 1.20. lest out of your tragedies they
compose comedies; and ye become their music, whilst they revel in your
ruins, and make themselves merry in your misery.

In the house of Aphrah, roll thy self in the dust.] An elegant Agnomination in
the original: q. d. Dust thy self in the house of dust. Aphrah had its name
from its dustinesse; as Paris is called Lutetia a luto, from its dirtinesse:
and as Hiram called the twenty cities of Galilee given him by Solomon, Cabul,
that is dirty, or displeasing, 1 King. 9.13. Fitly was this city called Aphrah,
or Dusty, says the Prophet: for it shall be reduced to dust, and the
inhabitants occasioned to roll themselves in the dust, in token of extreme
sorrow. See Lam. 2.10. Some think Aphrah is put for Ephraim: others, better
understand it for a particular city; either that in the tribe of Manasseh,
Gideons city, Judge. 6.11. or that other in the tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18.23.
not far from Jerusalem.

Verse 11. Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir,] Or, thou that dwell
fairly, as it were in a city set with Saphires, see Esaias 54.11. such as was
Susa in Persia, and Antioch in Syria, a city so sweet and specious, that
Mahomet never durst come into it, lest he should be there detained by the
pleasure of the place. Saphir here (say some) may allude to Samaria, that
instead of her fairness shall be exposed to ignominy and nakedness: they
shall be carried away, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their
buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Samaria, Esaias 20.4. So the Popes champions
dealt by the Waldenses in France, those ancient Protestants. One great city of
theirs they took, and put to the sword sixty thousand. To another they they
gave quarter for life; but so, Rivet. Jesuita vapul. 331.
as that both the men and the women should depart stark naked ( partibus illis
quae honest nominari non possunt, sanctorum illorum cruciatorum oculis
expositis) and show all.

The inhabitants of Zaanan] Loci pecorosi, says Junius, the country of
flocks. Some make it to allude to Zion. Others say, it signifies an outlet:
and make it to be as a gate to the kingdom of Judah. These came not forth of
their gate in the mourning of Bethezel, or of the place over-anent, to condole
with them, as having their hands full at home, and matter enough of mourning
for their own misery.

He shall receive of you his standing] The enemy shall stand and stay amongst
you, till he has subdued you, and made a clear conquest: he shall not give
you over, till he have done the deed.

Verse 12. For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good,] Or, shall
grieve for the good, viz. that he has lost in the common calamity; grieve till
he^ be heart-sick, as Amos 6.6. or wait till he faint, for hope deferred makes
the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. The name of this city is Maroth, that is,
bitternesses; and bitter things shall befall her: see Ruth 1.20. because
together with the good of Piety, which she ought to have waited upon, she has
lost the good of Prosperity, which in vain she has waited for. The expectation
of the wicked is wrath, Prove. 11.23.

But evil came down from the Lord.] It is He that sends and sets the enemy
awork: as Titus acknowledged, at the last destruction of Jerusalem, that he
only lent his hands to the divine justice. It was God that stirred up enemies
to revolted Solomon. And Joh descried Gods hand on the arms of the Sabean
robbers.

Verse 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the charet to the swift beast,]
To the Camel, or Dromedary, says Calvin, which is a very swift beast, (we
call a ^low body Dromedary, per Antiphrasin) or to the posthorses Angarijs, as
Junius: he means, Make haft away. Salmaneser is already at Samaria, and
Sennacherib will be ^re long at Lachish, Esaias 36.2. Hannibal ad portas, begone
with all possible speed: have, have, have.

She is the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion,] Not partner only, but
Author, and Ringleader. Such are all haeresiarchs, and inventers of evil
things, Romans ^^ 30. These shall drink deep of Gods wrath here, and be cast
alive into the burning (...), Rev. 19.20. Some apply the words to the
confederacy of Lachish with Jerusalem against king Amaziah, 2 King. 14.19.
slain at this city.

for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.] The often-change of
person in this verse is remarkable. The chief sin that Lachish stands charged
with is, that being near to Beersheba, she had learned her manner, Amos 8.14.
that is, her rites, and religions, instituted by Jeroboam, and transmitted them
to Jerusalem. Superstition soon spreads, and is catching: like the
Jerusalem-Artichoke, it quickly over-runs the ground, and chokes the Heart.

Verse 14. Therefore shall thou give presents, etc.] And so seek to make thee
friends among the Philistines: but such carnal confederacies never prosper.
The Greek Churches, Anno 1438. afraid of the Turks, sent and subjected
themselves to the Bishop of Rome, that they might have the help of the Latin
Churches: but shortly after, they were destroyed, their Empire subdued, and
swallowed up by the Ottoman greatness, etc. How much better were it to send a
Lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Esaias 16.1? to bring presents unto Him that
ought to be feared, Psalm. 76.11? even to God, who cutteth off the spirits of
Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the earth? verse 12. Was he not so to
Sennacherib whom Lachish here feared, and fled from? to Nebuchadnezzar,
Belshazzar, Xerxes, who after he had ^^^ted over two millions of men into
Greece, and beaten the Hellespont (for battering his bridge of boats over it)
with three hundred stripes, was defeated, routed, Hered.
and forced to flee back in a poor fishers boat, to save his own life?

The houses of Achzib (that is of a lie) shall be a lie to the kings of
Israel.] Or have been a lie to the kings of Israel: never true to those that
trusted them: And will thou confederate with them, and confide in them?

Verse 15. Yet will I bring an heir unto thee,] Or, a Possessour, who shall lay
claim to thee, as by right of inheritance. This heir was the Assyrian, and
those Colonies brought by him into the cities of Israel, 2 King. 17.34. These
took upon them as heirs and owners of the country, till turned out afterward
by Josiah King of Judah, 2 King. 23.4, 8. Here is another elegant allusion, (as
this Chapter is full of them) for Mareshah signifies an Inheritance, or
Possession. And if it were Mi^ah's own country, (as many think) we may see the
Prophets integrity, in not bearing with his best friends: but taking the same
liberty to tell them of their sins, and dangers, that they did to commit the
one, and to incur the other. Physician heal thy self, said they to our
Savior, Luke 4.23. that is, thine own country, as it is there explained.

He shall come unto Adullam, the glory of Israel.] Happily so called, because
David was once there hid and harbored: and the place thereby renowned. Or,
because it was a strong-hold, wherein Israel gloried and trusted, but in vain:
since the enemy should come to it, and surprise it. Some think poor Adullam is
called the glory of Israel ironically, and by way of scorn. Some read it thus,
O glory of Israel, (to wit, then lost and overthrown) and they make it to be a
deep sigh of the Prophet, fet from the bottom of his heart; whereby he
witnesses that he is greatly sorry for the ruin of the Israelites: Danaeus.
that he might move them also to mourn in like manner. This he further
presses them to in the next words.

Verse 16. Make thee bald and poll thee,] i. e. Make most bitter lamentation:
he alludes to a custom among the Easterlings, of tearing off the hair of their
heads and beards, in times of great heaviness. See Job 1.20. Esaias 15.2 Jer.
7.29. Ezr. 9 3. In other cases baldness was forbidden Israel, (lest they
should symbolize with Heathens) but in case of sorrow for sin, they were called
to it, Esaias 22.12.

for thy delicate children,] To whom thou have been rather a parricide then a
parent: L. Flor.
dealing by them, as that fal^e Schoolmaster in Italy, that brought forth his
scholars to Hannibal.

as the Eagl^,] when he is old, and loses his feathers; and with them, not
only his beauty, but also his swiftness and courage.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. VVO to them that devise iniquity,] Or, labor, affliction, vanity, a
lie. The Hebrew word Aven, is of large use; applied to all kind of sin,
which causes pain, sorrow, and misery: and here in particular to
covetousness, that root of all evil to a man's self, and others, 1 Timothy 6.9,
10. Our Prophet flings a Woe at it, as does likewise Habakkuk, chap. 2.9.
calling it an evil covetousness, as the Prophet Esaias tells us, that for the
uniquity of his covetousness, God was wroth with Israel and smot him, Esaias
57.17. The world counts it a light offense: and casts a cloak of good husbandry
over it, 1 These. 2.5. But this disguise will serve such, no better, then that
which Ahab once put on and perished. Let no man deceive you with vain words,
(...).
(those plaistered words, 2 Pet. 2.3. used by hels Proctours) for because of
these things ( sc. fornication, covetousness, etc. those peccadillo's as they
are counted) comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians.
5.6. For why? They devise iniquity, cogitant quasi coagitant, they plot and
plow mischief, being men of wicked devices, Prove. 14.2. talking eftsoons to
themselves, as that covetous caitif did, Luke 12.17. beating their brains about
their worldly projects, and resting no more, no not upon their beds by night (a
time and place appointed for rest, when men should together with their clothes
put off their cares, and compose themselves to sleep; that nurse of nature, and
sweet parenthesis) then one does upon a rack, or bed of thorns.

Thus they work evil upon their beds,] They work hard at it, having the devil
for their task-master, who shall therefore also be their play master. He has
their souls here as in a sling, 1 Samuel 25.29. violently tossed about and
restless: they are his drudges and dromedaries, driven about by him at his
pleasure 2 Timothy 2.26. wholly acted and agitated by him Ephesians. 2.2. having as many
Lords as lusts, 1 King. 21.4.
wherewith their hearts are night and day exercised, 2 Pet. 2.14. without
intermission. See this in Felix, who at the same instant trembled and coveted a
bribe: in Ahab, who sick of Naboths vineyard, laid him down upon his bed, but
rested not. His heart did more afflict and vex it self with greedy longing for
that bit of earth, then the vast and spacious compass of a kingdom could
counter-comfort.

when the morning is light they practice it] And so they lose no time, being up
and at it by peep of day; when others are fast asleep, and so more easily
surprised and circumvented by them. The morning is the most precious part of
the day: and should be employed to better purpose. But wickedness proceeds
from the wicked, as says the proverb of the Ancients 1 Samuel 24.13. and as they
like not to have God in their heads Psalm. 10.4. nor hearts Psalm. 14.1. so
neither in their words Psalm. 12.4. nor ways Tit. 1.16. but the contrary:
Surely satan is rightly called the God of this world; because as God at first
did but speak the word and it was done, so if the devil do but hold up his
finger, give the least hint, they are ready pressed to practisey.

because it is in the power of their hand] The Vulgar has it, Because their
hand is against God: and indeed the same word El signifies God and Power. The
Seventy render it, Because they have not lifted up their hands to God (an
exercise proper and fit for the morning Psalm. 5.4.) The Tigurine, Quia viribus
pollent, They have strength enough to do it. Nihil cogitant quod non idem
patrare ausint De Monachit. Lutherus.
Their hand is to power (so the Original has it) that is, says Calvin,
quantum possunt, tantum audent, they dare do their utmost, they will try what
they can do: their hand is ever ready to rake and scrape together commodity;
neither can they be hindered either by the fear of God, or any respect to
righteousness.

Ver. 2. And they covet fields, and take them by violence] See here the
several degrees of sin; and what descents covetous men dig to hell, and beware
betimes. Surely as the plot of all diseases lies in the humors of the body; so
of all sin in the lust of the soul. The Heathen could say, (...). Laertius.
Covetousness is called the lust of the eyes 1 Ioh. 2.16. because from looking
comes lusting, from lusting, acting, (hence lusts of the soul are called
deeds of the body Romans 8.13.) yea acting with violence, they covet and take,
they rob and ravish Psalm. 10. there is neither equity nor honesty to be had at
their hands: but as they take away fields, houses, heritages shamelesly; so
they bear them away boldly, and think to escape scotfree; because it is facinus
majoris abollae, Juvenal.
the fact of a great one, whose hand is to power, as ver. 1.

and houses, and take them away] though a man's house be his castle (as we say)
yet it cannot secure him from these cormorants. Scribes and Pharisees devoured
widows houses Mat. 23.17 where was a concurrence of covetousness and cruelty
(for these seldom go sundred) besides the putid hypocrisy of doing this under
a pretense of long prayers. A poor man in his house, is like a snaile in his
shell: crush that, and you kill him.

so they oppress (or defraud) a man and his house] Either by fraud or force,
by craft or cruelty they ruin a man, (a well-set man virum validum) and his
family, (...)
his whole progeny; which might not be done to the unreasonable creatures Deuteronomy.
22.6. This is to be like Vladus that cruel Prince of Valachia: whose manner
was, together with the offendour to execute the whole family; yea sometimes the
whole kindred.

Ver. 3. Behold against this family do I devise an evill] Turk. hist fol. 363
They had devised iniquity ver. 1. and now he devises their misery. God
usually retaliates, and proportions provocation to provocation Deuteronomy. 32.21.
frowardness to frowardness Psalm. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety Lev.
26.18, 21. and device to device, as here. He loves to pay sinners home in their
own coin; and to make them know by sad experience and see, that it is an evil
thing and bitter to forsake the Lord and his fear Jer. 2.19. Woe be to that
man against whom the Almighty sets himself to devise an evil: such an one
shall find, that thought is not free (as that pestilent, proverb would make it)
either from the notice of Gods holy eye, the censure of his mouth, or the
stroke of his hand. See Ier. 4.14. and 6.39. Rev. 2.23. Deuteronomy. 29.19. And this,
Nature it self had some notion of, as appears by his censure who judged that
Antiochus did therefore die loathsomely, because he had but an intent to burn
Diana's temple. Polybius. In declam.
Fecit quisque quantum voluit, says Seneca: and ^ncesta est, and sine stupro,
quae stuprum cupit says the same Author. Vain thoughts are very sins, and
expose men to punishment: these shall either excuse or accuse at the last day
Romans 2.15. Meane-while, God is devising what to do to them: he is preparing his
bow and making ready his arrows upon the string, even a Tophet of the most
tormenting temper will shortly swallow them up, without true and timely
Repentance.

From which ye shall not remove your necks] It shall so halter and hamper you,
that like fishes taken in an evil net, and as birds caught in a snare, so
shall ye be snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon you Eccles.
9.12. ye shall never be able either to avoid it, Sic laqueos fera dum jactat,
astringit Sen.
or to abide it. But as the bird in a gin, the fish on the hook, the more it
strives, the more it sticks: and as the bullock under the yoke, the more he
wriggles, the more he galls: so shall it be here. Your fair necks, that would
not bear the easy yoke of Gods obedience, shall be ridden on by the enemy and
bound to your two furrows Hos. 10.10, 11. yea a yoke of iron shall be put upon
thee, until thou be destroyed Deuteronomy. 28.48.

neither shall ye go haughtily] Heb. Romah; and hence happily Roma had its name,
from its height and haughtiness: according to that of the Poet -- atque altae
moenia Romae. Virg. 1. Aeneid.
The meaning here is, God would deject and darken them, so as that they shall
utterly lose their former renown and splendor. He will thrust them down, as it
were with a thump on the back, and there hold them. See Ezech. 21.26, 27. the
scene shall be changed, and the haughty abased.

for this time is evill] Both sinfully and penally evil The Apostle seems to
allude to this text, when he says, (...) i.e. (...).
R^deeme the time, because the days are evil: and Sufficient to the day is
the evil thereof, that is, the misery of it, says Christ Mat. 6.34. And
again, Those very days shall be affliction (so the Greek text has it) Mark
13.19. as if the time were turned into affliction: because of that evil, that
only evil without mixture of mercy Ezech. 7.5. here foretold, Ideo minatur
Deus ut non puniat.
and therefore foretold, that it might have been prevented.

Verse 4. In that day shall one take up a parable etc.] In that day, that
doleful, and dismal day of their calamity.

shall One] Any one that is moved at your misery, and would work you to a sense
of your sin the mother of your misery:

shall take up a parable] tristem and querulam sad and sorrowful.

and lament with a doleful lamentation] Heb. with a lamentation of
lamentations, or with heigh-ho upon heigh-ho, as the word seems to signify.

we be uttterly spoiled] Plundered to the life, laid naked to the very
foundation, chap. 1.6. put into such a condition, as that there is neither hope
of better, nor place of worse.

he has changed the portion of my people] that is God, or the Assyrian by Gods
appointment, has taken away our country, and given it to strangers. The Pope
took upon him in Henry the 8. days to give England Primo occupaturo to him
that could first win it This brutum fulmen came to nothing: But when Gods
people changed their glory for that which profited not, Ier. 2 11. he soon
changed their portion; he caused that good land to spew them out, he turned
their weal into woe, and brought wrath upon them to the utmost. Neither
profited it them any more to have been called Gods people, then it did Dives in
flames, that Abraham called him Son; or Judas, that Christ called him Friend.

how has he removed it from me?] Erah.
This is Lamentation-like indeed. See Lam. 1.1. and 2.1. and 4.1. all beginning
with the same word, How. The speech is concise and abrupt, meet for mourners.
There is an elegancy in the original not to be Englished. How uncertain are
all things here! God sits upon the circle of the earth, and shakes out the
inhabitants qt pleasure, as by a canvas. Esa. 40.
Persons and things are said to be in heaven, but on earth: on the outside of
it only, where they have no firm footing. Dionysius was driven out of his
kingdom: Aelian. lib. 2.
which yet he thought was tied to him with chains of adamant, says the
Historian.

turning away (from us as a loathsome object, being so incorrigibly flagitious)
he has divided our fields] sc. to the enemy for a reward: like as he gave
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar for his pains at Tire. Or thus, Instead of restoring
(which now we are hopeless of) he has divided our fields, our fertile and fat
country to those that will be sure to hold their own in it; as the Gauls and
Goths did in Italy, after they had once tasted the sweetness of it. Vatablus
renders the text thus: How has he taken from me those fields of ours which he
seemed ready to restore? he has even divided them, sc. to others.

Verse 5. Therefore thou shall have none that shall cast a cord by lot] Fields
were divided with cords of old, and inheritances also, See Psalm. 16.5. and
105.11. and 78.55. 2 Samuel 8.2. This hope is henceforth cut off from revolted
Israel: the ten tribes never returned, the other two did, and some few of the
ten amongst them. Whether upon their conversion to Christ they shall be
restored to the promised land, Time (the mother of Truth) will make manifest.

In the congregation of the Lord] So you were once, but now nothing less. A
Congregation ye are still, but of malignants: a rabble of rebels conspiring
against heaven. A name ye have to live, but ye are dead: ye cry out Templum
Domini, The Temple of the Lord are we: but in truth ye are no better then those
Egyptian temples, beautiful without, but within nothing to be seen but a cat,
rat, or some such despicable creature. Here they are called the Congregation of
the Lord by an irony, as the Cardinal of Ravenna is so called by way of
derision.

Verse 6. Prophecy ye not, say they, to them that prophesie] Prodigious
impudency, thus to silence the Prophets, or else to prescribe to them,
according to the other reading of the text, Prophecy not, as they prophecy,
for they are too tart: therefore Drop not ye who thus drop vinegar and nitre,
who vex our galled consciences, no less then the cruel Spaniards do the poor
Indians naked bodies, which, Sr. Fr. Drake.
for a sport they do day by day drop with burning bacon: But let these drop
that can smooth us up, that can utter toothlesse truths, that will drop oil
into our ears, byssina verba.
and give us silken words; these be Prophets for our turns etc. God cannot
please some hearers, unless he speak tinkling and tickling words. Now, these
must get their ears healed (as Demosthenes advised his countrymen of Greece)
ere they can be in case to hear with profit. They must learn of Bees, to pasl^
by roses and violets, and sit upon Time; to heed, I mean, sound rebukes rather
then smooth supparasitations. There are that note a jeare it the term Drop. It
is well known that the word Preached is often compared to rain Deuteronomy. 32.2. Esaias.
55.10.11. The Prophets therefore are here in derision called Droppers or
Distillers, Luke 16.1^.
and forbidden to do their office; or at least, to drop in that sort. Thu their
successors in evil the Pharisees (who were likewise coverous) derided Christ;
And thus their predecessors also in Esay's time put a scost upon him, and his
preaching, cap. 28.10. where the sound of the words in the Original carries a
taunt as scornful people, by the tone of their voice, and riming words, gibe
and jeare at those whom they vilify.

they shall not prophecy to them] q. d. You shall have your wish; my droppers
shall give over dropping, and be no further troublesome, nor take shame any
more by prophesying to such a perverse people, so shamelesly so lawlesly wicked.

that they shall not take shame] Or, shall they not take shame? q. d. though
they will not hear of it, that shame shall be their promotion, and confusion
their portion, yea they shall surely feel and find it so.

Verse 7. O thou that art named the house of Jacob] That have a name to live
but art dead Rev. 3.1. that art called a Jew, and make thy boast of God Romans
2.17. that have a form of knowledge Romans 2.20. and a form of godliness 2 Timothy
3.5. a semblance of sanctimony Luke 8.18. acting religion, playing devotion, as
if it were a neme only; or as if it were enough to be named the house of
Jacob, or to have his voice, though the hands are the hands of Esau, the
practice nothing suitable to the profession. Thus many amongst us content
themselves with the bare name of Christians: as if many a ship has not been
called Safeguard or Goodspeed, which yet has fallen into the hands of
Pirates. The devil will surely sweep, and hell swallow all such Nominalists:
such shall find that an empty title yields but an empty comfort at the last.
What was Dives the better for this, that Abraham called him son, or Judas
that Christ called him friend, or the rebellious Jews that God styles them
his people? Does he not elsewhere disclaim them, and call them a sinful nation,
a people laden with iniquity; the people of his wrath and of his curse? May not
all Formalists fear Jacobs fear? Genesis 27.12. My father peradventure will feel
me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver: and I shall bring a curse upon me,
and not a blessing. Our heavenly Father will surely feel us in our addresses:
and if he find us but complementing, and contenting our selves to be called the
house of Jacob, he will confute our vain confidences, and cut us out of the
roll; as he did Dan and Ephraim, who were named the house of Jacob, and yet for
their wickedness are passed by in the reckoning up of the twelve tribes, Rev.
7. as if they were soldiers put out of pay, and cashiered.

Is the spirit of the Lord straitned] or shortened? Is he a penny-father? has
he but one blessing? Mal. 2.15.
Is there not with him the residue of the spirit? plenteous redemption, an
exceeding abundant goodness even to a superpleonasme? (...). 1 Timothy 1.14.
Where then is the fault that you are no more Jacob-like, plain-hearted and
perswasible; that ye refuse to be reformed, hate to be healed, saying to me,
Depart, and to my Prophets, Drop not, etc. Neither curse ye nor bless ye, as
he said to Balaam? wherein if they should hearken to you, and be ruled by you,
yea, should you straightly threaten them with bonds to speak henceforth to no man
in my name, as Act. 4.17. yet my word is not bound, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
2 Timothy 2.9. but runs and is glorified: my spirit is not straightened, but is free
and not fettered. I tell you, that if these (Prophets) should hold their peace,
Luke 19.40.
and not drop, the stones would immediately cry out: which against change of
weather do stand with great drops of water to confute your unyeeldingnesse.
Turn ye therefore now at my reproof; behold, I will turn out my spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you, Prove. 1.23. I will do it howsoever;
yea, in despite of you I will do it, as some sense the foregoing verse, reading
it thus (and the original will bear it) Drop ye not, but they shall drop.

Are these his doings?) i.e. Such as God does approve of, or rather, are these
Jacobs doings? tread you in the steps of your father Jacob? did he ever silence
the Prophets, and withstand those that were sent unto him? Did he not rather
lie low, put his mouth in the dust and cry out, speak, Lord, for thy servant
hears. Good is the word of the Lord which ye have spoken, etc. And whereas ye
will be apt enough to reply that Jacob had no other cause: for the Prophets
never spoke but good and comfortable things to him, it is answered in the next
words.

Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?] Heb. upright; that
pondereth his paths by the weights of my word, and turns not to the right
hand nor to the left, Pro. 4.26, 27. but walks exactly, accurately, and
precisely, Ephesians. 5.15. keeping within my precincts, etc. Do not my words do good
to such, and speak they not peace to him? David felt it as sweet as honey, Ps.
119.103. But as honey causes pain to exulcerate parts, though of it self it be
sweet and medicinal: so does the word of God to exulcerate consciences.
Children, though they love to lick in honey, (...). Al. Aphrod. Probl.
yet they will not endure to have it come near their lips, when they have sore
mouths: so is it here. Excellently says Saint Austin, Adversarius est nobis,
quamdiu sumus and ipsi nobis, etc. The word of God is adversary to none, but
such as are their own greatest adversaries, etc. It may well be compared to
Moses rod, which whiles he held it in his hand, it flourished and brought forth
almonds; but being cast on the ground it turned into a serpent. Did it not take
hold of those refractaries, Zech. 1.6. that would not take hold of Gods
covenant, and choose the things that pleased him, Esaias. 56.4? Does it not still
sting wicked people with unquestionable conviction and horror; when as great
peace have they which love Gods law, Psalm. 119.165.
and nothing shall offend them?

Verse. 8. Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy] Heb. yesterday, no
longer ago; to all their former flagitious practices they have now newly added
this of execrable rapine and robbery, which is still fresh, and as it were
flagrant in mine eyes. Although the truth is, that God looks upon former sins
as presently committed: for as there is no beginning of eternity, so neither is
there any succession. But let men take heed how they heap up sin, lest they
heap up wrath: for although God may bear with people for one or two
out-strayes, yet when once it comes to three transgressions and to four, he
will not turn away the punishment, Am. 1.2. and one new sin may set many old
awork in the conscience; making it like Ezekiels scroul, Ezekiel. 2.12.
wherein was written lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Surely I have seen
yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, says the Lord, 2
Kin. 9.26. The word signifies last night, though it were done some while
before. See the word yesterday so used by the Apostle Hebraizing with his
Hebrews, Chap. 15.8. Some read the text thus, He that was yesterday my people
is risen up on the other side as against an enemy, viz. raging against God, and
ranging against all men, biting all they come aneer as mad dogs. See Esaias.
9.21. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. they please not God, but rise up in rebellion against him;
and are contrary to all men, being rather Ismaelites then Israelites, Genesis
16.12. and therefore not rightly named the house of Jacob (that plain man, Genesis
25.27. without welt or guard, guile or gall) nor could the word of the Lord do
good unto them, so long as their deeds were evil, and they loved darkness
rather then light. Joh. 3.19.


Ye pull off the robe with the garment] Robbing and pillaging passengers with
greatest inhumanity: not leaving them a rag to cover them, or a cross to
bless them with, as the proverb is. This was common in Scotland and Africa,
says Da^^^ here. It was in England also, till the days of king Alfred, who
first divided the land into shires, and then the subjects into tenths or
Tithings; every of which severally should give bond for the good a bearing of
each other, etc. Heyl. Geog. 474.
By this course men were not careful only of their own actions, but had an eye
to all the nine, for which they stood bound; as the nine had over each.
Insomuch that a poor girl might travel safely with a bag of gold in her hand,
and none durst meddle with her.

from men that pass by securely, as men averse from war] There are a sort of
such as delight in war, Psalm. 68.30. that make a sport of it, as Abner, 2 Samuel 2.14. that take more pleasure in it then in an Empire, as Justin says of
Pyrrhus king of (...). David was none such; and yet he wanted not for courage.
His motto was, Nulli major ex imperio, quam illi^x bello fui^ voluptar.
^^m for peace, or (as the Hebrew has it) I am peace. He had seen the woe of
war, and knew well the lawlesnesse of it. The law is no more, says the
Church in (...) L^mentations, Chap. 2.9. Inter arma silent leges, says the
Heathen, The noise (...) drowns the voice of laws. A reverend man has well
observed, that as those three commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thoss shall
not commit adultery, Thou (...) are ranked together in the law: so they are
commonly violated together by unruly soldiers, Esaias. 13.16. Their children
also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes, their houses shall be
spoiled, and their wives ravished. These are the miseries of war. But what
meant these miscreants to shed the blood of war in peace, 1 Kin. 2.5. to
strip the innocent and therefore fearlesse passenger of his raiment as those
thieves did him, that went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30.
dreading no such danger? neither to rob him only, but to ravish him too, Ps.
10. that they might sind all precious substance, and fill their houses with
spoil? And what meant the corrupt Rulers to suffer it so to be, and not to
brandish the sword of justice against such stigmatical Belialists.

Verse. 9. The women of my people] Or, the wives; once wives, but now widows,
and therefore calamatious, friendlesse, comfortless; as a vine whose root is
uncovered, as a wandering bird, or a nest forsaken, Isai. 16.2.

have ye cast out from their pleasant houses] where they had long lived with
their husbands in love, peace, and much sweetness, as good Naboths wife had:
This was barbarous cruelty. God had taken order in the law, that none should
harm a bird sitting upon her own nest, how much less a daughter of Abraham?
Widows and Orphans are his clients, Ps. 146.9.

from their children have ye taken away my glory] i. e. My maintenance and that
livelihood that I had allowed them for their better education, which might have
redounded to my great glory. Whereas now, being by you bereft both of friends
and means, gomunt, fremunt, vobis maledicunt, clamantque vindictam in coelum,
says Montanus, they groan, they moan, they curse you, they cry to me for
vengeance. etc.

Verse. 10. Arise ye and depart] Veteres migrate coloni, make up your fardles
and prepare for a deportation: Virg.
here is no longer being for you, unless ye were better. Behold the land is
defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land it
self vomiteth out her inhabitants Lev. 18.25.

This is not your rest] As you falsely fancy, and vainly vaunt: binding upon the
promise, but not performing the condition. It is the guise of graceless men to
stuff themselves with promises, till they have made them a pillow for sin:
Et sic prasumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt, Byrn
they presume till they perish, as he did who died with this desperate saying
in his mouth, Spes and fortuna Valete, Farewell life and hope together.

Because it is polluted] sc. by your sin, which is of so sullying a nature,
that it defiles also the very visible heavens, which are therefore to be
purged by the fire of the last day: like as those vessels that held the
sin-offering were either to be broken if earthen, or to pass the fire if of
better metal: they must not think to rest that let sin lie unrepented of in
the conscience. But as a man that has used himself to drink poison, at the 1.
and 2. time he may do well, but the last it overcomes and destroys himself: so
the next sin, though less, may set all the former aworking. And as two poisons
met in the stomach make a man restless; so sin and wrath met in the
conscience, raise a great garboile there. Neither must they think to dwell in
Gods good land, that will not live by Gods good laws, Esa. 1.19. Ps. 107.39,
40. they walk upon fireworks every moment ready to be blown up: Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. lib 5.
brimstone also is sca^^ered upon their habitations, that if the fire of Gods
wrath do but lightly touch it, they are suddenly consumed. Eusebius tells us
of Dioclesian, that bloody persecutour of the Church, that giving over the
Empire, he decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly: but he escaped not so.
For after that, his house was wholly consumed with lightning, and a flame of
fire that fell from heaven, he hiding himself for fear of the lightning died
within a little after.

it shall destroy you even with a sore destruction] Dissipatione roborata,
says Calvin, Perditione praecisa, says Tremellius. The land longs for a vomit
to spue you out, and it shall do it effectually. Poison given in wine works
more furiously then in water. Woe be to that people or person whom God will
destroy with a violent destruction. This he does not willingly, or from his
heart, Lam. 3.35. but men's sins compel him to it. Surely as many a fowl is
shot with an arrow feathered from her own boyd: and as of the blackbirds slime
is made the lime whereby he is taken: so out of the dung of men's sins does
God make his limetwigs (his judgments I mean) to take them withal. Long they
might rest, would they but let him rest: but pollution is the forerunner of
perdition.

Verse 11. If a man walking in the spirit, etc.] Si vir ventosus, so Junius
renders it, if a windy and false man lie, saying, etc. Let a man but feed them
with vain hopes and frothy fancies, let him but make fair weather before them
when the storm of Gods wrath is ready to break out upon them; let him promise
them plenty of all things, and prophecy to them of wine and strong drink: as
the Popish Priests in Gersons time publicly preached to the people, that if
any one would hear a Mass, he should not on that day be struck blind, nor die
suddenly, nor want sufficient sustenance, etc. These call themselves the
Spirituality, or men of the Spirit, (as Hosea has it) as if all others to them
were carnal, and destitute of the spirit. They also (after the manner of those
false prophets of old) take to themselves big-swoln titles, and as they
increase in their pretended holiness, so they proceed in their titles from
Padre benedicto to Padre Angelo, Specul. Europ.
then Archangelo, Cherubino, and lastly Cerephino, which is the top of
perfection. But what is all this more then a light flask, or a pillar of smoke,
which the higher it mounteth, the sooner it vanishes? And what are all such
vain boasters but gloriae animalia, popularis aurae mancipia vilia ac Hierome
calls Crates the Philosopher? may it not fitly be said of them as Hos. 9.7. The
Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad: and as Ezekiel. 13.3. Surely these
are foolish prophets that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing. O
Israel, they Prophets are like the foxes in the desert, etc. A wonderful and
horrible thing is committed in the land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and
the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: and
what will ye do in the end thereof? Jer. 5.31. All will be naught no doubt.
There is not a more dangerous creature then a parasitical Prophet. Ezekiel
calls them the devils dirt-dawbers, chap. 13.10. his upholsters, for they
sow pillowes, etc. And these are Prophets for this people, fit lettice for
such lips, dignum patella operculum: a singular plague of God upon the men of
this world, who deserve to be deceived: for why? they have desired it, and it
best pleases their vitiated palats. Most people, having first flattered
themselves, are well content to be soothed up by others: and I cannot but
accord him that says, If there were Judges ordained for flattery, they would
have no doings: there being so very few that will complain, that they are
flattered.

Verse 12. I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee,] An Evangelicall
promise (says Diodate, after Others) of gathering together the Universal
Church under the kingdom of Christ, contrary to the precedent dispersion, verse.
10. Assembling I will assemble, and gathering, gather them, sc. into the bosom
of the Church, called therefore Ecclesia (as culled and collected out of the
world) and Church, or Kirk, of (...): because it belongs to the Lord Christ,
who gathers his together, as the hen does her chickens: and died not for that
Nation of Jews only, but that also he might gather together into one, the
children of God that were scattered abroad, Joh. 11.51, 52. Here, He is called
the breaker up: and his Apostles likewise those that have broken up, and have
passed thorough the gate, etc. doing great exploits, and subduing souls to the
ohedience of the faith; as here in Britain, where Caesar himself could not break
through, but Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis, as Pompey in Lucan
upbraids him. Hence Tertullian says, Britannoruni inaccessa Romany loca
Christi patuerunt.
Christ brake into those places of Britanny that the Romans could never come
at. He is that King against whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30.31. He is
Jehovah on the head of his people, or in the forefront of them, as their
Captain General, to lead them on, and bring them off safely in all encounters.
Habent ista amplissimam promissionem, says Gualther here: this is an excellent
promise, and carries in it a most sweet consolation. Quasi Ante signanus and
Ductor. Lapid.
But I rather think it to be a continuation of the former threatening: I will
surely assemble them, sc to the slaughter. I will gather them together, sc.
that they may be broken in pieces: I will put them (or pen them up) together as
the sheep of Bozrah, that are fat, and fit, and appointed for the slaughter.
See Esaias 34.6. Esaias 8.9.
Bozrah was a rich pasture country in Edom, from whence most fat sheep, and
meet for meat were sent to the shambles.

As the slock in the midst of their fold,] So will God, first shut you up by
strait sieges, and then number you out to the sword: and ye shall all bow down
to the slaughter, Esaias 65.12. There is a memorable story of the suffering of
certain good people in Calabria, Anno 1560. by the hands of the bloody Papists
there. A great sort of them being thrust up in one house together, as in a
sheepfold, the executioner comes in: and among them, takes one, and
blindfoldeth him with a muffler about his eyes, and so leads him forth to a
larger place, where he commands him to kneel down: which being done, he
cutteth his throat, and so leaving him half-dead, and taking his butchers
knife, and muffler all of gore-blood, Acts and Mo^^. fol. 859.
comes again to the rest; and so leading them one after another, he dispatched
them all to the number of eighty eight. In Ireland many like barbarous
butcheries have been committed, by those breathing devils the Romish Rebels,
those fat-wolves worrying Christ's flock in the midst of the land. But shall
they thus escape by iniquity? (...). Acts 20.29.
No verily, in thine anger cast down that people, O God, Psalm. 56.7. Give them
blood again to drink, for they are worthy. A Lapide says, that Bozrah
signifies Rome: and that Micah here, after a sort foretells, that the Church
of Rome should be the common sheepfold of the sheep of Christ, under one
chief shepherd the Pope. But this conceit is far fetched: and Rome (the
slaughterhouse of the saints) is no otherwise Boz^ah, then that she is of Edom
(the Rabbis for Dumah, Esaias 21.11. Jegnaleg^^ dam.
read Roma, and call the Court of Rome, the wicked kingdom of Edom) and that
her brats, as the Vultures young ones, do glut-glut blood (so the Hebrew
sounds, Job 39.30.) and where the sl^^ a^e, there is she.

They shall make a great noise.] Heb. a humming noise. By reason of the
multititude of men, or rather wolves, Lycanthropi, wherewith they are
environed, to their no small heart-break.

Verse 13. The breaker up is come up before them] The (...), breach-maker shall
handle them hardly and cruelly, as Gally-slaves, or men condemned to the
mine-pits.

Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem. They have broken up] Made havoc, and
laid heaps upon heaps.

And their king shall pass before them] Not only fex populi, but Rex ipse,
shall be carried captive, as were Hoshea, and Zedekiah, the city being broken
up, Jer. 52.7.

And the Lord on the head of them] Jehovah, that man of war, Exodus 15.3.
going before them, as Captain of the enemies forces, to avenge the quarrel of
his covenant, Levit. 26.25.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. AND I said,] viz. at another time, and in a new discourse: the heads
whereof (...) we have here recorded. A stinging Sermon it is, preached to the
Princes, and Prophets, those great Heteroclites in the house of Israel. For as
in a fish, so in a Church and State, corruption begins at the head: and as
^heume falling from the head upon the lights, breeds a consumption of the whole
body, so is it here. To the chieftains therefore, and Capitanei, our Prophet
applies himself: And as it is said of Suetonius, that ealibertate, scripsit
Imperatorum vitas qua ipsi vix^runt, that he wrote the Emperors lives with as
much liberty, as they lived them: so did Micah as boldly reprove the Princes
sins, as they committed them. Such another Preacher amongst us was Latimer,
and after him De^ring; who in his Sermon before Queen Elizabeth, speaking of the
disorders of the times; These things are so, says He, and you sit still and do
nothing. And again, May we not well say with the Prophet, says He, It Is the
Lords mercy that we are not consumed, seeing there is so much disobedience,
both in subjects and Prince. Once it was Tanquam ovis, as a sheep before the
sheerer: Act. and Mon.
but now it is Tanquam ^uvenca petulca, as an untamed heifer, etc. In our
days, Reverend Mr. Stock had this commendation given him by a faithful
witness; that he could speak his mind fitly, and that he durst speak it
freely. I will go to the Bishop ( Steven Gardener, then Lord Chancellor) and
tell him to his beard, that he does naught, said Dr. Taylour Martyr; and he
did so, though his friends dissuaded him. Truth must be spoken, however it be
taken. And if Gods Messengers must be mannerly in the form, yet in the matter
of their message, they must be resolute, and plain-dealing. It is probable that
Joseph used some kind of preface to Pharaohs Baker, in reading him that hard
destiny, Genesis 40.19. such happily as was that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, chap.
4.19. or as Phile brings him in with a Vtinam tale somnium non vidisses, etc.
But for the matter, he gives him a sound, though a sharp interpretation. So
deals Micah by these corrupt Princes, to whom nevertheless he gives their
due Titles: and of whom he fairly begs audience. Hear I pray you, ye heads of
Jacob, etc. Or, hear ye now, who formerly have refused to hearken. It was in
Hezekiah's days, that this Sermon was preached, as appears, Jer. 26.18. not
long before Sennacherib invaded the land, Mic. 5. And although the King himself
were religious, and righteous, yet many of his Princes and Courtiers, who in
the reign of his father Ahaz, had been habituated in rapine, and
wrong-dealing, still played their pranks, and are here as barely told their own.

Is it not for you to know judgment?] To know it, and do it? as it is said of
our Savior, that he knew no sin, that is, he did none. And have the workers
of iniquity no knowledge? they eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not
upon God, Psalm. 14.4. Of all men Magistrates should be knowing men, fearing
God, hating covetousness, and cruelty, Exodus 18.21. They are the eyes of their
Country, and if they be dark, how great is that darkness? They are the common
looking-glasses, by which other men use to dress themselves. Judges they are,
to discern, and decide controversies: fit it is therefore and necessary, that
they know judgment: how else shall they execute it? Tully complains of the
Roman Priests in his days, that there were many things in their own laws that
themselves understood not. I will get me to the great men, says Jeremy, (when
he found things far amiss among the vulgar) and will speak unto them; for
they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these
have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds, Jer. 5.5.

Verse 2. Who hate the good, and love the evil,] q.d. That you know not
judgment, but are men ignorant of the truth, which is according to godliness,
appears by your wicked practices. For you stand acrosse to what God
requires, Homo est inversus decalogus.
hating what you should love, and loving where you should hate. Goodness is in
it self amiable, and attractive: but you are perfect strangers to it, and
therefore hate it, and those that profess it. Evil is of the Devil: and must
therefore needs be loathsome: and yet you love it, allow it, and wallow in it:
(...).
whereas you should abhor that which is evil (hate it as hell) and cleave (or
be fast glued) to that which is good, Romans 12.9. You are direct Antipodes to
the godly, Psalm. 15.4. and have nothing in you of the divine nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. or of the spot of Gods children: but are a perverse and crooked
generation, Deuteronomy. 32.3.

Who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones.]
Like so many carnivorous Canibals, or truculent wild-beasts. As the Ossi^^age,
or Breakbone pursues the prey, tears off the flesh, breaks the bones, and
sucks out the marrow: such were these griping tyrants: their furious rapacity
surmounted all bounds of humanity. Such an one was Verres among the Romans, as
Tully describes him: that Tigre Tiberius, those Romish Usurers in King John's
time here, called Caursini quasi capien^es Vrsi (quoth Paris) devouring Bears:
who left not so much money in the whole Kingdom, as they either carried with
them, or sent to Rome before them. Money and lands are here called men's skin,
flesh, and bones: and a poor man's substance is his life. See Mark 12. ult. and
Luke 8.43. Hence oppression is called a bony sin, Amos 5.12, 13. and
Oppressors Men-eaters, Psalm. 14.4. and murderers, Hab. 2.12. Cyprian cries
out, F^rae parcunt Danieli, Aves pascunt Eliam, homines saeviunt; Lions spare
Daniel, ravens feed Elias; but men rage and are worse then both. Melancthon
makes mention of a certain Prince, some few years before his time, who, to get
money out of his subjects, would send for them: and by knocking out first one
tooth, and then another (threatening to leave them toothlesse else) would extort
from them what sums soever he pleased. Our King John's exactours received from
his subjects no less sums of curses, then of coin, Joh. Manl. loc. com. page
636. Speed. 568. Ibid. 1012.
says the Chronicler: And so did Cardinal Wolsey, under Henry 8. by his
importable Subsidies: which caused Suffolk to rise up in arms, making poverty
their Captain.

Verse 3. Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin, etc.] He
stills proceeds in the Allegory, the better to argue, and aggravate their
extreme cruelty. Money, says the Heathen, is a man's flesh, blood, life, all.
Of this, when the people were pilled, and polled, by their cruel princes, who
are here compared to butchers and cooks, they are looked upon as not only
excoriated, but exca^^i^ied, and even exossa^ed, and laid for dead: for mortis
habet vi^es quae trahitur vi^a gemitibus. It is a lifelesse life that many poor
people live for want of necessaries. Such savage Shepherds Ezekiel inveighes
against, that not only sheer their sheep, Ezekiel. 34. Tiber. ap. Sueton.
but held them, and suck their blood. Atqui pastoris est pecus tondere, non
degl^bere, non carnem and ossa concidere, etc.

Chop them in pieces, as for the pot, etc.] Making no more bones of undoing
them and their families, then to eat a meals-meat, when hungry: yea nourishing
their hearts therewith, as in a day of slaughter, or good cheer. Jam. 5.3.

Verse 4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them] Then
sc. when God shall have changed their cheer, pulled the fat morsel from
between their teeth, and fed them with the bread of affliction, and water of
affliction, with prisoners pittance as they call it, which will neither keep
them alive, 1 King. 22.27.
nor suffer them to die; Then shall they cry, and whine as hogs when hungry, as
dogs when tied up from their meat; but God will not hear them. He will even
cast out their prayers with contempt, as being the prayers of the flesh for
ease, and not of the spirit for grace. They cry unto the Lord aloud, but it is
only to be rid of his rod, they roar when upon the wrack, but it is only to get
off, they look rufully as the fox does when taken in a gin, but it is only to
be set at liberty, they chatter out a charm when Gods chastening is upon them,
yea they may be with child (as it were) of a prayer, and yet bring forth
nothing but wind Esa. 26.16, 17, 18. For either God answers them not at all,
which was Saul's case and curse 1 Samuel 28.15. and Moabs Isa. 16.12. and David's
enemies Psalm. 18.41. Or else he gives them bitter answers Ezekiel. 14.4. Judge.
10.13, 14. Or if better; it is but for a further mischief, that he may curse
their blessings, and consume them after that he has done them good Josh.
24.20. Their preservation from one evil is but a reservation to seven worse;
as we see in Phaoh, Senacherih, Ahab, and others. Lo, this is the portion of a
wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors which they shall receive
of the almighty Job 27, 13, 14, 15. etc. See the place. Remediless misery
shall befall them, calamities that shall wring from them clamours but to no
purpose, or profit See Prove. 1.28.

he will even hide his face from them] that is, withdraw his savor, care,
providence, help, presence, and benefits, of all which the face is the symbol:
that like as they have turned upon God the back and not the face, and have been
merciless to men, Esa. 58.7.
hiding their eyes from their own flesh: so shall it be done to them in the day
of their distress, God will award them judgment without mercy who showed no
mercy Iam. 2.13. He will set off all hearts from them, as he did from wicked
Haman, See Prove. 21.13. with the Note.
when the king frowned upon him. Lastly, he will turn their own consciences
loose upon them (as once he did upon Joseph's brethren Genesis 42.21.) to ring that
doleful knell in their ears Isa. 3^ 1. Woe to thee that spoilist, etc. when
thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, etc. Talionis lege
mulctabere, as Adonibezek, Phocas, Charles 9. etc.

Verse 5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets] False prophets, who
pretended divine authority, when as God never sent them, but expressly declares
here against them, and threateneth them. Those profane Princes had their
flesh-flies, those court-parasites, to sooth and smooth them up in their sins:
to promise them peace, albeit they walked in the imagination of their own
hearts, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 28.19. Bucholcer:
and to live as they listed. Mirifica est sympathia inter Magnates and
parasitos, says One. There is a strange sympathy betwixt Great men and
claw-backs: nothing so troublesome to such, as truth; nothing so toothsome, as
flattery: this is the fruit of (...) self-love: and the end thereof are the
ways of death Prove. 16.25.

that make my people to erre] That (...) them and carry them out of the right
way into by paths, (...) Act. 20.30.
and blind thickets (...) ^rrour, where they are lost for ever. Deuteronomy. 13.13.
Seducers are said to draw (...) violently or to thrust them onward. Jeroboam is
said to have driven Israel from following the Lord: and the false Apostles to
drag disciples after them Act. 20. compelling them by their persuasions to
embrace those distorted doctrines, that cause convulsions of conscience.

that bite with their teeth] The dogs of Congo bite through they bark not,
says Mr. Purchase: Pilgr of Religion. Christ's Politician by Tho. Scot.
there are a sort of cu^-dogs, says Another, that suck a man's blood only with
licking. Seducers are such: Beware of false Prophets: for they come to you in
sheeps clo^thing; but inwardly they are ravening wolves. And in this sense
Hierome and Theodoret take this text: they devour those they make prize of,
(...).
as the Apostles word signifies Colos. 2.8. Others think their covetousness
and gormandise is noted. O Monachi, Vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi:
Vos estis, Decis est testis, certissima pestis.
As hungry dogs they snap at a crust, and make clean work, such is their
voracity and unsatisfiablenesse: Ingluvies, and tempestas, barathrumque macelii.

And cry, Peace] (...) All shall be as well as heart can wish, or need require.
Let these Cerberusses but be morselled, and you shall hear no worse of them.
Like they are to the ravens of Arabia that full gorged have a tuneable sweet
record: but empty, screech horribly. Si ventri been si lateri as Epicurus says
in Horace, Let their bellyes be filled and their backs fitted, and they will
prophecy all good to you: as those false Prophets nourished by Iezebel did to
Ahab; as the Pharisees cried up the Centurion, who had built them a synagogue
Luke 7. as the Popish Clergy canonize their benefactours, and extol them to
the skies. Wvlsin Bishop of Sherborn displaced secular Priests and put in
Monks. Hence the Monkish writers make him a very holy man; and report of him,
that when he lay a dying he cried out suddenly, I see the heavens open, Godw.
Cataloc. 335.
and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, and so died. Yea, they had
a trick to make their Images speak their minds this way. As the rode of grace
here in England had a man within it enclosed, with an hundred wires to make the
image goggle with the eyes, nod with the head, hang the lip: move and shake his
laws according as the value was of the gift that was offered. If it were a
small piece of silver, he would hang a frowning lip: if a piece of gold, then
should his jaws go merrily. This idolatrous forgery was at last, by Cromwels
means, disclosed: Act. and Mon. fol. 1034.
and the image with all his engines showed openly at Paul's cross, and there
torn in pieces by the people, who had been so seduced.

and he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against
him] Heb. sanctify a war, id est, excomunicatis aqua and igni interdicunt,
Gualth.
crucem adversus eos praedicant etc. they thunder against them, and throw them
out of the Church: publish their Croysades, as they did against the Waldenses
in France, the Hussites in Bohemia, and Luther in Germany: whom the pope
excommunicated, the Emperor proscribed, diverse divines wrote against: the
reason whereof when Erasmus was asked by the Electour of Saxony, he rightly
answered, Because he meddleth with the Popes tripple crown, and with the Friars
fat paunches.

Verse 9. Therefore night shall be unto you] Ye shall be benighted, your gifts
blasted, and your persons baffled: your lamp shall be put out in obscure
darkness: the sword shall be upon your arms, and upon your right eyes: your
arms shall be clean dried up, Zech. 11.17.
and your right eyes utterly darkened. Those illuminations and inspirations
that ye seemed to have, shall be taken from you: and God shall pass that
dreadful sentence, Take the talent from him, even here in this life: let him
not have the least dram or drop of a prophetic Spirit, of ministerial
abilities; and then, in the next world, cast ye the unprofitable servant into
outer darkness etc. Mat. 25.28.30.

and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine] Tenebrae vobis a
divinatione, vel propter divinationem, so Calvin. All the reward ye shall have
for your divination shall be disgrace and confusion: your folly shall be
manifest unto all men, as was that of Jannes and Jambres 2 Timothy 3.9.

And the Sun shall go down over the Prophets] The same thing is set forth by
sundry Metaphors, for more assurance: for Hypocritis nihil stupidius, it is
hard to persuade an hypocrite, that evil is toward him: see ver. 11.

Verse 7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded] They
shall be hissed and hooted at for Impostour, and falsaries: shame shall be the
promotion of these fools, as it is at this day of the Heathen Philosophers, of
the Jewish Rabbis, of the Popish Doctors and Schoolmen: who once carried the
bell for most acute and accurate Divines, but now appear to be great triflers,
a rotten generation of dunghil-divines as one styles them: in detestation of
whose vain jangling and doting about questions 1 Timothy 6.4. Luther says, Luth.
tom. 1. oper. lat. ep. 47.
Prope est-ut jurem etc. I could swear almost, that there was not a Schoolman
that understood one chapter of the Gospel. Latimer professed that by hearing
Bilneys confession, he learned more, then before in many years. So from that
time forward, says He, Act. and Mon. 917
I began to smell the word of God, and forsake the School-doctours, and such
fooleries.

yea they shall all cover their lips] And stand aloof; as lepers. See Lev.
13.45. Ezekiel. 24.17, 22. Or they shall leave off their lying; for I will stop
their mouths, Ego illis os claudam. Calv.
that they shall not hereafter so much as mute any more. The Septuagint render
it, All men shall abhor them, shall open their lips against them. Montanus,
involuent mysta cem suam, they shall wrap up their mustachoes, which (says a
Lapide) the false Prophets wore upon their upper-lip, and incedebant comptuli,
and went neatly trimmed, as do now the Calvinistical Ministers. But if some do
so, yet this is better then the Popish priests shaving, which is a ceremony so
bald, that some Priests in France are ashamed of the mark: and few of them have
it, that can handsomely avoid it.

for there is no answer of God] He comes not at them, as sometimes he did to
Abimelech, Laban, Balaam; neither speak they according to his word, for why?
there is no light in them Es. 8.20. The Philosophers professing themselves to
be wise (but wanting the wi^dome from above) became fools Romans 1.22. The
Pharisees had they known any thing aright and as they ought, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory 1 Cor. 2.8. Oracles they had and miracles
enough: but they rejected the counsel of God against themselves being not
baptized Luke. 7.30. or if they were, yet remained they a viperous brood Mat.
3. and never attained to that answer of a good conscience toward God 1 Pet.
3.21. The Schoolmen often cite the Philosophers, Lombard Passim.
seldom the Apostles; they count the authority of Fathers as good as that of
Scriptures: neither doubt they to call the writings of the Eathers by the name
of Scripture. Was not this to set men's threshold by Gods threshold: and their
posts by his posts Ezekiel. 43.8. what marvel therefore though they became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, while they taught for
doctrines men's traditions? what marvel though Popish fopperies once so admired
be now so much slighted, since the world sees further into them, then
formerly? Notable is that passage in K. Henry the eights protestation against
the Pope; England is no more a babe; there is no man here, but now he knows
that they do foolishly, that part with gold for lead etc. Surely except God
take away our right wits, not only the Popes authority shall be driven out for
ever, Act. and Mon. 990.
but his name also shortly shall be forgotten in England. We will from
henceforth ask counsel of him and his, when we list to be deceived, when we
covet to be in error, when we desire to offend God, Truth, and honesty etc.

Ver. 8. But truly I am full of power] But does it become the Prophet thus to
praise himself? Laus proprio sordescit in ore: and those who vaunt most, have
often the least courage; as those creatures who have the greatest hearts of
flesh, are the most timorous; as the Stag, Panther, Hare etc. For answer, it
must be considered, that the Prophet speaks not here of his own good parts,
out of a vain glorious humor (it was enough for him that he was all glorious
within, Psalm. 45.13.
virtusque suo contenta theatro est) but to separate himself from those false
prophets aforementioned, and to assert his calling by his qualifications, as
does likewise St. Paul 2 Cor. 12. to those who sought a proof of Christ
speaking in him. The word rendered But truly signifies, All which
notwithstanding: q. d. Albeit there is such a general defection from God, and
such unfaithfulness in the Prophets of these times, yet I am full of power,
lively and lusty, vigorous and vivacious.

by the spirit of the Lord] That noble Spirit, as David calls him, that
spirit of power, Psalm. 51. 2 Timothy 1.7.
of love, and of a sound mind (as Paul, that puts spiritual mettle into the
soul, and steeleth it against all opposition. And truly if the spirit put not
vigor into us, how dead and flat are our duties and all ordinances like liquor
that has lost its spirits? there is as much difference many times as betwixt
cold water and Aquavitae.

and of judgment] to discern of things that differ, to time a word as the
Prophet Esaias has it, Esa. 50.4.
and to teach things profitable and proper to my auditors (not as He in the
Emblem that gave straw to the dog, and a bone to the Ass; or as those false
Prophets, who spoke good of evil, and evil of good) and wisely to distinguish
betwixt law and Gospel in praxi; Gratias agat Deo, and sciatse esse Theologum
Luth.
which who so can do, let him thank God, says Luther, and let him know, that
he is a Divine indeed.

and of might] Or, of manhood, virtue, prevalency against an adversary,
patience under whatsoever cross occurrences for the truths sake, and for my
p^ain-dealing. A minister had need be a man, (...).
every inch of him; and to play the man 1 Cor. 16.13. yea, as the good soldier
of Jesus Christ, to suffer hardship; being strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might. He must be like the diamond in the Highpriests brestplate for
hardness and hardiness, as of Athanasius Naz^a^zen testifies, that he was
Magnes and Adamas, both a loadstone for his loveliness and humility, and an
Adamant for his resolute stoutnesse and magnanimity against those that were
evil.

to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sinne] to tell them
of their wickedness with the same liberty that they commit it. See here the
true picture of a Preacher, both how he must be gifted, and how deeded; A
thanklesse office it is with the world to be thus bold and busy; and very many
ministers affect to be counted no medlers: they think it enough to preach
toothlesse truths, and not to incur the displeasure of people, by telling
them of their transgressions, and Gods jud^gements. But this is not the garb
and guise of those that are sent and gifted by God. see Ezekiel. 3. and 33.

Verse. 9. Hear this, I pray you, ye heads, etc.] He had had a bout with them
before: but because little good was thereby done, he is at them again;
according to that counsel of the wiseman, In the morning sow thy seed, Eccles.
11.^^
in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou know not, etc. Preach the
word says the Apostle, be instant (or stand over the work) in season, out of
season, etc. 2 Timothy 4.2. (...).
Chrysostom told his Antiochians, that he would never give over preaching
against that sin of swearing, till they gave over their swearing: which
because he could not get them to do, he breaks out into these words. It will be
an hard speech unto you, but I will speak it: Though there be so many thousands
of you, yet there cannot be found an hundred that shall be saved: and I tell
you true, I doubt of them too.

Ye heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel] As bad as
they were he gives them their titles. The devil also is to have his due: he is
called by the holy Ghost Prince of the air, and his Angels are styled
Principalities, powers, Rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6.12. See
the Note on verse. 1.

that abhor judgement] They were not only ignorant of it, verse. 1. but
abhorred it; and therefore abhorred it, because they knew it not. Plato could
say, that if moral virtue could be beheld with mortal eyes, it would attract
all hearts to it self. But these, as natural bruit beasts made to be taken and
destroyed, spoke evil of those things that they understood not, 2 Pet. 2.12.
and what they knew naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupted
themselves, Jude 10. being carried away by their impetuous and imperious lusts,
they not only did that which was evil, but also hated the light of the law
that reproved and sentenced them: licensing others by their practice at least,
to do the like. Such Centaures and Cyclopes were these princes of Israel grown;
such Heteroclites these heads of the house of Jacob. The whole head was sick,
Isai. 1.5. the Rulers were a scab, Chap. 5.7. The Lord looked for judgment,
but behold oppression: for righteousness, but behold a cry. (...). Caff.
They had made the age not unlike that under Nero, wherein nothing almost was
unlawful: but villainy was acted by authority.

and pervert all equity] Heb. they pervert, etc. It is spoken to others, in
token of abomination: See the like, Genesis 49.4. with the Note. Now equity or
rectitude is perverted, when the guilty are acquitted and the innocent
condemned, 2 Chronicles. 19.7.
(See Esaias. 5.20, 23. when there is accepting of persons, and receiving of
gifts.

Verse. 10. They build up Zion with blood] Heb. bloods, that is, with goods
gotten by rapine and robbery, to the utter undoing of many poor oppressed,
whose livelihood is their life, Mar. 12. ult. Luke 8.43. How much better
Selymus the great Turk, who being upon his deathbed moved by Pyrrhus the Bassa
to bestow the great wealth, taken by him from the Persian Merchants, Turk.
hist. ^^^
upon some notable hospital for relief of the poor, took order that those
evil-gotten goods should be forthwith restored again to the right owners, to
the shame of many Christians who will not be drawn to do so. Our Henry the
seventh indeed in his last will and Testament, devised and willed restitution
should be made of all such moneys at had unjustly been levied by his officers.
But how few such princes are to be found? Speed. ^^^^
It is held a goodly thing to build Zion, though it be with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity. But God, as he will not have ex rapina holocaustum, so
he infinitely abhors all those, who, under pretext of religion in building
some poor hospital with the fragments of their accursed wealth, seek to make
him a party, a partaker of their cruelty, as those did, Esa. 66.3, 4, Mar.
7.11. Mat. 23.14. Our Henry the third, when he had (after his many great
exactions) sent the Friar-Minors a load of freese to clothe them, Dan. hist.
168.
had the same sent back again with this message, That he ought not to give
alms of what he had rent from the poor, neither would they accept of that
abominable gift. Zion is not to be builded or beautified with bloods, etc.

Verse. 11. The heads thereof judge for reward,] Being so many locusts, and
latrones cum privilegio, as one says, Well might Saint Paul say that
covetousness is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. It is here assigned as one
cause (and carnal security as another) of that Regiment without righteousness,
here justly complained of. And it was the worse, because it had overrun all
sorts of such as were in place of power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. The
Princes and Judges took gifts, which they should not only not have taken, but
have hated, Prove. 15.27. they should have shaken their hands from holding of
bribes, Esaias. 33.15. since there is a curse to such Magistrates with an Amen to
it, Deuteronomy. 27.25. and Psalm. 15.5. exclusion out of heaven: Stapleton.
Olim didici quid sint munera, said one once, Rain is good (said another) and
ground is good, sed exeorum conjunctione fit lutum, of the mixture of these two
is made dirt: So, Giving is kind, and taking is courteous: yet the mixing of
them makes the smooth paths of Justice foul and uneven. Nec prece nec precio,
should be the Magistrates Motto. And Justice Justice (as Moses phraseth it,
Deuteronomy. 16.20.) that is, clear sheer justice without mud should run down as
waters, and righteousness as a mighty torrent, Am. 5.24.

and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for
money] They were merely mercenary: and as Apollo's Oracles, corrupted by
Philips gold, were said (...), to speak as he would have them, so was it here.
Both Priests and Prophets were ignava ventris mancipia, (see verse. 5. with the
Note) greedy dogs, In Mat. 10.16
slow-bellies, they all looked to their own way, every one for his gain from
his quarter, Esaias. 56.11. Albertus Magnus complained of the covetousness of
Pastors in his time: Bernard for this cause calls them Impostours, and
By-seers, Hugo Cardinalis said that the devil had two daughters, Avarice and
Luxury: the former whereof he had married to the Jews, the latter to the
Gentiles: but now, says he, the Priests have taken away both of them from
their right husbands, and make use of them for their own. Si posui aurum in
conjugium meum, So the Septuagint read that text, Job. 31.24. signifying the
covetous man's great love to money: whence Saint James calls such, 2 Pet. 2.
adulterers, and adulteresses, Chap. 4.4. Saint Paul says they mind only
earthly things (sc. their purses and paunches) Phil. 3.19. and and uncessantly
woo this Mundus immundus, this vile strumpet the world: having eyes full of
the adulteress, and that cannot cease to sin. But their money shall perish
with them that teach for hire, that follow the ministry only as a trade to
pick a living out of, qui plus fisco quam Christo vacant, plus attonsioni quam
attentioni gregis, and ubi non vident quaestum, rident Christum, etc. All seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Psalm. 2.21.

yet will they lean upon the Lord] Or, lay their weight upon him, as upon a
staff or crutch, velut firmissimo scipione. Thus their forefathers ( Psalm.
78.32, 35.) though they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works,
yet they would needs believe that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer. So their successors, Jer. 3.3, 4, 5. when they had spoken and done
evil as they could, yet, having a whores forehead, they could give goodly
words, Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide
of my youth? Will he reserve his anger for ever? Will he keep it to the end?
Here were good words (for they are good cheap, as we say) but nothing more. The
Lord was much in their mouths, but far from their reins, Jer. 12.2.
Selfe-deceivers think they lean upon the Lord, when it is no such matter: Their
faith is a mock-faith, a strong fancy, a blind presumption, which will prove
but a broken reed, and was never true to those that trusted it. Surely as he
that makes a bridge of his own shadow cannot but fall into the brook; so
neither can he escape the burning lake, that had rather be carnally secured,
then soundly comforted. Good gold is a cordial; so is not Alchymy gold: neither
will it pass the seventh fire, as the other will. Security is the forerunner
of calamity: neither miscarry any so sure or so soon, as the over-confident.

and say, Is not the Lord amongst us] And has he not promised so to be for
ever? True, but upon condition that you be with him, and no otherwise, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. He is not so tied to you, but that he can go away from you. See his many
removes, Ezekiel. 9, 10, and 11 Chapters; and observe, that still as he goes out,
some judgment comes in. They call themselves of the holy city, and stay
themselves upon the God of Israel, the Lord of hosts is his name, Jer. 48.2.
but all this was but court-holy-water, as they call it, empty words; such as
our profligate professors are full of. But will thou know, O vain man, (or, O
empty man) that words without works are bootlesse? Jam. 2.20. that external
privileges alone profit not, (...).
Jer. 7.4. Act. 6.14. that formal profession and performances are disaccepted,
and those that please themselves therewith are but as women traveling with a
false birth, Isai. 26.18. Men are wont to do with these, as those Conjurers did
with the name of Jesus; they thought if they used that name, it was enough.
They hear therefore, Act. 19.5.
Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? So shall it fare with such as
glory in this, that they were born in the bosom of the Church, live under the
means of grace, etc. Gehezi took the Prophets staff: but there was something
more, else the child had not been raised. Those tell but an ill tale for
themselves, that have no more to say but this, Is not the Lord amongst us? Men
are the worse for his presence with them, if they walk not worthy of the Lord
in all wel-pleasing, Col. 1.10.
if they have not grace to serve him with reverence and godly fear: for even
our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.28, 29.

None evil can come upon us] Let Prophets say what they please, we shall have
peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. all shall be well with us, whiles God is with us, and for
us. Job. 8.20. Exodus 34. Psalm. 5.
But God will not take the wicked by the hand, says Job, neither will he at
all acquit the guilty, says Moses. The foolish shall not stand in his sight,
says David: for he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.5. Beware of him
and obey his voice; provoke him not: for he will not pardon your
transgressions, Exodus 23.21. or if he do, yet it is two to one, that he will
take vengeance of your inventions, Psalm. 99.8. Shake off therefore carnal
security: fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

Verse. 12. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field] even for
your sakes, O wicked Princes, Priests and Prophets; you are the traitors that
have betrayed us all into the hands of divine justice: to be angry with us for
saying so, and telling you what to trust to, is as if some fond people should
be angry with the herald, or the trumpet, as the cause of their wars.

Zion shall be ^lowed as a field] Shall be utterly laid waste and sevelled.
Conquerours used to plow up those places that they would not have re-edified;
and to sow them with salt, Judge. 9.45. It must needs be a dismal destruction,
that is described in such exquisite terms. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio.
This threatening of the Prophet took so well, that the judgment was respited
for above an hundred years, Jer. 26.19. But now men's hearts are more hardened,
and therefore their destruction more hastened.

and Jerusalem shall become heaps] Rupes ruderum, This they once thought as
possible, as to overthrow Gods own throne: the very disciples had a conceit
that the World could not outlast the Temple, as may be gathered from Mat. 24.3.
But they (some of them) lived to see themselves confuted, and our Saviors
words verified, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down, Verse. 2.

and the mountain of the house] that famous house that was worthily reckoned
one of the seven wonders of the world, and stood upon mount Moriah.

As the high places of the forrest] As woody and desert places, fit only for
wild beasts, Lege and Luge, says one, speaking of Jerusalems desolation.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. But in the last days it shall come to passe] God reserveth his best
comforts till the last, as that Ruler of the feast did his best wine, Ioh.
2.10. and as the sweetest of the honey lies at the bottom. These last days
are Gospel-dayes, Heb. 1.2. times of Reformation, Heb. 9.19. of Restitution,
Act. 3.21. called the World to come, Heb. 2.5. that new heaven and earth
wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. that new Jerusalem that is all of
gold, Rev. 2.1. Ezekiels new Temple, bigger then all the old Jerusalem; and his
new Jerusalem bigger then all the land of Canaan, chap. 40.41.42, etc. Let
Popish buzzars blaspheme that description of the Temple and City: Sanct. Argum.
cap. 40.
calling it, (as Sanctius does, once and again) insulsam descriptionem, a
senseless description: so speaking evil of the things that they know not, Jude
10. We believe and are sure, Joh. 6.69. that God has provided some better
thing for us, then for those under the law, Heb. 11.40. viz. that great mystery
of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. who should again
restore the kingdom to Israel, the spiritual kingdom to the Israel of God: as
is here foretold in the self-same words with those of Esaias chap. 2.1, 2. whence
he is not ashamed to take it.

That the mountain of the house of the Lord] The Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. called
elsewhere, the mountain of the Lord, and his holy hill, Psalm. 15.1. and 24.3.
and 48.2. Esaias 30.17. both for its sublimity, Gal. 4.26. and firmness, Psalm.
46.3. and 125.1. wind and storms move it not: no more can all the power and
policy of hell combined prevail against the Church, Mat. 16.18. She is (...), a
kingdom that cannot be shaken: and may, better then the city of Venice, take
for her Posie, Immota manet.

Shall be established in the top of the mountains] Constituetur firmiter, shall
be strongly set upon a sure bottom, upon munitions of Rocks: yea upon the Rock
of Ages, Mat. 16.18. Jer 31.35. Esaias 33.20. Some, by the house of the Lord,
here understand the Church: and by the mountain of this house, Christ, whereon
it is built, and whom Daniel describes by that great mountain that filled the
whole earth, Chap. 2.35. that stone cut out without hands, that smot in pieces
the four Monarchies, ibid. And hence it is, that this mountain of the Lords
house is exalted above the hills: the Church must needs be above all earthly
eminencies whatsoever, because founded upon Christ: who therefore cannot be
exalted, but she must be lifted up aloft together with him. God who is rich in
mercy, says, that great Apostle, has quickened us together with Christ, and
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. The Church is mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. she
is his wife, and wheresoever he is Caius, she is Caia: she shines with his
beams, and partaketh of his honors; union being the ground of communion.

and people shall flow unto it.] As waters roll and run toward the Sea: but
that these waters should flow upward, flow to the mountain, as here, is as
wonderful; as that the Sun should send his beams downward to the earth, when
as it is the property of all fire to aspire and fly upwards. This is the Lords
own work, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Chrysostom. Hom 8. ad Hop. Antioch.
The metaphor of flowing, imports the coming of people to Christ, by the
preaching of the Gospel. 1. Freely, Psalm. 110.3. 2. Swiftly, as the waters of
the river Tigris, swift as an arrow out of a bow. See Esaias 60.8. 3.
Plentifully, by whole Nations turned to the faith, and giving up their names to
Christ. 4. Jointly, as verse 2. and Zach. 8.21. 5. Zealously, bearing down all
obstacles that would damme up their way. 6. Constantly, and continually, as
rivers run perpetually, by reason of the perennity of their fountains; and are
never dried up, though sometimes fuller then some: quin ut fluvij repentinis
imbribus augentur, says Gualther, as rivers swell often with sudden showers, and
overflow the banks, so beyond all expectation, many times, does God take away
tyrants, and propagates his truth, enlarging the bounds of his Church, with new
confluxes of Converts.

Verse 2. And many nations shall come and say] The conversion of the Gentiles
is here foretold, a piece of that mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. The Jews
usually call Christians in contempt Gozin, (the word here used) and Mamzer Goi
Bastard-Gentiles. But, either they must come under this name themselves, or
deny that they are the posterity of Abraham, Genesis 12.2. Where God says, I will
make of thee a great Nation.

Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord] The wicked have their
Come, Prove. 1.11. and would not go to hell alone. Should not the Saints have
theirs? should they not get what company they can toward heaven? The Greeks
call goodness, (...), from (...); and (...), from (...), because it does as it
were, invite and call others to it; and every man is willingly to run after it.

and to the house of the God of Jacob] to the public ordinances, where we may
hear, and believe, and be sealed with that holy spirit of promise, as those
Ephesians were, chap. 1.13. We read that Marcellinus, Secundanus, and some
others, were converted to Christianity by reading Sibylla's oracles of Christ's
birth: and that by Chaucers Book, some were brought to the knowledge of the
truth. But either this was not so, or not ordinary: for faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word preached, which therefore the people of God do so
prize, as Luther did, who said, Acts and Mon. 767.
He would not take all the world for one leaf of the Bible: and that without
the preaching of the word, he could not live comfortably in Paradise: as with
it, he could live and enjoy himself, though it were in hell.

and he will teach us of his wayes] Cathedram in coelis habet qui corda docet,
says Austin. All true Converts are taught of God, Joh. 6. and then quam cito
discitur quod docetur? says the same Father; how soon are men discipled? how
soon learn they the ways of God, whereby to serve him here, and be saved by
him hereafter. For it is false that some contend for: sc. that every man may be
saved in his own faith, be it right or wrong: For none can come to the Father
but by the Son, Joh. 14.6. Neither is there any other name but His under heaven
whereby men must be saved, Acts 4.12. See Joh. 17.3. and 6.40. Heb. 11.6.
whatsoever the Huberians affirm of Universal Election; or the Puccians of a
natural faith.

and we will walk in his paths] which are all paved with mercy and love: so
that the saints run therein and faint not; walk, and are not weary, Esaias 40.31.
They are all Peripateticks, ever in action, Genesis 17.1. they are Currists, not
Quaerists, Ambros.
says Luther elegantly; they do not reason, but run the paths of Gods
precepts. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sancti gratia.

For the law shall go forth of Zion] The law, or doctrine, as Prove. 13.14.
Understand here the Gospel, that Law of God, Psalm. 19.7. that Law of Christ,
Gal. 6.2. that perfect law of liberty, Jam. 1.25. a counter-pane whereof God
puts into the hearts of his people, Jer. 31. whereby they become (as it was
once said of the Thracians) (...), a law to themselves; Herod.
as being transformed into the same image with the Gospel, like as the pearl,
by the often-beating of the Sunbeams upon it, becomes radiant as the Sun.

and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.] Not from Africa at first (as the
brethren of the rosy-crosse would have it) though it is thought the Gospel was
received, and the Christian faith professed even from the Apostles time, in
that large region of Nubia in Africa. But repentance and remission of sins
was preached among all nations beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.41. The Jews
were Gods Library-keepers, and the Apostles sent and went from Jerusalem to
plant Churches abroad the world, and to gather into one, the children of God
that were dispersed, Ioh. 11.52.

Verse 3. And he shall judge among many people,] We had before, Christ's
Prophetical Office: here we have his Princely, and elsewhere his Priestly,
This seems to have been the effect of that old prophecy among the Easterlings,
that Judaea profecti rerum potirentur, some that came out of^ Jury should
conquer all. Vide Sueto. in Vespas. and Tacit. lib. 21.
(wherein both the former are founded) for he is the true Trismegist, and
Melchisedech was a right type of him. He is the only judge, and needs no Vicar
upon earth, such as the Pope claims to be, Esaias 33.22, no such Officers to see
his laws executed, as the Ephori were among the Greeks, and the Censores among
the Romans. The Lord that sent the rod of his strength out of Zion, as verse 2.
does also give him to rule in the midst of his enemies, whiles his people are
willing in the day of his power, in the beauties of holiness, Psalm. 110.3.
willing that Christ should send forth judgment to victory, Mat. 12.20. that
is, perfect his own work of grace begun in their hearts. To which end, as it
here follows,

He shall rebuke (or convince) strong nations] Convince them, I say, (by his
Spirit) of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, ^oh. 16.8. Of the
lothesomnesse of sin, of the necessity of getting righteousness by Christ, and
repentance from dead works; that men may serve the living God, and as much as
in them is, Acts 17.30.
live peaceably with all.

And they shall beat their swords into plowshares] i. e. their fierce and fell
natures shall be mansuefied, as Esaias 11.6, 7, 8, 9. and if they wage war, it
shall be non nisi coacti, either for the just punishment of Delinquents, whom
they cannot otherwise come at: or for their own necessary defense, and that
they may establish peace with truth. But if men would live by the laws of the
Gospel, they need not wage war, or want peace, either of country or of
conscience: but they might take for their Motto, that of David, Any shallom, I
am peace: and have for their portion that peace, peace, Esaias 26.3. even a
perfect, sheer, pure-peace, a multiplied peace with God, with themselves, and
with others: this is a main piece of Christ's kingdom upon earth, Florus.
who is the Prince of peace, and came in a time of peace: viz. in the reign of
Augustus, when as there was Totius orbis aut pax aut pactio, says Florus, a
general peace, or truce thorowout the whole world.

neither shall they learn war any more] To make a trade or a gain of it, and
so to earn a curse Deuteronomy. 27.25. to delight in it, Psalm. 68.30. and make a sport
of it (as Abner did, 2 Samuel 2.14. and Pyrrhus king of Epirots) to wage it
without weighty reason rashly. If we Princes (said our Hen. 7.) should take
every occasion that is offered, the world should never be quiet, but wearied by
continual wars. We may also here take warring (as St. James does, chap.
4.1.) for jarring, and jangling, for private discords, and dissentions. Now
these the people or God are so far from learning, that they utterly lay them
aside, and are kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake forgave them, Ephesians. 4.32.

Verse 4. But they shall sit every man under his vine] seeding upon the fruit
that shall even fall into his mouth, says a Lapide. Sit they shall under
Christ, the true Vine, says Hugo, and under the holy Ghost, as a fig tree,
whose fruit is far sweeter then any honey. But these are coynt
interpretations says Gualther. I should rather expound this Text by that 91.
Psalm; wherein the safe and happy condition of the godly is at large described.
Vineyards and fig-yards were ordinary in those countries: and hence this
proverbiall expression, to set forth doubtless, the spiritual security, and
that peace of conscience chiefly, that is granted to Christ's subjects: a peace,
far beyond that under Solomon, which is here pointed at: or that under our
Queen Elizabeth, not to be passed over without one touch at least upon that
string, which so many years together sounded so sweetly in the ears of our
Fathers. Then it was, if ever, that the mountains brought forth peace, and the
little hills righteousness, Psalm. 72.5. The great ones defended their
inferiors, Westmer. in Psalm. 72.
and the inferiors blessed their superiors; the Magistrate righted the
subject, and the subject reverenced the Magistrate.

and none shall make them afraid] God, they know, will not hurt them, man
cannot: he may take away their heads, but not their crowns; their lives, but
not their hopes: for the righteous has hope in his death: his Posie is not
only, Dumspiro spero, but Dum expiro. Let the wicked have a trembling heart,
and failing eyes while he lives, Deuteronomy. 28.65. and when he dies cry out, as a
great man was heard to do, Spes and fortuna valete, Farewell life and hope
together. The servant of Christ, as he sits mediis tranquillus in undis all his
life long: so when he dies, he can call his soul to rest: and sing old Simeons
Nunc dimittas, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, etc.

for the mouth of the Lord of hosts,] And what better assurance can we desire,
since God can neither die, lie, nor deny himself: Since, secondly, he is the
Lord of Hosts, and so armed with power to make good what he has spoken. Peter
had a will to deliver Christ from the Jews, but wanted power. Pilate had power
to have done it, but wanted will. God wants neither of these to do for his
people, and to deliver them out of danger. Courage therefore.

Verse 5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his god,] They will
do so, they are resolved not to alter their religion: as Tully said, Me ex ea
opinione quam a majoribus accepi de cultu deorum, nullius unquam movebit
oration: I will never be dissuaded by any one from that way of divine worship,
which I have received from my forefathers. How wilful at this day are Jews,
Papists, Pagans, Heretics? And how much easier a matter do we find it, to
deal with twenty men's reasons, then with one man's will? A wilful man stands as
a stake in the midst of a stream, lets all pass by him, but he stands where
he was. Nay but we will have a king say they, when they had nothing else to
say. Nay, but I will curse howsoever, though against my conscience, said
Balaam: and do not the Popish Balaamites as much as this, many of them? As for
the Vulgar sort of them, they are headlong and headstrong, resolved to retain
contra gentes the senseless superstitions transmitted unto them by their
Progenitors. But what says the Oracle Rev. 14.7. Fear God, and give glory to
him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and (what ever your ancestors
did) worship you him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the
fountains of waters.

and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God] This was well resolved, and
is as well practiced by all Christ's faithful people, who dare not follow a
multitude to do evil Exodus 23.2. dare not walk by their fathers practice Josh.
24.2, 14, 15. for they consider that no commandment does so expressly threaten
Gods judgments upon posterity as the second. They therefore resolve to walk in
the name, that is, by the laws and under the view of the Lord their God, who
is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, as
Moses describes him, in opposition to all other deities, whether so reputed or
deputed Deuteronomy. 10.17.

for ever and ever] We will not only take a turn or two in his ways, as
temporaries; who are hot at hand but soon tire, and give in: but we will hold
on a constant course of holiness, and not fail to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes Psalm. 1.2. Ioh. 8.12. and 10.4.14. Rev. 7.17. As for
those Apostates that change their God, that change their glory for that which
does not profit, as they therein commit an horrible wickedness, such as the
heavens have cause to be astonished at Ier. 2.11, 12, 13. so they could not
choose out for themselves a worse condition Heb. 10.37, 38. for why? they put
the son of God to an open shame chap. 6.6. like (as those that are carted
amongst us are held out as a scorn) and do in effect say, that they have not
found him such as they took him for.

Verse 6. In that day] sc. of grace and of the Gospel: It is called a day and
that day, by an excellency in regard of Revelation, Adornation, Consolation,
Distinction, speedy Preterition.

says the Lord] Whose word cannot be broken Ioh. 10.35. and is therefore the
best security 2 Cor. 1.20.

will I assemble her that halteth] Heb. that goes sideling, that is maimed,
disioynted, lamed, Esa. 35.3. torn Psalm. 35.15. and tired out with long
journeys into captivity, as the Jews were by the Babylonians, Greeks and
Romans before Christ's coming: that they might breath after those days of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord Mal. 3.1.

and I will gather her that is driven out] Or, rejected, thrust away with a
force, that is, the Gentles, suffered to walk in their own ways Act. 14.16.
and carried away unto dumb idols, even as they were led 1 Cor. 12.2.

and her that I have afflicted] Both Jews and Gentiles, the whole community of
people: for God shook all nations then, when the desire of all nations (Christ
Heb. 12.25.) was to come Hag. 2.7. See verses 22, 23. Junius, after the
Septuagint, rendr^th it ut veniant desiderati omnium gentium, that the Saints,
those desirable ones, out of all nations may come: for unto Shiloh in a most
afflicted time (when the scepter was departed from Judah etc.) was the
gathering of all people to be Genesis 49.10. Esa. 26.8, 9. See Esaias. 66.20. rather
in litters as lame people are carried) should they come, then not at all:
rather on one leg with Jacob, should they wrestle, then not prevail.

Verse 7. And I will make her that halted a remnant] Yea a renowned remnant
Zeph. 3.19. Not many Jews were converted in comparison of the Gentiles: hence
they are called a remnant. They both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets: they have also persecuted us, says the Apostle or cast us out, as by
an Ostracisme, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, 1 Thessalonians.
2.15, 16.
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles etc. Thus the generality of them then:
and so to this day they continue cross, and cursing Christ and his followers,
thrice a day in their synagogues: Hieron in Esai. l. 12. c. 49. and l 14. c.
42. Buxtorf. Synag.
Howbeit at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election
of grace Romans 11.5. and that remnant became the seminary of the Christian
Church.

and her that was cast far off, a strong nation] Numerous and valorous. Vide
fidem and passionem martyrum and de gente robusta non ambiges, says Hierome
here. Consider the faith and patience of the Martyrs, and you will easily yield
them to be a strong nation indeed: Christians have showed as glorious power in
the faith of Martyrdom, as in the faith of miracles. They can do that which
others cannot turn their hands to: they can suffer wrongs, best of any: Compel
them to go a mile, they will be content to go two: yea as far as the shoes of
the preparation of the Gospel of peace will carry them. There is nothing that
they date not undertake and undergo for the glory of their God. Thy courage in
Christians, Heathens counted obstinacy; Tertull. in Apologet.
but they knew not the power of the spirit, nor the privy armor of proof that
the Saints have about their heart, which makes them insuperable, more then
Conquerours.

and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion] i. e. In the Christian
Church, out of which went the law, that is, the Gosp^l ver. 2. See Esa. 40.9.
and 52.7. Heb. 12, 22. There shall Christ reign, and so he did ever: but now
he shall declare himself to be Messiah the Prin^e Dan. 9.25 Lord and h^^st Act.
2.36. Savior and Sovereign. As king he 1. of rebels makes them s^^jects,
willing to be ruled by him. 2. He preserves them in that privilege by his
spirit. 3. He gives them laws far better then those of the twelve tables ^^
Rome, which yet far exceeded (says Cicero) all the learned libraries of the
Philos^ph^rs in worth and weight. 4. He sweetly inclines their will to ye^^d
universal obedience thereunto, and to cross themselves so they may please
(...) 5 He rewards them with comfort and peace here, and with life eternal
hereafter. 6. He destroys all the enemies of his Church, and then at last
delivers up the kingdom to his Father 1 Cor. 15.24. not his essential
kingdom as God, but his oec^^omical kingdom, as Mediator.

Verse 8. And thou O tower of the flock] that is, O Church of Christ, who is
often compared to a shepherdess in the Canticles: here to a Migdal-^der or tower
of the flock (that flock of Christ which has golden fleeces, precious souse:)
in reference either to that tower, Genesis 35.21. built for the safety and se^vice
of shepherds: or else to the sheep-gate in Jerusalem (whereof read N^h. 3.1.
and 12.39.) so called from the sheep-market, which for the convenience of the
Temple was near to it; as was also the sheep-pool called Bethesda Ioh 5.2.
where the sacrifices were washed. The world is a field, the Church a fold, in
that field; and a strong fold (strong as a tower) yea a strong-hold Ophel as it
is styled in the next words; and that of the daughter of Zion, that is of the
Christian Church, the inviolable security whereof is here noted.

unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion] such as was in David^ days
and Solomon's: la^ge, rich, peaceable, prosperous, terrible to other nations
etc. This was carnally understood by the Jews, who therefore dr^ame to thi^
day of an earthly kingdom, and have in their ^ynagogues a crown ready to set
upon the head of their Messiah whenever he shall come: neither were Christ's
disciples without a tincture of this Pharisaicall leaven: whence their
often-enquiries when the kingdom of God shall come? and their frivol^us
contests among themselves, who should be the greatest in Christ's kingdom? who
should sit at his right hand and at his left etc. as if there should have been
in Christ's kingdom (as in Solomon's) a distribution here of honors and
offices. And this groundless conceit hung as bullets of lead at their
eyelids; that they could not look up to see that Christ's kingdom was
spiritual and not of this present world.

the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem] This the Jews
(mistaking it as before) pray earnestly that it may come cito, Baxtor. Syn: Jud.
citius, citissime, bimherah, bejamen^s, with speed, and even in our days; often
throwing open their windows to behold their King, and to receive their
long-looked-for preferment, in his earthly monarchy.

Ver. 9. Now why do thou cry out aloud?] Hout and houle? q.d. have thou any
such cause to be so unreasonably and out ragiously impatient so long as Christ
is thy king and counselor? What if there now be no king in th^e? What if thy
counselor be perished? A wo-case I confess, and great confusion most needs
be the issue of it; as it fell out in Jerusalem after Josiah was slain: Confer
Hos. 3.4. with the Note there. But yet there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing; neither need the Saints be so excessively dejected with outward crosses,
so long as Christ is with them, and for them. If Seneca could say to his friend
Polybius, Fas tibi non est salvo Caesare, de fortuna tua queri, Be thy case
never so miserable, Sen. ad ^olyb. Consol.
thou have no cause to complain, so long as Caesar is in safety: How much
less ground of mourning or murmuring have Christ's subjects, so long as He
lives and reigns? Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est, Calvin. Epist.
alioqui totus desperassem writes Miconius to Calvin, of the Churches enemies:
I am glad that Christ is Lord of all: for otherwise I should have had no hope
of help at all. David in deep distress comfort himself in the Lord his God 1 Samuel 30.6. and Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me, says He: q. d. my professed
subjection to thee calls for thy care and protection of me: and here he
stays himself. Kings and Councillors are great stays to a state: but Christ
is not tied to them. These are but particular good things, as is health against
sickness, wealth against poverty etc. but Christ is an Universal good, all
sufficient and satisfactory; every way proportionable and fitting to our
souls, and several necessities. Why then do we cry aloud as utterly undone?
why sing we not rather with David when at greatest under, The Lord lives, and
blessed be the God of my salvation. Psalm. 18.46.
It is God that avengeth me, and delivers me from the violent man etc, He is
King of all the earth. He is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working
etc. It was a learned man's Motto, Blessed be God, that he is God; and blessed
be Christ that he reigns for ever; that Counsel is his, and sound wisdom:
that he has understanding, he has strength Prove. 8.14.

for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travel] They have, but they needed
not, had thou but turned into thy counting house, and considered thy manifold
privileges in Christ, thy King and Counselor. We often punish our selves by
our passions, as the lion that beats himself with his own tail. Sed o been
(says an Interpreter here) quod sint hidolores saltem similes parturientium,
It is yet an happiness, that the Churches pangs, though bitter, Tarnou.
yet are no worse then as those of a woman in travel. For 1. The pains of
travel seldom bring death; but life both to mother and child: so do
afflictions to the Saints 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 12.9. 2. Travel comes not by
chance, nor for long continuance: neither does affliction Ioh. 7.30. Luke
22.53. 3. Travel is unavoidable, and must be patiently born: so must
affliction; or else we lose the fruit of it: Act. 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. 4. Sharp
though it be, yet it is short: so mourning lasts but till morning Psalm. 30.6.
and 73.24. and 135.14. Ioh. 16.15. Ier. 10.23. 5. As the traveling woman has
the help of other women: so has the afflicted, of God, Angels and men. 6.
Lastly, as she remembers the sorrow no more for joy of a manchild born into
the world: so is it here Ioh. 16.20. Romans 8.17, 18.

Verse 10. Be in pain and labor to bring forth etc.] Be sensible of thine
ensuing captivity, and take on: but yet with hope of a gracious deliverance in
due time. See the Note on ver. 9. It is no less a fault to despise the
chastening of the Lord, then to faint when thou art rebuked Heb. 12.5. The
hypocrite in heart heapeth up wrath says Elihu, and why? he cries not when
God binds him Job. 3^.11. The wicked says Hannah, are silent in darkness,
and shall therefore lie down in sorrow. This is not patience but pertinacy, 1 Samuel 2.9. Esaias. 50.10.
the strength of stones and flesh of brass Job 6.12. It is not vasour but
apathie, stupidity and indolency, much complained of in scripture, and
threatened with a succession of sorrows Lev. 26.18, 28. seven more, and seven
more, and seven to that. Three times in that chapter God raises his note of
threatening, and he raises it by sevens, and those are discords in music.
Such sayings will be heavy songs; and their execution heavy pangs: worse then
those of a woman in travel.

for now shall thou go forth out of the city] This Now fell not out of an
hundred years after. Foul weather seldom rotteth in the air. Time wears
not out Gods threatenings. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, nedum Deo, Time can be
no prejudice to the Ancient of days: sooner or later his word shall be
accomplished. When the sins of the Amorites are full, they shall be sure of
their payment. The bottle of wickedness, when once filled with those bitter
waters, will sink to the bottom.

and thou shall dwell in the field] Sub dio, having no canopie over thee, but
the azured sky: so little account is made of poor captives: If they may have
the open air to breath in, though they lie without doors, 'its better then a
stinking dungeon, or to be shut up close under hatches among the excrements of
nature, as Barbarussa Christian prisoners taken in Greece were: Turk hist. 750.
so that all the way as he went home with them to Constantinople, every hour
almost some of them were cast dead overboard.

and thou shall go even to Babylon] there to dwell among plants and hedges,
making flower-pots for a foreign prince. There they dwelt with the King for
his work: 1 Chronicles. 4.23.

there shall thou be delivered, there the Lord shall redeem thee] This There,
is as Emphaticall as that Yet so often repeated Zech. 1.17. See the Note there.
It seemed improbable to many, and to some impossible, that ever they should
return out of Babylon. But God effected it to the great astonishment of his
poor people, who were like them that dream Psalm. 126.1. and could scarce
believe their own eyes. God loves to deliver those that are forsaken of their
hopes. Ad nos ergo transferamus promissionemistam, says Gualther upon the
text. Let us apply this promise to our selves: and as often as we are pincht with
poverty, or tormented with diseases, or cast out into banishment, or are in any
great danger by water or land, or under terrors of conscience, let us think we
hear God thus speaking to us, There shall thou be delivered: there I will
redeem thee etc.

Verse 11. Now also many nations are gathered etc.] that is, they shall be once
gathered, when the Babylonians, who are Lords of the world, shall muster many
nations against thee. Would any man take the Churches picture says Luther?
then let him paint a silly poor maid, sitting in a wood or wilderness,
compassed about with hungry lions, wolves, bores and bears, and with all
manner of cruel and hurtful beasts, Loc. com. de persee. ver. Eccles.
and in the midst of a great many furious men assaulting her every moment and
minute, for this is her condition in the world.

that say, Let her be defiled] sc: with blood and slaughter. Or, Let her be
condemned as an hypocrite, Let her be stoned as an adulteress, so the Trent
translation. Thus they pretend, as Rabshakeh did, that they were sent by God
against an hypocritical nation, that had broken their faith with God and men.
The like craft and cruelty was used in the Parisian massacre, and
Gunpowder-plot: God and man; said they (in that blind letter, that brought all
to light) have agreed to punish the wickedness of this age. Those that would
kill a dog, give out that he was mad first, says the French Proverb. Whom no
man looks after Jer. 30.17.

and let our eyes look upon Zion] Let us feed our eyes with such a delightful
spectacle: and say as that cruel Charles the 9. of France did, when he saw the
streets strawed with the bodies of the massacred Protestants, and the rivers
dyed with their blood, O pulchrum spectaculum! O brave sight, Or, as the Q.
Mother of Scotland, when she beheld the dead carcasses of her Lutheran
subjects, said, that she never saw a goodlier piece of Arraz in all her days.
See the accomplishment of this prophecy in the Lamentations, Psalm. 137. and in
the book of Nehemiah.

Verse 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord] Nothing like their
thoughts Es. 55.8. Confer Es. 10.7, 8. Zach. 11.15, 16. etc. His thoughts are
fatherly, whiles theirs are butcherly: the Physician in setting leeches to his
patient, seeks his good: he aims not at filling the leeches gorges: neither
will he set more on him, then will make for his health. God by his wisdom, and
according to his eternal counsel (which the wicked understand not) orders
and draws the blind and bruit motions of the worst creatures to his own
honor, and his churches good; D. Reyn.
as the huntsman does the rage of the dog to his pleasure, or the mariner the
blowing of the wind to his voyage, or the Artist the heat of the fire to his
work, or the Physician the blood-thirstinesse of the leech to a cure. Surely,
(says the Psalmist speaking of Senacheribs cruelty in the siege of Jerusalem)
the wrath of man shall praise thee (eventually, though not intentionally) the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain Psalm. 76.10. Let the enemies think and
project as they please, Ier. 29.11. 2 These. 1.6, 7.
let them rage and resolve upon your utter ruin. I know the thoughts that I
think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you an expected end: to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to
you who are troubled rest etc. For thus says the Lord God the Holy One of
Israel, In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength Esaias. 30.15. And I will strengthen the house
of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to
place them, for I have mercy upon them, and they shall be as though I had not
cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and I will hear them, Zech. 10.6.
Surely as it was said of old, Neither shall Rome fall while Scipio stands:
neither shall Scipio live when Rome falls: so may it more truly be affirmed
of Christ, that he and his people shall stand and fall together. But he shall
stand at the later day upon the earth Job 19.25. yea he shall set his right
foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the earth Rev. 10.2. as Lord of sea
and land, maugre the malice of all, that sought to supplant him, who shall
there-hence fall, and never rise up again Am. 8.14.

Verse 13. Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion] Go in this thy might
(wherewith thou so lustily threshest out thy wheat by the wine press said the
Angel to Gideon Judge. 6.14) and thresh the Midianites another while, thou
shall smite them as one man ver. 16. thresh them as the sheaves of the floor
that lie ready for the flaile, or (as the custom of those countries was Deuteronomy.
25.4. 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5, 18.) for oxen to tread out, or the wheel to turn
over Esa. 2.28.

for I will make thine horn iron etc.] So that thou shall do great exploites,
by mine assistance, against Sennacherib, Antiochus and other enemies subdued
and threshed down to straw by the valiant Macchabees. Spiritualiter etiam hoc
intelligendum, says Sa. here; this is also spiritually to be understood of
converting people to the faith separata palea infidelitatis. This the Apostles
did vigorously and effectually, being furnished by Christ with horns of iron,
and hoofes of brass; with spiritual courage and metal, whereby they did soon
beat in pieces many people, and brought them to Christ by the obedience of
faith, together with all their wealth and substance, which they cheerfully
consecrate unto the Lord of the whole earth. This was typified of old by the
Tabernacle built with the spoils of the Egyptians: and by David's dedicating to
the Lord the gold and silver which in great abundance he had taken from the
enemies 2 Samuel 8. It is prophesied of Tyrus, that being converted she should
find another manner of merchandise then formerly, viz: to feed and cloth Gods
poor with durable clothing. The Centurion, Esa. 23.18. Luke 7.
when once he became a Proselyte, built the Jewish Synagogues, that had been
thrown down by Antiochus. Constantine the Great was bountiful to the Church
above measure, insomuch as that he was by the heathens in scorn called
Pupillus, as if he had wanted a guardian to overruled and order his expenses.
Sed refriguit hoc studium hodie in magistratibus plerisque, as Gualthe^ ^re
complains, and not without cause. The Church is not only scanted, but spo^ed
of her revenues: and that which was piously consecrated, is impiously converted
to other uses etc. Thus He.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. NOw gather thy self in troops, O daughter of troopes] Here the
Virgin, the daughter of Zion despises her adversaries of Assyria and Babylon,
and laughes them to scorn: the daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at them
Isa. 37.22. and bearing her self bold upon the foregoing promise ( chap. 4.13.)
that she should beat in pieces many people, she takes liberty to taunt the
Assyrian Monarch with all his troops beleaguering her, and basely abusing her
Judges: telling him, that the Babe of Bethlehem would shortly take an order
with him. And although she were but a Virgin, yet, having such a Champion as
Christ, who is in love with her, that will take her part and fight her
quarrel, she doubts not to say, Now gather thy self in troops etc. Nunc
turmatim coito, o turmaria, Increase thine army and come forth, Gather your
selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces. Take counsel together, Isai. 8.9, 10. Isai. 33.22.
and it shall come to naught: speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is
with us, Jehovah is our Juge, Jehovah is our Champion, Jehovah is our king, he
will save us. Lo, this is the Churches confident boasting in Christ, this is
the triumph of her, trust in him. Psalm. 32.7.
The thought of his birth swalloweth up all her fears and discontents; and
compasses her about with songs of deliverance.

He has laid siege against us,] And already devoured us in his hopes: but if
we do but turn us to Christ, and say, Behold she whom thou love is
distressed: the Assyrian as a strong river is come up over all his channels,
and reaches even to the neck: yea the stretching out of his wings fills the
breadth of thy land, O Immanuel, Esaias 8.7, 8. he will soon bestir himself, he
will besiege our besiegers, he will smite them upon the cheek-bone, Psalm. 3.7.
and break the teeth of those ungodly, that smot the Judge of Israel with a rod
upon the cheek, for a reproach to the whole people. Hugo, (...). Bacillis
ceciderunt. Beza.
by this Judge of Israel, understands Christ, who was indeed at his passion
contumeliously buffetted, and smitten with rods upon the cheek, Mat. 20.6, 7.
But this, though it be true, yet cannot be the sense of this text.

Verse 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah] Not so called from Ephratah, Calebt
wife, 1 Chronicles. 2.19, 50, 51. but from its fruitfulness: whence also it had the
name Bethlehem, Joh. 6.
that is, the house of bread, where Jesus, (that Bread of life, that came down
from heaven) was born in the fullness of time, as is here first foretold by
this Prophet: that great mystery of godliness being revealed to the world by
degrees, in several Ages. Here was Christ born by mere accident; in regard of
his parents, who were brought hither by a tyrannical Edict of Augustus, Luke
2.2. but yet by a sweet providence of God, that this Scripture might be
fulfilled, and our faith in Christ settled.

Though thou be little among the thousands of Iudah] Or, Art thou little, etc?
q.d. No such matter: and so it agrees with Mat. 2.6. Or thus: And thou
Bethlehem Ephrata, it is a small thing to be among the Princes of Judah: Out of
thee shall come a Ruler, etc. q. d thou have a dignity above this, and above
them all, in that out of thee shall come a Ruler, etc. Take tsagnir in the
Neuter gender, (as Scultetus after Osiander, (...).
and Forster does) and then the ^eeming difference betwixt the Prophet and
Evangelist is taken away. Some make St. Matthew to relate the words of the
Scribes to Herod, as they had varied the Text before him. But we find not that
they are any where taxed for altering or corrupting the Text; but for
misinterpreting it only, Mat. 5. Besides that, they were by their office
Text-men, to look to the letter of the Scripture, and to keep it pure, 1 Cor. 1
20. where they are distinguished from teachers of traditions, and teachers of
Allegories.

yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me] that is, to God the Father: that
we may know that the coming of Christ in the flesh, was a plot of Gods own
contriving. He came not by c^^^ce, but by counsel: him has God the Father
sealed, anointed and appointed to the work. Joh. 6.27.
This is comfortable to consider of.

that is to be Ruler in Israel] Matthew rendereth it, a Captain that shall feed
my people Israel, Mat. 2.6. See the Note there.

whose goings forth have been from of old] This is spoken of Christ's eternal
generation, which none can declare, Esaias 53.8. What is Gods name, and what is
his Sons name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30.4. The Scripture usually speaks
of this grand Mystery by way of circumlocution. It is here spoken of in the
Plural number for the excellency of it. Adoro pl^ni^udinem scripturarum. Aug.
In this Text then we have a description of Christ, in his natures and offices.
See the like, Romans 1.3, 4. and adore the fullness of the Scriptures.

Verse 3. Therefore will he give them up] As a little before the day springs,
it is darker then ordinary: so before the dayspring from on high visited Gods
people, they were under very hard and heavy pressures and miseries: whereby
their desires after him were increased and ineagered. The enemy oppressed them,
by Gods permission, yea by his active providence: that they might pant after a
Savior, and sigh out with old Jacob their father, Genesis 49.18. O Lord, I have
waited for thy salvation.

until the time that she which travelleth has brought forth] She, that is,
the Virgin Mary, say some: Or, she, that is, say others, the afflicted Church,
according to chap. 4.9, 10. See the Notes there. She must have a time of
travel, of trouble, before she can bring forth, and be delivered. Luther says
well, that the Church is haeres crucis, and that every Christian is a Crucian:
we must suffer before we can reign, and bear the cross, or ere we wear the
crown.

Then the remnant of his brethren] i. e. the converted Gentiles, whom Christ is
not ashamed to call his brethren, Heb. 2.11, 12. shall return unto the children
of Israel] shall be proselyted, and conjoined to the elect Jews, that there may
be one sheepfold under one shepherd. And the Lord shall be king over all the
earth: In that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one, Zech. 4.9. See
the Note there.

Verse 4. And he shall stand and feed (or, rule) in the strength of the Lord]
He shall stand, and none shall be able to stir him: there shall be lifting at
his government, but it stands firm and fixed. Earthly Monarchies have their
times, and their turns: their ruin, as well as their rise. The Roman Empire
fell under the weight of its own greatness. The Turkish, although it be indeed
very strong, yet is it by many probably thought to be on the declining hand.
But Christ shall stand, when all earthly greatness shall lie in the dust. And
He shall feed his flock in the strength of the Lord: neither shall any ravenous
Lion, or grievous Wolf, pluck them out of his hand; because He and the Father
are one, Joh. 10.39. and God has laid help on one that is mighty, Psalm. 89 19.

and in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God,] that is, by the power of
Gods word, called his name, Acts 9 15. and elsewhere. This word has a singular
majesty in it, whereby it aweth and affects men's consciences, to the
propagating of Christ's kingdom: viz when it is accompanied with the Spirit of
God, called his strength in the former clause. And that these ever go together,
in all the subjects of Christ's kingdom, see Esaias 59 21. As for me, this is my
Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon them, and my word
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds s^ed, says the Lord,
from henceforth and for ever.

for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.] Now, that is, ere long:
in Gods due time, which often seems long, because we are short; apt to antedate
the promises, in regard of the accomplishment, to limit the Holy One of Israel,
and to set him a time, to set his Sun by our dial, Jer. 8 20. help they would
have that Summer at furthest. But as God never fails in his own time, so he
seldom comes at ours: We must live by faith, Hab. 2.2. and stay Gods leisure,
as David did for the kingdom, and those in Esther, for deliverance. Gods
promises will at length take their way over all Alps of opposition: but we
have need of patience etc. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10 36, 37.

Verse 5. And this man shall be the peace] The man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
that man, that shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest: as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land, Esaias 32.2. Winds and tempests will arise, and that upon the
Church; Assyrians, and Babylonians, ( Nimrods brats) will invade, and infest
her: but that famous He aforementioned shall be her peace, her Prince of
peace, Esaias 9.6. who gives her pacem omnimodam, peace internal, external,
eternal, called by the Apostle life and peace, Romans 8.7. This peace, peace, as
Esaias calls it, chap. 26 3. that is, a multiplied, renewed, continued peace:
this peace Regionis and Religionis, of Country, and of Conscience, as God has
promised, and Christ has purchased. He merited, and made it through the blood
of his Cross, Col. 1.20. Esaias 53.5. Ephesians. 2.16. And hence it was, that as he
was brought from heaven, with that song of peace, Luke 2.14. so he returned up
again, with that farewell of peace, Joh. 14.27. left to the world the doctrine
of peace, Ephesians. 2.17. whose Ministers are messengers of peace^ R^m. 10 15.
whose followers are the children of peace, Luke 10.6 whose unity is in the bond
of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. and whose duty is the study of peace, Romans 12.18 and to
whom God has promised, I will give peace in your land, etc. And ye shall chase
your enemies, etc. If any ask, Lev. 25.6, 7.
how peace, and pursuit of enemies can consist? It is easily answered. You
shall have civil peace amongst your selve, and besides an ability to quell, and
quiet foreign enemies. Or, you shall have peace: and if it hap that war arise,
you shall have the better in batte^^ If the Assyrian come into your land, he
shall be a loser by it: if he tread in your palaces, he shall retreat with
shame, and defeatment, as it befell Sennacherib.

Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds] that is, a competent number
of Chieftains and Champions, with their victorious forces, which shall repel
the enemies, and secure the Church, Christo duce and auspice Christo, under
Christ the Arch shepherd. This some understand of the Apostles, those anointed,
or authorized Ones, (as the word here signifies) the weapons of whose warfare
were not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strongholds,
2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and bringing in, not the heads, but hearts of those whom they
had subdued: as Paul did of Sergius Paulus, the Proconsul, Acts 13.9. where
also he is first called Paul, in memory (belike) of those first spoils he
brought into the Church. By shepherds here, are meant (says Gualther) the
Ministers and Preachers of the word, who feed, defend, and watch over the
flock. By principal men, Magistrates, endued with that free, (or, as the
Chaldee has it) kingly spirit, Psalm. 51.12. to decree, and act for the good of
the Church. Such shepherds, in the time of the Assyrian war, were Esaias,
Micha, Joel, etc. such principal men, were Hezekias, and Eliakim, Isa. 22.
etc. Such after the captivity were, Ezra, Haggee, Zachariah, Malachi,
Zorobabel, Nehemiah, Judas Macchabeus, etc. Qui nutantem remp. and Ecclesiam
suis consilijs, and fortibus gestis fulserunt, who under-propped and kept up
the tottering Church, and Commonwealth by their prayers, counsels, and valiant
achievements, both before and since the days of Christ upon earth.

Verse 6. And they shall wast the land of Assyria,] Heb. They shall eat it
down, as shepherds do pastures with their flocks. Pascere is put for perdere,
says Calvin: they shall leave nothing there safe or sound, but either bend, or
break the Churches enemies, bring them to Christ, by the sword of Gods word, or
utterly ruin them by temporal slaughters. Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum.

Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian] It is Christ that delivers his,
what instruments soever he please to make use of, Luke 1.71. 1 Cor. 15.24. an^
he must have the praise of it. The Grecians thankfully acknowledged to Jupiter
their deliverance from the Persians, wrought by Themistocles; and therehence
called him, (...): as the Romans for like cause Sosp^tator, presenting a Palm
to him, and sacrificing a white Ox: Live. lib. 6. d. 3.
^o acknowledging, it was his power, whereby the conquest was achieved. Our
Edw. 3. after his victory at Po^^^ers, (where he took the French king Anno
1356.) took speedy order, by S^mon Archbishop of Canterbury, that eight days
together should be spent in giving God the thanks and glory How much more
should we praise him for spiritual deliverances, Polyd. Virg. lib. 19.
from sin, Satan, the world, etc. and consecrate our selves wholly to his
service, since Servati simus ut serviamus, Luke 1.74. deliverance commands
obedience, Ezra 9.14.

Verse 7. And the remnant of Jacob] The remnant according to the election of
grace, Romans 11.5. these are but a few in comparison, as a remnant to the whole
piece, or an hand-full to an house-full: but they shall increase and multiply,
by Gods blessing upon them, as is here set forth by two similitudes. First, for
their propagation and multiplication, the Prophet compares them to the dew,
which is engendered and distilled from heaven immediately. Therefore also Psalm.
110.3. new converts are compared to dew, and Gods begetting them, to the womb
of the morning, See M. Tho. Goodw. fastserm. Apr. 27. 1642.
when overnight the earth was dry. Secondly, for their growth and increase, he
compares it to the sprouting up of herbs and grass in the wildernesses, where
man comes not, and so their springing tarrieth not for man, nor waits for
the sons of men, for them to come with their watering-pots to nourish them
(as herbs in gardens do) but these have showers from heaven, that give the
increase. I the Lord do keep my vineyard, I will water it every moment, Esaias
27.3. There is an honor due to Gods Ministers, 1 Thessalonians. 5 13. but the word
only must be ^^^^fied, Act. 13.48. and Christ earnestly entreated, that as of
old the Manna ^^me down with the dew, which covered the Manna (whence that
expression, hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17.) so He himself who is the bread of life,
would descend into us, by the word of his grace, and fill us with the fruits of
righteousness: that he would rigare and recreare, refresh and cherish our
hearts, as the dew from heaven does the dry and fady fields.

Verse. 8. And the remnant of Jacob -- as a Lion among the beasts of the
forrest] The saints shall prosper and do great exploits, as being endued with
an invincible force of the spirit, making them as so many Cuer-de-lions: or as
Chrysostom says of Peter, that he was like a man made all of fire walking
among stubble. What Lion-like men were all the Apostles, those white horses
upon which the Lord Christ rode about the world conquering and to conquer? Rev.
6.2. That lion of the tribe of Judah Rev. 5.5. had put upon them of his own
spirit: Ioh. 1.16.
and of his fullness bestowed upon them grace for grace: hence their
transcendent zeal and courage for the truth. Steven was amongst his
countrymen the Jews, as a Lion among the beasts of the forest. So were in
their several generations Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Luther, Latimer, Farel
etc. that noble army of Martyrs: One of them told the Persecutours that they
might pluck the heart out of his body: but never pluck the truth out of his
heart. Another, Act. and Mon. 1430. 1438.
that the heavens should sooner fall, then he would turn. A third, that if
every hair of his head were a man, he would suffer death in the opinion and
faith that he was now in. A fourth said, Can I die but once for Christ? And
generally, the valor of the patient, and the savagenesse of the persecutours
strove together; till both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and
astonishment in beholders and readers; and in some, effectual conversion, as in
Justin Martyr, in Calberius, in those 400. said to be converted at the
Martyrdom of Cecilia, and lastly in Silvester the executioner at the
martyrdom of Simon Laloe at Dyion in France: where seeing the great faith and
constancy of that heavenly Martyr, he was so compuncted with repentance, Act.
and Mon. fol. 829.
and fell into such despair of himself, that, after much ado, being comforted
and converted, he removed with all his family to the church of Geneva. But what
a silly conceit is that of the ^ewes at this day, that when Messiah comes, they
shall be these Lions among the Gentiles in the midst of all other people to
tread them down, and to tear in pieces without rescue? and what a true
character has a late writer given of them, that they are a light, aeriall, S.
H. Blount.
and fanaticall-brain'd people; and easily apt to work themselves into the
fools paradise of a sublime dotage?

Verse 9. Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries] q. d. Adversaries
thou shall be sure of, O my Church: but thou shall have the better of them.
Thou shall keep footing still under the stan^ard of the cross and prevail.
Sub militia crucis. Calv.
The mountain of the house of the Lord shall overtop all other mountains of
worldly power chap. 4.1 It shall be as that mountain not far from Arbela (where
the Empire of the world was won and lost in one day) called Nicatorium by
Alexander the great, as a constant trophee of that famous victory he there gat
over Darius. As she is highest in the favor of God, so she shall be highest in
her self: (...). Strabo.
and her enemies shall be found liars unto her. Her hand shall be lifted up,
and fall very heavily upon her adversaries: if not sooner, yet at utmost at the
Resurrection: the upright shall have dominion over them in that morning Psalm.
49.14. the Church shall shine as the Sun in his strength, when her enemies
shall be in that place that is fittest for them, even the lowest place, the
footstool of Christ. Meanewhile she conquereth th^n when she is conquered, (as
Christ overcame as well by patience as by power) and is sure not to be shivered
though shaken, not to be drowned though dowsed over head and ears in the
waters of affliction.

Niteris incassum Christi submergere navem:
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.
That ship may be tossed (says One) not shipwrackt whereof Christ is the
Pilot, the scripture the Compass, the promise the tacklings, hope the Anchour,
faith the cable, the holy Ghost the wind^, and holy affections the sails
filled with heavenly graces. Such a soul sails safely: and will neither fall
upon the soft sands of presumption, nor hard rocks of despair.

Verse 10. And it shall come to pass in that day Viz. of Christ's power and
kingdom Psa. 110.3. The word day here signifies non spatium diurnum, sed
diuturnum, ac a Deo destinatum, says Danaeus, not the space of 24. hours, but
a long time, yet certain and set by God.

that I will cut off thy horses out of thee] for the which thou have been
trading with Egypt: and in which thou trustest more then in me. Some trust in
horses, and some in charrets etc. I will therefore cut off both, I will take
away thine earthly idol; and that in much mercy to thee: that in quietness and
confidence may be thy strength Esaias 30.15. and ver. 7. your strength is to sit
still, or your Egypt is to sit still, q. d. by sitting still you shall have an
Egypt (the same word Rahab signifies strength and Egypt) by being without
their horses, you shall do better then when you had them, and thought your
selves simply the better or safer for them. See Zach. 9.10.

and I will destroy thy charets] That other prop and supposed help I will pull
from thee: that thou may not trust to such uncertainties that cannot save:
but in the living God who gives us all things richly to enjoy 1 Timothy 6.17.
Trust is Gods jewel: and of all things, he cannot endure to be robbed of it, or
wronged in it by creature confidence: for it gives him the sovereignty Judge.
9.15. and sets the crown on his head: and the contrary.

Verse 11. And I will cut off the cities of thy land] thy fenced cities, and
places of strength, for like reason as before, that thou may look upon my
name alone as a strong tower, and thereto run and be safe Prove. 18.10. that
thou may hover and cover under my wings Psa. 91.1, 2. and there hold thee as
secure as in a tower of brass, or town of war. Blessed be the Lord (says
David, who could not be safe in Keilah that had gates and bars) for he has
showed me his mavelous loving kindness as in a strong city, Psalm. 31.21. The
tower of Shechem saved not those that ran to it Judge. 9. The strong-hold of
Zion could not secure the Jehusites, that in the height of their pride scorned
David and his host, that laid siege to it 2 Samuel 5.6, 7. Belshazzar and his
Babylonians bare themselves so bold upon the strength of their city, and
provision laid in for 20. years, if need were, (as Xenophon testifies) that
they reproached the Persians that besieged them, and derided their attempts as
to no purpose: yet were shortly after made a prey to the enemy. Arimazes having
ga^ison'd a very strong and steep rock in the Sogdian country with 30000.
Plut: in Alex. Curt. lib. 7.
men, sent to Alexander the great (who demanded it) to know whether he could
fly or not? But the next day he was taken together with his strong hold, and
n^^^ed to a cross. God delights to confute men in their confidences: that
those that are his, may run to the Rock of ages Isa. 26.4. to that Arx roboris
of his holy Name, which alone is impregnable, inexpugnable. The Spaniards
called their Navy in 88. the Invincible Armado: but it proved otherwise: and
that upon Saint James his day, whom they count their Patron, their
Tutelary-Saint. It is not unlawful to have cities and strongholds etc. but to
confide in them, by rising up to a corky frothy hope when we have them: or to
sit down in a faithless sullen discontent and despondency when we want them;
this is to make flesh our arm, and so to incurr that heavy curse Ier. 17.5.
God will cut off all occasions of so doing from those whom he loves, as here
he promises: and as accordingly he performed to this people, after their
return from Babylon, and especially a little before the coming of Christ in
the flesh, when they were reduced by Pompey into a province of the Roman Empire.

Verse 12. And I will cut off witch-crafts etc.] As before God had p^omised to
take away such things as in themselves are not evil, but only by our abuse: so
here he will also remove from his people things simply evil, and unlawful,
such as are witch-crafts, idolatry etc. that he may make way for mercy which he
is ready to give, (...) Inde (...) fascino.
were they but fit to receive it. The word here rendered witchcrafts has the
signification of changing or turning: and is used for unlawful divelish arts
and Artisans. It is also applied to false teachers and their juglings Gal. 3.1.
Rev. 18.23. See a like promise Zech. 13.2. with the Note there. See Mal. 3.5.
with the Note.

and thou shall have no more sooth-sayers] Or starr-gazers, Fuller. Misc. lib.
1. cap. 16.
diviners; fortunetellers. One derivation of the word clepeth them Nebulones or
Knaves: as those that undertake to foretell future things ex nebulis by the
clouds, planets, stars, by calculating nativities, and the like unlawful
practices of Judiciary Astrology, Necromancie, Pyromancie, Oneiromancie,
Aruspicie, Sor^ilegie, and other diabolical Arts of that nature. The Ephesians
were much addicted to such wicked practices: hence the proverb (...) for the
black art. The Samaritans also, Act. 8. And hence that malicious slander of the
Jews, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, that is, one that deals
with the devil: for otherwise they knew, that Christ was no Samaritan, but a
Galilean, as they called him in scorn, Joh. 8.48.
in truth a Bethlehemite, as verse 2. The Jews themselves are taxed, Esaias 2.6.
that they were Soothsayers, like the Philistines; and told, that God had
therefore forsaken them, or sent them away into captivity. See more against
this sort of sin and sinners, Esaias 44.24, 25, 26. and 47.12, 13, 14. Jer.
10.2, 2. Dan. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. But especially Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. where we have
these five Arguments (as One well observes) against Astrologicall, and other
unlawful predictions. First, that all such are abomination to the Lord, verse
2. Secondly, that for such Arts, the Canaanites were driven out, verse 12.
Thirdly, that unless men cast away the use of the said Arts, they cannot be
perfect, that is, upright and sincere with God, verse 13. Fourthly, that godly
men must differ from Canaanites and Heathens, in the abandoning such arts,
verse 14. Lastly, that instead of such ways of prediction, the Lord raises up
Christ, the great Prophet, to foretell unto them what is meet for them to
foreknow, verse 15. with Act. 3.23. To seek to know more, is condemned for
curiosity and rashness, by Christ himself, in his own disciples, Act. 1.7. it
derogateth from the glory of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: it is to go a whoring from Christ, Lev. 20.6. and is
therefore in this Text fitly yoked with idolatry: It is here also reckoned
among those things that must be cut off, if Christ's kingdom shall be set up
amongst us. So that if there were no other text of Scripture against that
wickedness but this alone, it were sufficient.

Verse 13. Thy graven images also will I cut off] Sorcery and Idolatry are
fitly coupled here and elsewhere: for they commonly go together, as in the Pope
and his Clergy. See Rev. 9.21. and 21.8. as also in the Canaanites,
Philistines, and other Heathens. True it is, that the Temples at Rome were
without images for 170 years after it was built: that the Lacedaemonians would
not endure pictures or images, lest by them they should be distracted: that the
Turks and Jews both, at this day, do abhor Christian Religion, for the
abominable idolatry they see among Papists. For since the captivity of Babylon,
the graven images and statues have been so cut off from the Jews, that they
would never be drawn to worship the work of their hands. They have a saying
amongst them to this day, Moses Gerand.
That no punishment befalls them, wherein there is not an ounce of that
golden calf, they once made in the wilderness. Having paid therefore for their
learning, they abhor idols, Romans 2.22. and count it sacrilege, as Plutarch
did, to worship by images. The Papists should do so likewise: and not say as
their Vasquez (unable to answer our arguments does) that the second
Commandment belonged to the Jews only: or bring such proofs for their
idolatry, that the images themselves (if they were sensible) would blush to
hear repeated.

Verse 14. And I will pluck up thy groves, etc.] wherein thou placest a part of
thy happiness, (as the Hebrew word imports) and have an over-high opinion of
them, because anciently frequented by the Fathers, before the Law. But it
should have been considered, that it was but a will worship at best; yea, that
God had flatly forbidden the planting of groves, Deuteronomy. 16.21. as things in use
among Pagans, for honor, either of some God, or some great man's ghost, which
was thought to dwell there. Nulli certa domus, lucis habitamus opacis. Virg.
Aeneid.
The worshippers of Priapus, (that shame) when they had ended their sacrifice,
stepped into a grove hard by the altar, and there like bruit heasts,
promiscuously satisfied their lusts: thereby as they conceived, best pleasing
their god.

So will I destroy thy cities.] Or, thine enemies: and this will be the end, or
fruit of that forementioned reformation. Mr. Fox observes, that in K. Edw. the
sixts time, the English put to flight their enemies in Muscleborough field,
Acts and Mon.
in the selfsame day and hour wherein the Reformation, enjoined by Parliament,
was put in execution at London, by burning of idolatrous images.

Verse 15. And I will execute vengeance in anger] upon those that refuse to be
reformed, that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lords Jesus Christ,
2 These. 1.8. Such as were the Jews enemies, the primitive persecutours, the
stubborn Papists, some of whom have professed, that they would rather take
part with the Turks then with the Lutherans: as some rigid Lutherans again have
protested openly, that they would return to the Papacy, rather then to admit
ever of that Sacramentary and Predestinary pestilence (as they call it) of the
Calvinists. But what a sad story is that related by Mr. Buroughs, who had it
from a worthy Minister of those parts; Burr. on Hos. 1. p. 465.
that at Hamborough was not long since held a consultation by some learned
Lutherans concerning the cause and cure of Germanies calamities: and where it
was concluded, that Germany suffered so much in these late wars, because
their images in Churches were not adorned enough, which therefore they would
presently procure done. Had they consulted this Text, they might soon have seen
their mistake, and bethought them of better. But Lord, when thine hand is
lifted up, Esaias 26.11.
they will not see: howbeit they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy
toward thy people: yea, their ears shall be opened, and their instruction
sealed, Job 33.16. that they may be accounted worthy to escape that vengeance,
that shall be executed in anger and fury upon the Heathen, that have not heard
the joyful sound, but, as so many sea monsters, have with a deaf ear passed by
the doctrine of salvation, the Gospel of peace.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. HEar ye now what the Lord says,] Exordium breve est, sed plane
patheticum, says Gualther. This is a short, but pithy and patheticall preface;
wherein he wooes their attention: Audite quaeso, Hear, I pray you. Ministers
are spokesmen for Christ, and must therefore give good words: and yet
remembering on whose errand they come, it is required that they be found
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2.

Arise, contend thou] Surge, age, O Micah! Debate thou Gods cause against this
rebellious and ungrateful people, as it were in judgment: calling all, even
the insensible creatures to be judges. See the like, Deuteronomy. 32.1. Esaias 1.2. Mic.
1.2. (for these two Prophets have many things common) and be sensible, that
some sit as senseless before a Preacher still, as the seats they sit on,
pillars they lean to, dead bodies they tread upon: so that we have need (as One
did once in my hearing) to call to the walls and windows to hear the word of
the Lord. This heavy ear is noted for a singular judgment, Mat. 13.13, 14.
Esaias 30.8, 9. The Philosopher was angry with his Boeotians: telling them that
they had not their name for naught, since their ears were Ox-ears, and that they
were dull creatures, and incapable of counsel. Demosthenes also for like cause,
called upon his contrymen of Athens, to get their ears healed: and Diogenes
used to tell his tale to the statues and images, that he might inure himself to
lose his labor, as he had so often done, in speaking to the people. Page 18.
Let us, to the wearing of our tongues to the stumps, preach and pray never so
much, men will on in sin, said blessed Bradford, in that excellent Sermon of
his of Repentance. We cry till we are hoarse (says another rare Preacher) we
speak till we spit forth our lungs: but all to as little purpose as Bede did,
when he preached to an heap of stones. Asine quispiam narrabat fabulam: at ille
movebat aures. But shall people thus carry it away, and God lose his sweet
words? Never think it. Those that will not hear the word, shall hear the rod,
verse 9. of this chapter: and if they could but see their misery, they would do
as the Prophet requires, cut their hair and cast it away, under the sense of
the horror of Gods indignation, Jer. 7.27, 29. they would beg of God a hearing
ear, (which is as an ear-ring of gold, Prove. 25.12.) and beseech him to make
the bore bigger, that his word might enter: yea to draw up the ears of their
souls to the ears of their bodies, that one saving sound might pierce both at
once. Let him that has an ear to hear, hear: or if yet any think good to
forbear, let him forbear, Ezekiel. 3.27. but he will certainly repent it. He that
now gives God occasion to call to the hills, etc. shall one day tire the deaf
mountains, saying, Fall on me, hide me, dash and quash me in a thousand pieces.
O that I might trot directly to hell, and not stay to hear that dreadful
Discedite, Go ye cursed!

Verse 2. Hear O ye mountains the Lords controversie] Although the people would
neither hear nor obey God, the Prophet does: and, according to command, he
summoneth the mountains to hear and testify: the Lord seeming to say unto him,
as once he did to Ezekiel; But thou son of man, be not thou rebellious like
that rebellious house: but hear what I say unto thee, and do it. It might seem
to him a senseless thing to cite the mountains, etc. But he knew that if God
command a thing, to argue or debate upon it were bold presumption; to search
the reason of it, proud curiosity, to detrect or disobey it, flat rebellion. To
the mountains and foundations of the earth he applies himself: happly with like
mind, and in like manner as the Host of Nola did to the Churchyard: and there
called at the graves of the dead; Oh ye good men of Nola, come away; Anton. de
Guevara.
for the Roman Censor calls for your appearance: for he knew not where to call
for a good man alive.

and ye strong foundations of the earth] Those roots of the mountains, Jon.
2.7. yet not so strong, but God can shake them, Job 9.5, 6. Nah. 1.5, 6. and
that by so weak a creature as air, gotten under ground, and seeking a vent. He
can lift them off their foundations, Deuteronomy. 32.22. and carry them to another
place to hear his controversy, as he did the hill in Herefordshire, Anno 1571.
Camden. de B^^tan. fol. 473. Polan. synt.
and that other in the territories of Bern, that removing out of his place in
an earthquake, covered a whole village, that had 90 families in it. See the
Note on Amos 1.1.

for the Lord has a controversy with his people,] See the Note on Hos. 4.1.
and learn to tremble before this great God, who sits upon the circle of the
earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, Esaias 40.22. which he can
shake out of their place at pleasure, and send them packing to hell. O consider
what a fearful thing it is to be at controversy with God: and to have him
both our Accuser, witness, and Judge. O the terror of the Lord at that great
and last day of the world! Vtinam ubique de hoc judi^io disseretur! Then shall
they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us (but they shall reply, Luke 23
30.
we are witnesses against you for your detestable unthankfulness) and to the
hills, Cover us, but they shall echo out Cover us; for who can dwell with this
devouring fire? who can abide these everlasting burnings?

and he will plead with Israel.] At which time they shall find, that an empty
title, has but an empty comfort; and that tribulation and anguish shall be on
every soul of man that does evil: but of the Jew first, because of his
privilege, Romans 2.9.
and then of the Gentile. None so deep in utter darkness, as those that once
were Angels of light. Let us all pray with holy David, Enter not into judgment
with thy servant, O Lord, etc. And with Job, If thou should contend with me,
Psalm. 143.2. Joh 9.2, 3. Dan. 9.7, 8.
I could not answer thee one of a thousand. And with Daniel, O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee: but to us confusion of face, because we have
sinned against thee.

Verse 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee?] Or rather, what have I not
done, to do thee good? O generation, see ye the word of the Lord, Jer. 2.31.
and not hear it only: was ever any thing more evidencing and evincing then
what I now allege? Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness?
May I not well say unto you, as He did to his ungrateful countrymen; What?
Are ye weary of receiving so many benefits from one man? But say; What hurt
have I ever done you? Themistocles.
and wherein have I wearied you, or been troublesome to you? unless it be by
daily loading you with loving-kindnesses, Psalm. 68.19. and bearing with your
provocations? Forgive me that injury, 2 Cor. 12.13.

Testify against me,] Put me in remembrance, let us plead together, declare
thou against me, that thou may be justified, Esaias 43.26. See here, first,
with what meekness, and mildness God proceeds against sinners, so Esaias 5.3.
Judicate quaeso. See, next, that God is content, for our better conviction, to
submit his courses unto scanning, and to bring his proceedings with us to a
trial, before he pass sentence; that he might be justified when he speaks,
and cleared when he judges, Psalm. 51.4. Here he wills them to plead the
cause with him, as it were at even hand; offering to make answer to whatsoever
they could object, or lay to his charge. Seipsum quasi reum sistit. He makes
himself the Defendant, Gualther.
and bids them put in their Bill of complaint against him, freely and without
fear. This is Stupenda sane dignatio, a wonderful condescension indeed. Should
he use martial law against us, M. Neh. Rog.
and as soon as ever we offend (like Draco) write his laws in blood upon us (as
One well says) it were but just and right. But for him to reason and plead
with us about the justice of his cause before he proceeds to judgment, this
deserves admiration and acknowledgement in the highest degree. O the depth!

Verse 4. For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt] Here God twits them
with his former favors: which he never does, but in case of brutish
unthankfulness. Now there was brutish, and worse. To render good for evil is
divine: good for good is humane: evil for evil is brutish: but evil for good
devilish. This makes God, contrary to his custom, upbraid people with what he
has done for them: and angrily call for his love tokens back again, as Hos.
2.9. For their deliverance out of the Egyptian servitude how great a mercy it
was, see the Note on Hos. 11.1. such as they were again and again charged
never to forget Deuteronomy. 6.12. and 5.15. and 26.5. to 12. How much more bound are
we to God for our Redemption by Christ? for what is Pharaoh to Satan? Egypt to
this present evil world? Egyptian bondage to fins slavery? Seeing then that
our God has given us such deliverance as this, should we again break his
commandments etc. Well might the hills and mountains testify against such a
monstrous unthankfullnesse, and disingenuity.

and redeemed thee out of the house of servants] Gradatim progreditur, says
Calvin. It was something to be brought out of the land of Egypt, a most
superstitious place: where they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to
the similitude of the image of a corruptible man (for they defiled their king
Osiris) and of birds (for they worshipped the hawk and Ibis) and of
foure-footed beasts (for they worshipped an ox, Romans 1.23.
a dog, a cat, a swine) and of creeping things, for they worshipped the
Crocodile, Ichneumon etc. yea they worshipped plants and pot herbs. Hence the
Poet Felices gentes, Iuven.
quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina --
To be brought out therefore from amongst such hateful Idolaters was no small
favor, lest they should smell of their superstitions, as Mica's mother did
after all that ayring sin in the desert Judge. 17.3. and Jeroboam, by being
there awhile, had learned calf-worship: hence that strickt charge never to make
leagne with them. But to be redeemed out of the house of servants, was more:
out of the iron furnace Deuteronomy. 4.20. Ier. 11.4. where they wrought night and day
in latere and luto Exodus 1. in setting up those famous Pyramids, and
treasure-cities for Pharaoh, where they served with rigor, Exodus 1.13. their
lives were made bitter with hard bondage ver. 14. till God withdrew their
shoulders from the burden, and their hands did leave the pots Psalm. 81.6. till
they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a
paved-work of a Saphire-stone Exodus 24.10. to show, that God had now changed
their condition, their bricks made in their bondage to Saphirs. Confer Esaias
54.11. and consider what God has done for us, by bringing us into the glorious
liberty of his own children, who were once the devils drudges and dromedaries,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures Tit. 3.3. which gave laws to our members
Romans 7. and held us under in a brutish bondage, much worse then the Heathens
mil-house, the Turks galleys, Bajazets iron-cage, the Indian mines, or Egyptian
furnace. For there, if they did their task they escaped stripes; but here, let
men do the devil never such doughty service, they are sure of scourges and
scorpions after all, armies and changes of sorrows and sufferings: terrors
and torments, without any the least hope of ever either mending or ending. This
should make us lift up many an humble, joyful, and thankful heart to our most
powerful Redeemer: saying with St. Paul, Now to the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17.

and I sent before thee, Moses, Aaron and Miriam] As three principal guides,
and Miriam for one: who did her part among the women Exodus 15.20. and, having a
prophetic spirit, became a singular instrument in the hand of God who spoke by
her Number. 12.2. But her weak head was not able to bear such a cup of honor,
without being intoxicated: which caused her father to spit in her face Number.
12.2, 14. Her death is recorded in scripture Number: 20.1. but not her age, as is
Sarahs Genesis 23.1. Some have observed that God thought not fit to tell us of the
length of the life of any woman in Scripture but Sarah, to humble that sex. But
as souls have no sexes, so of some women (such as were Miriam, Deborah, the
Virgin Mary, Priscilla, Blandina, the Lady Jane Gray, Q. Elizabeth etc.) it may
be said, that in them, besides their sex, there was nothing woman-like or weak:
as if (what Philosophy says) the souls of these noble creatures had followed
the temperament of their bodies, which consist of a frame of rarer rooms, of a
more exact composition, then man's does. It is possible that Miriam might (till
that matter of emulation betwixt her and Moses his wife fell out) be as
helpful to Moses and Aaron, as Nazianzens mother was to his father; Non solum
adjutricem in pietate, sed etiam doctricem and gubernatricem. Nazian. Epitap.
pat.
not a help-fellow only, but a doctresse and governesse.

Verse 5. O my people remember now what Balak] There must be a Recognition of
Gods mercies, or else there will neither follow Estimation, nor Retribution:
Else we that should be as temples of his praises, shall be as graves of his
benefits. Our souls are naturally like filthy ponds, wherein fish die soon,
and frogs live long; rotten stuff is remembered, memorable mercies are
forgotten; whereas the soul should be as an holy Ark, the memory like the pot
of Manna preserving holy truths as the Law; and special blessings, as Aarons
rod, fresh and flourishing. This Israel did not, and are therefore justly
blamed Psalm. 106.7, 13, 21. and here again reminded of one signal mercy among
many, that they might take notice of the enemies malignity, Gods benignity, and
their own indignity and ingratitude, that parching wind, that dries up the
fountain of divine favors. Ventus urens and exsiccans.


what Balack king of Moab consulted] Joshua says, that he arose and fought
against Israel chap. 24.9. that is, he had a good mind to have fought, but he
did not because he durst not. So Esth. 8.7. Haman is said to have laid his hand
upon the Jews, because he intended and attempted such a matter. They, that is
the Sortilegi or Lot-sorcerers, with whom, Balack-like, he consulted, cast Pur,
that is, the lot before Haman from day to day, and from month to month: viz.
Esth. 3.7.
to find out what month or day would be lucky for the accomplishment of his
intended massacre of the Jews: but before that black-day came, Mordecai was
advanced, and Haman hanged. Now, as there, by the special providence of God
overruling the superstition of that wicked wreth, way was made for the
preservation of Gods people: So was it here. Balack consulted, and Balaam
answered him: that is, he was as willing to curse as the other would have had
him, but might not: for God would not harken unto him, but blessed his people
still, and delivered them out of his hand Josh. 24.10. Yea though at length he
was resolved to curse howsoever, and therefore went not forth as at other times
to seek for enchantments, but set his face toward the wilderness, as if he
would do the deed, whatever came of it Number. 24.1. Yet his endeavor was
fruitless and frustrate. So shall the malicious attempts of Rome and Hell be
against the Reformed religion and the Professors thereof (whom the Romish
Balaam banns and curses with bell book and candle (at the instigation of the
Spanish Balak, with his factours the Jesuits) so long as they adhere to him and
pray as Psalm. 109.26, 27, 28, 29. Help me O Lord my God: O save me according to
thy mercy. That they may know, that this is thy hand: that thou Lord have done
it. Let them curse, but bless thou: When they arise, let them be ashamed, but
let thy servants rejoice etc. Salvation is of the Lord: his blessing is upon
his people.

from Shittim unto Gilgal] Oration elliptica: q. d. Remember what I did for you
at Shittim in the wilderness, and so all the way until you came into the
promised land, even to Gilgal, where you first pitched tent Josh. 5.8, 9, 10.
At Shittim it was, where, by the pestilent counsel of Balaam (the devils
spelman) the Midianites outwitted them, by setting fair women before them as
a stumbling block Number. 25.1, 18. to draw them to those two sister-sins,
adultery and idoaltry. Then and there, Digni qui fu^ditus delerentur. Gualth.
the heads of the people were hanged up before the Lord against the Sun, and
some others; when as God might justly have cut them all off, and cast them away
from being a people before him. Nonne illic refulsit admirabilis Dei gratia?
says Calvin: was not this a miracle of Gods mercy?

that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord] i. e. the faithfulness and
goodness of God in keeping promise with your fathers, notwithstanding your
provocations. Or my righteous dealings with those fornicatours and adulterers,
whom I there judged: preserving the innocent, or penitent, till they came to
Gilgal, and onwards. Or that thou may know how just my complaint is of thee,
and mine action against thee. So Vatablus expounds it.

Verse 6. Wherewith shall I came before the Lord] This is vox populi the voice
of the people now convinced in part; or at least of some one for them. Praestat
herbam dare quam turpiter pugnare. Better yield then disgracefully hold out the
contest. God, say they has the better of us: neither need he now call upon
heaven and earth to arbitrate, nor on the mountains and strong foundations to
hear the quarrel, for we are self-condemned Tit. 3.11. Our own consciences
read the sentence against us, we have deserved to be destroyed: but oh what
may we do to avert and avoid his wrath? what shall we do that we might work the
works of God? Ioh. 6.28. Lo this is the guise of graceless men: feign they
would pacify God, and work themselves into his grace and favor by ceremonies
and frivolous businesses: yea they offer largely for a dispensation to live in
their sins, which they had as liefe be knocked of the head, as part with. Intere
a per flexuosos circuitus fing unt se ad Deum accedere, In loc.
a quo tamen semper cupiant esse remoti, says Calvin, they fetch a compass
about God, but care not to come near him. Heaven they would either steal if
they could, or buy at any hand, if they might: feign they would pass e coeno
ad coelum, a deliciis ad delicias from Dalilab's lap to Abraham's bosom: feign
they would (as One says) dance with the devil all day, and then sup with
Christ at night. They seem here very inquisitive and solicitous about their
souls health: they give the half-turn sed ad Deum usque non revertuntur but
they return not even to God: like a horse in a mill they move much, but remove
not at all: like those silly women 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. or as ants that run to and
fro about a molehill, but grow not greater.

and how my self before the high God] Or, shall I bow my self etc. will that,
or any like bodily exercise please him, or pacisy him? if cringing or crouching
will do it, if sackcloth and ashes, if hanging down the head and going softly,
if pennances and pilgrimagts etc. hypocrites do usually herein outdo the
upright. Does the Publican look with his eyes on the ground? the hypocritical
Jews will hang down their heads like bulrushes. Does Timothy weaken his
constitution by abstinence? the Pharisees will never give over till his
complexion be wholly withered and wanzed. Does Paul correct his body with milder
correction, as it were a blow on the cheek? the Jesuit will martyr his sides
with the severe discipline of scorpions. But although God must be glorified
with our bodies also 1 Cor. 6.20. and external service is required (what ever
the Swenkfeldians say to the contrary) yet Bodily exercise of it self profits
little 1 Timothy 4.8. and let those that brag off or bind upon their outward
worship of Christ consider, that the devil himself in the demoniack of Gadara
fell down and worshipped him. What comfort can there be in that which is common
to us with devils? who as they believe and tremble, so they tremble and
worship. The outward bowing is the body of the action; the disposition of the
soul, is the soul of it.

shall I come before him with burnt-offerings etc.] shall I prevent him, and
propiciate him with holocausts? shall I meet him marching against me, and thus
make my peace with him? The Jews were much in sacrifices, till they wearied
Gods soul therewith, and all his senses Esaias 1.13, 14, 15. but they were
sacrificing Sodomites ver. 10. they stuck in the bark, they pleased themselves
in the work done, not attending the manner, which either makes or marres every
action, and is mainely eyed by God: their devotions were placed more in the
massy materiality, then inward purity; and hence rejected David could tell
(through these Questionists could not) that God desired not sacrifice, further
then as thereby men were led to Christ; and that the sacrifices of God are a
contrite spirit Psalm. 51.16.17. that no burnt offering is acceptable, not calf
of a year old, unless laid on the low altar of a broken heat, which
sanctifies the sacrifice.

Verse 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of ramms] It was taken for a
maxim among all nations, that no man was to come before God empty-handed: nor
to serve him of free-cost. And although Lycurgus the Lacedemonian made a law,
that no man should be at very great charge for a sacrifice, lest he should grow
weary of Gods service: yet when the famous carver Phidias, advised the
Athenians to make the statue of Minerva rather of Marble, then of Ivory. 1.
because more durable (this passed with allowance.) 2. because less chargeable:
at the mention hereof, with infinite indignation they commanded him silence.
Pliny tells us, of Alexander the Great, that when, as being yet a youth, he
cast great store of frankincense upon the altar, and his Schoolmaster told
him, he must not be so liberal, till he had subdued the
frankincense-countreys: when once he had conquered Arabia, he sent his
schoolmaster a ship full of frankincense, largely exhorting him to worship the
gods therewith. Supersition is, for most part, not liberal only, but
prodigal; and no wonder, when as good works are by Bellarmine said to be
mercatura regni coelestis the price and purchase of heaven. Hence their
Churches are so stuffed with vowed presents, and memories, as at Loretto, Spec.
Europ.
and elsewhere, they are fain to hang their Cloisters, and Churchyards with
them. What would not men give, what will they not suffer, that they may be
saved? I would swim through a sea of brimstone, said One, that I might come to
heaven at last. But those that would buy heaven, and do offer as these here, a
bribe for a pardon, shall hear, Thy money perish with thee: And those that seek
to be saved by their works, Luther fitly calls, the Devils martyrs: They suffer
much, and take much pains to go to hell, they buy their damnation, as One says
the Pharisees did, when they gave Judas those thirty pieces, for which he sold
his salvation.

Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, etc?] The superstitious Jews
used, we know, to offer up their children in sacrifice to Moloch, or Saturn, 2
King. 17. and 21. and 23. and that, in an apish imitation of Abraham's offering
his son Isaac. Eusebius. praep. Evang. lib. 4. Diod. Sic. l. 20.
to the same Saturn the Phoenicians are said to have sacrificed the best of
they sons. So did the Carthaginians, as Diodorus Siculus testifies. And when
as they had for awhile left off so to do, and were overcome by Agathocles, they
(supposing that the gods were therefore angry with them, because they had not
done as formerly) slew 200. at once, at the altar, of their young Nobility, to
pacify the offended deity. Of like sort were Anammelech, and Adrammelech, the
gods of Sepharvaim, unto whom that people burnt their children in the fire, 2.
King. 17.13. And little better were our Ancestors, the old Brittones, who not
only sacrificed their strangers, but their children too, non ad honorem sed ad
injuriam religionis. Camd. Britan^
Here then the Prophet seems to speak by way of Concession, that he may show
these Questionists, how little it would avail them to sacrifice their children,
if such a thing were lawful to be done.

Verse 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good] i. e. What is right, just,
and acceptable to himself. He showed it by the light of Nature: for Aristotle
(Natures secretary) says, It is not likely that God is so well pleased with
the costlinesse of the sacrifices, as with the godliness of the sacrificers.
He has showed it much more by the light of Scripture: there he has told thee,
Arist. in Rheto^
what is the unum necessarium, One thing necessary; in comparison whereof all
other things are but by-businesses: what is the Totum hominis, the whole duty
of man, sc. to fear God, and keep his commandments, Eccles. 12.13. What is the
Bonum hominis, as here, yea, the Summum Bonum, or chiefest good of man,
attainable in this life; viz. Communion with God, and Conformity to God.

And what does the Lord require of thee] But thee? Quia in omni creatura
terrena nihil melius fecit te, ipse quaerit te a tu, quia in perdideras te, in
te, Aug. sermon. 136. de temp.
as Augustine elegantly paraphraseth this Text. In as much, as God has among
all earthly creatures, made nothing better then thee, therefore he requires
thee, of thee, etc.

But to do justly, and to love mercy] This is the sum of the second Table: as
that which follows, is of the first, to walk humbly with thy God. Here then
is a brief of the whole Bible, a little Bible, as the eleventh to the Hebrews,
is by One not unfitly called, A little Book of Martyrs. Do this and live: Do
this here enjoined, and thou shall never fall: yea, thou shall go gallantly
into heaven, as Saint Peter has it, 2 Epist. 1.10, 11. Certa semper sunt in
paucis, says Tertullian. Things simply necessaryk, whether to be believed or
practiced, are few in number, but many in virtue; in sight small, but great in
weight: like gold, which being solid, is contracted into a narrow room: but may
be drawn into so large an extent, that one angel may cover an acre of ground,
as the Naturalists have observed. To do justly, is the duty; not only of
Magistrates, whom God has entrusted with the administration of his earthly
kingdom, by the due execution of vindicative and remunerative justice, but also
of all other persons, in their server all places and stations, whose rule must
be that golden saying of our Savior, Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets, Mat.
7.12. See the Note there.

And to love mercy] This is more then to show mercy: for that a man may do, and
yet, for want of love, lose all, 1 Cor. 13. He must not only draw out his
sheaf, but his soul to the hungry, Esaias 58.10. nor distribute spiritual alms,
but do it out of deep affection, as Titus, 2 Cor. 7. he must be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.18. his mercy must flow from him,
as water does from the fountain, or light from the Sun: it must not be wrung
from him, as verjuyce from a crab, or as distilled water is forced out by the
heat of the fire. Let the love of Christ constrain us to look out some of his
receivers, (as David did Jonathans stock) to whom we may show mercy for his
sake. What though we be weak, yet if willing to show mercy, 2 Cor. 8.
God accepts according to that a man has, and not according to that he has
not. The widows mite is beyond the rich man's magnificence: because it came out
of a richer mind: The Apostle bids, Put on, as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, Col. 3.12. such as the Jailer had toward
Paul and Silas: such as the Samaritan had toward the wounded man by the
way-side: such as those primitive Christians had, who came to the Church, with
strong affections, with large contributions, Acts 4.34. The like is foretold of
Tyrus when converted, Esaias 23.18. and of Ethiopia, Psalm. 68.31. that she shall
hastily stretch her hands unto God, Heb. she shall make them run, noting her
readiness, and speediness, in giving her goods unto the saints. The tender
mercies of the Almighty, shed forth abundantly upon His, leave a compassionate
frame upon their hearts, and do dye their thoughts, as the die-fat does the
cloth.

And to walk humbly with thy God] Or, Bashfully, with an holy shamefacednesse,
and sollicitosnesse of doing any thing that may offend the eyes of Gods glory.
Yea, what care, faith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.11. sc. of walking worthy of the
Lord, unto all-pleasing, Colos. 1.10. as proving your hearts and lives to him
in every part and point of obedience. This the Lord in a mystery taught his
people, Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14. when commanding them to cover their excrements with a
paddle, he gives this reason thereof. For the Lord thy God walks in the
midst of thy camp, etc, therefore shall thy camp be holy, that he seen no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. They that stand in the presence
of Princes must be every way exact: and give them all due respect. Now a good
man, like a good Angel, is ever in Gods presence: and must therefore walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called, with all lowliness and
meekness, Ephesians. 4.1, 2. with all modesty, and demission of mind, and of
demeanor, (as the word here signifies) and especially, when he draws night
to God in holy duties. 1 Chro. 29.14.
Then it must be his care to exercise a threefold humility. First, precedent,
before he sets upon Gods service, he must in heart devote, and dedicate all
that he is, and has, as a due debt to the Almighty, saying with David,
Justinian.
It is of thine own, Lord, that I give thee: (...), as that good Emperor said.
The second is concomitant: when in the performance of good duties, he has
grace, (this lovely grace of humility especially) whereby he may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear; which is nothing else but an awful
respect to the divine Majesty, Heb. 12.28.
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. The third is subsequent; when after he
has done his best, he is dejected in the sense of his many failings in the
manner; and looking on his plumes, he looks also on his black feet, and is
abashed, and abased before the Lord. Lo, this is to humble himself to walk with
his God. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

Verse 9. The Lords voice cries unto the city] Or, shall cry, viz. by his
Prophets. (...), Herodet.
said the Heathen. God loves to fore-signifie, to warn before he wounds, to
foretell a judgment, before he inflicteth it. He had showed his people what
was good, and what he required of them: but to little purpose, through their
unteachablenesse, and stubbornness. He thereatneth therefore here to take
another course with them.

And the man of wisdom shall see thy name] Gualther renders it, And the man
of Essence, etc. that is, qui revera vir est, non caudex aut truncus, he that
is a man indeed, or not a stock, or trunck (such an one as was that saplesse
fellow Nabal, in whom all true reason was decayed and faded) will easily see
Gods name, that is, the divine majesty of the word, working powerfully upon his
heart, as the Sunbeams beat upon Jonas his head, and disquieted him. Danaeus
renders it, And wisdom sees thy name, that is, wisdoms children, as Luke
7.35. which will justify her, when others are either so froward, that nothing
can please them, (neither John fasting, nor Christ eating, Mat. 11.16, etc.) or
so dull, that nothing can affect them, as these here: the word of God was worse
then spilt upon them. Sure it is, that wisdoms children are not many. Who is
wise, and he shall understand these things? says Hosea chap. 14.9. the very
question imports a paucity. See the Note there. Though a gunne be discharged at
a whole flight of birds, there are but a few killed: though the net be spread
over the whole pond, but a few fishes are taken. Rari sunt qui philosophantur,
says Vlpian. It is with our hearers, as it was with Jonathans signal arrows,
two fell short, and but one beyond the mark: So where one shoots home to the
mark of the high-calling in Christ Jesus, many fall short. Three sorts of four
of those that heard our Savior, were naught, Mat. 13. And of those that heard
Paul at Athens, some derided, others doubted, and but a very few believed: as
Dennis, and Damaris, and some others with them, Act. 17.34.

Hear ye the rod] Since ye would not hear the word, and so redeem your own
sorrows. All Gods rods are vocal, they are speaking as well as smiting: they
are not mute, but mingled with instructions. They are his Free-school-master;
cursed, (...).
and crabbed, but such as whereby he opens men's ears (till then,
uncircumcised, and stopped with the superfluity of naughtiness) to discipline,
and commands them to return from iniquity, Job 36.8, 9. By chastening men,
God teaches them out of his Law, Psalm. 64.12. Hence Luther calls Affliction,
Theologiam Christianorum, the Christian man's Divinity: and Another says, that
Schola crucis est schola lucis. There shall be only fear, to make you
understand the hearing, Esaias 28.19. As God is said to hold his peace, when he
punishes not, Psalm. 50.21. Esaias 41.14. so, to preach and teach, when he does.
And look how Gideon, by threshing the men of Succoth with thorns and briars of
the wilderness, taught them, Judge. 8.7.16. so here. I have a message from God
unto thee, O King, said Ehud, Judge. 3.20. Lo, his poniard was Gods message.
Whence, One well observes, that not only the vocal admonitions, but the
real judgments of God, are his errands and instructions to the world. For
when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Esaias 26.9. Smart makes wit; and Vexation gives understanding.

and who has appointed it] God, who has not only a permissive, but an active
hand in all our afflictions. Others render the text, Quis sit, qui
accersatistud, who it is that has procured it, or sent for it, Who, but your
selves? according to Hos. 13.9. See the Note there. Nemo laeditur nisi a
seipso. Men may thank themselves for all their sufferings: for God afflicts
not willingly, Lam. 3.35. He comes forth of his place to do it, Esaias 16.21.
and counts it his work, his strange work, Esaias 28.21. He does justice, (when
there is no other remedy) but he loves mercy, and so requires us to do in
the verse next afore-going.

Verse. 10. Are there yet the treasures of wickednesse] What yet? for all that
ever I can say or do to the contrary? Though I cry out unto you by my word (and
have set it on with my rod, that it might stick the better) Oh do not this
abominable thing! Is there yet unto every man an house of the wicked, and
treasures of wickedness? (so some read it) see chap. 2.2. with the Note. The
Vulgar reads it, (and Gualther disliketh it not) Is there yet fire in the house
of the wicked? sc. the fire of Gods wrath? and treasures of wickedness, as
fuel cast upon it, to consume all? See Jam. 5.1, 2, 3. Treasures of
wickedness profit not, Prove. 10.2. since to heap up sin, is to heap up wrath,
Romans 2. and to rake together ill-gotten goods, is to carry home a fardle of
plaguy-clothes, and death with them. Ephraim said yet I am become rich, I have
found me out substance Hos. 12.8. But in so doing, Ephraim fed upon the wind
ver. 1. yea upon pestilentiall air: he daily increased lies and desolation,
that is, such lying vanities as bring desolation, and not consolation:
Desolationem potius quam consolationem. Aug. Epist. 121. ad Probam.
as hale hell at the heels of them, (as we see in the parable of that wretched
rich man Luke 16.) Animam ipsam incendio gehennae mancipant, the fire that is
in them shall feed upon their souls, and flesh thoroughout all eternity. Out
of doors therefore with these treasures of wickedness, by restoring them to
the right owners, as Zacheus did; and as Justinian the Emperor, who would not
put the vessels of the Temple taken by Titus, and recovered from Gensericus,
into the treasury, but restored them.

and the scant measure that is abominable?] Heb: the Ephah of leaxenesse, (so
called, Modius macilentus.
both because it want of its due proportion, and makes men lean) full of
wrath: q. d. you scant it to those you trade with, but God fills it up with his
fierce wrath and indignation. See Am. 8.5. with the Note.

Verse 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked ballances] Shall I clear
and acquit such? I that am the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, I abhor
all injustice? Exodus 34.7. Job. 8.
I that have named my self a God that will by no means clear the guilty, nor
take the wicked by the hand? Do they think to draw me in as a party? or that I
will bear with their false and fraudulent dealings, which I have so
oftdeclared against, and doomed both in the law, and by my servants Solomon,
Amos, and others. No: assure your selves, your sins shall find you out, and I
will curse you, smite you, plague you, and so set it on, as no creature shall
be able to take it off. Let earthly Judges warp, as they will, and wink at sin,
I neither can nor will: but as men have sowed, so they shall reap; as they
have sowed in hardness of heart, so they shall reap in horror of conscience,
and quorum eculos culpa clausit, poena aperiet, as they have lived
unconscionably, so they shall die uncomfortably: at which times, their
treasures of wickedness shall leave them in the lurch: as the devil leaves
witches, when they come to prison.

Verse 12. For the rich men thereof are full of violence] After that they have
once enriched themselves by fraud and false-dealing, they take the boldness
openly to oppress, and to exercise regiment without righteousness, which is
no better then robbery with authority: of which before chap. 2. and 3. Thus
wicked men wax worse and worse 2 Timothy 3.13. till wrath come upon them to the
utmost 2 Thessalonians. 2.

and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies] Not the rich men only are in
fault: but as the Cretians, so these are always liars, loud and lewd liars:
their tongue is deceitful in their mouth; so that they no sooner open their
mouths, but swarms of lies issue out: they are mendacierum loquacissimi, they
have taught their tongues to speak lies Ier. 9.5. they are now become artists
at it: Yea they take fast hold of deceit Ier. 8.5. so that they cannot be got
off, without striving. This is lamentable, and yet common: especially in
trading and traffiquing. But oh when shall that golden age return, that the
argument may again proceed, Sacerdos est, non fallet: Christianus est, non
mentietur. He is a minister, and will not deceive you: He is a Christian, and
will not lie! See Esa. 63.8.

Verse 13. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee] This is one
twig of that rod Verse, 9. that now they shall hear and feel too, that would
not harken to Gods word. Bernard tells us concerning a brother of his; that
when he gave him many good instructions and he, being a soldier, minded them
not: he put his finger to his sides and said, One day a spear shall make way
to this heart of thine, for instructions and admonitions, to enter. God can
(and, where he intends mercy will) make way for his his word by his rod: and
seal up instructions by chastening men with pain upon their beds, and the
multitude of their bones with strong pain Job 33.16, 19. He can fasten them to
their beds, as he did Abimelech, David, Hezekiah, and thereby tame them, and
take them a link lower Job 33.17. He can smite them with sickness, and make
them desolate, as it is here: with such sickness as shall make their best
friends afraid of them, and that none dare look at them, but as through a
grate: and all this with a sting too in the tail of it, Because of thy sins.
Fools, because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities are
afflicted. Their soul abhors all manner of meat (so sick they are and
stomackelesse, that nothing will down with them) and they draw near to the
gates of death Psalm. 107.17, 18. This was the case of that rich and wretched
Cardinal Henry Beauford Bish: of Winchester and Chancellor of England, Fox
Martyr. fol. 925.
in the reign of Henry 6. who tossing upon his sickbed, and perceiving he
must die, murmured at sickness and death, that his riches could neither
relieve him under the one, nor reprieve him from the other. This was also the
case of that great Emperor Charles 5. of whom Du-plessy reports, that when
he was old and crazy, he cursed his honors, his victories, trophies, riches,
saying, Abite hinc, abite long, Away, be gone miserable comforters are ye all.
Mention is made before of a great man that wrote this a little before his death,
Spes and fortuna Valete. And surely there are not a few rich Cormorants, who
may well say to their wealth when they are sick, as Cornelius Agrippa did to
his familiar spirit, Abi perdita bestia, quae me predididsti, Be gone thou
wicked beast, that have been mine undoing. etc. A promise contrary to this
threatening in the text is that Esai 33.24. And the inhabitant shall not say I
am sick: the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their iniquity.

Verse 14. Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied] Either as not having enough to
satisfy; but prisoners pittance, so much only as will keep life and soul
together: Or else, troubled with a bulimy, an appetitus caninus, a weakenesie
of the disgestive faculty, so that thy meat feeds thee not: the staff of it
being also broken by God, the nutritive property of it being taken away. See
the Note on Hag. 1.6.

and thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee] Thou shall be laid low
enough by civil and intestine discords, which as a fire feeds upon the
people Es. 9.19. no man shall spare his brother. Or, like as an hungry man
snatcheth on the right haud, and eats on the left hand, and yet is not
satisfied ver. 20. till thine unnatural convulsions end in a deadly
consumption.

and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver] Thou shall catch up thy
children, thy jewels etc. and think to secure them from the enemy, but shall
not be able. Of this misery we had over-wofull experience in our late
unnatural garboiles.

and that which thou delivsrest; will I give up to the sword] Other judgments
forerun the sword: which, when they will not do, the sword will then contemn
the rod Ezekiel. 21.10 that is, it will set at naught whatever the rod has done,
and come furbished and sharpened for the slaughter.

Verse 15. Thou shall sow, but thou shall not reape] This had been long since
threatened by Moses Deuteronomy. 28.38, 39 40. and was now above 700. years after to
receive its accomplishment in this people. There is an infallibility in all the
menaces of Gods mouth. Men are apt to think that they were uttered in terrorem
only; and to put them off, as those in the Gospel did, with a God forbid, When
knows if the Lord will deal with us according to all his wondrons works,
that this evil may pass from us Ier. 21.2? But what says the Prophet Zephany?
Zeph. 3.5.
The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity: every
morning does he bring his judgment to light; be fails not: but the unjust
knows no shame: sin has woaded such an impudency in his face, that he shuns
no sin, dreads no danger.

Verse 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept] Subest verbis hisce sarcesmus.
Here the Prophet taunteth them for their Idolatry: and tells them plainly
what will be the issue of it. q. d. You think you deal wifely and take a safe
course for your selves, that together with Ephraim you are joined to idols, and
have such great names as Omri and Ahab to countenance you therein. Omri's
statutes can be observed, when mine lie neglected. Haec tibi pro vili, sub
pedibusque jacent. Ovid
The works of the house of Ahab that Non-such can be imitated, and their
counsels embraced, when my work lies undone, and my counsel is rejected Luke
7.30. (...) Sane been.
Full well ye reject the commandment of God (being ingrati gratiae Dei as
Ambrose speaks) that ye may keep your own tradition Mar. 7.9. And do not the
Papists even the very same at this day. The Popes Canons are kept exactly, and
all the rites of the Church of Rome: they walk in the track of the
Trent-conventicle, and hold it worse to deface an Idol, then to kill a man: to
eat flesh or eggs on a fasting day, then to commit incest: to work on a holy
day, then to break the sabbath. There Is no command of the moral law but they
can dispense with it: but none of their ceremonial laws. Let God (say they,
profanely) look to the breach of his own law; we will look to ours.

that I should make thee a desolations] Luther here observes, that oppression
and other violations of the second table, God usually punishes with war,
famine, and pestilence: but breaches of the first table, and especially
idolatry, with utter desolation. This is a land-destroying sin Ier. 22.7, 8, 9.

therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people] that is, of such as had
been my people, if you could have held you so; but you are now, loammi,
dispriviledged. Or, that which I threatened in the law long since to bring upon
you, if ye carried not your selves as my people; or that which you deserved for
having profaned the name and title of being my people Ezekiel. 36.20, 23. Romans
2.24. with Luke 12.47.

CHAP. VII.
Verse I. WOe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer-fruits]
Allai li Alas for me. This last sermon of his, the Prophet begins with a
patheticall quiritation: bewailing his own unhappiness in the little good
success of his ministry. Mirifice autem nostris temporibus hic sermo
convenit, says Gualther: This discourse suites well with these times; wherein
we may justly cry out with the Prophet Esaias, Who has believed our report? And
again, O my leanenesse, my leanenesse! woe is me, for there is only as the
shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done
Esai. 24.13, 16. Hei mihi quam pingui macer est mihi taurus in arvo.
Though he had worn himself to a very sceleton in the Lords work; yet had he
labored in vain, Israel was not gathered chap. 49.4, 5. and hence his woeful
complaint. The like we read of Elias 1 King. 19.10. where he bitterly bewailes
his alonenesse: So did A^hanasius in his age, and Basil in his. Fasciculus
temporum Anno, 884. cries out, for the paucity of good people, Heu, heu, Domine
Deus, Alas, Lord, how few appear to be on thy side. Apparent rari nantes in
gurgite vasto. Virgil.
And Gualther complains, that the Anabaptists in Germany urged this as chief
argument to draw people from communion with our churches, In loc.
that there was so little good done by preaching, and so few souls converted.
Hence some ministers despond, and are ready to kick up all. Latimer tells of
one who gave this answer why he left off preaching, because he saw he did no
good. This, says Latimer, is a naughty, a very naughty answer. A grief it will
be, and fit it should be: piety to God and pity to men calls for it. Christ
wept over Jerusalem: Paul had great heaviness and continual sorrow in his
heart (not inferior to that of a woman in travel) for his contumacious
countrymen: (...). Romans 9.2.
neither could he speak of those lewd losels at Philippi with dry eyes Philip
3.18. But an utter discouragement it should not be, since our reward is with God
howsoever Esaias 49.5. and perhaps a larger, because we have wrought with so
little encouragement; we have plowed when others have only trod out the corn:
Hos. 10.91.
they trod and fed together, when as those that plow have no refreshing till
the work be done. Certain it is that God will reward his faithful servants
secundum laborem, non secundum proventum, (...).
according to their pains taken in the ministry, and not according to their
peoples profiting.

There is no cluster to eate] None to speak of: hedge-fruit there is great
store: wild-grapes not a few: grapes of Sodom, clusters of Gomorrah: But for
good grapes, pleasant fruit, godly people, there is a wondrous scarcity of
such. Diogenes lighted a candle at noonday to look for a man: the Host of Nola
went to the graves to call for the good men of the town. Tully says, that if
there be one good Poet in an age, it is well. Christ wondered at one good
Nathaniel, and tells us in the same chapter, that they are but few that receive
him, and with him the adoption of sons Ioh. 1.12. Clusters we must not look
for: bu^ if there be found two or three berries in the top of the uppermost
bough: four or five in the outmost fruitful branches, it is well. Sufficit mihi
auditor unus, sufficit nullus. Isa. 17.6.
Paul when he came first to Philippi had a poor audience; only a few women
Act. 16.13. and one convert: neither had he much better success at Athens; and
no Church could be planted there Act. 17.

my soul desired the first ripe fruites] praecocem fructum, the rath-ripe
fruit, as a great dainty, a precious rarity. We highly prize nettle-buds, when
they first bud: so does God our young services. Ier. 1.11. he made choice of
the almond tree because it blossometh first: so of Jeremy from his infancy. He
called for first-fruites of trees, and of the earth, in the sheafe, in the
threshing-floore, in the dough, in the loaves. He would have ears of corn,
dried by the fire; and wheat beaten out of the green ears Lev. 2.14. He would
have the primirose of our childhood. There were three sorts of first-fruites:
1. Of ears of corn offered about the Passover. 2. Of the loaves, offered
about Pentecost. 3. About the end of the year, in Autumn. Now of the two
first God had a part, not of the last. He likes not of those Arbores autumnales
Jude 13. (...).
that bud at later end of harvest. Conversion (as Divines observe) usually
falls out between eighteen years of age, and eight and twenty: Besides
Abraham in the old Testament, and Nicodemus in the New, we have not many
instances of men converted in old age. When people grow crooked and rooted in
evil practices, they are hardly ever set straight again. Remember therefore
thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Eccles. 12.1.
his soul delights in the first ripe fruits. Remember that Jesus Christ
shed his blood for thee, when he was but 8. days old: and took thee into his
family by baptism, when thou did hang on thy mothers breast.

Verse 2. The good man is perished out of the earth] Heb: The Saint, or
gracious man, that out of mercy obtained of God, can extend mercy to men. Rari
quippe boni. Of such it may be said, as One does of faithful friends in this
age, that they are all (for most part) gone on pilgrimage: and their return is
uncertain.

and there is none upright among men] None (to speak of) that makes straight
paths for his feet Heb. 12.13. that foots it aright, according to the truth of
the Gospel Gal. 2.14. that walks evenly Genesis 17.1. and accurately, (...).
as it were by line and by rule Ephesians. 5.15. and that halts not between two
opinions, as those Israelites; but is right in his judgment, and undefiled in
his way Psalm. 119.1. rather desi^ing to be good, then to seem to be so: few
such to be found surely: black swans you may count and call them.

Sed nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec avunculus usquam. Inven.
They all lie in wait for blood] A company of sanguinaries, blood-suckers,
hunting for the precious lives of men; but especially of such as reprove them
in the gate. If you touch them in their lusts, they will seek to touch you in
your life, as Ioash did Zachary, and as the Priests and people said of Jeremy
This man is worthy to die. All malice is bloody, and wishes him out of the
world, whom it spiteth.

they bunt every man his brother with a net] They add fraud to their force, and
craft to their cruelty: these seldom go fundered; as some write of the asp,
he never wanders alone without his companion with him; and as the scripture
speaks of those birds of prey and desolation, none of them shall want their
mate. Esa. 34.16. The matter is made the worse, because it is a brother whom
they hunt; whether he be so by race, place, or grace, a brother should be
better dealt with.

Verse 3. That they may de evil with both hands earnestly] Heb: for good and
all, or, for ado: that they may speak and do evil as they can Ier. 3.5. and
seek to out-sin one another; like unhappy boys that strive who shall go
furthest in the dirt. Nolunt solita peccare, says Seneca: Et pudet non esse
impudentes, says Austin. Luther testifies of the Monks in Germany, that they
were so desperately wicked, ut nihil cogitent quod non idem patrare ausint,
that they could not devise that wickedness, which they durst not do.

The Prince asketh] A beggarly practice for a Prince, but so base they were
grown, and so greedy of filthy lucre. The Prince asks, and, by asking only,
compels: for who dare deny him? If some Naboth do, he shall die for it.
There is a memorable story of a poor man in Spain, to whom when the Lords
Inquisitours sent for some of his pears, which they had cast their eye upon; he
for fear of offending, brought them his pears, Heyl. Geog.
tree and all by the roots.

and the Judge asks for a reward] Heb. Plaut.
The Judge for a reward, sc. will gratify that sordidum Poscinummium, the
Prince: who when he gives him his Commissions hinteth to him happily, Dio.
as Nero did to his public Officers, Scis quid nobis opus est. Thou know
what I want, and must have: see then that thou help me to it. Speed.
Such trading there was likewise betwixt our Rich. 2. and Judge Belknap with
his fellows. To this purpose, the Chaldee paraphrast here: The Prince, says
He, requires supplies of the Judge, and this bespeaketh him, Fac pro me, and
retribuam tibi; Negotiate for me, and I will be thy play master; favor me, help
me at my need, and I will requite thy courtesy, whenever thou will. Thus
muli mutuo scabunt, one hand claws another: and betwixt the oppressive Prince,
and uncoscionable Judge, the law is slacked, and judgment does never go forth:
for the wicked does compass about the righteous: therefore wrong judgment
proceeds, Hab. 1.4.

and the great man, he utters his mischievous desire] Heb. he speaks out
the corruption of his soul. He does it. Emphaticum est pronomen Ipse, says
Calvin. This same He has a special Emphasis in it, q. d. This impudent man
being now past all grace (for Illum ego peri^sse dico, Curtius.
cui perit pudor) boasts of his villainy: and thinks to bear it out bravely,
because it is facinus majores abollae, the fact of a great One. But who is this
He, this great man in the Text, that dares thus obtrude, and justify to the
world his most malapert misdemeanour? The rich Client, says Calvin, Ibi fas
ubi maxima merces.
that has his money to plead for him: for in suits both of love and of law,
money (mostly) makes mastery: and Angels trouble the current of justice (says
One) at certain seasons. Others understand it of Counselors, Pleaders,
Advocates, Sollicitours, and other Officers of Justice: who when as they ought
to reprove the iniquity of the Judges, do rather help it forward, by justifying
the wicked for a reward, and taking away the righteousness of the righteous
from him, Esaias 5.20. by making the law a nose of wax, and by quirks and
devices, varnishing falsehood and wrong-dealing.

so they wrap it up.] Contorcnplicant: they wreath their wrong-dealings
together, as a rope twisted of many threeds, Speed.
till their iniquity be found to be hateful: till there wants but an hurdle,
an horse, and a halter (as Belknap said of himself) to do them right. They make
a league together, they join and strengthen their evil counsels, and frauds,
etc, so Mr. Diodate. These men agree among themselves, and conspire with one
consent to do evil: so the Genevists.

Verse 4. The best of them is as a brier] which a man cannot handle without
hurt. See 2 Samuel 23.6. Psalm. 55.21. and 58.10. Ezekiel. 2.6. Mat. 7.16. and 13, 7,
22. so, you cannot deal with them without danger: guilt, or grief you shall be
sure of. Lot felt it so at Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. and so did those that set up
that bramble Abimelech, for their king, Judge. 9.

The most upright is sharper then a thorn-hedge] Vt ibi inveniatur dolor, ubi
sperabatur auxilium, says Hierom here: so that a man shall have grief, where
he hoped for help and succor: as a man that taking hold of a thorn-hedge to
get over, has his fingers pricked by it, and is glad to let go: Or, as a sheep,
that flying to the bush for defense in weather, loses part of her fleece. Now
if the best, and most upright among them were no better: what can be imagined
of the many? and what better can be hoped for by us (for one egg is not more
like another, (...).
then these times are those here described: it is but the same fable acted over
again, only every thing is now worse then ever) then a day of visitation, a
time of perplexily, as it follows here? For while they be folden together as
thorns, and while they be drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as
stubble fully dry, Nah. 1, 10. as sear thorns under the pot, Eccles. 7.6. I
will go through these briers, says God, I will burn them together, Esaias 27.4.
they shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place, 2 Samuel 23.7. that is,
in hell, as some interpret it.

The day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation cometh] Where sin is in the
saddle, punishment will be upon the crupper. God will have a visitation-day:
and that for his Watchmen, Prophets, and Governors, as well as for the common
sort. Thy visitation comes, Thou shall share in punishment with them, as thou
have done in sin: neither shall it help thee to say, Our Watchmen were in
fault: for God will visit you all: and his Visitation-Articles will be very
strict and critical.

Now shall be their perplexity] They shall be so intricated, and entangled; so
ensnared and ensnarled, as that they shall not know which way to turn them.
They shall be in as great a distress as Israel was at the red sea, Exodus 14.3.
or as the Jews at Shushan were, when the decree was gone out for their utter
destruction, Esth. 3.15. or as Manasseh was, when taken by the Assyrians among
the thorns, he was bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11.

Verse. 5. Trust ye not in a friend] Friends (said Socrates) there is no
friend: And a friend is a changeable creature, says Another: all in changeable
colors as the Peacock, as often changed as moved. Besides, (...).
many friends are not more fickle then false, like deep ponds, clear at the
top, and all muddy at the bottom. Fide ergo: sed cui vide. Try before you
trust: and when you have tried your utmost, trust not over-farre, lest you cry
out at length, as Queen Elizabeth did, In trust I have found treason: or as
Julius Caefar, when stabbed by Brutus among others, What thou my son Brutus?
He was slain in the Senate House, with 23. wounds, given (most part) by them
whose lives he had preserved.

Put ye not confidence in a guide] Potenti and pollenti consilio and auxilio.
Tarnou.
Be he never so potent, or politic, beyond thousand others, as the word
imports: and as the people said to David, But now thou art worth ten thousand
of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. thou art the light of Israel, thou art the breath of our
nostrils: so that if thou mistary, we shall all breath out our last. All which
notwithstanding, Princes are not to be trusted, Psalm. 62.7. and 118.8, 9. and
146.3. for either they may die, or their affections may die; all their golden
thoughts may perish. Great men's words, says One, are like dead men's shoes:
he may go barefoot that waits for them.

Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom] from thy wife,
thine (...), called the wife of thy bosom, because she should be as dear unto
thee as the heart in thy bosom. Be not too open-hearted to her, lest she tell
all, as Sampsons wife: or as Fulvia in Salust, who declared all the secrets of
Cncius, In bell. Catilinar.
a noble Roman, her foolish lover. A fool tells all, says Solomon, Prove.
29.11. he is as little able to keep, as to give counsel. He is full of chinks,
and leaks every way: the doors of his mouth are seldom kept shut: you may know
him by his gaping: fools are called by Aristophanes, and Lucian, (...), Gapers.
but a wise man keeps it in till afterward, Prove. 29.11. Tacitus he holds to
be the best Historian: and keeps his mouth with a bridle as David did, Psalm.
39. and as the Poets fain of Pegasus, that he had a golden bridle put upon him
by Minerva, their goddess of Wisdom. God and Nature have taught us by the
site of the tongue in a man's mouth to take heed to it, and to keep the doors of
it: and when all is done, to pray God to keep that door, Psalm. 141.3. The tongue
is ever in udo, in a moisture: but yet tied by the roots, that it may not
stir out of place; It is also guarded with a percullis of teeth, and a
two-leaved gate of lips, which we must carefully keep, and hold that for an
Oracle, Si sapis, arcano vina recende cado.

Verse 6. For the son dishonors the father] Or, revileth the father,
Menabbe^.
be-Nabals him, beknaves him (of Nabal comes Nebulo) turpitudine afficit
bespatles him, vilifieth him. This is monstrous wickedness, Mal. 1.6. and a
sure sign the devil has set his limbs in a man that is thus unnatural,
fierce, traitorous, heady, high-minded: which yet is foretold of these dregs of
times, these last and worst days, both by our Savior, Mat. 10.21, 35, 36. and
likewise by St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. Such a son was He, who when his father
complained, that never father had so undutifull a child as he had: Yes, Full.
holy State
said his son, (with less grace then wit) my grandfather had. Such a son
was Ham, and Absalom, and Amida, son of Muleasses King of Tunes, Turk hist. 745.
who cast his father out of his Kingdom, and put out his eyes: and Henry, Speed.
eldest son to our Henry 2. who rebelled against his father, and died before
him of a fever, and a flux, with excoriatiation of the bowels: And lastly,
Adolphus Egmondanus, Cominaeus.
who imprisoned his own fater six years, for no other cause but for living so
long; and keeping him from the Dukedom of Gelderland.

The daughter rises up against her her mother] As Mr. Fox mentions, some
that witnessed against their own parents here in Q. Mary's days: and were a
means of their Martyrdom.

A man's enemies are the men of his own house] See Mat. 10.36. with the Note,
and take our Saviors counsel there; Be ye wise as serpents, innocent as doves:
but beware of men, yea of the men of your own house.

Fide Deo soli: mortali fidito nulli:
Fallunt mortales: fallere Jova nequit.
Verse 7. Therefore will I look unto the Lord] Therefore: inasmuch as there is
no faith nor fair-dealing amongst men, I will look unto the Lord; look wishly
and intently, as a watchman in his watchtower does look as far as ever he
can see on every side. I also will lift up mine eyes unto those hills of
heaven, from whence comes my help, Psalm. 121.1. I will pray and look up, Psalm.
5.3. I will keep close communion with the Lord, and by faith commit the keeping
of my soul to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.
This I will do: and yet more then this.

I will wait for the God of my salvation] If he tarry, I will wait for him:
because he will surely come, Rev. 13.10. and 14.12. Psalm. 119.
he will not tarry, Hab. 2.3. This is the voice of faith: and here is the faith
and patience of the Saints. God sometimes lies off and stays long; even till
our eyes even fail with looking for his salvation; and all to try what we will
do: as Samuel tried Saul, who because he stayed not out his just time, lost his
kingdom. David waited for for the kingdom; and had it not, till he had learned
to quiet and behave himself as a child weaned of his mother, Psalm. 131.2. Those
in Esther waited for deliverance: and had it not, till almost forsaken of their
hopes. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord, says dying Jacob: and I will
wait for the God of my salvation, Genesis 49.
says our Prophet here, for a president to all the good souls of his time. Let
us but consider our distance from God in worth and degree; together with our
dependence upon him, our undone condition without him, how long he waited for
us, how he has hitherto helped us, as 1 Samuel 7.12. and now seems to say unto
us, Joh. 13.7.
as he did once to Peter, What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter; and we shall be content to wait, as here, and to say,

My God will hear me] According to my faith, and his own faithfulness. The
whole force of faith consists in this, says Luther, Vt quis been applicet
pronomina, that a man will apply pronounes: Luth. in Gal. 1.
that he can fiducially say, My God: and, will hear me. Were it not for this
word of possession mine, the devil might say the Creed to as good purpose as
we. He believes there is a God, and a Christ, and such a Christ, as is there
described: but that which torments him is, he can say my, to never an Article
of the Faith. Time was, when Christ heard the devil begging that he might enter
into the swine: but he could not say, My God has heard me. Let us secure our
interest in God: let us individuate Christ, and appropriate him to our selves,
(...).
by a particular faith, and then all shall be well with us.

Verse 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy] Here Is the triumph of faith, in
the fail of outward comforts, in the midst of the worlds insultations and
irrisions. Ne laeteris de me. O daughter of Babylon that art to be destroyed,
thou that art victrix gentium, captiva vitiorum (as Austin said of Rome in her
pride) thou that for present carriest the ball upon the foot, and none can come
near thee: Rejoice not against me, as forlorn and hopeless: say not, This is
Zion the outcast, whom no man seeks after. Jer. 30.17.
For assure thy self, The right hand of the Lord will change all this, and
Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur.

When I fall, I shall arise] Because fall I never so low, I cannot fall below
the supporting hand of God, which will help me up again Psa. 37.24. The wicked
fall and never rise Am. 8.14. they shall drink of the cup of Gods wrath, and be
drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more Jer. 25.27. their carcasses shall
fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvest-man,
and none shall gather them Jer. 9.22. This is fearful. If Haman fall before
Mordecai the Jew, he shall not easily stop, or step back. Esth. 6.13. A Jew may
fall before a Persian and get up and prevail. But if a Persian or other
persecutor begin to fall before a Jew, he can neither stay, nor rise. There is
an invisible hand of Omnipotency that strikes in for his own, and confounds
their opposites.

when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me] He can lighten the
greatest darkness: as he did the dungeons to the Martyrs. Acts and. mon. 857.
From the delectable Orchard of the Leonine dungeon: so Algerius an Italian
Martyr dated his heavenly Epistle. I am now in the Bishop of Londons Cole-house
(says Mr. Philpot) a dark and ugly prison as any is about London: but my dark
body of sin has well deserved the same: and the Lord now has brought me into
outer darkness, that I might be the more lightened by him: as he is most
present with his children in the midst of darkness. And in his letter to the
Lady Vane, I thank the Lord, Ib. 166
says He, I am not alone, but have six other faithful companions, who in our
darkness do cheerfully sing hymns and praises to God for his great goodness.
We are so joyful, that I wish you part of my joy etc. The posy of the city of
Geneva stamped round about their money was formerly out of Job, Ibid.
Post tenebras spero lucem, After darkness I look for light. But, the
Reformation once settled amongst them, they changed it into Post tenebras lux.
Light after darkness. Scultet. Aunal.
Like as the Saxon Princes, before they became Christians, gave for their arms
a black horse; Cranz. in Saxon.
but being once baptized, a white.

Verse 9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him] The Church had sinned, and God was angry with her. So Zech. 1.12.
Esaias 57.17. What mean then the Antinomians to tell us that God is never angry
with his people, for their foul and flagitious practices, no not with a
fatherly anger? nor chastises them for the same, no not, so much as with a
fatherly chastizement? Virg. Aeneid.
Is not this contra Solemn mingere? Godliness is on target against affliction.
Blind Nature saw this. -- nec te tua plurima, Pentheu,
Labentem texit pietas --
Only it helps to patient the heart under affliction by considering 1. That
it is the Lord. 2. That, a man suffers for his sin, as the penitent thief also
confessed Luke 24.41.3. That the rod of the wicked shall not lie long upon the
lot of the righteous. (...). Say we then, every one with David, I know that thy
judgments are right, and thou have afflicted me justly, Psalm. 119.75. yea in
very faithfulness have thou done it, that thou might be true to my soul.
And with that Noble Du-plessy, who when he had lost his only son, a gentleman
of great hopes (which was the breaking of his mothers heart) quieted himself
with these words of David, I was silent and said no word, because thou Lord
did it. Psalm. 39.
See my Love Tokens page 145.146. etc. It shall be our wisdom in affliction to
look to God, and to reflect upon our sins, taking his part against our selves:
as a Physician observes which way nature works, and helps it.

until he plead my cause] As a faithful Patron, and powerful Avenger: for
though it be just in God that I suffer, yet it is unjust in mine enemies, who
shall shortly be soundly paid for their insolences, and cruelties.

he will bring me forth to the light] He will discloud these gloomy days, and
in his light I shall see light.

I shall behold his righteousnesse] that is, his faithfulness in fulfilling
his Promise of deliverance in due time. Meane-while I will live upon
reversions, live by faith and think to make a good living of it too. All the
ways of God to his people are mercy and truth Psa. 25.10. this is a
soul-satisfying place of scripture indeed. All the passages of his providence
to them, are not only mercy but truth and righteousness: they come to them in
a way of a promise: and by virtue of the Covenant, wherein God has made
himself a voluntary debtor to them, 1 John 1.9.

Verse 10. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it etc.] Not only shall I
behold his righteousness (as before) but mine enemy shall see it, and feel it
too, to her small comfort. They shall see it when it is too late to remedy it:
as they say, the Mole never opens her eyes, till pangs of death are upon her.

And shame shall cover her,] when she shall see that thou have showed me a
token for good; that thou have helped me, and comforted me, Psalm. 86.17.

which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God.?] So laying her religion in her
dish, whereby God became interested in her cause, and concerned in point of
honor, to appear for her. The Church is no less beholden to her enemies
insolences for help, then to her own devotions: for God will right himself,
and her together. See Joel. 2.17. with the Note.

Mine eyes shall behold her] and feed upon her misery, not as mine enemy, but
as Gods: nor out of private revenge, but out of zeal for his glory.

Now shall she be trodden down, as the mire of the streets] Erit infra omnes
infimos: she shall be as mean as may be. Nineveh that great city, is now a
little town of small trade; Babylon is nothing else but a sepulture of her
self. Those four Monarchies that so heavily oppressed the Church, are now laid
in the dust, and live by fame only: so shall the Romish Hierarchy, and
Turkish Empire. All Christ's enemies shall shortly be in that place that is
fittest for them; sc. under his feet, as was before noted: he will dung his
Church with the carcasses of all those wild boars, and bulls of Bashan, that
have trod it down.

Verse 11. In the day that thy walls are to be built] In the type, by Nehemiah,
chap. 3. who did the work with all his might: and having a ready heart, made
riddance, and good dispatch of it. Mar. 16.15.
In the truth, and spiritually, when the Gospel was to be preached to every
creature, and a Church collected of Jews and Gentiles. The Church is in the
Canticles said to be a garden enclosed: such as has a wall about it, and a
well within it, Cant. 4.12. See the Note there. God will be favorable in his
good pleasure unto Zion, Psalm 51.18.
and build the walls of Jerusalem. His spirit also will set up a standard, in
his Saints, against strong corruptions and temptations: and make them more then
conquerours, even Triumphers, Esaias 59.19. Romans 8.37. 2 Cor. 2.14.

In that day shall the decree be far removed] That decree of the Babylonians,
forbidding the building of the Temple and City, shall be reversed: and those
statutes that were not good, (given them by Gods permission, because they had
despised his statutes, Ezekiel. 20.24, 25.) shall be annulled, and removed far
away. Some read it, In that day shall the decree go far abroad, and interpret
it, by Psalm. 2.7, 8. of the doctrine of the Gospel.

Verse 12. In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria] To thee,
Jerusalem, in the Type, shall recourse be had from all parts, as if thou were
the chief city of the world. ( Pliny says, that in his time she was the most
famous of all the cities of the East: and Titus himself is said to have wept at
the last destruction of it by his soldiers, whom he could not restrain from
firing the Temple) To the new Jerusalem, the Church of the New Testament, in
the Antitype: from whence the Gospel was sent out to every creature which is
under heaven, Col. 1.23. and whereunto people of all sorts flowed, and many
nations came, Mic. 4.1, 2. with highest acclamations, most vigorous affections,
and utmost endeavors bestowing themselves upon the Lord Christ, Act. 2.9. etc.
Jerusalem, in the Hebrew tongue, is of the duall number; in regard of the two
parts of the city, the upper and the nether town. Or, (as the Cabalists give
the reason) in regard of a twofold Jerusalem, the heavenly and the earthly: and
the taking away of the earthly, they say, was signified, by the taking away of
the letter jod out of Jerushalaijm, 2 Samuel 5.13. But Jerusalem which is above
is free, firm, and full; the desolate (once so) having many more children then
she that has an husband, Gal. 4.26, 27. whom the Lord of Hosts also does
bless, saying, (as a Father to them all) Blessed be Egypt my people, and
Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance, Esaias 19.23, 24, 25.

and from the fortress, even to the river] i.e. from all bounds and borders of
the land, yea of the world ( Psalm. 89.12. Tabor and Hermon are put for the East
and West parts of the World) shall people come in to the New Jerusalem, which
has twelve gates: On the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the
South three gates, and on the West three gates, Rev. 21.12, 13. See the Note
there.

Verse 13. Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate] Understand it, not of
the land of Caldea, as A lapide does; but of Judea, which must be desolated
before the coming of Christ in the flesh. And this is here foretold. 1 Lest the
impenitent, by misapplying the former proimses, should dream of impunity,
(saeculi laetitia est impunita nequitia) and 2. Lest the godly, because of this
desolation shortly to ensue, Aug.
should despair of the former promises.

Because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings] What their
doings were, and what the fruit thereof, see Ier. 9.3, 4, 5, etc and 12, 13,
14, 15, 16. This Prophet could not but tell them of both, though he had small
thank for his love and labor: even as little as Moses had of that perverse
people in the wilderness. His service among the Jews was in some sense like
that of Manlius Torquatus among the Romans: who gave it over, saying Neither
can I bear their manners, nor they my government. Jeremy once thought to have
done so, chap. 20.9. but might not. He lived to see this prophecy of Micah
fulfilled: and was afterward carried down to Egypt by his ungrateful
countrymen; where also (for a reward of his 41. years uncessant pains in the
Ministry as a Prophet) they stoned him to death, Bucholc. Chronol.
who had been a brazen wall to his country, ejusque commodis adangendis natus,
and a common blessing.

Verse 14. Feed thy people with thy rod] Rule them with thy Seepter, or feed
them with thy pedum pastorale, thy shepherds-rod, or staff, Psalm. 23.4. This,
say some, is the speech of God the Father, to God the Son. Or, (as others) of
God to the Ministers and Pastors, charging them to take heed to his flock, and
to feed his Church. But it seems rather to be a prayer of the Christian
Church (seeing the ruin of the Jewish Synagogue) that Christ (the chief
Shepherd) would do all good officer for his poor people, feeding them with his
rod, that is, with his word and Spirit, guiding them with his eye, Psalm. 32.8.
leading them in the way everlasting, Psalm. 139.24. lest, seduced by their own
lusts, or other men's evil lives, they should any way miscarry.

the flock of thine heritage] Those poor of the flock, Zach. 11.7. that hear
his voice and follow him, John 10.3, 4.5, 27. being holy, harmless, tractable,
sociable, patient, profitable as sheep; which have wool for raiment, skin for
parchment, flesh for meat, guts for music, etc. Such shall go in and out, and
find pasture, Joh. 10.9. pasture that will breed life, and life in more
abundance, verse 10. See Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3, etc. David's Pastoral: where he
assures himself, as a sheep of Christ's heritage, that he shall have all
things needful for life and godliness: And so may every poor Christian,
grounding his faith upon the Covenant, Ezekiel 34.25, 28.

which dwells solitarily in the wood] Sleeps in the woods, Ezekiel. 34.25.
where they meet with many a brush, yea many a bruise, verse 28. where they walk
in dark and dangerous paths, even in the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm.
23.4. of the darkest side of death, of death in its most horrid and hideous
representations. Feed them therefore; fence them with thine omnipotent arm,
bear them in thy bosom, see to their safety.

Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead] Not bite upon the bare ground, but feed
pleasantly, plentifully: feed among the lillies, frequent also the foddering
places, turn to the under-shepherds, the Ministers, and so return to the
Arch-shepherd and Bishop of their souls, following the Lamb wheresoever he
goes; who will teach them many things, and that out of deepest compassion,
Mar. 6.34. who will also show them great and mighty things, that they knew not,
Jer. 33.3.

as in the days of old] As thou wast with the Church of the Old Testament, so
be not wanting to that of the New: but feed them according to the inegrity of
thine heart, and guide them by the skilfulnesse of thine hands, Psalm. 78.72.
Pull them out of the Lions mouth, seek them up when lost, tend them, handle
them, heal them, wash them, drive them as they can go, bearing the lambs in thy
bosom, Esaias 40. Do for them, as thou have ever done for thy people in former
ages. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for
ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations Psa. 79.13.

Verse 15. According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt]
Here Is a present and full answer to the churches prayer: so ready is the Lord
to fulfill the desires of the righteous. It is but Ask and Have: and they are
worthily miserable, that will not make themselves happy by asking. The sum of
Christ's answer is this: As I led Joseph like a flock out of Egypt thorough the
wilderness; and fed them there daily and daintily, with Angels sood (never was
Prince so served in his greatest pomp) so will I show thee marvelous things at
Babylon, and bring thee thence with a mighty hand Ezekiel. 20.34. to make me a
glorious Name Esa. 63.14. and both these deliverances shall be a most certain
type of thy spiritual redemption by Christ. Lo thus will I do for thee as in
the days of old ver. 14. and so fit mine answer ad cardinem desiderij, give
thee not only the desire of thine heart, Aug. Consc. lib. 5. cap. 8.
but the request of thy lips Psa. 21.2. letit be to thee even as thou will
Mat. 15.29.

Verse 16. The nations shall see and be confounded] Considering how I have
defeated and befooled them; how I have made all their might to melt, and
moulder; they shall stand amazed, and be made a common table-talk: as
Belshazzar and the Babylonians were, when Cyrus (Gods servant) suddenly brake
in upon them and surprised their city, which they held insuperable: and as the
Heathen Emperors of Rome were, when the Christians, under the conduct of
Constantine, carried it against them.

they shall lay their hand upon their mouth] Be struck dumb, as if they had
seen Medusa's head: they shall not be able to contradict the Gospel, or to
hinder the progress of it. Valens the Arrian Emperou coming upon Basil, while
he was in holy duties, with an intent to do him hurt, was not only silenced,
but so terrified, that he reeled and had fallen, Greg. orat. de laud. Basil.
had he not been upheld by those that were with him.

their cares shall be deaf] With the sudden bursting forth of Gods wonderful
and terrible works, says Mr. Diodate.

Verse 17. They shall lick the dust like a scrpent] that is, be reduced not
only to extreme hunger and penury, but to utmost vility and baseness of
condition, so as to lick the very dust. And whereas it is added like a s^^pent,
he puts them in mind of that old malediction Genesis 3. and gives them to know,
that as, like that old serpent, they have lifted themselves up against God, so
will God cast them down again to the condition of serpents, and abase them to
the very dust. See Psa. 22.30 and 72.9. Es. 49.23.

they shall move out of their holes like worms (or creeping things) of the
earth] They shall tumultuate, and be all on an huddle, as ants are when their
molehill is thrown up with a spade. The Hebrew word imports great commotion and
bustle.

they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee] O
God, or O Church, terrible as an army with banners, Impiety triumphs in
prosperity, trembles in adversity: and contrarily, says holy Greenham Since
the fall, we tremble before God, Angels, and good men. What have I to do with
thee, thou man of God (said She) Art thou come to call to mind my sin and to
kill my son? At the siege of Mountabove in France, the people of God within the
walls, ever before a sally sang a Psalm: with which holy practice of theirs,
the enemy coming acquainted, when they heard them singing would so quake and
tremble, crying they come, Spee. belli sal. 282.
they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them.

Verse 18. Who is a God like unto thee?] No God surely (whether so reputed or
deputed: whether heathen deities, heavenly Angels. or earthly Rulers) can
compare with our God, or come near him, for pardoning of sin. Indeed none can
do it at all but He; as the blind Pharisees saw and could say. Men may pardon
the trespass, but God alone the transgression. But say, they could do
something that way: yet nothing like our God: who makes his power appear to be
great Number. 14.17 in pardoning such offenses as no God or man besides would
pardon. See Jer. 3.1. Neh. 9.31. he forgiveth iniquity, transgression and sin
Exodus 34.6, 7. that is, all sorts of sins, to all sorts of sinners without
excertion, Mat. 12.31. This is the express letter of Gods covenant, which we
ought not either to obliterate, or to interline; but to believe it in the full
latitude and extent. We are apt to cast Gods pardoning-grace into a mould of
our own; and to measure it by our model. But against this we are cautioned
Isai. 55.8. God must be magnified in our thoughts, his quarters there enlarged,
high and honorable conceptions are to be had of him: or else we wrong him no
less then we should do a King, by respecting and receiving him no otherwise
then we would do another ordinary man. He is set forth here, as a God
imparallell, and that not without an interrogation of admiration, O! who is a
God like unto thee? Thy mercy is matchless, thy grace abounds even to an
overflow. 1 Timothy 1.14. it is more then exceeding, it has a superpleonasme,
(...).
says the Apostle there. Surely as the Sea swallows up hugest rocks, and as
the Sun scatters greatest mists: so does He pardon enormities as well as
infirmities, and blotteth out the thick cloud as well as the cloud Isa. 44.22.
Jam. 2,
His mercy rejoices against, or glories over judgment: and is ready to say of
a great sinner indeed -- Jam dignus vindice nodus: The more desperate the
disease is, the greater glory redoundeth to him that cures it. Our Savior gat
him a glorious name by curing incurable diseases: and gained greatest love by
franckly forgiving Mary Magdalens and others sins, Luke 7.42, 47.
which were many and mighty, or bony as the Prophets word signifies Amos 5.12.
Adams Apostacy, Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest, David's blood-guiltinesse,
Manasseh his idolatry and witch-crast, Peter's thrice denying and abjuring his
master, Paul's blasphemy and persecution: All these sins and blasphemies have
been forgiven to the sons of men: neither can they commit more then he both can
and will remit to the penitent. Note this against Novatus that proud heretic:
and strive against that natural Novatianisme, that is in the timorous
conscience of convinced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for sins of
Apostasy, and falling after repentance, and to say as those Unbeleevers of
old, Can the Lord prepare a table for us in the wilderness? So, Can he forgive
such and such iniquities so often reiterated? This is a question, no question:
what cannot our God do in this kind, who pardons sin naturally Exodus 34.6.
(and therefore freely as the Sun shines, or as the Fountain casts out
waters) who does it also abundantly Isai 55.7. multiplying pardons as fast as
we multiply sins: and lastly, Constantly, Psalm. 130.4. Ioh. 1.27. Zach. 13.1.
It is his perpetual act: and it should be as a perpetual picture in our
hearts. We should go on our way toward heaven, as Sampson did toward his
parents, feeding on this honeycomb.

that pardons iniquity] Heb: that takes away, sheere away, non ne sit, sed
ne obsit, not sin it self, but the guilt of it; the damning and domineering
power of it: this David calls the iniquity of his sin: and says that this
God forgave him Psalm. 32.5. pronouncing himself and all such happy as are so
dealt with verse 1.2.

and passes by the transgression] Heb: Passes over it, takes no notice of
it, as a man in a deep muse, or as one that has have of business, sees not
things before him: his mind being upon another matter, he neglects all else
besides that. As David when he saw in Mephibosheth the feature of his friend
Jonathan, took no notice of his lamenesse, or any other defect or deformity: so
God beholding in his people the image of his son, winks at all faults, that he
might soon find in them. That which Cicero said flatteringly of Caesar, is
truly affirmed of God, Nihil oblivisci solet praeter injurias, He forgets
nothing but the wrongs that are daily done him by his; and as it is said of our
Henry 6. that he was of that happy memory, that he never forgot any thing but
injury etc. so here. Daniel 198.


of the remnant of his heritage] Not of all, but of those poor few that
confess and forsake their sins Pro. 28.13. and in whose spirit there is no
guile Psa. 32.2. that are mortified persons Romans 11.26. with Esaias 59.20. It is
a privilege proper to the Communion of Saints.

he retains not his anger for ever] Angry he may be, and smite in his anger
Esaias 57.17. yea he may take vengeance of the inventions of those whom he has
pardoned, Psalm. 99.8. temporal vengeance I mean: but it soon repents him
concerning his servants; and a little punishment serves turn for a great
offense, Jer. 31.19, 20, 21. David, no sooner said, I have sinned, but he
heard, The Lord has taken away thy sin, 2 Samuel 12.

because he delights in mercy] And hence he pardons iniquity of free grace,
ex mero motu, out of his pure and unexcited love, out of his Philanthropy, and
undeserved favor, the sole impulsive cause of pardon. What a man delights to
do, he will do howsoever. If the Sun delight to run his race, who shall stop
him? If God so delight in mercy, that he will save for his Names sake, and come
in with his Non obstante, as he does, Psalm. 106.8. who, or what shall hinder
him?

Verse 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us] Here Is the
pith and power of faith, particularly applying promises to a man's self. Say
that sin has separated betwixt us and our God, Esaias 59.2. and made him send us
far away into captivity: yet he will turn again and yern toward us, he will
turn again our captivity as the streams in the South. His compassions are more
then fatherly, Psalm. 103.13. motherly, Esaias 49.15. brotherly, Heb. 2.12. This
the Church knows, and therefore cries after him, Cant. 8.14.
Make have my beloved; and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart, which
when it flees, looks behind it, says the Chaldee Paraphrast there. And this
that he will do, she is bold to believe. He will, he will, and that to us,
says the Prophet here. Lo this is that work of faith, to wrap it self in the
promises, as made to us in particular, 1 Timothy 1.15. and unless faith be on
this sort actuated, it is, as to comfort, as good as no faith. Compare Mat.
8.26. with Mark. 4.40.

He will subdue our iniquities] By force and violence (as the word signifies)
subjugabit, pessundabit, conculcabit. Sin is sturdy, and will rebel, where it
cannot reign. It has a strong heart, and will not easily yield. But yield it
shall, for God will subdue it. And this is a further favor, (as every former
is a pledge of a future) To pardon of sin, God will add power against sin:
to justification by Christ's merit, sanctification by his Spirit: he will let
out the lifeblood of sin, and lay it adying at our feet: he will tread Satan
with all his black train under our feet shortly, Romans 16.20. He will not only
turn us again, but turn his hand upon us, and purely purge away our dross,
and take away all our tin, Esaias 1.25. In fine, he will so mortify the deeds
of the body by his Spirit, that sin shall not have dominion over us, Romans
6.14. shall not play Rex in us: the traveller shall not become the man of the
house, as Nathans parable speaks.

And thou will cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea] Where-hence
they shall never be boyed up again. This, the Prophet by an insinuating
Apostrophe, turns himself to God, and speaks with much confidence. Such is
the nature of true faith, sc. to grow upon God, and, as I may so say, to
encroach: as Moses did, Exodus 33.12, 13, etc. to chap. 34.10. and as David did,
1 Chronicles. 17.23. etc. See how he improves Gods promise, and works upon it, ver.
24, 25. he goes it over again, and yet still encroacheth: and the effect was
good, chap. 18. We hinder our selves of much happiness by a sinful
shamefacednesse. Let us come boldly to the throne of grace; Heb. 4. ult.
so shall we see our sins, as Israel did the Egyptians dead on the shore.

Verse 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham]
Heb. Thou will give: for all is of free gift. His love moved God to promise,
his truth binds him to perform, 2 Samuel 7.18, 21. For thy words sake, and
according to thine own heart have thou done all these things. Having made
himself a voluntary debtor to his people, he will come off fairly with them:
and not be worse then his word, but better. Hence Rev. 10.1. Christ is said to
have a rainbowe upon his head: to show that he is faithful and constant in his
promises, and that tempests should blow over, the sky be cleared. For this is
as the waters of Noah unto me, says the Lord: for as I have sworn that the
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth: so have I sworn that I would
not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, etc.
Esaias 54.9, 10. God has hitherto kept promise with nights and days, Jer.
33.20, 25. that one shall succeed the other: therefore much more will he keep
promise with his people.

which thou have sworn unto our fathers.] And, in them, to us, by virtue of the
covenant. So he spoke with us, when he spoke with Jacob at Bethel, Hos. 12.4.
and that the promises sworn to the Fathers of the old Testament, belong also to
us of the New. See Luke 1.55, 73, 74. Now, that God swore at any time to them,
or us, he did it for our sakes doubtless: that by two i^^^^table things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation:
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.17,
18. See the Note there.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of NAHUM.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE burden of Nineveh] i. e. The burdenous prophecy. See the Note on
Malac. 1.1. It is a burden to wicked men to be told of their sins, and
foretold of their punishments. To whom we may not unfitly apply that of the
Civilian, Perquam durum est, Vlpian.
sed ita lex scripta est. If it be so tedious to hear of it, what will they do
to bear it? Nineveh had fair warning before by Jonah; and for present, the
unclean spirit seemed to be cast out of her: but he returned soon after, with
seven worse, as appears by this Prophecy; and so their last state was worse
then the former, Mat. 12.45. Their bile half-healed, breaking out again, proved
to be the plague of leprosy, Lev. 13.18, 19, 20. such as shut them out of
heaven. God will do good to those that are good, and continue so. But as for
those that turn aside unto their crooked ways, (as all Apostates do) the Lord
shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, (as cattle are led to the
slaughter, or malefactors to execution) but peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm.
125.5.

The book of the Vision] Or the Epistle of the Vision. Hence some collect, that
Nahum went not to Nineveh as Jonah had done; but sent this prophetical Epistle
thither, to let them know what should shortly befall them. So Jeremy sent an
Epistle to Babylon, chap. 29. and Eliah wrote a threatening letter to Iehoram
king of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 21.12. before his translation to heaven; and lest it to
be sent to him by Elisha, or the other Prophets, who durst not show themselves
in his presence; such was his insolent cruelty, as it is conceived.

of Nahum the Elkoshite] Elkosh was a small town in Gali^ee beyond Bethabara,
as say Hierom and Dorotheus. Here was our Prophet born, and named N^hum, non
sine numine, says Gualther; for Nahum (as Noah) signifies a Comforter: and so
he proved, by this Book of his, both to the ten Tribes now newly carried
captive by the Assyrian Monarch; and also to the other two Tribes, Epiphanius.
who were shortly after besieged by the same Assyrian, in the reign of
Hezekiah; under whom Nahum prophesied. See the Note on Exodus 3.1.

Verse. 2. God is jealous] See the Note on Zech. 1.14.

and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth] As he is Pater miserationum, to
his people, a father of mercies, and God of consolation: so to his and their
enemies he is a most sure and severe revenger, Deus ultionum, as David calls
him, Psalm. 94.1. A God of recompenses, as Jeremy, chap. 51.56. And when He
comes against a people, he usually takes them to do, when they are at the
strongest, and most confident: as Nineveh now was, in the days of proud
Sennacherib.

and is furious] Heb. and is Master of hot wrath: he is all on a light fire, as
it were, with fierce indignation against the enemies of his Church: Yet not so,
but that he is Master of his anger too; and does nothing in it, but what is
just and equal. Hence the vials of his wrath are said to be golden vials, Rev.
15.7. his anger is holy, his fire is pure, and without smoke. And this is
further declared in the following words.

The Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries] Such as seek to thrust him
beside his throne, that oppose his worship, contemn his word, persecute his
people, send proud messages after him, saying. We will not have this man to
reign over us: Bring hither those mine enemies, says He, and slay them before
me, Luke 19.27. As for such as sin of infirmity, and return to him by
repentance, they shall not find him furious, but gracious.

and he reserveth wrath for his enemies] Their preservation for a time, is but
a reservation to that wrath to come. As he precipitateth not his anger, but
defers the execution of it, giving men space to repent, as he did Jezabel, Rev.
2. so they shall find that his forbearance is no quittance; and that Poena
venit gravior, quo mage tarda venit.

Verse 3. The Lord is slow to anger] Slack he is not, as some men count
slacknesse, says St. Peter, but long-sufferring to usward, etc. 2 Epist. 3.9,
The devil stirred up the Heathen Poets, to persuade people, that God either
knew not, or cared not what was done here below: that he was often from home,
feasting with the Ethiopians, etc. The Epicures also taught the like doctrine:
Homer.
and the Sadduces among the Jews, the Manichees among the primitive Christians,
the Libertines amongst us. But they shall one day find that God is slow, but
sure; that the higher he lifts his hand, the harder he will strike; the
further he draws his bow, the deeper will be the wound.

and great in power] Heb. Great of power, able to knock down sinners in the
very act of their rebellion, and to send them packing to their place in hell.
So that it is not for want of power that he is so patient. For the Lord our God
is God of gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, Deuteronomy.
10.17. But what need we go further then the Text, where he is called, the
strong God, great in power, And that will not at all acquit the wicked.] This
is the last letter in his name (that nomen majestativum, as Tertullian calls
it,) Exodus 34.7. which he will in no wise forget: as neither must we. He will
not take the wicked by the hand, says Job, Job 8.20.
nor wink at the workers of iniquity, says David, Psalm. 50.21. but will render
a just recompense to every transgression and disobedience, says Paul, Heb.
2.2. A God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

the Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm] The word Suphab here
tendered whirlwind, begins with a small Samech, ad minuendum timorem piis,
Buxtorf. Tiberias. 167.
ne propterea terreantur, to take off the Saints from their inordinate fears,
and to assure the wicked, that when the Lord comes, imminet inde Soph finis
and exitium: there shall be an end of them, and an utter destruction. As the
whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an
everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. Or, as some read it, The righteous is the
foundation of the world, as firm as the worlds foundation, sc. the earth, which
is unmovable.

and the clouds are the dust of his feet] He walks upon them as men do upon
the dust of the earth: he makes the clouds his charet, and rides upon the
wings of the wind Psalm. 104.3. See Isa. 60.8. and 19.1. The wickeds happiness
shall take its end surely and swiftly, as Ezekiel tells them in his seventh
chapter, An end is come, is come, is come.

Ver. 4. He rebukes the sea and makes it dry] He had showed what wonders God
can do in the air. Now he tells, what he does in the water, and in the
earth. And it is well observed by an Interpreter, that when the Prophets speak
of God, Tarnon.
they do for most part imitate the expressions of Moses that most severe
lawgiver, and allude to his history; to show, that by the law is the knowledge
of sin, Romans 3.20. without which the stony hearts of men melt not, that the
promise of the gospel may relish sweetly with them Psalm. 19.10, 11. The word
here renders He rebukes imports, that God rateth and rattleth the Sea
verborum pedumque strepitu with such a voice and other noise, as causes fright
and flight. The Sea saw it and fled, Jordan was driven back, what ailed thee, O
thou Sea that thou fleddest etc. Psalm. 114.3, 5. The waters saw thee, O God,
the waters saw thee, they were afraid; the depths also were troubled Psalm.
77.16. See Exodus 14.21. Psalm. 78.14. and 66.6. and 136.16. and 106.9. This is
not in the power of any man to do; though Xerxes vainly attempted something,
when he wafted two millions of men over the Hellespont, and, for battering his
bridge of boats, caused it to be beaten with 300. stripes, and cast a pair of
fetters into it, to make it his prisoner. But to how small purpose all this,
together with his digging through Isthmus, his drinking up rivers with his army
and the like, it well appeared, when he was forced to fly back out of Greece in
a poor fishers boat, which being overburdened had sunk all, if the Persians by
the casting away themselves, had not saved the life of their king, The story of
Canutus the Dane, (sometimes king of England) is well known. He was told by a
Court-Parasite that all things in his dominions were at his beck and command.
Canutus (to confute him) caused a chair to be set on the seashore; wherein
being set, he said to the sea flowing fast toward him. Thou belongest to me,
and the land upon which I now sit is mine own, neither is there any whosoever
that obeyes me not shall escape unpunished. I command thee therefore thou sea,
that thou come up no higher into my land; nor presumest once to wet thy masters
legs or garments. But the Sea, keeping his ordinary course, without duty or
reverence washed both his legs and gown. He then leaping back said, Let al^ the
inhabitants of the world know, ^en: Huntington.
that the power of kings is frivolous and vain; neither is there any mortal
man worthy the name of a king, but he to whose beck heaven, earth and sea by
his laws, eternally are obedient. Neither did Canutus after this time wear a
crown; but set it upon the Crucifix according to the superstition of those
times; thereby acknowledging it to be a royalty proper to Christ alone to
rebuke the surges of the sea, and to say unto them Peace, and be still, Luke
4.24. Mar. 4.39.

and dries up all the rivers] As he did Jordan Ios. 4 2 King. 2. Chereth 1
King. 17.7. the great river Euphrates Rev. 16.12. See the Note there. See also
Plin. not. hist. l. 2. cap. 85. and 103.

Bashan languisheth and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth] all the
beauty of those fertile and pleasant places fades. When the earth bears
fruit and flowers, she is said to yield her strength, to bring forth her
increase: as when through drought or otherwise she does not, she is said to
languish and hang the head. See Ioe. 1.10.12. If the Eclipse of the Sun cause a
drooping in the whole frame of nature, how much more the wrath and vengeance of
God?

Ver. 5. The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt] Though valleys and
low places are also liable to earthquakes: as Antioch often, Ferrara in Italy
An. Dom. 1514. and 1573. yet hill-countreys much more; because there are more
holes and cavernes, Als^ed. Chronol.
See Psalm. 29.6. and 144.4. Zach. 14.4, 5. In the year 1618. Aug. 25. Pleurs a
town in Rhetia was overwhelmed by a hill, which, with a most swift motion
oppressed 1500. men. So that village aforementioned in the country of Bern, that
was over-covered by a hill in an earthquake: to the destruction of 50. Polan:
synt.
families. All this and that which follows is alleged here, to show how
easily God can overturn the Assyrian greatness.

and the earth is burnt at his presence] Viz. by his fire from heaven, as
Sodom, and by other his land-desolating judgments, such as Judea (that once
fertile, now barren country) Greece, Asia (once so flourishing) Germany,
Ireland etc. do at this day groan under. God turns a fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psalm. 107.34.

yea the world and all that dwell therein] Quae quidem sunt mira, sed tamen
vera divinae potentiae effecta. Wicked men, besides what they here suffer,
Tarnou.
shall one day give an account of what they have done in the body, with the
world all on a light fire about their ears: The trial of their works shall
be by fire 1 Cor. 3.13. the tribunal of fire Ezekiel. 1.27. the Judge a consuming
fire Heb. 12.29. His attendants Seraphins flaming creatures Isai. 6.2. his
pleading with sinners in flames of fire 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. the place of punishment,
a lake of fire fed with tormenting temper Isai. 30.33. Sodoms fire and
brimstone was but a toy to it. And shall the Ninivites think to mott up
themselves against this formidable fire: which the most solid parts of the
world cannot avoid or abide?

Ver. 6. What can stand before his indignation?] A glass bottle may as well
stand before a cannon-shot. There Is no standing before a lion, much less before
a devouring fire, least of all before an angry God. When our Savior did but
put forth a beam of his Deity, and said I am he, the stout soldiers fell to
the ground Ioh. 18.6. and there they had lame, if he had not licensed them to
rise again. Augustine.
Quid autem judicaturus faciet, qui judicandus hoc fecit? The wicked shall not
stand in judgment, says David Psalm. 1.7.

who can abide in the fierceness of his anger?] Heb: Collectumque premeus
volvi^ sub naribus ignem.
in the inflammation of his nostrils. Thus the Prophet describes Gods terrible
executions of justice on the Churches enemies, pulcherrimis metaphoris,
hypotyposi evidentissima, and distributionis artisicio insignissimo by most
elegant Metaphors, evident demonstrations, and artificial distributions.
Crocius in loc.


his fury is powered out like fire] A metaphor either from metalls melted, or
from show^es of rain, such as God powered down upon Sodom (whereunto probably
the Prophet here alludeth, as verse 8. to Noah's flood) flaming showers Jer.
7.20. and 44.6.

and the rocks are thrown down by him] that is, by his fierce wrath, when it is
at the full height: as the fire which at first burns a little within, upon a
few boards and rasters; but when it prevails, bursteth out in a most terrible
flame: as thunder which we hear at first, a little roa^ing noise afarr off:
but stay awhile, and it is a dreadful crack, cleaving the very rocks. See Ier.
4.23, 24. Mat. 27.51.

Verse 7. The Lord is good] To Israel (though terrible to the Assyrians as has
been plainly and plentifully set forth) to the pure in heart Psalm. 73.1. and he
does good Psalm, 119.68. to those that are good, that are upright in their
hearts Psalm. 125.4. These shall taste and see that the Lord is good: these shall
feelingly fay,' Oh blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34.8. Oh
praise the Lord for he is good etc.

a strong hold in the day of trouble] Praesidium, aut fortalitium, A strong
fort or fortification, better then a^^wer of brass, or town of war: the
righteous run thereunto and are safe. Prove. 18.10.
Hezekiah (for whose sake this is spoken) had the experience of it. He had a
day of trouble and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: the children were come to the
birth, and there was not strength to bring forth Esai. 37.3. To God therefore
he runs in this doleful day of his, and had present help. And what though the
Gods of the nations had not delivered them: yet Hezekiah's God in whom he
trusted did not deceive him as Senacherib said he would ver. 10.12. He is the
champion of his church, and will be the strong hold of his people, when the
heathens Tutelur Gods, and the Papists Patrone-saints will leave them in the
lurch. England was sometime said to have a warlike George, but the Papists
being offended with us (to do us, as they suppose, a mischief) have robbed us
of out George, and left us God alone to be our Champion: for which honor and
favor all true English hearts are bound to thank them, and can merrily sing as
He did once, Contemno minutulos istos deos, modo Jovem propitium habeam, We
care not for their He-saints, or she-saints to shelter us: so that the great
God will be good to us, a streng-hold in the day of trouble.

and he knows them that trust in him] that hover and cover under his wings,
as the chickens do under the hens: for that is the force of the Hebrew word here
used. Such as these God knows for his 2 Timothy 2.19. he knows their soul in
adversity Psalm, 119. he knows how to deliver them, as he did the righteous
Lot 2 Pet. 2.9. then, when they knew not what to do, as Jehosaphat 2 Chronicles.
20.12. yet if their eyes be toward him, their affiance in him, he will
extricate and deliver them. So well pleased is he with those that trust in him,
(for that is meant here by his knowing of them Psalm. 1.6. confer Job 9.29. 1
These. 5.12.) he takes such complacency and delight in them Psalm. 147.11. and
33.18. and such continual care of them, (as has been proved by an universal
experience, nor one instance can be given to the contrary) that they shall be
sure to have whatsoever heart can wish, or need require 2 Samuel 22.2, 3. even
miraculous loving kindness from God in a strong city Psalm. 17.7. and 31.21. so
great as cannot be uttered Psalm. 31.19. This is for the comfort of Gods Israel.
But lest the wicked (as they are apt) should meddle with childrens meat, which
was never meant for them: lest Niniveh should please her self in a fond conceit
of Gods goodness to her also, and so turn it into wantonness, the Prophet
brings in a stinging But in the next words.

Ver. 8. But with an overrunning flood he will make an end of the place
thereof] i. e. of Niniveh that great but bloody city chap. 3.1. Her state shall
be utterly ruinated as the old world, by the general deluge. But because the
word here rendered flood is used of rivers that overflow the banks 2 Chronicles.
32.4. and the adjunct overrunning also implies as much (See Esai 8.8. Dan.
11.10, 40.) I suppose the Holy Ghost here forethreateneth that ruin of this
city by the river Tigris, which at an inundation broke out upon the wall, and
threw down twenty furlongs thereof. This was a sad foretoken to them of their
ensuing desolation by the enemy (as that rain was that fell in Egypt) where it
used not to rain (a little before Cambyses with his Persians subdued it) for
it fell out in the time of the Siege, as Diodorus testifies, according to an
oracle that the Ninivites had received by tradition from their progenitors,
sc. that their city should then be taken by the enemy, Diod. Sic.
when the river took part against them: and it fell out accordingly.

and darkness shall pursue his enemies] i. e. terrible and inextricable
calamities shall overtake them: their ruin shall be irreparable. And indeed it
may now be said of Niniveh, which once was of a great city in Strabo, Magna
civitas, magna solitudo See Zeph. 2.13, 14, 15. Drusius renders it thus,
Hosts suos persequi faciet tenebras, He shall cause darkness to pursue his
enemies, Or, He shall make his enemies to pursue darkness, according to that
noted saying of the Ancients, Deus quem destruit, dementat, whom God intends to
destroy, him He first infatuateth. But the former sense is the better.

Ver. 9. What do ye imagine against the Lord?] because against his people. So
Psalm. 62.3. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain
all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. The blind
and bloody Ninivites looked no further then the Jews whom they invaded: they
considered not that God was engaged in the quarrel of his people. This made the
Virgin daughter of Zion, confident of Gods help, shake her head in scorn and
pity at them, saying, Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against
whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even
against the holy One of Israel. Isai. 37.22, 23. She knew well (though her
enemies knew not) that as an unskilful archer in shooting at a beast hitteth a
man sometimes: so the Churches adversaries, in troubling of her, trouble
Almighty God, who will not fail to be even with them: for he that touches
Gods people, touches the apple of his eye Zach. 2.8. Saul, Saul. why
persecutest thou me ^ Act. 9.4. It was a simple question of Satan to our
Savior, (...).
what have I to do with thee? whilst he vexed a servant of his. Has he his
name from knowledge, and yet could he so mistake himwhom he confessed to be the
son of the living God? It is an idle misprision to-sever the sense of an injury
done to any of the members, from the head. Drusius reads the text thus, Quid
cogitatis de Domino? what think ye of the Lord? what conceit or opinion have ye
of him? Do ye imagine that he cannot perform what he threateneth by his
Prophets? or that he cannot, when he pleases, deliver his people out of your
hand?

he will make an utter end] Not a consumption only, but a consummation: This he
is even doing, as the Hebrew has it: he is busy about it, and will not fail
to sinish it: for he uses not to do his work to the halves. Surely a short
work will the Lord make in your land, now that he takes you to do, certo,
cito, penitus.

assliction shall not rise up the second time] God will dispatch you at one
blow. See a like expression 1 Samuel 26.8. Niniveh had many brushes before, by
Phraortes king of Medes and his son Ciaxares, and afterward by the Scythians,
whereof See Ier. 49.34. and by Astyages etc. Now N^buchadnezzar was appointed
by God to make an utter end of it etc. The wicked shall totally and finally be
consumed at once. Not so the Saints: these he corrects with a rod, those with a
grounded staff Esa. 32.32. These in mercy and in measure. in the bunches only,
he stays his rough wind in the day of the East Wind Esa. 27.8. he stays
such afflictions as would shake his plants too much, or quite blow them down.
But to the wicked he has no such tender respect: he smites them at the root,
and, after many blows, he resolves to have them down. For instance: compare
Gods different dealing with Noah and the old world, with Lot and the Sodomites,
Israel and the Canaanites, Moses and Pharaoh, David and Saul etc. Fret not
therefore thy self because of evill-doers Psalm. 37.1. when the wicked spring as
the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do slourish: it is that they
shall be destroyed for ever. Psalm. 92.7. Pharaoh bad fair way made him till he
came to the midst of the sea: not one wave may rise up against him to wet so
much as the hoof of his horse. It was a fair Sun-shine-day when Lot went out
of Sodom: but ere night there f^ll out a dismal change. It was in the Spring
that the flood came, then when every thing was in its prime and pride: besides
that, the world never more flourished in wealth, peace, arts, and all
magnificence: yet sudden destruction came upon them, they were all at once
buried in one universal grave of waters.

Ver. 10. For while they be folden together as thornes] And so can hardly be
handled without hurt: God will burn them together in the same place 2 Samuel
23.7. as a man puts thorns folden, and that cannot easily be sundred all
together into the fire, where they make a sudden blaze and are extinct. So will
God deal with the Ninivites, not withstanding their carnal combinations and
confederacies. Junius Crocius.


and while they are drunken as drunkard^] who are very quarrelsome, bragging
and braving: but may be easily dealt with, and pusht down with one finger.

as stubble sully dry] that has long lain a sunning, and so is very
combustible. The wicked are often compared to stubble, because good for nothing
but the fire: and when fully dry, when ripe for ruin, they shall be fully
devoured, as some read the words. Ecq^em vero mihi dabis Rhetorem etc. as One
says of another text. But what gallant Rhetoric is here? well might God say
Hos. 12.10. I have spoken also by the Prophets and used similitudes etc. (See
the Note there) here we have three in a breath; and all little enough to work
on the hearts of the wicked, who are loath to believe the truth and certainty of
Gods threats: but rather bless themselves when God curses Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Ver. 11. There is one come out of thee that imagines evil against the Lord]
Many there are, but one among and above the resT: sc. Sennacherib, that bold
Briareus, that lifts up his hundred hands at once against heaven; and
threateneth to cut off at a blow Gods people, as if they had all but one neck.
See verse 9. He is come up over all his channels, and gone over all his banks,
Isa. 8.7. but God shall soon put a stop to him: and with an overrunning slood
(that he may be even with him) make an utter and of his place, as it is here
ver. 8.

a wicked Counsellour] Heb. a counselor of Belial, or of the devil, who
lends him his seven heads to plot, and his ten horns to push Gods people.
What pernicious counsel he gave them see 2 King. 18. 2 Chronicles. 32. Esal. 36. sc.
to cast off God as not able to deliver them out of his hands: and to make an
agreement with him by a present etc. the pestilent counsel he gave them by
Rabshakeh, who was, say the Rabbines, a Renegado-Jew. Every Vizier and Basha of
State among the Turks uses to keep still a Jew of his private counsel: whose
malice, wit, and experience of Christendom, with their continual
intelligence, is thought to advise most of that mischief, Voyage into the
Levant. p. 114.
which the Turk at this day puts in execution against us (says mine Author)
the Jews being found the most nimble and Mercuriall wits in the world, but
counselors of Belial. In all the shop of hell there is no anvile so well set,
whereon to forge, no engine so apt, whereby to execute any choice piece of
mischief, as that man, who is ingenuose nequam, and publico ma^o facundus (as
it is said of C. Curio the Roman) Wittily wicked, and pestilently eloquent.
Such were Cardinal Pool to England, Cardinal Sadeletus to Geneva, and the
I^suite^ generaily, great Politicians and factours for Rome: They say, Satan
sent Luther, and God sent them to withstand him. They destroy many souls, as
the Dragon does the Elephant; by biting his ear, and sucking his blood; because
he knows that to be the only place which the Elephant cannot reach with his
trunk to desend. They take crafty counsel against the Church. Psalm. 8.33.


Verse 12. Thus says the Lord] To thee, O Jerusalem, and for thy comfort. The
Lord will speak peace to his people: and Ministers are charged to speak to
their hearts, Esaias 40 1.

though they be quiet] Or, still, well disciplined (as the Turkish Army is, to
the wonder of all that pass through it:) Turcae perpepetuum silentium tenent ut
muti. Cuspin. de Caesar. p. 475.
there was no falling out, nor complaining in the Assyrian hosts: therefore,
and by this means, did their king march on, p^sse throw.

and likewise many] How great an Army they were, may be gathered from the many
thousands of them that were slain by the Angel, Esaias 37.36. It is all, one with
God, whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only, Job 34.29. he
stands not upon multitudes, who takes up the Isles, as a very little thing,
Esaias 40.15.

yet thus shall. ^^ey be cut down] Heb. shorn; with as little ado as one would
shear a sheep, mow down a meddow, or shave off hair with a sharp rasor. The
Prophet seems to allude to that Text in Esaias (with whom, as his contemporary,
he has many things common) chap. 7.20. and to threaten the Assyrian, that he
shall be paid home in his own coin: and that as he had done to Israel, so
should it be done again to him. God loves to retaliate.

when he shall pass thorow] Heb. and he passes, or away he goes, se, to his
own country, after the loss of his Army, slain by the Angel, so Hierom.
Others, they shall be cut down, sc. by the hand of a mighty One, as Esaias 10.34.
or of an Angel, when he, that is Sennacherib, and every one of his Army has
passed through, sc. the land without restraint, or control, and now makes
account that he is master of all.

Though I have afflicted thee, yet I will afflict thee no more] sc. by these
Nineviten no, nor by any other enemies, unless there be very great need, 1
Pet. 1.6. The Church has ever had her Halcyous, her interchanges of prosperity
and adversity. God will not always chide, Psalm. 103.9. he delights in the
prosperity of his servants, Psalm. 35.27. and wishes, Oh that this people were
wise, etc. O that my people had hearkened, etc Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15. There is
another reading of the words, as may be seen in the margent. This is Iunius.
the Chaldee paraphras^^^. thus; Although the Ninevites enjoy great peace, and
by peace are so m^^^plied, that they are very numerous, yet shall they be shorn
and cut down.

Verse 13. For now will I break his yoke from off thee] Lest the promised
deliverance should be any whit doubted of; the time when, and the misery whence
they should be delivered is here laid open. God has set the time of his
peoples sufferings, which shall be neither so little a while as they would; ^or
so long as the enemy would. Hold out faith and patience; deliverance is at next
door by.

and will burst thy bonds in sunder] By yoke and bonds here, understund those
Tributes which the Assyrians, called out by Ahaz, imposed upon the kingdom of
Judah, 2 King. 18. God promises them here their ancient liberty; which was,
soon after this, recovered under Hez^kiah, who trusting in God, and reforming
religion, rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him no longer.
Shortly after also, the Persians destroyed Nineveh, dealt more gently with the
captive Jews, and gave them good leave to return home again, as many as had a
mind to it, Ezr. 1.4. 2 Chronicles. 36. Verse 14 And the Lord has given a
commandment.] sc. to his upper and lower forces (for he is Lord of Hosts,
Commander in Chief of all creatures.)

against thee] O Sennacherib devoted to destruction, for thine intolerable
pride and cruelty. God resists the proud, Iam. 4.6. he sets himself in
battellarray against him, as the word signifies, commanding all his creatures
to fall on: (...).
and no wonder. For whereas all other vices flee from God, pride alone flees
in his face: casts down the gauntlet of defiance, and makes head against
him. Hence his hatred of a proud person.

that no more of thy name be sown] i. e. that no more children be born to thee;
so Lyra expounds it: that thy posterity perish, so Gualther. This must needs
be grievous to proud and ambitious persons, who promise themselves a kind of
immortality here in their posterity: and that there shall be a perpetual
succession of their name in this world. Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever, they call their lands after their own names,
Psalm. 49.11. But their lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness, Prove. 20.20.
there shall be -- Nullus, cui lampada tradant. Others sense the Text thus. Thou
shall no more be talked of; but the memory of thy name shall be utterly
extinct. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth, Psalm. 34.16. See Esaias 10.12, 13, etc. Ier.
49.34. Sennacherib had done great exploits, till he lifted up his hand against
heaven, he had been very victorious and famous; but now lies wrapped up in the
sheet of shame, and is made an instance of divine vengeance, even among the
Heathen: For so Herodotus tells us, that in Egypt there was Sennacheribs
statue erected, with his inscription; Let whosoever looks upon me, (...).
Hero. l 2.
learn to fear God. He lifted up himself against his Creator and Father: he
is therefore slain by his own children. He thought to overturn the true service
of God; he is therefore slain at his idoll-worship. He went about to destroy
the house of God; he is therefore destroyed in the house of his god, Esaias 37.38.

Out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image] This, those
superstitious Heathens held a great loss, a sore affliction. It is reported of
the people of the East Indies, in the Isle Zeylon, that having an Apes tooth
got from them, which was a consecrated thing by them, they offered an
incredible mass of treasure to recover it. What a noise made Micah after his
Ephod and images, Judge. 18.24? and Laban after his Teraphim? Genesis 31. and the
men of Ophrah, for their altar and grove? And what a price set Papifts on their
pictures and trinkets. Judge. 6.30.


I will make thy grave] sc. Of thine idoll-temple, polluted by thy slaughter
therein, and so converted into a sepulcher for thee. There is a story (but of
no great authority) that Sennacherib, after his shameful return out of Judea,
demanding of some about him, what might be the reason that the unresistable
God of heaven so favored the Jewish nation, as he had found by sad experience?
Answer was given him, that Abraham from whom they descended, sacrificed unto
him his only son, which purchased this protection to his progeny. If that
will win him, says he, I will spare him two of my sons, to procure him to be
on my side. Which Sharezzer and Adrammelech his sons hearing of, prevented
their own deaths by slaying him. It is more likely that they laid wicked hands
upon their father, Castal. Annot.
either out of ambition, or discontent for the loss of the Army. Howsoever,
God made use of their cruelty, for the just punishment of Sennacherib: and is
here therefore said to have commanded it. After this, cruel war arose among
Sennacheribs sons, which were the utter overthrow of that nation, In Cyropad.
and laid them open as a prey to the kings of Babylou, as Xenophon writes.

for thou art vile] Worthless, and weightlesse. All wicked men are so, be they
never so great, Psalm. 15.4. Dan. 11.21. In his estate shall stand up a vile
person, that is, Antiochus Epiphanes, the great king of Syria, whom the
Samaritans in flattery styled, The mighty god. It Is virtue only that enobles.
Them that honor God, he will honor: but they that despise him, shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. Contempt shall be their portion, and with
ignominy, repreach, Prove. 18.3. Here then the Prophet threateneth the same that
Joel had done, chap. 2.20. His stink shall come up, and the ill savor shall
come up, becaue be has done great things, i.e, he has attempted to do them,
but was hindered from heaven. God put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his
lips, and turned him back to Nineveh: where, within less then fifty days
after, he was slain by his two sons, Tob. 1.23. and although his third son
Asar-haddon reigned in his stead,: yet he soon after lost both his life and
his kingdom, which was devolved to the Babylonians, and all the royal race of
Assyria was rooted out.

Verse 15. Behold upon the mountains the feet of him, etc.] This Behold is as
the sound of a trumpet before some Proclamation, to bespeak attention.
Jerusalem is surrounded with mountains, Psalm. 125.2. and on the mountains a
voice may be heard afar off. Pedes Evangelizantis. Vulg.
The feet of him that brings good tidings,] Or, Of an Evangelist, that brings
news of Sennacheribs ruin: but-especially of Satan subdued by Christ, which is
the sum of all the good news in theworld, Luke 2.10.

that publishes peace] Pacem omnimodam; external, internal, eternal, peace
of country, and of conscience, by Christ who is our peace: It is usual with
the Prophets to rise from earthly things to heavenly, from corporalls to
spiritualls. See Romans 10.15. Esaias 52.7.

O Judah keep thy solemn feasts, etc.] which hitherto hindered by the enemy,
thou have intermitted. Perform thy vows, (made in the day of thy distress)
bring presents to him that ought to be feared. Psalm. 76.11. 2 Chro. 32.23


for the wicked] Heb. Belial, that stigmaticall Belialist Sennacherib, that
lawless, yokelesse, masterlesse monster, that merum scelus, that is so
portentously, so peerlesly vicious.

He is utterly cut off] His Army by the Angel, himself by his sons, his
Monarchy by the Babylonians. See Esaias 27.1, 2.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. HE that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face] Nebuchadnezzar
the elder, that maul of the whole earth, Jer. 50.23. that brake and dispersed
the Nations, as a Maul or great Hammer does the hardest stones. See how like a
right Pyrgopolynicis he vaunteth of his valor, and victories, Esaias 10.8, 9,
10, 11, etc. So Demetrius was surnamed Poliorcletes, the Destroyer of cities;
Attilas called himself Orbis flagellum, the scourge of the World. Julius Caesar
was Fulmen belli, The thunderbolt of war: he had taken in his time a thousand
Towns., conquered three hundred Nations, took prisoner one million of men, and
slain as many. These were Dtssipatores indeed, and dashers in pieces, rods of
Gods wrath; and this they took to be a main piece of theit silly glory. How
much more honor was it to Augustine, M. Cottons pref to Hilder. on Joh. 4.
to be styled Haereticorum malleus, the hammer of Heretics? and to Mr.
Hildersam, to be Schismaticorum malleus, the maul of Schismatikes? and lastly,
to Luther, that he could thus say of himself: Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero
mors tua Papa?
I living, stopped Romes breath,
And dead, will be Romes death?


Is come up before thy face] Nineveh lay high; and those that went thither,
were said to go up, Hos. 8.9. Nebuchadnezzar is said here, to be come up to it,
long before he did, (which sets forth Gods omniscience: Known to him are all
his works from the beginning of the world: Act. 15.18. Psalm. 139.2.
and present to him are all things, both past and future) and to come up before
Nineveh's face; who thought none durst have been so bold as to look her in the
face. But though she had been a terror, yet now she is a scorn: as was
likewise Ephraim, when he offended in Baal, Hos. 13.1. See the Note there.

Keep the munition, watch the way, etc.] Ironice omnia, q.d. Do all this, if
you think it will do any good. But it is all to no purpose; you are an undone
people, your enemies are above fear, and you below hope; you have hitherto
delighted in war, you shall now have enough of it; you have troubled the
world with your arms, and Armies; now you shall meet with your match, a people
terrible from the beginning. Up therefore, and do your utmost: Neglect nothing
that may serve for your necessary defense; but it will not be: for except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127.1.

Verse 2. For the Lord has turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the
excellency of Israel] Both the ten tribes (carried captive already) and the
other two (vexed by Sennacheribs invasion) have taken their turns, and have
had their part of bitter affliction: and shall thou O Niniveh altogether escape
unpunished? Never think it. Especially since thou have exceeded thy commission,
and exercised an unheard of cruelty upon Gods people: for he was but a little
displeased, but ye have helped forward the affliction Zach. 1.15. See the Note
there.

for the emptiers have emptied them out] The Assyrians have spoiled and
pillaged till they have left neither men nor means behind them; such clean
work they have made, sweeping all before them, like a sweeping rain that
leaves no sood Prove. 28.3. Omnia corradunt and converrunt.

and marred their vine-branches] that is their sons and their daughters says
Lyra: their cities and villages, say others: like a malicious vinedresser, that
not only cuts off the luxurious or barren branches, but pulls up the young
sprouts by the roots, and so marrs the vineyard. The Assyrians endeavored
utterly to destroy the whole seed of Abraham without any mercy or compassion:
and this undid them. The jealous and just God cannot bear with such boares out
of the wood, that wast his vines Psalm. 80.13.

Ver. 3. The shield of his mighty men is made red] Panoplia terrorens auget.
All was red a color much affected by the Medes, Persians and Caldees) to show
that they were a sanguinary nation, and not more gold- thirsty, Esai. 13.
Herodot: Diod. Sic. Xenophon Curtius
then blood-thirsty.

the valiant men are in scarlet] A color affected by martial men, that would
seem to fear no colors. The Lacedaemonians used it much, when they went to
fight: that, if they should be wounded, their blood might not appear upon
their apparel, for the discouragement of themselves, and encouragement of the
enemy by such a sight. The Romish Cardinals are clothed in scarlet, and are
created by a red hat which the Pope gives them, in a token that they should be
ready to shed their blood for the Catholic faith: which if they should do (as
never any of them yet did) they would be no better then the Devils Martyrs:
since it is the cause, and not the punishment, that makes a true martyr. A
Tiburn-tippet, (as plain Mr. Latimer was wont to speak) would well become
those scarlet-Fathers: who, like bells will be never well tuned, till well
hanged; for their blood-guiltinesse, and soule-murther especially. In the
kingdom of Naples there were two notable thieves (the one named Paternoster,
Reinold. de idol Romans prafet.
the other Ave-Maria) who at several times had murdered one hundred and
sixteen men, and were therefore deservedly put to a cruel death. But nothing so
cruel as the Pope and his Conclave deserve, for their sending of so many souls
daily to that great red dragon; red with the blood of souls which he has
swallowed, as St. Peter has it, 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev. 12.3.

the charrets shall be with flaming torches] Those currus falcati charrets
armed with sithes and hooks, with, and in which, they were wont to fight:
these shall be with flaming torches carried along in them, either to light them
fighting by night, or else to fire the enemies houses, and to terrify their
hearts.

and the firr trees shall be terribly shaken] with the rattling of the
charrets, and clattering of the armor. In a bloody fight between Amurath the
third king of Turks and Lazarus Despot of Servia, the noise of warlike weapons,
the neighing of horses and outcries of men were so terrible, and great, that
the wild beasts in the woods stood astonished therewith, the trees seemed to be
shaken, and the Turkish histories to express the terror of the day, vainly
say, Turk. Hist.
that the Angels in heaven, amazed with that hideous noise, for that time
forgot the heavenly hymns etc. The word here rendered terribly shaken is rather
Chaldee, then Hebrew: as spoken of the Chaldees, coming against Niniveh.

Verse 4. The charrets shall rage in the streets] shall run so fast, as if they
were mad that drove them.

they shall justle one against another] Coxabunt they shall smite side to side,
through have and heat of fighting.

they shall seem like torches] Heb: their aspect is as of torches: fire
sparkleth out of their eyes that are in them: they look upon the Assyrians, as
if they would look through them.

they shall run like the lightenings] Heb. they shall break through as the
lightenings; that is, with incredible swistnesse: as lightening in an instant
comes out of the East, and shines even to the West Mat. 24.27. Luc. 10.18.

Verse 5. He shall recount his worthies Or Gallants, Magnificoes. These,
Asarhaddon the king of Niniveh seeing himself straighted, shall muster up, and
mind of their duties: bidding them now or never play the men, since the empire
was at stake.

they shall stumble in their walk] thorough fearfulness and
faint-heartednesse: according to that of the Psalmist, The stout-hearted are
spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found
their hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast
into a dead sleep Psalm. 76.5, 6. God struck a terror into the Ninivites upon
the first coming of the Chaldees. See Deuteronomy. 11.25. Therefore there is no great
credit to be given to Diodorus Siculus, who says, Cap. 7. Lib. 3.
that the Chaldees were thrice overcome in fight by the Assyrians, when as they
came in arms to besiege Niniveh.

they shall make have to the wall thereof] The Chaldees shall: taking advantage
of the Ninivites fear, that cowardly passion, that disarmeth and disableth a
man for his own defense, Or, the Assyrians shall hasten to the wall as fast as
their fainting and failing legs will carry them; to try what they can do, to
keep out the enemy. So the Emperor of Constantinople, certainly advertised of
the Turks purpose for the general assault shortly to be given, Turk. Hist.
fol. 345.
after that he had many times with tears requested to have borrowed money of
his covetous subjects, to have been employed for defense of their city; he
first commended himself and them to the Almighty by general fasting and
prayer: and afterward appointed every captain and commander to some certain
place of the wall, for defense thereof etc. but all in vain, as here at
Niniveh.

and the defense shall be prepared] Heb. the covering or coverer, Testudo
militaris. Some military engine, or moveable defense.

Verse 6. The gates of the rivers shall be opened] Notwithstanding all
forementioned endeavors to save the city, the water-gates or those that stood
near the river Tigris, flew open either by means of that inundation
abovementioned, or by the enemies irruption; or the treachery of some that were
within.

and the palace shall be dissolved] Or melted, happily by that inundation:
howsoever, by hostile impression: whether we understand it of the Palace
Royal, or the Idol-temple or both(the word will bear either) for it was not
unusual for Princes to have their houses near to the temples, as the kings of
Judah had Ier. 22.14. The Trojans had their Palladium in the Tower: the Romans
their Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus in the Capitol: Constantine the great,
built the Lateran Church in his Laterane palace; William Rufus, his
Westminster Hall, near the Minster.

Verse 7: And Huzza shall be led away captive] The Queen; so called, because
the stood firm, and was best underlaid of any other, as was thought, Some
render it, quae firma stabat, ducta est in exilium. She that was wont to stand
at the kings right hand (as Psalm. 45.) which is a place both of dignity and of
safety. As Christ is at Gods right hand Psalm. 110.1. so the Church is at his,
Psalm. 45.10. and he has led captivity captive Ephesians. 4.8. spoiled Principalities
and powers, made an open show of them, triumphing over them in himself, Col.
2.15. This is the saints happiness: they are out of gunshot, more then
Conquerours, even Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14.

she shall be brought up] whither she would not, to take horse or coach to go
into captivity, as Q. Zenobia was brought in triumph to Rome in golden fetters,
by Aurelianus the Emperor.

and her maids shall lead her] Her maids of honor; The Gynecium or Seraglio
shall fall into the hands of rude soldiers; and by them be hurried away into a
far country. Neither is it without desert: for omne malum fere ex Gynaecio;
Women are many times means of much mischief: and for their miscarriages, men
fall by the sword, and the mighty in the war: the gates also of the city
lamene and mourn, Esaias. 3.11.25, 26. even for the Ladies gallantry, whereof we
have here an inventory. What a deal of trouble bred Jezabel in Israel,
Athaliah in Judah, those 2. late turbulent Queen-Mothers in Scotland and
France? of which later and her Cardinal Lorraine, One made this stinging
distich, Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effraenis Monachus, plenaque fraud^ anus.


as with the voice of doves] Mourning secretly to themselves, and groaning
inwardly; In more in columbarum mussitantium. Esaias 38.14. and 59.11.
as not suffered to bark at those that carry them captive, (as Hecuba Queen of
Troy did, and is therefore fabled to be turned into a bitch) or to fill the air
with complaints of their hard fortunes, as they call it, or to ease their grief
by loud lamentations; but forced to smother it, and take it all to themselves,
which is no small aggravation of it: For Expletur lachrymis egeriturque dolor.
Ovid.
Their tongues and their tears are women's best weapons. Et hic fere lasciviae,
luxus, and libidinis sinis est, says Gualther here. Lo, such, for most part,
is the end of lasciviousness, luxury, and lust. Let women be warned.

tabring upon their breasts] Not singing and playing on instruments after their
Ladies, as once: but moaning, and groaning, and knocking their breasts, for the
greatness of their grief, and heaviness; whereof this is an excellent, and
eloquent description.

Verse 8. But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water] Like a fish-pool of
water, (...)
and therefore happy: The word here used for a pool, or pond, signifies also a
blessing. The Pope was wont to say of England, that it was puteus inexhaustus,
his pit that could not be drawn dry. Such a pit, or pool was Nineveh. Populous,
wealthy, potent, etc. Esaias 8.7. the Magazine of the whole East, a rich
Cargazon, Turk. hist. 843.
and not unlike the Island Cyprus, anciently called, Macaria, that is, blessed,
for the plenty, prosperity, and pleasure there abounding. This invited the
Romans to subdue it: as the pearls usually cast out at the flood, and gathered
at the ebb, Sext. Ruf. Sueton. in vit. Caesa. cap. 47.
drew Caesar's affection for the conquest of Britain: and as Nineveh's fish-pool
did the Chaldean fishermen. The greater wealth, the greater spoil awaiteth a
people, or person, Prove. 1.19. As if a tree has thick and large boughs, every
man desires to be lopping of it. Nineveh's antiquity is here also noted. Of
old, or, of a long time she has been Empress of the East; She was the seat of
the first Monarchy, which she also held longest of any, even above thirteen
hundred years. Howbeit this shall be now no protection to her, but an article,
or an argument against her, that she is an old sinner, and has been long time
heaping up, and hoarding the mammon of unrighteousness.

yet they shall flee away] as waters do when the banks of a pond are broken
down: and as fish do, when the water is drawn out, or dried up: then they
friggle any way. So shall the Ninevites flee away, when their city is once
broken: pugnae obliti, pristinaeque virtutis.

Stand, stand, shall they cry] Their own Commanders, desirous to rally them: or
their enemies, desirous to ransack them, and make prize of them: Sed surdo
fabulam.

but none shall look back] Or, cause them to turn. Nemo potest eos resupinare:
their hearts are fallen into their heels, and they have much more mind to save
themselves by flight, then by fight.

Verse. 9. Take ye the spoil of silver, take ye the spoil of gold] This is the
voice of God to the Caldeans; encouraging them to fall on, since they are sure
of good booty, plenty of plunder, which he here freely bestows upon them. In
like sort Mahomet the great Turk, the better to encourage his soldiers to
storm Constantinople, caused proclamation to be made through his Camp the day
before, that he would freely give all the spoil of the city for three days
unto them, Turk hist. 345.
if they could win it. And for confirmation thereof, he solemnly swore the
Turks great oath, etc. Now the love of money is (...), says a Father, daring
and desperate.

For there is none end of the store] Fat plunder, as was at Constantinople: the
wealth whereof, the Turks themselves wondered at; and were therewith so
enriched, that it is a proverb amongst them at this day, if any grow suddenly
rich, Ibid. 347.
to say, He has been at the sacking of Constantinople. Neither did they more
wonder at their wealth, then derided their folly: for that possessing so much,
they would part with so little to their Emperor, Ibid. 345.
for the defense of themselves and their Country. And the like is reported of
Heidelberg.

and glory out of all the pleasant furniture] Heb. vessels, or utensils of
desire: which are said to yield glory, because with men one has so much glory
and respect, as he has wealth, and rich household stuff. See Genesis 31.1. with
the Note. 1 King. 10.23. 2 Chronicles. 32.27. See here also the just judgment of
God upon such, as set their affections upon that costly vanity, rich furniture.
( Hezechiah smarted for it, Esaias 39.2, 6. 2 Chronicles. 32.27.) or rich attire,
which is superbiae nidus, the nest of pride, says One. The worst apparel is
natures garment; the best, but follies garnish, says Another.

Verse 10. She is empty, and void, and waste] An elegant Agnomination in the
Original, Bukab, umebukah, umbylla. kah.
beyond Englishing: whereby the utter destruction, and consternation of the
City and Monarchy is graphically depainted, and set forth to the life. See a
like elegancy, Jer. 16.15. The last word rendered waste, signifies burst up,
or, void of all verdure; a place where nothing green grows. Such an horrible
devastation follows upon Gods word of command to the Caldees, verse 9. like
as when Christ cursed the barren fig tree, Matthew. 21.20.
it withered away immediately, though it be the most succulent of any tree, and
bears the brunt of winter-blasts unwithered. Gods words, however slighted,
are not wind, but fire, Jer. 5.13, 14.

and the heart melteth] The heart ( in quo fortitudo stabulum habet, the seat
of courage) fell asunder in their bosoms like drops of water: Crocius.
they were cowed out. See Jos. 2.11. and 5.1. and 7.5. Esaias 13.7. Ezekiel. 21.12.

and the knees smite together] Genua labant, as is usual in extreme fear: the
blood retreating to the heart, Virg.
to releeve it. See Dan. 5.6. Job. 4.4. Esaias 35.3.

and much pain is in all loins] Such pain as befalls women in travel, Esaias
21.3. and 13.8. Joel 2.6. Mic. 4.9, 10. the doubled form of the Hebrew word
implies the extremity of it. The loins are the seat of strength: whence the
Latins call weak men, Elumbes.
Loinlesse men.

and the faces of them all gather blacknesse] Heb. ^ pot, i.e. such blackness
as is on the sides of a pot. Olla, lebes, cacabus.
See Joel 2.6. Joy and sorrow will show themselves in the face, as in a glass.
Now if for a temporal mischief, there is so great a consternation in wicked
men, what shall we think there is in hell?

Verse 11. Where is the dwelling of the Lious, etc.] Where is Nineveh, once so
terrible, now so despicable? Leoni mortuo vel mus insultat. Once none durst
look at it, or mute against it, now each passenger can insult over it, enquire
where it stood, and not be afraid to take this Lion by the beard. God powers
contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty, Job 12.21.
when once they turn tyrants, and exercise regiment without righteousness, as
Mic. 3.2, 3. Such a mighty hunter, or devourer of men and nations was Nimrod
(the first founder of this Assyrian Monarchy) and became a proverb against all
tyrants, and persecutours, Genesis 10.9. Such a Lion was Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17. Such a
Tiger Tiberius, (of whom One says, that he laid hold with his teeth on all the
excellent spirits of his time) Domitian, (who not content with the blood of
Christians, commanded all Jews that were of the stock of David, to be sought
out, and put to death) Dioclesian, and the rest of the Primitive persecutours:
As also that man of sin, the whole pack of Popes, successors to Boniface the
eighth (who came in like a fox, reigned like a lion, died like a dog) and to
Benedict the twelfth, who when he died, had this Epitaph made of him: Hic situs
est Nero, laicis leo, vipera clero:
Devius a vero, turba repleta mero. ^^ei Medulla hist. E^cles. 321.



and the feeding place of the young lions] Where the old ones provided prey fro
them, till they could skill to do it for themselves; that which they would soon
learn and practice, when once grown up. The Assyrian young-princes were
accustomed to rapine, and cruelty from the first: being no better then young
Tiberims, whom his Tutour Theodorus Gadareus rightly characterized, (...).
when he said, he was Dirt kned with blood: Or, then Nero the lion; of whom his
father Domitius prophesied, that of himself and his wife Agrippina (both
notoriously naught) no good man could be born. Mali corvi, malum ovum. Dio in
Nerone
Of an ill breed, ne catulus ^idem relinquendus, said the Romans, when they
slew one of their tyrants together with his young son. It was Maximinus, if I
mistake not.

where the lion, even the old lion walked] The courageous, or hearty lion
(named of Leo an heart) walked and stalked with his whelps, and none made them
afraid. Labi.
but now, his heart melts, his knees knock together for fear, and faintness,
as verse 10. his city Nineveh (that was not only spoliarium latronum, Calv.
but spelunca leonum) is now no where: it shall live by fame only, time shall
triumph over it. God will stain the pride of all glory, and bring into contempt
all the honorable of the earth, Esaias 23.9. So Clara fuit-Sparte, magnae
viguere Mycenae, Ovid. Metant. lib. 15.

Vile solum Sparte est, altae cecidere Mycenae.
Oedipodioniae quid sunt nisi nomina Thebae? etc.


Verse 12. The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps] i. e. that which
might have been enough and spare, but that they were unsatiable. So covetous
they were and ravenous, that their Posie might have been, Totus non sufficit
orbis: their desire of more, was enlarged as hell; greedy lions they were, that
could never have enough, Esaias 56.11. As a ship may be over-laden with gold and
silver, even unto sinking, and yet have compass and sides enough to hold ten
times more: so the cormorants and covetous caitives of this world, though they
have enough to sink them; yet never have they enough to satisfy them.

and strangled for his lionesses] i. e. for his wives and concubines, by whom
they were commanded, being captivarum suarum captivi, as Plutarch says of the
Persian kings; slaves to their she-slaves, whom they enriched and adorned with
the spoils of the subdued nations. Cicero in his fifth Action against Verres,
says, that the kings of Persia and Syria, (think the same of Assyria) as they
had many wives, so they would bestow upon them whole cities for their
maintenance. Antiochus king of Syria, gave two fair cities to his Concubine, 2
Maccab. 4.30. Antony gave all Egypt to Cleopatra. Henry 2. of France, gave to
Diana Valentina all the confiscation of goods made in the kingdom for cause of
Heresy, Anno 1554. which caused the burning of many good people. Vtinam hodie
non essent leanae, says Calvin here. It were to be wished there were not now
adays lionesses, Hist. of Council of Trent. 387.
that can of themselves strangle and devour: but we see that there are some
women that exceed all men in impudency and cruelty. The Queen Mother he meant,
in all likelihood, as Beza did her cruel son Charles 9. Author of the
Massacre, in that Verse of his, made upon the that new star in Cassiopeia,
1572.

Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente time. Camd. Elizab.
and filled his holes with prey, and his den with ravine] His palaces with
treasure, his coffers with cash, raked together by evil arts, and oppressive
practices. What else was the whole Assyrian Empire, but a great theevery?
Alexander the Great was told to his teeth, that he was the greatest thief in
the world. And was not Jul^^^ Caesar such another? who said, that for a
kingdoms sake right might be vio^^^^? and who robbed his country of her
liberty, for the satisfying of his unlawful desire of ruledome? But for whom
all this? surely for those that never thanked them for any thing, but fought
for their spoil.

Verse 13. Behold I am against thee] Ecce me contra^te: Behold I, Hoc ecce non
excitat modo sed perterrefacit.
who am of my self a whole Army of men, Van and Rcare both, Esaias 52.12. I am
against thee, says the Lord of Hostss, who have all creatures at command if
need were, as Auxiliaries: and can arm your own forces against you, sheath your
own swords in your own bowels. Woe be to rhose that have God against them. The
Tigurine renders it, En me tibi hostem, etc. Deus serierum.


and I will burn her charets in the smoke,] That is, says Danaeus, I will burn
all their munition, and furniture for war, with a most bitter and soft fire,
that they may be the more grieved, and the more tormented thereby. Others, by
smoke understand the suddenness of the judgment q. d. No sooner shall my
wrath begin to kindle, Calvin.
but I will consume them: prime impetu, so soon as ever the flame begins to
break forth, or rather, before. By charets may be also meant, those that were
carried in them. The Hebrew gloss here is, By smoke, that is, by a fire whose
smoke is seen afar off. See Judge. 20.40. Such shall be the fire of the last
day, as A Lapide here notes out of Hierom: when all the lions, and lions
whelps, that is, all tyrants and oppressors shall be burnt, together with all
their charrets, pompes, and messengers, ac imprimis little dux and princeps
Antichristus, and especially Antichrist their Captain, and Chieftain. He and
his Jesuits shall doubtless then be cast alive into a lake of fire, burning
with brimstone, Revel, 19.20. Let A Lapide note that.

and the sword shall devour thy young lions! Thou shall bring forth children to
the murderer: and those that have taken the sword (though never so young)
shall perish by the sword, Mat. 26.52. As a Nettle stings betime, an Urchin is
rough whiles young, and a Crab soon goes backward: so sanguinary dispositions
will soon discover themselves.

And I will cut off thy prey from the earth] Thou shall be no further terrible,
and troublesome to the nations, whom thou have vexed and spoiled. Of Baldwin
that Apostate, One says, that when he died, desiit simul maledicere and
vivere, he ceased at once to live and to rail. And of our Henry 2. the
Chronicler writes, that in a great distemperature against his rebellious
sons, he departed the world, which so often himself had distempered. Nineveh
the great huntresse was now under that woe, Esa. 33.1.

and the voice of thy messengers] thy Heralds, by whom thou have proclaimed
war, or made unreasonable demands, or laid hard laws upon other nations, or
exacted grievous tributes, or published thy new victories, to keep people in
awe, or lastly, blasphemed my great Name, as Rabshakeh one of thy messengers
will do, 2 King. 18.19. These shall all be silenced, an end shall be put to
them and thee.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. WOe to the bloody city] Nineveh, that delights in war, which One
well calls, (...).
the slaughterhouse of mankind, and Hell of this present world, Esaias 95. the
Greek word (...), war, signifies mush blood. Besides that, many murders
were committed in her, and connived at, if not countenanced by a pretense of
justice. Such a sanguinary city is Rome: not only drunk with the blood of
saints, Jacob. Rev de vita Pontif. page 119.
but also of her own children. Brazutus, set on by Hildebrand, was the death of
six Popes successively, within the space of thirteen years. Pope John the 22.
(who sat Anno Dom. 1316.) flead a Bishop, who had some way offended him, Ibid.
270. Spec. Europ.
and afterward burned him. Pope Paul the third, poisoned two Cardinals,
Fulgosus, and Contarenus, a Bishop also, and Johannes Baptista Vergerius,
because he suspected them of Lutheranisme. The Italians generally, as they
blaspheme oftener then swear. so they murder more then revile or slander. Such
another city of bloods is Paris in France: witness that barbarous Massacre,
wherein they poisoned the Qeen of Navarre, murdered the most part of the
peerlesse Nobility of France, with their wives and children, with a gre^ (...)
of the common people, an hundred thousand in one year, in diverse parts of ^^
Realm. Besides 6000. Gentlemen, slain there in private quarrels, within the
space of ten years, as it appears by the kings pardons. Now if the blood of one
Abel had so many tongues as drops, Genesis 4.8. the voice of they brothers bloods
cries unto me, what shall we think will be the woe of such bloody Cities and
States? Luther renders this Text. Aug. in Psalm. and Libera me de sanguin.
Woe to the murtherous State. Austin interprets it of all heinous offenses,
wherewith Nineveh was polluted. But surely if other sins have a woe hanging
at their heels, according to that of Job, chap. 10.15. If I be wicked, woe unto
me; bloody men shall have a woe with a witness, as those that walk in the way
of Cain, Jude 11. See Ezech. 24.6. Hab. 3.12. and remember that it was the ruin
of that great city Nineveh.

It is all full of lies] (...) so the Seventy render it, Vniversa, mendacium.
she is wholly made up of fraud and falsehood, mendacio^um loquacissima; no
truth in her private contracts, no trust in her public transactions, and
capitulations with other nations; be they never so strongly concluded, or never
so solemnly confirmed, yet had they no longer force with them, then stood with
their own profit. This was sides Ninivetica, as it was afterward Punica, and
is now Turcica: which will at length prove their downfall; as it befell
Nineveh, and Carthage.

and robbery] Or, ravage; such as lions exercise, Psalm. 7.3. Liars are commonly
thieves: fraudulency is no better then robbery. If I have beguiled any man,
Laceratio.
says Zacheus, I restore him fourfold, Luke 19.9. as having wronged him no
less, then if I had robbed him. Hence they go here coupled. Violence is
seldom sundred from conning contrivance; in those especially that hunt after
Monarchy, as N^mrod, Julius Caesar, Pellem vulpinam leoninae. assuere
Lysander (whose counsel and practice was to eek out the lions hide, with the
foxes skin, if need were) Jeroboam, Jehu, Herod, that fox, Julian, Caesar
Borgia, whom Machiavel propounds for a partern to Princes; telling them, that
Justice it self should not be sought after, but only the appearance: because
the credit is a help, the use a cumber. That great Elixer, called Reason of
State (though falsely so called, unless it be seasoned with Justice and Truth)
has so transmutative a faculty, as to make copper seem gold, right wrong, and
wrong right: yea, when all pleas fail, it will stand for good, whiles there are
forces to support it.

The prey departs not] They fetch in booty continually, they spoil and prey
upon others without end or measure. Once they seemed to repent of their luxury
and cruelty, at the preaching of Jonas; but now they are ^ bad again, or worse
then ever. They tear in pieces (our English seems to be made of the Hebrew
here) and greedily feed upon those murdering morsels of sin, Tureph.
which they must di^gest in hell, without better repentance, then they were
ever yet acquainted with.

Verse 2. The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels] A
most elegant and lively hypotyposis or description, of the Chaldees coming to
take Nineveh, Tam pulchra, says Hierom, and picture similis, ut omnis meus
Jermo sit vilior, so gallant and picture-like a representation of an advancing
Army, that no words of mine can come near it. Virgil is commended for his
excellent expressions, suitable to the matter he treats of. As when he sets
forth the cutting down of trees, by -- Son a icta securibus ilex: the ferrimans
trade, by -- fremit ictibus aerea puppis: the gliding of his boat, by --
Labitur uncta vadis abies, etc. But all this is but dull shuffe to the divine
Rhetorike here to be read. Let those that refuse to hear Gods sweet words, fear
lest they be forced to hear the noise of the whip, the rattling of the wheels,
etc Psalm. 7.12, 13. Luke 19.42, 44. Prove. 1.24, etc. The enemy is sent to
revenge the quarrel of Gods Covenant: the red horse is at the heels of the
white, Rev. 6.4.

Verse. 3. The horseman lists up both the bright sword] Heb. the flame of the
sword, brandished against the Sun, which makes it seem flaming. Such a sword
is man's tongue, thin, broad, long, and of a red siery color. See Psalm. 42.10.
and 64.3. Prove. 12.18. David cries out of this murthering-weapon in his bones,
whereby they killed him alive, as with a tuck, or rapier; and buried him in
their throats, those gaping graves, open sepulchers.

and the glittering spear] Heb. the lightening of the spear, because of its
bright and swift motion. Thus the Prophet perpetuis metapheris and
periphrasibus luxuriat (as One says of Apul^ius) abounds with Rhetorical
expressions, Turk. hist.
and continued meraphers. Bajazer the Great Turk, for his valor and skill in
handling his arms, was firna^ed Gilderum, or lightening.

and there is a mul^tude of slain. So that it is not fulgur ex vitro, an empty
terror, a bare fright only, as a fools dagger, that ratleth and inappeth, but
without an edge. ^ide his effectum. See here the sad effect, lo the tragedy
represented, behold a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcasses, etc.
This the Prophet spoke, not with any delight, further then made for the glory
of God, and the Churches deliverance: but that he may set forth by this
example, what they must look for that imitate Ninevites in their practices; for
sin ever ends tragically: Miror te quorum mores imitaris little exitus non
perhor rescere. Cic. De Naboth Cap.
and God is still the same, as He is set forth Chap. 1.2. I wonder, says
Cicero to Verres, that thou shunnest not their vices whose fearful ends thou
art much afraid of. And St. Amhrose, closing up the sad story of Ahab and
Iezabel, whom God destroyed for their wickedness, Fuge ergo dives ejusmodi
exitum, says he Tremble at such di^mall ends, and be careful to avoid them:
such ends ye shall avoid, if ye carefully fly from such flagitious practices.

and agreat number of carkasses] Heb. the heaviness of dead carcasses which
lie so thick. that the earth seems to groan under the burden of them.

there is none end of their corpses] that lie on heaps like so many
mountains: as they did after the fight between Amurath king of Turks, and
Lazarus Despot of Servia. Turk hist. 200
which whiles Amurath took a view of, he was suddenly stabbed to daath by a
half-dead soldier, starting up from among the carkasles.

they stumble upon their corpses] And afterward, perhaps, use them instead of
stools and tables, Lanquet: Chro.
as the Suissers did the Thuric^nses their adversaries An^. 1443. banqueting
in the place where they won the victory.

Verse 4. Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favored
harlot] Specious, and therefore gracious with her paramours: of a fair
countenance, but foul condition: like Aurelia Orestilla, that had beauty, but
no good property. Chrysippus cailed beauty the flower of virtue; Cujus praeter
formam nihil unquam bonus laudauit. Saluft.
but that is not generally true. Diogenes saw cause to say to some fair women
in his time, O quam bona domus, sed malus hospes; Here Is a fair hcuse, but an
ill inhabitant. Niniveh is the well-favored harlot here spoken of; her very
name signifies a fair habitation. Hierome and others interpret it, she was
indeed Vrbs formosa et famos^, fair and famous, but foolish and filthy,
Meretrix meretricissima; she multiplied her whoredoms both corporal and spir
ituall; for these are seldom fundred: as we see in that once well-favored, but
now withered whore of Rome, Rev. 17.1. Roma inverted is Amor, prepostrerous
love, unnatural filthiness is there as commonly practiced, as Idolatry. And
as a common harlot paints and deckes herself to please her lovers; so did
Niniveh, so does Rome in her pompous and men-pleasing worships: I have read of
a Lady in Paris, that when she saw the bravery of a Proceslion to a Saint, she
cried out, Oh how fine is our religion bepond that of the Huguenots. And Sir
Walter Rawleigh was wont say, that were he to choose a religion for fleshly
liberty, and lasciviousness, he would choose Popery: which is indeed an
alluring, tempting, bewitching religion, none like it.

the mistress of witch-crafts] Harlots are many of them enchantresses; and
have their philtra, their love potions, wherewith to ensnare men, and to draw
them on to lewdness, and to take away their hearts. Hos. 4.11. Athenaeus
brings in Plato bewailing himself, that he was taken so much with a filthy
harlot. And Elian tells of a whore that boasted to Socrates, that she could
easily get followers from him; not he from her. Of Sampson and Hercules (whom
some think to have been the same) those two verses verified, Nam potuit lenam,
potuit superare leaenam:
Quem fera non potuit vincere; vicit hera.


Think the same of idolatry also; and if those forceries, whereby the purple
whore has deceived all nations, as St. John (in allusion to this place) says
of her Rev. 18.23. For in that book of the Revelation the holy Ghost borrowes
all the elegancies and flowers in the story of the old Testament: thereby to
set out the story of the New in succeeding ages.

That sells nations through her whordoms] makes prize of them, as those
impostours did, 2 Timothy 3.6. and then make sale of them as her slaves 2 Pe^.
2.3. or otherwise use them at her pleasure, as homely as the whore of Babylon
now does those her slaves, and souls of men Rev. 18.13. whom she sits upon,
even upon peoples, nations, multitudes and tongues, Rev. 17.15. tyrannizing
over their consciences, and appointing them to very mean offices: as that
posture of hers, in sitting upon them, seems to import.

Verse 5. Behold I am against thee says the Lord] And I need say no more; were
thou but sensible of thy misery herein. Be not thou a terror to me O Lord,
says Jeremiah, and then let what will else befall me: I shall the better bear
it. Do not you fall upon me your selves, said Sampson to his country men,
Judge. 15.12.
that came to bind him: and then for the Philistines I shall order them well
enough: so faith the good soul, Let not God set against me etc. Tyrants and
Oppressors shall be sure to have him they enemy: and this he tells them here
again and again: to beat down their vain considence in their greatness:
whereby they think to bear down all before them.

And I will discover thy skirts upon thy face] i.e. I will turn up thy clothes
about thy ears: and so show all to, thine utter disgrace; a fit punishment for
so filthy a harlot. Esa. 47.3. Ier. 13, 22. Eze. 16.37.

And I will show the nations thy nakednesse] which nature teaches to
cover:therefore when a man has committed a sin, he blusheth: Acts and Mon.
Honos sit auri-bus.
the blood as it were would cover the sin, that mother of shame Rev. 3.18.
that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear. The whore of Babylon is, and
more and more shall be served on this sort: Rev. 17.16. Asore God, ye are all
bare-toul'd said Mr. Philpot Martyr to the Popish Synod, before whom he was
convented. The kings of the earth shall make Rome desolate and naked. Luther
and many other Protestant writers have done it already, by laying her open in
her colors to the world: taking the the same boldness and liberty to discover
her lewdness, that she did to commit it.

And the kingdoms, thy shamo] who shall therehence slight thee and hate thee,
together with all thy policies and superstitions, whereby thou have enslaved
them.

Verse 6. And I will cast abominable filth upon thee] As they do chamber-pots
and worse, upon harlots that are carted. I have read of a heathen people that
put the adniterers and adulteresses heads into the paunch of a beast, where all
the f^^th lies; and so stifled them to death.

And make thee vile] Conspurcabo, deturpabo to, I will bespattle thee and make
thee stink above ground, as loathsome carrion does; so the word signifies. It
was long since complained of by one of her own sons, that the stench of the
Church of Rome was gone up to heaven. And by another, Mat. Paris.
that of gold she was become silver, of silver iron, of iron earth, superesse
ut in stercus abiret, and now there remained no more, but that she should be
looked upon as dung. Theodoricus Vrias Augustinianus.
Accordingly it follows.

And I willset thee as a gazing-stock] The Septuagint renders it for an
example, others a looking-glass, but Calvin (after R. Solomon and Aber.-Ezra)
ponam t^ quasi stercus, I will set thee as dung, which men gladly look beside.
(...).
Luther rendereth it Ponam te in terriculamentum, I will make thee a bug-beare.
All this was done to Niniveh that great city: and all was done by God, not by
Fate, or Fortune, or any necessity of Nature, that states and kingdoms must
have their times and their turns, their rise and their ruin, as Politicians
dote. Osorius'de Nobil. l. 3.


Ver. 7. And it shall come to pass that all they that look upon thee shall flee
from thee] Thou shall be a very Magor-missabib a terror to all that are round
about thee: so that they shall decline thee and stand a loof off. Resilient a
te, they shall leap back from thee (faith the Vulgar translation) as if they
had trod upon a snake. Vbi simul hominum mores exprimit says Gualther. This is
the manner of most people: they measure friendship by profit, and shamefully
forsake those in adversity, whom they were wont to follow and fawn upon in
prosperity. David complains of such dealing, and Ovid, and many others.

And say, Niniveh is laid wast] which most men held impossible, Tempera fuerint
nubila solus eris. Cum fortuna per^t nulius amicus erit.
and never looked to have seen such a day. So Rome was called Aurea, and
AEterna and the Romans once thought (as it is said Dionysius did) that the
monarchy of the world had been tied unto them with chains of adamant. But God
confuted their golden dreams by breaking their Empire, and giving up their
city six several times in one hundred thirty nine years, into the hands of
the Barbarians: who exercised therein all kind of cruelty. Besides that, it is
observed that Rome since it became Papal was never besieged by any enemy, but
it was taken. The final ruin of it is daily expected, according to that
prophecy of St. John, Rev. 18.2. Lib. 8.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen: and that other of Sibylla before recited, Tota
eris in cineres; quasi nunquam Roma fuisses.

Who will bemoane her?] Heb. Who will move (his lips) for her. Some perhaps
will shake his head, or shoot his bolt at her: but none open his mouth to
bemone her. It was the just hand of God to set off all hearts, and shut up all
mouths from her, that had been so unreasonably merciless and hard-hearted.
Iam. 2.13.

Whence shall I seek comforters for thee] q.d. So odious thou art, that none
will do thee that good office: or if they would, so calamitous thou art that no
comsort will fasten; For as to sore eyes the gentleft medicine is troublesome:
so is comsort ministered to such as are in an hopeless condition. The care that
tastes words, as the mouth does meat, is at such a time imbittred, and out of
taste.

Ver. 8. Art thou better then populous No?] Heb. No Amon a great corn-countrey,
and therefore populous: Amon i.e. Nu. tritia Alma matter
for where victual and good trading is to be had, thither people will repair
apace. No (that is Alexandria) was the nurfing mother of Egypt: and Egypt was
called the worlds barn or storehouse, horreum unde hauriatur Genesis 42.1. It is
called Ier. 46.25. Amon de No, and Ezekiel. 30.11. Hamon No, and Verse 14.16. No,
without any addition. This was the old name of this city, before it was
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar: to whom God had given Egypt as his pay for his
pains in taking Tire. It was reedified by Alexander the great, and he called
it after his own name Alexandria. Amon it was called, for the reasons
above-given. Though there be that sech that name of it from Ham the son of
Noah. Theodoret will have it so called from Jupiter Hammon, whose son, Lib. 2
p. 51. Pausan: Lib. 3. Lib. de Isid. et Osirid
Alexander desired to be held: and from whom the Egyptian husbandmen were
called Ammonii, and their arable Ammonia, as Herodotus writes. Plutarch also
tells us, that the Africans worship an unknown God by the name of Amon, that
is (in their language) Heus, tu quis es? This city therefore is called No Amon,
probably to distinguish it from other cities of the same name; as Alexandria
Egypti, Caesarea Philippi, Augusta Vindelicorum. etc. Josephus says that it
abounded in people, Lib. 2. de bell. Iud. Gap. 16.
and wealth: being little less then Jerusalem in compass. Think thou now
O Niniveh, (says God here) that thou art in a better or safer condition, then
this city once was? but I am magnum infoelix nil nisi nomen habet. Let Niniveh
go to Jerusalem, Succurrat illud mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur.
to Shiloh Ier. 7.12. and do as Scipio did, when, beholding the downfall of
Carthage, he foresaw and bewailed the like future destiny of Rome his own
country.

That was situate amnng the rivers] which is held the best situation for
profit, pleasure, Lib. 17.
and strength.

That had the waters round about it [The river Nilus begirt it, (says Strabo,)
but could not mott it up from Gods fire. See Psalm. 33.17. Prove. 21.30. with the
Note.

Whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea] She had the Egyptian
sea on one side, and the lake of Mareotis on the other, which the Hebrews
called the Sea.

Verse 9. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength] No was the Metropolis of Egypt,
and knew no end of her power, as bearing rule over Ethiopia the strong, and
Egypt the infinite (some read this text) and as having all the rest of the
peoples inhabiting Afrike and Lybia for her confederates. Chus Valida et
Egyptij infiniti Drusius
See Ier. 46.9. where the Prophet speaks of such People as brought aid to
Egypt against the Caldees, but were foiled and worsted: Of the huge armies that
Ethiopia was able to raise, see 2 Chronicles. 14.9. and 16.8. Egypt for her strength
was called Rahab Psalm. 87.4. and 89.11. that is mighty and proud.

Put and Lubim were thy helpers] By Put, Hierome understands Africa (which
was over anent Alexandria, the sea between) a wast continent, thrice as big as
Europe: and by Lubim Lybia a considerable part of that continent, sometimes put
for the whole. These would have been helpers to No, but could not: because
over-powred by Nebuchadnezzar, sent against them by God. Leagues entered into
with wicked men, profit not those whom God will punish. The Grecian Churches
Anno 1438. being afraid of the Turks, sent and subjected themselves to the
Bishop of Rome; that they might have the help of the Latin Churches: but
shortly after, they were destroyed, and their Empire subdued, and swallowed up
in the Turkish greatness. It is gathered by some out of Revel. 16.14, 15, 16.
that the Pope and his adherents shall, toward the end of the world, for the
restoring of his decayed authority, call in the help, not only of Popish
Princes, but of foreign States, out of Asia, Africa, and America, to suppress
the heretics (as they call us) and to root out Religion; but with evil
success: for they shall associate themselves only to be broken in pieces,
Esaias 8.9. these Auxiliaries shall speed no better then those subsidiarie
Syrians did, 2 Samuel 10.18, 19. they shall receive a famous foil at Armageddon;
such as Sisera did, at the waters of Megiddo, Judge. 5.19. and a voice from the
throne shall say, It is done; verse. 16,17.

Verse 10. Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity] Whereof though
there be no other record, yet we ought not to doubt of the truth, since it is
here alleged by the holy Ghost, as a thing either done before, or shortly
after to be done, as may be probably gathered from Jerem. 46.25. Ezsk. 30.19,
21. compared with Jer. 20.28. and 44.49. To God (by reason of the vastness of
his being) all things are present. As he that stands on an high mountain, and
looks down, though to the passenger that goes by, some are before, some
behind; yet to him they are all present: So here.

her young children also were dashed in pieces, at the top of all the streets]
A terrible spectacle to those that passed by: who were to look for little
mercy, when children, in whom there is so little guile, or gall, and who are
usually favored for their innocence, and ignoscency, met with such hard
measure. See the Note on Hos. 13.16. War is an evil; Esaias 45.7. such as no
words (how wide soever) can sufficiently set forth. Bellum a belluis.

and they cast lots for her honorable men] whether so, for age or authority;
the dice were cast on them for slaves, as Obad. 11. A great alteration on the
suden. Tamberlanes coach-horses were conquered kings. Adonibezeks dogs,
seventy kings, gatherings crumbs under his table. Sapores used the Emperor
Valerian for a footstool. Craesus carried captive by Syrus, cries out, O Solon,
Procop. lib. 2. de bello Vandal.
O Solon. Gilimer led intriumph by Bellisarius, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity: and calls to him for a crust to relieve him, a cittern to solace him,
and a sponge to dry his eyes with. Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia silo:
Et subito casu, quae valuere, ruunt.
Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, after ten years reign, was deposed;
and by his enemies driven to that exigent, that he desired only a clerkship in
an house at Spire, of his own founding; which was barbarously, by the Bishop of
that place, denied him. Our Henry the sixth, that had been the most potent
Monarch for dominions that ever England had, was, when deposed, not the master
of a Molehill, Dan. hist. 189
nor of his own liberty, but beaten, and wounded, etc. to show that mortality
is but the stage of mutability; when they that were brought up in scarlet
embrace the dung-hils, Lam. 4.5.

bound in chains] not of gold, as Zenobia was; but of iron, as the word
signifies,

Verse 11. Thou also shall be drunken] sc. with the cup of the wine of Gods
wrath, Jer. 25.27. thou shall drink, and be drunk, and spue, and fall, and rise
no more, because of the sword which I will send amongst you. This is that
(...), dry drunkenness of them that are drunk, but not with wine, Esaias. 51.21.
of them that remember their affliction and their misery, the wormwood and the
gall, Lam. 3.19. If the saints sip sometimes of the top of Gods cup, the wicked
shall drink deep of it, yea though it be eternity to the bottom.

thou shall be hid] Or, thou shall lurk, either for fear of the enemy (who wast
once above fear, and thine enemies below hope) or, for shame of thine undone
condition. See Rev, 6.16. Luke 23.30. Hos. 10.8. Or, thou shall vanish, and be
brought to nothing; as if there never had been any such. Confer Obad 16.
Nineveh is nothing else now, says One who had been there, but a sepulture of
her self, a little town of small trade, where the Patriarch of the Nestorians
keeps his seat at the devotion of the Turk.

thou shall also seek strength because of the enemy] Or, from the enemy: beg
help of them, to whom thou would once have scorned to be beholden: or of
them, against whom thou have professed, and practiced open hostility.

Verse 12. All thy strongholds shall be like fig-trees] i. e. tam infirma ac
sificulnea essent. Look how the fig tree casts her untimely (or green)
figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wine, Rev. 6.13. yea, though it be but
of a gentle wind, if the figs be ripe, as here, they fall with little ado: so
shall thy munitions, wherein thou trustest.

they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater] that is, of the Chaldear,
who gape for thy destruction, and desires nothing more then to revell in thy
ruins. They shall take thy fortresses as easily, as Timotheus did towns;
which were said to come into his toyls, Aemuli ipsius dormientem pinxerant,
etc. Plut. in Sylla. Introd. to hist. by Mat. Paris. O vere Phr^giae neque enim
Phryges Virg.
whiles he slept. Or, as Charles 5. who in 28. battles in America, waged by his
Generals Cortez, and Pizarro, wan 28. kingdoms.

Verse 13. Behold thy people in the midst of thee are women] i. e. Fearful,
and faint-hearted: (...). See Esaias 3.12. Jer. 51.30. and 48.41. And this in the
midst of thee, where they should be most valiant, like cocks on their own
dunghill, as they say. Lo, those that formerly faced the heavens, and, by a
Cy^lopical-kind of impiety, slighted God, and dared the devil to a duel, how
crest-faln they are and couragelesse, when the enemy is upon them: the noise of
a driven leaf, affrights them, Lev. 26. a panick terror seizes upon them, as
it did once upon the Syrians, 2 King. 7. and upon the Imperialists, in the
war against the Hussites, so that they could not strike a stroke: and upon
the Burgundians, who expecting a battle, thought long thistles were lances,
and turned their backs, with those Ephraimites, Psalm. 78.9. It is God that puts
mettle into men, that strengthens or weakens the arm of either party, Ezekiel.
30.24. These lions, as they are called chap. 2.12. that formerly rushing out of
Nineveh their den, filled it with ravine, tearing and spoiling all they met
with, are now become Hearts and Stagges; that have great horns, but do nothing
with them, quia de^st animus, because they want courage: or as those Eretrians,
of whom Themistocles said, that they were like the sword-fish, Plutarch.
that had a sword indeed, but not an heart to make use of it.

the gates of thy land shall be set wide open] Thy frontier towns and
cinqueports, those keys of the kingdom; aperiendo aperientur shall open to
give the enemy entrance; as at the siege of Jerusalem, the iron-gate opened of
it own accord.

the fire shall devour thy barres] Because God, who is a consuming fire, shall
remove out of the enemies way, all obstacles and impediments: so that all shall
be pervious, and patent to them. Fire God had threatened once before, chap.
2.13. and it may very well be, that the gates were fired without a metaphor.
See verse 15.

Verse 14. Draw the waters, for the siege, etc. A most bitter and biting taunt,
or mock: Sarcasmus.
whereby the Prophet laugheth to scorn the fortifications of the Ninevites, and
their diligence and providence in defending themselves, which shall nothing
avail them, because God will curse their enterprises, Psalm. 127.1, 2. See the
like Sarcasme chap. 2.1. In those Eastern countries there was great scarcity of
water. Draw thee good store for the better holding out the siege: for if water
fail thee, thou must needs yield.

fortify thy strong-holds] But they shall soon fail thee, verse 12. as the
tower of Shechem did those that fled to it, and as the strong-hold of Zion did
the braving Jebusites, 2 Samuel 5.7. If God be against us, no other help can
relieve us. Brass and iron can fence a man against a sword, but not against
fire.

go into clay and tread the morter] viz. to make brick of. For in maritine, and
moorish places, where stones are not to be had, they used to wall their cities,
and make their munitions with brick. This, proud Nineveh is commanded here to
do, by an Irony, as Theophylact notes: but she shall but labor in the very
fire, take pains to no purpose: for God will destroy the works of her hands,
Eccles. 5.6.

make strong the brick-kilne] Or, repair it, that all may be ready. And these
things they did no doubt very diligently: neither were they for that to be
blamed. But this was their fault; as it was also the fault of the Jews in like
case, Esaias 22. that they looked not to the Maker of all, neither had respect
unto him that fashioned it long ago. See. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. This, if they had
done seriously, though they had made less preparation, the enemy might have
been daunted, and dismayed as much, as that Duke of Saxony was; who having
proclaimed war against the Bishop of Magdeburg, and understanding by his
intelligencers, that the Bishop levied no army, made no preparation, but only
gave out, that he would commit his cause to God, who would not fail to take up
arms for him; Insaniat alius, Bucholcer. Chronol.
said the Duke, It were a mad prank in me to make war upon such an one as
trusts in God to right and revenge him. Let who will meddle with such a man:
I will not.

Verse 15. There shall the sire devour thee] There, that is, in thy
strongholds, where thou think thy self most safe. These shall be to thee
pro carcere and pistrino, for a prison, or little-ease; when the fire of Gods
wrath shall kindle upon thee, the fire of war shall consume thee. See Amos
1.4. Joel 1.19. and 2.3, 30. Amos 7.4 with the Notes. Evil shall hunt the
violent man to destroy him, Psalm. 140.11. neither must he think to be safe any
where from divine vengeance, Amos 9.2, 3. Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. Obad 4. which
will not suffer them to live, as those Barbarians could tell, Acts 28.4. The
Heathens, called Nemesis, or Vengeance, (...); to show that no guilty person
could shun it. Shufle he may for a season from side to side, as Balaams ass
did, to avoid the Angels sword; Number. 22.27.
but at length lay down under it, and so condemned her masters madness, 2 Pet.
2.16. Running in to God, is the only best way to escape him: as to close and
get in with him that would strike you, does avoid the blow.

the sword shall cut thee off] Est haec vehemens plane comminatio, says
Gualther. This is truly a very vehement threat. See how thick it falls like
hail-shot upon them, that they can hardly take breath: and all too little to
work upon their hard hearts, which could not repent. These uncounsellable
Ninevites were like the Smiths dog. whom neither the hammers above him, nor the
sparks of fire falling round about him can awake. Like Leviathan, they esteemed
iron as straw, and brass as ro^ten wood. Darts were counted by them as
stubble, they laughed at the shaking of the spear, Job 41.27, 29. It is proper
to Gods people to tremble at his word, to stand in awe of his judgments,
whilst they yet hang in the threatenings. Wicked men flear, when they should
fear; and say in their hearts when God threateneth them, as Frederick the
second, Emperor of Germany was wont to say openly, in the greatest threatening
of his enemies, Minarum strepitus, Asinorum crepitus.

It shall eat thee up as the canker-worm] Which uses to make quick dispatch,
and clean work. See Joel 1. and 2. to shear all before it.

make thy self many] Heb. Weighty with multitude: so that the axle-tree of the
earth may seem to groan under thy grandeur and massinesse. Do this thou, O king
of Nineveh (for the Hebrew Verb here is Masculine.) Do the like thou, O city of
Nineveh.

make thy self many as the Locust] Which has its name in Hebrew from
multitude: because, as that Legion in the Gospel, they are many: and here the
Hebrew V^rb is ^emini^^. Ministers must lay about them on all hands; and be
ready to turn themselves, as it were, into all shapes and fashions, both of
speech and of spirit, to bring people to the knowledge of God, and his will, of
themselves, and their duties.

Verse 16. Thou have multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven] And
so think to have a stake in store, howsoever the dice chance to turn. For
these (...) were very rich, and could furnish her with money, which is the
sinews of wa^re. Besides, they traded far and near; and so could give
intelligence, and if need were, way-lay and intercept the enemies contributions
that it came not to them. But would you know, says the Prophet, how these
merchants will serve (...) your greatest need?

The canker-worm spoileth and flees away] q. d. They will serve themselves
upon you, and then leave you in the lurch, to make as good shift as you can.
They are mere canker-worms, which first eat up all, and then have away. These
false friends, well they may be the causes, but companions they will not be of
your calamity: like crows that flock to a dead carcass, not to defend it, but
to devour it: and no sooner have they bared the bones but they are gone. Such
false merchants as these has this land been much pestered with from Rome, in
former ages. Matthew Paris tells us of one Florentinus, the Popes Legate
here, in King John's reign, Ferentinus the wiser sort called him, for bearing
away so much money. And of another named Otto (one of the Popes merchants,
Muscipulatores.
or rather mice-catchers, as he calls them) who after three years raking
together of money, by most detestable arts, at last departing hence, to avoid a
storm, he left not so much money in the whole kingdom, as he either carried
with him, or sent to Rome before him. In the year 1235. there were spread
through England certain Roman canker-worms, called Caursim ( quasi capientes
ursi, devouring Bears quoth Paris) who had entangled the King, Nobles, and all
others that had to deal with the Court of Rome, in their cunning snares, and
usurious practices, under color of supplying with money such as wanted present
pay to the Pope. Fol. 613.
These were called the Popes merchants, says Speed.

Verse 17. Thy crowned are as the locusts] i. e. thy Barons (says Diodate) and
great Lords, wearing diadems and wreaths, in token of dignity: such a Nazarite
(that is the Hebrew word here) was Joseph, Genesis 49.26. because separate and
exempt from other men, as a Chiestain. Calvin likewise renders it, thy
Princes: the Vulgar Latin, thy Keepers. Some others, thy Nazarites, or, thy
religious persons, set apart from the common sort, to pray for the cities
safety. Such were those Chemarims, or Chimney-chaplains among the Jews, Hos.
10.5. Zeph. 1.4. Such are the Mailers among the Turks, who call them, the
religious brothers of love; and the shaveling-Mendicants among the Papists.
These locusts are, Rev. 9.7. said to have on their heads, Turk hist. 477.
as it were crowns like gold.

and thy Captains as the great grashoppers] Heb. as the grasshoppers of
grasshoppers, by an Hebraisme, like that, King of kings, song of songs, etc. The
word rendered Captains, is foraigne; R. David and others render it, Imperator,
Dux, Princeps. It seems to be a name of dignity among the Assyrians, as
Zaphnath-paaneah was among the Egyptians, Genesis 41.45. These are called
grasshoppers, and locusts, for their uselesnesse, and fearfulness.

which camp in the hedges] sc. Of the gardens or vineyards, And they are said
to camp, in regard of their multitudes, as if they were an army of them. See
Joel 2. The Prophet taxes here Nineveh's vain confidence in her confederates,
and such other hanger-on, as might truly say, Nos numeri sumus, fruges
consumere nati. We are men of no great moment, such as Aristophanes in Plutarch
prettily played upon, when he said, (...), i. e. Quaestoraes, bubones.

but when the Sun arises, they flee away] So these trencher-flies, when they
have served their own turns upon thee, and now see the tempest of war growing
on amain, they worship the rising Sun, keep themselves on the warm side of the
hedge, leave thee to shift as thou can, and seek out for themselves a better
fortune.

Verse 18. Thy shepherds slumber, O King of Assyria] This Apostrophe to the
king is emphaticall. He is given to know, that his Nobles, and Officers, Mich.
5.4, 5, 6. and 7, 14. his Councillors of State, and greatest Politicians,
should be benighted, and not know what counsel to give, or course to take.
Or, they slumber, that is, they are dead, as Psalm. 76.6. And this is more
agreeable to that which follows:

thy Nobles shall dwell in the dust] The Vulgar has it sepelientur, shall be
buried. Others, jacebunt, shall lie on the ground, like beasts, through fear
and consternation of mind, 1 Samuel 28.20. Then Saul fell straight way all along
on the earth, and was sore afraid.

thy people is scattered upon the mountains] Diffused and dispersed abundantly:
as sheep without a shepherd, whereof none being wiser then other, no man
gathers them, into the sheep-coats of better order.

Verse 19. There is no healing of thy bruise] Clades and strages tua
irreparabilis est. Thy disease is desperate, thy condition comfortless: thou
art utterly to be destroyed. When God smites his own people, it may well be
asked as Esaias 27.7. Has he smitten him, as he smot those that smot him? Or, is
he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? Surely no:
there is a manifest difference. He has torn, says the Church, and he will
heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6.1. Hence that
distinction of punishment, or pain, in condemnantem, and corrigentem, in poenam
vindictae, and poenam medelae. Afflictions, and temporal evils are in the
nature, to the wicked of a curse, to the godly of a cure; to the former,
mortal; to the latter, medicinal, When the wicked spring as grass, and when
all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is not for any good will that God
bears to them: but it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.7.
See the Note on chap. 1.9.

thy wound is grievous] Not only incurable, but full of anguish intolerable.
Thus, many sorrows shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32.10. and yet all that they
suffer here, is but as drops of wrath, fore-running the great storm in hell:
or as a crack, preceding the fall of the whole house upon them: The leaves only
fall on them here; there, the whole tree.

all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands, etc.] As rejoicing at
thy ruin, and subscribing to Gods just judgment upon thee: they shall take up
this taunting speech against thee, and say, How has the oppressor ceased? the
golden city ceased? The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the
scepter of the rulers, etc. Esaias 14.4, 5, 6, 7.

For upon whom has not thy wickedness passed continually?] Thy wickedness,
that is, thy wicked counsels, edicts, enterprises, have they not extended far
and near for mischief to many Nations? and this not for a little while, but
jugiter, continually? It has been thy constant trade from thy youth up (neque
enim nova est aut nupera haec tua crudelitas) to wast and weary out other
nations, with thine inrodes and hostilities. Thy destruction therefore is of
thy self, O Nineveh: the insultations, and complosions of others at thy misery,
is no more then thou have merited. Os quod in sort tua ceciderit, illud rodas,
as the Arabian proverb has it. Bear the reward of thy wickedness, which is
now come home to thee; Thy wickedness is the root of thy wretchedness: this
the Prophet here repeateth, and inculcateth in the perclose; that he may leave
it as a sting in the minds of his hearers, as Gualther well observes.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of HABAKKUK.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE burden] The Prophetical burden, says the Chaldee Paraphrast:
the burdenous prophesic, says Tremellius. See the Note upon Mal. 1.1.

which Habakkuk the Prophet did see] Amplexator ille, That Embracer, (so some
interpret his name) yea, Optimus Amplexator (as they gather from the last
Radical emphatically doubled) That best Embracer. Et certe omen habet nomen,
He has not his name for naught: for (as Luther writes) in this Prophecy he
loves, and huggeth his afflicted contrymen: he succoureth and solaceth
them, as the mother does her crying babe, to still it. Hierom and Others, make
Habakkuk to signify Luctatorem amplex stringentem, a Wrastler, that by closing
strives to prevail; that by might, and slight seeks to get the better. Such a
One was Jacob, whose wrestling was by weeping, Hos. 12.4.^
and his prevailing by praying. Such another was Habakkuk, who argues
earnestly with God about the state of his people, and prays ardently for
them; not doubting but that the Lord would preserve the faithful, Psalm. 31.23.
and plentifully reward the proud doer. A Prophet he is here styled, and a
Seer, and that is all is said of him: nothing of his pedigree, or time of
prophesying; that the Word (and not the man) might be glorified, Act. 13.47.
Regis epistolis acceptis, says Gregory; When a kings letters are brought to
his subjects, it is a ridiculous thing for them to enquire with what Pen they
were written; it is the matter must be minded. So here. A Prophet, Habakkuk was;
and is therefore to be received into our hearts, if we look for a Prophets
reward. He received heavenly visions, whereunto therefore we must not be
disobedient, Act. 26.19. That memorable sentence of his, The just shall live by
faith, is more then once made use of by St. Paul, in that weighty business of
Justification, Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. which proves the Canonical authority of
this prophecy. The precise time when it was uttered, is not known. In the
days of Manasseh, most think: but some are of opinion, in Josiah's time
rather, or not long before: because he foretells the Babylonish captivity,
and seems to agree with Jeremy in many things. Sure it is, that this Prophet
lived not after the captivity (see verse 6.7. of this chapter) as Epiphanius
and Hierom would have it: Hierem. in Prolog.
grounding upon those Apocryphal additions to Daniel, which either are false,
or else there were two Habakkuks.

Verse. 2. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear?] Lo, this is
the confidence of a good conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. when it is
parling with him by prayers, and bold intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.1. it dare plead,
as Jer. 12.1. (...).
and interrogate, as Romans 8.33, 34, 35. Esaias 63.15. and expostulate, as David
often: when God seems to be asleep, he wakes him: when to delay, he quickens
him: when to have lost his wonted kindness, he finds it for him; so does
Habakkuk here: for he knew he might do it. See his holy boldness beneath,
verse 12. and learn to continue instant in prayer, Romans 12.12. crying, Quousque
Domine? Beza in vita.
How long Lord? This was Mr. Calvias Motto; ever in his mouth, as D^o gratias
was, in Austins.

even cry out unto thee of violence] i. e. Of all sorts of heinous sins,
which I have long cried out upon, and sought by preaching and prayer to
redress, but cannot; so incorrigibly flagitious are they grown, that I have
now no other way left, but to turn them over to thee, with a Non convertentur,
They will not be converted. Shall they still escape by iniquity? In thine anger
cast down the people, O God: Psalm. 56.7.
and let them feel the power of thy wrath, that will not submit to the scepter
of thy kingdom. Thus the holy Prophet ( Elias-like, Romans 11.2.) Impendam and
expendar.
makes intercession to God against Israel (when once incorrigible, uncurable)
for whose souls health he would have spent, and been spent.

Verse 3. Why do thou show me iniquity? etc.] These were Hazai^s to Habakkuks
eyes, he could not see them with dry eyes, he could not but vex his righteous
soul from day to day, as Lot did at Sodom, with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet.
2.8. privately committed, (as here in their common commerce) and publicly, as
in the next words, in Courts and Consistories: for all was out of order.

and cause me to behold grievance] Molestation and mischief done to those that
would live peaceably in the land (Confer Psalm. 7.14, 16. and 94.20. and 55.11.)
to the poor that are fallen into their nets, debts, bonds, and morgages, Psalm.
10.9. It is as if the Prophet should say; Why do thou not punish these
enormous practices, but suffer evildoers to abuse thy long-sufferance, to thy
dishonor? Averroes the Philosopher, drew an argument from Gods patience to
deny his providence. But what says Austine? Some wicked, God punishes here,
In Psalm. 30.
lest his providence; and but some, lest his patience, and promise of judgment
should be called in question.

for spo^ling and violence are before me] E regione m^i vastatio and violentia,
so that I cannot look besides them, I cannot but complain of them. Elias, and
Jeremy were more passionate, 1 King. 19.4, 10, 14. Jer. 15.10. and 20.14.

and there are that raise up strife and contention] These are Satan's seeds-men,
and kindle-coals. He is an unquiet spirit, and strives to make others so; loves
to fish in troubled waters, does all he can to set one man against another,
Greg.
that he may prey upon both: as the Master of the pit suppeth upon the bodies
of those cocks whom he has set to kill one another. Be not make-bates,
seeds-men of sedition.

Verse 4. Therefore the law is slacked] Desluit lex. An elegant Metaphor from
the pulse, which in a dying man beats faintly. The law is the pulse of the
Commonwealth. If it stir not at all, the Commonwealth is dead. If it have
but slow motion, the Commonwealth is weak. But if it keep an equal course,
the Commonwealth is in good constitution. Lex lux, the law is a light, says
Solomon: but the deluge of sin had well-nigh put out this light in Israel; who
was now grown in a manner lawless, through long impunity.

and judgment does never go forth] Or, it goes not forth to the utmost, Vsque
ad finem. (...).
to victory: it is not carried on to a right upshot, as the Septuagint, and
Latin render it.

for the wicked does compass about the righteous] As a crown compasses the
head: He surroundeth and circumventeth him to his hurt. The children of this
world are wiser in their generation etc. The Midianites out witted the
Israelites Number. 25.18. The Pharisees hemmed in our Savior to ensnare him: but
were disappointed.

therefore wrong judgment proceedeth] Distorted judgment. So Ezekiel. 9.9. the
city was full of Mutteh that is of ( mishpat din mitteh, (...).
as Kimchi expounds it) judgment turned from the biasse: the balance of
justice was tilted on the one side 1 Timothy 5.21. A judge is to retain the
decency and gravity of the law: to do nothing of partiality or popularity; to
proceed, not according to opinion or appearance; but as a just law is an heart
without affection, an eye without lust, a mind without passion etc. so should
he. Else wrong and wrested judgment will soon proceed, to the prejudice of the
righteous.

Verse 5. Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously] Heb:
Wonder, Wonder. This is Gods answer to the former expostulation, which he
disliketh not, but incourageth the rest of his people to the like holy
boldness. It contains a promise to the Prophet and the rest that were like
affected, that he would shortly vindicate his glory and be avenged of the
wicked, though he bore long with them. This that he may the better assure, He
proceeds by an elegant Climax; wherein his speech gets ground and arises
higher and higher, that the D^sp^sers might be the more affected. Behold ye
despisers So St. Paul after the Septuagint (whose translation, he here
follows as most received, and most making for his purpose) Act. 23.45. the
sense being one and the same.

for I will work a work in your dayes] This phrase notes the strong intention
of God upon it, as Ier. 18.18. to devise devises notes strong plotting to
mischief the Prophet. So Christ is said to work a work Joh. 5.36. many do
rather play their works, then work them. This is not God-like. He is serious
and through in his works

which ye will not believe, though it be told you] But put off all, as those in
the Gospel did, with a God-forbid: and so go on in sin, till wrath come upon
you to the utmost. To this day, we cannot get men to believe the truth of Gods
judgments, whilst they hang in the threatenings: but one put-off or another
they get, through self-delusion, or obstinacy of heart Lam. 3.65. next unto
which follows, Thy curse upon them.

Verse 6. For lo, I raise up the Chaldaeans, that bitter, and hasty nation]
The Chaldaeans were anciently the Philosophers of the Babylonians: Babylon was
a Province of the Assyrian Empire; but not the same with Niniveh, (only walled
about by Semiramis and by her called Babylon) as Suidas notes. Niniveh was the
Metropolis, Babylon ruled by Prefects. One of whom, viz Merodach Baladan)
rebelling against Esar-haddon King of Niniveh, translated the whole kingdom to
the Babylonians, Gualth.
using the help and counsel of the Chaldaeans, famous for their wisdom and
authority: which yet was not done without the Lord who then stirred them up,
and now sent them against the Jews, to averge the quarrel of his covenant. In
like manner God has in these last times raised up the Turks that bitter and
hasty nation, bitter and bloody, hasty and headlong, (...) pursuing their
victories and subduing in a short space many nations, and kingdoms to their
Empire. Hence the Jews are in the former verse called upon to view among the
heathen what havoc the Chaldaeans had made; that is, should shortly make by
overrunning Syria, the greater part of all Asia, and some part also of Africa.
In the greatness of the Turkish Empire is swallowed up at this day both the
name and Empire of the Saracenes, the most glorious Empire of the Greeks, the
renowned kingdoms of Macedonia, Peloponnesus, Epirus, Bulgaria, Servia,
Bosina, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt, Judaea, Tunes, Argeirs, Media, Chaldaea,
with a great part of Hungary; as also of the Persian kingdom, Turk. Hist.
pref. to the Reader.
and all the Churches and places so much spoken of in scripture (the Roman only
excepted, which yet he daily threateneth) and in brief so much in
Christendom, as far exceeds that which is thereof at this day left. In fine,
no part of the world is left untouched by the Othoman monarchy, but America
only; Turk. hist. 132.
not more happy in her rich mines, then in that she is so far from so great and
dangerous an enemy. The King of Spain, of all other Princes Mohammedan or
Christian that border upon the Turk, is best able to wage war with him. How far
and with what bitterness and have he has carried on his Catholic Monarchy,
is better known then that it need here to be related. Q. Elizabeth put a stop
to him. Cambd. Elisab. 285.
Captain Drake and his soldiers when they took Sancto Domingo Anno. 1585.
(where his arms were to be seen in the town hall with this inscription, Non
sufficit orbis) derided his avarice and ambitions: but the poor Indies groan
heavily under his cruelty: and Grynaeus commenting upon these words that bitter
and hasty nation, Tribuuntur illis duo, says he, Two things are here
attributed to the Chaldees bitterness, and swiftness in undertaking and
dispatching conquests: quibus dotibus Iberos nostra aetate praeditos, proh
dolor, experimur, this by woeful experience we find now adays too much
verified of the Spaniards.

Verse 7. They are terrible and dreadfull] Or, horrible Such as were those
giants called Emims Deuteronomy. 2.11. Genesis 14.3. and far more formidable then that
Disputant at Paris, who would needs be styled Horribilis Sophista, De cause.
cor. art. lib. 3.
the Horrible Sophister, non minorem eam appellationem ratus (says Vives) quam
Africam aut Asiatici taking it for as great an honor, as to be a Conqueror.

their judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves] i. e. They
shall do as they list; their lust shall be their law, Pellitur e medio
sapientia, vi geritur res. See Psalm. 12.4, 5. Exodus 5.2. These Chaldaeans will
be their own carvers: ministering law according to their own pleasures. Ipsa
sibi judicabit, et decretum suum exequetur: vel ex decreto suo exequetur. Sic
Symmachus Vide Plin. lib. 8. cap. 17. and lib. 1. c. 10. cap. 73. (...)
The honor also and dignity of this nation (now base and obscure) shall grow
up and appear.

Verse 8. Their horses also are swifter then the leopards] Or Panthers, famous
for their swiftness: whence the proverb Panther a velocior. The horse is so
swift in service, that the Persians (as Pausanias has it) dedicated him to
their god the Sun; as the swiftest creature to the swiftest god. See Job.
41.20. Prove. 21.31.

and are more fierce then the evening wolves] Heb: more sharp set, after that
they have been held hunger bit, and empty all the day long. See Virg. Aeneid.
lib. 9. ver. 59. etc. Oppian: lib. 1.3. Homo homini lupus, One man (left to
himself) is a wolf, nay a devil to another. The Metaphor is here taken from
sharpest swords, which quickly cut.

and their horsemen shall spread themselves] with incredible swiftness, which
in war is most necessary and useful, as Julus Caesar experienced, and we in
our late commotions.

and their horsemen shall come from far] The Jews were secure of the
Chaldaeans, as being far remote: but that shall be no hinderance.

they shall flee as the Eagle that hastes to eat] In singulis verbis pondus
est, says Drusius, Here each word has its weight: Job. 9.26.
for he that hastes on his way is said to fly, and the Eagle is swifter of
flight then any bird, and especially when she hastes to eat. Of the Eagles
swiftness why and whence, See Ambrose Hexam: l. 1. c. 14.

Ver. 9. They shall come all for violence] that by force and violence they may
carry all before them. Fit via vi, Cedit viribus aequum. They are set upon it
and will have it so.

their faces shall sup up as the East-wind] that ventus urens and exiccans,
they shall blast all they look upon: Euroclydon-like, they shall overturn all
Act. 27.14. Lib. 2. c. 28.
Navigantium pestem the Mariners misery Pliny calls this wind, for the hurt
it does by sea. Some read it, Their faces shall look toward the East, viz.
toward Babylon, whither they carry the booty they get.

and they shall gather the captivity as the sand] So many shall be their
captives, and so little accounted of, as the dust or sand they tread upon. Thus
the Turks carry out of Hungary and other Christian countries near unto them,
innumerable booties and captives, 15000. at a time. And so the Spaniards, when
they had taken the Island Hispaniola in the Indies, within a few months they
rid it clean of the inhabitants and natives, whilst they gathered unto
themselves captives and slaves.

Verse 10. And they shall scoff at the kings] Heb. He shall scoff, i. e.
Nebuchadnezzar shall, and that not once only, but often: shall make a practice
of it, Hithpael uotat assiduam illusionem.
as the Hebrew word signifies. Thus Adonibezek dealt by the kings he took: the
Philistines by Saul 1 Samuel 31. Nebuchadnezzar by Zedekiah Ier. 25. and 29. 2
King. 25. as also by the kings of Egypt, Tire, Arabia, and others whom he had
taken, and used them happily, as Tamerlan did Bajazet, or those other captive
kings whom he caused as horses, to draw his charret. How much better
Evilmerodach, who, (mindful of the instability of all humane affairs) lifted
up the head and spoke to the heart of his prisoner Jehojakin king of Judah Ier.
52.31. Cyrus who honored his captive Craesus, Herod.
and made him of his Council? (neither was he less iuriched by the good
counsel Craesus gave him, then by all the wealth he had from him) Our Edward
the third, who having the king of Scotland and the French king his prisoners
here in England both together at one time, Speed.
gave them stately entertainment, and made them princely pastime, by holding
royal justs in Smithfield for their delight?

and the princes shall be a scorn unto them] Through the just judgment of God,
who scorneth the scorners Pro. 3.34. that is, says Rabbi Levi, facit ut aliis
sint ludibrio he makes others mock them in their misery, who in prosperity
scoffed at those that were better then they. Now therefore be not ye mockers,
lest your bands, be made strong etc. Esa. 28.22.

they shall deride every strong-hold] as that which cannot long hold out
against their assaults, how should they, when God breaks the bars and
sets open the gates to them Am. 1.5. and 9.3. Pro. 21.30.

for they shall heap dust and take it] i. e. by casting up mounts and ramparts,
take it with as much ease, Turk. hist. fol. 317.
as if they were in sport. The Turks have their Asapi or, common soldiers, of
whom they make no great reckoning, but to blunt the swords of their enemies,
and to fill up ditches with their dead bodies, that they may the better come at
the town or fort, which they would take.

Verse 11. Then shall his mind change] For the worse: in pejus proficiet, his
good and his blood shall rise together, as the proverb has it: he shall be
puffed up with his victories. Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis. Pride
compasses prosperous persons as a chain Psalm. 73.5, 6. Job 15.25, 26, 27.
their hearts are lifted up with their successes, as a boat that rises with the
rising of the water. Evagrius notes it for a special commendation of
Mauricius the Emperor, that notwithstanding his great prosperity, he retained
his ancient piety.

and he shall pass over] Or transgress all the bounds of modesty. Pride was
anciently pourtraited with three crowns on her head. Upon the first was
written Transcendo, upon the second Non obedio, upon the third Perturbo. David
calls wicked men Effractores breach-makers.

and offend imputing this his power to his god] Bell, or Jupiter Belus. This was
a wickedness with a witness; thus to transferr the glory of victory due to
God alone, upon an Idol. When Nebuchadnezzar offended in this sort, God turned
him a grasing, till he had learned better, Dan. 4.37. For, be the gods of the
heathen goodfellowes says One: the true God is a jealous God, and will not
share his glory with another Esaias 42.8.

Verse 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God?] Art thou not Jehovah
the unchangable, and shall we poor sons of Jacob be utterly consumed by these
Chaldees? Mal. 3.7.
Art not thou my God, my Judex and Vindex, who have hitherto judged and
revenged my cause? and will thou now abandon me to the fary of such an enemy?
Art not thou mine Holy One, whom I have hitherto sanctified in mine heart and
life Esaias. 5.16. and whom I have avouched for mine Deuteronomy. 26.17. denoting my
self wholly to thy fear and service? Art thou not all this and more then this,
says the Prophet, in the name and behalf of the Church here? Well then:

we shall not die] I am confident, and dare be bold to say it. Lo here the
triumph of faith, and the top-gallant of it, We shall not die, (says she)
abruptly but sweetly that is sure enough. She drinks to the disconsolate soul
in a cup of Nepenthes, and says, Courage my heart; Why art thou cast down, O
my soul! and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God. If he be
everlasting so shall thou, If he be thy God, and thine Holy One, thine in an
inviolable covenant, in a league defensive, and offensive, shall thou die? Lo
tamuth, Thou shall not die, (so some say, this text was anciently read) Lo
Namuth, We will not die. So the Church promises her self upon the former
promises: and such an answer she receives in her own heart to her former
prayers. And whereas it might be objected, that they were likely to be little
better then dead in the Babylonish captivity (for Mortis habet vices quae
trahitur vita gemitibus, an afflicted life, is a lifelesse life) the Prophet
answers;

O Lord, thou have ordained them for judgement] i. e. the Chaldeans, (our
oppressors) for punishment, for destruction, to burn thy rod, when thou have
therewith whipped thy children. See Exodus 9.16.

and, O mighty God, (Heb. O rock) thou have established them for correction]
Heb. thou have founded them, sc. thy people Israel: thou have thereunto
appointed them, 1 These. 3.3. thou have both founded and fitted them for thy
fatherly chastisements, who are therefore chastened of the Lord, that they may
not be condemned with the world. See here the different kinds, and ends of good
and bad men's sufferings. It has been noted before, that Almighty God as he is
Piorum rupes, a rock of refuge to the truly religious, so he is Reorum
scopulus, a rock of revenge, to dash in pieces the impenitent: as Valor. Max.
says of L. Cassius his tribunal.

Verse 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil] sc. with patience, and
without punishing it. This I am right sure of: and therefore cannot but
conclude, that thou will take an order with our oppressors, thou will one day
pay them home, for the new and the old, though for a time they ruffle, and
revell in our ruins. God, as he is (...), All-eye, neither can we be at any
time from under his view: so (...); He has an Holy eye, that cannot behold
evil, and bear with it. Hence that of Joshuah to the people, chap. 24.19. Ye
cannot serve the Lord, sc. unless ye first throw all your lusts out of
service: for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God: he will not forgive your
transgressions, nor your sins. Now therefore, if Cave, spectat Cato, was such
a forcible watchword among the Romans, and a Retentive from evil; Take heed,
Cato sees you, and will punish you; How much more should this prevail with
Christians, Cave, videt Dominus, Take heed, the Lord beholds? Ne pecees, Deus
ipse videt, bonus Angelus astat, etc. Surely, as they were wont to say at Rome
concerning cowards, that they had nothing Roman in them: so may it be said of
such as stand not in awe of Gods pure eyes, and dreadful presence, that they
have nothing Christian in them, what ever they pretend: since it is every godly
man's care, and comfort to be in the fear of the Lord all the day, to walk
evermore in the sense of his presence, and light of his countenance.

and can not look on iniquity] Heb. And to look on iniquity thou can not do
it. Lo, this is one of those things that God cannot do: as he cannot he: he
cannot die, he cannot deny himself: so here, he cannot look on iniquity, sc.
with approbation, or delight. He cannot but hate it: and (as the next thing to
hatred, is revenge) he cannot but punish it, such is the holiness of his
nature, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. He hates sin naturally, as we hate poison for it
self: and therefore let it be in a toad, or in a Princes cabin, we hate it
still. Nevertheless, it must be remembered for our comfort, that like as we
hate poison in a toad, but pity it in a man, because in the one it is their
nature, in the other their disease: So sin, makes wicked men the object of
Gods hatred, but the saints, of his pity: and accordingly, he chastises the
one, but plagueth the other.

Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously] And yet, such is thy
tolerance, seem to take no notice of their trespasses, and treacheries;
which I am sure thou hate with a perfect hatred. Here then the Prophet
disceptat potius secum, quam cum ipso Deo, says Calvin, contesteth, rather
with himself then with God, aboutthe ordering of thingshere below. He does not
question the divine providence, because good men suffer, bad men prosper, as
Aristotle did. He does not say with Pompey, when discomfited by Caesar, that
there was a mist, at least, over the eye of providence: so blaming the Sun
because of the soreness of his own blear eyes. He does not impatiently cry
out with Brutus defeated, (...) O wretched Virtue, or, O hard fortune. But he
modestly expostulateth with the Lord about his proceedings, having before
justified him: and now dares not reprehend what he cannot yet so fully
comprehend: but putting his mouth in the dust, concludes with David, after
some conflict with his own doubtings, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are
right, and that thou in faithfulness (non ad exitium, sed ad exercitium, and
that thou might be true to my soul) have afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75.

and hold thy tongue] And so, Quitacet, consentire videtur
by silence, seem to consent (as the Civilians rule is) but thou seem so
only, Psalm. 50.21. Or, Art thou deaf? Nor so neither, Psalm. 50, 3.

when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then hee] i. e. The
Chaldees destroy the Jews, which were some of them better then they: and the
rest were therefore the worse, because they ought to have been better. The
truth is, none are so bad as they that either have been good and are not; or
that might have been better, but would not.

Verse 14. And make men as the fishes of the sea] that are easily drawn out
with hook or net. So does Nebuchadnezzar with little ado, bring whole Nations
under his power, and pleasure. Here therefore, says Drusius, Nebuchadnezzar is
the fisher, the world is the sea, men are the fishes, the armies and arts of
the Chaldees, are called the net, drag, hook, to the which Nebuchadezzar
ascribed his victories, and not to God. Whereas he should have written upon
them, as the Ancients did upon their greatest exploits, Pausan.
(...), and have said, as Titus did, when some cried him up for his sacking the
city of Jerusalem; I only lent mine hand to God, who did the work by me.

as the creeping things] Or, the lesser fishes: for in the sea also are
creeping things innumerable, Psalm. 104.25. See Levit. 11.46.

that have no ruler over them] to right and revenge them: and are therefore
devoured, the lesser by the greater, without remedy. And what will men imagine,
but that thy people have no ruler over them, no God to take care of their
comfort, or to protect them from their enemies? How will they conclude them to
be in as bad condition, as those of Brasile, who are said to be, Sine rege,
sine lege, sine fide, etc. Or, the old Nomades, sub regno Cyclopico?

Verse 15. They take up all of them with the angle] No less then all will
serve their turns, or satisfy their ambition: as we read of Alexander, who
wept that there was but one world for him to conquer: Julius Caesar, who would
be aut Casar, aut nullus: this Nebuchadnezzar in the text, sitly compared to a
greedy fisherman, who could wish to enclose, and catch all the fishes in the
river, Covetousness is boundless; and ambition rides without reins. The
curse of unsatisfiablenesse, the disease of a spiritull dropsy, is upon all
carnal hearts: so that though one man should ingrosse a Monopoly of all the
wealth in the world, and heap up his hoards, and his honors to the stars:
yet would his heart be as hungry after more, as if he had nothing.

therefore they rejoice and are glad] This is worse then all the rest, that
they please and applaud themselves in their wickedness, that they hug and
stroke themselves on the head, as Doeg did, Psalm. 52.2. and those Sodomites,
Esaias 3.9. This shows that men are arrived at that dead and dedolent disposition
spoken of, Ephos. 4.19. and are even stradling over hell-mouth, which gapeth
for them.

Verse 16. Therefore they sacrifice to their net] Thus wicked men grow worse
and worse: their sin is infinite,, what marvail then, if their punishment be
also infinite in hell? Sejanus sibi sacrificabat. Deo.
To all other their iniquities these Caldeans add this of abominable idolatry,
they sacrifice to themselves, as Sejanus did, to their net, drag, etc, that is,
to their weapons, as Ajax called his sword, his god; and thanked it for all his
brave atchievments. And as Mezentius (another Atheist) is brought in, saying;
Dextrae mihi Deus, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10.
and telum quod missile libro. So Sesostris, king of Egypt (in Sampsons days)
would needs be called (...) Lord of the whole world: and when he had conquered
any country, he caused these words to be engraven there upon marble pillars,
This country I gained by mine own strength etc. So Antiochus, (...). Herod. l.
2.
(that little Antichrist) is said to worship his God Mauzzim, that is, his
forces and armies Dan. 11.38. It was Nebuchadnezzar that was here pointed at:
and how he deified himself and his own doings see Es. 10.13. Dan. 4.26.

and burn intense to their draggs] whiles they ascribe to the instrument, that
which is due to God alone, the chief Agent. Hold out net, said they: well done
dragge etc. Hoc ego primus vidi, said Zabarell, Hoc ego feci says Another. But
what says Luther? By men's boasting in this sort, Haec ego feci, haec ego feci,
Luth. in Psalm. 127.
they become nothing better then mere Faeces, dreggs and lees.

because by them their portion is fat] By them, that is, by their net and
dragge, they think that their condition is well mended, and their meat is fat,
opimus and optimus. God (the giver of all this) is not in all their thoughts:
but as the moon, the fuller it is of light, the further it getts from the Sun
the fountain of her light: so deal men with God.

Verse 17. Shall they therefore empty their net?] That they may fill it again
anew, and so draw to themselves as to a pond or pool, the wealth and power of
the whole East? Interrogatio precationis speciem habet, says Gualther. This
question is an effectual prayer: and it is as if the Prophet should thus say,
If, as hitherto, thou go on to wink at their wickedness, O God, will they not
grow more audacious every day, and mischievous to mankind? Arise therefore O
Lord of recompenses to the help of thy people. Set up and show thy self above
the heathen, that they may know themselves to be but men.

and not spare continually to slay the nations?] q. d. This cannot hold long:
and that it may not, is mine earnest suite and supplication. Lord when thou
make inquisition for blood, remember their blood-guiltinesse, Psalm. 9.12.
and forget not the cry of the humble. These cruel Chaldeans do not only
subjugate, but slay, not a few, but whole nations and that continually, and
that without mercy. Is it not high time for thee to set to thy hand, O
preserver of men etc. Note the Prophets ardency in prayer: and learn of him to
get upon the battlements, and look up, to see what comes of it, chap. 2.1. This
was also David's practice, Psalm. 5.3. where he uses the self-same military word
atsappeh: importing that he would be as a Spy upon a tower, to see whether he
prevailed with God, whether he got the day.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. I will stand upon my watch] To see what becomes of my prayer, and
what will be the issue of my doubts and temptations about Gods providence,
ruling the affairs of the world. See the Note on chap. 1.17. There are spaces
betwixt our prayers, and Gods answers. God harkens what Habacuc speaks: and
Habacuc must harken another while what God speaks. This he had learned of
David Psalm. 85.8. Prayer is a Christians angel, seed, dove, messenger: and must
be looked after. Who shootes an arrow, or casts a boule, and takes not notice
where it lights? They that observe not the answer of their prayers, do as
scoffing Pilate, who asked in scorn of Christ what is truth? but staid not for
an answer.

and set me upon the tower] Heb: set me firm and fast (as a Champion that will
keep his ground) upon the tower or fortress of divine meditation, upon Gods
word, Nescio quomodo imbecillior est medicina quam morbus.
which alone has virtutem pacativam a settling property to compose the soul
when distempered, and to lodge a blessed calm, a sabbath of rest in it, far
above all Philosophical Consolations: whereunto when Cicero had ascribed very
much, yet he is forced to conclude, that the disease was too hard for the
medicine. And this well appeared both in Socrates who died doubtingly; and
Cato, who desperately slew himself, after he had first read Plato's discourse
concerning the immortality of the soul. So foolish a thing it is, to fly in
distress of mind ad consolatiunculas creaturulae, as Luther speaks: and not
to run to the Name of the Lord, that strong tower Prove. 18.10. R. Kimchi reads
the text thus, I have set me in a circle q. d. I will not out, till I have an
answer, why thou deferrest to punish the wicked.

and will watch to see what he will say unto me] Or, in me, viz. by a
Prophetic spirit by internal revelation. 2 Samuel 23.1. Zach. 1.9. and 2.2.
Preachers must still hearken what the Lord God says unto them, and in them;
speaking as the oracles of God 2 Pet. 4.11. and able to say with St. Paul, I
have received of the Lord that which also I deliver unto you 1 Cor. 11.23. For,
ut drachmam auri sine imagine Principis, sic verba Praedicantis sine
authoritate Dei, contemnunt homines says Lipsius. Bring scripture, or else you
do but throw forth words without wisdom, and to little purpose, because they
come not Cumprivilegio.

and what I shall answer, when I am reprooved] Heb: upon my reproof or arguing.
Increpationis nomine tentationes intelligit, says Gualther. Under the name of
reproof, he understands those temptations whereby his faith was assaulted,
when he saw bad men prosper, good men suffer. Satan and the world do usually
set upon Gods servants with this weapon to unsettle their faith, and to make
them fall from their own steadfastness. Do thou still retain thine integrity?
said Jobs wife to him. See thou not how little good there is to be got by
Gods service? that all things are in a huddle here below, that they run on
wheels, and have no certain course? Thus the devil and his imps suggest to
the godly, and thereby greatly disquiet them: setting their thoughts all on an
hurricomb. It was the case of David Psa. 73. of Jeremy chap. 12.1.5. Of Basil
under the heat of the Arrian persecution, An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit
Dominus? says He; what? has the Lord cast off all care of his churches? Is it
now the last hour? etc. Of many good people in Salvians time, for whose
satisfaction he was forced to write those eight excellent books De
Gubernatione Dei; as likewise Austin (upon a like occasion) did those two and
twenty elaborate books De Civitate Dei: and as the Prophet Habacuc here does
the following vision which he had for some time waited for, and now receives
as a gracious answer to his prayer chap. 1. for his own and others settlement,
in the doctrine of Divine Providence.

Verse 2. Jam. 1.5.
And the Lord answered me and said] Wisdom he had sought of God, who gives
liberally; and wisdom is granted him without hitting him in the teeth with his
bold expostulations, and contestations about providence. Faithful prayer never
miscarrieth, but is sure of an answer, either before, as the prodigal; See Esa.
65.24. Or in the act, as Dan. 10.12. I am come for thy words, with an answer
thereunto. Or so one after, as here. If it come not all out so soon as we would
have it, know that there is water enough in the spring, but the pipes are stopped
or broken.

write the vision] that is, the following admonition: write it for the use of
all posterity. Note this against those Opinionists, that say that the Word of
God was not written by his command: Bell. lib. 4. de V. D. Cap. 4.
Or that it was written only for the use of the present ages, and of those
particular Churches, to whom it was directed or declared.

and make it plain upon tables] Boxen tables (as the Seventy render it) for on
box, for the firmness of the matter, were the ancients wont to write.

that he may run that reads it] That though he be no great Clerk, or in never
so great have of business, yet he may read it, being written in great letters
and very legible. See Deuteronomy. 27.8. Esa. 8.1. and 30.8. Gal. 6.11. you see how
large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand, (...).
the Greek signifies with what good great text-letters I have written etc. God
has written for us the great things of his law Hos. 8.12. and with much
perspicuity and plainness in things needful to be known: he has written them
as it were with the beams of the Sun: that none may plead difficulty or
obscurity: See Psalm. 19.9. and 119.105. Pro. 6.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. Of the
scripture it may be said, and latet and lucet: the knowledge thereof does even
bow down to us as trees do that are laden with fruits, so that a child may
gather them.

Verse 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time] This he is commanded to
write, that Gods people may learn to wait. He that believes makes not have,
he can both wait (as knowing that many of Gods promises bear a long date) and
also want; go without the good he desires: being well content that God is
glorified, though himself be not gratified. And this is the work of effectual
faith, which is herein like unto Crystal, of which it is reported, that the
very touching of it quickens other stones, and puts a luster and loveliness
upon them.

but at the end it shall speake] Effabitur, It shall speak confidently, boldly
and freely, to the great comfort of those that antedate not Gods promises, but
patiently abide the accomphshment thereof. If any ask when this shall be? it is
answered, In the end, that is, in Gods good time. Shall he lose his right,
because he has it not by the day set down in our Calendar? Possibly the
Calendar of heaven has a post-date to ours. Sure it is, that as God seldom
comes at our time: so he never fails at his own. Gods Expectants shall shortly
clap their hands for joy: and cry out with that holy Martyr, He Is come,
Austin, He Is come, Mr. Glover. Act. and Mor.
He Is come.

and not lie] that is, not disappoint: as the earth is said to lie when it
yields not her expected increase. God is faithful, and cannot lie. Christ has
a rainbow on his head Rev. 10.1. to show that he is faithful and constant in
his promises, and that tempests shall blow over the sky be cleared. He has
hitherto kept promise with nights and days, that the one shall succeed the
other, Ier. 33.20, 25. and shall he break with his people? How then should he
be Amen, the faithful and true witness Rev, 3.14? etc. Every man is a liar
either by imposture, and so in purpose, or by impotency and so in the event
deceiving those that rely upon him Psalm. 62.9. But God is a God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is he Deuteronomy. 32.4.

though it tarry wait for it] This is the duty, wait: and because it is a very
difficult duty (the Hebrews found it easier to bear evil, then to wait for
the promised good Heb. 10.36.) therefore is the promise here not delivered
only, but doubled, and trebled. It shall speak, it will come, it will surely
come: nay doubled again for more surety; It shall not lie, it will not tarry.
It is as if God had said, Do but wait, and you shall be delivered, you shall be
delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall, you shall. Oh the Rhetoric of
God! and oh the certainty of the promises!

It will not tarry] sc. beyond the time appointed of God. In se non tardat,
carni tardare videtur. Gods help seems long, because we are short. A short
walk is a long journey to feeble knees. But that God tarries not beyond his
appointed time, See Exodus 12.40, 41. at midnight were the firstborn slain,
because then exactly the 400 years were up. And Dan. 5.30. In that night was
Belshazzar slain; because then exactly the 70. years were ended.

Verse 4. Behold his soul which is lifted up] Ebulat, protuberat, which
swells like a bubble, and breaks thorough its own weakness: (...) Heb.
10.37. Ecce quisemu. nit. Gualth.
he that by unbelief or carnal security withdraws from God, and confideth
in the creature; seeking to shift and save himself some other way, as he is a
proud presumptuous person, so let him know that,

his soul is not upright in him] that is, it is very corrupt and crooked,
stark naught: and Gods soul can take no pleasure in him; but he will punish
him as a runaway, as one that has fled from his colors, forsaken his
captain, revolted to the enemy Heb. 10.37, 38. Transfugas ubicunque inventi
fuerint, quasi hosts interficere licet, was the old law of arms. What God
will do to such, See Psalm. 125.5.

but the just shall live by his faith] This is an answer to those that would
ask what shall we do till the vision speak? how shall we hold out till it
come? till the seventy years of captivity be expired? The just shall live by
faith says He, and shall make a good living of it too: He shall live and be
safe by the same faith, whereby he is just. He shall feed upon faith, as some
read that Psalm. 37.3. And whereas we find in those Apocryphal additions to
Daniel, that Habakkuk brought a mess of pottage to that Prophet in the Lions
den; as it seems to be but a Jewish fable, so the Jew that invented it,
grounding his conceit upon this text, would express thus much, Keck. Phys.
that as pottage (that succus benignus, as Keckerman calls it) preserves
this natural life from perishing: so does faiths acting upon the promises, and
extracting nourishment from the same, maintain life spiritual: and thereby it
was that Daniel stopped the mouths of the Lions, Heb. 11. How Habakkuk takes
out this his own lesson of living by faith, and not by sense, see chap. 3.17.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, etc.] See here the life of faith, in
the fail of outward comforts, so true is that of Solomon, Prove. 2.7. The Lord
lays up sound wisdom for the righteous: When he is in greatest straits, then
he has such quietness, soundness, and presence of mind, as bears him up
above all troubles: like as blown bladders do the body aloft all waters. Faith
furnishes him with strongest and most satisfying joys; such as the flames
cannot dry up, nor rivers of blood drown: faith actuated upon the promises
makes the believer walk above the middle region of the air (as it were) in a
continual serenity, as Henoch did: and seals him a double charter of
privative, and positive privileges. See it set down 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Faith
makes him live in the mouth of death, by strengthening him against the horrors
of it Psalm. 23.4. Romans 8.38. Heb. 11.31. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. and by showing
him heaven beyond it, Heb. 11.13. and therein freedom from all evil, fruition
of all good.

Verse 5. Yea also because he transgresses by wine] Or, How. Much more because
he is a a wine-bibber, perfidious, proud, neither keeps at home, etc. These
four faults the Prophet here lays to the charge of the Babylonian, and
there-hence infers for the comfort of the distressed captives, that his
destruction cannot be far off: and therefore the just should meanwhile, live
by faith, and bear up under affliction. For if those that believe not the
promises, but shift and shark for help and comfort elsewhere, shall smart for
their unbelief, as verse. 4. where shall those appear that are here described?
shall these bipedum nequissimi, worst of men escape by iniquity? Never think
it. First, their drunkenness alone would undo them; as it did Amnon, (...).
Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 3. (...). Aelian. lib. 2. cap. 41.
Elah, Nabal, Belshazzar, Bonosus, etc. Aristotle says, that double
punishments are due to drunkards: first, for their drunkenness, and then for
other sins committed in and by their drunkenness. Nebuchadnezzar (or, as
some will have it, Belshazzar) is here called wine, or, (by an ordinary
ellipsis) a man of wine: not only Meribibulus, but a deep and desperate
drunkard, a very tundish (as Diotimus of Athens was called,) a hogshead, as
young Cicero. No wonder therefore though he were all the rest that follows.
1. Perfidious, to those that committed themselves to his trust, or made leagues
with him, which he kept no longer then stood with his profit. 2. Proud, or
Arrogant, Prove. 21.24. See Dan. 4.30. how he spreads his peacocks tail, and
prides himself in it: his great wealth tumoured him up with great swealth. 3.
He keeps not at home] Non habitabit, his own country will not contain him,
but he encloseth all nations in his draw-net, chap. 1.15. Sheol.
4. He enlarges his desire as hell] which has its name in Hebrew, from its
unsatiablenesse, Prove. 30.15, 16. and in Latin it is called Infernus ab
inferendo, say some, from the devils continual carrying in souls thither, and
yet it is not filled.

and is as death] which is the end of all men, Eccles. 7.2. the way of all
flesh, 1 King. 2.2. of all the earth, Josh. 23.14. the house appointed for all
living, the great Congregation-house, Job 30.23.

and cannot be satisfied] Lust is unsatisfiable, and whatsoever it gets, is
but as fuel to the fire. Ambition grows as the Crocodile does, as long as he
lives. It rides without reins, and there is no hoe with it.

but gathers unto him all nations, etc.] All that he could come at; All Asia,
and a great part of Africa; and could never have enough, till his mouth was
filled with a spade full of mould. Therefore, he shall not keep home, (so some
read the words above in this verse) Ideo non manebit in habitaculo His kingdom
shall not long continue, but after a few years be over-turned by the Persians:
this golden head (as Daniel calls the Babylonish Monarchy) held not up above
170 years, if we reckon from Merodach-Baladan the first founder, to Belshazzar,
slain by cyrus, who translated the kingdom to the Persians, Dan. 5.

Verse 6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him?] Shall not the
Babylonian, who is now a terror, be ere long a scorn? shall he not inherit
with ignominis, reproach?

and a taunting proverb against him] Heb. An interpretation, and riddles: For
example, Woe to him that increases that which is not his: that is both a
proverb (because in many men's mouths) and an interpretation, because it is
plain and perspicuous. But that which follows is a riddle. That ladeth
himself with thick clay. This Nut must be broken up, ere the kernel can be
come at. See Judge. 7.15.

Woe to him that i^creaseth that which is not his] Heb. Lo, lo. Some render it,
Veshibhro.
Hoe, he that multip lies not for himself, but fro another, sc. for the Medes
and Persians, not Woe, but Hoe, a note of insulting, and upbraiding, answerable
to the Latin Vah, Vah, tune ille es, etc. Ah sirrah, are you he that
increases that which is not yours, etc. Euge, (...).

how long?] This is the common complaint of the oppressed nations, groaning out
their grievances, and longing for deliverance from those troublers of the
world. Neither is this vsque quo in vain; for God is gracious: and may better
style himself then the great Turk, Awlem Penawh, that is, The worlds refuge:
the poor man's King, as James 4. of Scotland was called.

and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay] With gold and silver, that
guts and garbage of the earth; fitly called clay, because of the clogging and
polluting property: and said to load people, as a sumpter-horse laden with
treasure all day, but at night turned into a stinking stable, with his back
full of gauls, and bruises. He that first called Riches, Bono, Goods, was
mistaken; the Scripture calls them, Thorns snares, thick clay, etc. a great
burden to the owner, according to the proverb, Magna navis, magna cura, A great
ship is a great care: and the lading often proves no better then that which
Captain Forbisher brought back with him, after his Voyage to discover the
Straits, viz. a great quantity of stones, which he thought to be Minerals: from
which, Camd. Elisab. 189.
when there could be drawn neither gold nor silver, nor any other metal, they
were cast forth to mend the highways. This was labor in vain, pressure to no
purpose: and no less is theirs that heap up riches without right, Jer. 17.11.
or, if by right means, yet set their hearts upon them, Psalm. 62.10. still
striving (as they say the toad does) to die with as much earth in their mouths
as may be; till at length their Never-enough, be quit with fire-enough in the
bottom of hell. Nenessan the Lawyer was wont to say, He that will not venture
his body, shall never be valiant: he that will not venture his soul, never
rich. O curvae in terras animae, and coelestium inanes. Is it nothing to lose
an immortal soul? to purchase an everlasting death? to sink into the
bottomless lake under this thick clay.

Verse 7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee?] Rent and tear
thee, as hunting-dogs do the beast they pursue. See Esaias 13.14, 21. Jer. 58.
and 51. The interrogation here used, imports both the certainty of the thing,
and their security: as if no such thing could possibly befall them: Suddenly
therefore, says the Prophet, shall thou be surprised, and spoiled by the
Persians, when thy city Babylon is held impregnable, and boasts of provision
enough laid in for twenty years siege. Security is the certain Usher of
destruction; as we see in Benhadads army, and those Midianites, Judge. 7. and
the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30. and Pompeyes marching against Caesar; and the French
at the battle of Agincourt: so confident they were of a victory, that they sent
to our King Henry 5. Speed. 795.
who was then in the field against them, and gat the day, to know what ransom
he would give, etc.

Verse 8. Because thou have spoiled many nations] God loves to retaliate (as
has before been often observed) to spoil the spoilers, by a remnant of the
people, by such as were of no note, and much unlikely to do such exploits. Thus
he spoiled these Babylonians by Cyrus, and his Medes; the Persians, by
Alexander and his Macedonians (whom they so slighted, that Darius in his proud
Embassy to him, called him his servant, but himself the King of kings, and
Cousin of the gods.) So the Roman Empire was miserably rent and torn by the
Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Lombards, people not before heard of: and the Greek
Empire, by Turks, Tartars, Saracens, Scythians, etc. taht it might the better
appear, haec non sine numine fieri, that it was the Lords own doing: who often
suffers his enemies, like Adoniah's guests, to feast and frollick in a jocund
security and promise of continued prosperity: But at last, when they are at the
height of their joys and hopes, he confounds all their devises, and lays them
open to the scorn of the world, and the spoil of the remnant of the people
whom they vilified.

because of men's blood] Heb. bloods, every drop whereof had a tongue to cry to
God for vengeance saying, Rev. 16.6. Psalm. 55.23.
Give them blood to drink, for they are worthy, Oh let not bloody and
deceitful men live out half their days. That soldier can never answer it to
God that has not a good cause, and strikes not rather as a Justicer, then as
a soldier.

and for the violence of the land] Heb. of the earth, though principally of
that land of desires the promised land, and the inhabitants thereof whom he
that touched, touched the apple of Gods eye, ^^hon.
that little man in the eye that may not be meddled with Zach. 2.8.

of the city] Jerusalem, called the city by an excellency, and by a better
right then ever Rome was. See Lam. 1.1. and Jeremies elegy there over it, when
captivated by these Chaldees.

Verse 9. We to him that coveteth an evil covetousnesse] For there is a good
covetousness (which few are guilty of) 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly the best
gifts: And yet show I unto you a more excellent way: Covet earnestly the best
graces, such as are faith, hope and charity, these better then gifts. A shop
full of barrells enrich not, unless they be full of commodities. Gifts (as to
heaven) are but the lumber of a Christian: it is grace makes him rich toward
God, and of that he cannot be too covetous. But the covetousness of the
Caldeans here threatened and thundered against, was of another nature. It is
called an evil covetousness, and has its name in the Original of piercing
or wounding, as Joel 2.8. and fitly, both in respect of a man's self 1 Timothy
6.10. and others Prove. 1.19. Am. 9.1. and here. Woe to such, and destruction
too, as Hos. 7.13. The Lord to show his just indignation against Covetous
persons smites his fists at them, as Balac did at Balaam Number. 24.10. See Ezekiel.
22.13. Behold, I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have
made, and at thy blood which has been in the middst of thee. Now lest people
should object or conceive that those were but great words: and that the Lord
would not do so as he said; or that they should deal well enough with Him:
therefore it follows verse 14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken, and
will do it,

to his house] i. e. his family and posterity, which he intends to advance, but
indeed undoes them, by leaving them a cursed hoard of ill-gotten goods: wherein
they do them a greater displeasure then Joab, and Gehezi, did in leaving their
children the leprosy for a legacy. Job speaks chap. 15.34. as though the
wicked, when they set up their houses by pilling and polling, by getting riches
without right, did but make a stack of wood, and then comes a spark of Gods
wrath, and makes an end of all. As in another place, Brimstone, says He, shall
be scattered upon his habitation chap. 18.15. so that if the fire of Gods
displeasure do but light upon it, De vita Constant: lib. 5.
etc. Thus Dioclesian that cruel persecutour had his house wholly consumed with
lightening, and a flame of fire that fell from heaven upon it, as Eusebius
tells us. Add hereunto, that many times there comes a son that is as good with
a fork, as his father was with a rake: as great a spend-all, as his father was
a get-all.

that he may set his nest on high] and there feather it at his pleasure (see
Obad 4.) and secure his children, like as the Eagle builds on high, to save her
young from the serpent that seeks to destroy them.

that he may be delivered from the power of evill] which he hat cause to fear
from others, to whom he has been so injurious and oppressive. But how will he
be hid or freed from the terrors of his own guilty conscience: well he may
build cities with Cain, and set up high towers with Phocas, but what said the
oracle to him? Though thou set up thy strongholds as high as heaven, yet sin
at the foundation thereof, will soon overturn all, and lay it level with the
ground.

Verse 10. Thou have consulted shame to thy house etc.] Thou have taken a wrong
course both for thy house of the kingdom (so the Persians called the kings
palace Dan. 4.27.) which shall be blown up: and for thine own private family
and posterity: it is not all thy care, pains, plotting and practicing, that
can preserve it from ignominy and utter ruin. God will turn thy glory into
shame, and make thy name to rot and stink as putrified flesh Prove. 10.7. and
ver. 9. He that perverteth his ways shall be known. And when such a man is
raked up in the dust, his evil courses shall be cast as dung in the faces of
those whom he leaves behind him. What fools then are Extortioners, Muckwormes
and Cormorants, that live miserably and deal unjustly, opening the mouths of
all to cry out upon their cr^^tinesse, covetousness and cruelty, and yet think
to raise up their houses and advance their names, and adorn their children
with glory and estimation?

by cutting off many people] A poor glory it was to Sylla to have made such a
merciless massacre at Athens: and after that, to have proscribed and slain
4700. (...).
citizens of Rome, as he caused it to be publicly recorded, videlicet ne
memoria tam praeclarae rei dilueretur, says mine Author. Johnst. de Not.
Constable.
So for Julius Caesar to have been the death of a million of men, Mahomet the
great Turk, of 800000. So for Stokesly bishop of London to boast upon his
deathbed, that he had in his time brought to the fire fifty heretics, as he
called them: or for the bloody Spaniards, that they have murdered fifty
millions of Indians in 42. years, as Acosta the Jesuit testifies.

and have sinned against thy soule] The worth whereof is incomparable, the
loss irreparable, as Christ (who only went to the price of souls) tells us
Mat. 16.26. It was therefore no ill counfell that Francis Xaverius gave John 3.
King of Portugal to meditate every day a quarter of an hour on that divine
sentence, What shall it profit a man to win the world, and lose his soul?
Neither was it any evil answer that Maximilian (King of Bohemia, afterward
Emperor) gave the Pope, who persuaded him to be a good Catholic with many
promises of profits and preferments: the king answered, I thank your holiness:
but my souls health is dearer to me then all the things in the world. Hist. of
Counc. of Trent. 429. Speed 496.
This pleased not the Pope, who said that it was a Lutheran form of speech. and
yet that of Lewis king of France about the year 1152. pleased him much worse,
who cast his Bulls (whereby he required the fruits of vacancies of all
Cathedral Churches of France) into the fire, saying, I had rather the Popes
bulls should roast in the fire, then that my soul should fry in hell.

Verse 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber shall answer it] Here are woeful Antiphonies screech-owles of woe cry
aloud from the beams of the oppressors chambers, and make most hideous noises
in the ears of their consciences. So that although none other should dare to
mute against them, or accuse them of wrong-dealing; yet their very houses built
by rapine and blood shall testify against them: so shall other creatures that
groan under their abuses Romans 8.19, 20, 22. They seem all to say unto us those
3. Lib. 2. de Arcap. 3.
words, says Hugo, Accipe, Read, Fuge; Accipe beneficium, Read Officium,
Fuge Supplicium.

Now if we harken not to them but do the contrary, they shall be one day as so
many swift witnesses against us.

and the beam out of the timber shall answer it] Tignum e ligno respondet ei.]
An allusion to responsores, as in Quires and music: And perhaps the Prophet
here tacitly taxes the Babylonian luxury in keeping Quiristers and Musicians
for their sinful delight. God, says he, will fit you with other singsters
shortly, that shall twit you by turns with your murders and ravages: for the
stone shall cry out of the wall, Woe to him that builds a town with bloods:
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, And woe to him that stablisheth
a city by iniquity.

Verse 12. Woe to him that builds a town with blood] This seems to be the
senseless creatures black Cantus (as they call it) chaunted out against the
wrong-doer, by Gods own appoinrment, cui obscura clarent, muta respondent,
silentium confitetur, says an Ancient, -- cui servi ut taceant, jumenta
loquentur, Juvenal.
The very beasts have a verdict to pass upon oppressors; as the dumb Ass did
upon Balaam: yea the lifelesse creatures shall ring a doleful knell of Woe and
alas in their ears, and cry them guilty: as the earth did Cain, and the
heaven did Phocas; and as the tignum e ligno does here Nehuchadnezzar. His town
of Babylon was built in blood by Seminamis who slew her husband, so was Rome by
Romulus, so was Alexandria in Egypt by Alexander that great manslayer, the
founder of populous No, of whose Woe read Nah. 3.8, 10. with the Note. And for
Alexander himself, Speed.
he lay unburied thirty days together, neither did his bloody conquest above
ground purchase him any title for an habitation under ground. The like befell
our Conqueror William, who laid his foundation here upon fireworks: and was
punished in his posterity for his depopulations at Newforrest, and elsewhere.

and stablisheth a city by iniquity] That thinks so to stablish it, but it
proves otherwise. Josephus tells us that Nebuchadnezzar set three several
walls of brick about his Babylon, Joseph. lib. 10. chp. 11.
one within another: but all would not do, when once God took it to do.
Oppression is a bony sin Am. 5.12, 13.

Verse 13. Behold is it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor
in the fire] Labor in vain to quench the fire, wherewith Babylon shall be
burnt, Jer. 51.58. Or have labored to no purpose in building that city, and
enlarging that Empire, which now God will have down. Is it not evident, that
they have lost oleum and operam, yea hazarded their own lives, as those do that
st^ive against a flame. What profit has he that labors for the wind Eccles.
5.16. much less he that labors in the fire, that devouring element. See
Esaias 33.14. Possibly he may besaved himself, yet so as by fire, but his work
shall be burnt, that loss he shall suffer 1 Cor. 3.15. As they that seek after
the Philosophers stone labor in the very fire to as little purpose as may be:
for they must use so much gold, and spend so much gold, and then perhaps they
can turn as much into gold by it, as they have spent in making of it. Hence One
calls Alchymy A multiplying of something by nothing; Another, an Omne,
Aliquid, Nihil. Another an art without art, never taught by Moses and Miriam,
as some have doted, and delivered, that this was a piece of their Egyptian
learning. But it is certain that those holy souls never either learned or
taught any such laborious loss of time and money. Demetrius Phalereus
complains of these Alchymists long agone not without indignation quod certis
consumptis incertorum gratia, Athenaeus
quae se capturos sperabant, non ceperunt, quod vero habebant abjecerint, that
they cast away certainties for uncertainties, that they attained not what they
hoped for, but cast away what they had. Julius Scaliger also Fornaculas is it as
odi, Ad Cardan. exerc. 83. p. 100.
says He, odio plus quam Vatiniano. Sunt enim noctuae ad aucupia crumenarum. I
cannot abide those fornaces: indeed they are pick-purses etc. know there is a
true Alchymy called by some the Spagirick art, being in great use in physic.
This I condemn not, so it be warily and wisely dealt in. But this by the way
only. It seemed to some an impossible thing that Babylon should so suddenly be
destroyed as was foretold verse. 7. It will be done certo, cito, penitus,
suddenly, surely, severely, says the Prophet, for the Lord of Hosts has
undertaken the doing of it. Annon ecce a Domino exercituum? (so the Hebrew has
it by an emphaticall Aposiopesis) Is it not, (look you) of the Lord of Hosts?
The people shall labor in the very fire,

the nations also shall weary themselves for very vanity] Viz. in seeking to
save Babylon, which by a divine decree is to be destroyed without remedy, Psa.
137.8. So is Rome that other Babylon Rev. 18.2. cito itidem casura, De rem. ut.
fort. dial. 118.
si vos essetis viri, said Petrarch long since. It would soon be down, would
you but stand up as men. Neither shall the Jesuits (that ultimus diaboli
crepitus) be able to uphold it: there is a cold sweat upon all the limbs of
Antichrist already.

Verse 14. For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord etc.] He shall make himself a glorious name among the nations of the
earth, by executing vengeance upon Babylon, and so pleading the cause of his
oppressed people (whom he seemed, during their captivity there to neglect) that
men shall have cause to say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily
there is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.11.

as the waters cover the sea] the channel of the sea: that is plentifully, and
abundantly, See a like promise, Isay 11.9. but to another purpose. That Is a
famous promise of the coming and kingdom of Christ: and so some Interpreters
apply this. Wherein though they seem to be mistaken, considering the context:
yet the Ancients rightly here-hence argued, that Christ would certainly come
again to judgment, because many wicked men escape in this world without
condign punishment, which then they shall be sure of, 2 These. 1.6, 9. Then all
shall be set to right, though now they may seem less equally carried: and the
reason of Gods proceedings with men shall be cleared up, which now also we are
bound to believe to be (sometimes secret, but) ever just. At the day of
judgment we shall see an excellent harmony in this discord of things: and all
obscure passages shall be made as plain to us, as if they were written with
the most glittering Sunbeam, upon a wall of Crystal. Then shall this sweet
promise have its full accomplishment. The earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, in greatest
abundance, and redundancy.

Verse 15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink] The Babylonians (among
other their flagitious practices aforementioned) were much addicted to
drunkenness, as is recorded by Herodotus, Ctesias, and others. Their land was
sick of drink, and would therefore spew them out: Themselves were men of wine,
verse 5. (See the Note) and should therefore drink deep of the wine of Gods
fierce wrath. They drank to their neighbors, or companions, not in a way,
either of courtesy, or charity, but purposely to intoxicate them, to make them
drunk, that they might either deride them, or abuse them to filthy pleasure, or
both: they buckt them with drink, and then laid them out to be sunn'd, and
scorned, as Noah was by his grace^esse son. Therefore as he cursed Ham
(though Scaliger excuse him) and it stuck to his posterity for ever: so does
God here denounce a woe to drunkards, and so sets it on, as no creature shall
ever be able to take it off.

that put thy bottle to him] Not thy bowl only, but thy bottle, that he
may drink, and be drunk, and spew, and fall, etc. Jer. 25.27. This is
ordinarily practiced by our Roaring-boyes, (as they will needs be called by a
woeful prolepsis, Here for hereafter) in their Cyclopicall, (...). Either by
persuasions, or threats, the bottle is set to the mouth, and must be emptied,
ere it come thence. The civil, sober, and temperate man is urged, and it may be
forced to swallow down long and needless draughts (as a horse does a drench)
by domineering drunkards, that they may see his nakedness, triumph over him,
as laid up, or (as the new term is) satisfied. Their courses are here
graphically, and in lively colors described by the holy Ghost; to set forth
the hatefulness thereof, and how woeful will be the issue. There are that read
the words thus. That put thine anger to him, thy fervor, and thy fury,
viz. if he pledge thee not whole-ones, and drink not all the Outs, as they call
them. Domitius, the father of Nero, slew Liberius, Sueton.
an honest Roman, because he refused to drink so much as he commanded him.
Others read it, That put thy poison to him: and indeed, Ebrietas est
blandus demon, dulce venenum, suave peccatum, etc. Drunkenness is a
fair-spoken devil, a pleasant poison, a sweet sin, which he that has in him,
has not himself, and which he that runs into, runs not into a single sin,
but is wholly turned into sin. How often, (says a grave Divine) have I seen
vermin sucking the drunkards blood, as fast as he, that of the grape, or
malt, yet would he not leave his hold, or lose his draught? Gualther reads it,
Conjungens fervorem tuum, Joining thine heat, inflaming thy self, that thou
may drink him under the board. De sua bobacitate librum conscripsit seu
potius evomuit. ^erod.
This was great Alexanders sin, and ruin: so it was M. Anthonies, (who wrote
a book of his abilities to drink down others) and before them both Darius's, as
Athenaeus has left recorded. How much better his successor Ahashuerosh,, who
made a law at his great feast, that every man should drink according to his
pleasure, Esth. 1.8. So Minos, king of Creet ordered, that his subjects should
not drink one to another, (...), unto drunkenness. Quinetiam Spartae mos est
laudabilis ille,
Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo.
Among the old Germans, diem noctemque continuare potando, nulli probrum, says
Tacitus, It was no disgrace to drink night and day together. It is still the
sin of that nation, as Gualther upon this text heavily complains; and it is
grown to a proverb, the Drunken Dutchman. Of them, the English, much commended
for their sobriety, learned in the Netherland-warres, to drown themselves by
immoderate drinking: Cam^d. Elis. 231.
and by drinking to others healths, to impair their own: so that in our days
came forth the first restraint thereof by severity of laws, says Camden: who
yet, being so great an Antiquary, could not but know, that in the year 959.
Edgar king of this land, made an Ordinance for putting pinnes in cups, that
none should quasse whole ones.

And make him drunk also] Robbest him of himself, and layest a beast in his
room. The same Hebrew word Zolel signifies a drunkard and a vile person:
filthy venomous creatures breed in those fennish grounds Ich 40.21. Behemoth
lies in them; which Gulielmus Parisiensis applies to the Devil in drunken
hearts: whereas in dry places, sober souls, he walks about seeking rest but
sindeth none Mat. 12.43. Natal. Comes E^^ist. 84. demon meridianus
The very Heathen in hatred of this sin fained that Cobali (an hurtful and
pernicious kind of Devils) accompanied Bacchus: and that Acratus, or the
intemperate Devil was their Captain. Seneca calls it a voluntary madness,
another a noonday Devil, no more a night-walker, as once, 1 These. 5.7. The
Lacedaemonians punished it severely; so do the Turks at this day, pouring
ladle-fuls of boiling lead down their throats sometimes: and at least
bastinadoing of them on the bare feet, till they are disabled for walking in
haste again to their conventicles of good-fellowship. Heyl. Geog. 793.
Morat Bassa commanded a pipe to be thrust through the nose of a Turk, which was
found taking Tobacco: and so in derision to be led about Constantinople. Let
men shun this shameful sin; and be far from drawing others to it: for have
they not sins enough of their own to answer for? Must they needs go to hell in
company? Dives desired that his brethren and companions in sin, might not
come to that place of torment. Luke 16.
This he did, not out of any good will to them, but because he knew, if they
were ever damned, he should be double-damned.

That thou may look on their nakednesse] Those parts that nature would have
covered are called nakedness per Antiphrasin. To look on them with delight, is
by some held a sin against Nature: the ground of their opinion is Genesis 3.7.
To make men drunk for that purpose, is worse. But if for further abuse of their
bodies to uncleanness, (as Attalus the Macedonian dealt by Pausanias a young
Courtier, who afterward slew King Philip, Pansudam so^^um mero Al^^lus non
^uae tantuin verim and convivarum libi^^^ velut scor^^m. vrle subject,
ludi^^^^^ (...) theat. (...) vi^^uti sun^limus and rigidae inn ^^tiae. Vell.
lib. 2.
because he would not punish Attalus, for so doing) that is worst of all: and
has a woe, woe, woe, hanging at the heels of it.

Verse 16. Thou art filled with shame for glory] Or, more with shame then with
glory. That is thou shall be filled shortly with ignominy for that glory
wherein thou presently pridest thy self: thy drunkenesse shall redound to
thine utter disgrace, as it was to Darius, Alexander, Autoninus, Bonosus,
Trajan (a good Emperor otherwise, but a drunkard, and a pederast, as Dio
Cassius reports him.) Yea Cato, that most severe censurer of other men's
manners; to whom it was sometime objected (how deservedly I know not) quod
nocturnis potationibus indulgeret, that by night he would drink soundly. This
is a blurre to him, if true, and confutes that elogium given him by Paterculus,
that he was omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, free from all vices, and as like
virtue her self as might be. In Scripture, the drunkards style begins in
lawlesnesse, proceeds in unprofitablenesse, ends in misery; and all sh^t up in
that denomination of his pedigree, A son of Belial.

Drink thou also] Since thou art so able at it (since thou have so well deserved
that infamous Epitaph of a certain drunkard.

Heus, hic situs est Offellius Buratius Bibulus,
Qui dum vixit, aut bibit aut minxit. abi praeceps) Jo^nsi. de Nature. constant.

Drink another while of the cup of shame and sorrow: take thy part of all
manner of miseries Jer. 25.26. Obad. 16. Snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempost shall one day be the portion of thy cup: For the righteous
Lord loves righteousness Psalm. 11.6.7. Yea he loves to retaliate and will
therefore make these drunkards drink also: and those that made others drunk
that they might look on their nakedness, to lie with their fore-skins
uncovered to their perpetual reproach. Uncircumcision was a shameful spectacle
indeed among that people.

The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned to thee] Heb. turned about, or
shall turn it selse, quia rerum omnium vicissitudo: thy turn is now come to
take off the dregs of Gods cup of calamity Ier. 25.15. that has eternity to
the bottom.

And shameful spewing shall be on thy glory] Kikalon a compound word, the
vomit. of ignominy; a fit punishment for filthy drunkards, who break their
heads as swine do their bellies, over-charge their stomachs as dogs do their
gorges, and then disgorge themselves in a shameful sort, as Antonius did at
Narbon amidst his guests at a feast: and as Eccius, Luthers great adversary,
whom he merrily called Ieccius from his casting: as Tiberius was nicknamed
Biberius.

shall be on thy glory] The Hebrew word for glory, properly signifies
weightinesse: as the word twice here used for shame, signifies lightness: an
elegant opposition, showing that whatsoever the Babylonians gloried in, and
held themselves honorable for, should be lightly accounted of, and lie buried
in the sheet of shame, as in a dunghill of filthy vomit.

Verse 17. For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee] Here, for the comfort
of Gods people (which is the main scope of this prophecy) he repeateth the
chief causes of Babylons calamity: viz. her cruelty to Lebanon, that is, to all
Judaea (a part being put for the whole.) Or else he speaks of the violence
done to the Temple, which was built of the cedars of Lebanon; as was likewise
the Temple of Diana at Ephesus made of Cedar-wood. The devil loves to be Gods
ape. This violence in firing the Temple, and desolating the country, shall
cover thee all over, as a garment does the body: yea, it shall be as the shirt,
made for the murdering of Agamemnon, where the head had no issue out.

and the spoil of beasts which made them afraid] Men are here called beasts, as
the land, Lebanon: these were spoiled and terrified, these were murdered and
massacred by the Chaldeans, who shall therefore be severely punished, and this
written, as it were, over their heads, to signify for what they suffer.
Because of men's blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of
all that dwell therein. See the Note on verse 8.

Verse. 18. What profits the graven image] The Chaldees promised themselves
much help against their enemies from their idols: and were ready to say, as
that Roman Emperor Antoninus the Philosopher did, when he was to meet his
enemy, Ita refer.- Vulcat. Galliz. in Avid. Cass.
Non sic deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret. We have not so served the gods, as
that he should overcome us. The Prophet here rejects their confidence, and
lays open their folly. See the like, Jer. 10.8, 14, 15. Zech. 10.2. Esaias
44.16, 17, etc. Confer Jer. 51.47, 52. Ezekiel. 20.30, 32.

that the maker thereof has graven it] And can he hope for help from the work
of his own hands? can the image give that to others, which it has not for it
self? In Henry the eights time, one Mr. Cotismore was accused of heresy, for
saying, Act and Mon 763.
that Images were but Carpenters chips; and that when men go to offer to them,
they did it to show their new gear. The men of Cockram, not pleased with their
new Rood, quarrelled with the joyner, and refused to pay him: he complained to
the Major of Doncaster, who gave them this counsel; Pay the poor man his
money, and go your ways home, and look on it, and if it will not serve for a
god, make no more ado, but clap a pair of horns on his head, and so he will
make an excellent devil. This the Parishioners took well in worth: the poor man
had his money, and diverse laughed well thereat: but so did not the Babylonish
priests, Ibid. 1340,
says Mr. Fox. Horace brings in Priapus, that ridiculous garden god, saying,
thus, Olim truneus eram ficulnus, etc. He thought no otherwise of the Images of
Jupiter, and the rest: but durst not say so, for fear of the people So that of
him it might be said, as Augustine does of Seneca, who wrote a book against
superstitions, but colebat quod reprehendebat, De civ. D^i. lib. 6. c. 10.
agebat quod arguebat, quod culpabat, adorabat, he reproved them, but yet used
them.

the molten image, and a teacher of lies] Pictura falsa veritas est, says One.
It is but a shadow of the person that it represents. God cannot be pictured,
or expressed by any image. Images of Christ are not only defects, but also
lies, says the Homily against peril of idolatry, set forth in Queen
Elizabeth's days. Irenaeus reproves the Gnostics for carrying about the
images of Christ, made in Pilates time, after his own proportion, Lactantius
says, that there is no religion where there is an image. Varro had said the
same long before him, as Austin recites him. Plutarch says, it is sacrilege
to worship by images, etc. and tells us, that Numa forbad the Romans the use
of images in temples; neither had they any for the first 170. years together,
no more had the Persians, says Strabo, nor the old Germans, says Tacitus.
The old Britones indeed had their idols, Portenta diabolica (so Gildas calls
them) pene numero Aegyptiaca vincentia, ugly for shape, and almost as many as
the Egyptians for number. These all fell down together, when Christ was first
known here (as they say the Egyptian idols did, when Christ with his parents
fled thither, for fear of Herod) but Antichrist soon set up others in their
stead, and taught the people that they were Lay men's books. But if they be
lying teachers, (as here they are called) they must be lying books too; and
therefore not to be read by any that would receive the love of the truth, that
they may be saved. Bern in Swisserland, was the first town, that after the
Reformation, was purged of images; making a bone-fire of them, on an
Ashwednesday. The like was done here in England, in King Edward 6. his reign,
on that very day wherein the victory was gotten at Muscleborough in Scotland:
and now I hope we are rid of them for ever. The Turks will not endure them, no
not upon their coins; because of the second Commandment: for they also do so
honor Moses his writings, Par. Porleg. in Genes.
that they kiss any piece of Paper, wherein any thing of his is written, and
do exceedingly hate Papists for their abominable idolatry: as do likewise the
Jews.

that the maker of his work trusts therein] Which he would never do, if not
bewitched, and bereft of his right mind. To trust in a god of a man's own making,
is a prodigious error, a stupendous stupidity.

to make dumb idols] In the Hebrew there is an elegant Agnomination, Elilim
illemim, speechless, No-gods, that give no answer to their suitours, and --
quorum sunt numina nomina tant um.

Verse 19. Woe unto him that says to the wood, Awake] It is wood still, and
yet he says to it, Awake, Arise, etc. as if he would deny his own reason, and
un-man himself. When Hezekiah saw that such was the venom of the Israelitish
idolatry, that the brazen-Serpent stung worse then the fiery, he pulled it
down, and in contempt called it Nehushtan, that is, a piece of brass, 2 King
18.4. Pagnins renders it, These. Ling. sanct.
aenusum. Marinus, aeniculum, that is, parum quid aeris, a little piece of
sorry brass. The Jews at this day say, that as long as they see the Preacher
direct his speech and prayer to that little wooden crucifix, that stands in
the pulpit by him, to call it his Lord, and Savior, to kneel to it, to embrace
it, to kiss it, to weep upon it, Spec. Eur.
(as is the fashion of Italy) this is preaching sufficient for them: and
persuades them more with the very sight of it to hate Christian religion, then
any reason that the world can allege to love it. Woe therefore to those Popish
Idolaters, because of offenses: destruction to them, that thus say to the wood,
Awake, and to the dumb stone, Arise] A prayer, fit to be preferred to God
only, (as Psalm. 35.23.) who gives not his glory to any other, nor his honor
to graven images. Esaias 42.8.
He that is the right object of men's prayers, must be omnipotent, omnipresent,
omniscient, a God also in covenant with us, etc. Is any wood or stone so? Is it
not inutile lignum a dead stock? Eben dumam, a dumb stone? Our English seems to
come of the Hebrew.

It shall teach] Dumb, and yet teach? Others read it questionwise, Ipse doceat?
Can it teach? What better lesson can ye learn from it then a lie, as verse 18?
Bid adieu to it therefore, as King Hen. 8. did to the Pope (if he had done so
to Popery too, it had been better for him) in his Protestation against him.
England is no more a babe, to be led and fed with lies --. Surely except God
take away our right wits, Act. and Mon. 990.
not only the Popes authority shall be driven out for ever, but his name also
shortly shall be forgotten in England. We will from henceforth ask counsel of
him and his when we list to be deceived, when we covet to be in error, when we
desire to offend God, truth and honesty etc.

behold it is laid over with gold and silver] q. d. Come and see, believe your
own eyes at least, behold the matter, form, workmanship of this new-made god,
Ibid. 1084.
and grow wiser. The Rood of Grace with all its trinkets, the blood of Hales
(that notable impostor) was laid open at Paul's cross by Cromwell, and there
viewed and torn in pieces by the people.

there is no breath at all in the midst of it] No soul, Aesop.
not so much as that of a beast. O pulchrum caput, sed cerebrum non inest, said
the ape (in the fable) coming once into a ca^vers shop. The best thing that an
image can teach a man is, that it self is dumb and dead: and that the maker
thereof cannot give life and breath to it, much less a deity.

Verse 20. But the Lord is in his holy Temple] It is not enough to condemn
superstitions: but we must know and serve the true God in a true manner. Tully
wished that he could as easily find out the true religion, as disprove the
false ones. De not. deos.
Cambyses destroyed the Egyptian idols, rather in scorn of all religion, then
hatred of idolatry. Lucian ieared the heathen-gods: and yet was an enemy to
Christianity. Erasmus was no Papist, nor yet good Protestant. Henry the 8.
despised the old religion, and yet envied the new. There are many (said He in
Pa^liament) that are too busy with their new Sumpsimus: and others that dote
too much upon their old Mumpsimus etc. Hence it is that the Prophet here to
those dunghill-deities of the heathens, those dead idols, opposes the living
and only true God, Jehovah, says he, is in his holy Temple: that Essentiator
who has his being of himself, and gives being to all things else (...) as St.
Paul elegantly expresses it Act. 17.25. He is in his holy Temple, sc. in
heaven by his power and glory and in his Church on earth by his grace and
goodness. The use of which doctrine follows.

let all the earth keep silence before him] Heb. sc. or be still, all the earth
etc. Reverentiae cause silete, Tremble at his judgments, trust in his
promises, wait upon him in his ordinances, walk before him in obedience, speak
not of him or to him, but as knowing your distance, your infancy. In speaking
of God, our best eloquence is silence, says Mr. Hooker. In speaking to him,
quanta cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta humilitate, Bern. de diverse. 25.
accedere debet e palude sua procedens and repens vilis ranuncula, says
Bernard? with what reverence and godly fear, with what humility, should a poor
small frog, creeping out of his mud, draw near unto this great God, before whom
Angels appear with greatest self-abasements? what abhorrency then and
self-annihilation can be sufficient to accompany our approaches to this great
God of heaven? And how should the enemies of the Church stand in aw, and even
quake before him, wriggling into their holes, as worms do, when it thundreth,
and being all hushed, as sheep are before the wolf, birds before the hawk, all
the beasts of the field before the lion when he roareth.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. A prayer of Habbakkuk the Prophet] Habakkuk signifies a Wrastler,
that by closing striveth to get the better, as has been before noted on chap.
1.1. To close with the adversary is the best way to supplant him, or to avoid
the blow: so is running in to God, the way to escape him. The Prophet had heard
Gods speech and was afraid verse 2. He saw his wrath ready to break forth, and
therefore gets in with him by this prayer. He knew that, Flectitur irat us voce
rogante Deus. Ovid.
God suffers himself often to be overcome by the prayers of his people: and
yields much unto them, when most bitterly bent Mat. 24.20. he therefore sers
shoulders and sides to work, and wrestle lustily in this chapter. He knew it
was a Prophets work, to pray as well as preach: and between these two, to
divide his time. God forbid (says Samuei, who is reckoned the first of
Prophets) that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: I will
also teach you the good and right way 1 Samuel Act. 3.24.
12.23. So does this Prophet: he both prefers a prayer (the word, (...)
say some, signifies such a prayer as is made by a Mediator before a judge;
we have an advocate with the Father 1 Ioh. 2.1.) and dedicated the same to the
people, to be used by them in the time of the captivity: which yet they
shamefully neglected to do, as Daniel acknowledges chap. 9.13. or if they did
any thing toward it, they merely sought themselves in it, and so lost their
labor, Zech. 7.5. whereas had they prayed as here is prescribed, confessing
their sins, Lam. 3.
and beseeching God not to deal with them after their deserts, but according
to his ancient loving kindnesses that never fail, they might have found mercy.
The Altar of incense stood against the Mercy-seat: and Rev. 9.13. the prayers
of the Saints from the four corners of the earth sound and do great things in
the world, make it ring. It was the speech of a learned man: If there be but
one sigh come from a gracious heart, it fills the ears of God, so that God
hears nothing else.

upon Sigionoth] Vocabulum Musicum est, cujus ratio Hebraeis ignota, says
Buxtorf: it is a Musical term, the reason whereof is unknown to the
Hebrew-Doctours at this day. Yet Rabbi Solomon (and with him the most
Interpreters) renders it pro ignorantiis, for ignorances, or as touching his
own and his peoples errors; which the prophet here (convinced by Gods former
answer to his expostulation) confesses with confusion of face. Ignorance
surely is a blushfull sin; especially if affected and delighted in (as the
Hebrew word seems to imply, confer Prove. 5.19. and 20.1.) Privative
ignorance, though it do somewhat excuse a man ( sc. a tanto, (...).
not a toto, Luk 12.47.) yet is it a sin to be confessed and bewailed: for
Christ died for the not-knowing of the people Heb. 9.7. and destruction is
threatened pr^ non-scientia, or lack of knowledge Hos. 4.7. But Calvin well
observes here, that the Prophet by begging pardon for i^norances, does not
omit his own and the peoples more grievous sins: but shows, that men must
also be sensible of their lesser lapses, and cry out with David (after whose
example this whole song is framed) Who can understand his errors (or
ignorances unwitting and inconsiderate sins?) O cleanse thou me from secret
faults. Psalm. 19.12.

Verse 2. O Lard I have heard thy speech and was afraid] Audivi auditionem
tuam. I have heard (not thy fume, or thy report, as some render it, unless it
be in the Prophet Esays sense, chap. 53.1. but) thy preceding discourse, in
answer to my disceptation. I have heard that the Babylonians will come, and
that my people must into captivity. This was no pleasant hearing: for we all
naturally shrink in the shoulder, when called to carry the cross: but those
that do what they should not, must look to hear and feel too, what they would
not.

and was afraid] Fear is constrictio cordis exsensu mali instantis, a passion
of the soul shrinking in it self from some imminent evil. The wicked hear
and jeere: or their fear drives them from God, as it did guilty Adam.
Contrarily, the godly tremble at Gods judgments, whiles they hang in the
threatenings: and draw nigh to him with entreaties of peace. In this fear of
the Lord is strong confidence, and his children have a place of refuge, Prove.
14.26.

O Lord reviue thy work in the midst of the yeares] i. e. Preserve alive
thine Israel, that work of thine hands Esaias. 45.11. together with thy work of
grace in their hearts: keep that spark alive upon the sea of tribulations and
temptations. The Angels (says a Reverend man) are kept with much less care,
charge, and power, then we: because they have no biasse, no weights of sin hung
upon them etc. There is not so much of the glory of God (says Another) in all
his works of Creation and Providence, as in one gracious action that a
Christian performs.

in the midst of the years make known] sc. thy power in perfecting thy
glory, and not forsaking the work of thine own hands Psalm. 138.8. It was
Luthers usual prayer, Act. and Mon.
Confirm, O God, in us, that thou have wrought: and perfect the work that thou
have begun in us, to thy glory. So be it. So Q. Elisabeth, when prisoner at
Woodstock, prayed thus: Look Lord upon the wounds of thine hands: and despise
not the work of thine hands. Thou have written me down in thy book of
preservation with thine own hand: O read thine own handwriting, Engl. Elis.
page 134.(...).
and save me, etc. But what meant the Seventy here to translate, In the midst
of two beasts: which whiles Ribera striveth to defend, he tells us a tale of
the babe of Bethlehem, born in a stable, and laid in a manger betwixt two
beasts, an ox and an ass. It may very well be, that the Church here prays
for Gods grace and favor, during the time of her captivity.

In wrath remember mercy] In commotione irae: when thou art most moved against
us, and have as much ado to forbear killing of us, as thou had to forbear
Moses, when thou mettest him in the Inn, then remember to show mercy, call to
mind thy compassions which fail not. Look then upon us, and be merciful unto
us, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name, Psalm. 119.132. The
wicked are threatened with an evil, an only evil, without any mixture of
mercy: Ezekiel. 7.5.
this the Prophet here deprecateth, and beggeth mercy. Per miserere mei,
tollitur iradei.

Verse 3. God came from Teman] The Prophet alludeth to that of Moses in his
Swan-like song Deuteronomy. 33.2. and alleges Gods benefits of old, for his own and
their present confirmation of faith: without which prayer would be to no
purpose: hence effectual prayer is called the prayer of faith, Jam. 5.15.
Faith is the foundation of prayer, and prayer is the fervency of faith.
Whatsoever ye ask believing, Mar. 7. Psalm. 55.
ye shall receive, says our Savior. Cast thy burden (or thy request) upon
the Lord says David. To help us so to do, it is of singular use to consider
what God has done heretofore: for thou have, thou will, is an ordinary medium
of Scripture Logic, see Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3, 4. There be six Hasts drawing in the
next, Turn us again etc. ver. 4. See also 2 Cor. 1.10. Gods Majesty and might
when he gave the Law in Sinai, is here set forth, to show how easily he can, if
he please, Psalm. 126.4.
turn again the captivity of his people, as the Streams in the south.

And the holy One from mount Paran. Selah] He that is Holiness it self (a
title far too good for that man of sin, that Merum Scelus, the Pope, Philip
the Fair of France did him right, in writing to him thus Sciat tua maxima
Fatuitas etc. Be it known to your Foolishness, not to your Holiness) and that
must be sanctified in righteousness Esaias 5.16. mount Paran was contiguous to
the mountains Sinai and Teman, otherwise called Seir for its roughness Deuteronomy.
33.2. Selah. This the Seventy make to be a musical notion, rendering it
Diapsalma. It seems to import an asseveration of a thing so to be, and an
admiration thereat. The Jews at this day use it in their prayers for Legnolam
i. e. For ever, or Amen. It is probable, that the Singers of the Temple came to
a Selah (which word is used 92 times in Scripture, and only in Psalms and
Songs) they made a pause, that the hearers might stay their thoughts awhile
upon the preceding matter, worthy of more then ordinary observation. Hence
Tremellius and Iunius express Selah by the adverbs Sum Maxim,
Vehementissime, Excellenter. It was doubtless a singular mercy of God to his
people of Israel, that he came from Teman etc. to speak with them from heaven:
and there to give them right Judgments, and true Laws, good Statutes and
Commandments, Neh. 9.13.14. This when he did.

His glory covered the Heavens and the Earth was full of his praise] The Law
was given in a most majestic manner (see Exodus 19.) partly to procure
reverence to the doctrine of it, partly to set forth the nature and office of
it, which is to terrify Offenders, and to drive them to Christ: and partly also
to show that God has power, and weapons enough, to defend those that keep his
Law, and to punish such as would draw them off from their obedience thereunto.
That Is a pious meditation of a Reverend Writer, if the Law were thus given, how
shall it be required? Dr. Hall
If such were the Proclamation of Gods Statutes, what shall the Sessions be? I
see and tremble at the resemblance. and c.

Verse 4. And his brightness was as the light] The glory of the Lord was as a
devouring fire on the top of the mountain. Exodus 24.17. the noonday light, the
Sun in his strength was nothing to this incomparable brightness, which was as
the light, (...)
or as the Sun: s^e Job 31.26. and 37.20. Hence the Heathens called Apollo or
the Sun Orus, (which is the word here used) Hence also the Greek (...) to see.

He had (...) coming out of his hand] Or, bright beams out of his side, as the
Sun has: The (...) the Lord are in every place Prove. 15.3. Rev. 4.6.
and every man before him is all (...) Job 34.22. the whole world is to him as
a Sea of glass, a clear transparent body, he shines and sees throw it. Gods
hand or side is said to be horned in the sense, that Moses his face was. Exodus
34.30.

And there was the hiding of his power] Not the revealing of it, but velamen,
symbolum, integumentum, the veil, the cover, such as God put over him when he
showed Moses his glory. He could see but his back parts, and live: we need see
no more, that we may live. God is invisible, incomprehensible, and dwells in
light unapproachable. How little a thing does man here understand of God, Job
26.14. the greatest part of that he knows, is but the least part of that he
knows not. Surely as a weak eye is not able to behold the Sun, no nor the
strongest eye without being dazzled: we cannot look upon it in rota, but only in
radiis: so here we cannot see God in his Essence, but only in his effects, in
his works and in his Word, where also we have but a show, but a shadow of him,
we see but his train in the Temple as Esaias: the holy Angels cover their faces
with their wings as with a double scarf before Gods brightness, which would
put out their eyes else ^s. 6.3. see Psalm. 104.2.1 Tim. 6.16.

Verse 5. Before him went the pestilence) Dever the word signifies such a
disease, as comes by a divine decree. (...)
So Hypocrites call the pestilence (...), because sext by God in a spiritual
manner, a stroke of his own bare hand as it were. Here it is made one of his
Apparitours or pursivants, sent before him to destroy the Canaanites, as it had
done the Egyptians.

And burning coals went out at his feet) Or, the carbuncle burning bile Deuteronomy.
32.24 The Vulgar translateth it the devil, Others (...) a deadly inflammation,
whereof good Oecolampadius died, and was lamented by Melancthon. But Luther
very uncharitably (the best have their failings) wrote that he believed
Oecolampadixm ignitis Satanae telis and hastis confossum, Lib. de Missae private.
subitanea morte peri^sse, that Oecolampadius died suddenly, being stabbed to
death with the fiery darts of the devil.

Verse 6. He stood and measured the earth] Not Joshuah but God brought his
people into the promised land, and divided it amongst them, Psalm. 78.55. Like
as also he had divided the whole earth by bounds and borders to the several
Nations Psalm. 74.17. and does still appoint men the bounds of their habitations
Act. 17.26.

He beheld and drove asunder the Nations] He did it with his looks, as it were:
that is, with very little ado. Let the Lord but arise only, and his enemies
shall be scattered, Camd. Elis.
let him but frown, and they fall before him: If Augustus could frown to death
Asinius Pollio: and Queen Elizabeth her chancellor Hatton, what shall we think
of Gods bended brows?

And the everlasting mountains were scattered] i. e. those kingdoms of the
Can^anites that were held firm and unmovable as the mountains, yea rivetted as
it were upon eternity, see Number. 13.21.31, 22. These were scattered,
dissilierunt fell in pieces, and leapt this way and that way, as stones broken
with a great hammer. God threshed these mountains, and beat them small, he made
the hills as chasse Isay 41.15. No worldly height could stand before him. By
mountains here some understand Kings and Princes, as by hills, those of
inferior rank.

His ways are everlasting) Heb. his walks or journies, that is, his government
of the world by his power and wisdom is perpetual, he never casts off the
care thereof: There are that refer the word his to the Canaanites, (...)
who had of old possessed the land without disturbance; But the former sense is
the better.

Verse 7. I saw the Tents of Cushan) King of Mesopotamia, who tyrannized over
Israel eight years, after Joshua's death: God selling his people to him for
naught, and not increasing his wealth by their price, Psalm. 44.12. Judge. 3.8.
But delivering them in the end by that valiant Othniel, who brought the tents
of Cushan under affliction or vanity. Some render it propter iniquitatem,
because of iniquity, and set this sense upon it: It was for sin that God sold
his people into the hands of Cushan Riskathaijm, and yet afterward sent them a
Savior: why then should they now despair of a seasonable return out of
captivity, though by their sins they have provoked the Lord to wrath: since if
they return unto him and seek his favor, there is yet mercy with the Lord
that he may be feared? Lo, this is the right use of histories: and this is our
duty to make observations to our selves, as did the Prophet here, I saw the
tents of Cushan: I considered the thing that has been, it is the same which
shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done etc. Eccles. 1.9.
Historiae fidae monitrices. Dicuntur (...).

And the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble] Cortinae vel pelles etc.
When by the sword of the Lord and of Gideon they were cut off and discomfited
Judge. 7.7. etc.

Verse 8. Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers?] As Xerxes, that brutish
man, was against the Hellespont, for battering his bridge of boats, beating it
and casting a pair of fetters into it? Was God thus angry against Jordan, and
against the Red Sea? No such matter. If God seem angry at any time against the
reasonlesse, or livelesse creatures, it is for a punishment of man's sin. But
here his end and purpose was to show; that he did ride upon those horses and
charets (the rivers, and sea) for the salvation of his people. He did so when
time was: and that he will do so again, when time shall serve, this question in
the text shows, that there is no question to be made of it.

Verse 9. Thy bow was made quite naked] sc. Out of the case. He means, thy
power was clearly manifested, and powerfully exerted against the nations above
mentioned: so that all men might see plainly, that thou were that man of war,
Exodus 15.3. which shootest thine arrows at a certainty, and never missest
thine enemies, thy but-mark. See Job 16.12.

according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word] i. e. according to thy
promises to thy people, confirmed with oaths, even those sure mercies of
David, or assured to David. Some render it, according to the oaths, those
props of thy word. His word is sure and sufficient of it self: but, for our
better settlement, and as a prop to our faith, He has bound it with oaths:
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. For now we may say with Solomon, For
thy words sake, nay more, For thine oaths sake, and according to thine own
heart have thou done all this, 2 Samuel 7.18, 21. Thy love moved thee to make
promise, yea, to give oath: and now thy truth binds thee to perform. All thy
paths to thy people now are mercy and truth, Psalm. 25.10. not mercy only, but
mercy and truth: not by a providence only, but by virtue of a promise,
ratified with an oath: This is sweet indeed; this deserves a Selah] to be set
to it.

thou did cleave the earth with rivers] Exodus 17.6. Psalm. 78.15, 16. Deuteronomy.
8.15. Neh. 9.15. This cleaving the hard Rock, and setting it abroach, this
turning of the flint into a fountain, Psalm. 114.8. was a work of Omnipotency,
and is therefore so much celebrated. It makes much to the miracle, that the
earth was cleft with rivers: this imports both the plenty and the perennity
thereof: for the Rock, that is, the river out of the rock followed them, 1 Cor.
10.4. lest in that dry and barren wilderness they should perish for want of
water. The same God also who had given his people petram aquatilem, gave them
pluviam escatilem, Tertul. de patientia.
(as Tertullian phraseth it) Manna from heaven, Quails in great abundance, and
never was Prince better served in his greatest pomp. He also defended them from
the fiery serpents, and delivered them from a thousand other deaths, and
dangers: all which mercies are here implied, though one only be instanced: and
all to ascertain the Saints how much God sets by them, and what he will yet
do for them, as occasion requires. As he made the world at first, that he
might communicate and impart himself to his Elect: so for their sakes does he
still preserve and govern it, ordering the worlds disorders by an overruling
power, for his own glory, and their eternal good.

Verse 10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled] sc. At the promulgation
of the Law, Exodus 19.17. Psalm. 114.4, 6. when God came with ten thousand of his
Saints, Deuteronomy. 33.2. and so terrible was the earthquake, that it wrought an
heart-quake, even in Moses himself, Heb. 12.21. It is the office of the Law to
do so: and happy is he, who terrified, and thunderstruck by the threats
thereof, runs to Christ for refuge, as to One who is able to save to the
utmost them that come unto God by him, Heb. 9.25. Some take mountains
metaphorically, for the Mighties of the earth, and read it thus. The mountains
saw thee, and they grieved. See Number. 22.3. Josh. 2.9, 10, 11

The overflowing of the water passed by] the inundation of Jordan passed into
the dead-sea, the lower part of it, I mean: like as the upper stood, and rose
up upon an heap, Gualth.
Josh. 3.16. being bounded and barred up by the Almighty power of God.

the deep uttered his voice; and lifted up his hands on high] i. e. summo
consensis suffragatus est, etc. It voiced, and voted for Gods judgments;
helping forward the execution thereof.

Verse 11. The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitation] viz. In the days
of Joshuah, and upon his prayer, chap. 10.12, 13. whereupon One cries out, O
admirabilem piarum precum vim ac potentiam quibus etiam coelestia cedunt, etc.
O the admirable power of prayer, Buchol.
that works wonders in heaven! and oh the heroical faith of Joshuah, the
trophies whereof he set in the very orbs of heaven.

at the light of thine arrows, they went] By these shining arrows, and
glittering spears, some understand that terrible lightening, mixed with that
horrible hail, Josh. 10.11. with Exodus 9.23. and then it is figura plane
poetica, a Poetical expression: for the poets call lightening (...), As the
sword of the Lord and of Gideon. Judge. 7. 18.
Joves arrow. See the like Psalm. 18.14. The huge hailstones were Gods
glittering spears, wherewith he slaughtered his enemies. Others suppose, that
these things are meant of the arms and weapons of the Israelites, called Gods
arrows and spears, because used at his command, and ordered by him. This sense
Gualther likes better, as most comfortable to Christian warriors, who fight
the Lords battles.

Verse 12. Thou did march through the land in indignation] Heb. Thou did
walk in pomp, as a Conqueror, through the land, sc. of Canaan, in contempt of
the opposite forces, treading upon the neeks of thine enemies, Josh. 10.24.

thou did thresh the heathen in anger] See Amos 1.3. Mic. 4.13. God, by the
hands of Joshuah, did all this. The most of the old inhabitants were destroyed.
Some few fled into Africa, and left written upon a pillar for a monument to
posterity; We are Phoenicians, that fled from the face of Joshuah the son of
Nave.

Verse 13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people] q. d. Thou wast
Generalissimo in ^our expeditions, in the days of the Judges, who therefore
were so successful. How could they be otherwise, when God came with them into
the field? Camd. Elisab.
If Q. Elizabeth could take for her Motto, Cui adhaereo, praest, He to whom I
adhere, prevails, how much more may Almighty God say as much?

even for salvation with thine anointed] i. e. with David, 1 Samuel 16.12, 13. 2 Samuel 5.3, 16. and 19.22. and 22.51. Psalm. 20.7. a lively type of Christ, that
Messiah the Prince, the mystery of which promised Savior, the ancient
Jew-Doctours confessed to be contained in this text, It is not altogether
unlikely, that the Prophet might intend here to point at Jesus Christ, when he
says, for salvation (Jeshang, whence Jesus) for thine anointed, or thy Christ.
There are that read the words in the Future-tense, thus: Thou shall go forth
for the salvation of thy people, sc. when Messiah that great Sospitator comes:
thou shall wound the head of the wicked, sc. of the Devil, Romans 16.20. Thou
shall make naked the foundation of his kingdom, unto the neck. Selah: thou
shall utterly destroy sin, death, and hell. A remarkable mercy indeed, a
mystery of greatest concernment, and most worthy to be considered. Gualther
carries the sense this way: and yet adds, that if any please to refer the
words to the history of the old Testament, they must be understood of those
tyrants that persecuted the true Church, and whom God for Christ's sake subdued
and subverted, together with their kingdoms.

Verse 14. Thou did strike through with his staves, the heads of his villages
[Heb. thou did pierce, or bore through, as with an awger, with his staves (a
Metaphor from shepherdy, according to that, Psalm. 23.3. thy rod and thy staff,
etc.) or, with his tribes (the (...)) that entered the land of promise: Acts
26.7.
with these men, or with these weapons, though never so unlikely, thou did
by the hand of David, wound the hairy scalp of thine enemies, those Pagans and
persecutours: and much more wi^^, by the Son of David, subdue Satan and his
Accomplices.

they came out as a whirl-winde to scatter me] Heb. they tempested, they raised
an hurly-burly, being turbulent spirits, as the devil is, to disperse me, as
the dust of the mountains is scattered before a whirle-winde.

their rejoicing was as to devour the poor] i. e, Poor me, they devoured in
secret, as if God had been nothing aware of their doings: and this was their
exultation, or rejoicing: they took pleasure in their cruelty, and promised
themselves impunity.

Verse 15. Thou did walk thorough the sea etc.] q. d. Shall they thus
prevail by iniquity? and did they carry the ball upon the foot till they had
gotten the goal? Has ever any waxed fierce against God, and prospered, Job.
9.4? I trow, not. Thou that of old didd'st walk through the red sea, did
tread it, or, Psalm. 56.7.
foot it, and that most swiftly, as if thou had had thy change of horses.

through the heap of great waters] which thou laid'st on heaps for thy peoples
sake, so that, instead of being swallowed up, they were preserved thereby: Thou
Lord, I say, have many times since, (when all hope failed) opened a fair way
for thy servants to escape out of greatest dangers: and so I trust thou wile
again, when they most stand in need of thine heavenly help. Cum res est in
acie novaculae etc. God will be seen of his in the Mount.

Verse 16. When I heard, my belly trembled etc.] Heard what? That speech of
thine, verse. 3. whereunto the Prophet now returns (after a long digression
for the peoples support and comfort; Digressions in divine discourses are not
always and absolutely unlawful. God sometimes draws aside the doctrine, to
satisfy some soul which the preacher knows not: and, sparingly used, it
quickens attention.) O Lord I have heard thy speech (touching Isreal's
captivity, chap. 1. and after that, the Chaldeans calamity, chap. 2.) and was
afraid verse 2. Neither was this a slight or sudden pang, and soon put over:
but such as soaked to the very roots, so that my belly, or my heart in my belly
trembled; See Prove. 20.27.

my lips quivered] through want of natural heat, which in this fright was
gone inward to succor the heart: as soldiers upon the approach of an enemy
run into the castle.

at the voice] at the dreadful denunciations of judgments.

rottenness entered into my bones] Poetico more ex signis describit, says
Gualther. The Prophet, in manner of a Poet, describes his great fear, by the
gracious effects and signs thereof in his body.

that I might rest in the day of trouble] This was the fruit of his holy fear
of Gods imminent judgments, and that contrition of spirit that followed
thereupon: viz. that both He, and all that took part with him in those pious
practices of sensiblenesse and self-abasement, should have peace with God, and
be able to call their souls to rest in the evil day.

when he comes up etc.] i. e. The Chaldean spoiler.

he will invade them with his troops] Or, cut them in pieces. And that this was
done, See 2 King. 25. and the book of Lamentations thorowout. Howbeit in
judgment God remembers mercy, as the Prophet had prayed: for besides the
favor that the Jews found at Babylon by means of Daniel and others, Cyrus
having taken that city gave commandment, that no Jews, or any that spoke the
Syrian tongue should be hurt, as Xenophon relates: and after this he gave them
free leave to return home.

Verse 17. Although the figtree shall not blossom] Here the Prophet shows a
well settled and a sedate mind indeed: that he had attained, and by prayer
waded unto a blessed composedness and sabbath of spirit, such as the cock on
the dunghill meddled not with, neither knows the worth of: it being the most
precious and peerlesse jewel that ever the heart of man came acquainted with.
It hat been before noted, that the Prophet here takes out his own lesson of
living by faith in the fail of outward comforts. Origens teaching and living
were said to be both alike: Habakkuks were so. Divinity is practical: If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: As lessons of Music must be
practiced, and a copy not read only, but imitated: so is it here. It is a
blushful thing quando dicta factis erubescant, as Tertullian has it; Plus
sanctimoniae conspicitur in ipso libello, quam in libelli Auihore.
when men's lives put their words to the blush, when Sanctiores sunt aures
plebis quam corda sacerdotum, there are more heavenly doctrines in the peoples
cares, then ever were in the preachers heart, as Hilary has it: when (as One
said of Erasmus his Enchiridion) there is more holiness in an Authors book,
then in his bosom: Exemplis sane qui docet, ille docet. Aristotle requires in
a Teacher, Arist Rhetor. Epist. ad Epbes.
that he show himself a pattern of his own rules: and it is a good thing to
teach (says Ignatius, (...) if thou practice the same that thou teach. That
is an excellent commendation indeed that is given to a late eminent Divine
amongst us, Mr. Sam. Crook.
that his life was but one continued Commentary upon his doctrine: and an
exemplary sermon consisting of living words, or of words translated into works.
The just shall live by his faith, says Habakkuk: and that I do so, it shall
well appear by my living upon God, when I have nothing else to subsist with; by
believing him upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible,
and against reason in things incredible.

Although the figtree etc.. q d. Let war come on, and with war famine; as it
befell Jerusalem at the last siege in the days of Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.3. Ier.
52.6. Lam. 2.11, 12. there was no relief left for the people, the enemy had
eaten up all, as Joel 2. and made clean work, so that faithless men were
woe-begone, and ready to run mad for the sight of their eyes Deuteronomy. 28.24. with
51. and to devour their own fingers, as Pope Boniface 8. did, when shut up
close prisoner in St. Angelo and sorely straitened.

Verse 18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation] This joy of the Lord was the Prophets strength, Nch. 8.10.
and kept his head above all waters of affliction. So it was David's at the sack
of Ziglag 1 Samuel 30.6. when Saul at the same time for want of it ran first to
the witch, and thence to the swords point. A Good man has God for his portion:
and if any occasion of discontent or trouble befall him, he retireth into his
Counting House, and there sees himself so well stored with unloosable graces
and invaluable privileges, that he cannot be greatly moved Psalm. 62.2. His
soul in greatest straights can magnify the Lord, and his spirit rejoice in
God his Savior. Disquieted he may be sometimes for a season, till he has
recollected and better bethought himself, we are staggering says the Apostle,
but not wholly sticking 2 Cor. 4.8. for not the evenest waights but at their
first putting into the balance do somewhat sway both parts thereof, not without
some show of inequality, which yet after some little motion do settle
themselves in a meet poise and posture.

Verse 19. The Lord God is my strength] And hence his joy of says, and ability
to bear up under pressures of afflictions as a man that is well lined within,
and has abundance of good blood and fresh spirits, can endure to go with less
cloths then another etc.

And he will make my feet like hindes feet] As these do swiftly and suddenly
run up to the top of inaccessible rocks, so shall I quickly escape out of
trouble, and walk upon mine high places again in the holy land: Yea as Jacob
after he had conversed with God at Bethel, Genesis 29.1.
lift up his feet and went lustily on his way to Padan-Aram, so shall I go
lightly on my long journey to heaven; and, having my soul suppled with the
oil of spiritual joy, I shall find it made more lith, nimble and ready to
every good work.

to the chief-musitian on my stringed instruments] This is David-like indeed,
as in the whole prayer or long he resembles that sweet singer of Israel: and
the verse has caused a cloud. Euthymius says of David, that he was Primi
regis and linguae and cor and calamus, the tongue, heart, and pen of almighty
God. In the primitive times, happy was he held that could repeat aliquid
Davidicum, any thing of David's doings. Our king Alured translated the Psalter
himself into his own Saxon tongue. Andromicus the Greek Emperor made it his
manual, his Vade-mcum. It appears by the contexture of this whole chapter,
that the Prophet Habakkuk was well versed in the Psalms, which is a sweet field
and Rosary of promises, a Summary of the old Testament says Luther: the good
souls Soliloquie, says Another; wherein are Amulets of comfort more pleasant
then the pooles of Heshbon, more glorious then the tower of Lebanon, more
redolent then the oil of Aaron, more fructifying then the dew of Hermon etc.
Most worthy to be laid up in that Persian casket embroydered with gold and
pearl which Alexander reserved for Homers Iliads. Our Prophet as he partly
imitated, and partly transcribed them in this Canticle, yea in this verse (
Confer Psalm. 18.33, 34.) So he concludes as David many times begins, To
the chief-chaunter or Musick-master, or To him that excels, sc: in the art
of singing and playing on Instruments, those holy Levites whose charge it was 1 Chronicles. 9.33. and for whom he doubted not but God would afford and provide new
matter of Psalmody, by compassing his people about with songs of deliverance,
Selah Psalm. 32.7.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of ZEPHANIAH.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah] which is (by
interpretation) Gods Secretary, or Hidden-one, Psalm. 27.5. and 83.3. Or, as
Hierome and some others will have it, Gods watchman Ezekiel. Hebraei Prophetarum
patres, quot quot nominatim recesentur, ipsos quoque prophetas fuisse dicunt.
3.2. and 33.7. A fit name for a Prophet.

the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah etc.] These were, if not Prophets, (as
the Jew-Doctours make them) yet men famous in the Church: as were Alexander and
Rufus, though they be but mentioned and no more, Mark 15.21.

in the days of Josiah] who rained one and thirty years, but being in his
minority, began not to reform religion, much corrupted in the days of his
idolatrous father Amon, till the eighteenth year of his reign, 2 King. 22.1.
and 23.22. whether before or after the Reformation, the word of the Lord came
unto Zephaniah, Interpreters agree not. Jeremiah (his contemporary) began not
to prophecy till the thirteenth year of Josiah's reign Ier. 1.1, 2. at what
time, (viz. in his twelfth year) he had begun to reform with a great deal of
zeal, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. but with all he met with a great deal of opposition from
the Princes and people who had been woefully hardened and habituated in their
idolatry under Manasseh and Amon, and therefore with much difficulty drawn off.
Zephany and Jeremy were singular helps no doubt, to that peerless king in his
zealous undertakings for God. But why he should send to Huldah the Prophetess,
rather then to either of them 2 King. 22.13. what other reason can be given but
that she dwelt in the College at Jerusalem, and so was next at hand? And why
He went up against Pharaoh Necho, and sent not first to any Prophet to ask
their advise, what can we say but this, that sometimes both grace and wit are
asleep in the holiest and wariest breasts? and that the best of Gods Saints may
be sometimes miscarried by their passion, to their cost?

Verse 2. I will utterly consume all things from off the land] Exordium plane
tragicum A tragical beginning of a terrible sermon. Hard knots must have hard
wedges; hard hearts, heavy menaces: yea handfuls of hellfire must be cast into
the faces of such, that they may awake out of the snare of the devil, by whom
they are held captive at his pleasure. 2 Timothy 2.26. It is in the Hebrew,
gathering I will gither all things etc. q. d. g. I will pack up, I will take
mine own, and begone. Converram and convasabo omnia, I will sweep away all by
the beesome of my wrath, and leave a clean land behind me, for the sins of
those that dwell therein. The doubling of this denunciation Colligendo Colligam
imports the certainty, verity and vehemence thereof.

Says the Lord] Dictumm Jehovae. You may believe it therefore: for every word
of his is sure, and cannot be broken John 10.35. may not be slighted or shifted
off Heb. 12.25.

Verse 3. I will consume man and beast] Heb. I will gather (as verse 2.) them,
and cast them away as they do the sweepings of the house. See the word used in
this sense, Psalm. 26.9. Gather not my soul with sinners etc. God gathers his
people for a better purpose: both while they are alive, Psalm. 27.10. and when
they dye, Esaias 57.1 The righteous is taken away (Heb. gathered) from the evil
to come: as a Shepherd gathers his sheep when a storm is coming: or as a
master of a family does his jewels, when his house is on fire. But as for the
wicked, they are gathered too, but it is for slaughter, as beasts in a pound,
malefactors in a prison: and at the last day the tares shall be gathered and
bundled up together for hels Furnace, Mat. 13, 41.42.

I will consume the fouls of the heaven] Made for man's use, to be to him for
food, Genesis 9.2. for physic and for delight, as companions of his life: hence
it is threatened as a judgment to him to loose them Ier. 4.25. and 10. and here.

An the fishes of the Sea] Made likewise for man's use to feed him, Number.
11.5.22. Luke 24.42. hence the latin piscis of pasco to feed, and the Hebrew
Berechah for a fishpoole: the word signifies a blessing Genesis 12.2. with Neh.
2.14. Now the Lord here threateneth destruction to beasts, birds, and fishes,
not by way of Hyperbole, as the Rabbines dreams: but because in common
calamities, in warlike tumults, and when God will destroy a people indeed, the
beasts also are killed up, the fowls hunted away, the fish-pooles wasted, etc.
Let those that will not believe this, look into Illyricum, Thracia, Macedonia,
Greece, and diverse parts of Turkey, laid utterly desolate and empty both of men
and other creatures. Hierome upon this text, and likewise upon Hos. 4.
affirms the same of his native country, wasted so with War, ut, praeter
coelum and coenum, and crescentes vipres and condensa sylvarum, cuncta
perierint, that besides air and earth, and briars, and forests, all was
destroyed. And that we may not wonder at this severitie of God, hear what the
same Father says elsewhere of his ungracious countrymen: In mea patria de us
Ven er est, and in d^em vivitur, and sanctior est ille qui ditior; In my
country their belly is their god, Epis.ad Chremat.
their glory is in their shame, they mind earthly things: and so their end
has been destruction, and utter desolation, as Phil. 3.19. Gualthers Note here
is very good: herein we may observe, says he, the judgment of God and his
wonderful providence: that whereas we see in populous places, rivers and
pooles to abound with fish, woods and fields, with birds and beasts, though
they be continually caught, and carried away: yet where there want men to make
use of them, there are few or none to be found. For as they were all made for
man, so when men are consumed, they also are consumed, as is here threatened.
Non ita temere fieri putemus, etc. Let Gods hand herein be acknowledged, and
his anger appeased by faith in Christ Jesus and repentance from dead works,
that our land may be sowed with the seed of men and of beasts.

And the stumbling blocks with the wicked] Those Balaams blocks, In lib. Reg.
those moments and monuments of idolatry, that so much offend God, and cause
offense and ruin to those that worship them, (as Eucherius interprets it)
who are here called wicked, with an accent, and by a specialty.

And I will cut off man from off the land] Even the better sort of men too, who
shall be wrapped up together with the wicked in the common calamity. The good
figs as well as the bad are packt to Babylon; but with this difference that
God will there set his eyes upon the good for good. Ier. 24.6. as the corn is
cut down as well as the weeds; but for better purpose.

Says the Lord] who has spoke it twice that you may once well observe it, and
lay it to heart.

Verse 4. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah] To whom I have so long
stretched out my hand in vain to reclaim them. Esaias 65.2. Prove. 1.25. If God do
but put forth his hand to afflict, as Satan solicited him to do against Job,
chap. 1.11. and 2.5. who can abide it? but if he stretch it out as here, woe be
to those that must feel the weight of it. His hand is a mighty hand. 1. Pet.
1.6. the same that spannes the heavens, and holds the earth as a very little
thing Esaias. 40. Lord, says David (who had felt it in part) who knows the
power of thine anger? Even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. q. d. Let a
man fear thee never so much, he is sure to feel thee much more who falls
under the stroke of thine heavy hand. Oh keep out of his fingers, who can crush
us to death before the moth, Job. 4.19.

And upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem] who are therefore worse then others
because they should be better: and shall fare the worse for their external
privileges wherein they glory.

And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place] That which remained
since Josia's reformation 2 King. 23.3.4.5. says Diodate shall a Nation be
born at once Esaias 66.8.?

And the name of the Chemarims) Baals chimney-chaplaines, They are translated
idolatrous priests, 1 Chronicles. 23.5. But because we find them here mentioned as
distinct from the Priests, therefore many Expositores hold that they were
certain Ministers of their idolatry different from the priests; such as the
Monks are among the Papists. The vulgar rendereth it Aedituos Underlings to the
other Priests: Elias in Tijby says they were such as were shut up in
cloisters, Chemarim Atrati thy are called, either from their black garments, or
because they were smutched with burning incense, or from the brand-markes they
had superstitiously set upon their bodies, or because of their pretended fiery
zeal and fervency in their religion, such as are the Saorisici Seraphici among
the Papists, who falsely and foolishly call them, the Lights of the World; sc.
to light them into utter darkness.

Verse 5. And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops] Called
elsewhere the Queen of heaven, the constellations and heavenly bodies: whom
they thought to worship so much the more acceptably, if in an open place, and
on high, in the very sight of the stars. Observent ista qui hodie Astrologiam
judiciariam prositentur, says Gualther, Let those amongst us observe this, who
profess judiciary Astrology: for these worship the stars no less then did
the heathens of old, and do openly bring in Heathenisme again; whiles (first)
they call the stars by the names of those heathenish deities, that ought to
be abolished: and next, they subject to those stars all events of things, yea
man himself as touching all his manners and fortunes, which the Scripture
affirms to depend upon the eternal providence of God alone. This is
intolerable impiety and they that fall into it, shall not escape the just
judgment of God.

And them that worship, and that swear by the Lord (or to the Lord consecrating
themselves as by oath to his service) and that swear by Malcham] that is, by
their King, Epec. Eur.
as the Egyptians did of old, Genesis 42.15. The Spaniards at this day, in the
pride of their Monarchy are grown also to swear by the life of their King.
There are a sort of mongrell Christians in the East called Melchites, Niceph.
as one would say Of the Kings Religion, because they resolved to do as Melech
the King commanded them, though it were to make a mixture of religions, as
these in the text would, and as our late Modelatours Sancta Clara, and others,
of whom one said well, that they had made a pretty show, had there been no
Bible, to tell us, that the jealous and just God hates and plagueth halting
betwixt two, lukewarmnesse and neutrality in religion, all dow-baked duties,
speckled birds, plowing with an Ox and an Ass, mingled seeds linsey-wolsey
garments Lev. 19.19. Upon which text the Doway Doctors note is, Here all
participation with heretics and schismatiks is forbidden. But by Malch^^ most
understaud here an Idol of the Ammonites, otherwise called Mosec^ served in
Tophet near to Jerusalem, and in the mount of Olives, called therefore the
mount of corruption 2 King. 23.13. Which God could not but see, as (...) he
looked out of the Sanctuary. These worshippers of Malcham would not utterly
renounce the true God, but they would set up others with him as partners: this
would not be endured. Such were of old the Samaritanes among the Jews, the
Ebionites among the Christians, the Papists at this day, who swear by God and
Saints, and pray to God and his Saints, and commit themselves to them (together
with God) as their Tutelars and Patrons.

Verse 6. And them that are turned back from the Lord] Not gross idolaters,
but yet treacherous backsliders, that fall off from their former forwardness,
that turn from the holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21. that depart a post Dominum,
from after the Lord, as the Hebrew here has it, Apostates, those worst of men,
that do not only not fulfill after the Lord, as Calch, but utterly forsake
him. An heavy judgment awaiteth such. Psalm. 125.5.
God shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, etc.

and those that have not sought the Lord, nor enquired after him] diligently
sought him, Heb. 11.6. zealously enquired after him, as after a lost jewel,
Jer. 29.13. God will visit for unzealousnesse; and curse those that do his work
carelessly, cursorily, in a perfunctory, formal, bedulling way.

Verse 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God] When his hand is upon
thy back, let thy hand be on thy mouth. Chat not against him, murmur not at his
menaces, but stand mute before him. He is the Lord God, Three in One, and One
in Three: thou art also always in his presence, which thou can not flee from
them, Psalm. 139. therefore see Hab. 2.20. with the Note and the rather because
God stands over thee with his judgments.

for the day of the Lord is at hand] wherein he will powerfully declare himself
to be a God that cannot lie, and that his wrath is quo diuturnior eo minacior,
the longer in coming the heavier it lights. This was soon after fulfilled in
the death of their good king Josiah, with whom died all the peace and
prosperity of that people: and Judea often changed her masters, but not her
miseries, till at length she was carried captive to Babylon.

For the Lord has prepared a sacrifice] That is, a bloody slaughter of you, by
the cruel Chaldees, who shall sacrifice you, that have so much gloried in the
multitude of your sacrifices: and God shall glorify himself as much now in
your just destruction, as ever he did in your forefathers commendable devotion.

he has bid his guests] The Babylonians, and (after they have filled
themselves) the birds, and beasts, as Rev. 19.17, 18. so that ye shall have
sepulturam insepultam, a gravelesse burial.

Verse 8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords sacrifice] Or,
good cheer: for at their sacrifices they used to feast their friends: and here
the Lord is providing dainties for his guests; viz. the flesh of Princes,
gallants, courtiers, verse. 9. merchants, 11. who use to eat the fat, and drink
the sweet, Jam. 5.5.
nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter: and now also for a day of
slaughter: when the beasts shall tear their flesh, and the birds bare their
bones.

that I will punish the Princes and the Kings children] Who might seem to be
safest of any, and farthest off from danger: but Gods hand can easily reach
them, and shall do with the first, because their faults fly fast abroad upon
those two wings of Example and Scandal. See this threatening fulfilled in
Josiah's sons (those degenerate plants, Heroum filii noxae.) Jehoahaz
ambitiously step into his fathers throne before his elder brother, and was soon
after carried down to Egypt, and there slain. Jehoiakim the elder brother
succeeded him: but rebelling against the king of Babylon, he was carried
captive, and dying by the way, was buried with the burial of an ass, being
cast out to be torn by birds and beasts, Jer. 22.
according to this prophecy. Jechoniah came after, and was likewise carried
into captivity: but because he hearkened to Jeremiah, persuading him to yield,
and to go into voluntary banishment, he had some good days toward his latter
end, Jer. 52.31, 32. Lastly Zedekiah, another son of Josiah, was made king;
who as he was worse then the former, so he sped worse. See Ier. 39.6, 7.
potentes potenter torquebantur.

and all such as are clothed with strange apparell] Those gallants, that
imitated in their raiment those whom they most inclined to; some the Egyptians,
others the Babylonians. A vanity not known in England, they say, till the
wars in Holland. And (as ex malis moribus bonae leges) then first were great
ruffes, with huge wide sets, Camd. Elis. 215.
and cloaks reaching almost to the ancles, no less uncomely then costly,
restrained by Proclamation. Now, what so common with our fashionmongers
(against whom this is a stinging and a flaming text) then to be clothed with
strange apparel, Oh what enemy of thine has taught thee so much vanity? said
Mr. John Fox to his son, returning from his travels, and attired in a loose
Outlandish fashion. Hist. of Modern Divi. page 279.
a la mode de France especially, and other Popish countries. But what says
One, Borrow not (fashions) of the Egyptians: if you do, you may get their biles
and botches: of the Polonians, lest you get the plica Polonica in your hairy
scalps: of the French, lest the lues Gallica befall you. Those that affected
the Babylonian habit, were sent captives to Babylon, Ezekiel. 23.15. and those
proud Dames (whose wardrobe is inventoried, Esaias 3.16. etc.) were a cause that
the mighty men fell in battle, ver. 25.26. Seneca complains, that many in his
time were more solicitous of their attire, then of their good behavior; and
that they had rather the Commonwealth should be troubled, then their locks,
and set looks. And does not our age abound with such fantastical Cincinnatuli.

Verse 9. In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold] i. e. Great men's officers, who by an absolute power went into other
men's houses, and to whom no doors were shut, says Mr. Diodate. These leap upon
the threshold, that is, with great impudency, and insolency, they invade and
spoil other men's houses, and do what they list,, like so many Lurdaines, or
Lord-danes: neither dare any question, or control them. Lo such things were
done in good Josiah's days, without his consent, or so much as knowledge: for
none might be suffered to come to him with a complaint; all ways being shut up
by those great Ones about him, whose houses were by that means filled with
violence and deceit] that is, with those ill-gotten goods, got by wrench and
wile from the right, but unrelieved possessours, through the might and slight
of those unconscionable Underofficers.

Verse 10. There shall be the noise of a cry from the fish-gate] called also
the firstgate, Zach. 14.10. whereat the Caldeans entered, and caused a great
hubbub, as in such a case is usual.

and an howling from the second] Called by the Chaldee Paraphrast, the
bird-gate: there was also one called the horse-gate, Jer. 31.40. Some
understand the text, not of any gate, Jerushalaijm.
but of the second part of the city: for there was the upper town, and the
lower town, (whence Jerusalem is of the duall number) and the tower of David,
on the hill of Zion. Others, of the College where Huldad dwelt, 2 King. 22.14.
a school of learning, as the Chaldee interprets it, and called Mishneh. as
you would say, a place of repetition, or of catechizing the younger sort; with
whom nothing sticks but what is repeated to them over and over, as the knife
goes over the whetstone. Shanan and Shanah repetire, sicut in acuendo. See
Deuteronomy. 6.7.

and a great crashing (or shivering, Heb. shebher) from the hills] Gareb and
Goath, Jer. 31.39. and the rest that were round about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2.
The Prophets scope is to show that all places shall be full of tumult and
outcry, upon the approach of the enemy. They that would not listen to the
sweet voice of God inciting and enticing them to repentance, have now their
ears filled with hideous and horrid notes, and noises.

Verse 11. Howl ye inhabitants of Maktesh] Or, of the mortar, or of the low and
hollow place, of the base-town, where corn was brayed in mortars, before Mills
were in use. These are here called upon to turn their laughter to mourning, and
their joy into heaviness, to weep and howl for the evils that shall come upon
them, Jam. 4.9. and 5.1. but especially for their sins, the cause of those
miseries: for Gods judgments upon sinners are feathered from themselves: as a
fowl shot with an arrow feathered from her own body.

for all the merchant-people are cut down] The merchantmen were wont to
furnish the mortar-men, such as dealt in corn, spicery, and the like. These
shall be cut down, as being more like Canaanites (a people devoted to
destruction) then Israelites, a people saved by the Lord, the shield of their
help, and the sword of their excellency. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Vide Garol. Paschalij
legate. cap. 7. p. 24.
See Hos. 12.8. with the Note. He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in
his hand, he loves to oppress. See Amos 8, 5, 6. Mic. 6.10, 11, 12.
Merchandise well managed, is of great use to Kingdoms and States, for many
reasons. 1. For descrying the counsels and strength of other Nations. 2. For
procuring the love and friendship of foreign Princes and people. 3. for
exchanging of commodities: for non omnis fert omnia tellus. 4. for gaining
experience of many and great matters: this caused Thales, Hippocrates, and
Solon to exercise merchandise. 5. It occasioned the building of many famous
cities. Massilia for one, as Plutarch writes. Nevertheless this honorable
profession is much abused by those whom Nahum calls cankerworms chap. 3.16.
for their covetousnes luxury, oppression, bringing in unnecessary wares (that
emasculate and dissolve men's spirits) and heretical books that undo their
souls; and lastly for their carrying out the wealth of their country to
strangers, yea to enemies sometimes. Hence they are justly cut down by God, and
are to be ordered by the Magistrate according to Lev. 19.35, 36. Deuteronomy. 25.
Ezekiel. 45.9, 10, 11, 12.

all they that bear silver are cut off] The rich traders that had marsupia
plena, and carried money in great burdens, these shall be also cut off or
silenced, have nothing to say for themselves why they should not be destroyed
with the rest, as those that have been involuti argento as the vulgar
translation has it here, so wrapped up in their money, and affected to it, as
that it has rather possessed them, then they it. Cor habent in aere non in
athere, their heart goes after their covetousness Ezekiel. 33.31. Here they are
called Portatores argenti silver-carriers, sumpter-horses, laden with thick
clay. Silver is that which the basest element yields, the most savage Indians
get, servile apprentises work, Midianitish Camels carry, miserable muck-worms
admire, covetous Jews swallow, unthristy Ruffians spend etc. It is to be
wondered (says One) that treading upon these minerals, we cannot contemn them.
They lie furthest from heaven: and the best of them are in India furthest from
the Church: and yet how many does money make to run quick to the devil on an
errand, and pays them home for their pains?

Verse 12. I will search Jerusalem with candles] which yet he needs not do,
since the darkness hides not from him, but the night shines as the day: the
darkness and the light are to him alike, Psalm, 139.12. Confer Job 34.22. Ier.
23.24. Deo obscura lucent, muta respondent, silentium confitetur, Night will
convert it self into noon before God, and silence become a speaking evidence.
His eyes also are a flaming fire, that needs no outward light, but sees by
sending out a ray etc. but when Jerusalem is threatened to be searched with
lig^ts, the meaning is, that it shall be set all upon a light fire, and the
inhabitants ferretted out of their lurking-holes, their Princes and potentates
pulled out of privies and sepulchers by the pursuing enemy, as Hierome out of
Josephus here affirms they once were. Besides that, they shall be brought to
a particular and punctual account for their sins: God will be very exact and
accurate with them that way; setting all their evil deeds in order before
their eyes Psalm. 50.21. and bringing wrath upon them to the utmost 1 These.
2.16. This is fearful Psalm. 130.3. and shall be fulfilled especially at the
last day, when wicked men shall give an account minutatim of all their
Atheistical thoughts Psalm. 14.1. ungodly deeds which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him Jude 15. with the whole world flaming about their ears 2 Pet. 3.7,
10, 12. 1 Cor 4.5. 2 These. 1.8.

and punish the men that are settled on their lees] Coagulati curded or
thickened, congealed and condensed: that are habituated and hardened in their
evil practices, that have got a sward, nay a hoof upon their hearts; that have
brawny breasts, and horny heart strings; that stick stiffly in the mire of their
sins as Moab Ier. 48.11. and, being deeply drowned in the world, are
desperately divorced from God, whom they basely fancy to be a God of clouts,
one that howere he speak big words, yet will do neither good nor hurt.

-- mibi haec mortalia curat. that say in their hearts] As that saplesse fellow
does Psalm. 14.1. Some set their mouths against heaven, and shame not to utter
their reasonings and resolutions of this kind. These are Epicuri de gregiporci:
such as was Lucretius, Diageras, (...)
Herace with his -- credat Iudaeus apella. Herat. sermon.

Nonego, namque deos didici secuum agere aevum etc.
Let the Jews believe a Providence: not I etc. says that profane Poet. But
behold here were Jews yea and that in good Iosiah's days, that said in their
hearts (those feculent hearts of theirs, full of dregs and dross.)

the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evill] Nec been pro meritis
capitur, nec tangitur ira. Of such practical Athiests that say in their hearts
there is no God, and live thereafter, there are great store even amongst us: of
such dust-heaps we may find in every corner. And when men are once arrived at
this Terra del Fuogo this desperate degree of Atheism, what wonder though they
run riot in all sinful licentiousness.

Verse 13. Therefore their goods shall become a booty] Their evill-gotten goods
ver. 9.11. Ecc. 4.1, 2, 3.
(for a proof of my providence which they blushed not to deny) shall be carried
away by the Chaldees, to their unmedicinable sorrow and heartbreake.

and their houses a desolation] because built in blood. See Nah. 2.11, 12.

they shall also build houses but not inhabit them etc.] Ex lege mutuatur
minas. That they might the more regard his words, The Pophet makes use of the
menaces of the Law Deuteronomy. 28.30.39. whereof the Prophets were Interpreters:
applying, as here, the general doctrine thereof to the people of their times.
To rebuke or exhort men in good words, in Gods own words, is the readiest way
to prevail with them: unless they be Lucifugae scripturarum (as Tertullian
says of the Marcionites and Valentinians) which yet will take hold of them
howsoever Zech. 1.6.

Verse 14. De Resur. carn.
The great day of the Lord is near, it is neer] It is the day of the Lord, that
fatal day appointed by him to ruin the nation: for with him it is all one
whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only Job 34.29. Next, it
is his great day; because therein the great God will set himself to do great
matters: How much more at the day of judgment called also a great day Rev.
6.17. and 16.14.

This great day is near, yea very near, it hastes greatly] it has wings and
wind under those wings, as Zech. 5.9. it will be upon men ere they are aware:
neither will any thing more hasten it then their security, and fearelesnesse.
Think the same of the last day which cannot but be at hand, and then the
transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut
off Psalm. 37.38.

even the voice of the day of the Lord] Methinks I hear it. Fallor? Ovid. 5.
Fast.
an armasonat? non fallimur, arma sonabant.
Mars venit, and veniens bellica signa dedit.
Hierome speaks thus of himself, whether I eat, or drink, or sleep, methinks
I hear that last trump sounding these words in mine ears, Arise ye dead and
come to judgment. Surgite mortui venite in judicium.
A very necessary meditation.

the mighty man shall cry there bitterly] How much more the turba imbellis, the
weak and cowardly? they shall take up a loud lamentation, and cry with the
breaking of their loins.

Verse 15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and distress etc.] By
this Synathroismos or heap of words, the Prophet would affray and arrouse
these dead and dedolent sinners, settled upon their lees, so wedded and wedged
to their wicked practices, that nothing can sunder them, but an extraordinary
touch from the hand of heaven. See Joel 2.1, 2, 3. and Amos 5.18, 19.20. with
the Notes, and confider what the terror of the Lords last day will be.

Verse 16. A day of the trumpet] with its horrid Taratantara and alarme] not of
those that shout and praise God, neither with a noise of joy and trumph as Number.
23.21. Psalm. 47.5. Ezra 3.11.12. but of those that shout with broken sounds in
the day of battle, as Amos 1.14. in classico with a vocifciation, Turk Hist.
and horrible howling, such as the Turks at this day make, when they storm a
city.

against the fenced cities and against the high-towers] wherein ye trust, but
in vain. These high-towers were built at the corners of the walls. Hence the
Hebrew text here has it, Against the high-corners. Great men and such as bear
up the weight of the commonwealth are sometimes called by this name 1 Samuel
14.38. Draw ye near hither all ye chief of the people: Heb. All ye corners. See
the like Zach. 10.4. Judge. 20.2. Neither men nor means were ever true to those
that trusted them. Our help is in the Name of the Lord, that strong tower
whereto the righteous run and are safe Prove. 18.10.

Verse 17. And I will bring distress upon men that they shall walk like blind
men] The Dutch have a Proverb, God puts out the eyes of him whom he intends
to destroy: i. e. he besotts and infatuates them they shall be consilij and
auxilij inopes: in rebus liquidis aqua baerebit, they grope for the wall like
the blind, they grope as if they had none eyes, they stumble at noonday as in
the night, they are in desolate places as dead men, Esaias. 59.10. This was long
before threatened Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29.

because they have sinned against the Lord] Sin is the mother of misery. See my
Love Tokens page 111, 112. etc.

and their blood shall be powered out as dust] Then which nothing is more vile
and abject, the enemy shall make no more of spilling their blood, then of
sprinkling a little dust. Copissime and adjectissime. Tarnou.


and their flesh as dung] spread upon the land to manure it. The Hebrew word
for flesh here may seem to signify wormes-meat. Our bodies are no better,
Lechum. Drus.
why then do we pamper and prink them up?

Verse 18. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in
the day of the Lords wrath] We were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold 1 Pet. 1.18. Money has drowned many a soul 1 Timothy 6.
delivered none. See Prove. 11.4. with the Note, Esaias 13, 17. Ezekiel. 17.19. It is
righteousness and not riches that delivers from death Prove. 10.2. Money can
neither pacify God, nor sill the conscience, nor stop the enemies mouth, but
inflame them rather with an unsatisfiable desire of enjoying all, as Rome did
the Gauls, and Cyprus the Romans: and as the pearls, usually cast out with
the flood, Sextus Rufus.
and gathered at the ebb, drew Caesar's affection for the conquest of
Britain. Sueton.


but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousie] The sins of
Gods people are not only disobediences but treacheries, because of the
covenant. God is thereby provoked to jealousy which is cruel as the grave, or
hard as hell; the coals thereof are coals of fire which has a most vehement
flame. Cant. 8.6. the wore signifies the consuming flame of God.

for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land]
Swept clean by God with the beesom of destruction: so that the land was
desolate after them Zech. 7.14. Affliction rose not up the second time, Nah.
1.9. See the Notes there, and learn to give God the glory of his severity
against sin.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. GAther your selves together, yea together) Excut ite vos, iterumque
excutite. Fan your selves, yea fan your selves. The precept is doubled,
Tremeli.
as it is likewise Number. 3.40. and 2 Cor. 13.5. to show the necessity of our
doing it, as also the utility if well done, and lastly our crossnesse and
averseness thereunto, together with Gods exceeding great desire that it should
be thoroughly done for our greatest good. Grievous things he had threatened in
the former chapter: all which to prevent, he here prescribes them a course of
selfe-examination, and thereupon sound conversion: so true is that of an
ancient Ideo minatur Deus ut non puniat, Isid.
God does therefore threaten that he may not punish. It is as if God should
thus say, Behold thou art in danger of destruction; is it not therefore high
time to search, yea to be serious and exact in the scrutiny? to gather thy
dispersed wits together, to summon the sobriety of thy senses before the bar
of thy best judgment? to consider and consult what is fit to be done in this
case? to have thine eyes in thine head, with Solomon's wise man Eccles. 2.14?
Yea to have thine eyes like the windows in Solomon's Temples, broad inward 1
King. 6.4. Men's minds are naturally as ill set as their eyes: they turn
neither of them inward. Lamiae-like they are sharp sighted abroad to discern
other men's faults: but blind at home to take notice of their own. Nature
shows no sin: what is our iniquity or our sin, said those in Jeremy when
wrath was even breaking out upon them Jer. 16.10? so Hos, 12.8. Men deal with
their souls as some do with their bodies; who, when their beauty is decayed,
they desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by
painting: so their sins, from themselves by false glosses, and from others by
excuses. But he that thus hides his sins cannot prosper, Prove. 28.13. he
must not look for gains his prosperity 3 John 2. but for further hardness of
heart, Prove. 28.14. and horror of conscience Psalm. 32.3. For God will not
scarf men's bones before they are set, nor lap up their sores before they are
searched. Wherefore Search you, search you O Nation, etc. Search your selves to
the quick, sift you to the branne, lay your hands upon your hearts, thrust them
deep into your bosoms with Moses, so shall you take them out again leprous as
snow Exodus 4.6. Commune with your consciences and be still, or make a pause.
Psalm. 4.4. lay a peremptory charge upon them to be true to you, and to do
their office impartially, in laying open how many transgressions are wrapped up
in your sins, Levit. 16.21. in bringing them all forth to you, as they in
Ezra brought forth the vessels of the Sanctuary, by number and by w^ight, Ezra
8.34.
in their circumstances and aggravations. Why should God say unto thee of thy
sins,, as once Samuel did to Jesse of his sons, Are these all thy children?
Conscience, if not charged to the contrary, and well watched, will either lie
to thee, as Gehezi did to his Master: or at least substract a part of thy
sins, as Ananias and Saphira did a part of the price. Search therefore, and
follow your work close, that ye may say with Ephraim Jer. 31.19. After that I
was made known to my self, I repented, and with David, I examined my ways,
and finding all out of order, I turned my feet to my testimonies, Psalm. 119.59.

O nation not desired] As not desirable: having nothing of worth in thee
wherefore any should be found of thee, or seek any further after thee, Daniel
was a man of desires, chap. ut veniant defiderati omnium gentium Jun.
9.23. David a man after Gods own heart. Moses fair to God, Acts 7.20. The
Saints are the desired ones of all Nations, as some read that text Hag. 2.7.
The precious sons of Zion comparable (not to silver only, as the word here
used imports, but) to sine gold, Lam. 4.2. As for the wicked, they are all
dross, Ezekiel 22.18, 19. and God does so little desire them, as that he puts
them away, or makes them to cease as dross, Psalm. 119.119. and commands
others to do the like by them, Prove. 25.4, 5. Some take the words in the
active sense, and render them, O n^tion not desirous: viz. to search thy ways
and turn again to me. Thou that have no mind to be dealing with thy self, or
to draw nigh to me, but had as leife be knocked on the head, as do either:
Gens vacua desiderio. O nation void of any good desires. August.
Whereas tota Christiani hominis vita sanctum desiderium est, the whole life of
a good Christian is one continuate desire after God, his kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof. Mat. 6.33. he follows after it Prove. 21.21. as an
Apprentice follows his trade, though he be not his craftsmaster. Some faint
desires, luskish longings, short-winded wishes may be found in a wicked man;
but they rise not up to the full height of well-knit resolution for God. Like
they are to Meteors that are carried above the earth, but not united to the
Element of fire: therefore they fall and return to their first principles: like
ice which melts in the day, and hardens again in the night: like the
sluggard in his bed, that puts out his arm to rise, and then pulls it in
again. See Psalm. 78.34.38.

Verse 2. Before the decree bring forth] The decree is great-bellied, and will
shortly bring forth, if not prevented. There is an execution toward: and if
course be not timously taken, ye are like to pay, not the debt only, but
charges and damages: Look to it quickly before the decree etc. Here are three
cautionary Befores, as there are four comfortable Yets to be read Zach. 1.17.
God yet offers them mercy as Alezander did those he warred against, whiles the
lamp burned: and as Tamerlane, whiles the white flag was hanged out. See Ier.
18.7.8.

Before the day pass as the chaffe] Before that day of the Lord that is near,
very near, chap. 1. Verse 14.15. Pass upon you, and ye become as chafe before
the wind, as the dust of the mountains before the whirlewind. O fan you, fan
you: or else God will fan you after another fashion: search you, or he will
soon search you with candles, chap 1.12. gather your selves together, or he
will gather your souls with sinners, and your lives with bloody men, Psalm.
26.9. would men but judge themselves, God would not judge them, 1 Cor. 11.31.
did they but see their sins to confession, they should never see them to
their confusion Prove. 28.13. would they but meet God, as Abigail did David,
they might disarm his indignation. Saving a little pains in this case, doubleth
it: and the best that can come of negligence is repentance. It is better that
we should try our selves, then that he should try us in his furnace of
temptation, or other affliction. Do it therefore before the day pass as the
chafe, or before the chafe or stubble pass in that day, pass before the
wind wherewith God shall winnow you, who would not winnow your selves. The
scholar that will not scan his own verses, shall find that his master will scan
them to his cost. And the tradesman that will not cast up his books, shall have
his books to cast up him at length.

Before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you] As a mighty torrent of
fire, such as you are never able to avoid or abide. Abused mercy turns into
fury: neither will God suffer his patience to stand still for a sinning stock.
Twice in a breath these hypocrites are here told what to trust unto, for more
surety.

Verse 3. seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth] Here the prophet turns
himself to the better sort: for upon those hypocritical halters before
mentioned he had but lost his sweet words; he did but wash a blackmore. We read
not in Scripture of any hypocrites conversion, and what wonder? for whereas
after sin, conversion is left as a means to cure all other sinners, what
means to recover him who has converted conversion it self into sin? This
made our Savior say to his Disciples concerning the Pharisees those cankered
hypocrites, Let them alone, Mat. 15.14 and himself weary of wasting words upon
them called to the multitude and said. here ye and understand, verse 10. In
like sort this Prophet here, Seek ye the Lord:, for it is past time of day with
them to seek him: therefore they shall go with their flocks, and their herds
to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him: he has withdrawn himself from
them. Hos. 5.6. Concerning seeking the Lord see the Note on Am. 5.6.8.

All ye meek of the earth] This is the character, the distinctive note of a
true Christian: who as he is sure to be afflicted ( affliction and meekness
grow both upon the same root in the holy tongue) so by affliction he is
meekened and mortified, his flesh is crucified with the affections and lusts:
and so he is fitted to seek the Lord, to lie at his feet and say, speak Lord,
for thy servant hears. (...) Septuag.
The e meek and lowly ones are they whom God will teach Psalm. 25.9. beautify
Psalm. 149.4. solace Isai 29.19. and 61.1. save, God will save the humble
person. Job. 22.29. Now meekness and humility are a pair of twin-sisters,
never asunder. Sorores collactanea.
See how they go coupled, Mat. 11.29. and the Seventy render this text, all
the lowly of the earth, that are as low as th earth, in your own eyes and
esteem.

Which have wrought his judgement] i.e. have been doing at it, qui fecistis
praecepta etsi non perfecistis who aim at perfection though ye cannot attain
to it, (...), quasi (...). solo aquatus. Psalm. 103.18.
who think upon his Commandments to do them, having respect to them all, and
wishing well to the work, Psalm. 118.5, 6. which God graciously accepts as a
working his judgment and yet would have you to abound more and more. Wherefore,

Seek righteousness, seek meeknesse] i. e. further measures of holiness, and
degrees of grace. Let him that is holy be holy still, let him persevere, grow,
and advance forward toward the high prize proposed unto him taking for his
motto that of Charles 5. Plus ultra further yet, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. So 1. Tim. 6.11. But thou O man of God, (that is, O
godly man, as the life of God is put for a godly life, Ephesians. 4.18. see 2 Kings
4.9.) fly these things (what things? heterodoxies. ver. 3, 4, 5. and love of
money ver. 9, 10.) And follow after (Gr. persecute, pursue alacriter and
acriter) righteousness, this is the totum hominis Ecles. 12.13. the bonum
hominis Mic. 7.8. and by way of distribution comprehends (as to God)
godliness and faith, (as to men) love, patience, meekness.

It may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords wrath] possibly ye may,
probably ye shall be; pardon of sin ye shall be sure of; mitigation also of
sorrow, if not prevention: saved ye shall be, or more gently handled, or so
inwardly calmed, that ye shall be able to call your souls to rest, when others
are at their wits ends. You shall be safe under the covert of Gods wings, and
in the hollow of his hand: when others that are without God in the world, shall
be as a naked man in a storm, an unarmed man in the field, or as a ship at Sea
without anchor, subject to dash and split against rocks, and quick sands.

Verse 4. For Gaza shall be forsaken and Askelon etc.) Here is dainty
Rhetoric in the Original. This Prophet was (as Quintilian says a good
Orator ought to be) Vir bonus, dicendi peritus, a good man, and a master of
speech. The Hebrew tongue seems to have bin in the prime and flourish when
Esaias, Micah, and Zephany prophesied, like as the Latin was about Tullies time.
The Philistines are here threatened, for a terror to the impenitent Jews, who
should taste of the same whip, and for the comfort of the Godly, who should be
hid when these their enemies should be utterly destroyed. Gaza was so forsaken,
according to its Prophecy, that it was therehence called Gaza the desert:
Askelon according to its name became ignis ignominia the reproach of the fire
that wasted it, and (as a merciless element) laid it desolate. Act. 8.26.
Ashdod (called in the New Testament Azotus Act. 8.) shall also (according to
its Etymon) be wasted with fire, and her inhabitants driven into a far country
as Captives at high noon, when the Sun (in those hot climates especially) is
most parching and scorching: they shall be driven out with all the disadvantage
that may be.

And Ekron shall be rooted out] Ekron was the place where Beelzebub the Prince
of Devils had his throne. Virg.
The Poets put it for hell. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.
Threatened it is therefore here (not without an elegancy that cannot be
englished) with utter extirpation The grand-devill had nested and nestled
himself as near the holy land as might be: (...) etc.
but he shall not long rest there, the Hebrew child will disquiet the great
Pan: ande.

Verse 5. Woe to the Inhabitants of the sea coast] These were the Philistines:
they lay between the Jews and the Sea: God having so disposed of it, that his
people might not have much commerce with foreign nations nor learn their
manners. Into havens and maritime towns there is usually a conflux of vices,
like as there is of waters into the Sea: witness Tire and Sydon, Corinth,
Carthage, Capernaum, etc. Hence that proverb maritimi mores: and that censure
of such people littorales duri, horridi, immanes, latrociniis dedicit omnium
denique pessimi, Those that dwell by the Seaside are usually ill-conditioned,
fierce, cruel, theevish, and the worst of men. These Philistines were no
better, and are therefore here put under a woe, and threatened with utter
destruction.

The nation of the Cherethites] i. e. Destroyers: so the Philistines had styled
themselves, as glorying to have conquered and cut off many people. The old
Latin translation renders it Gens perditorum The nation of Destroyers: so
does Aquila, Theodotion, and Symmachus, Now it comes to their turn to be
destroyed, according to Esaias 33.1. That these Cherethites were a sort of
Philistines See 1 Samuel 30.14, 16. Ezekiel. 25.16. That they were valiant men
appears by that legion of them that guarded David 2 Samuel 9.4. and 15.18. and
were highly esteemed by him, because they stuck to him in his affliction at
Gath, and also when Absalom was up in arms 2 Samuel 15.18.

the word of the Lord is against you] And not only against Israel. This was
spoken, as for the terror of those Philistines, who thought themselves out of
the reach of Gods rod, and slighted his word, so for the comfort of the people
of God, who thought much that themselves should be so severely dealt with, and
the uncircumcised Philistines escape scot-free.

O Canaan the land of the Philistines] Indeed of the Israelites, Josh. 13.3.
but held by force by the Philistienes, who were of the stock of the Canaanites,
but not subdued; and had detained part of the land from the right owners for
800. years and upwards; and now they come to be reckoned with. Subito tollitur
qui diu toleratur.

I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant] No settled
inhabitant, that shall fix there, as the word signifies. Thus Poena venit
gravior, quo mage sera venit, the longer God stays, the heavier he strikes.

Verse 6. And the seacoasts shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds] It
shall be wast and untilled, and therefore unfrequented by any but shepherds,
who pitch their tents up and down, where they may best feed their flocks in
desert places.

and folds for flocks] God may do thus in his just judgment upon his enemies,
that live in his good land, and not by his good laws: but woe be to our
Depopulatours, that drive out men, and put in cattle: that betray towns, as
Rome did Carthage, with a distinction, We will save the city, but destroy the
town. How dangerous it is to prove Abaddons, appears by Gods punishing hand
upon William the Conquerours, issue in New-forrest, wherein 36. Parish Churches
had been demolished by him, with the removing of all the inhabitants, to make
room for beasts, or dogs-game. There his second son Richard was gored in
hunting by a Deer; Speed.
Rufus his other son, mistaken for a Deer, was by chance shot through with an
arrow. Henry likewise his Nephew, whilst he hotly pursued the chase, was
struck by a bough into the jaws: and, as Absalom, left hanging until he died.

Verse 7. And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Iudah] Who had
not only their own country kept empty for them all the 70. years of
captivity, and not any displaced to make room at their return, (see the Note on
Zach. 7.14.) but liberty to make use of the Philistines country: which was
also further subdued by the Maccabees, but especially by the Apostles, who
preached the Gospel, and planted Churches in those parts, as we read in the
Acts chap. 8.26, 40. and chap. 9.32, 35, 36.

they shall feed thereupon] They shall go in and out, and find pasture, under
the great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, who shall feed them daily, Joh.
10. 1 Pet. 4.
and daintily among the lillies by the powerful preaching of the Gospel among
them.

In the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening] Vbi temporis
circumstantia securitatem notat, says Gualther, The circumstance of time
notes their spiritual security: evenings are often dark and dangerous. They
shall lie down as cattle do, that take no care; they know whom they have
trusted, and are fearlesse.

for the Lord their God shall visit them] Visit and redeem his people, raising
up an horn of salvation for them, Luke 1.68, 69. His visits are not empty
visits, Psalm. 8.5. his favors are not like the winter-Sun, that lights, but
heateth not, etc.

and turn away their captivity] to their unexpressible comfort, Psalm. 126.1.
but especially when Christ ascending up on high leads captivity captive, etc.
Col. 2.14, 15. Ephesians. 4.8.

Verse 8. I have heard the reproach of Moab] How can he but hear who is all
ear? who is both above us, and within us, in whom we subsist, Col. 1.17. And
what will he sooner be sensible of then the reproachings of his people? See
Esaias 37.23. and 57.3, 4. But draw near hither ye sons of the sorceresse, the
seed of the adulterer, and the whore. (See how he becalls them) Against whom do
ye sport your selves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the
tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood? The Moabites
and Ammonites were great jearers of the Jews, and revilers of their religion.
These reproaches leniter volant, non leniter violant, cruel mockings the
Apostle calls them, Heb. 11.36. David felt them as a murdering weapon in his
bones, Psalm. 42.10. God will call such men to an heavy reckoning one day as
deride the power of godliness, and the professors thereof. Bid says, that
this was the great sin of the ancient Britanes, immediately before their
destruction by the Saxons: and it is at this day both a presage and desert of
our ruin, that as the Turks count all fools to be saints, so men with us
account all saints to be fools.

and the revilings of the children of Ammon] How good they were at it, we may
see in those words of Sanballat, and his copesmate Tobiah the Ammonite, Neh.
4.2, 3. words as full of pride and scorn, as profane wit, or rancoured malice
could make them: and they lay so heavy upon Nehemiahs spirit, that he could
not ease himself but by breathing heavenward, verse 4. Hear, O our God, for we
are despised, and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a
prey in the land of captivity, etc. Hear, says Nehemiah: I have heard it,
says God. Thou have seen it, says the Psalmist, for thou beholdest mischief
and spite to requite it with thine hand, Psalm. 10.14.

and magnified themselves] by speaking big and blustering words, bubbles of
words, great swelling words, full of wind, 2 Pet. 2.18. these shall find, that
such words are not wind, but will be required in fire, Jude 15. God is an
utter enemy to boasting and threatening Bragadochios.

Verse 9. Therefore as I live [This is Gods oath: so, As true as I live, Number.
14.21. with Psalm. 95.10. therefore they are to blame that use it in their
common talk.

Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, etc.] Whereas they think that I either hear not
their revilings, or regard them not, I shall make Moab and Ammon smart and
smoke for them.

even the breeding of nettles and salt pits] They shall not indeed be consumed
with fire from heaven: but their land shall lie waste for a long season.
Nettles grow in barren places, and are good for nothing, unless it be the buds
at first coming. Pliny writes, Hist. Not. l. 31. c. 7.
that where salt is dug, little good else grows. See Judge. 9.45. Psalm.
107.34.

for a perpetual desolation] Certain it is, that those nations carried captive
by Nebuchadnezzar were never restored: but that in aftertimes a mixed multitude
of vagrants, out of many nations met there, taking upon them the old title of
Arabians, and living by rapine and robbery. Out of these came Mahomet, founder
of the Turkish Empire and Superstition, who overturned the Christian Churches,
there planted by the Apostles, (as was here fore-prophecied, The residne of my
people shall spoil them, etc. See verse 7.) Confer Gal. 1.17. and soon overrun
all the East and South, as Popery did all the West and North, at the same time.

Verse 10. This shall they have for their pride] Moabites were as much noted
for their pride, as now the Spaniards are: and are therefore here devoted to
destruction. Pride goes before a fall, etc. A bulging wall stands not long: a
joint luxated and swelled, till that be down, cannot be set. God resists the
proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. he brings those ungodly down to the ground, Psalm. 147.6.

because they have reproached, etc.] And all this out of the pride of their
hearts, which breaks out, as a master-pock, in their carriage: so that the
pride of Moab testifies to his face, and it shall be to him an abomination of
desolation.

Verse 11. The Lord will be terrible unto them] For he shall march forth in
battle-array against proud persons, (...).
1 Pet. 5.5. and stain the pride of all their glory: he will pull them down
from their pinnacle of self-exaltation, and make them know themselves to be but
men. Attilas, king of the Hunnes, proudly gave out, that the stars fell
before him, the earth trembled at his presence, and that he would be the
scourge of all nations. But what became of him? He died suddenly by a flux of
blood, P. Jovius.
breaking out at his mouth and choking him, on his wedding day at night. It
were easy to instance further, in Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Herod
the king of Tire, Psalm. 76.12.
etc. With God is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22. he is terrible to the kings of
the earth, whiles he cutteth off their spirits. Heb. he slippeth them off, as
one should slip off a flower betwixt ones fingers; or a bunch of grapes off the
vine; so soon is the business done.

For he will famish all the gods of the earth] He will cast them into an
atrophy, into a consumption. This was fulfilled, partly when Nebuc^ adnezzar
destroyed the Nations, Dan. 4.
and proclaimed the true God to be the only God, but principally when Christ
came in the flesh, and sent out his Apostles to decry those Heathen deities,
and to preach the everlasting Gospel, saying with a loud voice. Fear God, and
give glory to him, etc: and worship him that made heaven, earth, sea, and
fountains of waters, Rev. 14.7. Now it was, that Satan fell like lightening
from heaven, the oracles were silenced, the Heathen Emperors amazed at the
prevailing power of the Gospel in despite of them, the very names of most of
the gods of the earth were abolished, the Temple of Apollo at Delphos fired
from heaven; and at that very time when Julians ambassadors were there to
enquire what should be the issue of the Persian war. Thus the Heathen
superstition fell flat to the ground, their gods were famished for want of
worshippers and sacrifices etc. And the same we hope and wait for to befall the
Antichristian rout and religion. That Idol is grown very lean, and has lost a
collop as we say. Bellarmine is very sensible, Lib. 3. de Pont. Romans cap. 21.
and bewailes the business, that ever since we began to count and call the
Pope Antichrist, he has suffered no small decays and losses in the christian
churches. He has indeed, and more and more shall do till he be left as lean
as a rake, and all his plumes pulled, his credit cracked, his honor laid in the
dust.

and men shall worship him] Heb. bow down to him. He is thy Lord, and bow thou
down unto him, Psalm. 45.11. Body and soul both must stoop to God: Zanchy.
and both at once 2 Cor. 6.20. Swenck feldians. ( Stinkfeldians Luther called
them from their ill savor) take away all external service: so do the
Nicodemites. Hypocrites draw nigh to God with their lips only, when their
hearts are elsewhere: their bodies are in sacellis, their hearts in sacculis as
Ezekiel. 33.31. But the true Israelites give God both inward and outward worship:
he does ponere dextram in pectore, as Persius phraseth it: being shod with the
preparation of the Gospel, he treads it not awry, neither too much outward as
the formalist, (...).
nor too much inward as the Swenckfeldian. He looks upon our late
worship-scorners, our high-attainers as the last brood of Beelzebub: and
reckons that to cast off ordinances is to cast away the remedy 2 Chronicles. 36.15,
16. Prove. 29.1.

every one from his place] Not at Jerusalem only as once, Ioh. 4.21. but in all
places, pure hands and hearts shall be lift up, without wrath, without
doubting: 1 Timothy 2.8.
both in church and chamber: any place whatsoever shall be a sufficient
oratory, so that God be worshipped in spirit and in truth, and the public not
neglected.

even all the Isles of the Heathen] that is, all countries, though not
encompassed with the sea: for the Jews called all lands Islands which they
could not come at but by water. That God shall be worshipped in the four
corners of the earth, see the Note on Deuteronomy. 6.4. It was the last speech of
dying Chrysostom, Glory be to God from all creatures: Let the Jesuits at the
end of their books subscribe Laus Deo and beatae Virgini, Let this be the badge
of the Beast: let us cry To God alone be glory all the world ever.

Verse 12. Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword] which is long
enough to reach you, though far remote. The Poets feign that Jupiter was wont
to be feasted by the Ethiopians: but that shall not save them from Gods sore
and great strong sword. Nebuchadnezzar, to whom God had given Ethiopia, and
Egypt and Saba as a ransom for his people Esa. 43.3. See Prove. 11.8. with the
Note. The Ethiopians and Egyptians were subdues together Ier. 46.2. Esaias 18.1,
2. It is now inhabited by the Abyssines (a kind of mongrell-christians) and
called Prester-lohns country; where they say they have this custom amongst
others: In their great solemnities they have a cup of gold born before them,
filled within, and besmeared without with dirt, yet so as the gold appears:
and next to this cup is carried a crucifix. Hereby they would show that man
should be pure as gold: but being within and without defiled by sin, he is
restored by Christ crucified, so as that the gold of Gods graces appears in
him here in part, and shall do hereafter in all perfection.

Verse 13. And he will stretch out his hand against the North] i. e. against
Assyria (which lay north from Judea) as is presently added by way of
exposition. Selnec. paedag. Christ. par. 2. page 118.
the scripture sometimes has its own interpretation annexed as Ioh. 2.19, 21.
and 7.39. Howsoever, the Rabbines have this saying amongit them, Nulla est
objectio inloge quae non habet solutionem in latere; i.e. there is not any
doubt in the Law, but may be resolved by the context.

and destroy Assyria] cast this rod of his wrath into the fire, after the he
had worn it to the stump (as that Martyr said) upon other nations.

and will make Niniveh a desolation] See Nah. 2. with the Notes.

Verse 14. And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her etc.] Here are
various and vehement expressions of the dreadful face of her desolations.
Omnia congerit que vastitatem horribilem denotare solent, says Gulather,
because it was held a thing almost impossible that Niniveh should be destroyed.
Hence that admiration of bystanders and beholders ver. 15. But what can be
impossible to the Almighty? and what will not He do for his churches cause and
comfort? See ver. 6.

all the beasts of the nations] which shall come from far to haunt this
new-desert. beau-desert. See Isai. 13.21, 22. and observe that Parallel texts,
like glasses set one against another, do cast a mutual light. The lapidary
brighteneth his hard diamond with the dust shaved from it self: so must we
clear hard scriptures.

both the Cormorant (or Pelican) and the Bittern] Those inauspicate birds of
prey that are signs both of Gods curse and man's misery Esa. 34.11. The former
has its name in Hebrew from vomiting, and seems, says One, to be the same
that we call the Shovelard, which swalloweth shelfishes, and after vom^teth
them to get the fish. Not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 3.
The later lives about lakes, says Pliny, and with her beak beats the fish
out of the shell with great vehemence.

shall lodge in the upper-lintels of it] beautified with pomegranates, flowers
and other curious garnishes, a are wont to be seen at the proches of places.

their voice shall sing in the windowes] the black Saints, as they say; where
was wont to be heard all manner of music and melodious noises, Luxus cedet in
luctum, their merry dances shall end in a miserable downfall.

desolation shall be in the thresholds] which were wont to be worn out with the
abundance of clients and parasites, tracing over them.

for he shall uncover the cedar-work] i. e. God, or the enemy by Gods
appointment, shall uncover the roof made of Cedar, for better continuance.
Cedar is strong and durable: and by reason of the dryness of it the timber
chawneth not, rotteth not: Physic. l. 2.
yea, it has a property to preserve other things from putrefaction, says
Scribonius. The Ninivites raftered their houses with it, as they say the
Africanes do with whale-bones. But now that God shall bar them and expose them
to the injury of wind and weather, how can they stand? and what can be in the
thresholds but desolation?

Verse 15. This is the re^oycing city] Exultabunda, that could stand on no
ground, but was ready to leap out of her skin as it were: her inhabitants were
mere mirth mongers altogether set upon the merry pin: like the people of
Tombu^um in Afric, who spend their whole time in singing and dancing. Now the
case is altered, and the Church, out of zeal for Gods glory, thus insulteth
over them.

that dwelt carelesly] As if situate in the clouds, above all fear; and
altogether insuperable. Security ushereth in destruction. See Ier. 49.31, 32.

that said in her heart I am, and there is none besides me] This was a proud
word indeed. I am is one of God Almighties names Exodus 3.14. and There is none
besides me, is one of his titles Esa. 45.5.21. and 48.12. Thus empty man would
be something (the toad would swell to the bigness of an ox) though man be
born like a wild-asses colt Job 11.12. and man being in honor understands
not, that he is, Psalm. 49.20. p^coribus merticinis. Tremel.
or shortly shall be, like the beasts that perish: that die of the murraine,
and so become carrion good for nothing.

Vnde superbit homo cujus conceptio turpis,
Nascipoena, labor vita, necesse meri?
How is she become a desolation!] Here the Prophet Niniven in Theatro statuit,
and traducit apud Judaeos (says Calvin) sets Niniveh upon the stage, and
shows his Jews the tragical end of her: how she should wonderfully be
brought down beyond all expectation. God delights o make himself marvelous:
he is the only true Thaumaturgus.

every one that passes by her shall hiss and wagg his hand] In scorn, horror
and disdain; and why, See Nah. 3.19. with the Note. Lam. 2.15, 17. 1 King.
9.8. Ezekiel. 27.36. Mic. 6.16. Surely God scorneth the scorners Prove. 3.34. and
makes that the merciless find no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. WOe to her that is filthy and polluted] Meaning Jerusalem, once a
faithfully city, now an harlot, foedissimum prostibulum, Isay 1.21.
of the kind of those sordid men who are called Borboritae, of their miry
filthynesse, whom Epiphanius and Oecumenius speak of. (...)
The word here rendered filthy comes from a word that signifies dung, or that
signifies an example: and so it is a metaphor taken from light women that are
catted in a disgraceful way and made a public example, and infamous instance.
It is rendered also gluttonous, (...).
or all craw as Levit. 1.6.

Ingluvies and tempestas, barathrumque macelli. To the oppressing city]
Praedatrici, that makes a prey of others (either by force or fraud) as the
silly dove is made a prey to the hawk and other ravenous birds.

Verse 2. She obeyed not the voice] sc. of her teachers, nor inclined her ear
to them that instructed her, as Prove. 5.13. Hence she was so filthy and
oppressive: who if she had harkened to wholesome counsel, and hidden the word
of Gods grace in her heart, would have purified her self even as He is pure, 1
Ioh. 3.3. and not have exacted money and corn, but have left off that usury
Neh. 5.10.

she received not correction] or discipl^ne, as being incurable or
incorrigible, pining away in her iniquity Lev. 26.39. and not accepting the
chastisement of her sin.

she trusted not in the Lord] but knocked at the creatures door for help in her
distress, and made flesh her arm, her heart departed from the Lord Ier. 17.5.
This God takes very ill Ier. 2.12.13. as he has very great reason: Confidence
being the least and yet the best we can render to him for all his benefits.

she drew not near to her God] Though he were her God, yet she gat as far from
him as she could: and, like a wild beast, would not be tamed nor managed by
him. Now if these be undoubted arguments of filthy and polluted State, as
surely they are, what shall we think of our selves, who are as deeply guilty as
ever Jerusalem was in the promises? what shall the Lord do, or what shall he
not do rather to a nation so incorrigibly flagitious, so obliged, so warned, so
shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked?

Verse 3. Her Princes within her are roaring lions] Roaring over the meaner
sort, and tearing them with their claws, See the Notes on Mic. 3.1, 2, 3.

her Judges are evening-wolves etc.] See Hab. 1.8. This rapacity and bribery
they had learned (likely) under Manasses and Amon: and exercised under good
Josiah, who either knew it not, or could not redress it. Est ergo periculi
plena reip. forma, quae ab uno dependet, says Gualther here. And Tertullian
tells us, Tert. Apol.
that one special thing the Primitive Christians prayed for the Emperor was,
that God would send him Senatum fidelem a faithful Senate, pious Councillors,
good underofficers. Of Aurelians Council it was said, that by them the good
Emperor, who might know nothing but as they informed him, was even bought and
sold. Alphonsus King of Arragon said, that Princes were for this, in a worse
condition then other people: because they could seldom hear the truth of
things. Augustus bitterly bewailed the death of Varus: because now, said he,
Grand. Signi. Serag. 148.
I have none about me that will deal truly with me. The Grand Signior goes often
abroad that he may receive poor men's petitions, and right them upon the
greatest Bashawes, who, bewitched by bribery, have denied them justice. And
hence it has been ever observed, that few of his chief officers die in their
bed. These evening-wolves many times have not a morrow left them to gnaw the
bones in. Rodulphus Archb. of Canterb. next after Anselm was surnamed Nugax for
his jesting and toying.


Verse 4. Her Prophets are light] Rash, headlong, futilous, debauched (as the
French translateth it) aeriall, fantastical, waightlesse, worthless men, such
as in whose doctrine there is no authority, in whose life no gravity,
staidness, severity, constancy: like the planet Mercury, they can be good in
conjunction with good, and bad with bad: like that French Apostate, of whom
Beza says, that he had religionem ephemeram, for every day a new religion, ab
his ad illos, ab illis ad hos leviter iens and levius transiens, double-minded
and unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.

and treacherous persons] Viri perfidiaerum, most perfidious persons, This is
their true title, whom the world counts, and calls facile, facetious,
fair-conditioned, comporting, condescending, people-pleasing preachers. Can
there be a worse treachery then to betray men's souls, as your Aiones and
Negones do, that cry peace, peace, and so cozen men to hell.

her priests have polluted the sanctuary] Or holy services. Cum coelum terrae
commiscent sacra profanis. God looks to be sanctified in all those that draw
nigh unto him, Levit. 10.3. that they should be singularly holy, handling the
word sancte magis quam site (as One once told the wanton Vestall) and living
so, that malice it self may be silenced. God of old appointed both the weights
and measures of the sanctuary, to be twice as large as those of the
Commonwealth: to show, that he expects much more of those that serve him
there, then he does of others. See 1 King. 7.15. with 2 Chronicles. 3.15.

they have done violence to the law] sc. by their crafty and perverse glosses,
setting it on the rack as it were, and so making it speak more then it would:
tawing it with their teeth, as shoomakers do their upper-leather, forcing it
two miles, when it would go but one, yea murdering it, as Tertullian says of
some, quod caedem scripturarum faciant, that they slaughter the scriptures, to
serve their own purposes: for which cause also he calls Marcion the heretic,
Murem Ponticum, the Rat of Pontus, for his arroding and gnawing the text.

Verse 5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof] The unjust Princes were said
to be in the midst of Jerusalem as roaring lions, verse. 3. Here the just Lord
is also said to be in the midst of her, as a sin-revenging Judge. He sits
as God in the midst of those uncircumcised vice-gods, (as I may in the worst
sense best term them) he sets a jealous eye upon all their unrighteous
proceedings, and is with them in the judgment. Neither eyeth he them only,
but all others in like sort: as the king in the Gospel came in to see his
guests. His eye, like a well-drawn picture, takes view of all that come into
the room. O that we could be in his fear all the day! O that we would ever walk
uin the sense of his presence, and light of his countenance! Ne pecces, Deus
ipse videt, bonus Angelus astat, etc. Sin not: for God sees thee, the good
Angels stand about thee, Satan will accuse thee, Noli peccare, nam Deus videt,
Angeli astant, diabolus accusabit, conscientia testabitur, Infernus cruciabit.
Conscience will give in evidence against thee, Hell will torment thee: A
reverend and religious man had this written before his eyes in his study.

he will not do iniquity] i. e. He will not let enormities go unpunished, nor
pass by the infirmities of his people without a sensible check, Psalm. 99.8.
See Hab. 1.13.

Every morning does he bring his judgment to light] Daily and diligently does
He both threaten by his Prophets, and execute with his hand, the menaces of his
mouth upon those that will not be warned, that refuse to be reformed. He has
in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. Maturely he will do
it, and accurately: It is his mornings work, Psalm. 101.8. like as it is theirs
to rise early, and corrupt all their doings, verse. 7. He will be up and at it
as soon as they.

he fails not] As he may seem to do, when he forbeareth. Non deest, He will
not be wanting to his office, to proceed against the uncounsellable.

but the unjust knows no shame] He can blush no more then a sackbut, as the
proverb is. Such an impudency has sin woaded in his face, that he basheth
nothing. Et pudet non esse impudentem, he is past all grace, as we say, and as
good at resisting the Holy Ghost, as ever those Jews were that had a whores
forehead, Jer. 3.3. sinews of iron, and brows of brass, Esaias 48.49. When
neither fear of God, nor shame of the world will rein men in, what hope is
there of such? Illum ego periisse dico cui periit pudor, says an Heathen.
Curtius.
He is an undone man that knows no shame. Prevent it in time: for the modest
beginnings of sin at first will make way for immodest proceedings. The
thickest ice that will bear a cart, begins with a thin trembling cover, that
will not a pibble.

Verse 6. I have cut off the nations] And hanged them up in gibbets, as it
were, before your eyes, for your admonition, ut ruina majorum sit cautela
minorum, Greg. Mor.
that their destruction might be your instruction: that seeing your neighbors
house on fire, you might look to you own: that observing other to suffer
shipwreck, you might see to yor tackling. This is the use God expects we
should make of his judgments upon others, Luke 13.3, 5. and 17.26, 29. Matt.
12.13, 41.42. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, etc. and surely he de^erveth to be made an
example, that will not take example by others.

their towers are desolate] Or, their corners, sc. of their munitions, whereon
towers were set. Or their extremities, q. d. I have over-turned them from one
end to another. Drusius and Ribera interprets it of their Princes. See the
Note on chap. 1.16.

I made their streets wast, etc.] See chap. 2. verse. 5, 6, 14, 15. To the end,
that when my judgments were thus on the earth, the inhabitants of the world
(but especially of the Church) might learn righteousness, Esaias 26.9. that the
righteous seeing the vengeance, might wash his feet in the blood of the wicked,
Psalm. 59.10. taking warning by his harms. Observe here by the way, what great
account God makes of his people, since for their instance and instruction, he
thus wastes the wicked: like as the Persian kings, when their sons had
committed a fault, made their servants to be beaten before them.

Verse. 7. I said surely thou will fear me] As in a school, when one boy is
whipped, the rest tremble; and as in the Commonwealth, poena ad paucos, metus ad
omnes: so it should be in the Church. Other men's woes should be our warnings:
others sufferings our sermons; others lashes our lessons: Gods house of
correction, a school of instruction, where we should hear and fear, and do no
more so, Deuteronomy. 17.13. He that trembles not in hearing, shall be crushed to
piece in feeling, said that Martyr.

and receive instruction] This I promised my self of thee, but am disappointed,
Jer. 5.3. See verse 2. thou art therefore ripe for destruction.

So their dwelling should not be cut off] They should have redeemed their
sorrows, and saved their city. And this God speaks to others, as weary of
speaking any longer to them, to so little purpose.

but they rose early and corrupted, etc.] Manicabant, they made have, that no
time might be lost: the woefully wasted that best part of the day, the morning,
(which (...), furthereth every business) in corrupting their practices, doing
evil as they could. Once (says a Reverend man) Peter's argument was more then
probable; These men are not drunk, for it is but the third hour of the day.
Drunk. cup. by. D. Harris.
Now, men are grown such husbands, as that by that time, they will return
their stocks, and have their brains crowing before day.

Verse 8. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, etc.] Stand forth, and
hear your doom: which that ye may know, that I do not precipitate, or rashly
pass upon you. Wait ye upon me, etc. and yet that ye may not presume upon my
patience, know that there is a day set, a determination settled for your full
payment.

Nostra Deus sub it is non damnat crimina pocnis:
Compensat long as sed gravitate moras.
to gather the nations] To put them up as it were sheep, into a pound for
slaughter. See more of this Jer. 25.

to pour upon them mine indignation] Here Is mention made of Gods prey, of his
indignation, fierce anger, fire of jealousy against nations and kingdoms: the
better to persuade people to that which they are so hardly drawn to believe,
viz. that God is not made all of mercy: but, though fury be not in him, to
speak properly, Isay 27.4. Exodus 34.7.
Yet that he will not by any means Clear the guilty, but punish them severely,
taking vengeance of their inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

Verse 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure language] Then, when my
sword has rid circuit, Eccles. 14.17. and bin bathed in the blood of all
nations, for their many and mighty sins; I will turn to the people, I will
turn mine hand upon the little ones; mine elect, that remnant reserved for
royal use. These I will bring, not into the fire only, but through it, and
will refine them as silver is refined etc. Zach. 13.7, 9. so that their tongue
shall be as choice silver, Pro. 10.20. their lip shall be a pure lip, at it is
here, a lip of excellency, Prove. 17.7. so that they shall scatter pearls, Mat.
7.6. throw abroad treasure, Mat. 12.35. even apples of Gold in shrnes of
silver, Prove. 25.11. 1 John 3.3.
they shall purify themselves, as God is pure. Old things shall be past with
them, all things shall become new: new constitution, new communication, new
conversation. Look how the Conqueror sought to bring the French tongue into
England, commanding it to be taught in schools, spoke in courts etc. so does
the Lord Christ, woe rides about the world upon his white horses, the Apostles
and other Ministers, conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. wherever he
prevails, he turns to such a pure language, even the language of Canaan: not
the Hebrew tongue (as R. Abraham senses this text) which all nations shall
speak, says he, in the kingdom of Christ (what they do in heaven, I have not
to say, some are confident) but words of grace, Col. 4.6. words of truth and
soberness, Act. 26.25. right words, Job. 6.2. spiritual speeches, Ephesians. 4.29.
Scripture language, 1 Pet. 4.11.

That they may call upon the name of the Lord] As all Gods people do, it is
their character 1 Cor. 1.2. he has no dumb children, they no sooner breath but
pray Act. 9.11. for prayers is the breath of the spirit, Romans 8.26. and the
fruit of faith: hence it is called the prayer of faith, and under the phrase of
calling upon the name of the Lord here is meant believing in his name, and
reposing upon Christ for safety here, and salvation hereafter.

To se^ve him with one consent] Heb. with one shoulder, that is, unanimously,
and with conjoined endeavors. (...)
A metaphor from oxen yoked and setting their shoulders together to the work:
(...). Sept.
or else from porters, who set their several shoulders to the same burden. The
Saints may the better do so, because they have the Spirit to lift with them
and over anent them, as the Apostles word imports Romans 8.26. Let them
therefore endeavor by all good means, (...)
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. that they may
say as holy Miconius did of himself and his colleagues at Gotha in Thuringia,
Cucurrimus, certavimus, laboravimus, pugnavimus, vicimiv, and viximus semper
conjunctissimi. We ever ran together, strove, labored, fought, vanquished and
did altogether, in much peace and concord. This is Christian-like indeed, See
Act. 1.14. and 2.1.46. and 4.32. animo animaque inter se miscebansur, says
Tertullian, they were all of one heart, and of one mind. The very Heathens
acknowledged that no people in the world did hold together and love one
another, so as Christians did. To see their travels, (says Master Fox
concerning the Saints here in times of persecution) their earnest seeking,
burning zeal, readings, watchings, sweet assemblies, love, concord, godly
living, faithful marrying with the faithful etc. Act. and Mon. 750.
may make us now in these our days of free profession (but lamentable
divisions) to blush for shame. They served the lord with one shoulder, we
shoulder one another: they kept unity with purity without schism, much less
heresy, glorifying the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ with one mind
and with one mouth Romans 15.6. with a pure lip, as it is here: we are quot
homines, tot sententiae; so many men, so many minds. How many religions are
there now amongst us, says one? Old heresies new vampt? Our Savior Christ
says, if the Son of man come, shall he find faith etc? Yes sure he may find
many faiths: so many men, so many faiths. Pudet opprobria nobis etc. It is not
peace but party that some men mind, says another: 1 Cor. 14.23
their chief studies are studium partium, and studium novarum rerum,
part-taking, and novelling. But what says the Apostle? If ye speak with
several tongues, will not he that comes in think ye are mad? so when the world
hears of so many dissonant opinions; will they not think we are run wild? Is
it not a shame to us, that the Turks should say, we may sooner look that the
fingers on our hands should be all of one length, then that the Christians
should be all of one judgment? why should any Julian jeare us for our
divisions? why should any Campian hit us in the teeth with our many sects and
schisms? Pardon may be got for our other sins by faith in Christ's blood, Ad
fratres in Suevia Lutheran.
discordiam neque si sanguinem fundamus expiabimus (says Oecolampadius to the
Lutherans of his time) our scandalous discords God will judge.

Verse 10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia] Heb. of Chush, that is of Arabia
Chusaea which lay betwixt Judea and Egypt. Confer Esaias 18.1, 7. Some understand
it of Ethiopia which is beyond the river Nilus, and has two very great rivers.
See this in part fulfilled by that Ethiopian Eunuch Act. 8. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap.
1. Alvarez hist. Aethiopic.
neither may we think that he was alone in that country, Matthias the Apostle
is said to have preached the Gospel to the Ethiopians. The large region of
Nubia there had from the Apostles time (as it is thought) professed the
Christian faith, till about 200 years since it forsook the same. The kingdom
of Habassia held by Presbyter John, See Breerw. Enquiries 156.197.159.174.
are yet Christians differing from us in a few ceremonies only. See the Note
on Chap. 2.12.

My supplyants] My praying people, that ply the throne of grace, and multiply
strong suits pouring out a flood of words in humble supplication (as the Hebrew
signifies) continuing instant in prayer, as knowing that their safety here and
salvat on hereafter is of me alone.

Even the daughter of my dispersed] Jews and Gentiles, elect of both sorts Joh.
11.52. scattered here and there as the salt of the earth upon the face thereof,
to keep it from putrefying, Danaeus thinks that there is mention made of the
daughter of the dispersed affectionately: namely, both to describe the
earnestness of the Saints in serving God (for women quicquid volunt, valde
volunt) and that this so goodly and and joyful a spectacle or sight of women
worshipping and servng God, and of Virgins especially, might stir up and move
affections. It is easy to observe, that the New Testament affords more store
of good women then the old, who can make masculine prayers, mingled with tears:
And as Music upon the waters sounds further and more harmoniously then upon
the land, so do prayers well watered.

Shall bring mine offering] Heb. my meat offering, or rather my wheat-offering,
their hodies and souls, Romans 12.1. that best of facrifices, for a reasonable
service, Minchath^
a solemn present: such that the Chaldee paraphrast might express; He
translateth it thus: They shall bring as presents unto me the banished of my
people, who were carried captive, and shall return by my mercies. Some think
that here is foretold the return of the Jews to their own land, toward the end
of the world, to set up the spiritual worship of God there: the famous Church
that shall be among them, full of sanctity and rid of all wicked ones, verse
11, 12, 13. the joy and gladness that shall possess their souls verse 14.
through Gods removing of all cause of fear from them verse 15. the
encouragement they shall receive from others, verse 16. and (which is the cause
of all this) the apparent arguments of Gods great love and favor, verse. 17.
the quality of those that shall be received to be citizens of this New
Jerusalem, verse 18. the utter rooting out of all their enemies, verse 19 the
fame and dignity that this Church of the Jews shall be of among all nations,
verse. 19, ^. Thus they: quam recte iudicium sit penes Lectorens.

Verse 11. In that day shall thou not be ashamed] There is an holy shame for
sin, such as was that of Ezra, chap. 9.6. of the penitent Publican, Luke
18.13. and of those good souls in Ezekiel, who blushing and bleeding loathed
themselves for their abominations. To be ashamed on this sort is no shame,
Ezekiel. 16.
but a sign of that godly sorrow that works repentance never to be repented
of, and not to know shame, to be frontlesse, and impudent is the note of a
naughty man, Verse 5. But that which God promises here is, that he will cover
their sins, not impute them Psalm. 32.1.2. and that he will by his grace
preserve them from scandalous and reproachful practices that might render them
ignominious and despicable, see Psalm. 19.39. shiring upon them himself, and
giving them honor in the hearts of others, as he did Solomon.

Them that rejoice in the pride] Or, in thine excellency, as Psalm. 68.35. that
is the thine external privileges, wherein thou have hitherto so prided thy
self, as the only people of God, holy and beloved.

and thou shall no more be haughty] Stand upon thy tip-tees, upon thy
pantofles, as if there were none such.

because of mine holy mountaine] Ier. 7.4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord etc. cried they aloud that nothing cared for the Lord of the
Temple. So the Jesuits and their Romish crew cry, the Church, the Church, the
Catholic church, ad ravim usque like so many oyster-wives: but this is not the
guise of Gods people. He will purge his church of such Formalists.

Verse 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor
people] Poor and therein afflicted, therefore despised. Poverity is an
affliction, and makes a man trodden upon. Men will be sure to go over the hedge
where it is lowest. Hence St. Nil habet insoelix paupertus durtus in se, Quam
quod ridiculos homines facit.
Paul joined them together, I have leared to want and to be abased. They that
want must look to be abased. This thy son says He Luk 15.30. not, this my
brother: he would not once own him, because in poverty. But though men will
not, yet God will Iam. 2.5. Rev. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but that is nothing,
thou art rich: poor in spirit, rich to Godward, glorying in nothing but this,
that thou understandest and know me and my will, thy self and thy duty Ier.
9.23. and art therefore a rich Cargazon, a full Magazine, such as the world is
not worthy of.

and they shall trust in the name of the Lord] As having nothing else o trust
to. So St. Paul's widow indeed, being desolate and left aloue, trusts in God,
who whiles she had an husband trusted too much in him. 1 Timothy 5.5. A
noble-woman of Savoy, mother to John Galear Duke of Millaine after her hu^bands
decease, caused a coin to be made, upon the one side whereof she drew these
words, Sola facta solum Deum sequor, Being left alone, I trust in God alone.

Verse 13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity] Sanctity and security
are here promised to all the citiz^ns of the Church. Being justified by Christ
they shall do righteousness and truth: there shall no way of wickedness be
found in them Psalm. 139.24. they shall be kept from foul flagitious practices,
neither shall they wallow or allow themselves in any known sin unrepented of.
Their spot, if any, shall be the spot of Gods children Deuteronomy. 32.5. unvoluntary
and unavoidable informity, such as there is a pardon of course for: only they
must sue it out by praying daily, Forgive us our trespasses.

Nor speak lies] For that is a foul fault, and ra^ely found in a Saint Esaias
63.8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: So he
was their Savior. Tho. Walsingh.
It was wont to be as current an argument, Christianus est, non mentietur, He
is a christian, he will not lie, as afterward it was, Hic est frater, ergo
mendax, This is a friar, and therefore a liar. Sophronius testifies of
Chrysostom, nunquam eum mentitum fuisse, that he was never heard to tell a
lie. Whereas of Pilat Egesippus tells us, that he was Vir nequam and parvi
faciens mendacium, a naughty man, and one that made little conscience of a lie.
it may seem so indeed by that scornful question of his, What Is truth? Ioh.
18.38

neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth] Their pure lip ver.
9. is not used to the language of hell, their spirit without guile Psalm. 32.2.
produces speech without deceit: for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34. See the Note there.

for they shall feed and lie down] shall have all that heart can wish, or need
require; plenty, safety, security etc.

and none shall make them afraid] So as to make them dec iniquity or speak
lies: as very good men when frighted have dared to do: witness abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, but especially David, deeply guilty of this sin 1 Samuel 21.2, 8. and 1 Samuel 27.8, 10. In the sense of which sin he prays, Remove from me the way of
lying Psalm. 119.29. we also should pray, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from that evil one, the father of lies. And having the shepherd of
Israel to feed us and tend us; we should not fear Psalm. 23.2, 3. but choosing
rather to dye then to lie, to suffer then to shift, commit the keeping of our
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator 1 Pet. 4.19.

Verse 14. Sing O daughter of Zion, shot O Israel: Joy is the just man's
portion, which the wicked may not meddle with Hos. 9.1. In the transgression of
an evil man there is a snare or a cord to strangle his joy with, to cheek and
choke all his comforts, but the righteous sing and rejoice Prove. 29.6. they are
commanded so to do: yea the command is doubled and trebbled here and elsewhere
in both Testaments: and it is a sin for such not to rejoice, as well as not to
repent.

be glad and rejoice with all the heart] which no wicked man can do: his mith
is but the hypocrisy of mirth: like a little counterfeit complexion. It may
smooth the face, never cheer up the heart: like a slight dash of rain that
soaketh not to the root: or a handful of brush wood or sear thorns under the
pot Eccles. 7.6. As their humiliations are but skin-deep, they rent-their
garments and not their hearts, they grieve in the face, and not in the heart
Mat. 6.16. so do they rejoice in the face, and not with all their heart 2 Cor.
5.12.

Verse 15. The Lord has taken away thy judgments] i. e. He has remitted thy
sins, removed thy punishments, turned again thy captivity as the streams in
the south, commanded his Prophets faying, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people etc.
Esa 40.1.2. tell her that all accusations and actions laid against her in the
coury of heaven are non-suted, and Gods wrath appeased. This is the sum of
all hte good news in the world: this is a short gospel.

he has cast out thine enemy] As rubbish and sweepings of the house are cast
out: so has God dealt by thine enemies corporal and spiritual: (...)
repurga. re everrere significat.
that thou being delivered out of the hands of both, might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all thy days Luk 1.74, 75.

the king of Israel even the Lord is in the midst of thee] In the many
testimonies of his powerful and gracious presence: yea, he has set him up a
mercy-seat, a throne of grace, and bidden thee come boldly thereunto Heb. 4.16.

thou shall not see evil any more] sc. so long as thou retainest God with
thee, who is both a sun and a shield Psalm. 84.11. and children have a place of
refuge Prove. 14.26.

Verse 16. Fear thou not] why should thou whilst the king of Israel is in
the midst of thee? Be of good cheer said Caesar to the ferriman in a storm,
thou can not miscarry: Caesarem enim fers and fortunam Caesaris, so long as
Caesar is in the same bottom with thee. May not the church much more gather
comfort, having God in her company; and so many of his servants to fay to her,
Fear thou not? True faith quelleth and kills distrustful fear: but awful
dread it breeds, feeds, fostereth and cherishes.

and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack] Remollescant. Let not thy fears
weaken, but rather waken thy diligence in well-doing: lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees Heb. 12.12. Up and be active: pluck up your
good hearts, and buckle close to your business: your task is long, your time
short, your master urgent, you wages unconceiveable. It troubled a martyr at
the stake, that he should then go to a place where he should ever be receiving
wages, and do no more work. Up therefore and be doing. Be not slothful, but
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises Heb.
6.12. Hippoc. Aphoris.
Spontaneae lassitudines morbos loquuntur, faithlessnesse argues a diseased
soul.

Verse 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty] Even the mighty
strong God Esaias 9.6. the Giant, as the word signifies, the champion of his
church. He being in the midst of thee cannot but see how thou art set upon;
and how many dangers and difficulties thou encounterest with, and will send
thee in new supplies Ephesians. 1.19. seasonable succor.

He will save] This properly signifies the privative part of man's happiness:
but includes also the positive. Jesus will do all for his people.

He will rejoice over thee with joy] As a bridegroom does over his bride Esa.
Gesti super te laetitia.
62.5. He will take special complacency and content in thee, being made
accepted in the beloved Ephesians. 1.6.

He will rest in his love] And seek no further. Heb. He will be silent in his
love, passing by small faults without any the least signification of his
displeasure: as if he were even fond over his church, and did err in his love
toward her, as husbands are licensed to do toward their wives Prove. 5.19. Some
render it obmutescet in amore suo he shall be dumb in his love, so as he cannot
speak through excess of love. Lovers are so transported sometimes, that they
cannot utter their minds.

He will joy over thee with singing] As a father does over his child whom he
bears in his bosom, or dandleth on his knee.

Verse 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly]
which now they cannot celebrate, as being in captivity; and are therefore in
great heaviness; as was David Psalm. 42.2, 3, 5. Nothing goes nearer to a good
heart then to be debarred the benefit of Gods holy ordinances, then to hear
the sabbaths mocked at by the enemies as these good souls did Lam. 2.7. and to
be asked as David was, Where is now thy God Psalm. 42.3. All outward comforts in
this case are mere Ichabods. When the Ark was taken, Eli could live no longer:
that word struck him down back ward, and killed him in the fall. No sword of a
Philistine could have slain him more painefully: neither is it easy to say
whether his neck or heart were first broken.

who are of thee] True children of the church, as appears by their strong
affections to the ordinances 1 Pet. 2.2. Luther said he would not live in
Paradise without the word; as with it be could easily live in hell. An infant
cannot be quieted with gawdes or fine clothes without the dugg: so neither cana
true chirstian with any thing, but the public services, the solemn assemblies.

to whom the reproach of it was a burden] It lay heavy upon their spirits, and
made them send up many a deep sigh to God, who hears the breathings of his
people Lam. 3.56. 1 Chr. 15.26.
and will restore comfort to such his mourners Esa. 57.18. He that helped his
Levites to bear the Ark, will help those that grieve at the want of it, and
groan under the reproach cast upon it, which they ever honored as the face of
God Psalm. 105.4. Yea as God himself Psalm. 132.5.

Verse 19. Behold at that time I will undo all that afflict thee] Heb. Behold
Me: Look not to thy self as unworthy or unlikely to inherit such precious
promises: for, not for your sakes do I this says the Lord God, be it known
unto you, but for mine own holy Names sake Ezekiel. 36.22, 32. your unworthiness
shall serve for a foil to set forth the freeness of my love: your
unlikelinesse, the greatness of my power: my grace is sufficient for thee, my
strength is perfected in thy weakness 2 Cor. 19.9. Again, look not to thine
enemies, how many and mighty they are, how witty and wealthy, how active and
combined ( lorica^us incedit Satan and cataphractus, said Luther) let thine
eyes be upon me, as Jehosaphats were when he knew not whither else to look 2 Chronicles. 20.12. let thine heart be lift up in my ways, as his was 2 Chronicles. 17.6.
behold me, behold me Esaias 65.1. Look not downward on the rushing and roating
streams of miseries and troubles which run so swiftly under thee, for then
thou will be giddy: but look upward and steadfastly fasten on my power and
promise: believe in the Lord thy God, so shall thou be established: believe his
Prophets, so shall thou prosper 2 Chr. 20.20. thine enemies also shall be found
liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places Deuteronomy. 33.29. I
will undo them, says God here Heb. I will do them (per Antiphrasin:) or I will
bruise them and break them in pieces, as R David renders it, by comparing
Ezekiel. 23.3, 21. I will not only repress them but root them out. Those that
offer violence to the Church like blind Sampson, they lay hands upon their
pillars, to pluck the house upon their own heads.

and I will save her that halteth] As enemies shall not hinder the Churches
happiness, so neither shall her own infirmities. Grant she be lame and
luxated, maimed and disjoynted, so that she goes sideling and halteth down
right Psalm. 38.17. Say she be driven out of her country as an exile, out of
all companies, as an outcast (whom no man seeks after Ier. 30.17.) and out of
all good conceit of her self, as an abject, vile in her own eyes, not fit for
the communion of Saints, or kingdom of heaven: Yea I will save her, I will
gather her: like as the gathering host in the wilderness (see Josh. 6.9.) took
up the lame, feeble, and those that were left behind. See Mic. 4.6. with the
Note, and Ezekiel. 32.16. I will seek that which was lost, and reduce that which
was driven away etc.

and I will get them praise and fame in every land etc.] So that glorious
things shall be spoken of thee, O city of God: As thy sin shall be remitted, so
thy name shall be healed, thy fame spread, per era hominum volitabis, I will
fashion men's opinions of thee, so that those that formerly shamed and shunned
thee, shall highly esteem thee, and stand for thee.

Verse 20. At that time will I bring you againe] And this I tell you again,
that you may the better believe it: only you must wait my time, for in time
will I bring you again, and in time will I gather you, and in time will I make
you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, as before I promised:
but you must give me time to do all this. He that believes makes not have.
The vision is yet for an appointed time Habac. 2.3. See the Note there. Limit
not the Holy One of Israel, set him not a day, say not Now or never: wake not
your beloved till he please. He is a God of judgment, and waits to be
gracious Esaias 30.18. Have patience therefore, yea let patience have her perfect
work Iam. 1.4. that ye may receive a full reward 2 Ioh. 8. For behold I come,
and my reward is with me, to give you an expected end Ier. 29.11.

when I turn back your captivity] Heb. Captivities: that is, all four
captivities together. For the Jews were carried captive to Babylon 1. under
Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33.11.2. Next, under Jehojachim 2 Chronicles. 36.6.3. under
Jechonias 2 King. 24.12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.10.4. Lastly, under Zedekiah 2 Chronicles.
36.17. 2 King. 25.6. All these shall be brought back together by an eminent and
signal deliverance.

before your eyes] Those eyes of yours that failed almost for my salvation, and
for the word of my righteousness Psalm. 119.123. shall see the accomplishment
thereof, and be satisfied Psalm. 54.7. and 92.11. Dexter tibi prae laetitia
saliet oculus.

says the Lord] This is the seal of all, and security sufficient, for Dei
dixisse est fecisse: God will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, nor alter
the thing that is gone out of his lips Psalm. 89.33, 34.

Laus Deo in aeternum.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of HAGGAI.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. IN the second year of Darius the King] Not of Darius the Mede, G^a^b.
Chronol.
as Genebrard doteth, for he was predecessor to Cyrus Dan. 5.31. And Haggai
prophesied after Cyrus and Cambyses, Ezra 4.5. and 5.1. Neither of Darius
Nothus, as Scaliger in his book De Emend: temporum (the doctrine whereof is
almost wholly fictitions, says One, and founded upon the confines of Nothing:)
but of Darius, son of Hystaspes, who succeeded Cambyses in the kingdom of
Persia; being chosen king by the Peers, Herdot. in Thali^.
upon the neighing of his horse first, as Herodotus testifies. Whether this
Darius were the husband of Queen Esther, as some affirm, or her son, as Others,
(and was therefore so favorable to the Jews) I undertake not to determine:
Only take notice, that by Heathen Historians it is said, Herod.
that the wife of this Darius was called Atossa, which sounds in part somewhat
like Hadassah, that is Esther, chap. 2.7. Hadassah was her own Hebrew name:
and, after she was made Queen, she was called Esther. He is called Darius the
King, as if he were the Only King on earth. His successor Darius in his proud
Embassy to Alexander, called himself the King of Kings, and Cousin of the gods:
and for Alexander, he called him his servant: But Alexander soon after became
his Lord. (...). Plato lib. 3. de l gib. Prove. 21.1.
For the Kingdom of Persia was lost by that Darius, as it had been restored by
this to its former splendor, after the havoc made by Cambyses; who among
other vile acts of his (as Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, according to
the preverb of the Ancients 1 Samuel 24.13.) forbad the building of the Temple
Ezra 4.12. But He who sets up Princes at his pleasure, and turns their hearts
whither soever he will (as the plowman does the watercourse with his paddle,
or the gardener with his hand) turned here the heart of this great King to his
people the Jews: so that he made a new decree for the advancement of the
building, Ezra 5.8. God also seasonably stirred up Haggai, and Zachariah to
quicken the people, (who were soon after their return from Babylon, grown cold
again and careless) and so blessed their Ministry, that the House, that is,
the Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies, was finished in four years space, or
thereabouts, Ezra 6.14. The outward Court, and so the whole Temple, in three
years after that, Antiq. l. 11. c. 4
as Josephus witnesses.

In the sixth moneth] In the 3444. year of the world, Func. Chronel.
as Funccius computeth it, in the Calends of September, (confer chap. 2.19.)
when the Jews were ingathering their harvest, and fruits, and found a dearth
toward. This the Prophet makes use of, pressing it upon the people, as a just
hand of God upon them, for slighting and slacking the rebuilding of his house.
It is good for Gods Ministers to set in with him, to strike while the iron is
hot, to cry, Hear ye the rod, Mic. 6.9
and who has appointed it: for as iron is very soft, and malleable, whiles in
the fire, and as molten metals ar fit for the mould; so when men are under the
cross, they are more easily wrought upon; they will hearken to instruction,
that before laughed at it, as the wild ass does at the horse and his rider, Job
39.18. The wild ass, that is used to the wilderness, though she kick up her
heels, and snuff up the wind at her pleasure, so that they that seek her will
not weary themselves, yet there is a time when she may be taken; in her month
they shall find her, Jer. 2.24.

In the first day of the moneth] Heb. In one day. One for first is ordinary in
both Testaments, Genesis 1.5. Number. 29.1. Dan. 9.1. Mat. 28.1. Joh. 20.1. 1 Cor.
16.2. The time of this Prophecy (as of others, Isa. 1.1. Jer. 1.2, 3, etc.) is
precisely noted, to teach us what account we should make of Gods Oracles, and
inspirations; and how God will one day eckon with us for the helps we have had,
and the time we have enjoyed them. He sets down all: how much more should we,
and live up to our means and mercies, propagating our thankfulnsse into our
practice? Jeremy prophesied forty years, but with ill success: it was his
unhappiness to be Physician to a dying State. Tunc etiam, docta plus valet
art malum.
The Holy Ghost sets a special mark upon these forty years of his
prophesying, Ezekiel. 4.6. by bidding the Prophet lie forty days upon his right
side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, a day for a
year.

came the word of the Lord] i. e. he began to prophecy, Prophetarum ora sunt
Dei os Chrysostom.
as Ezra 5.1. being sent and set awork by God, whose alone it is, to make meet
Ministers of either Testament, 2 Cor. 3.5. to send, gift, and bless them, Jer.
23.21.

by Haggai the Prophet] Heb. by the hand of Haggai, that is, by his means, and
Ministry. See the Note on Mal. 1.1. Haggai signifies merry, and pleasant,
Festivus and laetus.
as at a solemn feast: which name of his excellently suiteth both with the time
of his prophecy, viz. after the return from captivity, see Psalm. 126.1, 2. and
also with the matter whereof he treats, and whereto he drives, Christ, the
Desire of all nations. Will thou be merry at any time? says Seneca, think on
Caesar: can thou be sad, and he be in health? How much more cause have we to
be to be merry in the Lord Christ? Let us keep the feast with all solemnity:
let us keep holy day, (...).
since Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Let this
swallow up all our discontents, and crown the calender of our lives with
continual festivals: Let the ransomed of the Lord return and come to Zion with
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads, etc. Esaias 35.10. The Septuagint
ascribe certain of the Psalms to Haggai, and Zachary, in the titles they
prefix: though some think that the Hallelujah-Psalmes (as they are called)
because they begin and end with Hallelujah, or, Praise ye Lord, were sung by
the Jews, returning out of Babylon; those two Prophets beginning the tune, or
giving the verse (as they call it.) And hereunto the Prophet Jeremy might have
an eye, chap. 31.12. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion,
and shall flow together, to the goodness of the Lord, etc.

unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel] Philo says, he was also called
Barachias, He is called Shesbazzar, Ezra 1.8.
others Phadaias, out of 1 Chronicles. 3.17. His name Zerubbabel signifies, either
Born in Babel, or, Far from confusion. A Prince (of all men) should observe
order, keep the peace. By the Laws of England, a Nobleman cannot be bound to
the peace; because it is supposed that the peace is always bound to him, and
that of his own accord, he will be careful to keep others in good order. But
what a regnum Cyclopicum was at Rome in Nero's days, Quando poterat quisque
ea, quam cuperet potiri, Dio in vit. Neron.
negare licebat nemini? Tum servus cum Domina, praesente Domino suo, and
gladiator cum virgin nobili inspectante patre rem habuit, etc.? Blessed be God
for better times.

Governor of Judah] Or, Duke, Captain, Provincial, President. The manyheaded
Multitude has need of a Guide, who may be (...), peaceable and prudent, Lib.
1. de leg.
(says Plato) to keep and care for the welfare of his subjects. Such an one
was Zerubbabel, Aug. epist. 179
Nobilis genere, nobilior sanctitate, Noble by birth, but more noble by his
piety: drained from the dregs, and sifted from the brannes of the baser sort of
people. In loc M. Pemble.
In the seventeenth year of his age, he led back part of the people from
Babylon to Jerusalem; where he continued Governor for the space of fifty eight
years, says Grynaeus. Those that make Darius in the Text, to be Darius Nothus,
must needs allow him a much longer life and government: which God, say they,
grants to some, because he has something to be done by them. The
Revolution of States may here also be remarked. This people was first governed
by Judges, or Captains: then by Kings, and now by Captains again. So the
Principality of Edom, as it began with Dukes, and rose to Kings, so it returned
to Dukes again, after the death of Hadad, in Moses his time, 1 Chronicles. 1.51.
Gen, 36.43. (...).
Adeo nihil est in vita firmum aut stabile. So uncertain are all things.

and to Joshuah the son of Josedech] A brand plucked out of the fire, Zech.
3.2. and therefore the fitter for such a preferment, Bernard.
ut in alto positus non altum sapiat. David came not to the kingdom, till his
soul was even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131.2. Queen Elizabeth swam to her
crown, through a sea of sorrows. Matthias King of Hungary, was taken from the
prison to the throne. But, to the business: Joshuah the High Priest was a type
of Christ, in regard, Turk. hisi.
1. Of his name, which signifies a Savior. 2. Of his Office of
High Priesthood. 3. Of his partner-agency with Zerubbabel, in reducing the
people home to their own country. The Lord Christ, Acts 3.15. Heb. 4. and 7.
is both our Prince of life, and our merciful and faithful Highpriest, ever
living to make request for us.

the high priest, saying,] Zerubbabel and Jeboshuah were the Chieftains of the
people: and though not themselves in fault, or at least nothing so much, (for
they were both very religious) yet they were not so forward and forth-putting
as they should have been in so excellent a work. Howsoever, if the task be not
done, the Taskmasters are beaten, Exodus 5.14. It is the misery of those, that
are trusted with authority, that their inferiors faults are beaten upon their
backs. If the people gather Manna on the Lords sabbath, Moses and Aaron shall
hear, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments? Calvin in loc.
Exodus 16.28. It is Mr. Calvin's opinion, that Haggai therefore addressed
himself to these two principal persons: to the end that they might join their
forces with him, in reprehending and exciting the people to the Lords work.
When the word and the sword go together, there is great likelihood of much good
to be done. Upon the sword of Charles the Great was written, Vtriusque tabulae
custos. And Queen Elizabeth riding progress once is Suffolk, M. Leighs treat.
of Divin. ep. Ded.
said, that now she saw the reason, why that County was so well governed, for
she observed that all the Justices coming to meet her, had every one his
Minister next to his body.

Verse 2. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying,] This title is often used in
these three last prophecies (eighteen several times in that eighth of Zachary)
because, being to build, they had many enemies; therefore had need of all
encouragement. And Hierom in his Prologue ^oteth it as an act of great courage
in Haggai and Zachary, that against the Edict of King Artaxerxes (or Cambyses)
and the oppositions of Sanballat, and other potent Adversaries, they should
stir up the people to build the Temple: and as an act of heroical faith in the
Prince, priest, and people, to set upon the work, and finish it, Not by might,
nor by power, but by the spirit the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 4.6. See more of this
title in the Note on Mal. 3.17. Doct. 1.

this people say] Words then have their weight: neither are men's tongues their
own: but there is a Lord over them ( Psalm. 12.4.) that will call them to a
strict account of all their waste words, Mat. 12.36, and hard speeches, Jude
15. and then they shall experiment that by their words (which they happly held
but wind) they shall be justified, and by their words condemned, Mat. 12.37.
How good is it therefore to carry a pair of balance betwixt the lips? Nescit
poenitenda loqui qui proferenda prius suo tradidit examini, says Cassiodore;
He that weighs his words before he utters them, shall prevent an
after-reckoning for them.

the time is not come, the time, etc] He repeateth their frivolous and frigid
excuses, in their own very words; that he may the better confute them, Vsus est
(...) ut rei indignitatem amplificaret.
and the sooner bring them to a sight of their sin. Sin and shifting came
into the world together, Genesis 3.12. And this is still the vile poison of our
hearts, that they will needs be naught, and yet never yield, but that there is
reason to be made, and great sense in sinning. These Jews (likely) had both
Scripture and Reason to plead for their backwardness (as there is no wool so
course, but will take some color: and the sluggard is wiser in his own eyes,
Prove. 26.16.
then seven men that can render a reason:) For Scripture: To every thing there
is an appointed time, a set season, such as we can neither alter nor order,
Eccles. 3.1, and verse 3. There is a time to break down, and a time to build
up. And that this time to rebuild the Temple was not yet come, some might
pretend, that the seventy years foretold, Hieronym. R. David.
were not yet fully expired: others (with more show of reason) that they had
been too hasty in laying the foundation long since, as appears by their ill
success, and many adversaries: that, God who had dwelt so long in a
Tabernacle, and was now worshipped at his new-created Altar, would bear with
them, if they first built their own houses, and then be more free to build his
House, which they intended to do hereafter, with great care and cost. This is
still the guise of graceless procrastinatours, to future and fool away their
own salvation. Hereafter, say they, may be time enough, and what need such
have to build the spiritual Temple? In space comes grace, God is more
merciful then so: and at what time soever a sinner repents from the bottom of
his heart, etc. Mat. 23.17.
Fools and blind men (as our Savior calls the Pharisees) that thus stand
trifling, and baffling with God, and their souls, being semper victuri, as
Seneca says, always about to do that, which if not well done, they are
utterly undone for ever: for upon this little point of time hangs the crown of
eternity. The gales of grace are uncertain, the day of grace, (which is very
clear and bright) is usually a short one. Non licet in bello bis peccare, said
Lamachus to a soldier of his brought before him, and pleading he would do so
no more: So God will not suffer men twice to neglect the day of grace, which,
if once past, will never dawn again. Let none therefore when pressed to the
present Now of meeting God by repentance, answer as Antipater King of Macedony
did, when one, presented him a book treating of happiness (...) I am not at
leisure: Or as Archias the Theban, when forewarned of a conspiracy against him,
cast the letters by, with In crastinum seria, and was slain ere the morrow
came. Or as these Cunctators in the Text, that had often in their mouth, The time
is not come, the time etc. lest the very next minute they be cut off by death
from all further time of repentance, acceptance and grace for ever. Men may
purpose, promise, expect a time of healing and happiness, when they shall be
deceived, and find a time of terror and torment, Jer. 14.19. Some, when a
dying, would have given a world for time: as I have heard (says a Reverend
man) one crying day and night call time again: but that could not be. Posthac
occasi^ calva.
As in war, so here, none are permitted to err twice. Time must be taken by
the forelock, as being bald behind.

Verse 3. Then came the Word of the Lord etc.] Then after a short silence, as
it were, Ribera.
profertur Domini quasi cogitata responsio follows the Lords elaborate and
deliberate answer, not without some touch of holy tartness, at their
ingratitude: for, of all things, God can least endure to be slighted, where he
has better deserved. He looks upon such with anger, being grieved at the
hardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. He complains of such with a sigh; Ah
sinful nation, Isa. 1.4. he is ready to rid his stomach of them, verse 24. Ah,
I will ease me etc.

Verse 4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, etc.] Not
covered only, but cieled with cedar, (as the Chaldee here has it) arched and
garnished, as the Greek, carved and trimmed, as Ambrose renders it. Sure, Lib.
3. epist. 12.
either your beds are very soft, or your hearts very hard, that you can, not
only come into the tabernacles of your houses, but give sleep to your eyes,
Psalm. 132.4, 5.
or slumber to your eyelids. Before ye have found a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Good David, could not find in his
heart to dwell in an house of Cedar, when the Ark of God dwelt within curtains,
2 Samuel 7.2. Valiant Vriah, deemed it altogether unfit and unreasonable, that
when the Ark, and Israel, and Judah abode in tents, he should go to his house
to eat, and drink, and to take his ease and pleasure, 2 Samuel 11.11. Solomon
first built an house for God, and then for himself. The Christian Emperors,
Constantine, Theodosius, Honorius, etc. exceeded in building Churches, Turk.
hist. (...). Herodet.
which, from their stateliness were styled Basilica, or places for a King. The
very Turks at this day, though content to dwell in mean and homely houses, yet
their Moschees or Meeting Houses, are very sumptuously built, and set forth. It
is a principle in Nature, that the things of God are elder, and more to be
respected then the things of men. A professor of the Turks law proclaims,
before they attempt any thing, that nothing be done against religion. This is
better then that which was written over the gate of the Senate House in Rome
(which yet is not to be disliked, in its place and order) Ne quid detrimenti
Resp. capiat. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: but with all and
above all, Give unto God the things that are Gods: (...). Mat. 22.21.
The Greek article is twice repeated by our Savior, when he speaks for God,
more then when for Caesar: to show, that our special care should be, to give
God his due, to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then
all other things shall seek us. Cicero.
Caetera aut aderunt, aut caetera non oberunt. But most people are so busied
about their own houses, their cottaeges of clay, the body, that Gods house, 2
Cor. 5.1.
the soul lies wast and neglected: the lean kine eat up the fat: the strength
of the ground is spent in nourishing weeds. Earthly mindedness sucketh the sap
of grace from the heart, as the Ivy does from the Oak, and makes it
unfruitful. Men are so taken up about the world, that they think not on Gods
kingdom: as the Duke of Alva told the French king, Fren. Hist.
who asked him whether he had observed the late great Eclipse? No, said he, I
have so much to do upon earth, that I have no leisure to look toward heaven.
But is not one thing necessary, and all other but by-businesses? And have we
not in our daily prayer, five petitions for spirituals, and but one for
temporals? Are we not taught to make it our first request, that Gods name may
be hallowed, though our turns should not be served? Is not Esau stigmatized
for selling his birthright, for a mess of broth? And is not Shemei chronicled
for a fool, Heb. 12.16.
who, by seeking after his servants, lost his life? Pope Sixtus for a mad man,
that sold his soul to the devil, to enjoy the Popedom for seven years? what
shall it profit a man to win the world and lose his own soul? to win Venice,
and then be hanged at the gates thereof, as the Italian proverb has it? Surely
such a man's loss will be 1. Mat. 16.
Incomparable, 2. Irreparable: for what shall a man give in exchange of his
soul? It was no evil counsel, that was given to John the third, King of
Portugal, to meditate every day a quarter of an hour on that divine sentence.
It would be time well spent to ponder as often and as long together on this Text,
Is it time for you, O ye, that are so sharp set upon the world, so wholly taken
up about your private profits, your pleasures and preferments, to sit in your
ceiled houses, as Ahab once did in his ivory Palace, or Nebuchadnezzar in his
house of the kingdom (as he vain-gloriously calls it, Dan. 4.30.) and Gods
house lie waste, and his service neglected, to whom we owe our selves, 1 Cor.
6.19. our lives Mat. 16.25. our parents, children, friends, means Mat. 19.29.
our gifts and abilities, 1 Cor. 4.7. our honors and offices, Psalm. 2.10, 11,
12. all that we are, and have? How justly may God curse our blessings, Job
16.15.16.18, 21. 1 Cor. 12.21.
(as he threateneth these selfe-seeking, God-neglecting Jews both here, and
Mal. 2.2.) scatter brimstone upon our houses, drp up our roots beneath, and
above, cut off our branches, drive us from light into darkness, and chase us
out of the world with his terrors. Col. 3.2. Phil. 2.21.
Surely such are the (ceiled) dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of
him that knows not God, that inverteth the order appointed of him, by
coveting, not the best guists, but an evil covetousness, Hab. 2.9. by setting
his affections, not on things above, but on things on the earth, by seeking
their own things, every man, and not the things of Jesus Christ.

Verse 5. Now therefore thus says the Lord of hosts] Haggai was but a young
man, says Epiphanius: Now therefore, lest any one that heard him, should
despise his youth, and slight his doctrine, he shows his authority, he comes to
them cum priviligio, he delivers not the conceptions of his own brain, but the
Word and mind of God. For as Chrysostom says of St. Paul, so may we say of all
the rest of the pen men of the Holy Scripture, Cor Pauli est cor Christi, their
heart is Christ's own heart: and their words are to be received, reverenced and
ruminated, not as the words of mortal men, but (as they are indeed) the words
of the everliving God, 1 These. 2.13. Greg. in Reg 3
Excellently spoke he who called the Scripture Cor and animam Dei, the heart
and soul of God. It is, every whit of it, divinely inspired, or breathed by
God, says the Apostle, and is profitable both for reproof, and for instruction
in righteousness. 2 Timothy 3.16.
See an instance hereof in this Text, together with the Prophets rhetorical
artifice in first chiding, and now directing them to reprove, and not withal to
instruct, is to snuff the lamp, but not power in oil, that may feed it.

consider your wayes] Heb. set your hearts upon them, diligently recogitate,
and recognize your evil doings; and so shall ye soon find out the cause of your
calamity, Judge your selves, so shall ye not be judged of the Lord, accept of
the puntshment of your iniquity: so iniquity shall not be your ruin: your
ruth, but not your rums. Capite consilium ex rebus ipsis, velexperiment is
Learn at least by the things ye have suffered: Let experience the mistrisse of
fools, reduce you to a right mind. Lay to heart your manifold miseries, those
(...) as one calls them, Free Schoolmasters, cursed enough and crabbed, but
such as whereby God opens men's ears to discipline, and eyes to observation of
his works, and their own ways; Job. 36.8, 9, 10.
according to that of Ezechiel, chap. 40.4. Son of man behold with thine eye,
and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall show thee
etc. the senses must be exercised that the heart may be affected with the word,
and works of God; according to that mine cye affects my heart, Lam. 3.51. and
Solomon gat much of his wisdom by observation, as appears by his
Ecclesiastes which some have not unfitly called Solomon's Soliloquy. It is but
little that can be learned in this life, without due and deep Consideration:
which is nothing else but an act of the Practical understanding, whereby it
reflects and stays upon its own intentions: and, comparing them with the rule,
it proceeds to lay a command upon the will and Affections to put them in
execution. Thus David considered his ways, and finding all out of order, he
turned his feet to Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. And, to still Gods enemies,
Psalm. 4.4. he bids them commune with their own hearts and be still, or make a
pause, viz. till they have brought their consideration to some good upshot and
conclusion. For when consideration has soundly enlightened a man's mind,
informed his judgment according to that light (that candle held to his mind)
and determined is will according to that judgment, it must needs bring forth
sound resolutions, purposes and practices; as it did in the Ninivites, Ephraim,
Ier. 31.19. Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. the Prodigal, Luke 15. the Church in Hosea,
chap. 2.6.7. She considered she was crossed and hedged in with afflictions, and
resolves to return to her first husband. The contrary inconsiderateness is
complained of as a public mischief. Ier. 6.8. and 8.6. and 12.11. They have
laid it waste: and being waste it mourns unto me: The whole land lies wasle,
because no man lays it to heart, that is, considers deeply of the cause of
its desolation. Without this, though a man had all poslible knowledge locked up
in his brain and breast, it would be but as rain in the middle region, where it
does no good; as the horn in the Unicorns head, where it helps no disease; or
as fire in a flintstone insensible and unprofitable, till beaten out by sound
consideration: This makes knowledge to become expreimental, as Psalm. 116.6. and
Romans 8.1, 2, this is to follow on to know the Lord. Hos. 6.3. as without this,
men's knowledge is but a flash, and may end in ignorance and profaneness:
because never formed and seated in their hearts, never disgested by due
meditation and application to their own consciences.

Verse 6. Ye have sown much and bring in little] This was visible to them: and
they are called upon to consider it. The Philosopher affimes that man is
therefore the wisest of creatures, because he alone can compute and consider.
And yet how little does man respect this privilege, without which he were to
be sorted with beasts, or mad men? God harkened and heard, but no man spoke
advisedly, no man repented of his wickedness saying, what have I done? Jer.
8.6.
no man humbled himself under the mighty hand of God, though god thrust him
down, as it were, with a thump upon the back. Most men's minds are as ill set as
their eyes are; neither of them look inwards. Lord, says the Prophet, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see etc. Esaias 26.11. So,
when Gods rods call for reformation, they will not hear it and who has
appointed it, but they shall hear Job 33.15. Conscience, their domestical
Chaplain, shall ring this peale in their cares, Consider your ways: Ye have
sowed much but brought in little etc. Omnia fuistis and nihil profuit, you have
tried all ways to live, and 'twill not be, labored all night, and taken
nuthing, labored in the very fire, and wearied your selves for very vanity
Hab. 2.13. as those that seek after the Philosophers stone, the most they can
look for is their labor for their pains. Either vanity or violence has
exhausted you, as Zach. 8.10. and Gods vengeance is visible enough in those
secret issues and draines of expense at which your estates run out, because he
puts not his holy finger on the hole in the bottom of the bag. For it is his
blessing alone that makes rich Prove. 10 23. and except he build the house,
they labor in vain that build it Psalm. 127.1. There is a curse upon unlawful
practices, though men be never so industrious, as in Iehojachim. Ier. 22. And
all their policies without dependence upon him for direction and success, are
but Arena sine calce sand without lime; they will not hold together, when we
have most need of them, but fall alunder, like untempered mortar. Hence the
Psalmist assures us, that Promotion comes neither from the East, Psalm. 75.6.
nor from the West, nor yet from the South where the warm sunshine is, but
from the Lord: he puts down one, and sets up another. So Hannah, The
Lord, says she, makes po^r, and makes rich: he brings low, and lifts up
1 Samuel 2.7. And albeit no man knows either love or hatred by all that is
before them, because all things come alike to all Eccles. 9.1, 2. (God makes a
scatter as it were, of these outward commodities: good men gather them, bad men
scramble for them) yet if he blow upon a man's estate, and by losses and crosses
so beat him down with his own bare hand (as here in the text) that either he
has not to eat, or dare not cat his fill, for fear of wanting another day, or
if he do cat, yet the staff of bread being broken, and for want of Gods
concurrence, he eats and is not satisfied etc. he has but prisoners pittance,
which will neither keep him alive, nor yet suffor him to dye, he is to be very
sensible of it, to consider his ways, and looking upon his penury (as a piece
of the curse for neglect of Gods service Levit. 26.14. etc.) to deprecate that
last and worst of miseries, the judgment of pining away in their iniquities
Verse 39. This is worse then any scarcity, then any bulimy or doggish appetite,
a disease common in times of famine. The righteous cateth to the satisfying of
his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want Prove. 14.25. As his belly
prepares deceit Job 15.35. so it suffers deceit; mposturam faciunt and
patiuntur, as the Emperor said of them, that sold glass for pearls. Fumos
vendidi^, fumo pereat, as Another. Ye looked for much and lo it came to
little, as it follows verse 9. and why? but because they thought every little
too much for God, and all well saved that was kept from him, Mal. 3.9, 10, 11.
See the Notes there. The Popish Commentators upon this text call upon the
people, (if ever they mean to thrive) to keep holidays; to hear Masses etc.
yea some Priests in Gersons time publicly preached to the people, Non crit
caecus, nec subito morietur, nec carebit sufficienti sustentatione.
that whosoever would hear a Mass, he should not fall blind on that day, nor
be taken away by sudden death, nor want sufficient sustenance etc. This was
more then they had good warrant to promise; and yet they are believed. Shall
not we learn to live by faith, to trust in the Lord and do good? so shall thou
dwelt in the land, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3. The wicked in the
fullness of their sufficiency are in straits. Jeb. 20.22. Contrarily, the
godly, in the fullness of their straits are in a sufficiency: and this is the
gain of godliness. 1 Timothy 6.6. Piety is never without a well-contenting
sufficiency, it has treasure that saileth not, bags that wax not old, Luke
12.33. And shall have hereafter riches without rust, wealth without want, store
without sore, beauty without blemish, mirth without mixture etc.

Verse 7. Consider your wayes] See ver. 5. Do it early, and earnestly. Excutite
vos, iterumque excutite, as Tremellius renders that in Zeph. 2.1. Search you,
search you, O Nation not worthy to be beloved. So Lam. 3.40. Let us search and
try our ways. Not search only but try, and as it were sift them to the brann
So 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves, as it were with redoubled diligence, in a most needful but much
neglected duty, of dealing with your own hearts. But if ye will not, see that
flaming place Ezech. 16.43. If men will not judge themselves, God will: as
though scholars will not scan their verses, their masters will. Men are as
loath to review their actions, and read the blurred writings of their own
hearts, as School-boyes are to parse their lessons and false Latins they have
made. But as he who will not cast up his books, his books will cast up him at
length: so those that will not consider their ways, and take themselves to
task, shall find that sparing a little pains at first will double it in the
end: and that the best that can come of this forlorn negligence, is the bitter
pangs of repentance. Oh therefore that, with Solomon's wise man, we had our eyes
in our heads, and not in the corners of the earth! Eccles. 2.14. 1 King. 6.4.
And that our eyes were, like the windows in Solomon's Temple, broad inward,
that we might see our sins to confession, so should we never see them to our
confusion. The Israelites confessed their murmuring and stubbornness, when God
sent evil Angels amongst them, that is, some messengers of his wrath and
displeasure. The Prophet Haggai here would have their posterity consider and
better consider, since the hand of God was so heavy upon them, and that he came
against them as in were with a drawn sword, how they might disarme his just
indignation by a speedy reformation. To which purpose he adds

Verse 8. Go up to the mountain, and bring wood and.c] Set upon the work, and
be serious: build the Temple with like zeal as Baruc repaired the wall Neh.
3.20. acendit scipsum, he burst out into an heat, being angry with his own and
others sloth: and so finished his task in a short time. It must be an earnest,
upright, and constant endeavor of reformation, that must follow upon our sense
of sin, and fear of wrath: or else all will be but mo^us aliquis evanidus (as
Calvin on the text has it) a very slash: It will be but as prints made on
water; as soon as finger is off, all is out. It was certainly therefore an
excellent saying of Luther (though condemned for heretical by Pope Leo the
tenth) Optima and aptissima poenitentia est nova vita. Amendment of life is the
best repentance: neither is there any wiser way to break off our sins, then to
practice the contrary duties. He that repents with a contradiction (says
Tertullian) God will pardon him with a contradiction. Thou repentest and yet
continuest in thy sin. God will pardon thee, and yet send thee to hell. Those
that will have God to take pleasure in them, as in his Temple, to love them and
come unto them, and make his abode with them Ioh. 14.23. to dwell in them, and
walk in them (as they did in Solomon's porch, and other walks and galleries
about the Temple Zach. 3.7.) to be glorified in them (accounting himself to
receive, as it were, a new being, by those inward conceptions of his glory, and
those outward honors we do to his name) they must go up to the Mountain, not
of Lebanon (though that was a pleasant and plentiful place Deuteronomy. 3.25.) but of
Heaven, that Hill from whence comes their help, and bring wood, (growing wood
Cant. 1.17. living stones 1 Pet. 2.5.) and build the house 1 Cor. 3.9. Ephesians.
2.22. laying faith for a foundation, love for a covering, having hope for a
pinnacle, humility for a pavement etc. washing it with tears, sweeping it by
repentance, beautifying it with holiness, perfuming it with prayers, hanging
it with sincerity etc. So shall Christ the King be held in the galleries Cant.
7.5. he shall covet their beauty Psalm. 45.12. and be held fast bound to them in
the bands of pure affection, and spiritual wedlock. He will take pleasure in
them, as he did in those that prayed in or toward the Temple Deuteronomy. 12.11. 1
King. 8.29. as he did in Daniel that man of desires chap. 9.23. in David Gods
corculum or darling 1 Samuel 13.14. in his Hephsibah or sweetheart the Church
Esaias. 62.4. called elsewhere the beloved of his soul, or his beloved soul:
And he will be glorified in them by their spiritual sacrifices 1 Pet. 2.5.
reasonable services Romans 12.1. performed in spirit and in truth Ioh. 4.24. by
some one of which God is more glorified then by all the actions of unreasonable
or unregenerate creatures.

Verse 9. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little] Spes in oculis, luctus
in manibus, as Hierome here. The hope of unjust men perishes Prove. 11.7. etiam
spes valentissima his likelyest hope, as some render it: he thinks himself
sure, as Esau did of the blessing, but he only thinks so: God cuts off the
meat from his mouth Joel 1.16. takes away his corn in the time thereof Hos.
2.9. confutes him in his confidences, which prove like the brooks of Tema.
Job. 6.17. and serve him, as Absaloms mule did her master: his high hopes hop
beadlesse, as One phraseeh it. It falls out with him as with those perverse
Israelites in the wilderness made to tack about two and forty times, after
that they thought themselves sure of the promised land.

I did blow upon it] i. e. I dispersed it with case. By a like phrase (for
sense) God is said Esa. 25.11. to spread forth his hands in the midst of his
enemies, as he that swimmeth spreads forth his hands to swim: and to bring
down their pride, together with the spoils of their hands, with greatest
facility. The motion in swimming is easy, not strong: for strong violent
strokes in the water would rather sink then support. In like sort God blasted
their treasure, or blew their hoards hither and thither, he consumed their
substance and cursed their blessings, as Mal. 2.2. See the Note there.

why says the Lord of hosts? because of mine house that is wast etc.] Their
sin of preferring their own private interests and self-respects before Gods
work and service is here repeated, and exaggerated, as the ground and cause of
all their calamities: And all little enough to bring them to a sound and
serious sight and hatred of their sins. Such a deep kind of drowsinesse has
surprised us, for most part, that whereas every judgment of God should be a
warning-peale to repent, we be like the smiths dog, who the harder the anvile
is beaten on, lies by and slecpeth the sounder: Or like the silly hen, which
loses her chickens, one by one by the devouring kite, and yet as altogether
insensible of her loss, continues to pick up what lies before her. This is to
swelter and pine away in iniquity, as if nothing could awaken men Lev. 26.39.
and it is threatened last of all, as worse then all their losses, captivities
etc. A lethargy is no less deadly then the most tormenting disease. Let
ministers therefore, by such forcible and quick questions as this in the Text,
and otherwise, arrouse their hearers (as they once did here their dear friends
in the sweating sickness, who, if suffered to sleep, dyed certainly) that
they may awake, and recover themselves out of the snare of the devil etc. It
is well observed by One, that the devils particula^ sin is not once mentioned
in Genesis, because he was not to be restored by repentance: But the sin of Man
is enlarged in all the circumstances. And why this? but that he might be
sensible, ashamed, and penitent for his sin. They say in philosophy, that the
foundation of natural life is feeling; no feeling, no life. And that the more
quick and nimble the sense of feeling is in a man, the better is his
constitution. Think the same of life spiritual, and of that hidden man of the
heart, as St. Peter calls him.

and ye run every man unto his own house] Or, ye take pleasure every man in his
own house. q. d. Ye are all self-seekers, private-spirited persons, ye are all
for your own interests: like the snaile that seldom stirrs abroad, and never,
without his house upon his back: or like the Eagle, which when he flies
highest, has still an eye downward to the prey, that he minds to seize. In
parabola ovis capras suas querunt. Romans 16.
They serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellyes: or if they serve
Christ, it is for gain, as Children will not say their prayers, unless we
promise them their breakfasts. In serving him, they do but serve themselves
upon him; as those carnal Capernaites did Ioh. 6. Well might the Apostle
complain as Philip. 2.21. And Another since, that it is his Pleasures. his
Profit, and his Preserment, that is the natural man's Trinity: and his carnal
self that is these in Unity. May he be but warm in his own seathers, he little
regards the dangers of the house. He is totus in se, wholly drawn up into
himself, and insensible of either the public good, or common danger: though
the water-pot and spear be taken from the bolster, yet he stirrs not. Far
enough from St. Paul's frame of spirit or speech, Who is offended, and I burn
not? far enough from his care and cumber, anxiety and solicitude for the house
of God, and prosperity of his people 2 Cor. 11.28. (...)
Nothing like they are to Ambrose, who was more troubled for the state of the
Church, then for his own dangers? Nothing like Melanethon, of whom it is said,
that the ruins of Gods house, and the miseries of his people made him almost
neglect the death of his most beloved children. True goodness is
publike-spirited though to private disadvantage: as Nature will venture its own
particular good for the general, so will grace much more. Heavy things will
ascend to keep out vacuity, and preserve the Universe. A stone will fall down
to come to its own place, though it break it self in twenty pieces. It is the
ingenuity of saints, in all their desires and designs to study Gods ends more
then their own: to build Gods house with neglect of their own, as Solomon did:
to drown all self-respects in his glory, and the public good, as Nehemiah did:
of whom it might be more truly said, then the Heathen Historian did of Cato,
Di^. Lucan.
that he did (...), over-love the Commonwealth, and that he did -- toti
genitum se credere mundo, believe himself born for the benefit of mankind.

Verse 10, 11. Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from rain, etc.] It Is
never well with man (whose life is ever in fuga, as the Philosopher has it,
and must be maintained by meat, as the fire is by fuel) till God hear the
heaven, and the heaven hear the earth, and the earth hear the corn, the wine,
and the oil, and these hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.21, 22. where we may see the
genealogy of these good creatures resolved into God. The earth (though a kind
mother) cannot open her bowels, and yield seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater, if not watered from above. The heaven (though the storehouse of Gods
good treasure, which he opens to our profit and nourishment, Deuteronomy. 28.12.)
cannot drop down fatness upon the earth, if God close it up, and withold the
seasonable showers. This the very Heathens acknowledged in their fictions of
Jupiter and Juno: Strabo.
and the Metapontines, having had a good harvest, consecrated (...), an harvest
cut in gold, to their God, in the Temple at Delphos. Now, when a rabble of
Rebels shall conspire against God, and fight against him with his own weapons,
as Jehu did against Jeboram with his own men, what can He do less then cut
them short? then make them know the worth of his benefits by the want of them?
then call for a drought, ( verse 11.) and so for a dearth, (which inevitably
followed in those hot countries) and consequently for pestilence and sword, the
usual concomitants? Pro cherebh legunt cherib.
the Septuagint for drought here (by a mistake of points) translate a sword.
And in the Original there is an elegancy past Englishing. Because my house is
chareb, that is, wast, therefore I have called for a choreb, a drought, or for
a chereb, a sword, which shall in like sort lay your land wast, and make your
houses desolate: according to that is threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. and Matthew. 23.38.
And in the very next chap. verse 7. Christ tells his Apostles that those
refractary Jews, and others, that rejected Him the true Temple, in whom the
Godhead dwelt bodily, that is Essentially (and not in clouds and ceremonies,
Col. 2.9.
as once between the Cherubims, which they used to call Shechinah) because they
loathed the heavenly Manna, therefore they should be pined with famine. They
that would have none of the Gospel of peace, should taste deeply of the miseries
of war. They that despised the only medicine of their souls, should be
visited with pestilence. The black horse is ever at the heels of the red; and
the pale, of the black, Rev. 6.4. As there has been a conjuncture of offenses,
so there will be of miseries: A conflux of them abides the neglecters of Gods
House, the contemners of his Gospel. Vrsine tells us, that those that fled out
of England for Religion in Queen Mary's days acknowledged that that great
inundation of misery came justly upon them, for their unprofitablenesse under
the means of grace, which they had enjoyed in King Edwards days. Zanchy
likewise tells us, that when he first came to be Pastor at Clavenna, there
fell out a grievous pestilence in that Town, so that in seven months space,
there died 1200. persons. Their former Pastor Mainardus, that man of God, as
he calls him, had often foretold such a calamity, Zanch. Miscel. ep. ad
Lantgrav.
for their profaneness and Popery: But he could never be believed, till the
plague had proved him a true Prophet; and then they remembered his words, and
wished they had been warned by him. Let us also fear, Am. 5.12. Peccata ossea i.
e. fortia.
lest for our many and bony sins (as the Prophets expression is) but
especially, for our hateful and horrible contempt of his servants and services
(never the like known) we pull upon our land Amos his famine, not of bread, but
(which is a thousand-fold worse) of hearing the words of the Lord. A famine
long since foretold and feared by our Martyrs and Confessors; Am. 8.11.
and now, if ever (if God forefend not) in procinctu to fall upon us, as the
most unworthy and unthankful people that ever the Sun of heaven beheld, or the
sun of Christ's Gospel shone upon so fair, and so long together. The best way of
prevention is prevision, and reformation: beginning at our own, as Gidcon did
at his fathers household, Judge. 6.27. And the best Almanac we can rely upon for
seasonable weather, and the lengthening of our tranquillity is our obedience to
God, love to our neighbors, care of our selves, etc.

Verse 12. Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, etc.] So mighty in
operation, so quick and powerful is the good word of God in the mouths of his
faithful Ministers, when seconded and set on by his holy Spirit. See for this,
Esaias 55.10, 11. Jer. 23.28, 29. Act. 19.20. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Heb. 4.12. See
that scala coeli, ladder of heaven, as One calls it, Romans 10.14, 15. and
consider how mightily the word of God grew and prevailed in those primitive
times. It spread through the world like a Sun beam, says Eusebius: it was
carried about into all places as on Eagles, or rather as on Angels wings.
Athanasius of old, and Luther alate were strangely upheld and prospered against
a world of Opposites to the truth they preached. Melch. Ad^m. in vit. Farel.
Farellus gained five great cities with their territories to Christ. How
admirably and effectually King Edward the sixth was wrought upon by a sermon of
Bishop Ridleys, touching works of charity; see his life written by Sir John
Heywood, Page 169, 170, etc. It is the spirit that quickens the seed of the
word, and makes it prolificall, and generative. And as in the body there are
veins to carry the blood, and arteries to carry the spirits that quicken the
blood; so is it with the word and spirit in the soul. If Gods Spirit open not
man's heart, the word cannot enter. If he illighten not both Organ and Object,
Christ, though never so powerfully preached, is both unkent, and unkist, as the
Northern Proverb has it: The word heard profited them not, because not mixed
with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. They heard it only with the
hearing of the ear, with that gristle that grew on the outside of the head:
whereas they should have drawn up the inward ear to the outward, that one and
the same sound might have pierced both. But this all that hear cannot do,
because all are not of God, Joh. 8.47. and so have not his ear-mark, spiritual
senses habitually exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult. they have an
heavy ear, which is a singular judgment, Esaias 6.10.

With all the remnant of the people] i.e. The generality of the returned
captives, followed their leaders. A remnant they are called, because but few in
comparison of those many hedge-rogues Mr. Dyke calls them, potters they are
called, 1 Chro. 4.23. men of base and low spirits, that dwelt still in Babylon
among plants and hedges: being the base brood of those degenerated Israelites,
who when liberty was proclaimed for their return to Jerusalem, chose rather to
get their living by making pots for the king of Babylon. These are ancient, or
rather obsolete things, as Junius renders it, worn out and forgotten: and
indeed they deserve to be utterly forgotten, and not written, or reckoned among
the living in Jerusalem, Esaias 4.3.

Obeyed the voice of the Lord their God] with the obedience of faith: and this
they did by the good example of their Rulers. Thus, when Crispus the chief
Ruler of the Synagogue believed, many of the Corinthians believed also, Acts
18.8. When the kings of Judah were good or evil, the people were so likewise.
Great men are the looking-glasses of their country: according to which, most
men dress themselves. Qualis Rex, talis grex. Why compellest thou the
Gentiles, said Paul to Peter, sc. by thine example, to Judaize, Gal. 2.14.

and the words of Haggai the Prophet] whose mouth God was pleased to make use
of. And this is added for a confirmation of the Prophets calling to the work;
because of long time before, there had been no Prophet among the people, nor
any to tell how long, as the Church complains, Psalm. 74.9.

as the Lord their God had sent him] Heb. according as the Lord their God had
sent him, after the same manner they heard, and obeyed the Prophet, as the Lord
had sent him: they did not wrest his words to a wrong sense: nor did they
question his Commission; but receiving it as the word, not of man, but of God,
they set forthwith upon the work, yielding as prompt and present obedience, as
if God with his own mouth had immediately spoken to them from heaven.

and the people did fear before the Lord] as if He himself had been visibly
present in his own person. So Saint Peter's hearers, Acts 10.33. Now therefore,
say they, we are all here present before God, to hear all things commanded thee
of God. If young Samuel had known that it was the Lord that called him once and
again, he would not have returned to his bed to sleep. If men were well
persuaded that the God of heaven bespeaks them by his faithful Ministers, they
would not give way to wilful wanderings, but hear as for life, and fear to do
any thing unworthy of such a presence: they would work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, yea work hard at it, as afraid to be taken with their task
undone. Psalm. 103.^3 Eccles. 12.
They that fear the Lord will keep his covenant, says David. Fear God and keep
his commandments, says Solomon. And, in every nation he that fears God and
works righteousness, is accepted of him, says Peter, Acts 10.35.

Verse 13. Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger] Or, Angel. See the Note on
Mal. 1.1. Then speaks] Namely on the four and twentieth day of the month, as
it is in the last verse: until which day they had been building, for three
weeks together. But Governor Tatnai and his accomplices came upon them, and
discouraged the people, and hindered the work, Ezra 5.3. It was but need full
therefore, that Gods command should be repeated, and a special promise added,
I am with you, says the Lord. Where we may well take up that of Tully
concerning Brutus his Laconicall Epistle, Quam multa, quam paucis! how much in
a little. I am with you, says the Lord, you need not therefore fear, what man
can do unto you. God is All-sufficient to those that are Altogether his. See 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Cint. 2.15
The Church is called Jehovah Shammah, that is, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35.
God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved, Psalm. 46.5. Immota
manet, may better be her Motto, then Venice's. She is surely invincible, Zach.
12.5, 6, 7. as having a mighty Champion, even the holy One of frael: and this
makes her (though but a Virgin) to laugh to scorn her proudest enemies: yea, to
shake her head at them, Esaias 37.22, 23 as rather to be pitied then envied.
There were they in great fear, (says David, of the Churches enemies) for why?
God is in the generation of the righteous, Psalm. 14. Hence those Philistims
were so woe-begone, 1 Samuel 4.7. And the Egyptians no less, Exodus 14.25. Let us
flee, say they, from the face of Israel for the Lord fights for them. What
shall we then say to these things? says Paul, (who had often heard when he
was in the enemies hand, Fear not, I am with thee) If God be for us, who can be
against us? who dare be so foolhardy? so ambitious of his own destruction? Has
ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4. Where is Pharaoh,
Nero, Nebuchadnezzar, etc? Was it safe for these, or any any other to provoke
the Lord to anger? were they stronger then he? Oh that men would (according to
Solomon's counsel) meddle with their match, and not contend with him that is
mightier then they! Esth. 7.8.
Can God be with his people, and see them abused to his face? Will they force
the Queen also before him in the house? Will they, Giant-like, fight against
God? will they needs touch the apple of his eye, that tenderest piece of the
tenderest part? Will they invade his portion, plunder him of his jewels, pull
the signet from his right hand? Surely God is so with his people, that as he
takes notice of the least courtesy done to them to reward it, (even to a cup
of cold water) so of the least affront, or offense to revenge it, be it but a
frown, or a frump, Genesis 4.6. Number. 12.10. Better a millstone were hanged, etc.
Better anger all the witches in the country, then one of Gods zealous
witnesses, Rev. 11.5. Death cannot hurt them, Psalm. 23.3. Hell could no more
hold them (the pains of hell gat hold on David, but he was delivered, Psalm.
116.3.) then the Whale could hold Jonas: It must needs render them up again,
because God is with them. Now I had rather be in hell (said Luther) with God,
then in heaven without him, and it were far safer for me.

Verse 14. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, etc. Here Is the
Appendix of the foregoing sermon, whereof we have heard but the brief Notes.
That one word, I am with you, seconded and set on by Gods holy Spirit, set them
all awork. How forcible are right words? Job 6.25
One seasonable truth falling on a prepared heart, has often a strong and sweet
operation, sc. when God is pleased to work with it, and make it effectual:
this, man cannot do, no more then the husbandman can make an harvest. The
weapons of our warfare are mighty, 2 Cor. 10.4
through God, to the pulling down of strongholds. Luther having heard
Staupicius say, that that is kindly repentance which begins from the love of
God, found from that time forward the practice of repentance far sweeter to him
then before. Galeacius Caracciolus, an Italian Marquess, was converted by an
apt similitude used by Peter Martyr, reading on the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. Dr. Taylour, Martyr, blessed God, that ever he became
fellow-prisoner to that Angel of God, (as he called him) John Bradford.
Senarclaeus (in his Epistle to Bucer, prefixed before the history of the death
of John Diarius, slain by his own brother, as Abel was, for religions sake) I
remember, says He, when he and I were together at Newburg, the day before his
slaughter, he gave me a great deal of grave and gracious counsel, Ego vero
illius oratione sic incendebar, ut cum eum disserentem audirem, Spiritus Sancti
verba me audire existimarem, i. e. I was so stirred up with his discourse, as
if I had heard the Holy Ghost himself speaking unto me; so fervent was he, and
full of life; for he first felt what he spoke, and then spoke what he felt. So
should all do, that desire to speak to purpose; and then pray to God, as for a
door of utterance, so for a door of entrance to be opened unto them; such as
St. Paul had to the heart of Lydiae, and as Bishop Ridley had to the heart of
good King Edw. 6. whereof before.

and they came and did work. The Governors also, by overseeing others, and
ruling the business by their discretion. Where Gods glory and the common good
is concerned, all sorts must set to their helping hand.

Verse 15. In the four and twentieth day] See the Note on verse. 13. The time is
diligently noted, to teach us to take good note of the moments of time, wherein
matters of moment have been, by Gods help, begun, continued, and perfected in
the Church. This will be of singular use, both for the increase of faith, and
of good affection in our hearts.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. IN the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the moneth]
This is the Preface to the fourth sermon, as some reckon it: noting the exact
time when it was delivered. See the Notes on chap. 1.1. and 15.

came the word of the Lord] This he often inculcateth, to set forth the truth
of his calling, and validity of his commission. See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 5.

by the Prophet Haggai] Heb. by the hand of the Prophet. See the Note on Mal.
1.1.

Verse 2. Speak now to Zerubbabel, etc.] The better to hearten them on in the
work, the Prophet is sent again to them, with a like message as before. Note
here. 1. That there are none so forward for God and his work, but may stand in
need of continual quickening: there being more snares and back biasses upon
earth, then there are stars in heaven: and the good gift of God having so
much need of righting up: For, like a dull sea-coal-fire, if it be not now and
then blown, or stirred up, though there be no want of fuel, yet will of it
self at length dye and go out. Besides that, every inch, every artery of our
bodies, if it could, would swell with hellish venom to the bigness of the
hugest Giant, that it might make resistance to the work of Gods sanctifying
Spirit. Heb. 10.24
Let us therefore consider one another, and study every man his brothers case,
to stir up, or whet on to love and good works. God will not forget this our
labor of love, but abundantly both regard and reward it, Mal. 3.16. See the
Notes there. 2. That continual preaching makes men continue in well-doing.
Therefore it was, that Barnabas was sent to Antioch, Acts 11.22, 23. who, when
he came and had seen the grace of God was glad, and exhorted them all, that
with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. And hence also it was,
that Paul and Barnabas ( chap. 14.21.) returned again to Lystra, and to
Iconium, and Antioch, confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them
to continue in the faith, etc. And ordaining Preachers every where for that
very purpose, for the increase of their knowledge, for the strengthening of
their faith, for the help of their memories, and for the quickening of their
affections. Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi sed saepe cadendo. Gods tender plants
need be often watered, that they may spring and sprout. Plantas tenellas
frequentius adaquare proderit. Primas.


and to the residue of the people] Non enim sacris Eleasiniis, quae in vulgus
spargi nefas erat similia sunt oracula Dei, says an interpreter here. Gods
oracles are not to be hid from the common sort, as Sibylla's were, and as the
Popish Doctors hold, lest men should be made heretics thereby, that is, right
believers. Grynaus.
It is heresy, says One of them to read the scriptures. It was the invention
of the devil, says Another. An husbandman reading the scriptures was possessed,
says a third. It is not needful for the common sort to know more of Gods mind
then the Articles of the Creed, says Aquinas, Bellarmine etc. John Barclay in
his Parenesis, excusing the church of Rome for taking away the scriptures from
the Vulgar, says thus, Sed de his quoque providit Ecclesia concionibus, in
quibus Evangelia referuntur etc. But for this, the Church has made sufficient
provision by appointing Sermons to be made upon the Gospels for the day, and by
permitting books of devotion wherein much use is made of the holy Scriptures.
And for the historical part of the old Testament, says he, men may read
Josephus his Antiquities, where it is set down more plainly and plentifully
then-in the Bible etc. But I am weary of raking in this foul channel.

Verse 3. Who is left amongst you that saw this house in her first glory?] Some
such there were amongst them (as is here employed) and these must needs be very
old, sixscore at least, some say more. Zorobabel might well be one of these;
for he was a chiefetaine in the first year of Cyrus, Ezra 2.2. And Jehoshuah
the High Priest might be another: for he came out of Babylon with Zorobabel at
the same time Ezra 2.22. We see by experience, that men's lives are daily
shortened. Natural reasons whereof may be these. 1. Untimely marriages. 2.
Cloying our bodies with variety of meats, and so digging our own graves with
our own teeth. 3. Much ease and delicacy. The supernatural reason may be, that
so the world may sooner come to an end. God makes have to have the number of
his Elect fulfilled, and therefore dispatcheth away the generations, shorteneth
life for his Elects sake, fetches home his pilgrims, makes their days few
though evil ( Genesis 49.) takes them away from the evil to come etc. Bern.
death being to them arumnarum requies (as Chaucers Motto was) yea janua vitae,
porta coeli, the daybreak of eternal brightness.

and how do ye see it now?] It is a part of old men's prudence rightly to
compare things long since past with things present, and so to conjecture at
things to come. Thus the prudent person, by discourse of reason, foreseeth an
evil and hides himself, when the young fool passes on and is punished.

is it not in your eyes] that is in your thoughts; for God takes notice of the
inward workings of the heart 1 Samuel 16.7. Psalm. 139.2. 1 King. 8.39. For he
made the heart, and must therefore know all that is in it: as a watch-maker
knows all the wheels and motions of the watch. He also will bring every secret
thing into judgment Ecles. 12.14. Therefore thought is not free (as foolish
folk dote either from the notice of his eye (he had soon found out these Jows,
when they did but despise the day of small things in their hearts Zach. 4.10.)
or from the censure of his mouth Heb. 4.12, 13. Romans 7.14. (the law is
spiritual and meets with involuntary motions to sin, ver. 7.) Or lastly, from
the stroke of his hand which is a mighty hand 1 Pet. 5.6. and falls very heavy
Deuteronomy. 29.19. even for a root of bitterness, as it is there, for vain thoughts
Ier. 4.14. how much more for mischievous, murtherous, covetous, vainglorious
and adulterous thoughts etc. It were good therefore to write upon walls and
windows (yea would it were written upon the tables of our hearts) that short
Motto, which as short as it is, yet our memories are shorter, Cave, Deus videt.
Take heed, God looks on: for he is omnipresent and omniscient.

is it not in your eyes in comparison as nothing?] A mere Non-ens or nullity?
not fit to be named in the same day with the former Temple? For, first Cyrus
appointed the full proportion of this second House, the height thereof
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits Ezra. 6.3. which
was but one half so big as Solomous Temple. Herod indeed, Lib. 15. Ant. cap. 14.
to curry favor with the Jews (which yet would never be) built upon Solomon's
foundation, and bestowed a great deal of cost, if we may believe Josephus. But
so could not these Jews do, that returned from Babylon: for they were
(secondly) but few, and those also poor, and, though helped both by Cyrus and
Darius, yet they were glad to build the Temple of common stone, and unpolished,
nothing like those precious carved stones wherewith Solomon built 1 King. 6.
Thirdly, God hereby would draw their minds from the legal ceremonies and
services; the Sun of righteousness being now ready to arise upon them, the
dayspring from on high to visit them. Howbeit, because they could not have so
glorious a Temple as the former, they slighted it in their thoughts, and would
have neglected it: Learn hence, That men naturally account as nothing of Gods
service, if not accompanied with outward pomp and splendor. The Israelites in
the wilderness would needs have a calf, (as the Egyptians had) made of their
Jewels and earrings. Jeroboam would have two, and those of gold.
Nebuchadnezzar dedicated a golden image with all manner of music Dan. 3. The
people wept when the foundation of this Temple was laid Ezra 3.12. because
nothing so magnificent as the former. And the Papists explode our religion in
comparison of theirs, because nothing so pompous and plausible to the rude
people, whom they deceive with apish toys and trinkets, shows and pageants.
In their petition to King James they pleaded for their religion, that it was
more pleasing then ours, and more agreeable to nature. John Hunt a Roman
Catholic in his humble appeal to King James thus blasphemeth: Chap. 6.
the God of the Protestants is worse then Pan God of the clownes, which can
endure no ceremonies nor good manners at all. Many, like children, like that
book best, that has most babyes in it: neither will they eat their milk, but
in a golden dish. This proceeds from a blind understanding and carnal
affection. The Church in its infancy was enticed with shows and shadows: but
now God requires a reasonable service, he calls for spirit and truth.

Verse 4. Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel etc.] Here he exhorts all ranks,
first to good Affection, Be strong or of a good courage: Secondly to good
Action, Work, or Be doing: for affection without action is like Rachel,
beautiful, but barren. Charach unde (...) valeo. Sept. vertunt. (...).
Be strong so as to prevail and carry on the service, all discouragements
notwithstanding. Those that will serve God in the maintenance of good causes
must be courageous and resolute 1 Cor. 16.13. For otherwise, they shall never
be able to withstand the opposition that will be made either from carnal
reason within, or the World and Devil without, for want of this spiritual
mettle, this supernatural strength, this spirit of power, of love, and of a
sound mind, 2 Timothy 4.7. opposed to the spirit of fear that cowardly passion
that unmans us, and expectorateth and exposes us to sundry both sins and
snares: when he that trusts in the Lord shall be safe Prove. 29.25. Here then
that we faulter not, budge not, betray not the cause of God, nor come under his
heavy displeasure, who equally hates the timorous and the treacherous; let us
1. Be armed with true faith: for, Fides famem non formidat, faith quelleth and
kills distrustful fear. 2. Get the heart fraught with the true fear of
God: for as one fire, so one fear drives out another Mat. 10.28. 1 Pet. 3.13,
14. 1. Get and keep a clearing, chearing conscience: for that fears no
colors, as we see in St. Paul, Athanasius, Luther, Latimer, and other holy
Martyrs and Confessors. 4. Think on Gods presence, as here, Be strong, and be
doing, for I am with you. Though David walk thorough the vale of the shadow of
death, that is of death in its most hideous and horrid representations, he will
not fear: For why? thou art with me, says He, Psalm. 23.3, 4. Dogs and other
creatures will fight stoutly in their Masters presence. 5. Consider your high
and heavenly calling and say, Et Turnum fugieutem haec terra videbit? Virg.
Shall such a man as I fly etc? Either change thy name, or be valiant, says
Alexander to a soldier of his that was of his own name, but a coward. Lastly
look up, as St. Steven did, to the recompense of reward, steal a look from
glory, as Moses Heb. 11.26. help your selves over. the difficulty of suffering
together with Christ, by considering the happiness of reigning together. Thus
be of good courage, or deal courageously, and God shall be with the good, 2
Chro. 19. vlt.
as Iehosaphat told his Judges when to go their circuit.

and work] Good affections must end in good actions, else they are scarce
sound, but much to be suspected. Number. 23.10. Ruth. 1.
Good wishes (and no more) may be found in hels mouth Number. 23. Orphah had good
affections, but they came to nothing. God must be entreated to fix our
quicksilver to ballast our lightness, to work in us both to will and to do,
that it may be said of us, as of those Corinthians, that as there was in them a
readiness to will, so there followed the performance also. 2 Cor. 8.12. Desire
and Zeal are set together, 2 Cor. 7.11. desire after the sincere milk, and
grouth in grace 1 Pet. 2.2. John Baptists hearers so desired after heaven, that
they offered violence to it Mat. 11. True affections are the breathings of a
broken heart, Acts 2.37. Romans 7.23. But the desires of the slothful kill him,
Prove. 21.25. Virtutem exoptat contabescitque relicta, Good affections are ill
bestowed upon the sluggard, since they boil not up to the full heat and height
of resolution for God, or, Pers.
at least, of execution of his will. The sails of a ship are not ordained,
that she should lie always at rode, but launch out into the deep. God likes
not qualmy Christians, good by fits, as Saul seemed to be when David's innocence
triumphed in his conscience, or as Ephraim, whose duties were dough-baked, and
whose goodness was as the morning-dew etc. Be ye steadfast and unmovable, 1
Cor. 15. (...).
always abounding in the work of the Lord. Stick not at any part of it:
difficulty does but whet on Heroic Spirits as a boule that runs down hill is
not slugged, but quickened by a rub in the way. If this be to be vile, I Will be
yet more vile, 1 Samuel 6.22. who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel
thou shall become a plain. Zach. 4.7. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.

For I am with you says the Lord of hosts] By a twofold presence. 1. Of help
and assistance. 2. Of love and acceptance. Of the first, see chap. 1. verse 13.
with the note there. The second seems here intended. The Jews were poor, yet
God assures them they had his love. So had the Church of Smyrna Rev. 2.9. I
know thy poverty, but that's nothing, thou art rich, rich in reversion, rich in
bills and bonds: yea rich in possession, or All is theirs, they hold all in
capite: they have 1. plenty. 2. propriety in things of greatest price: for they
have God All-sufficient for their portion, for their protection, I am with you,
says he, and that is enough, that is able to counterpoise any defect whatsoever,
as we see in David often, but especially at the sack of Ziklag; where when he
had lost all, and his life also was in suspense, the Text says, he comforted
or encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. whereas Saul in like
case, goes first to the witch, and then to the swords point: A godly man, if
any occasion of discontent befalls him, retires himself into his countinghouse,
and there tells over his spiritual treasure: he runs to his cordials, he
reviews his white stone, his new name ( better then that of sons and of
daughters, Isay 56.5.) Rev. 2.17.
he has meat to eat that the world knows not of, the stranger meddleth not
with his joy. Virtus lecythos habet in malis. Tua praeseutia, Domine, Laurentio
ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit, says a Father, Thy presence O Lord made the
very gridiron sweet to the martyr Laurence. It made the fiery furnace a gallery
of pleasure to the three worthies, the lions den an house of defense to Daniel,
the whales belly a lodging-chamber to Jonas, Egypt an harbor, a sanctuary to
the child Jesus etc. He goes with his into the fire and water, as a tender
father goes with his child to the Surgeon. Nevertheless, says David, I am
continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand. Thou shall guide
me with thy counsel: and afterward receive me to glory. Again, I am with you;
that is, I will accept your worships, Psalm. 73.23, 24.
though in this meaner temple. If God may have the substance of worship, he
stands not much upon the circumstance. The sick may pray upon their beds, the
persecuted in chambers, Acts 1. yea in dens and caves of the earth, Heb. 11.38.
The Church in Queen Mary's days met and prayed often together in a cellar in
Bow-church-yard. It was one of the laws of the twelve tables in Rome, Ad divos
adeunto cast, pietatem adhibento, Act. and Mon.
opes amovento. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire ( viz. in
comparison of obedience, 1 Samuel 15.22.) but as a better thing, mine ears have
thou opened, Psalm. 40.6. Hypocrites by cold ceremonies think to appease God,
they observe the circumstance, neglect the substance, they stick in the bark of
religion, gnabble on the shel, offer the skin, keep back the flesh, serve God
with shows; and shall be served accordingly.

Verse 5. According to the Word] Or, as Tremellius has it better, Cum VERBO
quo pepigeram vobiscum, with the WORD, in and sor whom I covenanted with you,
etc. So my Spirit remains among you. And so it is a gracious promise that the
whole Trinity will be with them. The particle eth seems put for gnim^ and the
article He is emphatical, showing that by Word is meant the second person,
often called the Word both in the Old Testament, 2 Samuel 7.21. with 1 Chronicles.
17.19. and in the New. Luke 1.2. John 1.1. 1 John 5.7. The Caldee seems to
favor this interpretation, for he renders it, My Word shall be your help.
Hierome, Albertus, Nyssen, and Haymo dissent not. Haggai, and other Prophets
and Patriarchs of old did well understand the mystery of the Sacred Trinity.
See my note on Genesis 1.1. Elihu speaks of the Almighty his makers Job. 35.10.
Solomon the same Eccles. 12.1. Cant. 1.11. which Jarchi interprets of the
Trinity. Isay has his Trisagion, or, Holy, Holy, Holy, chap. 6.3. and chap.
42.5. Thus says God the Lord, He that created the heavens, and they that
stretched them out. So Deuteronomy. 6.4. When Moses begins to rehearse the law, and
to explain it, the first thing he teaches them is the Trinity in Unity and
Unity in Trinity. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One. Three words
answering the three persons: and the middle word, Our God deciphering fitly the
second, who assumed our nature as is well observed by Galatinus: Others observe
that the last letters in the Original both in the word Hear, and in the word
One are bigger then ordinary; as calling for utmost heed and attention. The old
Rabbines were no strangers to this tremend mystery (as appears by R. Solomon's
note on Cant. 1.11. We will make etc.) though their posterity desperately deny
it. The Greek Church was not so sound in this fundamental point: therefore
their chief City Constantinople was taken from them by the Turks (as Estius
observes) on Whitsunday or (as others) on Trinity Sunday; which day (says our
Chronicler) the Black Prince was used every year to celebrate with the greatest
honor that might be, Speed. 723.
in due veneration of so divine a mystery. Now, Christ is here and elsewhere
called The Word either because he is so often promised in the Word. Or else,
because by him Gods will was manifested and revealed to men, and that either
mediately in the Prophets, whence Peter Martyr thinks that phrase came. Then
came the Word of the Lord, that is, Christ, Or immediately, himself, Heb. 1.2.
and 2.3.

That I covenanted with you] Or, in whom I covenanted and whence Christ is
called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Christ then was a Savior to those
of the Old Testament also, Rev. 13.8.
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. Christ undertook to pay his
peoples debt in the fulness of time: and hereby they were saved. A man may
let a prisoner loose now, upon a promise to pay the debt a year after. See Heb.
9.15. and take notice of the unity of the faith in both Testaments: they of old
saw Christ afar off in the promises, they saluted him, and were resaluted by
him, (...).
Heb. 11.

When ye came out of Egypt] Ye, that is, your ancestors. Things done by the
parents may be said to be done by the children; because of the near conjunction
that is between them. Hence Levi is said to pay tithes in Abraham, and Adams
sin is imputed to us all. Heb. 7.


So my spirit remains amongst you] Not the substance, but the gifts of the
Spirit; not the tree, but the fruits. Those whom God receives into the
covenant of grace, he endues them with the spirit of grace. See Romans 8.9.11.
How else should they be able to perform their part of the Covenant, since we
cannot so much as suspirare, unless he do first inspirare, breath out a sigh
for sin, till he breath it in to us by his Spirit? Hereby then we may know
whether or no we are in Covenant with God (the Devil will be sure to sweep all
that are not) sc. if his spirit remain in us Jer. 31.35. working illumination,
1 Cor. 2.14.15. Mortification, Romans 8.13. Motion, Romans 8.14. Gifts, 1 Cor.
12.4, 7, 8. etc. Fruits Gal. 5.22.23. strength, Esaias 11.2. Courages, as here.

Fear ye not] Cur timet hominem homo, in sinu Dei positus? Aug.
why should such fear man who have God in Christ by his Spirit standing with
them and for them? The righteous may be bold as a lion: he has the peace of
God within him, and the power of God without him and so goes ever under a
double guard, what need he fear? It is said of Achilles that he was Styge
armatus, and therefore could not be wounded. But he that is in covenant with
God is, Deo, Christo, Spiritu Sancto armatus, and may therefore be fearlesse of
any creature.

Verse 6. For thus says the Lord of hosts] i. e. the three persons in Trinity,
as appears by the note on the former verse. Howbeit the Author to the Hebrews
chap. 12.25.26. applies the words to Christ: whence observe, that Christ is
Lord of hosts, and God Almighty: even the same second person that is called
haddabhar the Word in the former verse, is very God. Compare John 1.3. with
Col. 1.14.16. and John 1.9. with John 8.12. and John 1.11. with Acts 3.13.14.
etc. See those cohaerencies of sentences, John 9.3.4. and 11.4. and 12.39.40.
besides the Apostles argument Heb. 1.4. That one Gospel written by St. John,
who was therefore called the Divine by an excellency (as afterward Nazianzen
also was) because he does professedly assert and vindicate the Divinity of
Christ (ever strongly impugned by the Devil and his agents, those odious
Apostates and heretics ancient and modern: And no wonder, for it is the Rock,
Mat. 16.18.) setting him forth, 1. as coessential to the Father his only
begotten son, John 1.14. One with the Father in essence and power, John
10.30.38. and 14.23. 2. As having the incommunicable names and attributes of
God John 8.58. and 20.28. Eternity John 1.1. and 17.5. Infiniteness, John
3.13. Omniscience, John 2.24. and 21.27. 3. As doing the works of God, such as
are Creation, John 1.3. Conservation, John 5.17.3. miracles etc. 4. As taking
to himself divine Worship, John 9.38. and 20.28. and 14.1. This truth men must
hold fast, as their lives, and be rooted in it: getting strong reasons for what
they believe. The second ground wanted depth of earth; The seed was good, and
the earth was good, but there was not enough of it; therefore the heat of the
sun scorcht in up. Christ is here called the Lord of Hosts, and the Lord of
glory, Isay 6.1. with John 12.41. Jam. 2.1.

Yet once it is a little while etc.] Adhuc unum pusillum. This little little
while, this inch of time, was the better part of five hundred years, viz.
Galatin. lib. 4. cap 9, 10.
till Christ came in the flesh, Heb. 12.26. the Jew-Doctours say no less. A
long time to us is but a little while to God. A thousand years is but as one
day to the Ancient of days. His Prophets also, being lifted up in spirit to
the consideration of eternity, count and call all times (as indeed they are in
comparison) moments, and points of time, Punctum est quod vivimus, and puncto
minus, could the Poet say; D. Hall Pea^m.
What is that to the Infinite? said a certain Nobleman of this Land to one,
discoursing of an incident matter very considerable, but was taken off with
this quick Interrogation. So say we to our selves, when under any affliction,
we begin to think long of Gods coming to deliver us. What is this to Eternity
of extremity, which yet we have deserved? Tantillum, tantillum, adhuc pusillum.
Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry: as in the Interim, the just must live by faith, Heb. 10.37. Gods help
seems long, because we are short. We are short-breathed, short-sighted, apt to
antedate the promises, in regard of the accomplishment. We also often find it
more easy to bear evil, then to wait till the promised good be enjoyed. Those
believing Hebrews found by experience, that the spoiling of their goods
exercised their patience: but staying Gods leisure for the good things he had
promised them, required more then ordinary patience, or tarriance, Heb. 10.36.
Take we heed of prescribing to the Almighty, of limiting the Holy One of
Israel, of setting him a time, with those Bethulians.

and I will shake the heavens] Not the earth only, as at the giving of the
Law, (to purchase reverence to the Lawgiver) but the heavens also: viz, by the
powerful preaching of the Gospel, whereby Satan was seen falling from heaven,
Luke 10.18. that is, from men's hearts; and the Saints set together in heavenly
places, or privileges in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. For he that has the Son,
has life, he has heaven aforehand. 1. In pretio. 2. In promisso. 3. 1 John
5.1^.
In primitiis. Here then the Prophet encourages these builders: telling them
that under this second Temple, how mean soever it seemed, he would first send
Christ, (called the Desire of all Nations, verse. 7. and Peace, verse. 9. with
Ephesians. 2.14.) to grace it with his presence. Secondly, he would cause the
Gospel to be preached in a pompous and powerful manner. I will shake, etc.
Shake them, to settle them, not to ruin them, but to refine them, shake their
hearts with sense of sin, and fear of wrath, that they may truly seek Christ.
For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh.
1.17. And the end of this universal shake, was to show says Chrysostom, Hom.
14. in Matthew.
that the old law was to be changed into the New, Moses into Messiah, the
Prophets into Evangelists, Judaisme, and Gentilisme into Christianisme. When
Christ was born, we know how Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him,
Matt. 2.3. What a quire of Angels was heard in the air at Bethlehem, and what
wondering there was at those things which were told them by the shepherds, Luke
2.18. Eusebius tells of three Suns seen in heaven not long before his birth.
Orosius tells of many more prodigies. The Psalmist foretelling our Saviors
coming in the flesh, breaks out into this joyful exclamation; Let the heavens
rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar and the fullness thereof.
Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of
the wood rejoice before the Lord, for he comes, for he comes to judge the
earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with truth,
Psalm. 96.11, Lib. 18. de C. D. cap. 48.
12, 13. and Psalm. 98.7, 8, 9. This I know is by some (but not so properly)
understood of Christ's second coming to judgment, And both Augustine, and
Rupertus construe this text also the same way. But the whole stream of
Interpreters, old and new, carry it against them: and some of them tell us of
sundry strange, and stupendous commotions, that fell out even according to the
letter, in heaven, earth, and sea, about the time of Christ's birth, death,
resurrection, and soon after his Ascension, when he rode about the world upon
his white horse, the Apostles and their successors; with a crown on his head,
as King of his Church, and a bow in his hand, the doctrine of the Gospel,
whereby the people fall under him, Psalm. 45.4.
and he went forth conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2.

Verse. 7. And I will shake all Nations] First, by the civil wars between the
Triumviri, not long before Christ's Incarnation. Secondly, by the general tax,
Luke 2.3. when all went to be taxed every one into his own city. Thirdly, by
the preaching, and miracles of Christ and his Apostles, whereby the Nations
were shaken out of their sinful condition, and brought to the obedience of
faith by effectual conversion. Thus a Lapide, I will shake all Nations with
wonder at so great a mystery, with joy and with newness of life, says Sa. The
Gospel (says Forbes on Revel. 14.) has three degrees of operation in the
hearts of men. First, it falls to men's ears, as the sound of many waters, a
confused sound, which commonly brings neither terror nor joy: but yet a
wondering and acknowledgement of a strange force, and more then humane power,
Mar. 1.22, 23. Luke 4.32. Job. 7.46. This may be in the reprobate, Act. 13.41.
The second effect is the voice of thunder, which brings not only wonder, but
fear. This may also be in a reprobate, as Felix. The third effect, proper to
the Elect, is the sound of harping; while the Gospel, not only ravisheth with
admiration, and shakes the conscience with terror, but also fills it with
sweet peace and joy. Hitherto He. Certain it is, that the Gospel makes a
stir where it comes, and brings an earthquake to men's souls, as it did to
the Gaolers, Acts 16. and Peter's converts, Act. 2. And this partly through the
frowardness of our affections, and partly through the malice of Satan, fearing
the ruin of his kingdom. For, as for the Gospel, this effect follows it, by
accident. See Matthew. 10.34, 35. with the Note there. See also Luke 12.49. It is
by accident to the Sun, that it makes the dunghill stink. It is by accident to
the Sea, that it makes the passenger sick: the ill humors in his stomach
disease him. So here: And the Desire of all Nations shall come] that is,
Christ, Valete meae desideria. Cic. lib. 14. epist. 2. ad uxor. and filiam.
for so the Apostle expounds it, Heb. 12.25. And the Church says of him,
Totus ipse desideria, Cant. 5.16. he is all-over desirable. And again, Esaias
26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within
m^e will I seek thee early. And unto Shiloh shall the gathering of the people
be, says Jacob, Genesis 49.10. as unto the Standard Bearer, Cant. 5.10. the
carcass, Mat. 24.28. as the doves scour to their columbaries, Esaias 60.8. When I
am lifted up, says He, I will draw all men after me, Joh. 12.32. that is, all
mine Elect: these will follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, as the hop and
Heliotrope do the Sun. And because the Nations had not heard of Christ, till he
came in the flesh: and this coming of the desire of all Nations seems to
follow presently upon the preaching of the Gospel, therefore Junius renders it
Desiderati, the Desirable ones of all Nations, (...).
and interprets it of the Elect, (the Septuagint also say the same) who should
come to the second Temple in a spiritual sense, worshipping the same God that
these good Jews did, and should come with strength of affection, (as the Hebrew
imports) should make hard shift to come, Esaias 66.20. They shall bring your
brethren as an offering to the Lord, upon horses, in chariots, and in litters,
that is, though sick, weakly and unfit for travel, yet rather in litters then
not at all. Neither shall they come empty-handed, but with all their desirable
things (so some render this text) colligent omnes suos thesauros, says Calvin,
they shall come with strong affections, with liberal contributions, as Act.
4.34. and as Tyrus who, when once converted, leaves hoarding and heaping up
wealth (as formerly) and finds another manner of employment for it, namely to
uphold Gods worship, and to seed and cloth his Saints Isa. 23.18.

and I will fill this house with glory] This reedified Temple shall be honored
with Christ's bodily presence: and the spiritual Temple, which is the Church,
Diodate.
shall be honored by my presence in spirit, the abundance of my graces, the
light of my word, and power of my spirit, who shall rest upon my people as a
spirit of glory, when the world loadeth them with greatest ignominy. 1 Pet.
4.14. rest upon them, by a blessed Shechinah.

Verse 8. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts]
Whereas the Jews might object, that it was not likely the second Temple should
be more glorious then the first, since they wanted that wealth wherewith Solomon
abounded: God answers in like sort, as once he did Moses alleging the
slownesse of his speech, Who has made muns mouth etc? so here, whose is the
silver and the gold? Exo. 4.10.11.
am not I the true Proprietary, and chief Lord of all? cannot I furnish you out
of my great purse the earth and the fullness thereof Psalm. 24.1? Terra est
marsupium Demint.
what is silver and gold, but white and red earth, the guts and garbage of the
earth as one phraseth it? things that I have no need of Psalm. 50.13? They lie
furthest from heaven: the best of them are in Ophyr (perhaps the same with
Peru) furthest from the church. Adam had them in the first Paradise Genesis 2.11,
12. in the second, you shall not need them Job. 26.2, 3. etc. In defect of
other, I my self will be your gold, and you shall have plenty of silver Job
22.25. Rev. 1.12.13.
Christ girt about the paps (that seat of love) with a golden girdle shall
walk in the midst of his seven golden candlesticks, with a golden censer in
his hand perfuming and presenting the prayers of his people upon the golden
Altar, Rev. 8.3. and measuring that city of pearl, his church, with a golden
reed Rev. 21.15. Ribera and some others think that God, as of old he had
stirred up Cyrus and Darius (both of them Heathens) to contribute to the
building of the Temple, so afterward he stirred up Herod a wealthy king, not
long before Christ came, to bestow abundance of cost upon the same Temple; and
that this was here fore-prophesied. But I should rather incline to Calvin, who
doubts not but that the devil stirred up Herod to do as he did; that the
Jews doting upon the splendor of that brave structure (the disciples did no
less Mat. 24.1, 2.) might cease looking for Christ, or trusting in him. And
who knows (says He) whether Herod himself might not have such a fetch in his
head. Howsoever the devil was in it, doubtless, to take off their minds from
the expectation of Christ's coming, which was now at hand, by those external
pompes: and to withdraw the spirits of the godly from the furniture and gayety
of the spiritual Temple; We know how the disciples (who leavened with the
leaven of the Pharisees dreamt of an earthly kingdom) were taken with the
beauty and bravery of Herod's Temple, showing the same to our Savior, and
fondly conceiting that by that goodly sight he might be moved to moderate the
severity of that former sentence of his, Behold your house is left unto you
desolate Mat. 23.38. with 24.1. But his thoughts were not as their thoughts.
The bramble reckoned it a great matter to reign over the trees: So did not the
Vine and Olive. The Papists hold that God is delighted with golden and silver
vessels in the administration of the Eucharist, and offended with the contrary.
But the Primitive Christians celebrated the sacrament of the Lords supper in
vessels first of wood, and afterward of glass. That saying also of Ambrose is
well known, Aurum sacramenta non quaerunt, nec auro placent, quae auro non
emuntur. It was grown to a proverb soon after Constantines time, Once we had
golden Ministers and wooden vessels, now we have wooden Ministers, and golden
vessels. Religion brought forth wealth: and the mother devoured the daughter.

Verse 9. The glory of this later house shall be greater then of the former]
Because Christ shall appear and preach in it (as ver. 7.) who is the
brightness of his Fathers glory ac consequenter vrbis and orbis; any relation
to whom heighteneth and ennobleth both places and persons. Bethlehem, though it
be the least ( Micah. 3.6.) is yet not the least among the princes of Judah (
Mat. 2.6.) because Christ was born there. The tribe of Nepthali is first
reckoned of those by Rachels side: because at Capernaum, in this tribe, Christ
inhabited Rev. 7.6. in which respect also this town is said to be lifted up to
beaven Mat. Genesis 42.4.
11.2, 3. Benjamin is called the beloved of the Lord, Gods darling (as their
father Ben amin was old Jacobs) because God dwelt between his shoulders, sc. in
his Temple built upon those two mountains, Moriath and Zion Deuteronomy. 33.12. The
glory of that first Temple was, that the Majesty of God appeared in it,
covering it self in a cloud. The glory of this later house was greater, because
therein the same divine Majesty appeared, not covered with a cloud, but really
incarnated. For, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth, Ioh. 1.14. In this flesh of ours, and under this second Temple, Christ
not only uttered oracles, did miracles, and finished the great work of our
redemption, but also laid the foundation of the Christian Church. Jam. 1.
For the Law (that perfect Law of liberty the Gospel) came out of Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to all the ends of the earth, Esaias 2.3.
Psalm. 110.1. From hence it was that the Lord of glory, whom the blind Jews had
crucified, sent out his Apostles, those messengers of the churches, and the
glory of Christ as they are called 2 Cor, 8.23. to gather together unto him
those desirable ones his elect ( verse 7. See the Note there) whom he calls
the glory Esa. 46.13. the house of his glory Esaias 60.7. a crown of glory Esaias
62.3. the throne of glory Ier. 4^.21. the ornament of God Ezekiel 7.20. the beauty
of his ornament ib. and that set in majesty ib. a royal diadem in the hand of
Jehovah Esaias 62.3.

and in this place will I give peace] Even the Prince of peace, and with him
all things also Romans 8.32. pacem Pectoris and Temporis, Peace of country and
of conscionce: this later especially seems here to be meant. For the former (
viz. outward Peace) was not long enjoyed by these Jews; and their second
Temple was often spoiled by the enemies, Ioh. 14.
and at length burnt and overturned. But the Peace of God that passes all
understanding, is that Legacy which the world can neither give nor take from
Gods people. And of this inward Peace the Septuagint (according to the Roman
edition) takes the Text, and so does Ambrose. Haec est pax su^er pacem, says
He. Christ as he was brought from heaven, with that song of Peace Luk 2.14.
Onearth peace, good will toward men, (which is the same with that salutation of
St. Paul who learned it belike, of those Angels, Grace be to you, and Peace) so
he returned up again with that farewell of peace Ioh. 14.27. and left to the
world the doctrine of peace, the gospel of peace Ephesians. 2.17. whose Author is
the God of peace 1 Cor. 14.33. whose Ministers are ministers of peace Romans
10.15. whose followers are the children of peace Luk 10.6. whose unity is in
the bond of peace Ephesians. 4.3. whose duty is the study of peace Romans 12.18. and
whose end is, to enter into peace, to rest in their beds, their souls resting
in heaven, their bodies in the grave till the joyful resurrection, even every
one walking in his uprightness Esaias 57.2. Psalm. 37.33.

Verse 10. In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month in the second year
of Darius] This diligence of the Prophets in noting and noticing the precise
time of Gods hand upon them, Scultet. Annal.
should teach us to do the like. See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 1. Melch. Adam
in vit. Bugenhag.
The churches in Switzerland kept that day yearly as an holiday whereon the
Reformation began amongst them. Bugenhagius kept a feast every year on that day
of the month wherein he and some other Divines had finished the Dutch Bible,
and called it The feast of the Translation of the Bible. Philipp. Pareus in
vita Dau. Parei.
The University of Heidelberg kept an Evangelicall Iubilee three whole days
together Anno Dom. 1617. in the Calends of November, in the remembrance of the
renowned Reformation of religion, begun by Luther a just hundred years before.
Hereby Gods name shall be sanctified, our faith strengthened, and our good
affection both evidenced and excited. By the time here described, it appears,
that they had now been three months building, and the Prophet meane-while had
given them great encouragement thereunto. But forasmuch as he found that they
stuck in the bark, as they, say, rested in the work done, thought they should
therefore win upon God because they built him a Temple, the Prophet gives them
to understand, that there is more required of them then a Temple. viz. that
therein they worship the Lord purely and holily, in spirit and in truth: that
their divine worships be right both quoad fontem and quoad finem, for
principle and end of intention; for else, they impure all that they touch, and
are no whit better, but a great deal the worse for all their performances. This
the Prophet teaches them in the two following oracles propounded by way of
demand to the Priests. How apt are men to lose themselves in a wilderness of
duties? To dig for pearls in their own dunghils? to think to oblige God to
themselves by their good works? to spin a thread of their own to climb up to
heaven by? to rest in their own righteousness? to save themselves by riding on
horses, Hos. 14.3? The Prophets design is here to beat them off from such fond
conceits: telling them that the person must be accepted ere the service can be
regarded, as Abels. To the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are
defiled and unbeleeving is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is
defiled, Tit. 1.15.
says the Apostle. Calvin upon this Text says no more: and yet Cor. a Lapide
is very angry with him for saying so much. Aug. de vera innocent. c. 56.
There is in Peter Lumbard this golden sentence eited out of August inc: The
whole life of unbeleevers is sin: neither is any thing good without the
chiefest good. This sentence Ambrose Rybera a Poprsh Postiller, censureth for
harsh and cruel: But does not God here say the same thing? Crudelis est illa
sententia.
Certain it is that good actions from bad men displease: as a man may speak
good words, but we cannot hear, because of his stinking breath. The facrifice
of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. Charity is nothing,
unless it flow out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

Verse 11. Ask now the Priest concerning the Law] For who should know the law
better then the Priests? And who so fit to resolve cases of conscience as they?
It was their office, Levit. 10.10, 11. Deuteronomy. 33.10. Mal. 2.7. See the Note
there. It was an evil time with Gods people, when he was put to complain, who
is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger, that I sent, Isay 42.19? Viu.
in Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 4. c 1.
When the Prophet was a fool, the spiritual man was mad for the multitude of
their iniquity,, and the great hatred, Hos. 9.7. Varro upbraided the Roman
Priests of old with their gross ignorance of many things in point of their own
rites and religions: and Cicero brake a jest upon C. Popilius an ignorant
Lawyer at Rome. For when Popilius, being called for a witness to some
controversy, answered Nihil se scire that he knew nothing, Cicero answered by
way of jear, Put as fortasse te de jure interrogari you mean (perhaps) that you
know nothing in the law, which yet you profess to have skill in. What a shame
was it for the Pharisees who took upon them to be guides of the blind, teachers
of babes etc. Romans 2.19.20. to be found, blind leaders of the blind, Mat. (...)
Enni^s
15? So is it for Divines being asked concerning the Law, or will of God in
such and such cases, not to be able to answer discreetly, and intelligently as
he did Mark 12.34. as an egregie cordat us homo? But so bungler-like, and so
far from the purpose, that it my well be seen that desiring to be teachers
of the Low, they underst and neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1 Timothy 1.7. How like the motion of a puppet, the language of a Parret is the
discourse of such unlearned or uninteressed Casuists? Every Minister of Gods
making can truly say, The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned,
that I should know to time a word to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by
morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned, Esaias 50.4. See 1 Cor.
12.8. Tit. 1.9. Ephesians. 3.4, 7.1 Cor. 2.13.

Verse 12. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt etc.] problemes and parables are
notable helps to the bolting out of the truth, and conviction of the
gainsayers. For problemes, see Mat. 21.25. Mat 22.42. etc. For parables, see
Judge. 9. that of Jotham, Mat. 21. Mat. 22. Mat. 13.
of Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. of the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. of our Savior,
concerning the two brethren sent into the Vincyard, the wedding of the Kings
son, the sower etc. See the Note on verse 10.

and the Priests answered and said no] Roundly and readily: without hacking and
hewing, without doubling and dissembling; as those perverse priests, those
selfecondemned Hierophants, Mat. 21.27. that against their consciences answered
Jesus and said, We cannot tell. The wit of graceless persons will better serve
them to faulter and fumble, deny, or devise a thousand shifts to evade and
elude the truth, then their malice will suffer them to yield to it, or profess
it. This is to detain the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. as Plato, who
had the knowledge of One God, yet he dared not to communicate it to the vulgar:
and as some of the chief champions of Popery, who held justification by faith
alone, but refused to say so, lest their Dagon should down, their Diana be
despised. Let every spiritual man (but especially Ministers) be ready as to
every good work, so to this of comparing spiritual things with spiritual, that
he may judge or discern of all things, 1 Cor. 2.13.15. according to the
analogy of faith, Romans 12.6. the tenor of the Scriptures, his sure Cynosura:
and laying up all in his heart, Luke 2.18. he may have a treasure there of new
and old, a word of wisdom and a word of knowledge ^00, 1 Cor. 12.8. both as a
Teacher, and as a Pastor, to bring forth for common benefit.

Verse 13. If one that is unclean by a dead body] with a ceremonial
uncleanness. The Hebrew has it thus, If one that is unclean in soul, that is,
in his whole person, as every wicked man is totus totus pollutus wholly covered
with corruption, a loathsome leper from head to foot, wholly set upon sin as
Exodus 32.22. lying down in wickedness or in that wicked one, 1 John 5.19. sick
of such a disease as the Physicians call corruptionem totius substantiae, nay
dead in sins and trespasses Ephesians. 2.1. and can therefore do no better then dead
work at best, Heb. 9.14. such as the living God will not be served with, ibid.
See the note on Mal. 3.16. doct. 4. Use 1. He is unclean, unclean, and impureth
all that he touches, according to that which follows.

Verse 14. So is this people, and so is this Nation before me] Though pure in
their own eyes Prove. 30.12. and to the world-ward unrebukeable, as Paul the
Pharisees Phil. 3. and those self-iustitiaries, Luke 16.14, 15. Ye are those
that justify your selves (and have the worlds good word for you) but God
knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God. Sordet in conspectu judicis quodfulget in
conspectu operantis. Splendida pecca u. Am. 6.13.
Wicked men's services are but glistering sins, they rejo^ce in a thing of
naught, as Amos has it, like as Leah rejoiced in that whereof She had cause to
repent, and said God has given me my hire, when she had more cause to say, God
I fear will give me my hire, my payment, because I have given my maiden to my
husband, Genesis 30.18. But she was in the common error of measuring and judging
of things by the success: as if God were not many times angry with men, though
they outwardly prosper: or as if there were not here one event to the clean and
to the unclean Eccles. 9.2. Uutill the day that God shall separate the sheep
from the goats, whom for the glory of his name, and the good of his people he
suffers for present to go one among another to make his own to stick the
faster together, and to their principles, Shepherds say, that it is wholesome
for a flock of sheep to have some goats to feed amongst them: their bad scent
being good Physic for the sheep, to keep them from the shakings. Only let
Gods sheep take heed that they contract no corruption by conversing with goats:
which is soon done, for sin is catching, and ill company is contagious.
Nemoerat sibi ipsi: sed dementiam spargit in proximos, says Seneca, No man
erres out of the right way alone, but draws others along, And multos
sollicitat so^iet as nefanda, says Chrysostom, evil company solliciteth many
to sink, virtue is often overcome by vice, says Nazianzen, Orat. 1. Apolog
as a little wormwood sooner imbittereth a great deal of honey, then twice so
much honey can sweeten a small deal of wormwood: Or as one spoonful of vinegar
will soon tart a great deal of sweet milk: but a great deal of milk will not so
soon allay one spoonful of vinegar. Remove but one stone, and the whole river
will rush downward: but you can hardly stop the stream again with a strong
damme. Touch pitch and you shall presently be defiled, but touch soap and you
shall not presently be made clean, without much rubbing and rinsing. Me^entius
the tyrant Corpora corporibus jungebat mortua vivis tied living men to dead
carcasses: but the dead did notrevive by the living, Virgil.
the living rather putrified by reason of the dead. He that bore consecrated
flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt touched bread, or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, he made it not thereby holy. But if an
unclean person touched any of these, he made it unclean. The Donatists abused
this Text, to prove that Baptism was defiled, and vacated, if administrated by
an unregenerate Minister: But Augustine again against Fulgentius the Donatist
vindicateth the Text from their false glosses, and asserteth from it the
contrary truth. May not clean corn be sowed with foul hands, and grow
nevertheless? Aqua baptismatis haptizatos ad regnum coelestis mittit, and ipsa
postea in cloacam descendit. Greg in Evang. hom. 17.
May not a trumpet be well sounded by an impure breath? And is not the water in
Baptism, that cleanses the child, cast afterward into the draught? says
Gregory.

so is this people, and so is that nation before me, and so is every work of
their hands, and that which they offer, etc.] Note the order of the Induction.
First themselves were unclean, both people and nation; there was a general
defection and defilement ran thorough all sorts and sexes, as the woof runs
through the warp: so that they were all together but one continued web of
wickedness, as it were, spun out and made up by the hands of the devil, and
the flesh, an evil spinner,, and a worse weaver: both root and fruit were
naught, as Esaias 5.4. both head, heart, and foot was out of order, Esaias 1.5, 6.
and they are barely and boldly told of it by the Prophets. Secondly, the works
of their bands were unclean: for not only the praying, but the plowing of the
wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. all their natural and civil actions also are
abominable. Whether they plow, or play, or eat, or sleep; corruption is like
copres, which will turn wine or milk into ink; or leaven, which turns a very
Passover into pollution; or as the Sanies of a plague sore, which will render
the richest robe infectious. Thirdly, that which they offer there, their
sacrifices, and all their religious performances were likewise unclean: not in
respect of God, who commanded them: nor of the matter, for they offered clean
beasts; but of the manner of offering (which makes or marres the action) and of
the men, who were unregenerate, and rested in the work done, and drew near to
God with their lips, thinking to put God off with an external worship only;
Ludentes cum Deo tanquam pueri cum suis puppis, as Calvin has it, that is,
playing with God, as children do with their babies. Calv. in loc.
The Poets declaimed against this foppery, as Persius: and Another, Non been
coelestes impia dextra colit.

Verse 15. And now I pray you consider] Heb. Lay it upon your heart, as chap.
1.5. See the Note there. The often repetition of this precept, sets forth: 1.
The necessity of the duty pressed. 2. Their singular stupidity, that were no
more affected with such manifest marks of Gods wrath upon them: no, though he
had even snatched the meat out of their mouths, and kept them hunger-starved,
which is the way of taming the most untameable creatures.

from this day and upward] To the end that when I shall have blessed you with
greater plenty, as verf. 19, ye may recognize your sins, the cause of your
calamities, and remembering (as Jacob did his baculinam paupertatem, Genesis
32.10.) your former penury, you may thankfully cry out with that Noble
Iphicrates; (...).
From how hungry to how plentiful an estate am I raised? Let a profane
Demetrius attribute such a change as this to blind Fortune saying, (...). But
let all Saints sing with holy Hannah; They that were full have hired themselves
out for bread: and they that were hungry ceased. The Lord makes poor, and
makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up, etc. 1 Samuel 2.5, 7.

from before a stone was laid upon a stone] i.e. before there was any hand set
to the work of rebuilding the Temple, which was interrupted for many years,
after the return from Babylon. See Ezr. 3.8. and 5.2.

Verse. 16. Since those days were] Or, as some read it, Antequam essent in to
opere. Before they were about that work, minding Gods house more then their own.

When one came to an heap of twenty measures] that is, where you expected
twenty measures (and experienced good-husbands can partly guess at harvest,
how their corn will yield, when threshed out) there were but ten. Gods hand was
upon your increase, not in the field only, but also in the floor; so that you
were defeated, and your hopes frustrated: and not in the barn only, but at the
winepresse too, God has cut you short. This was that which was long before
threatened, but little regarded, Deuteronomy. 28.20. Carnal men read the threats of
Gods Law, as they do the old stories of foreign wars, or as they behold the
wounds and blood in a picture, or piece of Arras, which never makes them smart
or fear. This hasteneth their judgment, and shows them ripe for wrath, even
then when they think themselves far enough out of the reach of Gods rod.

Verse. 17. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail] Pugnis
pluvi, colaphis grandinavi, I have followed you close with one judgment upon
another: Perdidistis fruc^um calamitatis, etc. Aug.
and all to bring you back into mine own bosom: that as ye had run from me
by your sins, so ye might return to me by repentance: but behold, I have lost
my labor, and ye have lost the fruit of your sufferings, which indeed is a
very great loss, were ye but soundly sensible of it. These Jews were sensible
of their calamities and disasters abroad and at home, but they did not wisely
inquire into the cause thereof; as David did into the cause of the famine that
fell out in his days, 2 Samuel 21.1. God had not hitherto give them an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, as it is Deuteronomy. 29.4. And as Esaias
9.13. The people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek
the Lord of hosts. But after their hardness and impenitent heart, treasured up
wrath, etc. Romans 2.5. They could not but see themselves grievously crossed, and
cursed in all the labors of their hands. Lib. 3. de not. deor.
Neither were they so blind as not to see God in that they suffered. They had
learned that out of Psalm. 78.47, 48. Psalm. 29.3, etc. Tully indeed thought that
God minds not mildew, or hail, etc. Nee si uredo aut grando quippiam nocuit, id
Iovi animadvert endum fuit: neque enim in regnis reges omnia minima curant,
etc. As kings take not notice of smaller businesses in their kingdoms, says
He, so neither does God of these ordinary occurrences. But the Jews (for the
generality) had learned better things. And the Apostle tells those Heathens
too, Acts 14. that God had not left himself without witness amongst them, in
that he did good and gave rain from b^aven, and fruitful seasons, etc. ^Cicero
himself likewise, another time, could say, Curiosus est and plenus negotii
Deus, God takes care of all, and is full of business. And oh that this truth
were as fruitfully improved, as it is generally acknowledged! Oh that men would
turn at Gods reproof; his recall reproofs, his vocal rods, Mic. 6.9. and not
put him to his old complaint; Why should ye be smitten any more? Esaias 1.5.
ye revolt more and more. This we may wish, but God alone can effect. For till
he please to thrust his holy hand into men's bosoms, and pull off the foreskin
of their hearts; Afflictions (those hammers of his) do but beat cold iron.
Salvian.
See Ier. 2.30, 31. and 6.29, 30. Lev. 26.41. Plectimur a Deo, nec flectimur
tamen: corripimur sed non corrigimur. We are put to pain, but to no prosit,
Jer. 12.13. as Abaz, that stiff stigmatick, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. and Ahaziah, who
sent a third Captain to surprise the Prophet, 2 King. 1.
after two before consumed with fire from heaven: as if he would despitefully
spit in the face of God, and wrestle a fall with the Almighty.

Verse 18. Consider now from this day and upward] And see how punctually the
time of benediction answers to the time of your conversion: so that you no
sooner begin to build, but I begin to bless. It is said of the men of
Issachar, that they were in great account with David, because they had
understanding of the times, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. It is certainly a point of
spiritual prudence to consider the times, and to compare things past with
present and future. Time is the wisest of all things, Laert. lib. 1
said Thales; the best counselor said Plutarch. Truth is the daughter of
Time, In Pericles:
says Another Philosopher. See the Note on verse 15.

Verse 19. Is the seed yet in the barn?] Hierom renders it, In germine, In
the sprouting, or spirting, as they call it, and so far enough from the
harvest; and yet further, if yet in the barn, and not put into the ground.
Neverthesse, for your diligence in building Gods house, I assure you in the
word of truth, that you shall have a very great increase, a plentiful harvest.

From this day will I bless you] And it is the blessing of God that makes
rich, as is to be seen in the examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob. Others, whose godliness was their gain, whose piety was profitable to
all things, as having the promises of both lives, 1 Timothy 4.8. Now all that are
of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. are heirs of the world
with him, Romans 4.13. and so have right to all things in Christ, the heir of all
things, 1 Cor. 3.22. Heb. 1.2. though these things on earth be detained from
them for present, by those men of Gods hand, Psalm. 17.14. as Canaan was from
Israel by the cursed Amorites, till their sins were full; Genesis 14.
yet they shall shortly have power over the Nations, and (which is better)
Christ will give them the morning-starre, that is himself, Rev. 2.26, 28
and with himself a Cornucopia of spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. The Lord
that made heaven and earth will bless them out of Zion, that is, with better
blessings then heaven or earth afforded. We read not here of any other
blessings but increase of corn, wine, oil, etc. because this people was wholly
almost affixed to earthly things. 1 Cor. 2.
The Prophet could not speak wisdom among those that were perfect. But better
things were implied and assured to the godly, as appear^th by the ensuing
Oracle.

Verse 20. And again, the word of the Lord] Again the same day.
Twice-aday-preaching is no new practice then. This Prophet did it: so did our
Savior, Acts and Mon. f^l. 940.
Mat. 13.1. So did Chrysostom, as appears by his Note on 1 These. 5.17. So
did Luther: which because one Nicholas White commended in him, he was accused
of heresy, in the reign of Hen. 8. It is not so long since it was held here
practical Puritanisme. The late Arch-prelate being sued unto by a Nobleman to
prefer a Chaplain of his, (whom he commended for an able Divine, Socra^:
and a twice-aday-preacher) turned away in a great heat, saying, The more fool
he.

Verse 21. Speak to Zerubbabel governor of Judah] Governors are sure to meet
with many difficulties, and discouragements (high-seats are never but uneasy)
and had need therefore of singular consolation, that they may hold on their
course, like the Sun in the firmament, and show themselves to be of an
undaunted resolution. We may well say to Governors, as that Prophetical
Simeon spoke to the pillars which he whipped before the earthquake: Stand
fast, for ye shall be shaken.

I will shake the heavens and the earth sc. by abrogating and abolishing both
Jewish Ceremonies, and Heathenish superstitions, Heb. 12.27. As also by
National commotions, and translations of Monarchies: The Greeks shall break
the power of the Persians, the Romans of the Greeks, the Goths and other
barbarous nations of the Romans. But especially, by casting the devil out of
the heaven of men's hearts, Luke 10.18. those strongholds wherein he had
entrenched himself, Mat. 24.7.
2 Cor. 10.4, 5. that the ransomed of the Lord may receive a kingdom, which
cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. and partake of those new heavens, and new earth
wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. even that world to come, as these
days of the Gospel are called, Heb. 2.5. See the Note above on verse. 6.7.

Verse 22. And I will overthrow the throne of kingdomes] sc. by pouring
contempt upon Princes, and causing them to wander in the wilderness, where
there is no way, Psalm. 107.40. (as he dealt with Darius the last Persian
Monarch) by putting down the mighty from their seat, and exalting them of low
degree, Luke 1.52. (as he dealt with Bajazet the great Turk, and Tamerlan the
Scythian shepherd) by changing the ^imes and the seasons, removing kings, and
setting up others in their stead, Dan. 2.21. All this God will do, and all that
follows in the Text, viz. destroy the strength of kingdoms, overthrow the
charets and their riders, etc. rather then. his Church shall be unhelped, or
his kingdom of grace hindered. Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made
heaven and earth, and will rather unmake all again, then we shall be
unrelieved. Psalm. 124.8.
Yet have I set my king upon mine holy hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.6. Yet, for all
the sorrow, for all the malicious machinations, and attempts of his enemies to
the contrary: who are therehence admonished to be wise for themselves, and to
kiss the son, for he must reign, and all his foes must be his footstool.
There is a Council in heaven will dash the mould of all contrary counsels upon
earth. The stone cut out of the mountains without hands (which is Christ the
Conqueror) will break in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver,
and the gold. And in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to
other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and
it shall stand for ever, Dan. 2.44, 45. So Dan. 7. after that the Prophet had
described the greatness and glory of all the four Monarchies, at length he
comes to speak of a kingdom which is the greatest and mightiest under the
whole heaven, and that is the kingdom of the Saints of the most High, Dan.
7.27.
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and all Rulers shall serve and obey
him.

Verse 23. I will take thee, O Zerubbabel] That is, O Christ, of whom
Zerubbabel was both a father and a figure, Luke 3.27. Zach. 4.10. I will take
thee, that is, I will advance and exalt thee. See this expounded, and applied
by that great Apostle, Philip. 2.5. to the 12.

and will make thee as a signet] that is, I will highly esteem thee, inviolably
keep thee, and entirely love thee, Cant. 8.6. Jer. 22.24. and all my people in
thee, and for thee, Esaias 49.16.

for I have chosen thee] as Esaias 42.1. Quoniam in te mihi complacui, says the
Chaldee. For in thee I am well pleased, as Mat. 3.17. See the Note there.

Says the Lord of hosts] This is three several times set down in this one
verse, for our greater assurance, and confirmation of our faith. I shall close
up all with that observation of Divines, that all the Prophets (except Jonah
and Nahum) expressly end in some prophecy concerning Christ. He being their
mark at which all of them chiefly aimed. Indeed he is both mark and matter, of
both old and new Testament. And therefore if we will profit in teaching,
hearing, reading, we must have the eye of our mind turned toward Christ, as
the faces of the Cherubims were toward the Mercy seat. Do this, if ever you
will do well.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of ZACHARIAH.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. IN the eighth month, in the second year of Darius] Two months after
Haggai began to prophecy. See the Note on Hagg. 1.1. These two Prophets did
jointly together reprove the Jews, for their sloth in reedifying the Temple,
and incite them to set forward the work, Ezra 5.1. contributing their utmost
help thereunto, verse. 2. They were also a singular help the one to the other,
in the execution of their office. For two are better then one; and why, see
Eccles. 4.9. with the Note. For which cause also Christ sent out first the
twelve, and then the seventy, by two and two, Mar. 6.7. Luke 10.1. So Paul and
Barnabas were sent abroad; the two faithful witnesses, Revel. 11.3. (...), as
the Poet speaks of Ulysses, and Diomedes sent to fetch in the Palladium. Acts
and Mon, Exodus 4.16
One good man may be an Angel to another, (as Bradford was to his fellow-Martyr
Dr. Taylour) nay, a God to another, as Moses was to Aaron. And for others; in
the mouth of two or three witnesses a truth is better believed by them: and a
twisted cord not easily broken. Haggai lays down the mind of God to the people
more plainly in direct and downright terms: Zachary flies an higher pitch,
abounding with types and visions; and is therefore worthily reckoned among the
abstrusest and profoundest Penmen of holy Scripture. Praecaeteris obscurus est
profundus, varius, prolixus, and aeigmaticus, Cor. a Lapid.
For it must be understood (and let it here be prefaced) that albeit all
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is prositable to instruct, 2 Timothy
3.16. pure, precious, and profitable, every leaf, line, and letter of it, Psalm.
12.6. Prove. 30.5. Yet, between scripture and scripture there is no small
difference; some pieces of Gods Book for their antiquity, and some other for
their obscurity do justly challenge our greater attention and industry. Of the
former sort famous for their antiquity, are the five Books of Moses; whom
Theodoret fitly calls the great Ocean of divinity, (...).
the fountain of the following scriptures. Of the second sort, noted for their
difficulty, and that will not be acquainted with us but upon further suit, some
are hard through their fullness of matter in fewness of words, as the
Poetical books, wherein (no doubt) the verse also has caused some cloud: And
others again, by the sublimity of the subject they handle: such as are the
books of Ezechiel, and Daniel, and this of Zachary, who is totus fere
symbolicus, and is much followed by St. John in his Revelation. Hence Hierome
in his prologue to this Prophet says, Hieron.
Ab obscuris ad obscuriora transimus, and cum Mose ingredim^r ad nubem and
caliginem. Abyssus abyssum invocat etc. We pass from dark prophecyes to that
which is much more dark: and with Moses we are entering into the cloud and thick
darkness. Here one deep calls upon another; and being in a Labyrinth, we
hope to get out by Christ's golden clue: concerning whose Passion, Resurrection
and glory he speaks more like an Evangelist then a Prophet, and may therefore
be rightly styled, The Evangelicall Prophet.

came the word of the Lord unto Zachariah the son of Barachiah] Therefore the
same that our Savior speaks of Mat. 23.35. Luk 11.51. though I once thought
otherwise, after Hierome, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Glassius, Grotius etc. But 1.
the name of his Father Berechiah. 2. the manner of Christ's account (reckoning
from Abel the first Martyr to this, penultimus Prophetarum last save one of the
Prophets, and last of all that was slain by the Jews, after the reedifying of
the Temple, Zach. 11.1, 13
whither being assaulted, he ran for sanctuary) easily persuades me to alter
mine opinion. As for those that hold that our Savior there spcaketh of Zachary
the Father of John Baptist Luk 1. slain by the Jews, because he preached
Virginis partum and Christi ortum, Christ born of a Virgin, Baronius, Tolet,
and others, as they affirm it without reason, so they may be dismissed without
refutation. Hoc, quia de scripturis non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur, says Hierome.

the son of Iddo the Prophet] Whether the word Prophet be to be referred to
Zechariah, 2 Chr. 22.15.
or to Iddo, is uncertain. That there was a Prophet Iado we read, and Zechary
might well be of his line, after many descents. He is here mentioned (as also
Ezr. 5.1.) ut nepoti suo Zachariae nomen and decus conciliet, for an honout to
his ab-nephew Zechary; according to that of Solomon, The glory of children are
their fathers, Prove. 17.6.
to wit if they be godly and religious. What an honor was it to Jacob, that he
could swear by the fear of his father Isaac? to David, that he could say,
Psalm. 116.16. 2 Timothy 1.5.
Truly, Lord, I am thy servant, I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid? to
Timothy, that he had such a mother as Lois, such a grandmother as Eunice? to
the children of the Elect Lady, to the posterity of Latimer, Bradford, Ioh
8.33. Mat. 3.9.
Ridley, and other of those men of God, who suffered for the truth? If the
degenerate Jews so boasted of Abraham their father, how much more might
Zechary (no degenerate plant, (...)
no bastardly brood as they were Mat. 12.39.) boast and bear himself bold on
his father Berechiah (the blessing of God) and his grandfather Iddo (Gods
Witness, Confessor, or Ornament) since he trod in their holy steps, and was
adorned with their gifts and virtues? The Papists brag much of Peter, and other
Apostles their founders and predecessors: But this is but an empty title, to
talk of personal succession (which yet cannot be proved) unless they could
also show us their gifts and graces, as all the world may see they cannot. We
read of a painter, who being blamed by a Cardinal, for coloring the visages
of Peter and Paul too red, tartly replied, that he painted them so, as blushing
at the lives of their successors.

Verse 2. The Lord has been sore displeased with your fathers] Heb. He has
boiled against your fathers with foaming anger, with height of heat. There are
degrees of anger, see Mat. 5.22. and Deuteronomy. 29.28. The Lord rooted them out of
their land in Anger, and in wrath, and in great Indignation. Surgit hic oration:
and the last of those three words is the same here used in the text: noting an
higher degree then the two former, even such a fervor and fierceness of Gods
wrath, as makes him ready to kill and cut off (see 2 King. 6 6. and note the
affinity of that word with this) like as he had much ado to forbear killing
of Moses, Exodus 4.
when he met him in the Inn; and as Nebuchadnezzar was not only angry, but
very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon Dan. 2.12.
Now if the wrath of a king be as many messengers of death Prove. 16.14. what
shall we think of the foming and frothing wrath of God, which burns unto the
lowest hell, and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
After which follows, in the next verse, I will heap mischiefs upon them,
Deuteronomy. 32.23.
I will spend minc arrows upon them etc. He had done so upon the Ancestors of
these refractary Jews, who had been saepius puncti and repuncti, minime tamen
ad resipiscentiam compuncti, ost punished, but could never be reclaimed; so
incorrigibly flagitious, so shamelesly, so prodigiously wicked were they, till
there was no remedy. This their vile stubbornness made him sore displeased
with them: and put thunderbolts into his hands to destroy them; For though
Fury be not in God Isay 27.5. to speak properly, he is free from any such
passions as we are subject to, yet if briars and thorns set against him in
battle, if a rabble of rebels conspire to cast him out of his throne, saying We
will not have this man to rule over us etc. I would go through them, I would
burn them together, says he, in the same breath. Abused mercy turns into
fury. Nothing so cold as lead, and yet nothing so scalding, if molten. Nothing
more blunt then iron: and yet nothing so keen, if sharpened. The air is soft
and tend: yet out of it are ingendered thunder and lightenings. The sea is
calm, and smooth: but if tossed with tempests, it is rough above measure. The
Lord, as he is Father of mercies, so he is God of recompenses: and it is a
fearful thing to fall into his punishing hands. If his wrath be kindled, yea
but a little, Heb. 10. Psalm. 2.
woe be to all those upon whom it lights: how much more when he is sore
displeased with a people or person as here? For who knows the power of thine
anger, says Moses? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath: that is, let
a man fear thee never so much, Psalm. 90.11
he is sure to feel thee much more, if once he fall into thy fingers. And this
is here urged by the Prophet as a motive to true repentance: since by their
fathers example, they might see there was no way to escap^ the dint of the
divine displeasure, but to submit to Gods Justice and to implore his mercy: men
must either turn or burn, For even our God is a consuming fire Heb. 12.29.

Verse 3. Therefore say thou unto them] These Jews, says Cyrill, had neither
seen their fathers wickednesses, nor heeded their calamities. mittitur ergo ad
cos Zacharias quasi paedagogus, Zachary therefore is sent unto them as a
schoolmaster or Monitour: that by considering what had been, they might prevent
what otherwise would be: and redeem their own sorrows.

thus says the Lord of hosts] A far greater Lord and Potentate then that
great King of Persia, who was now their sovereign. True it is that they had
been commanded by a former King to desist from building the city Ezr. 4.12, 21.
But there was no one word in that letter to forbid the building of the Temple.
There was also now another King set up, and of another family. They are
therefore by this Prophet and by Haggai called upon again and again to turn to
the Lord, and to return afresh to their work Ezra 5.1. Wherein, because they
were sure to meet with many enemies, therefore here and elsewhere (eighteen
several times in that eight chapter) there is frequent mention made of the
Lord of Hosts, for their better encouragement. See the Note on Mal. 3.17.

turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hosts] This is the great Doctrine of the
Old Testament: as Repent ye, is of the New. And this He purposely prefixeth, as
a preface and preparative to the other Prophesies both of Mercies and
Judgments, whereof the whole is fitly made up. Sour and sweet make the best
sauce. Promises and Menaces mixed, make the most fruitsull discourse: and serve
to keep the heart in the best temper. Hence David's ditty was composed of
discords, Psalm. 101.1. I will sing of mercy and judgment, and so be both merry
and wise. But, to the words of the Text;

turn ye unto me etc.] By sin men run away from God (whereby it appears that
sin is the greatest evil, because it sets us furthest off from the greatest
good) and by repentance they return unto him. Deuteronomy. 30.2, 8, 9, 10. Mal. 3.7.
Ier. 4.1. Hos. 14.1. Act. 26.18. Hence Act, 3.19. Repent and be converted.
Contrition is repentance for sin 2 Cor. 12.21. Rev. 9.20. Conversion is
repentance from sin Act. 8.22. Heb. 6.1. Hereunto is required first a serious
search of our ways (for it is a Metaphor taken from a traveller) Let us search
and try our ways and turn again to the Lord Lam. 3.39. I considered my ways,
and then (seeing my self far wide) I turned my feet to thy Testimonies. Psalm.
119.59. Satius est recurrere, quam male currere, said that Emperor in his
symbol, It is better to stop or step back, then run on, when out of the way:
for here he that hastes with his feet sins Prove. 19.2. the faster he runs,
the farther he is out. But as the deceived traveller (when once he finds his
error) in his judgment he dislikcth it, in his will he turns from it, in
his affections he grieveth at it, and is angry with his false guides, with his
utmost endeavor he not only turns again to the right way, but makes the more
have that he be not benighted: So is it here, David not only turned his feet to
Gods ^estimonies, from which he had swarved, but he thenceforth made have and
delayed not to keep his commandments Psalm. 119.59, 60. For, this true
conversion we are speaking of, this repentance never to be repented of, is an
upright, earnest and constant endeavor of an entire change of the whole man
from all that is evil to all which is good. This is the doctrine of the
Gospel, Tit. 2.11. and this is all the fruit Isaey 27.9. To turn from one sin
to another, is but to be tossed from one hand of the devil to the other: it is
but with Benhadad to recover of one disease, and dye of another: it is but to
take pains to go to hell. See this in Saul, John, Herod, Agrippa, and others,
who gave but the half turn: turned not from East to West, but from East to
North only: their change was not essential but only graduall: it is not a
through change for subject and object, but partial and temporal, as being but
moral, or formal, or merely mental. It proceeds from conviction of
judgment only, and not for aversion of will: from horror of punishment, not
from hatred of sin; which they leave (happily) but loath not: leave it, I say,
for the inconveniences that follow it, for the fire that is in it, not for the
filthiness that is in it. Now all these seeming Converts, because they cast
not away all their transgressions ( All is a little word, but of large extent)
are therefore to be reckoned among those fools of the people that pass on and
are punished, those enemies of God that instead of turning again (turning
short again upon themselves with the prodigal, Prove. 22.3.
and returning to the Lord with Ephraim) go on still in their trespasses till
their hairy scalp be wounded, Psalm. 68.21.
till evident and inevitable judgments be incurred, till iniquity prove to be
their utter ruin Ezekiel. 18.30. Wherefore now Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of
Hosts, Add not to all your other sins that of Impenitency, for which there
remains no more sacrifice (as Herod added to all his former abominations the
beheading of the Baptist) but Turn you, Turn you, why will ye dye O house of
Israel. And for this, consider these ensuing particulars. 1. Who you are that
are required to return: weak and worthless creatures, the slime of your
fathers loins, dust and ashes, altogether unable to avert or avoid Gods
judgments: beaten rebels you are: and have therefore no help left, but to fall
down before God and implore his mercy. Turn and live, except ye repent ye shall
all perish. 2. Next, see who it is to whom ye are required to return: Not to
some tyrant, or implacable enemy that having gotten us into his hands, will
deal cruelly with us, (as the Duke of Alva roasted some to death, starved
others, and that even after quarter) but to the Lord your God, Hist. of Netherl.
who is gracious and m^rcifull, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
quickly repents him of the evil Joel 2.13. He will surely both assist such
as have but a mind to return (why else does he bid us turn, which he knows we
cannot do without him? and why does he bid us pray to him to Turn us? when we
bid our children ask us for this or that, it is because we mean to give it
them.) He will also accept us with all sweetness, as he did Ephraim, Ier.
31.19, 20. and the Prodigal Luk 15. The father met him ver. 20. so he will do
us Isay 65.24. The Prodigal came, the Father ran Tantum velis, Basil.
and Deus tibi praeoecurret) he fell on his neck, as Jacob did on his dear
Joseph's, he kissed him, when one would have thought he should have kicked him,
Ambros.
or killed him rather for his former riotousnesle. He calls for the best
robe, and for the gold-ring, and for the fatted calf. Filsus timet convitium,
Pater adornat convivium, Psalm. 88.5.
Let us eat and be merry says He, For this my son was dead (given up for dead,
free among the dead, free of that company) and is alive again: He was lost and
is found. Of himself he lest his father and ran riot: and yet he is called the
lost son, in the best sense. Hunger drove the wolf out of the wood: and yet he
is accepted, as if not necessitated. 3. Thirdly take notice from what you are
required to turn. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways: for why will ye dye,
ye house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11. It is your sin only that you are to part with,
and why should ye be so fond of it? if you look upon it, either in the Author
of it, the devil, Ioh. 8.44. Or in the Nature of it, as it is an Offense
against God (your rightful Lord, your bountiful Benefactour) and a breach of
his Law which is holy, and just, and good; Or in the horrid effects of it (as
upon other creatures for man's sake, so especially) upon man himself, whom Sin
has excluded from the possession of the lower paradise, and the possibility of
the higher, into an eternity of all extremities, after many a little hell here
aforehand. Or (lastly) in the ransom of it, Christ's blood and bitter
sufferings, that soul of sufferings which his soul then suffered when God
made our sins to meet upon him Esaias 53.6. Oh think on these things sadly,
seriously, fixedly and copiously, and you will soon see caul enough to turn to
him from whom these children of Israel had deeply revolred, Isay 31.6.
and were therefore grievously plagued, they and their fathers, that they might
return to him that smote them. Which because they did not, but stood stouting
it out with God (which was their manner from their youth) therefore were the
Syrians before, and the Philistines behind to devour Israel with open mouth:
and for all this his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out
still Isay 9.12, 13. Besides the hinderance and hurt they did to others by
standing out: For ifye turn again to the Lord, your brethren shall find
compassion, said Hezekiah to his people, moving them to repent 2 Chr. 30.9. And
should not we lend them this friendly help.

and I will turn to you, says the Lord of Hosts] And should not such a favor
from such a Lord melt them and make them malleable? Romans 2.4. Joel 2. If. 55.7.
Mat. 3.3. Psalm. 130.4. Iam. 4.4. Luk^ 15.
Should not the goodness of God lead them to repentance? Should they not rent
their hearts because God is gracious? return unto him because he will multiply
pardon? repent because his kingdom is now at hand? fear him the rather,
because with him there is mercy? draw nigh to him, who thus draws nigh to
them? make have home with the prodigal, where there is bread enough? Surely
nothing works so much as kindness upon those that are ingenuous. Those
Israelites at Mizpeh drew water, and powered it forth before the Lord, upon the
return of the Ark. There is no mention of their lamenting after the Lord, while
he was gone; 1 Samuel 7.
but when he was returned and settled in Kiriath-jearim 1 Samuel 7.6. 2 Cor. 5.14.
Tit. 2.14.
David argues from mercy to duty Psalm. 116.8, 9. Ezra from deliverance to
obedience chap. 9.13, 14 The love of Christ constrains us says Paul, his
grace that brings salvation teaches us to denyungodlinesse, and to live up
to our principles. Romans 12.1.
I beseech youby' the mercies of God, says the same Apostle, as not having any
more prevailing, more heart-attaching, attracting argument in the world to
press them with; I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
mercy have I drawn thee Ier. 31.3. And again I drew them with the cords of a
man, with bands of love, Hos. 11.4. that is, with reasons and motives of mercy
befitting the nature of a man, with rational motives: to neglect mercy is to
sin against humanity: not to convert by kindness, is to receive the grace of
God in vain: nay, it is to heap up wrath against the day of wrath. A son
feeling his fathers love, creepes nearer under his wing. A Saul, sensible of
David's curtesy in sparing him, when he might have spilt his blood, was
strangely mo^^ified and melted into tears. Shall God offer to turn to us, and
we refuse to turn to him? Shall he beseech us to be reconciled, and we go on in
our animosities and hostilities? Does he offer to power out his spirit even
upon scorners, and to make known his words unto them, and all this, that they
may turn at his reproof Prove. 1.23? And shall they yet turn their backs upon
such blessed and bleeding embracements? Had God given us but one Prophet, and
forty days time only to turn unto him (as he dealt by Niniveh that great city)
surely we should have repented long agone in sackcloth and ashes. But how
justly (alas) may he complain of us, as he did once of Jezabel Rev. 2.21. I
gave them space to repent, but they repented not. I have striven with them by
my spirit, and wooed them by my word. I have heaped upon them mercies without
measure: and all to bring them back into mine own bosom. I have also smitten
them with blasting and mildew, with judgments public and personal: and yet
they have not turned unto me says the Lord Am. 4.9. Ah sinful nation etc. If
any ask, What can we do toward the turning of our selves to God? I answer:

First you must be sensible of your own utter inability to do any thing at all
toward it Ier. 10.23. Btza.
Job, 15.5. Philip. 2.12. Non minus difficile est nobis velle credere, quam
cadaveri volare. It is no less hard for us to be willing to believe, then for
a dead carcass to fly upwards.

Secondly, know that yet it is possible, feisable, by the use of these means
that God has appointed: who also has promised to make it both possible and
easy to us. He bad Moses fetch his people out of Egypt: but himself effected
it. He bad the Israelites go and blow down the walls of Jericho: they obeyed
him, and it was done: So here.

Thirdly as our liberty in external acts is still some, (as to come to the
public ordinances, to set our selves under the droppings of a powerful
ministry, and there to lie, as he did, at the pool of Bethesda, waiting the
good hour) so must our endeavors be answerable. The Bereans brought their
bodies to the Assembly, took the heads of St. Paul's sermon, compared them with
the scriptures Act. 17.11, 12. and yet they were unconverted.

Fourthly, make much of the least beginnings of Grace, even those they call
Repressing: since they prepare the heart for conversion. See Luke 11.32.

Fifthly, Pray, Turn us O God and we shall be turned, Draw us and we shall run
after thee. And here remember to be earnest. Ask, seek, knock, as the
importunate neighbor that came to borrow two loaves, or as the widow that
came for justice, Luke 18.1.
and would not away without it. He that hears the young ravens that cry only
by implication, will he be wanting to his weak but willing servants?

Lastly wait for the first act of conversion, the infusion of the sap of Grace,
which is wholly from God; our will prevents it not but follows it: and
whenever the spirit imbreatheth you, turn about, like the mill; when God has
tuned and does touch you, do you move and make melody: resigning up your selves
wholly to him, and putting your selves out, God into possession. Thus if you
turn to him, he will turn to you. The Lord is with you, whiles ye be with him.
If ye seek him he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. See that ye refuse not him that speaks in this text with
so much affection and earnestness: (...) Heb. 12.25.
see that ye slight him not, that ye shift him not of^ (as the word
signifies:) for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that thus speaks from
heaven, sc. by his blood, Word, Sacraments, Mercyes, motions of his spirit,
crosses etc. When Physic, that should remove the disease, does cooperate with
it, then death comes with the more pain and speed. The stronger the conviction
of sin is, the deeper will be the wrath against it, if it be not by repentance
avoided. No surfeit more dangerous then that of bread: no judgment more terrible
then that which grows out of mercy offered, and despised.

Verse 4. Be ye not as your fathers] Man is a creature apt to imitate, to be
led more by his eyes then by his ears: and children think they may lawfully Be
as their fathers. St. Peter's converts had received their vain conversation
from their fathers, as it were ex traduce, or by tradition 1 Pet. 1.18. And St.
Steven tells his perverse hearers that they were as good at resisting the Holy
Ghost as their fathers had been before them Act. 7.51. They used to boast much
of their Ancestors Ioh. 8.33. and to bind much upon their example and
authority Ier. 44. 17. Mat. 5.21. They thought they were not much to be blamed,
because they did but as their fathers had done before them. The Prophet
therefore dehorts or rather deterrs them from that folly: serting forth both
the crime and doom of their forefathers, whom they so much admired, and so
stiffly imitated, and this he ost repeateth that they might once consider it,
and be wrought upon by those domestic examples.

have cryed] Loudly and lustily; Es. 58.1.
according to that, Cry aloud, spare not, Lift up thy voice like a trumpet: sic
clames ut stentora vincas, A minister should be a Simon Zelotes, a son of
thunder: as Basil was said to thunder in his preaching, lighten in his life; as
Hierome for his vehemence was called Fulmen Ecclesiasticum, the Churches
light-bolt: as Harding, before his shameful Apostasy, wished he could cry out
against Popery, as loud as the belles of Oseney: and as Farellus (that notable
French Preacher) whose voice when the envious Monks sought to drown by ringing
the bells as he was preaching at Metis, he lifted up his voice adravim usque:
and would not suffer himself to be outroared. The Saints-bell (as they called
it) Pierius uses for an hieroglyphick of a preacher, who must not speak the
word only, but sound it out into all the earth, Romans 10.18. not preach it
only, but cry it, as the Apostles word signifies, 2 Timothy 4.2. clangite,
clamate, Jer. 4.5. Boat, vociferate, (...). Boantis, Vociferantis.
Mat. 3.3. Ministers have to do with deaf men, dead men, living carcasses,
walking sepulchers of themselves. Now therefore as our Savior lifted up his
voice when he said, Lazarus come forth: so must they stand over men and cry
aloud, awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, that Christ may
give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14.

turn you now from your evil ways etc.] This was the constant cry of the
Prophets as here, and Apostles as Acts 26.18. to open men's eyes (naturally
closed up that they cannot see the evil of their ways, Ier 2.35. Rev. 3.15.)
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.

and from your evil doings] Heb. Designs, gests, or exercises enterprized
advisedly, and prosecuted studiously, of natural disposition and inclination as
Prove. 20.11. and 1 Samuel 25.3. This St. John usually calls committing of
sin. 1 Epist. 3.4, 8, 9. John 8.34. this is to add rebellion to sin, Job
34.37. impudence to impotence, brows of brass to iron sinews, Isa. 48.4.
This is wickedness with a witness, which if men could but see in its native
colors, and cursed consequents, they would soon be persuaded to turn from it.
As the eye cannot but be offended with a loathsome object: so neither can the
understanding. Take rats-bane, it looks not evil: bu^ when a man feels it
boil, burn, torture him, etc. he hates it extremely. So he should do sin:
he will do else at length, when it is too late. For prevention: take the
counsel of a Martyr, get thee Gods law, as a glass to look in -- So shall you
see your faces foul-arrayed, and so shameful, mangy, pocky, and scabbed,
Bradfords sermon. of Repent. p. 20.26, 27.
that you cannot but be sorry at the contemplation thereof, and seek out for
cure: Especially if you look to the tag tied to Gods law, the malediction:
which is such, as cannot but make us to cast our currish tails between our
legs, if we believe it. But O faithless hard hearts! O Iezabels guests, rocked
and laid asleep in her bed! O wicked wretches etc.

but they did not hear] Though the Prophets cried, and spoke loud enough to be
heard and heeded. An heavy ear is a singular judgment, Isa. 6.10. An hearing
ear, a precious mercy, Prove. 20.12. God must be entreated to boar our ear
Psalm. 40.6. and to make the boar so big that the word may enter; to say as
Isa. 42.18. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see.

Verse 5. Your fathers where are they?] Is not the grave their house? have they
not made their beds in the dark? are not they gone down to the Congregation
house of all living Job 30.23? Every man should die the same day he is born; as
being born a child of death: the wages of sin is death, and this wages should
be paid him down presently. But Christ beggs their lives for a season 1 Timothy
4.10. he is the Savior of all men, not of eternal preservation, but of
temporal reservation. But what a sad thing is it for men to dye in their sins
as these in the Text, and their Nephews did John 8.21, 24. How may such men, on
their deathbeds, say to their sins, as Charles the fifth did of his honors,
victories, riches, Abite hinc, abite long, Go, Mornaeus.
go, get you out of my sight: or as Cornelius Agrippa the conjurer did to his
familiar that used to accompany him in the shape of a dog, Abi a me perdit a
bestia, Joh. Manl. loc. com. 136. P. Sut. de vit. Caribusian.
quae me perdidisti, Be gone thou wretched beast that have wrought my ruin:
Petrus Sutorius speaks of one that preaching a funeral sermon on a religious
man (as he calls him) and giving him large commendations, heard at the same
time a voice in the Church, (...)
mortuus sum, judicat us sum, damnat us sum, I am dead, judged, and damned. The
Devil preached Saul's funeral, 1 Samuel 28.19. though David made his Epitaph, 2 Samuel 1.

And do the Prophets live for ever?] Those false Prophets (so Hierome senseth
it) that cried peace, peace to your fathers, and made all fair weather before
them, when the fierce wrath of God was even ready to burst out upon them, as an
overflowing scourge. But they do better that understand it of Gods true
Prophets, who are dead indeed (for wise men dye as well as fools Psalm. 4^.10.
Good men dye as well as bad, Ezech. 21.4. yea good men often, before the bad,
Esaias 57.1.) but their words dyed not with them: the truth of their prophesies
not only lived for ever (for ever O Lord thy word is stablished in heaven
Psalm. 119.89.) but struck in the hearts and flesh of their perverse hearers,
like the envenomed arrows of the Almighty throughout all eternity. Haeret
lateri lethalis arundo
Wicked men may, as the wounded Heart, frisk and skip up and down when the
deadly arrow sticks in their ribs, but not so easily shake it off.

Verse 6. Did they not take hold of your fathers] Overtake and catch them (as
Huntsmen their prey, or as one enemy does another in flight 1 King. 18.27. 2
King. 25.5.) to drag them down to the bottom of hell. A godly man, as he has
peace with God, with himself, and with the creatures: so he has also with the
Ordinances, and may say as Hezekiah, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou
have spoken. Are not my words always good says God, to them that walk
uprightly, Mic. 2.7? Excellently Augustine, Adversarius est nobis, quamdiu
sumus and ipsi nobis: quamdiu tu tibi inimicus es, inimicum habebis sermonem
Dei. Gods word is adversary to none but such as are adversaries to themselves:
Neither does it condemn any, but such as shall be assuredly condemned by the
Lord; Cor and anima Dei Greg. in 3. Reg.
for what is the Word, but the heart and soul of God, as Gregory says. And
what says the Essential Word of God, who came out of the bosom of his father
and knew all his counsel? He that rejects me and receives not my words,
has one that judges him: the word that I have spoken, the some shall judge
him in the last day, John 12.48? Oh consider this ye that forget God, that
slight his word as if it were but wind, that belly the Lord and say, It is not
he neither shall the cvill (foretold) come upon us, neither shall we see sword
nor famine. And the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them,
thus shall it be done unto them, Wherefore thus says the Lord God of hosts,
because ye speak this word (and is there not such language of many men's hearts
now-adayes?) Behold I will make my words (not wind, but) fire and this people
wood, and it shall devour them, Ier. 5.12, 13, 14. The Word of God in the
mouths of his Ministers may well be likened to Moses his rod: which whiles he
held it in his hand, it flourished, and brought forth almonds: but being cast
upon the ground it became a serpent. Semblably, Gods words and statutes, if
laid to heart, they yield fruit and comfort: but if slighted or snuffed at (as
Mal. 1.13.) serpent-like they will sting the soul, and become a savor of death
etc. This contempt will also call for a sword, to revenge the quarrel of the
Covenant: as it did upon these men's fathers for their instance, and admonition.
It is reckoned by Daniel as a great aggravation of Belshazzars sin Dan. 5.22.
that he was not sensible of his father Nebuchadnezzars pride and fall. And
thou his s^nne Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou knew
all this. The sin of these Jews in the Text was the greater, because their
Fathers and Elders (either out of sound conversion, or at least out of clear
conviction of conscience) had confessed and remonstrated the truth and justice
of God in threatening and executing his judgments upon themselves, saying as
Lam. 1.18. The Lord is righteous, for we have rebelled against his
commandments: and as chap. 2.17. The Lord has done that which he had devised,
he has fulfilled his word, he has thrown down and has not pitied etc. Hear
them in their own words here like as the Lord of hosts (whose power is
irresistible) thought (devised, determined with himself, Zamam
and accordingly denounced by his Prophets) to do unto us (who did not the
words which he commanded us, Ier. 11.8.) according to our ways (which were
always grievous, Psalm. 10.5.) and according to our doings ( that were not
good, Ezekiel. 36.31.) so has he dealt with us: for he loves to retaliate and to
render to every transgression and disobedience, a just recompense of reward,
Heb. 2.2.

Verse 7. Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month] The third
month after the former prophecy, when the Jews probably had practiced the
doctrine of Repentance, so earnestly pressed upon them: and had humbled
themselves under the mighty hand of God, who was now ready to lift them up by
this and the seven following most comfortable Visions touching the restoration
and reformation of the Church and State. The Devil and his impes love to bring
men into the briars, and there to leave them, as familiars forsake their
witches, when they have brought them once into fetters: as the Priests left
Judas the traitor to look to himself, Mat. 27.4. and as the Papists cast off
Cranmer, after that, by subscribing their Articles, he had cast himself into
such a wretched condition, that there was neither hope of a better, nor place
for a worse; Melch. Ad. in vita.
ut jam nec honest mori nec vivere inhoneste liceret. But such is not Gods
manner of dealing with those that tremble at his word, and humble at his feet.
Deijcit ut relevet, premit ut solatia praestet, He comfort those that are
cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. commands others to comfort the feeble-minded, 1 These.
5.14. and notes those that do not with a black-coal, Nigro carbone notar.
Job 6.14. See the workings of his bowels, the rowlings of his compassions
kindled into repentance toward his penitentiaries, Jer. 31.20. Hos. 11.8. Esaias
40.1, 2. See how he comforts them with cordials according to the time wherein
he had afflicted them, Psalm. 90.15. and in the very thing wherein he had abased
them; as he once dealt with their Head, Philip. 2.7, 8.

Kerse 8. I saw by night] The usual time for such revelations. It may note
(moreover) the obscurity of the Prophecy: whence also the mention of
myrtletrees (low and shady) and that in a bottom, as Calvin conceives: and all
this, that he might give a taste of good hope to the Jews by little and little.

and behold a man riding upon a red horse] Not Alexander the Great, riding upon
his horse Bucephalus, and translating the Empire from the Persians to the
Grecians, as Arias Montanus conceited it: But the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
the Captain of the Lords Host, Josh. 4.14. and of our salvation, Heb. 2.10.

riding upon a red horse] In the same sense (says One) that this color is
given to his garments, Esaias 63.1, 2, 3. and to the Angels horse, Rev. 6.4. The
wild Bull (says Another) of all things, cannot abide any red color. Therefore
the hunter for the nonce, standing before a tree, puts on a red garment; whom
when the Bull sees, he runs at him as hard as he can drive. But the hunter
stepping aside, the bulls horns stick fast in the tree: as when David slipped
aside, Saul's spear stuck fast in the wall. Such an hunter is Christ: He lifted
up upon the tree of his cross, had his garment dipped and died in his own blood,
as one that comes with red garments from Bozra. Therefore the Devil and his
Angels (like wild bulls of Bashan) ran at him with all their force, (in that
three-hours darkness especially) but he delivering himself, as a mighty
Conqueror, their horns stick fast, as it were in his cross: as Abraham's
ram, by his horns stuck fast in the brier, etc.

and he stood among the myrtle-trees that were in the bottom] Myrrhe-trees some
render it. Here Christ, that horseman and head of his Church, keeps himself,
as touched with the feeling of our infiunities, Heb. 4.15. as suffering and
sorrowing with his people, who are fitly compared to myrtles, that grow in a
shady grove, in valleys and bottoms, and by waters sides. -- and amantes
littorae myrtos. Virg. Georg.
Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, Esaias 32.20. Myrtles also are
odoriferous, and precious, Esaias 41.19. and 55.13. so are the Saints, Esaias 43.4.
Colos. 4.6. they cast a good scent wherever they go, by the grace of God that
is in them: as Alexander the Great is said to do, by the excellent temperament
of his body. Lastly, Levit. 23.40. with Neh 8.15. the Jews at their joyful
feast of Tabernacles, used myrtle-branches among others, to testify their
thankfulness for a settlement in the promised land, after so long wandering in
the wilderness. The Gentiles also in their solemn feasts, enterludes, and --
cingebant tempora myrto, wore garlands made of Myrtle. Virg. Georg:
Let us keep the feast: Let us keep holy day, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.8.
(...)
who himself did over-abound exceedingly with joy, had an exuberancy of it, at
that constant feast of a good conscience. Diogenes could say, that a good man
keeps holy day, 2 Cor 7.4.
all the year about: Christ crowns the Calendar of his peoples lives with
continual festivals here: how much more in heaven? Pliny tells us, Plin. lib.
15. cap. 29.
that ex myrto facta est ovantium corona, subinde and triumphantium; of Myrtle
was made, among the Romans, the crown or garland, of those that did shout for
victory, or ride in triumph.

and behind him were there red horses] i. e. horsemen: Nam nimis crassum est
illud commentum, fuisse locutos equos, says Calvin here. These horse men are
Angels, as verse 10. deputed to several offices, and executions, for
judgment, fo^mercy, or both; shadowed by the diverse colors of their horses.

Verse 9. ^alvin.
Then said I, O my Lord what are these?] Thus the Prophets enquired and
searched diligently (as says Saint, Peter, 11 Epist. 1.11.) for the truth of
things, (...).
as hunters seek for game, and as men seek for gold, in the very mines of the
earth: who not content with the first oar that offers it self to their view,
dig deeper, and deeper, till they are owners of the whole treasure. See Prove.
2.4. and rest not, till ye see that blissful sight, Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

and the Angel that talked with me,] Or, in me, as the Vulgar renders it. This
was some created Angel, who might reveal things to the Prophet by working on
the fantasy, and spirit, by way of information and instruction, as Dan. 9.21.
Luke 1.11. Apoc. 1.1.

I will show thee what these be] How ready are the holy Angels to serve the
Saints, Heb. 1.14. rejoicing more in their names of office then of honor, of
employment, then preferment, to be called Angels (that is, Messengers, or
Internuntio's) then Principalities, Thrones, Dominions, Ephesians. 1.20. accounting
it. better to do good, then to be great, to dispense Gods benefits, then to
enjoy them. Hence they are with, and about the Saints, as their companions,
guides, protectours, monitours, and rulers of their actions, as here.

Verse 10. And the man that stood among the myrtle-trees] The man Christ Jesus,
that is ever with his Church, and in the midst of his people, that feeds
among the lill^es, and walks in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks.
He being asked by the foresaid Angel, answered him (in Zacharies hearing) for
he is Palmoni hammedabber, that excellent Speaker, as Daniel calls him, and
therefore asks him of the vision, Dan. 8.13.

These are they whom the Lord has sent] As his Epoptai, or Overseers and
Intelligencers. Not that God needs them, as Princes need the counsel and aid
of their subjects. The holy Angels receive more from God, then they perform,
or bring to him. But he makes use of their service about us. 1. For the honor
of his Majesty, and comfort of our infirmity. 2. To make out his love unto us,
by employing such noble creatures for our good. 3. To make and maintain love
and correspondency between us and Angels, till we come to walk arm in arm with
Angels, (...).
as Zach. 3.7. and to be like unto them, yea their equals, Luke 20.36. if not
more, Ephesians. 1.23.

Verse 11. We have walked to and fro through the earth] Itavimus, we have
coursed up and down with incredible swiftness. Hence they are called the
charrets of God, Psalm. 68.17. (Heb. Gods-charret, to note out their
joynt-service, as of one) as here, his horsemen, ready pressed to do his pleasure.

and behold all the earth sits still, and is at rest] excepting the Church
alone, which like Noah's Ark, is ever tossed up and down, till it rest at last
on the everlasting mountain: then she shall have her happy Halcyons: then she
shall see her enemies afar off, as Lazarus did Dives, or as the Israelites at
the red sea did their persecutours, dead upon the shore. Meanwhile, she must
not expect to be calm, and quiet for any continuance. Joh. 16.33. Joh. 16.20.
Esth. 3.15. Esaias 21.10. 1 Cor. 3.9.
In the world ye shall have trouble, And ye shall weep and lament: but the
world shall rejoice: they shall revel, and laugh themselves fat. The king and
Haman sat down to drink: but the city Shushan was perplexed. The Church is
called Gods threshing-floor, because threshed with continual crosses: and
Gods-husbandry, because he will be sure to plow his own ground, and to make
long furrows upon their backs, whatsoever become of the waste; and to weed his
own garden, though the rest of the world be let alone, and grow wild. Moab is
not poured from vessel to vessel, Jer. 48. Job 10.10.^
but setleth upon the lees: when the Israel of God is poured out as milk, and
crudled like cheese, as Job speaks in another case.

Verse 12. Then the Angel of the Lord] That Advocate with the Father, Jesus the
Juft One, 1 John 2.2. who appears for his afflicted people, and feelingly
pleads for them, as being afflicted in all their afflictions, even the Angel of
his presence that saves them, Esaias 63.9. It much moved him, to hear that Gods
enemies were in better case then his people: and this put him upon the
following passionate expostulation.

O Lord of Hosts, How long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, etc.]
Vsquequo Domine. Calvin had these words much in his mouth: thereby breathing
out his holy desires in the behalf of the afflicted Churches, Melch. Adam. in
vita.
with whose sufferings he was more affected then with any thing that befell
himself. It is said of Melan^thon, that the miseries of the Church made him
almost neglect the death of his dearest children: and put him upon many prayers
and tears; which, Idem in vita Melanch.
like music upon the water, made a most melodious noise in the ears of God.
When Luther in a certain Epistle checked him, and chod him for his exceeding
great care of the Churches welfare, calling him pertinacissimam curarum
hirudinem, etc. he meekly replied, Si nihil curarem, nihil orarem; If I should
not care so, I should not pray so. God seems sometimes to have lost his
mercy, (as here, How long will thou be unmercifull to Jerusalem) and then we
must find it for him. He seems to have forgot his people: we must remind him.
He seems to sleep, delay: we must waken, quicken him, with How long Lord? Thou
shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea the set
time is come, says Daniel, Psalm. 102.13, 14
who is (probably) held to be the Pen man of that excellent Psalm. 102. (Confer
Dan. 9.2.) and he speaks it with as much confidence, as if he had been in Gods
blessed bosom the while. This also he spoke, not now by a spirit of prophecy,
or special revelation; but by way of argumentation, or necessary
demonstration: For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the
dust thereof; They pity her, and melt over her, therefore thou Lord much more:
since all their tenderness is but a spark of thy flame, a drop of thine Ocean.

against which thou have had indignation, these threescore and ten yeers] There
is much ado among Interpreters about Jeremies 70 and Zacharies 70, whether one
and the same: or different one from another. That of Scaliger is most unlikely,
who reckons these years of the captivity, from the first year of Xerxes with
his father Darius, unto the fourth year of Darius Nothus. Lib. 6. de Emend.
Temp.
How much better our countreyman Lydiat (whom yet Scaliger so much scorned,
saying, Quis est ille ex ultima Britannia Canis, qui Ios. Scaligerum audeat
allatrare?) who concludes it to be 70 years from the last destruction of
Jerusalem by the Chaldees, Lyd. Emend. Temp. Anno M. 3485.
to this second year of Darius Hystaspes, wherein Zachariah prophesied? That of
A Lapide upon this Text, I cannot pass by, Moraliter idipsum dicamus, idipsum
oremus and obsecremus pro Anglia, etc. Let us say the same, pray the same for
England, Scotland, etc. that the Angel here does for Jerusalem; How long Lord
will thou not have mercy upon England, where Heresy has prevailed now these
hundred years and upwards? The English fugitives beyond-seas, write upon their
College and Church-doors, in great golden letters, Jesu, Jesu, converte
Angliam: Fiat, Fiat. Jesu convert England: Amen, Amen. Why, yet this is
somewhat better then that of Pererius the Jesuit, upon Genes. 15.16. If any
man marvel says He, why England continues to flourish, notwithstanding the
overflow of heresy, and cruel persecution of Catholics, (just execution of
Catholics, he should have said) we answer, because their iniquity is not yet
full, (God grant it, Ier. 28.6.) Sed veniet tandem iniquitat is complementum.
But the time is not far off: and forbearance is no quittance, etc.

Verse. 13. And the Lord answered the Angel] How should God do otherwise then
answer his welbeloved Son, with good and comfortable words, since he is all in
all with the Father, and can do any thing with him? Father, says he, Joh. 12.
I know thou hear me always. Did God hear Abraham for Ismael, nay for
Sodom? Did David hear Ioab, interceding for Absalom? Acts 12.20.
Did Herod hearken to Blastus making request for those of Tire and Sidon, with
whom he was highly displeased? And shall not God give ear to his Son, praying
for his people, that are as dear to him as the apple of his eye? Good and
comfortable words he does surely answer him: such as were once those, Joh.
12.27, 28. when Christ had thus prayed; Now is my soul troubled, and what shall
I say? Father save me from this hour: but for this cause came I to this hour.
Father, glorify thy Name. Then came there a voice from heaven ( Bath-chol the
Rabbis call it) saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.
So, when he shall say in his daily intercession (for he ever lives to make
request for us, at the right hand of the Majesty on high) It irketh me, that
the whole earth is at rest, and my Church at so much unrest: Return, O Lord,
Psalm. 90.13.
how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. Save now I beseech
thee O Lord: Psalm. 118.25.
O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity. How can God do less then answer as
Isa. 33.10. Now will I arise, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my
self: Or as in the words next following here (which indeed are all along good
words and comfortable words) I am jealous for Jerusalem etc. The Lord shall yet
comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem; Yet for all the sorrow he shall do
it, Ier. 30.17.
and for all that Others called her an outcast saying, This is Zion, whom no
man seeks after: and she her self concludes her doleful ditty with, Thou
have utterly rejected us: thou art very wroth against us. Lam. 4.22.

Verse 14. So the Angel that communed with me] See the Note on ver. 10.

cry thou saying] q. d. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God,
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, speak ye to her heart and cry unto her
saying, that her appointed time is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned,
and so the quarrel is ended: for she has received of the Lords hands double
for her sins. Nothing so much as I have deserved says she Ezra 9.13. twice so
much as she has deserved, says He. O sweet contradiction! O beautiful
contention! The same Hebrew word signifies to repent and to comfort 1 Samuel
15.35. Esaias 40.1. Gods care is to comfort those that are cast down. His command
to his Prophet is to cry comfort to the penitent with an extraordiny
earnestness, from the God of all consolation.

I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousie] Love is strong
as death, zeal, or jealousy (for the same word signifies both) is hard as
hell. Cant. 8.6. Non amat qui non zelat says Augustine. He loves not that
zeales not. And Basil venturing himself very far for his friend, and by some
blamed for it, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I cannot love a man, but
I must do mine utmost for him. When one desired to know what manner of man
Basil was, it is said there was presented in a dream to him a pillar of fire
with this motto, Talis est Basilius, Lo, such an one is Basil. It is certain
that our God is a consuming fire, who would set the briars and the thorns says
He, that is the churches enemies, against me in battle? Es. 27.4.
I would go through them, I would burn them together. And yet he says in the
same place, Fury is not in me: Prove. 6.34.
What will he do then when jealousy is in him as here? Jealousy is the rage
of a man, and has these three properties.

First it is exceeding watchful, and quick-sighted: hardly shall the Paramour
escape the husbands eye, a wanton glance is soon noted and noticed. God is no
less sensible and observant of the least indignity done to his dear spouse,
his Hephzibah, Genesis 4.6. Esth. 7.8.
be it but in a frown or a frump. Why is thy countenance cast down, says God
to that dog-bolt Cain? Why do lowre upon my righteous Abel? What will he
force the Queen also before me in the house? If David's enemies mow and make
mouths at him, Psalm. 40.15.
if they cry Aha, Aha, so would we have it, God will reckon with them for it.
If Edom say jearingly to the Prophet, Watchman, what of the night? watchman,
what of the night? If Ammon clap but his hands at Gods Israel, if he stamp with
the feet, and rejoice in heart only, when it goes ill with the church, God will
stretch out his hand upon him, and cut him off out of his country, and he
shall know that he is Jehovah, Ezekiel. 25.67. yea that the Lord God of Israel is
a jealous God. He will be jealous for his land, and pity his people Joel 2.18.

Secondly jealousy is violent: it is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof
are coals of fire Cant. 8.6. The same word is elsewhere put for fiery
thunderbolts, Psalm. 78.48. also for a carbuncle or burning fever Deuteronomy. 32.24.
Jealousy puts a man into a feaver-fit of outrage: arms him with fiery darts,
yea with lightbolts: makes him cast firebrands, be ready to take any revenge:
Think the same of God in a way of justice. He will spit in the face of a
Miriam, that shall but mut^er against his Moses: Number. 12.14.
what then will he do, (or rather what will he not do) against Jezabel,
Athaliah, Herodias etc?

Thirdly jealousy is irreconcilable, implacable, Prove. 6.34, 35. He will not
spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he
rest content though thou give many gifts, what would not Balaac have given to
have had his will upon Israel? What large offers made Haman? he would pay ten
thousand talents of silver to those that had the charge of the business to
destroy the Jews. Ahashuerosh yielded: but so did not God. Esth. 3.9. Esth.
7.4.
We are sold (said Esther) I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain and to
perish: But God never consented to the bargain. He had war with Amalec for
ever, and laid his hand upon his own throne, as swearing to root him out Exodus
17.16. And this proud Agagite Haman shall feel the force of his curse in his
very bowels. Let the laboring Church but cry out, Help O King, hear O
husband, give ear O shepherd of Israel, Isa. 8.8. Isa. 63.15:
the enemy is come into thy land O Immanuel, and the stretching out of his
wings fills the whole breadth of it. Where is thy zeal (or jealousy) and thy
strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, our Redeemer, or near kinsman, nay,
our husband. Thy church is unto thee A sister, a spouse: Esaias 58.7. 1 Cor.
6.17. Genesis 14. 1 Samuel 30.18. Ier. 12.7. Ier. 4.10.
And can thou hide thine eyes from thine own flesh? from her that is joined
to the Lord, and is one spirit? shall Abraham venture for the rescue of his
kinsman, David of his two wives, and will thou do nothing for the dearly
beloved of thy soul? shall she be given up into the hand of her enemies? shall
the sword reach unto the soul. Let Christ but hear such words from the mouth
of his Spouse: and he will soon gird his sword upon his thigh, he will act
Phineas his part and execute judgment: Psalm. 78.66.
he will smite his enemies in the hinder parts (whip them, as men use to do
boys) and so put them to a perpetual reproach; shame them for ever, as a
company of punyes or Zanies.

Verse 15. And I am very sore displeased with the Heathen that are at ease]
Heb. I am in such a heat as causes fuming and foaming. I am boyling-hot, and
even ready to burst out upon them, to destroy them: for the word here used has
great affinity with another word that signifies to cut down, and to destroy 2
King. 6.6. and imports an higher degree of displeasure, a greater height of
heat, then either Anger or wrath, as may be seen in that signal gradation
Deuteronomy. 29.28. The Lord rooted them out of their land in Anger and in Wrath, and
in great Indignation. The last of these three is this word in the Text, Fervore
maximo ferveo, I am as hot as may be against those Heathens that are at ease,
at heartsease, that come not in trouble like other men, neither are they
plagued as better men, Psalm. 73.5.
and are therefore secure and insolent above measure Job 21.23. haughty and
haunty, so that the Church cannot rest for them: they thrust with the shoulder,
and push with the horn (as afterward verse 18.19. with Dan. 8.4.) yea they
push the diseased Ezekiel. 34.21. (which is a singular cruelty.)

they help forward the assliction] they fall like dogs upon the wounded Dear.
This David complains of as an unsufferable grievance Psalm. 69, 26. Esaias 27.
For they persecute him whom thou have smitten: and they talk to the grief of
those whom thou have wounded. God smites his in mercy and in measure, in the
branches only, Aug.
and not at the root, neque ad exitium sed ad exercitium. Displeased he may be
with his own, and make bloody wails upon their backs, if need be: but then he
looks that others should pity them, and not lay on more load and seek to
bring them to utmost extremity. God puts his people sometimes into the hands of
his enemies, for correction sake. Now they commonly being enraged with haughty,
revengfull, and malicious desires, exceed their commission, and so derive the
mischief upon themselves (See Prove. 24.17, 18,) they cannot do but they must
overdoe (as Nebuchadnezzar the rod in Gods hand Isai 10.) and thereby utterly
undo themselves for ever. For their cruelty comes up to heaven 2 Chronicles. 28.9.
and God soon hears the cry of his oppressed ( for he is gracious) and
avengeth himself on their pitiless enemies: standing over them and saying as
Isa. 47.6. I was wroth with my people. I have polluted mine inheritance, and
given them into thine hand: thou did show them no mercy: upon the ancient
have thou heavily laid the yoke. And again: Because these Philistines have
dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a deceitful heart, to destroy
it for the old hatred: Ezekiel. 25.15, 17. and 26.2.
Therefore I will execute great vengeances upon them with furious rebukes, and
they shall know that I am the Lord when I shall laymy vengeance upon them. 2 Samuel 13.39.
Joab never pleased David better, then when he made intercession for banished
Absalom: for the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom, whom yet
he had very just cause to be greatly displeased with. God in a heat, as it
were, against Israel, offers Moses a great fortune Exodus 32.10. but would
have taken it very ill, that Mos^s should have taken him at his word.

He is but a little angry with his people] and soon repents him of the evil:
But woe be to those that help forward the indignation, that deal by Gods
afflicted as the Herd of Deer do; which, when any of the herd is shot, the hest
push him out of their company. Camden.
It is said of Q. Elisabeth, that she hated ho less then did Mithridates, such
as maliciously persecuted virtue forsaken of fortune. Think the same of God. He
wears his rod to the stumps, and then throws it into the fire. He sets his
horse-leeches to his people (when he finds them sick of a plethory of pride,
when fullness has bred forgetfulness, saturity security) and suffers them
to suck rill they burst: and then treads them under his feet, and puts them
away as dross Psalm 119.118, 119.

Verse 16. Psalm 42.7.
Therefore thus says the Lord] Thus, one deep calls another: the lower deep
of our misery, the higher deep of Gods mercy. As Craesus his dumb son burst out
into Kill not king Craesus: so, when enemies are ready to devour the Church,
Gods bowels work: he can hold no longer but cries, Save my child, Handle the
young man gently for my sake, See Ier. 31.20. Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for
ever; neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me
etc. when the child swoons in the whipping, God let falls the rod, and falls a
kissing it, to fetch life into it again. A Physician, in some cases purges
his patient till nothing be lest almost, but skin and bone or blooddeth him ad
deliquium animae, till he faint and sink, but yet his care is still to maintain
nature: so this heavenly Father and Physician is careful to keep up the
spirits of his suffering Saints, by comforts and cordials, as here:

I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: Miserationibus visceralibus with
multitudes of tender mercies that flow from the inwards, from the bowels, from
the bosom and bottom of the heart: had that of a Parent, nay of a mother toward
her child in an extremity as 1 King. 3.26. And here observes how fully and
sweetly the Angels prayer ( verse 12.) is answered even ad cardinem desiderij.
Aug. Confess. lib. 5. c. 8.
God not only grants him according to his own heart, but fulfills all his
counsel, as it is Psalm. 20.4. Lets it be to him even as he will, nay gives him
an enlarged answer, presses upon him (as Naaman did upon Gehezi's two talents
when he desired but one.) How long will thou not be merciful to Jerusalem
says He?

behold I am returned to Jerusalem with many mercies says God.] I went away
and hid me from it in my anger Hos. 5.15. but am come again with many comforts,
to relieve it. As all light is from the Sun, and all waters from the sea: so is
all comfort from God. In thy light shall we see light: but Thou did hide
thy face and I was troubled Psalm. 30.7. as when the Sun is eclipsed, all
creatures here flag and hang the head, there is a drooping in the whole frame
or nature: and as when the extracting force of the Sun leaves the vapors that
are drawn up, they fall down again to the earth; So sares it with the Church:
If God withdraw, she lies all amort, yea, she lies open to all sorts of evils
and enemies: for her shadow is departed from her. But he cannot be long absent,
such is his love: he will repent for his people when he sees their power is
gone Dent. 32.36. when there is a dignus vindice nodus, an extremity fit for
divine power to interpose: when misery weighs down, and nothing but mercy turns
the scale, then (at furthest) in the very turning and critical point. He will
return to Jerusalem with mercies. He will return to her, not as the winter sun,
that casts a goodly countenance when it shines, but gives little comfort and
heat: but with a Cornu-copia of all manner of blessings will he come.

my house shall be built in it says the Lord of Hosts: and a line shall be
stretched forth upon Jerusalem] that is both Church and State shall flourish.
God will both do good in his good pleasure unto Sion: be will also build the
walls of Jerusalem Psalm. 51.18. but mark that he says in his good pleasure, as
here in tender mercies; to teachus, that all the good we enjoy is merely of
mercy, it is all of free grace: for otherwise, there should not be so much as
any face of Church or commonwealth, as we see in the Jews at this day; a
miserable dissected people, because Lo-ruhamah, Hos. 1.
such as have not obtained mercy. Then Ancestors acknowledged with all
thankfulness for so undeserved a favor, that Except the Lord of Hosts had
left unto them a very small remnant, Isay 1.9.
they should have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. Had not the Angels
laid hold upon Lots hand, and the good Lord been merciful unto him Genesis 19.16.
he also had perished amongst those sinners against their own souls. Jehoshua
was a brand plucked out of the fire Zech. 3.2. And when One said to Mr. Bradford
the Martyr God has done much for you since I first knew you, and has wrought
wonderously in you to his glory; he thus answered, Truth it is, for He has
dealt favorably with me, Act. and Mon. 1473. Ezra 9.13.
in that he has not punished me according to my sins, but has suffered me to
live that I might seek repentance. Thou have punished us less then our
iniquities deserve, says Ezra. And it is of the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, says the Church, because his compassions fail not Lam. 3.22.

Verse 17. Cry yet saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts my cities] Here are
four Yets in this one verse, and all very gracious ones: to break their hard
hearts, and to raise their faith in his promised mercies. For it is as if God
should say. Though I was sore displeased with your Fathers, and ye are risen up
in their rooms a very rate of rebels, so that I have had indignation against
you full seventy years, ver. 12. yet I do you to know, and by my Propher I
proclaim with great earnestness and evidence of truth, that I do yet own you
my cities (so that ye are not discovenanted) and will yet prosper you (so that
it shall no more be said This is Zion whom no man cares for: for you shall
have plentiful increase of men, Ier. 30.17.
cattle and all manner fruits of the earth as chap. 2.4.) yea you shall have a
fullness of all things, not only repletive but diffusive, not only of
abundance, but of redundance too; your cup shall over flow into the lesser
vessels of others.

my cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad] Diffundentur,
dissluent, aut effluent. You shall have not for necessity only, but for lawful
delight and honest affluence.

and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion] sc. with spiritnall comforts, taking her
into his wine-cellar Cant. 2. yea into the wilderness, and there speaking to
her heart Hos. 2.13.

and shall yet choose Ierusalem] That is, settle her in the sound assurance of
her. Election and Adoption, whereof those outward blessings are both fruits
and pledges. Hence David doubts not to conclude his spiritual good estate, and
hopes of eternal happiness from his external enjoyments Psalm. 23.5, 6. Thou
preparest a table before me, thou anointest mine head, my cup runs over.
Hence he inferrs, Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of
my life: and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. In all that is
here said, we may see that scripture fully made good Ier. 51.5. Israel has not
been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of Hosts: though their land
was filled with sin against the Holy one of Israel. And herein God dealt with
his people according to hi^ prerogative, and not according to his ordinary
course. When the cursed Canaanites had fi^led their land from corner to corner
with their uncloannesies, Ezra 9.11.
they were devoted to destruction. When the Edomites grew insolent and ripe for
ruin, they were called the border of wickedness, and the people against whom
the Lord had indignation for ever. Mal. 1.4. See the Note there.

Verse 18. Then I lift up mine eyes and saw] That is, I gave good heed to this
second vision also: which was added purposely for confirmation of the former
promises; which should be certainly accomplished to the Church, notwithstanding
her many and mighty enemies. Horns they are called for their might and
mischievousnes: by a metaphor, a feris cornupetis from fierce beasts, whose
strength and wrath lies in their horns; or else from warriers, who wore iron
horns upon their helmets.

and behold four horns] Not the four Monarchies (for the Grecians and Romans
were not yet: and this is spoken here for the present comfort of the afflicted
Church) but the enemeis of Israel from all the four parts of the world (fee
Psalm. 107.2, 3.) for they were surrounded; On the North were the Syrians,
Assytians, and Babylonians. ( Ab Aqu lone nihil boni, Ier. 4.6. and 6.1) On the
East, the Ammonites and Moabites. On the South, the Edomites and Egyptians. On
the West, the Philistines, as may be gathered out of Jeremy and Ezekiel. Geneva
is at this day a small people, environed with enemies, French, Spanish, Savoy,
Pope, and barred out from all aid of neighbors, cit^es, and churches: yet, by
the mighty arm of God, strangely and strongly upheld and desended.

This Mr. Beza represented in a most elegant emblem of a city depainted as
hanged by a twined thread; Melch. Ad. in vit. Bez. 227.
sustained and maintained by the mighty hand of God alone. Would any man take
the Churches picture? says Luther: then let him paint a a silly poor maid,
sitting in a wood or wilderness, compassed about with hungry wolves, Loc. com.
de perfec. verae Ecclesiae.
lions, bores, and bears, and with all manner of cruel and hurtful beasts;
and in the midst of a great many surious men assaulting her every moment and
minute, for this is her condition in the world.

Verse 19 And I said unto the Angel that talked with me, What be these?] Though
the vision be dark and mysterious, yet the Prophet despaireth not of a right
understanding, neither does he waywardly reject it with a Quod non vult
intelligi, vult negligi. But, wanting wisdom he asks it of God, as St. James
also advises us to do chap. 1.5. and as David practiced. Teach me good
judgment and knowledge says He, give me understanding and I shall observe thy
law. Thus Daniel prayed, and had an Angel sent to inform him, not once but
often in friendly and familiar manner Dan. 9.21. and 10.11. and 11.2, 3. So had
Joseph, Cornelius, Paul, etc. And although Angels are not so ready now, or
appear not, at least, so visibly to tell us the mind of God: yet He will not be
wanting to his willing servants; but in the use of means they shall be all
taught of God: as David was by repayring to the Sanctuary Psalm. 73.13. and as
the Eunuch was by Philip Act. 8.

these are the horns which have scattered] Heb. tossed them up in the air, as
furious beasts do with their homes, Lud de Dieu in Mat. 22.44.
and sorely bruised them. Number not modo dispersionem significat quae fit per
modum ventilationis, sed etiam quae fit per modum al^isienis and contritionis.
See Hos. 10.14. and 13.16.

Verse 20. And the Lord showed me four carpenters] He that before was called
an Angel, is here called Jehovah, this shows him to be Christ, who is God
blessed for ever. In respect of his eternal essence he is called the Lord: in
respect of his office or Mediatourship, an Angel.

four carpenters] Or smiths: so many horns, so many Artificers to batter and
break them. God wants not ways and means to help his at a dead lift: he
knows how to deliver says Peter, 2 Pet. 2.9.
and herein usually he goes a way by himself. Many times he sets the
enemies together by the ears among themselves: whilst that I withal escape,
says David Psalm. 141.10. Thus by Nebuchadnezzar, as by a mall or bettle, he
brake the rest of those horrible horns: as at this day the Pope by the Turk,
and Spaniard by the French, and that the Church may have her Halcions. N.
marvel I slept so soundly seeing Antipater was by and watched, said Philip of
Macedon. We may better say of Antipater, our gracious Father and guardian, the
keeper of his Israel.

Verse 21. What come these to do?] he asks not what they were? for by their
tools or weapons he perceived they were Carpenters or smith, (as some think)
with iron instruments to break these iron homes: confer 1 King. 22.11. He
inquireth therefore of their employment only. Futilous and foolish questions
should be avoided, Tit. 3.9.

so that no man did lift up his head] Turn head, or look cheerfully as Luke
21.28.

but these are come to fray them] deterrere, says the Vulgar: better
deterrere, to fright them, now that they had pusht Israel to the Lord.

to cast out etc.] Thus Omne sub regno graviore regnum est. See Eccles. 5.7.
with the Note there.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. I lift up mine eyes again and looked] i. e. I looked wishly, not
sluggishly, as betwixt sleeping and waking as chap. 4. I saw further by the
spirit then common sense could have carried me. I beheld Jerusalem in her
future glory, I looked intently, I took aim, not by the things which are seen,
but by the things which are not seen 2 Cor. 4.18. Heb. 11.27. Gal. 4.26.

and behold a man.] The Man Christ Jesus, as his Mother is called a Virgin Isa.
7.14. the Virgin, that famous Virgin that conceived and bare a Son, that gat a
man from the Lord Genesis 4.1. This Man (called before and after an Angel, as
appearing in humane shape) is here seen and set forth as an Architect or
Master Builder, going to take the plot of his Church (see Rev. 21.15. and
observe by the way, how in that book the holy Ghost borrows the allegories and
elegancies of the Old Testament, to set out the story of the New, in succeeding
ages.)

Verse 2. Whither go thou?] This was great boldness; But the Prophet
understood himself well enough; and Christ approves and assents to it in a
gracious answer here, and especially verse 4. Great is the confidence of a good
conscience toward God. See Esaias 63.16, 17. Hab. 1.12. We may come boldly to the
throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. 1 Pet. 3.23.


to measure Jerusalem.] This had been promised before, Chap. 1.16. But for
their further confirmation, who saw a little likelihood of such a reedifying
and repeopling, it is repeated. Thus the Lord, tendering our infirmity, seals
to us again and again in the holy Sacrament, what he had said and sworn to us
in his word.

Verse 3. And behold the Angel] Zacharies Angel, as One calls him. Went
forth] to take direction from Christ, and to give the prophet further
information. See the Note on Chap. 1.9.

and another Angel went out to meet him] So ready is Christ to answer prayers,
and to satisfy his weak but willing people, that draw near unto him with a
true heart. Heb. 10.22. If any such ask and miss, it is because they ask
amiss. Jam. 4.3.

Verse 4. Run, speak to this young man] Not go, but Run: yea, fly swiftly with
weariness of slight, as Dan: 9.21. Christ thinks it long ere his praying
people hear from him. Only he will be enquired of by them Ezekiel. 36.37. Zachary
seems to have been a young Prophet, and Christ remembered the kindness of his
youth, and became a wonderful counselor to him: He gave to this young man (or
greenheaded stripling) knowledge and discretion. Prove. 1.4. Epiphanius says he
was an old man: and that he is called a young man because a client and disciple
of the Angel that communed with him. Where Angels are called men, it was no
dis. paragement to Zachary to call himself a lad, or servant considering his
distance. Thus Abraham's servant, though old, is called his boy Genesis 24.52. by a
Catachresis. That Is a good Note that One gives here, That the Angel tells the
prophet; Mr. Pemble.
but the prophet must tell the people: God using not the Ministry of Angels
but men (earthen vessels) to bear his Name to his people Acts 8.26. and 9.6.
and 16.9

Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without wals] Or shall dwell in towns
without walls, viz. in the suburbs or villages, there being not room enough
within the walls to receive them. This seemed an incredible thing to this poor
remnant now returned from Babylon. But it is the property and duty of believers
to trust God upon his bare word: and that against sense in things invisible,
and against reason, in things improbable.

for the multitude of men and cattle therein] That is, says Augustine, of
spiritual and carnal persons in the Chuch Catholic.

Verse 5. For I, says the Lord, Igneus qui and cominus arceat and eminus
terreat. Theodor.
will be unto her a wall of fire] The Church (Christ's garden) may seem to lie
open to all incursions and disadvantages: but as it has a well within it Cant
4. So it has a wall without it, yea round about it, better and stronger then
that about Babylon, or Susa in Persia; the stones whereof were joined together
with gold, as Cassiodorus testifies. Lib. 7. Var. Epist.
The Lacedaemonians were forbidden to wall in their city of Sparta: as being
sufficiently fortified by the valor of the inhabitants. The Hollanders will
not wall the Hague, though it have 2000 households in it: as desirous to have it
counted rather the principal village of Europe, then a lesser city. China is
said to be surrounded with a strong wall of stone: and England, with walls of
wood, sc. A puissant Navy. But what is all this (either for defense or offense)
to a wall of fire? who dare venture to scale such a wall? It is not valor but
madness to fight with a flame. Fire is terrible to the fiercest creatures, as
Lions, Leopards etc. Shepherds and travelers were used to guard themselves by
making great fires round about their night-lodgings, to keep of wild beasts.
Some think the prophet alludeth to that custom: others, to the Angel guarding
of Paradise with a flaming sword, Instit: Lib. 2. Cap 13.
that is, says Lactantius, with a wall of fire. The Church may sit and sing,
we have a strong city: salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Esaias
26.1. Heb 1.7, Genesis 32.1.
He makes his Angels spirits, his ministers a flame of fire. These met and
ministered unto Jacob at Mahanaim making a lane for him, These are the watchmen
over the walls of the new Ieru. salem, and of the mountains about the same.
Isai. 62.
as the word imports. These fiery charets and horsemen appeared, for Elisha by
whole legions 2 Kin. 6.17. and do still pitch their camp round about the godly
Psalm. 34.8. Who therefore cannot but be safe, as being guarded by the peace of
God within them, and by the power of God without them, through faith unto
salvation.

and will be the glory in the midst of her.] God is the Churches both bulwark
and beauty: her muniment and ornament. His presence, his worship, his Grace,
his protection is that tower in the midst of her Esaias. 5. that golden head of
the picture, that tower of the slock and strong hold of the daughter of Gods
people Mic. 4.8. Hence the Ark is called the glory Romans 9.4.5. and all comforts
without it but Icabods. 1 Samuel 4.20.
Hence Judea is called the glorious land: and Heathens are brought in saying,
Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. For what nation is
there so great that has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is, in all
things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7
And what nation is there so great that has statutes and ^udgments so
righteous as all this law etc. Surely as Samsons strength and glory lay in his
hair, so does the strength and glory of our land consist in the true religion,
and Gods sincere service: which if it should be shaved and deprived of, though
every shower were a shower of gold (says a Divine) every stone in the land a
pearl, every beggar an honorable Senator, every fool as wise as Solomon,
every weakling as strong as Samson; yet our wealth, honor, strength, wisdom,
and glory are gone, and we shall sing a doleful Miserere with Phineas his wife
Ichabod.) The glory of England is gone; for Religion is gone.

Verse 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North] A
proclamation to those in Babylon to make have home, and come away for shame:
now they had so fair a way made, and such free liberty given them to return. A
man would wonder they should be so backward to a business of this nature. But
they that were born in hell, know no other heaven, as the proverb is. There
they had lived a long season in peace and safety in a rich and fat though a
foreign Country. There they were at quiet, enjoyed their religion and
customs, got wealth, had favorites at Court: and what should they trouble
themselves to remove into a Country where they were sure to meet with many
bitter enemies, the Samaritans and others? And who can tell whether this
Proclamation of King Darius be not a design to try their affection to their
country, and so to fall upon such as did offer to return thither? Thus by
casting of perils, distrusting of promises, and listening to that Improba Siren
Desidia, Antiqr. Lib. 11 Cap. 4.
they staid half of them, at least behind: whatever Josephus has falsely
storied of 4628000. that returned: the contrary whereto see Ezr. 2.64.

for I have spread you abroad into the four windes] And do now offer to
recollect and reduce you to your own country. See that ye shift not off Me
that speak from heaven. Heb. 12.25. and 2.3.
See that ye neglect not so great salvation. How often is the Lord even fain to
smoke us, and so force us out of our clayie cottages, toward our heavenly home;
And what ashame is it to us that a Heathen should say Fugiendum est ad
clarissimam patriam: Plotin: apud. Ang de C.D lib. 9. Cap. 16
ibi pater, ibi omnia. We should even flee apace to our own country that is
above: since there is our Father, there is All that heart can wish or need
require.

Verse 7. Deliver thy self, O Zion that dwell with the daughter of Babylon]
q.d. Is Babylon a fit place for thee to abide in? what comfort can thou take
in such lewd company? Save thy self from this untoward generation Act. 2.40.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut
off in her in iquity: for this is the time of the Lords vengeance: he will
render unto her a recompense. Jer 51.6.7. Shortly after this exhortation to the
sons of Zion, Babylon revolted from the Persians, Justin: lib. 1. Herod. lib. 3.
and was taken and sacked by Darius in the fourth year of his reign (that is two
years after this Prophecy was uttered) by the help of his friend Zopyrus. Two
thing should prevail with the people of God to shun the society of the ungodly.
1. Infection of sin, which is more contagious and catching then the plague.
Though Lot learned not the evil manners of Sodom, yet his daughters did.

2. Infliction of punishment Zac. 9.2. Hamath lay so nigh Damascus in places
that she fared the worse for her neighborhood. See for both these, Rev. 18.4.
and say, if at any time forced to be in bad company, O that I had wings of a
dove: Psalm. 55.6.
for then would I flee away, and be at rest. Or, if this Oh will not set thee
at liberty, take up that Woe, to express thy misery, Woe is me that I sojourn in
Meshech, etc.

Verse. 8. For thus says the Lord of hosts] Sanchez refers these words to
those aforegoing, q. d. Deliver thy self, etc. for so the Lord commands. But
herein he stands alone; the current of Interpreters carrying it against him.
This preface seems prefixed for procuring more authority to the ensuing
promise, which to the poor Jews might seem incredible. If Jehovah speaks it,
and he that has all power in his hand to effect what he speaks, why should
any one doubt, or despair?

After this glory] i. e. these glimmerings of glory, these out goings of grace
begun amongst you, and by degrees to be finished.

has he sent me unto the Nations which spoiled you] Or, against the Nation^
for it is a sending in judgment: and perhaps against either the Caldeans
destroyed by the Persians (see the Note on verse 7.) Or, the Persians,
afterward destroyed by the Grecians, and by Alexander the Great. See Esaias
33.1. Now, whereas some object, that Christ is her said to be sent of his
Father: and this seems to import an inferiority: It is answered: First, that
two equals by mutual consent may send one another. Mission does not always
import inequality. Secondly, One may be inferior to another, either by nature,
and so Christ is not: or by condition, as he is the Mediator, and as he did
voluntarily abase himself; and so he is, Phil. 2.7.

For he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye] The little man that
is in the eye, (as pupilla of pupa) Or, the black of the eye. God, Ishon, of
Ish. It is here called Bath, the daughter of the eye: because it is as dear to
a man as an only daughter.
who at first drew light out of darkness, does by an admirable work, draw the
light of the body out of the black apple of the eye. Philosophers call it, the
Chrystalline bumour. It is the tenderest piece of the tenderest part: to
express the inexpressible tenderness of Gods love, says Salvian. The eye is
kept most diligently, and strongly guarded by nature with tunicles. A man can
better beat a thultch on the backs then a touch on the eye. Siquis digitum meum
mordeat, siquis pungat brachium and crura, siquis etiam duriter vulneret, etc.
says Calvin here. If one bite my finger, prick my leg or arm, yea slash and
wound me, I can better bear it, then if he thrust his finger in mine eyes.
Amida son of Muleasses king of Tunis, cruelly put out his fathers eyes, by
holding hot burning basins before them. Turk hist.
Robert de Behasme, Earl of Shrewesbury, Anno 1111. playing with his own
child, Speed. 473.
for a pastime, put his thumb in the boys eyes, and thrust out the balls
thereof. We use to say, Oculus and fama non patiuntur jo^os. The eye and the
good name. will endure no jests. Let persecutours take heed how they meddle
with Gods eyes. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened
himself against God and prospered? Job 94. Some read the text thus. He that
touches you, touches the apple of his own eye, that is, he very grievously
hurts himself, as procuring and pullingdown upon his own head, the sharp
wrath and vengeance of God. But the former is the better.

Verse 9. For behold, I will shake mine hand upon them] Kings, they say, have
long hands; and can easily reach those that are far distant, This is much
more true of the King immertall: who can quickly crumble, to crackle the
mightiest monarchs: he cuts off the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76.12. he slips
them off, (so the Hebrew there imports) as one would slip off a flower between
ones fingers: or as one should flip off a bunch of grapes. If the Lord do no
more but arise, his enemies shall be scattered, Psalm. 68.1. If he do but show
himself in the field (as Xerxes used to pitch bis Tent on high, and stand
looking on his Army when in fight) the Philistines will be heard to cry out;
God is come into the camp: Woe unto us; who shall deliver us out of the hands of
these mighty Gods, etc 1 Samuel 4.8. But if he once shake his hand, (that mighty
hand, as Saint James calls it, that spanneth the heavens, and shakes the
foundations of the earth) how much more if he smite with the hand, Ezekiel. 6.11.
and stamp with the foot, (as the Prophet in another case; and as Pompey vainly
vaunted, that with a stamp on the ground of Italy, he could raise an Army) the
sinners against Zion are soon afraid; Esaias 33.14. Jer. 4.13.
fearfulness surprizeth the hypocrites. Woe unto us, say they, for we are
spoiled. The very shaking of his hand at them, shall make their hearts ache,
shake and fall asunder in their bosoms, as drops of water.

and they shall be a spoil to their servants] i.e. To the Jews, whom they
lately spoiled and enslaved. This was fulfilled in Esthers days: and
afterward in the time of the Maccabees. Besides, what is yet expected to be
done by the nation of the Jews; when, at their glorious conversion, Christ
shall dwell among them, verse. 10. and the multitude of Nations shall join
themselves to Christ, ver. 11. the Jews inhabiting in their own land, verse.
12. to the silencing, amusing, and amazing of all flesh, verse. 13. whilst the
enemies of the Church by them subdued, Zach. 10.11. and possessed, Esaias 14.2.
Obad. 17, 19. shall willingly, or perforce come under Christ's obedience. The
conversion of the Gentiles (says a learned Author) is many times intimated by
the Israelites mastering of them, spoiling them, The calling of the Jews by Sir
H. Finch.
possessing them for servants, and for handmaids, as Esaias 14.2. Am. 9.11.
Obad. 19. and here, which is not meant so much of a temporal subduing, as of a
spiritual joining with them in seeking of the Lord; yet so as the chief
soeveraignty and stroke of keeping men within the lists of their subjection and
obedience unto Christ, shall remain among the Jews. And so Saint James teaches
us to expound those phrases, Act. 15.17. where that which Amos says, that they
(the Israelites) may possess the remnant of Edom, James renders, that the
residue of men may seek after the Lord. The enemy, whom indeed, the Jews shall
spoil, root out, and destroy, after they have groaned long under his hard yoke.
and bondage, is Gog and Magog, that is to say, the Turk, Ezech. 38. and 39 with
whom they shall have a mavelous conflict, as it may seem in their own
country, Ezech. 39.2, 4. Dan. 11.44, 45. and over whom they shall obtain a
noble victory (God from heaven miraculously fighting for them, Ezech. 38.18,
19, etc. Zach. 14.3, 4, 5.) at, or near Jerusalem, Joel 3.2. Ezech. 39.16. This
enemy is not always represented by one and the same name: but sometimes he is
called Moab, Edom, Rabbah, Ashur, Javan: happily because those that inhabit the
seat of these people shall join hands with the Turk, and fall in the same
destruction. Sometimes he is called Leviathan, Esaias 27.1. Ezekiel. 38.2. Dan.
11.40.
from his quality; sometimes Gog and Magog, from his country; sometimes the
king of the North, from his territory. But by all these names, one and the same
enemy is understood: which marvellously clears the place in Ezekiel, chap.
38.17. where the Lord by his Prophet speaks to Gog in this wise; Art thou he
of whom I have spoken in ancient time by my servants the Prophets of Israel,
which prophesied in these days and years. He cannot mean Himself, nor Daniel,
which was but his contemporary, much less Zachary that came after: but he
means, the ancient Prophets long before, who spoke of the same person, though
not by the same name.

and ye shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me] You shall subscribe to
the truth of these promises, which now you can very hardly be brought to
believe: when God shall have fulfilled with his hand that which he had spoken
with his mouth, as Solomon's phrase is, 1 King. 8.15.

Verse 10. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for lo, I come] After a long
absence (as it may seem) and great expectation, I come, not to lodge for a
night, but to dwell and make mine abode in the midst of thee; partly in my
new-built temple, but principally in the Temple of my body, Ioh. 2.21. For the
Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, Joh. 1.14. Lo here is habitatie Dei
cum carne, God dwelling with men, which the Magicians held impossible, Dan.
2.11. And for this the Church here, though at a great under, is commanded to
sing and shout, notwithstanding her present pressures. This might seem to her
an unseasonable discourse; which, says Siracides, is as music in mourning.
But when is physic more seasonable, Ecclus. 22.6.
then in time of sickness? And when had the Saints more need of chearing up,
then when they are pressed down with heaviest crosses? And what greater comfort
to a good soul then Christ Jesus our joy? Christus tecythus habet in malu: his
comforts are such as the world can neither give, nor take away: such as no good
thing can match; no evil thing overmatch.

Verse 11. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day etc.] See
the Note on ver. 9. And further observe: that albeit the thorough coming in of
the Gentiles, for all Nations with one consent to receive Christ, be put off
till the Jews famous conversion: yet that nothing hinders, but that this and
such like places that speak of the same may well serve to warrant the first
inceptions of their calling. And so does St. James cite them Act. 15.16, 17.
out of Amos 9.11, 12. and Paul Romans 9.25, 26. out of Hos. 1.10.

and I will dwell in the midst of thee] See the Note on ver. 10.

and thou shall know etc.] See the Note on ver. 9.

Verse 12. And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion] Or his enclosure, his
several, divided from the rest of the world by a wonderful separation, as the
Hebrew word signifies Exodus 33.16. And though there were some interruption in
showing favor for a time: yet was there no imercision, and utter breach of
covenant: nor is to this time, as the Apostle shows Romans 11.28, 29. About the
time when the Turkish tyranny shall have lasted 350. years (says my former
Author out of Dan. 7.25. and 12.7, 11. Rev. 9.15.) the Jews shall repair
toward their own country Esaias 11.15, 16. and 51.10, 11. Ier. 3.18. Hos. 1.11.
where they shall have a great conflict with the Turk Ezech. 38. and be in great
distress for a time Dan. 12.1. but at length prevail, to the utter ruin of
the Grand Signior himself, and the overthrow of his Army; perhaps not far from
the sea of Gennezaret, otherwise called the lake of Tiberias Ezekiel. 39.11. After
which they shall dwell in their own country Ier. 3.18. and 23.8. Ezech. 37.21,
22. Am. 9.14, 15. They shall inhabit all the parts of the land as before Obad
15.19, 20. Ier. 31.38, 39, 40. Esaias 27.12. and 65.10. The land shall be more
fertile then ever it was Ezech. 35. Hos. 2 21, 22. Joel 3.18. Am. 9.13. Zach.
14.10. The country more populous then before Esaias 49.19, 20, 21. Ezech. 34.31.
and 36.37, 38. There shall be no separation of the ten tribes from the other
two: but all make one entire kingdom Ezech. 37.22, 24. Hos. 1.11. and a most
flourishing Commonwealth Dan. 7.27. together with a Church most glorious, both
for outward beauty Zech. 14.6, 7. Esaias 60.20. and 62.1, 2, 3. and inward purity
in doctrine Ezech. 37.23. Zacb. 13.2, 3. in discipline, all profane purged out
Joel. 3.17. Zach. 14.8. abundance of spiritual graces Esaias 25.6. etc. safety
Zach. 10.12. and 14.11. prosperity Esa. 25.8. and 51.13. and stability Esaias
26.1. and 33.16. Ier. 30.20. etc. perpetuity Esaias 60.21. Joel. 3.20.

Verse 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord] Heb. Hus, St. Peace and be
still, as our Savior once said to the raging Sea Mar. 4.39. whereupon the wind
ceased (which before had blowed and blustered till it was weary again, as the
Greek word there imports) and there was a great calm, all was suddenly
hushed, (...).
and silent. the enemies of the Church are no less brutish and boisterous then
the fierce winds and waves Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27. (...)
But God who sets a bound to the mighty waters which they may not pass Psalm.
104.9. he also resraineth the remainder of man's wrath Psalm. 76.10. If he do but
(as the Roman Tribune was wont to do) interpose his Veto. If he do but say
(st.) Be silent O all flesh, (...) plot not, prate not, practice not against my
people, (...)
who dare quatch in his presence, or gainest and his commands? Who art thou O
man that chattest against God? says Paul. Who is this that darkeneth counsel
by words without wisdom? Romans ^.20. Job 38.2.
says God to Job: how now? Let all flesh be silent: Let God be justified, and
every mouth stopped. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come
out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed. He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked (whether they will
or no) shall be silent in darkness: for by strength shall no man prevail. The
adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces: out of heaven shall he
thunder upon them (says holy Hannah.) And then they shall be glad to be quiet,
1 Samuel 2.3, 9, 10.
and to save themselves as they can: like as the worms, when it thunders,
wriggle into the comers of the earth; and as Caligula (that bold miscreant that
dared his Jove to a duel) when it thundered, covered his eyes with his cap,
Sueton.
running under the bed, or any bench-hole.

O all flesh] frail and foolish, weak and worthless men, who may not compare
their wisdom, or oppose their strength to Gods: before whom they can no more
stand, then a glass-bottle can before a Cannon-shot. They should therefore do
well to meddle with their match; and not contend with him that is Mightier then
they. Eccles. 6.10.
The Church is called Jehovah shammah, or the Lord is there Ezekiel. 48.35. and
although she be but a Virgin, yet she has a thrice-puissant Champion, Es.
37.22, 23.
even the Holy One of Israel.

who is now also already raised up] Or arroused awaked as a man out of sleep
Psalm. 44.23. or as a giant that shouteth by reason of wine Psalm. 78.65.

out of his holy habitation] That is, out of Heaven Deuteronomy. 26.15. where he has
bathed his sword Isa. 34.5. and bent his bow and made it ready Psalm. 1.12. Or
out of his Temple, which was likewise Gods habitation 1 Samuel 2.20. and thence
God would help his people, as they once said to David at Mahanaim 2 Samuel 18.3.
Therefore now it is better that thou help us, or cause us to be helped, out of
the city: Remarkable is that of the Psalmist, In Salem is Gods Tahernacle, and
his dwelling place in Zion. Psalm. 76.2, 3.
There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword and the
battle. Selah. There? where? In the Tabernacle, in the Assemblies of Gods
Saints. By all flesh, here may also be meant the unbeleeving Jews, who are
enjoined silence and submission, they are styled here, as the Levites styled
the people saying, Neh. 8.11.
Hold your peace: dispute not, doubt not, distrust not Gods promises, seem they
never so improbable, or impossible to be effected: harken not to the murmurings
of your own misgiving hearts, but silence your reason, exalt your faith etc.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. ANd he showed me Jehoshuah the High-Priest] In a vision doubtless;
and that for this end, that both the Prophet, and by him the people also, might
be advertised, that they wrestled not against flesh and blood, men like
themselves, but against spiritual wickednesses, or wicked spirits, who did act
them and agitate them against the Church; ride them and spur them to do
mischief: as he did that bloody Farnesius one of the Popes Champions, Scito
persecutorem tuum ab ascensore daemone perurgeri. Bern.
who coming with an army into Germany, swore that he would ride his horse up to
the spurrs in the blood of Protestants. It was the devil that stirred up the
spirit of Tatnai, Shether-Boznai, Sanballat etc. to hinder the good work now in
hand: like as he did Eckius, Cajetan, Cochlaus, Catharinus and many other great
scholars (besides the two kings of England and Hungary) to write against the
Reformation begun by Luther, and Charles the fifth with all the strength of the
Empire to withstand and hinder it. But all in vain. Here he bends his
acculation chiefly against the chief Priest: but thorough his sides, he strikes
at the welfare of the whole Church. Ministers are the maine object of his
malice; a special spite he bears to such: singling them out and sifting them
to the bran, as he desired to do Peter: stirring up unreasonable and wicked men
against them, as he dealt by Paul when he fought with beasts at Ephesus, with
breathing devils where ever he came, being in deaths often. When the viper hung
upon his hand Act. 28. the devil doubtless thought to have dispatched him: but
he was deceived. So he is ever, when he attempts as an Accuser of the Brethren:
he is sure to be non-suted, and his plea to be cast out of the court by our
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who appears for us (as he
did here for Jehoshua) to put away sin. Heb. 9.24, 26. and to take away the
iniquities of their most holy things.

standing before the Angel of the Lord] i. e. before Christ, his best friend,
and doing his office as an High Priest. Such is Satan's malice and impudency
(says an Interpreter here) to hurt and hinder us most in our best employments:
and to accuse the Saints even to their best Friend Christ Jesus. He knows
well, that as Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so does a Christians strength
lie in his holy performonces, perfumed and presented by Christ. Hence his
restlesnesse in seeking to set a difference, and to breed bate. Hence also, as
the fowls seized upon Abraham's sacrifice, and as the Pythonisse interrupted
Paul and his company when they were praying and well-doing Act. 16.16, 17. so
deals he still by Gods best servants: and that sometimes so, that if after
duty, they should put that question to their own heart, as God did to Satan,
Vnde venis? whence come thou? it would return Satan's answer, ^^om compassing
the earth.

and Satan] That Adversary the devil, as St. Peter. calls him: the Accuser
of the brethren Rev. 12.9. that trots betwixt heaven and earth as a teaser, and
makes a trade of it. Once this name Satan is applied to an holy Angel going
forth as an adversary to wicked Balaam, Satan's spelman as One calls him.

standing at his right hand] why there? Because, say some, the Accusation was
as true as vehement: and so Satan had the upper hand. For Joshua was clothed
with filthy garments verse 3. and there was cause enough why his own clothes
should abhor him, as Job has it chap. 9.31. what his particular sin objected
to him by Satan, was, is hard to say. Some will have it to be one thing, some
another. It is plain by Ezra 10.18. the some of his sons and allies had taken
strange wives which he might have hindered; but that himself had taken a harlot
to wite, Dialog. com. Tryphon.
as Justin Martyr affirms, is no way likely. I should sooner believe with
Thedoret and Sanchez, that the sins here alleged by Satan against Ioshuah and
laid to his charge were, not so much his own personal sins, as the sins of the
whole people: quodammodo enim totus populus est in sacerdote, and in sacerdote
peccat: for the whole people is, after a sort, in the Priest etc.

to resist him] Heb. To Satan yet against him, to do his kind, by frustrating
his prayers and intercessions for the people, by laying his and their sins in
his dish, and by laying claim to them for his. Carried on still by like
hellish hatred of God and his people, he sins that sin against the holy Ghost,
every moment: As Pliny speaks of the scorpion, that there is not one minute
wherein it does not put forth the sting. Our comfort is, that 1. We have an
Advocate with the Father etc. and he is the propitiation for our sins, the
Patron as well as Judge of his Saints. 2. that as Satan stands at our right
hand to molest us in holy duties, so do the holy Angels stand there to
withstand him Luke 1.11. whence it was that the Curtains of the Tabernacle were
wrought full of Cherubins within and without. 3. That if we resist the devil,
steadfast in the faith, and strong in the Lord, he will fly from us, Iam. 4.7.
For this old serpent, having his head already bruised and crushed by Christ,
cannot so easily thrust in his mortal sting, unless we dally with him: and so
lay open our selves unto him. He shall in vain strike fire, if we deny tinder.
He may knock at the door, but if we answer him not at the window he cannot get
in.

Verse 2. And the Lord said unto Satan] The Lord Christ that dyed, yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Who then shall condemn us? who shall lay ought to our
change? Romans 8.33.34, 35.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Satan may attempt it, but can
never effect it. We know that whosoever is born of God sins not, sc. unto
death: but he that is begotten of God keeps himself ( sc. in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life Ind 21.) 1
Ioh. 5.18.
and that Wicked one or that Troubler of the Saints, touches him not, viz.
with a deadly touch, so as to poison him and undo him. Christus nobiscum,
state. The Prince of Persia cannot stand before Michael the King of Saints.
Dan. 10.13, 21.


the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord] Christ argues not the case with
Satan, but cuts him off short with a vehement check and reproof; turns him over
to his father to give him his due, Inhonestum enim est (says Cyrysostom)
honestam matronam cum meretrice litigare, It is not fit for a matrone to scold
with a strumpet. Admit the accusation wi^^ true, yet it was maliciously and
unreasonably urged. Doeg spoke nothing but truth against David and Abimalech;
yet he hears; What shall be given upto thee? or, what shall be done unto
thee, thou salse tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, that pierce deep, wound,
deadly; Psalm 120.3, 4.
with coals of Juniper, that shall burn fierce in respect of thy self, and
sweet, in regard of others; for men are wondrous well pleased when such ill
members are punished.

even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem] He chose her for his loves: and now
loves her for his choice. He loves her and washes her with his blood, that he
may present her to himself holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. The Persian
maids were first purified and perfumed, before Ah^suerus made his choice Esth.
2 Not so here: A fountain of free grace is opened for sin and for uncleanness
to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem Zach. 13.1. And
Uranople, or the new Jerusalem has its foundation garnished with all manner of
precious stones, Reu. 21. Now the fundation of God stands sure, so that the
gates of hell cannot prevail against it. Satan must know that God has chosen
Jerusalem, and will not cast away his people which he foreknew. Romans 11.2.


is not this a brand plucked out of the fire] Titio ex igne ereptus? newly
snatched out of the Babylonish furnace: Psalm. 68.12.
where they have long lain among the pots, where they have been not only
sullied, but scorched and half-burnt: should they then be cruelly cast again
into the flames, which they have strangely escaped like as the barbarous
Persecutours ran Polycarp through the bowels with a sword, when the beasts
would not devour him, nor the fire burn him. Or as the bloody Papists in Queen
Mary's days, Act. and Mon. fol. 1392.
cast the woman of Garneseys babe again into the fire, that sprang and sprawled
out of his mothers womb, as she was in burning. This was clean contrary to that
Apostolical precept, Of some have compassion, pulling them out of the fire.
Jude 21. Ean. 3.30.
And far short of Nebuchadnezzars practices, who taking the three worthies out
of the burning fiery furnace promoted them to great honor and offices.

Verse 3. Now Joshuah was clothed with filthy garments] The tottered rags of
the old Adam, the nasty filthynesse and superfluity of naughtiness that yet
remained in him (though in part regenerate) and intermingled with his best
works. Sin is the Devils excrement: it defiles the soul worse then any jakes
can do the body (as the Hebrew word here signifies, and as our Savior shows
Mar. 7.20. or then the Sanies of a plague sore does a garment. Hence that of
the Church, We are all as an unclean thing, Esaias 64.6.
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. And that of Job, If I wash my
self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge
me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall make me to be abhorred, Job.
9.30.31. 1 Cor. 4.5.
this is the same in effect with that of Paul, I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not hereby ^ustified: but he that judges me is the Lord: who when he coms
to turn up the bottom of the bag, as the steward did Ben^amins, he will
manifest the hidden things of darkness, find out our thefts that we dreamt
not of, open all fardles on that great fair-day, Sacc^ soluto (...) argentum
Ambr.
the day of judgment. As in the meanwhile, should Lord but break open that
filthy sink of sin that is in the very best of us, we should not only be
loathsome to God Zach. 11.8. and to good men Prove. 29.27. but even to our own
selves also, as Job was ( hap. 42.6. Judas was not able to abide is own stench
Mat. 27.4, 5. Yea and some holy men (as Mr. Lever, for one) when they have
desired to see their utmost uncleanness, their corruptions in the most ugly
colors, God has heard them. But yet his hand therewith was so heavy upon
them, that they went always mourning to their graves; and thought it fitter to
leave it to Gods wisdom to give them a sight of their sins, and to mingle the
the potion of sorrow, then to be their own choosers. See that excellent text
Job 15.14, 15, 16. And then stand aloof with the Leper and say, I am unclean, I
am unclean: yet, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean.

and stood before the Angel] His filthy garments notwithstanding: Though we
cannot say our hearts are pure, and our performances perfect: yer if we wallow
not in sin, allow it not, if with the daughters of Zion, we look upon our
former neatness as nastinesse, and finenesse as filthiness, if we be in any
measure purged from the love and liking of sin by the spirit of judgment, and
by the spirit of burnning Isai. 4.4. Christ will neither abhor our presence,
nor reject our services. Aaron was to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings
Exodus 28.38. Christ is this Aaron etc. And though there be an inequality of
expressions in duty quoad nos in us; yet there is a constancy of intercession
by Christ propter nos, for us.

Verse 4. And he answered and spoke to those that stood before him] i. e. to
the Angels that waited upon him. Est autem hoc humanitus dictum says Iunius.
This is ^^^ken after the manner of men: for properly men are washed, justified
and sanctified by the Merit and Spirit of Christ alone. 1 Cor. 6.11. But the
Lord Christ speaks thus to the created Angels his Ministers; to show that He
who only has power to for give sins, does yet therein employ the holy
ministry for an instrument. See 2 Cor. 9.18. and Job 33.33, 24.

take away the filthy garments Those symbols of his sinfulness, (see the Note
on verse 3. so his sins were pardoned in heaven. But because it is small
comfort to a condemned person to have a pardon granted him, unless he know it,
and be assured of it: therefore it follows.

and unto him he said behold] By whatthou have seen in the Angels stripping of
thee.

I have caused thine iniquities to pass from thee] Transtuli peccatum as he
once said to David, I have taken away thy sin, I have tranferred it upon my
self: speaking to my Father for thee, as once Paul did to Philemon for his son
Onesimus, Philem. 18, 19.
if he has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account, I will
repay it. This is the greatest happiness that can befall a man in this world
Psalm. 32.1, 2, and could not but be a singular comfort to these poor Jews,
priest and people amidst their manifold afflictions. A man that has got his
pardon is not troubled though he lose his glove, or hankercheife, nor though it
should prove a rainy day. Being ^ustified by faith we glory in tribulation Romans
5.1.3. Feri domino, eri: nam a peccatis absolutus sum, says Luther: Strike
Lord, strike, while thou will: my sins are pardoned. I thank thee, O Lord (said
Another in his great extremity) for all my pain: and I beseech thee, if thou
think good, to add to it an hundredfold. But behold a further honor; as
mercies seldom come single.

and I will cloth thee with change of raiment] i. e. I will change thy rags
into robes, thy stained clouts into clean clothing. Thou shall be arraied with
the righteousness of the saints Rev. 19.8. that twofold righteousness,
imputed and imparted: that of justification, and this other of sanctification:
that as an undercoat, this as an upper: that clean and pure, this white and
bright: both must be had from Christ, who is made unto us of God not only
wisdom, but righteousness, sanctification, and redemption 1 Cor, 1.30. 2 Cor.
5.19. Surely as our apparel is not bred of us, neither grows out of our
bodies: so neither does this change of raiment in the Text. But the blessed
Lamb of God cloatheth us with his own fleece, which is long enough and large
enough to cover all our defects and deformities, and to set us forth to the
admiration of Angels. As he takes upon him our sins, so he puts upon us his
righteousness. This is a blessed exchange indeed, a sure pledge of our peace
with him, and with God by him. We read in our own Chronicles, that Edmund
furnamed Ironside (in whom England was lost) and Knute the first Danish King,
after many incounters and equal fights, at length embraced a present agreement:
Daniels hist. lib. 1.
which was made by parting England between them two, and confirmed by oath and
Sacrament, putting on each others apparel and Arms, as a ceremony to express
the Atonement of their minds, as if they had made transaction of their persons
each to other; Knute became Edmund, and Edmund, Knute. Even such an exchange I
may say of apparel is betwixt Christ and the pardoned sinner etc. Christ puts
upon his Church his own comeliness, decks his spouse with his own jewels, as
Isaac did Rebecca: cloth her with needle work, and makes her more glorious
within then Esther ever was in all her beauty and bravery: rejoices over her,
as the bridegroom over his bride, yea is ravished in his love to her, with one
of her eyes lifted up to him in prayer or meditation, with one chain of her
neck, that chain of his own graces in her Cant. 4.

Verse 5. And I said, let them set a fair mitre upon his head] Who said this?
The Prophet, grounding his speech on the last gracious words of the Angel,
takes the boldness to enterpose this his request for the bestowing of the
priestly ornaments upon Joshua, and accordingly it is done. This the prophet
knew would be a comfort to the whole people, and a confirmation to Ioshuas
faith, for the pardon of his sins: like as it was to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, Mat. 28.19. Joh. 20.21.
that Christ after his resurrection restored them to their office, after they
had all shamefully forsaken him.

let them set a fair mitre upon his head] Not a diadem, as the old Translation
has it (that is for a kings head) much less a triple crown with the word
Mystery (Babylons motto Rev. 17.5.) engraven in it, as Brocard and many other
eyewitnesses affirm of the Popes crown but a Mitre or tiar. It has its name
from compassing about, be cause it environed the Highpriests head. It had a
holy crown with it Exodus 29.6. signifying the Deity and dignity of Christ. It
had also upon the forefront of it a plate of pure gold with this caelature,
Holiness to the Lord. Hence it was not lawful for the High priest, (say the
Jews) to put off his mitre to whomsoever he met, were he never so great a man:
lest the name and glory of God (whose person he sustained) should seem to
submit to any living: With this Mysterious mitre upon his head, with other
priestly Ornaments and vestments it was, that Alexander the greatmet the
High Priest Iaddus (Nephew and successor to Ichoshuah in the text) as he was
ma^ching against Jerusalem with hostile intent: and adoring that God whose name
was seen written on the golden plate of his Mitre, he entered the city
peaceably, offered sacrifice in the Temple, as the Priests directed him, Dan.
8.7, 20, 21. and 11, 13.
and having seen there the prophecy of Daniel concerning himself, he granted
the Jews many immunities and privileges, and so departed. Parmenio, one of his
favorites, asked him the reason of his friendly dealing with the Jews, ^seph.
lib. 11. Cap. vlt.
who by denying him help and tribute had highly displeased him: He answered,
that while he was yet in Macedonia, and but thinking of the conquest of Asia, a
certain man appeared unto him in the habit of that High Priest encouraging him
to set upon the work, and assuring him of good success therein.

and the Angel of the Lord] that is Christ, the Master of these Ceremenies, the
effect of this Levitical office.

Verse 6. And the Angel of the Lord protested] Either with an oath or some deep
asseveration, or both; as 1 Samuel 25.26. As the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives etc. The former is an oath, the latter an asseveration or obtestation
only, conjoined with that oath. Among the Heathens Ex animi seu sententia was
instead of an oath: And rather then swear or say more, in a matter of no great
moment, Chinius the Pythagorean would undergo a mulct of three talents. Others
render it Testified, or called witness upon his words, the Angels and the
prophet there present, for the more assurance. Thus, though Christ's word be
sufficient (for he is Amen, the faithful and true witness) yet for his
servants better settlement, Rev. 3.14.
he has bound his promises to them with an oath, and taken heaven and earth to
witness; which is dignatio stupenda, a wonderful Condescension.

Verse 7. If thou will walk in my ways, and keep my charge] That is, if thou will walk in all the Commandments (moral) and ordinances (Levitical)
blameless as holy. Luke 1 6. Act 20.28.
Zachary did, and so approve thy self righteous before God, by taking heed to
thy self first, and then to all thy flock, which is thy charge, the Holy Ghosts
depositum, and the purchase of Christ's own blood. God linesse is the highway
to happiness: the good old way that has been ever beaten by all those saints,
that now find rest to their souls. The very first steps in this way are
Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God in Christ Jesus. By these, men
return to God from whom they have departed: are brought near to him, and set
in the way of his steps Psalm. 85.13. We are his workmanship (says the Apostle)
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10. not without good advice, and due direction.
Ephesians. 5.15. Walk circumspectly, walk by rule and by line, Gal. 6.16. Lift not up
one foot till you find sure footing for the other, as those Psalm. 35.6.
Christians, (and especially Ministers) are funambulones, says Tertullian: if
they tread but one step awry, they are gone, and may draw many with them.

then thou shall judge mine house, and shall also keep my courts] i. e. Thou
shall rule in my Temple, and wait at mine altar. The Pope and his Prelates
catch at the former, but let go the later: where Christ says Feed my sheep,
Bellarmine says, the meaning is, Rule like a king; Baronius, Take to thy self
the supreme government of the Church. But a preaching Bishop is a just wonder
among them, a Vir portenti, as those priests in the next verse are called.

and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by] i.e. Among the
Seraphims (as the Chaldee here interprets it,) thou shall walk arm in arm (as
it were) with Angels Mat. 22.30. Heb. 12.22. He seems to allude to the walks
and Galleries that were about the Temple. Heaven is the reward of walking in
the way that is called Holy: the end of men's faith, the salvation of their
souls. Christ tells us that in his Fathers house are many mansions for us, Joh.
14.2. (such as have far better gardens, and Galleries then Mahomet fondly
promises his swordmen in his fools-paradise) And it is a part of his joy, that
we shall one day be where he is, attended with innumerable Angels, John 17.24.
who will be glad of our company. How much better cause have we then that
Heathen to cry out, O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud animorum concilium
coetumque preficiscar: Cic. de seneclute.
and cum ex hac turba and colluvione discedam, etc. O what a brave and bright
day will that be, when we shall go to that Congregation-house of blessed
spirits: and walk no longer in the way of this world, which is (like the land
of Chabul) dirty and dangerous, like the vale of Siddim, slimy, and slippery, 1 Samuel 2.
full of lime-pits, and pitfalls, snares and stumbling blocks, laid by Satan to
maime, or mischieve us! O happy they that walk humbly with God, who keeps the
feet of his Saints, and has charged his Angels to bear them up in their hands,
lest they dash their feet against a stone! This whiles they are here: Psalm.
90.12.
and when they go hence, to convey them through the air (whereof the devil is
the prince) as through the enemies country, into the heavenly habitations: and
there to entertain and welcome them with sweetest varieties, felicities,
eternities, sitter to be believed then possible to be expressed.

Verse 8. Hear now, O Joshua the high Priest] Hear a sermon of Christ, the
Fountain of all this mercy bestowed upon thee, and yet further promised unto
thee. Hear for thy self, hear for thy whole Society. Thou and thy fellows, thy
fellow-friends, the rest of the priests, thy fellows in service, though
inferior in Office (for there was a subordination of priests, both before the
Temple, Number 3. and 1 Chronicles. 23.4, 5. and under the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 35.8, 9.)
Types also of Christ, and partakers of the benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2.

for they are men wondered at] Erant omnibus probrosi, says Calvin, They
departed from evil, and thereby made themselves a prey, Esaias 59.15. they were
for signs and for wonders in Israel, Esaias 8.18. hissed and hooted at, Psalm.
71.7. as those that affected to be singular, and seraphicall, They think it
strange, says Saint Peter to his holy converts, that you run not with them to
the same excess of riot: speaking evil of you, as if you were no better then
madmen, Esaias 59.15. 1 Pet. 4.4.
robbed of your right minds as the word signifies. It is a French proverb, He
that would have his neighbors dog hanged, gives out that he is mad. The
primitive persecutours used to put Christians into bears and dogs skins, or
ugly creatures, and then bait them: so graceless persons put the saints of God
into ugly conceits, look upon them as strange creatures, and then speak and act
against them. In our wretched days (as the Turks count all fools to be saints,
so) people account all saints to be fools; and the more zealous among them
monsters and miscreants. Holy Stat^.
As for Athanasius, and Marcellus who have impiously blasphemed against God,
and have lived as wicked miscreants, and are thereupon cast out of the Church,
and condemned, we cannot receive them to the honor of Episcopacy, said those
fourscore Bishops in the mock-Synod of Sardis. And Bid testifies of the
ancient Britains immediately before their destruction by the Saxons, that they
were come to that height of wickedness, as to cast reproach upon the
professors of religion, as upon the worst of men. Does not Saint Paul say as
much, 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made a theater, or are set upon the stage for a
laughing stock unto the world, and to Angels, and to men, etc?

For behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.] The same that grew out
of the root of Jesse, when that goodly family was sunk ^o low, as from David
the King, to Joseph the Carpenter. See Esaias 4.2. and 11.1. and 45.8. and 53.1.
Ier. 33.15. where the Chaldee for Branch renders it Messiah, as here also he
does: And some have observed that themagh, a Branch, is by transposition of
letters, the same with Masciach, Messiah: Samech and tsade, being near akin;
and of the same sound almost. A servant Christ is called by reason of his
Mediatorship, taking upon him the form of a servant; yea, of a faulty servant
that was to be beaten: yea, that being cruelly beaten was brought forth to the
people with an Ecce homo, Behold the man. Behold, says God here, Joh. 19.5.
I will bring forth my servant the Branch: bring him forth, out of the bosom of
his Father, out of the womb of his Mother, out of the types of the Law, etc.

Verse 9. For behold the stone, etc.] Another title given to Christ, who is the
foundation and chief cornerstone of his Church; and another Behold, prefixed
as a starry Note, or as a hand pointing to a remarkable matter. All the
Prophets pointed to Christ, who is therefore called, the Branch, the Stone,
etc. that in these creatures (every where obvious) as in so many optic
glasses, we may see him, and be put in continual remembrance of him; It being
as necessary to remember Christ, as to breathe, says a Father. See Psalm.
118.22. Esaias 28.16. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8.

that I have laid, and that I will engrave] The Church is Gods building, and we
are his workmanship, this artificial manufacture, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works: (...). Ephesians. 2.10
there being not so much of the glory of God in all his works of creation and
providence, as in one gracious action that a Christian performs. As for the
glorious work of our redemption by Christ, it was a plot of Gods own
contriving, a fabric of Gods own erecting: it was the Lords own doing, and it
is justly mavelous in our eyes.

Upon one stone shall be seven eyes] That is, Christ shall draw all eyes and
hearts to him: as the stones of the Temple did the Disciples eyes, Mat. 24.2.
and Mar. 13.1. Master, say they to Christ, see what manner of stones, and what
buildings are here. Thus some sense it. I should rather by these seven eyes
understand the Spirit in his several operations upon Christ, as Esaias 11.2. for
he received not the Spirit by measure, as others; but had as much of it as a
creature could possibly have. See the Note on Rev. 1.4. where the holy Ghost,
for his manifold good gifts and perfect givings, is called The seven Spirits;
like as he is also styled the seven golden pipes, Zech. 4.2, 3. There are that
by these seven eyes upon one stone, understand the Providence and Wisdom of
Christ in the Government of his Church. He is indeed, as One says (...),
All-Eye, Sic spectat universos quasi singulos: sic singulos quasi solos; like a
well-drawn picture he eyeth all. Christ as he is a living, so he is also a
looking stone: he looks at the miseries and matters of his Church, Exodus 3.7
and says as once, I have seen, I have seen the afflictions of my people in
Egypt, etc.

Behold, I will engrave the graving thereof] Hae coelaturae dona and stigmata
Christirepraesentant, says A Lapide. These gravings represent the gifts and
wounds of Christ, Lib. 4.
in allusion to the polished corners of the Temple. Coelum dictum est quod
coelatum, id est signatum sideribus, says Varro. Heaven has its name in
Latin from its being enameled and bespangled with glistering stars, as with
curious workmanship, or costly furniture. Of the third heaven, the habitation
of Saints and Angels, Heb. 11.10
God is said to be by a specialty the builder and maker, or (as the Greek has
it) the cunning Artificer, and public Architect. A great deal of skill and
workmanship he laid out upon it: but nothing so much as upon the Humane nature
of Christ, wherein, as in a Temple, dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col 2.9
that is, personally, by virtue of the Hypostaticall Union. For the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory (the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth, John 1.14
full, full to the very brimme, full with a double fullness. Vasis and Fontis,
of the Vessel, and of the Fountain. Hence, He was fairer (much fairer, double
fairer (as the Original imports) then the sons of men, sc. with the beauty
of wisdom and holiness: grace was poured into his lips, God had anointed him
with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Ezekiel. 28.7
Psalm. 45.2, 7. The Priests in the Law were consecrated first with oil,
compounded and confected of diverse precious spices: so was Christ with gifts
and graces of the Spirit, Act. 10.38. and 4.27, Esaias 61.1. not by measure, as
we are, Ephesians. 4.7. but without measure, as much as a finite nature was capable
of: particularly, he was furnished and polished with wisdom, as a Prophet,
against our ignorance; with holiness, as a Priest, against our guilt; and with
power, as a King, against our corruptions: These and all other endowments, he
had well heapt, pressed down, and running over, poured into his bosom. Next,
as the Priests under the Law were also consecrated with blood, so was the Lord
Christ with his own blood, when his Father engraved him with graving; or, as
the Hebrew has it here, opened him with opening in his bloody passion,
baptized him in his own blood, stewed him in his own broth, as it were; when in
a cold winters-night he sweat great clods of blood; which through clothes and
all fell to the very ground. When after this they dug his hands and his
feet, Psalm. 22.16. and made his heart melt in the midst of his bowels, verse
14. Wounded he was in the head, to cure our vile imaginations: In the hands, to
expiate our evil actions: in the heart, and feet, for our base affections, and
unworthy walkings. Tormented he was for our transgressions, bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, tanquam pulcherrima
corporis caelatura, and by his stripes or bloody wails, we were healed. Adam
signifies Man, red-earth, or Bloody. Esaias 53.^
Christ was Man in his Incarnation, and bloody all over in his passion. This
death of Christ therefore look on (says Master Bradford Martyr) as the very
pledge of Gods dear love toward thee: see the very bowels of it as in an
Anatomy. See, Gods hands are nailed, they cannot strike theo; his feet also,
he cannot run from thee: his arms are wide open to embrace thee: his head
hangs down to kiss thee: his very heart is open, so that therein look, nay
even spy, and thou shall see nothing therein but love, love, love to thee, etc.

Cernis ut in toto corpore sculptus amor. and I will remove the iniquity of
that land in one day] I will remove, i. e. remit and pardon, the iniquity, both
guilt and punishment. Of that land, i. e. Of the Church, that pleasant land,
more dear to God then all the earth besides. In one day, i. e. together and at
once, suddenly and in an instant. See Esaias 66.8.

Verse 10. In that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall ye call, etc.] i. e.
Ye shall have peace, Regionis and Religionis. of country and of conscience.
Christus auferet iniquitatem, afferet pacem. Christ, as he saves his people
from their sins; so from the hands of them that hate them. When this Prince
of peace was born, in the days of Augustus, Vniversa gentium erat aut pax, aut
pactio: Luc. ^lor. l. ^.
there was a general either peace, or truce among all Nations. And this man
shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into the land -- thus shall he
deliver us from the Assyrian, etc. Mic. 5.5, 6. But behold a better thing: This
Shiloh, this Tranquillator, Pacificator, by removing iniquity, creates peace
of conscience: like as after Jonah was cast overboard, the sea became calm.
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, Esaias 9.7.
Where Christ rules there is peace, peace, Esaias 26.3. that is, perfect, sheer,
pure peace, with God, our selves, and others: and the more Christ's government
increases in the soul, the more is peace renewed, continued, multiplied. Psalm.
119.16^
Great peace have all they that love thy Law and nothing shall offend them,
says David. And thou have been a strength to the poor, a refuge from the
storm, a shadow from the heat, etc. ( Esaias 25.4.) better then that of the
broad-leaved Vine, and fig tree, very cooling and comfortable in those hot
countries. See this in righteous Noah: who being justified by faith, had peace
with God, and therefore was medijs tranquillus in undis. How securely does he
ride out that uproar of heaven, earth, and waters! He hears the pouring down of
rain above his head, the shrieking of men, the bellowing of beasts on both
sides him, the raging and threats of the waves under him. He saw the miserable
shifts of distressed unbeleevers, and in the mean time sits quietly in his dry
cabin, not feeling, nor fearing evil. How happy a thing is pardon of sin,
and peace with God! what a quiet safety, what an heavenly calm does it lodge
in the soul! what earnest pantings, and strong affections to the salvation of
others. Ye shall call, etc.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. ANd the Angel that talked with me] See the Note on chap. 1. ver. 9.
came again] After some absence, as it may seem: and a new vision or revelation
received from God to be imparted to the Prophet.

and waked me as a man that is wakened etc.] It fared with the Prophet
(notwithstanding the former visions) as with a drowsy person: who though
awakened and set to work, is ready to fall asleep at it. So Peter, James, and
John, (those pillars as they are called Gal. 2.) fell asleep at their very
prayers Mat. 26.40. such dull metal are the best men made of: and so weak is
the flesh, be the spirit never so willing; so ill-disposed is our most noble
and immortal part the soul, to supernall and supernatural employments.
Meditation and prayer are the creatures of the holy Ghost Jude 20. and that we
may not run out into extravagancies, or put up yawning petitions, we must watch
and pray Mat. 26.41. yea watch while we are praying, meditating etc. against
corruption within (the sin that does so easily beset us Heb. 12.1.) and
temptations without, whether from the world (the things whereof are so near us
and so natural to us) or from the devil who is ever busiest with the best (as
flies are with sweetmeats) and with the best part of their best performances,
as in the end of their prayers, when the heart should close up it self with
most comfort.

Verse 2. What see thou?] The sight was already in sight; but the Prophet had
not seen it, or noted it, if the Angel had not stirred him up to it. If the
Lord give us not sight as well as light, if he inlighten not both Organ and
Object too, if he shine not into our hearts to give us the light of the
knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor 4.5.
seeing we shall see, but not perceive; with Hagar, we shall not be able to
discern the fountain that is just before us.

I have looked] Carefully viewed the sight. It is expected ut acti agamus: that
having a talent of grace we trade with it, that our will, which at first
conversion was merely passive should be afterward active: that we which once
were darkness, but now are light in the Lord, should walk as children of light
Ephesians. 5.9.

behold a candlestick] that is the Church, as Rev. 1.20.

all of Gold] pure gold as the Candlestick in the Tabernacle Exodus 25.31. which
is therefore called the pure Candlestick Lev. 24.4. Exodus 31.8. noting out the
Churches purity in doctrine and manners. Chrysostom that golden Preacher
testifies of some Saints in his time, that they were puriores coelo, purer
then the visible heaven. Her Nazarites were purer then the driven snow, whiter
them milk, ruddier then rubies, their polishing was of Sapphire etc. Lam. 4.7.

with a bowle] Heb. gullah an oyle-glass, or oyle-cruse; a hollow round vessel
quod pariter Latin recte gulam appellas says a Lapide; which you may not
unfitly call a gullet or throat: for as the throat receives the food and
transmitteth it to the stomach: so did this vessel receive the oil to be
transmitted to the lamps. It figured Christ in whom it pleased the Father that
all fullness should dwell Col. 1.19. for the Churches use Ioh. 1.16. and 3.34.

and his seven lamps thereon] signifying the manifold graces and diversity of
gifts in the Church by the same spirit of Christ 1 Cor. 12.4, 6. For of his
fullness we all receive grace for grace Job. 1.16.

and seven pipes to the seven lamps] Heb. seven and seven, that is, seven I say
seven, by the figure Anadiplosis says Sanctius. This is a better gloss then
that of those that say the Hebrew text is corrupted; as having two sevens for
one. These seven pipes you must imagine to be in the bottom of the bowl, to
distribute the oil to each lamp; the grace of Jesus Christ to each Christian,
that he may shine as a lamp or luminary in the world, Phil. 2.15.16.
holding forth the word of life, as the hand does the torch, or the watchtower
the light, and so the haven to weatherbeaten Mariners.

Verse 3. And two Olive Trees by it] The two chief branches whereof through the
two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves ver. 12. that is, the
spirit of grace infuseth all precious graces (much more precious then gold that
perishes, though it be tried in the fire) into the Church. Hence grace is
called the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. yea Spirit 25. Danaeus his Note
here is, though from these two olive trees there was continual oil powered
into that burning candlestick that it should never dry up or be put out, yet
are not these olives said to be pressed by any man, which notwithstanding
amongst us, must needs after an ordinary manner be done, that the oil may flow
or run from them. Neither is this oil said to flow, nor with toil and labor
to be carried from one part or place into another, that there may be always
oil for the candlestick: but there stand these olive trees growing, and
dropping down oil into the Bowl, and this of themselves, without the help or
service of any men or oyle-mills: Mr. Pemble.
to show, says Another Interpreter, that Gods grace only is sufficient for his
Church, to repair and maintain the same without all other means, against all
opposition of man: and this is the Scope of this vision.

Verse 4. What are these, my Lord] Or, Sir; which English word comes from
Cyrus, the Persian word for a Lord or great Prince, as H. Stephanus will have
it: Others fetch it from (...) authority, or (...) a Lord, and so the word
Adoni in the text is usually rendered. Others think our word Sir comes from the
French Sieur, whence Monsieur my Lord: as the word Lord from the old Saxon
Laford which comes of Laef to sustain: like as the Hebrew Adonai from Eden a
foundation or pillar, that sustaineth the whole building. It is written
sometimes with Camets or long A in the end, and then it is proper to God (as
having the vowels of Jehovah) and is given to him 134. times in the old
Testament. Sometimes it is written with Bathach or short A, and then it is
applied to the creatures, as here to the Angel: Hinc Hispanorum Don, says
Drusius.

what are these] The Prophet had been before warned by the Angel to behold and
heed the vision. This he had done, and yet was to seek of the sense and meaning
of it: as a man may look on a trade and never see the mystery of it: or look on
the hand-diall, and never understand the curious clock-work within. None can
understand the mystery of Christ, but such as have the mind of Christ 1 Cor.
2.7, 11, 16. such as are spiritually rational, and rationally spiritual: such
as are taught of God, and conducted by his spirit into all truth Ioh. 16.13. No
understanding of Gods riddles, but by plowing with his heifer, as I may say.
This the Prophet here knew: and therefore applies himself to the Angel for
information: so did Daniel chap. 8.15. see chap. 9.22.

Verse 5. Know thou not what these be?] Thus preparation is made to the
ensuing interpretation of the vision by this dialogue; that we might give
better heed to that manifold wisdom of God made known to and by the Church:
Ephesians. 3.10.
wherein the very Angels themselves are great students, and daily proficients.
Docent proficiendo, and docendo proficiunt. The best of men know not so much as
they might have known. Are ye also ignorant of these things? (says our Savior
to the twelve) are ye also without understanding? Mat. 15.16. what? know you
not etc. seven several times in one chapter 1 Cor. 6. And how does the Apostle
shent and shame his Hebrews for their du^nesse and doltishnesse Heb. 5.12. It
was expected, it seems, by the Angel here, that Zachary a Master in Israel
should have known more then he did, of the meaning of this candlestick, by
Moses his ancient candlestick. For the godly of those times did not believe
those rites and ceremonies of the law did of themselves please God, or that
they were dumb shows and insignificant Heb. 9. But they acknowledged them to
be figures: the truth and signification whereof was to be sought in Christ. The
ceremonial law was indeed their Gospel.

and I said, No my Lord] An ingenious confession of his ignorance: and this was
far better then to plead for it (as many now-adayes) or to pretend more skill
then he had: that he might at least seem to be some body. Ignorantiam meam non
ignoro, says Origin. Though I know little else, yet this I know, that it is
but little that I know. And not only in innumerable other things am I ignorant,
Ep. 119. c. 21.
says Austin; but even in the very Scriptures also, my chief study, multo
plura nescio quam scio, I am to seek of many more things then I understand.
Surely, says Agur, I am more brutish then any man, and yet he had commerce
with Ithiel and Vcal ver. 1. and have not the understanding of a man, sc. of a
man in Christ. I neither learned wisdom (though taught it) nor have the
knowledge of the holy, that is of the Angels, as Dan. 4.13, 17. and 8.13.
Zachary here saw himself far short of the holy angel that ^alked with him; and
therefore desires to be taught by him.

Verse 6. This is the Word of the Lord] that is, this Hieroglyphique contains
the mind of God in it. This is the interpretation of the vision, neither so
concise, nor obscure, ut Oedipo sit opus (as a Lapide after Ribera here says)
that it can hardly be understood. For who sees not by the opposition here made
between humane help and divine, that in building and beautifying his Church
with safety and salvation God will make bare his own holy arm; and do the work
alone, or by the weakest means against the strongest resistance? Thus then
have we (says an Interpreter) in three words the scope of this whole vision.
Mr. Pemble.
That as the making and maintaining of this Candlestick and his Lamps, was
without the art and cunning of man by means supernatural; so Gods spirit
without and above all humane helps, should suffice for the reedification and
preservation of the material Temple, and true Church.

unto Zorobabel] The Tirshata or chief magistrate Ezra 2.63. called also (as it
is thought Shesbazzar, Ezra 1.8. He was a type of Christ: to whom also God the
Father here speaks concerning his church to be gathered by the preaching of
the Gospel.

not by might, nor by strength,] as Mahomet in the East, and the Spaniard in
the Indies: but by the power of his spirit that great Wonder-worker, whereby
the people fall under him Psalm. 45.5. and strong holds are cast down before him
2 Cor. 10.4. as once the walls of Jericho. Thus he unwalled all the children
of Seth Number. 24.17. viz. by the foolishness of preaching: and thus hestill
rides upon his white horses, his Ministers, conquering and to conquer. Rev.
6.2. Britaniorum inaccessa Romany loca Christo subdita sunt. Tertull.
The Romans could never subdue this Nation: but Christ could. The Germans and
other Western people embraced the Christian religion in the year 772. when the
Mahomitan impiety wasted the East. Gods spirit is irresistible, compared to the
wind Ioh, to a mighty rushing wind Act. 2. that bears all before it, therefore
called a spirit of power 2 Timothy 1.7. of counsel and of might Esaias 11.2. and
therefore here fitly opposed to an army, and to the arm of flesh, to all
humane power and policy whatsoever, though the gates of hell come to their help.

not by might nor by strength etc.] These two words some take to be Synonymas;
Mercor says that the former signifies stout and noble acts: the later
imports power and faculty of doing those acts; and is the same that (...) in
Greek. By the Spirit of God we are to understand his power, providence, and
Grace 2 These. 2.8. Is. 11.4. etc. whereby he helps his people with a little
help Dan. 11.34. that throug weaker means, they may see his greater strength.
Thus he helped David against Goliath, and the Israelites against the
Philistines often: but especially then, when unarmed they marched with their
slings, and plow-staves, and hooks, and forks, and other instruments of their
husbandry, against a mighty and well-furnished enemy, and returned laden both
with arms and victory. Sometimes again, God helps his without any visible
help, as when he destroyed Senacherib's army by an Angel, swept away Sisera's
army by the river Kison, and the Saracens and Persians by the river Euphrates,
in the days of Theodosius, Anno. 394 Alsted. Chronol. p. 300.
(smitten with a Panick terror, they ran headlong into the river, and were
drowned, to the number of an hundred thousand) for whom also the winds sought
in that famous battle against Maximus; as both winds and waves did for us
against the invincible navy. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 5. cap. 26.
The Church alone deserves to be styled invincible, that has the Lord of
Hosts to be her Champion, who has armies above, and armies beneath (as the
Rabbines well observe) 2. general troops, as his horse and foot, Magnleh
cheloth and matteh cheloth.
ready pressed; Legions of Angels, Millions of other creatures. the curtains of
the Tabernacle embroidered with Cherubims signified the service and protection
of the Church by the Angels. Let the Pope be the Sun, and the Emperor the Moon
(as the Canonists style them) yet the Sun must not smite the Church by day, nor
the Moon by night: but the stars in their courses must fight against Sisera,
and both the Popes bull, and the Emperors thunderbolt tend exceedingly to the
furtherance of the Reformation begun by Luther. Whereupon Scultetus makes this
observation, Ecce tibi adimpletum Psalmicum illud Psalm. 54.3. Behold that of
the Psalmist made good. He shall send from heaven and save us from the reproach
of him that would swallow us up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his
truth. He shall: but when will he, may some say? First when his people in
distress cry aloud, I came for thy word Dan. 10.12. He will come, but he will
have his peoples prayers lead him. Secondly, when his enemies blaspheme and
insult, saying, Where is now their God? When Rabshakeh (a Renegado Jew, as the
Rabbis report him) shall jear at Hezekiahs prayers as an empty business, an
airy Nothing, as words of the lips only; whereas counsel and strength are for
the war (thus some read that text Esaias 36.5.) Thirdly when the the Church is at
lowest, and all seems lost and desperate: when the enemy is above fear, and the
Church below hope; when she is talking of her grave, like Israel at the red
sea: then is Gods season to set in; it is his glory to help at a dead lift, to
begin where we have given over, to relieve those that are forsaken of their
hopes, to come when we can scarce find faith upon the earth: God sees when the
mercy will be in season. When his people are low enough, and the enemy high
enough, then usually appears the Churches morning star: then Christ came
leaping and skipping over the mountains of Bether, all impediments that might
seem to hinder, (as sins of his people, oppositions of his enemies) and make
the Churches mountain to be exalted above all mountains, molehils in comparison
of her.

Verse 7. Who art thou O great mountain?] So the enemies seemed to themselves,
set aloft, and overtopping the low and poor estate of those feeble Jews, as
they called them Neh. 4.2. But the Virgin daughter of Zion despises them here,
Esaias 37.22.
and laugheth them to scorn: she shakes her head at them, and says, whom have
thou reproached and blasphemed etc? It is good for thee to meddle with thy
match, and not to exalt thy self against the holy One of Israel, Psalm. 76.4, 5.
Jer. 51.25. Babylon is called a destroying mountain sated upon a rock: yet Gob
will level, and lay it low nough. 26. Melch. Ad.
who is more gloririous and excellent then those mountains of prey. The
stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep (such as Sisera did) and
none of the men of might have found their hands when once they fell into the
punishing hands of the living God. He will soon level these lofty mountains.

they shall become a plain A champiagne that before seemed unpossible,
inaccessible. Christ's enemies shall be in that place that is fittest for them,
the lowest; that is, the footstool of Christ: when the Church, as it is the
highest in Gods love and favor, so shall it be highest in it self Gaudeo quod
Christus Dominus est: alioqui totus desperassem, writes Miconius to Calvm upon
the view of the Churchs enemies. Glad I am that Christ reigns: for else I had
been utterly hopeless. O pray, pray says another Saint: for the Pope of Rome,
and his Conventicle of Trent are hatching strange businesses. The comfort is
that he that sits in heaven sees them: the Lord above has them in
derision. For in the thing wherein they deal proudly, God is above them: and
his will shall stand when they shall dung the earth with their dead carcasses.
Sciat Celsitudo Tua etc. Let your Highness know (says Luther in a letter to
the Duke of Saxony) that things are otherwise ordered in heaven then they are
at Ausborough: where the Emperor Charles the fi^t had madea decree to root out
the Reformed religion out of Germany. But soon after, the Turk broke into
Hungary, and the borders of Germany: so that Caesar had somewhat else to do then
to persecute the Protestants. So the primitive persecutours fondly inscribed
upon the public pillars Deleto Christianorum nomine etc. that they had blotted
out the name of Christ and his religion from under heaven: but this they could
never effect with all the power of the whole Empire. They found and complained
that the Church might be shaken and not shivered: concuti non excuti as 2 Cor.
4.8, 9. Faecundi sunt Martyrum cineres, the very ashes of the Martyrs were
fruitful, and their blood prolifical. The Church conquers even when she is
conquered: as Christ overcame as well by patience as by power. The people of
Rome (says One) saepe praelio victus, nun juam bello, they lost many battles,
but were never overcome in a set war: at the long run they crushed all their
enemies. Bellarmine somewhat boasts the like of the Church of Rome, that she
was never worsted in any set battle by the Protestants. But if he had lived
till these late years, he would have known it otherwise: And indeed he could
not be ignorant of that famouss Bellum Hussiticum as they called it in Germany,
and the many fields fought and won by the Huguenots in France etc. And if at
any time the Church lose the day, Victa tamen vincet. Christ has his
stratagems as Joshuah had at Ai: he seems sometimes to retire, that he may
return with greater advantage. Certain it is, he will thresh the mountains and
beat them small before his Zorobabels: he will make the hills as chaff, Esaias
41.15.

and he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings saying, Grace,
Grace, unto it] i. e. He shall hold out to lay the very last stone of this new
building with joy, and with general acclamations and wel-wishes. There was a
promise for it long before Esaias 44.28. This Zorobabel was not ignorant of: as
neither of that which follows Chap. 45.1, 2. that, for the effecting of that
promise, God would go before him to make the crooked place straight, to break
in pieces the gates of brass and cut in sunder the bars of iron, i.e. to take
away all rubs and impediments. There it the like promise in the New Testament,
and it may be a singular encouragement to those that go on to build the tower
of Godliness, to prepare a tabernacle intheir hearts for the holy One of
Israel, that he may dwell in them and walk in them etc. the gates of hell shall
never prevail against them, since Christ, as another Sampson, has flung them
off their hinges, has destroyed the Devils works, and laid the topstone of his
spiritual temple with shouting saying, Grace, grace, unto it. The meaning is,
says an interpreter, that the Angels, the faithful, and all creatures,
rejoicing at Christ's kingdom established in the world, shall desire God the
Father to heap all manner of blessing and happiness upon it: Diodat.
See Psalm. 118.26. Or, they shall acknowledge and preach, that the Father has
laid up in him all the treasures of his grace and gifts of his spirit. It is
the observation of another Reverend man, preaching upon this text, that when we
preach of humane wisdom and foresight, we should fall down and cry (as we are
here taught) Grace, Grace, unto it, Mr. Tho. Goodwin Fastserm. before Parl.
Apr. 27.1642.
we are not to cry up Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel, any man or means whatever: but to
exalt the free grace of God the work of which alone it is and has been.
Zerubbabel should bring forth the head-stone (as master builders used to do the
first and last stone) and the people should magnify Gods mere free grace: and
acknowledge that he was mavelous in their eyes. Thus that learned Preacher:
who also by the lighted Candlestick here, understands full perfecting, and
finishing of the Temple, and restoring the worship of God within it unto its
full perfection of beauty and brightness. By the two Olive Trees. Zerubb abel
with the elders and Joshua High Priest with the other priests that sat before
him, as Chap. 3.8. wite Ezra. 6.14. confer Psalm. 52.8. These are said to empty
golden oil, that is, their estates and pains for the finishing of costly work:
and likewise because it was done in fincerity of heart, therefore it is called
golden or pure cyl. Further, these eminent ranks and sorts of persons that
should give their affistance to this work are called sons of oil verse 15. As
being fruit full and affording plenty of it. Thus Esaias 5 1. a fruitful hill and
fertile soil, is in the Original (as here) called a son of oil etc.

Verse 8. Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,] This is a
conformation of the former comfort, and a feal of the former promise; all which
was but little enough by reason of the peoples distrust and iufidelity. Against
which the prophet here produces his warrant, Gods own word: q. d. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. This is a pillar and ground of
truth. See the Note od 1 Timothy 3.15.

Verse 9. The hands of ^erubbabel have laid the soundation of this house: his
hands etc.] Here the scope of this stately vision i^ plainly held forth, and
without a parable. What the scripture speaks darkly in one place, it speaks
plainly in another. The Rabbis have a saying, that there is a mountain of
sense hanging upon every Apcx of the word of God. They have also another
saying, Nulla ^st ob^ctio in lege, quae non haber solutionem in latere, i. e.
There is not any doubt in the law, Pemble of the Persian Monarchy.
but may be resolved out of the law. Zorobal^cl is both founder and finisher of
the Temple (those that will have it not to be finished till about the sixth
year of Darius Nothus, make him to be very long-lived: and tell us that God
grants to one a longer life then ordinary, because he has something to be
done by them.) The distrustful Jews began to despise those small beginnings of
a building: and to despair of ever seeing it perfected, by reason of those
mountains of opposition they met with, and thought they should never dig down
or get over. The work shall the done says God, and Zerubbabel, how unlikely
soever, shall do it. Believe the Prophets, and ye shall prosper. It shall never
be faid of Zorobabel, as of the foolish huilder This m^n began, but could not
sinish: Or as an out-lander seeing Christchurch in Oxford, said of it, Egregium
opus: Cardinalis iste instituit Collegium, Luke 14.30. Rod. Gualthe.
and ab^^boit culmam. A pretty piece of Work! A college begun, and a kitchen
finished. It was God that set Zerubbabel awork: and He does not use do things
to halves. He is Alpha and Omega, the Beginner and Ender, the Author and
Finisher. Heb. 12.1. I am consident of this very thing, faith Paul, that he
that has begun a good work in you will perform it Psalm. 1.6. And faithful is he
that calls you, who also will do it 1 These. 5.24. And, the Lord will persect
that which concerns me (says David) sorsake not the work of thine own hands,
Psalm. 138.8. Look upon the wounds of thine hands, and despite not the works of
thine hands, said Queen Elizabeth. Thus if men pray in the holy Ghost, keep
themselves in the love of God, and look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ
umo c^ernal life, they shall be builded up in their most holy says, Jude.
20.21.
where by Christ shall dwell in their hearts, as in his holy Temple.

and thou shth know] Thou Zachary shall know, that the Lord of Hosts has sent
me] His Angel as his Internuncio. See Luke 1.19. Or thou Zerubbabel shall know,
that I Za^hary come not to thee of mine own mind, but on Gods message, and am
therefore to be believed. When Ehud told Egion he had a message from God,
though he were an heathen and a fat unweildy man, he stood up to receive it
Judge. 3.20. though that message was a messenger of death, a poniard in his
bowels. Should not we harken to the Father of spirits and live? Heb. 12.
should the Consolations of God be sinall with us? Job. 15.11. Should we
instead of wrestling with God by prayer, (so putting his promises in suit)
wrangle with him, by cavelling objections? l^se dixit among Pythagoras his
scholars went current: if their master said it, 'twas enough: And shall we
that are taught of God not give the like credit to our Master in heaven? shall
we not yield him the obedrence of faith?

Verse 10. Tor who has d^spised the day of small things?] Nay, who had not?
The generality of the Jews were clearly guilty Ezra 3.13. and are therefore
here justly reproved. As Naaman once looked on Gods Jordan with Syrian eyes,
and so sllghted the motion of washing therein: so these distrusiful Jews
despised the small beginnings of this great work; and the little likelihood of
ever bringing it to any good upshot. Is it not in your eyes as nothing-saith
Hagg^e, ( hap. 2.3? They seemed only to grieve at it: but God construeth it
for a downright contem pt: for he judges otherwise of our carnal affections
then we our selves, and will have us to know that his thoughts are not our
thoughts, neither are his ways our ways Esaias 55.8. Out of meancst principles
he many times raises matters of greatest moment: that his own immediate hand
may the more appear. The kingdom of heaven was at first but as a grain of
musta^d-seed Mat. 13.32. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands, as if
it had dropped out, or been blown down thnece, became a mountain and silled the
whole earth Dan. 1.34, 35. The cloud that rose as little as a man's hand, soon
after muffled the whole heaven. God put little thoughts into the heart of
Ahashuerosh concerning Mordecai, but for great purposes. Who would ever have
thought, that out of Abraham now as good as dead should have come the Messiah?
or that out of the dry root of Jesse should come the Branch spoken of in the
former Chapter? who would have imagined that going forth only with his bow
Rev. 6.2. and arrows Psalm. 45.5. the foolishness of preaching, he could
conquer in three hundred years the whole Roman Empire? that by Hus a goose, and
Luther a swan, such strange things should have been done in Bohemia and
Germany? that by a scruple cast into Hen. the 8. his mind about his marriage
with Katharine of Spain by the Trench Ambassador (who came to consult with him
of a marriage between the Lady Mary and the Duke of Orleans second son to the
King of France) whether Mary were legitimate etc? the Pope should be cast off
here, and reformation wrought by so weak and simple means, Spec. Erop.
yea by casual and cross means? this says one, is that miracle which we are
in these times to look for.

For they shall rejoyce] Or, But they shall rejoice, or, Nay, they shall
rejoice, nay they shall see, viz. that which they despaired of ever seeing, and
were therefore much cast down about the perfection of the work, and its
glorious accomplishment. And this shall be surely effected by Gods powerful and
watchful providence, called here those seven eyes of the Lord which run to and
fro through the whole earth] called elsewhere the seven spirits of God Rev. 5.6.
and 1.4. and Gods spirit here Verse 6. so guiding and managing all affairs and
occurrences, that all the rays and beams of providence issuing from those
eyes might be seen to meet in the accomplishment of this, as their ultimate
aim, and scope. See the Note on Chap. 3.9.

Verse 11. Then answered I, and said unto him] No mean measure of understanding
would content the prophet: but he is still enquiring and incroaching upon the
Angel, so does Moses upon God, Exodus 33. He had not been long out of the Mount,
but he is asking God to show him his glory: which when he had seen, yet he
rests not satisfied, but must have more. and yet more; So David, though
deep-learned, is ever and anon at it, teach me thy statutes. Spiritual learning
is infused by degrees: our hearts are as narrow-mouthed vessels, and God
delights often to hear of us. Whither I go thou can not come now: but thou
shall afterward. Then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know: provided that ye
beg and dig Prove. 2.3, 4, 5, and beat, as the foul does the shell to get out
the fish: and be discontentedly contented, till ye come to see as ye are seen,
a spe ad speciem etc. What are these ^w olives etc. And.

Verse 12. Joh. 13. Hos. 6.3.
What be these two olive-branches, etc.] See the Notes on verse 3. and verse 7.

Verse 13. Know thou not what, etc.] See the Note on ver. 5.

Verse. 14. These are the two anointed ones] Heb. sons of oil. See the Note on
verse 7.

that stand by the Lord of the whole earth] because by the candlestick and
utensils of the Temple and Type of the Church, which is at Christ's right hand,
Psalm 45. as he at his Fathers right hand, Romans 8. He is with all his to the end
of the world: and it is a part of his joy that we shall be one day where he is.
This Lord of the whole earth, sovereign over all: but takes delight only in
such as (Esther like) he purifies and perfumes for royal use: and these he
loves so affectionately as never any Lord did his subjects, Zech. 3.17. He
loves the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacoh, Psalm. 87.2.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. THen I turned me, and lifted up mine eyes] i.e. I prepared me to the
receiving of a new vision: nothing so comfortable as the former, but no less
necessary; that the people, by sense of sin, and fear of wrath, might be
taken off their wicked practices, redeem their own sorrows, and be accounted
worthy to escape all those things that should (otherwise) come to pass, as
verse 11. and to stand before the Son of man, at that dreadful day. This
seems to be the mind of the Holy Ghost, Luke 21.36.
in these two visions here recorded: which while some Interpreters attend not,
in toto vaticinio neque coelum, neque terram attingunt, says Calvin, they are
utterly out.

and behold a flying roll] Or, volume, as Psalm. 40.10. or scroll of paper, or
parchment, usually rolled up, like the web upon the pin, mi convolvuntur
nostrae Mappae Geographicae, as our Mappes are rolled up, says A Lapide: and
as in the public Library at Oxford the Book or Roll of Esther (an Hebrew
Manuscript) is at this day to be seen: D. Pride. Orat. 4. Amem. Antibarb. lib.
3. Volans velocissimum astion^s incursum significat. Chrysostom.
but here flying] Not only because spread wide open, as Rabshakeh's letter, 2
King. 19.14. and as that Book of the Prophet Esaias, Luke 4.17. but also as
fleeting along swiftly, like a bird ready to seiz on her prey. Nemo scelus
gerit in Pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. The Heathens thens named
Nemesis (their Goddess of Revenge to take punishment of offend ours) (...),
because no man can possibly escape her. They tell us also that their Jupiter
writes down all the sins of all men in a book, or scroll, made of a
goatspelt, (...).
which they call (...): the very word whereby Aquila and Theodotion (two Greek
Translatours) do render the Hebrew of this Text. (See Dan, 7.18. Rev. 20.12.)
Symmachus turns it (...), a Chapter, or Abstract of a larger Book, full of
sins, and Woes: and yet it is of an unheard of hugeness, verse 2. and of
very sad contents, like that book of Ezechiel, chap. 2.9, 10. lamentation, and
mourning, and woe; or the first leaf of Bishop Babingtons book (which he turned
over every morning) all black: to inmind him of hell, and Gods judgments due
unto him for his sins.

Verse. 2. What see thou] q. d. Mark it well, and let thine eye affect thine
heart; let these things be oculis commissa fidelibus.

I see a flying book] See the Note on verse 1. Some read it, A double book,
(according to the Chaldaick signification of the word) as containing double,
that is, manifold menaces and punishments of sin. But the Chaldee Paraphrast,
Septuagint, and others, render it flying; as hasting, and hovering over the
heads of wicked persons.

the length thereof is twenty cubits, etc.] Ten yards long, and five broad.
Neither let men say, that words are but wind, as they did Jer. 5.13. For, 1.
Even wind, when gotten into the bowels of the earth, may cause an earthquake;
as when into the bowels of the body, an heart-quake. 2. God threateneth those
scoffers verse 14. that he will make that word which they termed wind, to
become fire, and themselves fuel to feed it. And as fire flies upon fuel
fully dried, Nah. 1.10. and consumes it in an instant: so Gods flying roll
will lick up the evildoers, no otherwise then the fire from heaven after it
had consumed the sacrifice, the wood, the stones, and the dust, licked up also
the water that was in the trench, 1 King. 18.38. The threatenings of Gods Law
(the same with this Roll) are (as Erasmus says of Ezekiel. 3.18.) fulmina non
verba, lightbolts rather then words: or if words, yet they are (as One says)
Verba non legenda sed vivenda, Words not to be read only, but lived: at least,
not to be read as men do the old stories of foreign wars; wherein they are
nothing concerned (but as threatening themselves in every threat, cursing
themselves in every curse, etc.) nor as they read the predictions of an
Almanac for wind and weather: which they think may come to pass, and it may
be not: but be confident of this very thing, that God who has denounced it
will surely do it, and that he will execute the judgment written in this roll,
Psalm. 149.9. yea every sickness and every plague which is not written in the
book of this Law, them will the Lord cause to descend upon the disobedient,
until they be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 28.61.

Verse 3. This is the curse] Or oath, with execration and cursing. Number. 5.21.
(...). ut and A^. Graece, juramentum et execrationem significat. Mercer.
Cursing men are cursed men, and God has sworn that swearers shall not enter
into his rest.

that goes forth] yea flies, verse 2. more swift then an eagle, an arrow, a
flash of lightening. Or, if not, yet Poena venit gravior, quo mage sera venit.

over the face of the whole earth] Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that does evil: but of the Jew sirst, (Ingentia beneficia flagitia,
supplicia) who is therefore the worse, because he ought 'to have been better;
and then, Romans 2.9.
of the Gentile also. Theodoret, Lyra, and Vatablus think that Iudaea is hinted
in the measure of the book (twenty cubits long, and ten broad) as being twice
so long (and somewhat more) as it is broad: witness Hierom in his Epistle to
Dardanus. Epist. 129.
But let the whole earth here be taken in its utmost latitude, since the
Gentiles that sin without the Law, are yet liable to the punishments of the
Law. And some of them by the light of Nature saw the evil of swearing: but all
generally of stealing; but especially of perjury and sacrilege, here
principally meant. Confer Mal. 3.8. Neh. 13.10.

for every one that steals shall be cut off] By stealing understand all sins
against the second Table: as by swearing, all against the first: and so the
sense is the same with that of the Apostle, Every transgression and
disobedience receives a just recompense of reward Heb. 2.2. And cursed is
every one, that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law, to do them, Gal. 3.10. Howbeit because these two sins were more
frequently and more impudently committed in those days, therefore are they (by
a specialty) instanced. The Jews coming poor out of Babylon, held it no great
sin to steal for supply of their necessities: and then to forswear themselves
for the better hiding of their theft, Give me not poverty, said holy Agur, lest
being poor I steal, and (as one sin draws on another) I take the name of my
God in vain Prove. 30.9. See the Note there. Hunger is an evil counselor,
necessity an hard weapon, a sore temptation: when it comes to this, Either I
must steal or starve. But then to this must be opposed that of the law, Thou
shall in no case steals. Thou must rather dye then do wickedly. Aut faciendum
aut patiendum, Either obey the law, or suffer the curse.

as on this side according to it] i. e. According to the curse, described in
the roll, the thees shall be cut off as well as the swearer: they shall speed
alike. The tares shall be bound up in bundles, thieves with thieves, and
swearers with swearers, and burnt in the fire Mat. 13.30, 40. According to the
prediction shall be the execution. Whether on this side, that is in Judea (so
some sense it) or on that side, in other parts of the world, such persons
appear, they shall have their payment.

and every one that swears Not only falsely as verse 4. but lightly, vainly,
causelessly, in jest and not in judgment: whether by God, or by creatures and
qualities; Judaeis and Pharisaeis vulgar vitium, says Paraeus on Iam. 5.12. a
common fault among the Jews and Pharisees Mat. 5.34, 35. and 23.16.18. See the
Notes there. Among the Christians in Chrysostomes time, as appears by his many
sermons against it at Antioch. And in these days, if ever, because of oaths
the land mourns, God has a controversy Hos. 4.1, 2. We have lived to see
iniquity in the fullness of oaths and blasphemies unparaleled darted with
hellish mouths against God and our Savior so ordinarily and openly, that some
of them are become very interjections of speech to the vulgar, and other some
mere phrases of gallantry to the braver. I knew a great swearer (says a great
Divine) who coming to his deathbed Satan so filled his heart with a madded
and enraged greediness after that most gainelesse, Bol^on.
and pleasurelesse sin: that though himself swore as fast and as furiously as
he could, yet (as though he had bin already among the bannings and blasphemies
of hell) he desperately desired the standers by to help him with oaths, and to
swear for him.

Verse 4. I will bring it forth] sc. out of my treasuries or storehouses of
plagues and punishments Deuteronomy. 32.34. Or, That which thou have seen in vision, I
will put in action: I will produce it into the open light, into the theater of
the world: their faults shall be written in their foreheads, their sins shall
go before to judgment, my visible vengeance shall overtake them.

and it shall enter into the house of the theef] which he calls his castle:
and where he thinks himself most secure, as out of the reach of Gods rod: as i^
he could mot up himself against Gods fire. But what faith Bildad? His
confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the
king of terrors. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his:
brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, Job 18.14, 15. so, that if
the fire of Gods wrath do but touch it, all is on a light flame. A. Gell.
He will unkennel these foxes: and drag (acus out of his denn, to his deserved
punishment. Dioclesian the Persecutour (one of those Latrones publici, Eusub:
de vit. Constable. lib. 5.
as Cato called them) giving over his Empire, after that he had sufficiently
feathered his nest; decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly. But he
escaped not so: for after that, his house was wholly consumed with lightening
and a flame of fire that fell from heaven, he hiding himself, for fear of the
lightening, died within a while after.

and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name] Hence Ribera
gathers that by the whole earth in the former verse is meant Judaea only:
because none but Jews swore by the name of the true God, who is indeed the
proper object of an oath Esaias 65.16. Ier. 12.6. Howbeit in lawful contracts
with an Infidel or Idolater, oaths by false gods may be admitted, and are
binding. As for perjury, it is a provoking sin; as containing three great
evils. 1. The uttering or upholding of a lie. 2. The calling upon God to
testify and justify a lie. 3. The praying for a curse upon a man's self: and
beseeching God to be a swift witness against him, Mal. 3. as he was indeed
against Zedekiah, Narcissus in the ecclesiastical history, Earl Godwin in
Polydor Virgil, Rodulphus Duke of Suevia, Ladislatis king of Hungary, Dr.
London ( Act. and Mon. fol. 1114.) Richard Long a soldier at Callice in K.
Henry the 8. days: who deposing falsely against Will: Smith Curat of Callice,
shortly after, upon a displeasure of his wife, Act. and Man. fol. 1117.
desperately drowned himself. And within the memory of man Feb. 11. An. Dom.
1574. Anne Averies forswore, her self at a shop in woodstreet London; praying
God she might sink where she stood if she had not paid for the wares she took.
Hereupon she fell down presently speechless, and with horrible stench died.

and it shall remain in the midst of his house] And be a troublesome inmate
with him, such as he cannot rid his hands of though never so fain: there it
shall roost and rest, in despite of him. If it distaste not his dough or empty
his basket, yet will it fill his store with strise, or mix the wrath of God
with his sweet morsels: his meat shall be fauced, his drink spiced, as Job
20.23. It is a moth in his wardrobe, murraine among his cattle, mildew^in his
field, rot amongst his sheep, and oft-times makes the fruit of his loins his
greatest heart-break.

with the timher thereof and the stones thereof] As in case of treason or other
horrible c^i^nes, the very houses of the offenders; Illam domum in qua fuerit
inventus haereticus diruendam decernimus.
were pulied down and made a jakes, Dan. 2.5. and 3.29. The Popish Council of
Tholose gathered together against those Ancient Protestants the Alpigenses,
made a decree, that the very house wherein an heretic was found, should be
pulled down. The Mannour-house of Milcot in Warwickshire, built by Lodovike
Greevill deeply guilty of these two grand evils mentioned in the text, and
lately burnt to the ground, is commonly looked upon as a speaking monument of
Gods just judgment against Sacrilege and Perjury: whether men personally
commit these sins or love them in others Zach. 1.17. Rev. 22.15.

Verse 5. Lift up now thine eyes and see] No doubt, says Calvin here, but the
Prophet was frighted at the sight of the flying roll, full of curses. Psa.
119.120,
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, says David, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. And Habakkuk, when he considered the cursed condition of the
Churches enemies, my belly trembled, said he, when I heard it: my lips quivered
at the voice. rottenness entered into my bones chap. 3.6. Daniel was more
afficted and troubled for Nebuchadnezzars calamity, then himself was, chap.
4.19. Here therefore the Angel encourages the Prophet, and bids him look
up and see a further vision; and not through dulnesle or dejectedness, to let
pass without due observation the notable works and witnesses of Gods
providence and power. Curious Artisans when they set forth some special piece
to publik view, they take it ill when notice is not taken of it: So here. See
the Note on ver. 1.

Verse 6. And I said, What is it?] i.e. what means it^ for the vision is very
hard and mysterious: lest (says One) the plain denunciation of the second
overthrow of temple and state might discourage them too much, to go forward in
the present restoration of both. Hugh Broughton on Dan. 2.4. observes, that
while the visions are general, and cause the Jews no danger, so far Daniel
writes in the Syriack tongue, general over the East. But when the oppressors
be named, and the Jews plainly described the people whom God defends, then
the eighth chapter and all after, he writes in Hebrew (a tongue less known and
studied) and has a commandment to keep close the plain exposition chap.
12.4. There is a great deal of wisdom required of those, that are entrusted
with the dispensation of divine truths. Our Savior spoke as the people could
hear, and not as he could have spoken. See Heb. 5.11, 12.

this is an Ephah that goes forth] The Ephah was the greatest and most common
measure among the Jews: and is therefore generally put for any measure
whatsoever Deuteronomy. 25.14. By false measures (one kind of thest) they had sinned
(whence the Chaldee here, Isti sunt populi qui accipiebant, and dabant mensura
falsa, These are the people that bought and sold by false measures) by the same
therefore, their punishment is set forth and signified; A piece of their
punishment it was that they were bounded and limited: that wickedness was
confined and kept within her Ephah. The Vulgar translates it Amphora a pitcher:
which when it is once filled with the bitter waters of wickedness, will soon
sink to the bottom. Sinners as they are stinted, so when they have filled up
their measure, they are sure to be punished: when they are ripe in the field,
God will come with his sickle; when their grapes of Sodom are full ready, he
will cast them into the winepresse of his wrath Rev. 15.16. Genesis 15.16. Mat.
23.32.

this is their resemblance thorough all the earth] Heb. their eye, their
aspect, their color. This, that is, this Ephah, is their resemblance: sc. that
when they have filled up their sins, they shall have their fill of punishment.
Or This, meaning some apparition representing Gods providence showed by the
Angel to the Prophet; T^ch 3.9. and 4.10. and 9.1.
is their eye, that is, the eye of the three persons in Trinity, Gods
univerfall providence, which presideth over his judgments. Or thus: This Ephah
or measure of their punishment, proportionate to their sin, in killing Ch^^st
especially Mat. 23.32. shall be their eye thorough all the earth, i. e. shall
be conspicuous and apparent to all sorts: so that all men shall hate them, and
hoot at them for a company of Kill-Christs, shall look upon them as a people of
Gods curse etc. Thus the Chaldee here, Behold they are made manif^st before all
the inhatants of the earth: for all men shall be witnesles of their horrible
both sins and plagues.

Verse 7. And behold there was lift up a talent of lead] A lump of lead, the
weightiest metal: noting the immovable and immutable dec^ee of God ^or the
punishment of the wicked. Esaias 3.11.
Say to the wicked, tell him so from me, it shall go ill with him: Iniquity
shall be his ruin. This lump of lead is fir^^ lifted up, and then let down
upon the Ephah as an adequate covering: and betokens the grievousnesse and
long continuance of the Jews punishment and banishment for their parricide,
(...). 1 These. 2.16.
or rather deicide, in crucifying the Lord of glory. A day of grace they had,
but they knew it not; therefore is wrath come upon them to the utmost, or,
until the end, or finally, so as it shall never be removed: so some interpret
it.

and this is a woman that sits in the midst of the Ephah] In medio modi:
and so she went forth or moved forward with an open face, and upper parts
appearing, as not afhamed: the show of her countenance witnessed against her,
she declared her sin as Sodom Esaias 3.9. and as Lots daughters who savoured too
much of Sodom, when, glorying in their shame, they called their incestuous
br^ts M^ab, that is the begotten of my father, and Benammi which sounds to the
same sense. This woman is also said to sit, as resolved of her course. Confer
Psalm. 1.1. and 50.20. the Jews are still a stubborn and refractary people.
Antiqu^m obtinent: O that the falvation of Israel were come out of Zion etc.
Psalm. 14.7. Deus nos dignabitur clarissima visione cum reducet Zion, says
Jachiades one of their Rabbines. I add, Fiat, Fiat.

Verse 8. And he said, this is Wickednesse] viz. this woman, a figure of the
whole sinful nation of the Jews: as were Aholah, and Aholibah Ezech. 23. and
Babylon the great, the mother of fornications and abominations Rev. 17.5. to
whom I may add that granddaughter of hers Katherine de Medices Queen Mother:
who by her wickedness wonderfully troubled all France for thirty years
together.

and he cast it into the midst of the Ephah] The Angel, as an executioner of
divine justice, throws her down who before sat perking and priding her self;
and claps her upclose prisoner as it were in the Ephah.

casting the weight of lead into the mouth thereof] that is of the Ephah, or of
the woman, according to that Psalm. 107.42. the righteous shall ^ee it and
rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Montanus one of the Talmud
adde^h, that this woman is compelled to take this lead into her mouth: that
mo^ten lead was powered down her throat, for a punishments of her frauds and
thests ver. 3. But the wicked shall not be so excused: sor upon them God shall
rain ^nares, fire, brimstone, and a burning tempest: this shall be the portion
of their cup, Psalm. 11.6. and this is far worse then molten lead, or burning
bell-mettle. Compare with this text ler. 51.64. and Rev. 18.21. with 20.1. An
Angel a strong Angel, for better assurance of Romes irrepairable ruin, takes
a stone, a great stone. which he throws, and with force thrusts into the
bottom of the sea whence it cannot be boy^d up, whence nothing ordinarily is
recovered, much less a millstone thrust from such a hand with such a force.
What do ye imagine against the Lord? says Nahum: he will make an utter end:
affliction shall not rise up the second time chap. 1.9. that is, the wicked
shall be totally and finaily consumed at once: neither will God make another
doing of it. I have overthrown some of you, as God over threw Sodom and
Gomorrah: Am. 4.11. wickedness is here crushed together as it were in a narrow
veslell, covered with lead, and carried into a strange country.

Verse 9. Behold there came out two women] Winged women, and carried through
the air with a pleasant wind, to note their ready and speedy obedience, prompt
and present. Women they are said to be, to keep proportion with the present
vision; lest the meeting and mixing together of men and women in the same
matter might minister occasion to some impure surmisings. But that they were
men and not women, that are here meant, is agreed upon by all. These were Ezra
and Nehemiah, (says Willet on Levit. 11. after Junius and Piscator on the
text) those great Reformers of the Jewish Church. But this stand, not with the
last verse. I rather subscribe to those that expound the text of the Romans,
who with great celerity and violence destroyed the Jews state: and so, that
which they feared befell them ^oh. 11.48. The Romans, said they, shall come to
take away both our place and our nation: and within a few years it proved
accordingly: as if God had taken them at their word, as he did those murmuring
miscreants Number. 14.28. As truly as I live, says the Lord, as ye have spoken in
mine cares, so will I do unto you. Hereunto the Chaldee Paraphrast consents,
when by these two women thus described he understands, populos leves and
expeditos, such Agents and Inst^uments, as God would employ in the speedy
execution of his wrath upon the Jewish Nation: such as were Titus, Vespasian,
and A^lius Adrian. See my Trite treasure chap. 7. sect. 2.
Diodate makes these two women a figure of God, two properties, namely Mercy
toward his Elect, and Justice toward his Enemies, wherewith he transports
upon these last the judgments by which he had punished his own people: which
is done with admirable celerity. Thus He. Danaeus makes those two women to be
the Anger and Justice of God, which do always follow and want upon one
another, and take vengeance on men's wickedness. Jud^ium sit penes lectorem.

and the wind was in their wings] A masculine Affix rese^red to a Feminine
Noune: to intimate that these women were indeed types of men, says Mr. Pemble.
^he Romans were men every inch of them, as the proverh is: and therefore of
cowards they were wont to say that they had nothing Roman in them: and of
Brutus, that he was the lasi of the Romans.

and they lift up the Ephah between the Earth and the heaven] This betokens a
deportation and disiection of the Jewish Nation: being tossed as a tennis-ball
into all nations, and scattered into the sour winds, as Ier. 48.32. Rupertus
hence concludes them rejected of both carth and heaven. Out of the earth they
are as it were banished, by a common consent of Nations: and heaven admitte^n
them not, as those that please not God, and are contrary to all men 1 Thessalonians.
2.15. And as their guide Judas, when they took Jesus, was hanged betwixt heaven
and earth, being caelo terraeque perosus; so fares it with that wretched
people, and will do till God shall call them a people which were not a people,
and her beloved, which was not beloved Romans 9.25.

Verse 10 Whither do these bear the Ephah?] that is, says Ribera, Quamdiu
duratura est populi hujus impietas? How long shall this peoples wickedness
last? like as Isa. 6.10, 11. when the Prophet had heard, make the heart of the
people fat, and shut their eyes etc. he cries out, How long Lord? the answer
whereunto is the same in effect with this of the Angel: until the cities be
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate; And the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great
forsaking in the midst of the land.

Verse 11. To build it an house in the land of Shinar] That is, of Babylon,
Genesis 10.10. and 11.2. where diverse of the Jews still remained in wilful
exile, as loath to leave their houses and gardens, which they had builded and
planted there, Jer. 29 5. preferring captivity before liberty. See 1 Chronicles.
4.22, 23. Hence, upon their final dispersion by the Romans, diverse of them
resorted thither for entertainment. There Peter, the Apostle of the
circumcision, had collected an elected Church, 1 Epist. 5.13. and thence he
writes his Epistle to the sojourning Jews scattered through those Eastern parts
chap. 1.10. from whence also those kings of the East, Rev. 16.12. the converted
Jews (as some expound it) are expected. And who can tell whether this land of
Shinar be not the same with that land of Sinim, Esaias 49.12. Confer Esaias 11.16.
Zach. 10.11. Or, by the land of Shinar here, may be meant exilium totius orbis,
their general rejection by all nations; the whole world being to them a
Shinar, that is, a land of excussion.

and it shall be established, etc.] This denotes the diuturnity, or perpetuity
of their punishment.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. ANd I turned, and lift up mine eyes] i. e. I passed on to another
vision: and 1 lifted up the eyes of my mind, higher to heaven, says Hierom, to
receive a further revelation from God. And whereas he says, I turned, he
declares, that God from on every side gives his Church clear testimonies of
his care of her, so that she will give heed unto them, and lift up her eyes.

there came four chariots out] i.e. four squadrons of Angels, Gods Warriors,
and Ministers of his manifold decrees, which are here set forth by the name of
brazen mountains. 2 King. 2.11 2 King. 6.17 So Hab. 3.8
See chap. 1.8. with the Note. Chariots the Angels are called in many places:
but especially Psalm. 68.17. The chariots of God (in the Hebrew it is chariot,
in the singular, to note the joint service of all the Angels) are twenty
thousand, (...).
even thousands of Angels. (of cheerful ones, so the Septuagint, of such as
serve the Lord readily, and freely, with joy and tranquillity, and so do quiet
his spirit, Deuteronomy. 33.26 God rides upon the heavens for Isra. else help, i.e.
upon the Angels. Heb.
as it is said here vorse 8: give him full satisfaction) The Lord is among them
as in Sinai, in the holy place: that is, the Angels by their swiftness and
warlike prowess make Sion (the Church) as dreadful to all her enemies (did
not one of them so to Sennacherib?) as those Angels made Sinai, at the delivery
of the Law, which was given in fire, Deuteronomy. 33.2. The word rendered Angels, in
the above cited Psalm. 68.17. (and so the Chaldee plainly expresses it) is by
some (who derive it of Shaan, to sharpen) referred to chariots: to note a kind
of chariots, armed with sharp hooks, used in wars, as many humane Writers
record. And so it makes something to the confirmation of this Interpretation,
Statius. Macrob. Vegetius.
concerning Angels, rather then the four Monarchies. But the Angel himself is
our best Interpreter, verse 5. where, being asked by Zachary, what these
chariots were? he answers, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which
go sorth from standing before the Lord of all the earth, a plain Periphrasis of
the Angels, chap. 1.10. See the Note there.

from between two mountains] tanquam e carceribus, as designed by Gods all
disposing providence, and power, and ready pressed at his appointment and
pleasure to run their race, do their office, execute Gods judgments, which are
both unsearchable, and inevitable: and this the Poets hammered at in their
ineluctabile Fatum, as they called it. Gods decrees lie hid under mountains of
brass, as it were, till they come to execution: they run as a river under
ground, till they break out and show themselves. When he has once signified
his will, then we understand it; which before lay hid from us: that is, when
these chariots come out from between the mountains of brass, when the event
declares what was the immutable decrce of God. Hence the Psalmist, Thy right
cousnesse is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep: this
for the decree. And for the execution, Thou preservest man and beast, ( Psalm.
36.6.) but by such means, and in such manner as to thee seems best. It is our
part to say Amen to his Amen, and to put our F^at and Placet to his. The will
of the Lord be done, said those primitive Christians, Act. 21.14. Here am I,
send me, Esaias 6.8.

Verse 2. In the first chariot were red horses, etc.] These several colors
seem to set forth the diverse ministrations of the Angels, deputed to several
employments. The black color betokens sorrowful occurrences and
revolutions. The white, joyful. The red, bloody. The grisled, sundry and mixed
matters, partly joyful, and partly sorrowful. But I easily subscribe to Him
that said, We must be content to be ignorant of the full meaning of this
vision. Tanta est profunditas Christianarum literarum, says Austin, so great
is the depth of divine learning that there is no fathoming of it. Prophecy is
pictured like a Matrone, with her eyes covered, for the difficulty. For which
cause Paulinus Nolanus would never be drawn to write Commentaries: and Psellus
in Theodoret asks pardon for expounding the Canticles of Solomon.

Verse 4. What are these my Lord?] Difficulty does but whet desire in Heroic
spirits: the harder the vision, the more earnest was the Prophets inquisition.
he was restless, till better resolved; and therefore applies himself again to
his Angel- Tutour, rather then Tutelar, whom, for honor sake, he calls My
Lord. See the Note on chap. 4.5. and take notice of the truth of Saint Peter's
Assertion concerning the Prophetic scrutiny (1 Pet. 1.11.) with greatest
sagacity and sedulity.

Verse 5. These are the four spirits of the heavens] Angels are spirits, Heb.
1.7, 14. and spirits of heaven, Mat. 24.36. Gal. 1.8. resembling their
Creator, as children do their Father, both in their substance which is
incorporeall, Hence they are called sons of God, Job 1.6. and 38.7
and in their excellent properties, Life, and Immortality, Blessedness, and
Glory: a part whereof is their just Lordship and command over inferior
creatures. For like as ministering spirits they stand before the Lord of the
whole earth, who sends them out at his pleasure, to serve his providence: so,
they have, (as his Agents and Instruments, no small stroke, in the ordering and
managing of natural and civil affairs, as may be seen in the first of
Ezechiel. The wheels, that is, the events of things, have eyes, that is,
something that might show the reason of their turnings, if we could see it. And
they are stirred but as the living creatures, that is the Angels stirred them:
And both the wheels and living creatures were acted and guided by Gods spirit
as the principal and supreme Cause of all, the Lord of the whole earth, as he
is here called.

that stand before, etc.] As waiting his commands, and ready to run on his
errand, Mat. 18:10. Dan. 7.10. Jacob at Bethel saw them. 1. ascending, sc. to
contemplate and praise God, and to minister to him. 2. descending, sc. to
execute Gods will upon men, for mercy, or for judgment, Psalm. 103.20. For
which purpose, Ezekiel tells us that they have four faces, to look every way,
when as Gods watchmen they stand sentinel in heavens turret. And that the
sole of their feet is like the sole of Calves feet, round, and ready to go
either forward or backward with greatest facility: that as they see every way,
so they are apt to go every way for the dispensing of Gods benefits, and
executing of his chastisements toward the Elect, and vengeance on the
reprobates. All this they do justly, 2 Samuel 24.17 2 King. 19.35 Genesis 19.11 Acts
12.23 Rev. 16.16
diligently and purely, with faith in receiving Gods commands, Rev. 15.6.
clothed in pure white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden
girdles. Let us labor to obey God, as Angels do: else we may be Angels for
gifts, and yet go to hell.

Verse 6. The black horses which are therein, etc. These Angels are appointed
to several Countries. The black horses to Babylon, (which lay North from
Judaea) to inflict vengeance. The white horses are sent with them, to deliver
the Church out of Babylon: and to bring their brethren for an offering unto the
Lord, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon
swift beasts to Gods holy Mountain Jerusalem, Esaias 66, 20.

And the grisled go forth toward the South countrey] To show that the
punishments of Egypt, and Arabia (which lay Southward from Judaea) should be
somewhat mixed, and mitigated: they should be in better case then Babylon: yet
not so good, as that the Jews should dream of a happy estate in those
countries: but rather repair to Judaea, and there keep them; since those that
are out of Gods precincts, cincts, are out of his protection, Psalm. 91.9, 10,
11, 12.

Verse 7. And the bay went forth, etc.] Junius reads it, And the strong, or
confirmed ones: that is, the Angels, armed with power, and authority from God
for the execution of his will, Esaias 10.34. Lebanon shall fall by a mighty One,
that is, by an Angel. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. they are called the Angels of Gods power:
and elsewhere principalities, and powers.

and sought to go, that they might-walk to and fro through the earth] Not only
toward the South, as verse 6. This does not teach, that the Angels are more
careful of this world then God is, of whom they desired it. But first, that
they can do nothing without commission from Him. Secondly, that they are ever
ready to offer their service and to yield obedience, upon the least intimation
of the Divine pleasure.

Verse 8. Then cried he upon me] That I might the better observe it: since he
spoke it with so great vehemence.

Have pacified my spirit] i.e. perfecerunt voluntatem meam, as the Chaldee here
has it, they have done my work thoroughly, to my great content. When the
Churches enemies are slaughtered, God inviteth the birds and beasts to a feast,
as it were for joy: and takes as much delight in their just punishment, as any
man can do in a cup of generous wine: whence it is called the wine of Gods
wrath, Rev. 14.10. See Deuteronomy. 28.63.

Verse 9. And the word of the Lord came unto me saying,] This second part of
the Chapter, is not a vision, but a Sermon, or an historical prediction of
what was really to be done. For as Gods Spirit was quieted, and as it were
comforted by the Angels faithful execution of their offices: so He seeks by
this Prophecy, to quiet and comfort the spirits of his people the Jews, that
were returned out of Babylon. For these finding themselves beset with enemies,
and exigencies, might possibly despair of ever seeing the accomplishment of
those promises and prophecies of the kingdom restored to the house of David,
and of the great glory of the second Temple above the first. To keep up their
hearts therefore, is this declaration made them of the kingdom and priestood
of Christ, under the typical coronation of Jehoshuah the High Priest.

Verse. 10. Take of them of the captivity] i. e. Of the returned captives, even
of Heldai, Number. 16.2.
of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah] Men famous in the Congregation, men of renown.
That these four mentioned here (taking in Josiah, who is also called Her, verse
14.) were Ambassadors from the godly Jews in Babylon, and brought their gists,
as Junius thinks, I cannot affirm. But that they were the same with Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, as the Jews and Hierom tell us, I do not
believe. Josiah seems to be the Host to the other three: as Gaius was to St.
Paul, and other good people. Though some think rather, he was either treasurer
for the Temple, or else a goldsmiths, and one that could make crowns. Calvin
conjectures from the fourteenth verse; (where it is said, that the crowns shall
be to these men for a memorial) that being men of authority, they were deeply
guilty of infidelity and impatiency, because they ^aw not a present performance
of the promises; they were discontented themselves, and discouraged others. Ye
have need of patience, says the Apostle to those short spirited Hebrews chap.
10.36. who found it more easy to suffer evil, thento wait for the promised
good.

and come thou the same day] Either the same day these men came from Babylon:
Or, the self-same day that the Lord spoke to the Prophet, is he commanded to
go, not to put it off a day longer: for the people needed a speedy and hasty
comfort. No sooner had God prepared the people, but the thing was done
suddenly, as 2 Chronicles. 29.36. No sooner were they ripe, but he was ready. He is
a God of judgment, a wise God, that knows when to deal forth his favors: As
till then he waits to be gracious, Esaias 30.18. His fingers itch to be doing
good in his good pleasure to Sion: as the mothers breasts ache, when now it is
time the child had suck. He exalts the lowly, he fills the hungry with good
things. When once David is poor and needy, God will make no tarriance, Psalm.
40.17. when his soul is even as a weaned child, then he shall have the kingdom,
Psalm. 131.2.

Verse 11. Make crowns] Two, says Piscator: one of gold, for the Kingly
dignity, another of silver for the Priesthood. Three, says A Lapide, who makes
it a type as of Christ's threefold office, so of the Popes triple crown: which
later relates rather to Prides picture drawn by the old Romans, with three
crowns on her head; On the first whereof was in scribed Transcendo: on the
second Non obedio: on the third Perturbo. Danaeus thinks it likely by the 14.
verse, that here were four crowns made according to the number of the four
persons here mentioned, that brought in the gold and silver. Ribera will have
it to be all but one crown made of both metalls, and called crowns for the
greatness of it; Chald. vertit Facies coronam magnam.
as Wisdoms for singular wisdom, Pro. 1. Behemoth Beasts, for an huge beast
Job 40. The Verb singular tihieh ver. 14. seems most to favor this conceit of
his. But in Hebrew the singular is often put for the plural.

Verse 12. And spoke unto him saying, Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts saying]
that is, Confidently and Constantly affirm and averr it: that notwithstanding
all unlikely hood, and unbelief on the peoples part, Almighty God will surely
bring it to pass: This heap of words imports so much: for do ye think the
scripture speaks in vain? says St. James, not without some holy
indignation, chap. 4.5.

behold the man whose name is the Branch] The man Christ Jesus, Romans 1.3.
who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh: and as a Branch grew
out of his roots Esaias 11.1. See the Note above on chap. 3.4. Jehoshuah, 2 Cor.
12.7. Romans 12.3.
that he might not be exaited above measure with the abundance of this new
honor, or think of himself more highly then he ought to think, is given to
understand, that he is crownned for no other cause then this, that the Jews
might understand, that there should One arise, that should be both a King and a
Priest also for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: and his name should be
the Branch, Not only because when he was a child, he grew in age and in
wisdom, and in grace with God and men, (which is Vatablus his reason) but
because he is the ^oot, fountain, and foundation of all the faithful, who do
grow up and increase in him, with the increase of God: Hence it follows.

he shall grow up out of his place, and shall build the Temple of God] that is,
the Church, which at all times has been gathered together by Christ, through
the preaching of the Gospel.

and he shall grow up out of his place] Or He (the Branch) shall branch up de
sub se, from under hinself: he shall be born of himself, as it were, of poor
parentage; for this Branch grew out of the root of Iesse, when that goodly
family was sunk so low, as from David the king to Joseph the carpenter. He that
writes the life of King Edward 6. says of his Tutours Dr. Cox, and Mr. John
Cheek, Sr. John Heywood.
that they were men of mean birth; but so well esteemed for virtue and
learning, that they might well be said to be born of themselves.

and he shall build the Temple of the Lord] i. e. the spiritual temple, that
Temple the Church, the glory where of was far greater then the glory of the
former Hag. 2.9. See the Note there. And this he should do in the quality of a
king, and with royal magnificence. Ye also as lively stones elect and precious
are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood etc. 1. Pet. 2.5.

Verse 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord] The same again for
greater assurance: as Pharaoh's dream was doubled. Or, Even he shall build it,
that is, he shall both begin and finish it (It is the same word again, but in
the future tense) Christ is called the Author and Fimsher of our faith Heb.
12.2.

and he shall bear the glory] Jesus shall, not thou Jehoshuah (in Greek,
Jesus) though now thou bear the crown. All thy glory is but figurative of his.
Thus says the Lord, Remove the diadem (or mitre) take off the crown: this
shall not be the same etc. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall
be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, that is
Christ the king and priest of his Church. Particularly for his Kingly office,
he shall sit and rule upon his throne, as a Sovereign Lord of all: And for his
Priestly office

he shall be a Priest upon his throne likewise] for the Church also has her
throne and jurisdiction, though distinct and severed from the civil.

and the counsel of peace shall be between them both] i. e. there shall be no
clashing between these two offices in Christ; as there was sometimes between
the Kings and the Priests of former ages, but they should, as it were, take
sweet counsel together for the good of the Church: Christ having purchased all
peace to his people by his Pr^es^hood, and maintaining and defending it, by his
Kingdom.

Verse 14. And the crowns shall be to Halem -- for a memoriall] Or monument of
their incredulity, says Calvin, and for their full conviction. See the Note
above on verse 10. Or their liberality, fay others, and peradventure with some
inseription or remembrance of their names (here recorded) for honor sake. But
best of all those that say these duties were for a memorial in the Temple of
the Messiah that was shortly to be expected, and was presently promised. The
poor Jews at this day are said to have a crown hanging in their synagogues,
against the coming of their long lookt-for Messiah. Taim. in Sanhed. cap. 11
And that he comes not all thi^ while, they say it is for their sins which are
many and bony, or, migh^y, ((...).) But now seeing he stays so long, he
shalibe, say they, a forerunner of the end of the world, Spec. Eur.
and shall gather by his power all nation, into one fold, according to that
which here follows.

Verse 15. And they that are far off] This was fulfilled in the conversion of
the Gentiles who together with the Christian Jews grew up into an holy Temple
in the Lord Ephesians. 2.19. etc. It was also in some sense fulfilled in Cyrus,
Darius A^ta^^^^^s, Herod, who were at great charge for the Temple-work. See
Ezra 7.15, 16. the King and his Council, the Babylonian and Jews make a
contribution to the work.

and ye shall know] sc. by the event, and by your own experience.

If you will dilig^ntly obey the voyce] That is, If by faith ye receive Christ
held forth in the promise: and then petfift in the obedience o^ faith unto the
end.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. IN the sourth year of King Darit^s] Two years and a month after the
former sermon. The word of the Lord was precious in those days: T^^ Lod gave
the word: Psalm. 68.11.
but it cannot be said that great was the company of those that pr^ach^a it;
during the Captivity they complained that there was no more any Prophet;
neither any among them that knew how long their mi^ery should last. Soon after
their return, God stined them up Haggie, and Zachary; and after that Malachy:
and then there was Chathimath chazon, as the Jews ph^afe it, a sealing up or
end of Prophecy. Only they had Bath-gol as they calt it, a voice from heav^n
sometime, as Mat. 3.17. Ioh. 12.28. This and the pool of Betheida only were
left them as extraordinary fignes of Gods love to that people. But for a
punishment of their killing the Prophets (as they did this Zachary between the
Porch and the Altar) and stoning those that were sent unto them (as they did
the other Zachary the son of Jehojadah) they had no more Prophet^, Mat. 23.37.
till the Archprophet, and his forerunner the Baptist came. And now also by
thi^ long vacation of two years and a month, it appears that Preachers were
rare, and that sermons they had but seldom. Neither was it otherwise here in
England at the first reiormation: for to many churches (for want of Preachers)
Readers were sent. Whence one of the Martyrs wished that every able Minister
might have ten Congregations committed to his charge, (...) Cant. 180.
till further provision could be made.

the word of the Lord came unto Zachariah The Lord is said to come to Balaam,
Abimelech, Laban etc. But he never concredited his word to these prosane
persons; as he did to the holy Prophets, of whom it is said as here, The word
of the Lord came unto them.

in the fourth day of the ninth month] which answers to our November; why the
precise time of the prophesies is set down, See the Note on Hag. 1.1.

Verse 2. When they had sent] They? who? Not the Pr^nces of Persia that were
now proselyted, as the vainglorious Jews (and after them Heymo and Hugo) would
have it, for the honor of their nation. Nor the Samarinans (as some in
Theodoret held) as seeming to Judaize in part, to join Jewish ceremonies with
heathenish rites. But either the Jews yet ^emayning in Babylon, as Calvin
conceives (blaming them (...) their sloth (...) commenthing them for (...)
they (...) vice) Of else the whole body or (...) last^^ ^ome particul^ man not
named (...) I (...) in the fifth month (...) Enallage; the singular (...) name
of the whole (...)

unto the house of God] Not to (...) from Bethel (as the (...) likely. But, to
the house of God, (...) to the (...) nigh finished: and that (...) que^tion
here (...)

Sherezer, and Regemmeleeh, and their men] that is, their (...) were men of
rank and fashion; as it was fit they should be in (...) polyment. And here the
Sep^uagim, by their correct translating of the (...) have caused a strange
coil among those that strive to defend them (...) they translated against
their will: and theresore what can we expect from them but slippery doing? It
is most sure, that the translation of theirs which we now have, is full of
errors: and that they pervert diverse clear prop^esit (...) Jesus Christ, and
have occasioned many mistakes, being themselves mnay times grossly mistaken as
here: unless they did it wilfully. Some (...) men think that the Septuagint
that we have now, is not theirs. It was burnt (...) (as some hold) in the
library of Alexandria, or (as others by (...) when he burnt Serapion.

to pray before the Lord] Heb. to entreat the face of the Lord, (...) prayers
and sacrifices in the most solemn sort. The Hebrew properly (...) Lord with
prayers, to set upon him ^ith utmost (...) until he yield, to urge him (as
they did the Prophet 2 (...) 17.) (...) he be ashamed to deny, till we put ^m
to the bsush, or leave a blot in his (...) (as she Luke 18.5. unless we
m^^^revaile. This must be done, especially when we are to converse with
Pro^nets about soule-businesses, cases of conscience etc.

Verse 3. And to speak unto the P^^^] whose office is to (...) knowledge^ and
present it too; to teach Jacob God judgment, and to (...) before him Deuteronomy.
33.10. to selfoyle Mae. (...) 9. to bring (...) 8.22. to speak as the Oracles
of God, 1. Pet. (...) sand can skill of Job 33.23.

and to the Prophets] who were extr^ordinarily raised up some ames by Gods, ^^
assist the Priests in teaching the people, and to shame them for their back
wardnesse to such businesses. See the Note on ver. 1.

should I weep] that is, fast, which, was ever with (...) 17. and affliction of
the soul; which indeed is (...) Levit. 16.31. and 23.37.
the which, it is but as a brainelesse he^^^ or a life (...) humble day (says
One) without an humble, (...) but an high provocation, like Zimri (...) when
(...) Congregation were weeping before the door of the Tabernacl^

in the fifth moneth] wherein the Temple was consumed to (...) In a sad
remembrance whereof the Jews (...) day of (...) for a solemn fast every year,
till now

separating my self] Heb. Nazar^^^^ my self, that is abridging my self of
meats, drinks and delights. Hence a fasting day is called a day of restraint
I^el 2.15. Tsom. (...).
Hence it has its name both in Hebrew and Greek. Hence ^^^ it is spoken of as
a foul fault Esaias 58.3. Beheld in the day of your fast (...) The Popish fast
is a mere mock fast^^ for they separate themsel^ (...) kind of meats only: it
is not a to tall abstinence. And here in (...) of Turk Hist. 777.
the very Turks, who upon their fasting-dayes will ^^^ so much (...) or wash
their mo^ths with water all the day long, before (...) in the sky: and then
they-make all the cheer and joy they can (...) as the At ick Daines in their
Thesmophoria (a feast of Ceres) prepare (...) fasting, but after that laid the
reins in the neck and ran riot.

as I have done these so many yeers] Seventy at least. But they seem to reckon
up upon so many as was scarce to be told and that therefore God was deep in
their debt. Is it not time now to give over, since the Temple wa almost
reedified? This was the great case (...) ded by these Questionists. Hereunto an
answer is made by the Prophet (...) two following chapters, and this answer is
partly Reprehensory Chap. 7. partly Consolatory Chap. 8. The Sun of
righteousness loves not to set in a cloud: Verse 4. Then came the word of the
Lord of Hosts] This is often prefaced for amhority's Take: and to procure
andience and reverence. The Lord God has Spoken, who can but be affected? See
that ye despise not him that speaks from heaven. The Angel Mat. 28.7. uses
no other argument to assure^ the women of the truth of what he had told them,
but this, Lo I have told you.

Verse 5. Speak unto all the people of the land] Not to the Ambassadors only:
as the cause is common, so let the answer be public: for they were all too
well conceited of their external services, bodily exercises, and made much ado
about a trifle, a practice of their own devising, neglecting the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith Mat. 23.23.

and to the priests] Who themselves were to seek belike; And having been the
authors and observers of these customs, were backward to abolish them, as
those that rested in them without true repentance, faith and new obedience.

when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh moneth] sc. For the
slaughter of Gedaliah and the sad consequence thereof 2 Kings 25.22. and Jer.
41.1.

even those seventy yeers] wherein ye have lost full sevenscore fasts: and were
not a button the better for them: because they fasted rather to get off their
chains then their sins: they rested in their fasts, in the work done, neither
regarding how, nor why they should fast. Now God weighes men's actions by their
aims. And with him, though a good aim does not make a bad action good (as we
see in the case of Uzzah) yet a bad aim makes a good action bad, as in Jehu's
reformation. He had a squint eye to his own ends in all (as the eagle has an
eye upon her prey when she flies highest) and so consulted ruin to his own
house.

did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?] Did you propound me to your selves?
Or gat I any thing by the hand? Did you serve me? and not your selves rather
upon me? was it not sinful self-love, and base self-seeking that put you upon
these practices? looked you any higher therein, then only to the satisfying of
your own carnal humors? God was not in all your thoughts. This Daniel saw and
acknowledged with grief and shame, Chap. 9.13. All this is come upon us: yet
made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our
iniquities and understand thy truth: Therefore has the Lord watched upon the
evil and brought it upon us etc. The Jews no doubt had prayed much and often
during that seventy years captivity: yet Daniel denies that they had prayed to
any purpose: because they had failed both quoad fontem and quoad finem, they
had acted from evil principles, and had been carried on by self-respects. They
had not that true-heart spoken of by the Apostle Heb. 10.22. but that wicked
mind mentioned by the Wiseman Prove. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is
abominable: how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind: either as
thinking to cozen the God of heaven, Hos. 10.1. Cant. 5.4.
or at least to stop his judgments, and still the noise of his own conscience
by his external services. Thus Ephraim bore fruit to himself, but proved an
empty vine: when as the spouse (that fruitful vine on Christ's house-side) kept
her fruit for her beloved: who therefore fed heartily upon it, and not upon her
vine only, but her milk too, not upon her honey only, her finer and sweeter
services, but upon her honey comb too, that had much wax in it, meaning her
worser and courser performances. If the heart be upright all is well betwixt
Christ and his people. O labor for that truth in the inward parts, that we may
be with Appelles approved in Christ Romans 16. that he may say of ^s, as once he
did of Nathaneel, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, Great virtues
^ot, sweetened with sincerity are no ornaments unto us. And Great infirmities,
not sowred with hypocrisy, are no great deformities. Those God acknowledges
not, these he imputes not.

Verse 6. And when ye did cat and when ye did drink] q. d. In all your actions
natural, civil, recreative, religious, you should have sought, served, and set
up me, you should have done all to the glory of God, as says the Apostle: you
should have eat, drunk and slept eternal life, as it was faid of a certain
Scotch Divine. The way of life is above to the wife Prove. 15.24. he goes a
higher way then h^^ neighbor, who contents himself with a natural use of the
creature, but he can extract a spiritual. Grace is called the divine nature, as
that which Elixir-like by contaction turns all into the same property with it
self: meat makes us not acceptable to God 1 Cor. 8.8. The kingdom of God
consists not in meats and dr^nks, Romans 14.17. Howbeit the Israelites were
commanded, as to fast, so to feast ^^. forethe Lord; that is, in faith and
obedience: and to do every thing from the heart, as unto him. This these Jews
did not; and are therefore worthily blamed. From their feeding themselves
without fear of God, is concluded their no respect to him in their fasts and
holy services: since true goodness is ever like it self, and carries an
uniformity in all proceedings.

Verse 7. Should ye not hear the words which the Lord ha^h cryed] q.d. Has ^^
not spoken loud enough, long enough? Has he not sufficiently declared his^^^
concerning these external actions, and especially concerning a fast profaned
through wickedness Isai. 58.3, 4. Jer. 14.12. and eisewhere. Sed surdo s^ul^m;
All has been but as a trumpet sounded in a dead man's ear: you are altogether
uncounsellable, untractable: and all that has been spoken has even been spilt
upon you.

should ye ^ot the words] So the Original runs, by a concise and short kind of
speaking, well befitting a sharp reproof. Should ye not hear them and heed
them? which if you had done, you might have spared that labor of coming to
us: and out of the former prophesies have resolved your selves.

when Jerusalem was inhib^^ted, and in prosperity] But then their hearts were
fat as ^^ease, and the prosperity of those fools destroyed them: who, Frov.
1.3^ 3^
if they had hearkened to wisdom, had dwelt sasely: and lived quite from the
fear of evil. Surely as those that lie on down pillows cannot well hear: so
such as be at case in Sion, cannot profit by good counsel. It is by correction
that God opens the ears of men, and fealeth their instruction. Job. 33.16.

when men inh thit the South of the pla^n] Heb. the South of the plain, that
is, the bounds and borders, that part of the country that lies most open to
the inrodes of the enemy, and has most of all felt the desolations of war. See
Jer. 1^.26, and 32,44.

Verse And the word] See the Note on Verse 4.

Verse 9. Ex^^me true judgement] According to Deuteronomy. 1.17. See the Note there.
The prophet having here to do with Hypocrites, who boast much of their piety
with neglect of charity and seem to be strickt in the service of God, but make
overbold with men, presses them to duties of the second table, which yet he
would have exercised in the first table: for not only the second is included
in the first, but in the very first commandment of the Law the observation of
the rest is commanded, as Luther well observes.

and show mercy] Or bountifulness, kindness, favorable dealing.

And compassions] Heb bowels q.d. Do it out of deep pity fiom the heart-root.
Esaias 57.
Draw out, not your sheafe only, but your soul to the (...) this way the
poorest may exercise his Charity: though he cannot show mercy, yet he may love
it ^^^6.8 he may wish well to it, as these poor wretches that were willing
indeed but never (alas) able to relieve the necessitous Mat 25.35. we usually
call such poor men, poor souls: but in the bowels of compassions a poor soul
may be a rich Christian: and a rich man may have a poor soul.

Verse 10. And oppress not the widow nor the sathe^^^se] Widows and Orphans
are Gods clients, taken into his special protection.

the stranger] Whose right is so sacred, says one, that there was never ration
so barbarous, that would violate the same.

nor the poor] whose misery moves compassion without an Orator. In the low
countries they may not beg, but only look pitifully. To grind the faces of
such is barbarous cruelty: to wrong them, or but wrangle with them, is called,
man-eating, Psalm. 14.4.

and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.] For
though you never act it, yet Fecit quisque quantum voluit, says Seneca It is
said, Josh. 24.9. Balac arose and fought with Israel: And yet the story says
nothing so. Sed fieri dicitur quod tentatur aut intenditur, says Ribera upon
Amos 9.5. Hec did not, because he durst not: yet he is said to have done it,
because he had a mind to do it. A man may die of an inward bleeding: so of
heart-sinnes, which are majoris reatus, as we see in devils, though outward
sins are majoris infamiae, as the Schools well observe.

Verse 11. But they refused to hearken] Being a nation void of counsel, Deuteronomy.
32.28. not willing to know what they should do, lest they should do what they
would not. Nay (said they once, when they had nothing else to say) but we will
have a king.

and pulled away the shoulder] As untamed heifers do from the yoke: or untoward
Porters from the burden. The Vulgar renders it, Averterunt scapulam
recedentem, making it a Metaphor from those that scornfully turn their backs
upon their betters, when they like not their commands: as the Earl of Essex did
once upon Queen Elizabeth; Camd. Eliz. Anno 1598.
whereat she waxing impatient, gave him a cuffe on the ear, bidding him be gone
with a mischief. Sides and shoulders should be set to Gods work, Zeph. 3.9.

and stopped their ears] Heb. they made heavy their ears. See here, how they
proceeded by degrees from bad to worse (for Nemo repent fit turpissimus) noted
in the many Ands here used. There is a concatenation of Vices as well as of
Graces: and he that is one step down the ladder of hell, knows not where he
shall stop, till he break his neck at the very bottom. Wherefore Principiis
chsta. Meddle not with sin: it is modest and maidenlike at first, but who knows
what it may come to? We have heard of Virgins so modest at first, as to blush
at the motions of an honest love, who being once corrupt and debauched, have
grown boldly lascivious, so as to solicit others, so as to prostitute
themselves to all comers, etc. Keep thee therefore far from an cvil matter,
Exodus 23.7. have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians.
5.11. Circa serpentis antrum positus non eris diu illaesus. Isidor.
He that plays upon the hole of the asp may be suddenly stung.

Verse 12. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant] that hardest of stones,
harder then the flint, Ezekiel. 3.9. then the nether-milstone, Job 41.24. Pliny
says of it; Durities ejus est inenarrabilis, and simul ignium victrix natura
and] nunquam incalescens. The hardness of this stone is unspeakable: the fire
cannot burn it, nor so much as heat it through: the hammer cannot break it; and
therefore the Greeks call it an Adamant from its untameablenesse. Hircino tamen
rumpitur sanguine, says the same Author. Howbeit this hardest stone soaked
for a while in goats-blood, (...). Apocal. 1
may be dissolved and broken in pieces. So may the hardest heart by the blood
of Christ (the true scapegoat) applied by faith. They shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn: He shall look again upon them, and they
shall melt much more. A stroke from guilt broke Judas his heart into despair:
but a look from Christ broke Peter's heart into tears. Now till the heart be
thus graciously mollified, instructions glide off it, as rain falling upon a
rock: Afflictions, Gods hammers do but beat upon an adamant, qui respuit
scalptra and malleos, quin and ipsos disrumpit, which will sooner break them,
then be broken by them. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in hearts and cars,
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7.51.
How their fathers did, appears by this Text, and Neh. 9.29. They had not only
sinews of iron, a natural hereditary hardness, (whereby all men are born
averse from, yea adverse to the motions of the Spirit: That which is born of
the flesh is flesh) but also brows of brass, Efay 48.4. an habitual,
voluntary, adventitious, wilful hardness; refusing to be reformed, hating to
be healed: such a desperate hardness as neither Ministry, nor misery, nor
miracle, nor mercy could possibly mollify.

by the former Prophets] Heb. Manus enim est (...), Arist.
by the hand of the former Prophets, that is, by their mouth and ministry: but
to as little purpose, through their singular obstinacy, as when Bid preached
to an heap of stones.

Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts] Which argues that they
were great sinners before the Lord, as Genesis 13.13. for he does not use to kill
flies upon men's brows with beetles.

Verse 13. Therefore it is come ^o passe] By a most just and equal
retaliation. Distributive justice requires that men should be punished
according to the nature, Prove. 14.14
and kind of their offenses. The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his
own ways: As he makes a match with mischief, so he shall have his belly-full
of it: he has sold himself to do wickedness, and he shall be sure to have his
payment. With the froward God will show himself froward, Psalm. 18.26. he will
be as cross as they are, for the hearts of them. If they turn the deaf ear to
to him, he will do as much for them another time. They shall call and cry for
help till their hearts and sides ache, but all in vain: he will not come at them.
If they pull away the shoulder, he will pull away their supporters, and they
shall be overthrown in stony places, Psalm. 141.6. If they harden their hearts,
he will harden his hand, and hasten their destruction. This shall they have of
Gods hand, Esaias 50.
they shall lie down in sorrow.

Verse 14. But I scattered them with a whirl-wind] This is the second part of
their punishment. The first was no audience, or help from heaven at their
greatest need, verse 13. This was the curse of Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15. of Moah,
Esaias 16.12. of David's enemies, Psalm. 18.41. The next now is, they were
disjected and dissipated, as the dust of the mountains before a whirlwind:
cast out of their native soil, and carried they knew not whither, with a great
and fearful dispersion, and discerption of the same body and nation.

thus the land was desolate after them] This is the third degree of their
grievous punishment, their land laid utterly waste and desolate: according to
that, God turns a fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein, Psalm. 107.34. Here a learned Expositour observes a
wonderful providence, M. Pemble in loc.
that this pleasant country, left thus destitute of inhabitants, and compassed
about with warlike Nations, was not invaded, and replanted by forreiners for
seventy years space: but enjoyed her Sabbaths, resting from tillage and all
other employments.

for they laid the pleasant land desolate] They, by their sins, rather then
the Babylonians by their Armies, did all this spoil, as Daiel also confesses,
chap. 9.16. and Nehemiah, chap 1.8. Sin is the great makebate, hell-hag,
trouble-town that hurled confusion over the world at first: and brings
desolation still to pleasant countries. Palestins was very pleasant, not more
by the nature of the soil, Ezekiel. 20.^
then by Gods special blessing: a land that he had espied out for them,
flowing with milk and honey, which was the glory of all lands: This land they
had laid desolate, or for an astonishment, as some render it: or for an In qua
quid? as Montanus reads it, What Is here? Nothing of its old pleasantness.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. AGain, the word of the Lord of Hests] As for reprehension in the
former chapter, so for consolation in this: that they might not be discouraged,
or say as once they did, There is no hope: but lifting up the hands which hung
down, and the feeble knees, they might go on to lay the last stone with joy. To
which end also no less then 18. several times in this one chapter God is
styled the Lord of Hosts: that resting upon Gods Power, and Goodness, (whereof
they are assured by many precious promises) as upon the Jachin and Bozez, the
two main pillars of a Christians faith, they might have strong consolation.

Came to me] See the Note on chap. 7.8.

Verse 2. I was zealous for Zion] See the Note on chap. 1.14. Jealous as an
husband, zealous as a loving Father: for, Non amat qui non zelat, says
Augustine; and a Father being rebuked by some for his exceeding forwardness
for his friend, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I know not how to love
any otherwise then earnestly. God therefore to ascertaine his people of the
truth of the ensuing promises, and to cure their unbelief, lets them know that
all this he will do for them of his free grace without their desert. As at
first he loved them merely because he loved them Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. so out of the
same love, he will bestow upon them all the good things here mentioned. See the
like Esaias 9.6, 7. where after a sweet description of Christ, his kingdom, and
Benefits, he concludes all with The zeal (that is the tender love and free
grace) of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. Fear ye not, So 2 Samuel 7. 21.
For thy words sake, that is, for thy Christ's sake, and according to thine own
heart have thou done all these things which thou had promised. According to
thine own heart, that is, ex mero motu, out of pure and unexcited love, or
zeal, which is the top of all the affections, and the heat of the heart.

Verse 3. I am returned unto Zion] After a long absence, as it may seem by the
late troubles, and that dismal dispersion chap. 7.14. God was gone aside and
returned to his place, till they should acknowledge, their offense, and seek
his face: in their affliction, said He, they will seek me early. Neither was he
frustrated as appears Hos. 5.15. with 6.1. Come and let us return unto the
Lord, say they; Do so: and then I will come again unto you as the rain, as
the later and former rain unto the earth, with a Cornu-copia of peace, plenty
and prosperity. Neither this only will I do as a stranger in the land, or as a
wayfaring man that tarrieth for a night.

but I will dwell in the midst of Ierusalem] My Shechinaeh, Ier. 14.8.
or settled habitation shall be in the midst of it, sc. in my Temple there
situated. Maimonides says, that the Hebrew word here used signifies
continuationem stationis, a sure and settled abode; such as was that of the
Godhead of Christ in his Manhood. For the Word was made flesh and dwelt
amongst us, (...). The word seemea to be made of this Shacan in the Text.

and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth] A faithful city Esaias 1.17. A
Verona rightly so called: a place where the sincere service of the true God is
set up and practiced: (...).
in opposition to other cities (such as Athens was, wholly given to idolatry
Act. 17.16.) that went a whoring after lying vanities, and so forsook their own
mercies Ioh. 2.8.

and the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy mountaine] This and the former
clause may safely and fitly be extended to the holy Catholic Church of the new
Testament also: whereof Jerusalem and the Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple
stood, were Figures. The Rabbines themselves expect the good things here
promised to be performed when their Messiah shall come, quem tantis vlulatibus
exposcunt.

Verse 4. There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of
Ierusalem] Because the Ancient of days the just Lord is in the midst thereof
Zeph 3.5. Iam. 1.17.
and he will give every good gift and perfect giving, that is, both Temporal
and Spiritual. The F^ther of lights will be to His both a Sun and a Shield:
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly Psalm. 14.11.
Godlnesse has the promises of both lives 1 Timothy 4.8. Christ is heir of all
Heb. 1.2. and the Saints are his coheires Romans Esaias 9.6.
8.17. He is the everlasting father, and withal the Prince of ^eace: his
Children and subject^ shall have both the upper and nether spring, both the
blessing of the right hand (sprituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ
Jesus) and also of the left; Riches and honor, delight and pleasure, life and
length of days, peace and prosperity etc. Pro. 3.16, 17. and 8.18. Psalm.
112.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 28.

and every man with his staff in his hand] his third leg, as they call it: q.
d. they shall live so long that they shall need a staff, a servant or a son
(such as Scipio was to his old decrepit father) to lean upon; because the
strong men the legs shall bow themselves, Eccles. 12.3.
that is, bend and buckle under their burden. They shall not be cut off by the
devouring sword of war, that slaughter-man of mankind, that lays hepes upon
heaps, and by chain-bullets cuts its way through a heap of men at once,
without respect of old or young.

and the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girles] Lads and lassed
(as the Hebrew seems to sound) that mind little else but play, as if, with
Leviathan, they had been made to sport, or as those people of Tombutum in
Africa, who are said to spend their whole time in singing and dancing. But this
they could not do if the times were troublesome, and the soldier at his boody
play according to that of Abner 2 Samuel 2.14. Let the young men now arise and
play before us, that is, thrust their swords in their fellows sider ver. 16.

Verse 6. If it be marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people] Here
the Lord graciously answers the secret objection of these Jews unbeleeving
and misgiving hearts. It is impossible, thought they, that these promises
should ever have their performance: they are sure, too good to be true. This is
the voice of carnal reason: it usually tells a story of impossibilities, and
judges according to sense, looks upon Gods Jordan (as Naaman did) with
Syrian eyes. But faith can mount higher and see farther: as a lark with a
little eye getting aloft, can see that, which an Ox, with a bigger eye, but
being below on the ground, cannot. It is the nature of faith to look upon all
things seisable. I can do all things, says she, thorough Christ that
strengthens me. Is there any thing too hard for the Almighty? was to that an
absurd question of these men's Ancestors, Can he prepare a table for us in the
wilderness? God can do much more then he will do: but whatsoever he wills
that he does both in heaven and earth. And if faith have but a promise to
fasten upon, she can believe God upon his bare word, without a pawn: and that
both against sense in things invisible, and against reason in thing ^^^red ble.

^^^uld it also be marvelous in mine eyes.] q. d. will ye measure me by your
selves, and make my thoughts to be as your thoughts, my ways as your ways?
there is no compartion. Abraham ca^ed not for the deadness of his own body or
his w^ves, but was strong in faith, and gave God the glory of his power Romans
4.20. This was it indeed that God himself minded him of when he said unto him
Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me and be uprihgt: q. d. Thou will
never do the later unless thou believe the former.

Verse 7. Behold I will save my people from the East] This was in part (no
doubt) literally meant of the scattered Jews: and fulfilled also, in those
five hundred years space between the Captivity and Christ, though stories tell
us not when and how: and shall be much more at their much-desired conversion.
For this is laid down for a general rule, that all Evangelicall promises made
to the Jews, seeing they neither at first received the Gospel, nor ever
hitherto enjoyed that peace, plenty, and prosperity which these and such like
promises do purport, cannot but aim at somewhat that is yet to come. Albeit it
cannot be denied but that the great and glorious things which in the height and
excellency thereof are spoken particularly to them, do in their measure and
degree appertain in common to all the faithful: and so in the New Testament
are ordinarily applied.

Verse 8. And I will bring them] and them they are sure to be brought. For who
has resisted his will? he will breathe life into those dead bones and flesh
shall cover them: he will make up those two sticks into one, and David his
servant shall be king over them for ever Ezekiel. 37.

and they shall dwell in the midst of Ierusalem] They shall, they shall. O the
Rhetoric of God! O the certainty of the promises! what a monstrous sin is
unbelief?

and they shall be my people, and I will be their God] This is a short Gospel:
this is the sum of the covenant of Grace. Brevis and longa, planeque aurea est
haec clausula, as Pareus some-where speaks of another Teat. This is a long and
yet a short clause: short in sound, long in sense, but golden all over.

in truth and righeousnesse] I will be their God in truth] that is, in an
assured performance of promise.

and they shall be my people in righteousnesse] That is, in obedience to my
commandments. So here is the covenant renewed in a mutual stipulation.

Verse 9. Let your hands be strong] Having therefore these promises dearly
beloved, let us take heart of grace against all occasions of distrust and
fear: 2 Cor. 7.1:
let us up and be doing, that the Lord may be with us; Let us fear lest such a
promise being left us, yea such a bundle of promises as are contained in the
New Covenant, any of you, Heb. 4.1.
by shrinking from the service, should seem to come short of it; or by faintly
forwarding the Temple-work, should lose the things that he has wrought, Esaias
35.3, 4.
but that ye receive a full reward 2 Ioh. 8. strengthen ye the weak hands and
confirm the feeble knees. Say to them of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear
not etc. 2 Chr. 2^.20.
Say the same every man to himself, Encourage your selves in the Lord your God,
as David did 1 Samuel 30.6. Believe the Prophets and ye shall prosper.

do ye not hear in these days these words by the mouth of the Prophets] my
self and Haggai? Job 15.11.
And should the consolation of God be small unto you? will ye not trust us whom
you have alread tried? and take comfort by our words now, whom you have
formerly found no liars.

Verse 10. Ez 3. John 2. Zach. 7.
For before these dayes] sc. during those forty and four years, wherein they
ceased from the work, minding only their own houses and managing their own
affairs, their labor was unprofitable, their state unquiet thorought foreign
forragers, and homebred Malcontents.

there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast] Nulla emolumenta laborum,
Both man and beast did their parts, but to little purpose. Ludit qui sterili
semina mandat humo Ovid.
They sowed much, and brought in little: they earned money, but put it into a
bottomless bag Hag. 1.6. (See the Note there) the gains did not countervaile
the pains, the wages the work.

neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in] whether a man
were within doors or without, he was in danger of the enemy (See the like 2 Chronicles. 15.5.) he did eat the bread of his soul in the peril of his life: being
wholly at the enemies mercy, 1 Samuel 24.19.
which is mere cruelty. For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go away?
said Saul: I trow not, till he have his penniworth of him; as that Monster of
Millaine, as the bloody Papists in the Massacre of Paris, as the merciless
Spaniards on the harmless Indians, (fifty millions of whom they have
murdered in forty two years, as Acosta the Jesuit testifies) as Ptolomaeus,
Lathur us king of Egypt on these poor jews, thirty thousand of whom he cruelly
killed: and compelled the living to feed upon the flesh of the dead: And lastly
as the Jews themselves, of whom Tacitus takes notice, and gives them this
character, that there was misericordia in promptu apud suos, sed contra omnes
alios hostile odium, that they were kind enough to their own, but cruel to all
others, whom they look upon as Idolaters, and therefore think they may safely
kill, as they did the Cyprians and Cyrenians in Tra^ans time to the number of
240000. Dio in Tra.
thousand? and as they still do Christians where they can without danger of
being discovered: whom also they curse in their daily prayers with a Maledic
Domine Nazaraeis: and by whom they are every where so contemned and hated, that
they are exiled out of the world, cast out of many countries, and where they
are suffered (as in Turkey) they are at every Easter in danger of death. For
Biddulph tells us, that if they stir out of doors between Maundy-Thursday at
noon, and Easter-eve at night, the Christians among whom they dwell will stone
them: because at that time they crucified our Savior, derided and buffeted him.

for I set all men, every one against his neighbour] And I set, emisi or
commisi, not permisi or dimisi, as the Vulgar has it: I set on or sent out,
not I let or suffered all men. Gods holy hand has a special stroke in the
Churches afflictions, whosoever be the instrument. Herehin his all-disposing
Providence is not only permissive, but active. Esaias 45.7.
I make peace and create evil, that is, war and contention: which is called
evil by a specialty, as including all evils. Omega nostrorum Mars est, Mars
Alpha malorum. But is there evil in a city, and I have not done it? Am. 3.6.
(for a punishment) sent an evil spirit of division and discord between
Abimelech and the men of Shechem Judge. 9.23. not by instilling any evil
motions into their minds: but in a way of just revenge for their treachery and
cruelty to Gideons family. This God does 1. by letting loose Satan upon them
(that great kindle-coale, and makebate of the world) to raise jealousies,
heart-burnings and discontents between them. 2. By giving them up to the lusts
and corruptions of their own wicked hearts. 3. By giving occasions of enraging
them more and more one against another. And here the wickedness of these
factions and fallings out is wholly from their lusts that war in their members
Iam. 4.1. and not at all of God, though his providence do concur like as the
stench of the dung hill rises not from the Sun, though the Sunshine upon it
be the occasion of it.

every one against his neighbour] A sad case, that common misery should not
breed unity amongst them: that necessity had not made them lay down their
private enmities: that being vexed so by the common adversary, they should yet
vex and interteare one another. Blows enough were not dealt by the Samaritans,
Ammonites, and other Malignants; but their own must add to the violence. Still
Satan is thus busy, and Christians are thus malicious: that they must needs
fall out by the way home, and give bloody-noses too sometimes. St. James calls
upon such to resist the devil, that is, their unruly passions of rage and
revenge, Iam. 4.1.^.
wherewith the devil empestereth and embroileth their spirits; and, like your
cockmasters, sets one to kill another, that at night he may feed upon both.

Verse 11. But now I will not be unto the residue etc.] Now that the Temple is
well-nigh perfected, and so the cause of my displeasure removed; the matter you
see is already well amended, and shall be yet better; for there is a series, a
concatenation of Gods mercies, like the links in a chain, every former draws
on a future, if we break not the chain by our unthankfullnesse. Psalm. 11^.16.
The right hand of the Lord shall change all this says Hope, when it is at
worst. Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. As when, it is in better case,
it says, Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. It is well for the present, and yet it will be better hereafter.
Fury is not in God: or if at any time it seem to be, Psalm. 103.9.
yet he will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. It is
with God in some sort as it was with David, whose soul longed to go forth unto
Absalom: 2 Samuel 13.39.
for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead. Let the Lord but
see the rainbow of repentance appearing in our hearts, and he will presently be
pacified: well he may wash us, but he will never drown us.

Verse 12. For the seed shall be prosperous] Or, full and perfect, as the
Chaldee has it; it shall be fruitful and yield a plentiful crop, such as
shall every way answer the desire of the husbandman. Instead of your late
scarcity (whereof See Hag. 1.9. with the Notes) you shall abound with plenty of
all things, Act. 14.17.
feeding of the fat, and drinking of the sweet, and having your heart filled
with food and gladness, more particularly.

the vine shall give her fruit] so that ye shall swim in wine.

and the ground shall give her encrease] her full burden of the best; so that
your floors shall swell, and your tables sweat with sweetest varieties.

and the heavens shall give their dew] that womb of the morning wherein the
fruits are conceived.

and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things]
whereas people are apt to attribute too much to means and second causes of
plenty and prosperity; God assumes the honor of all to himself. Rain and
fruitful seasons are his gift Act. 14.17. And Hos. 2.22. he resolves the
genealogy of corn and wine into himself. I will hear the heaven, and the
heaven shall hear the earth etc. And both here, and elsewhere he gives us to
know, that the reward of religion is abundance of outward blessings: which yet
are not always entailed to godliness (whatever Jesuits tell us of the
Churches prosperity and plenty, fetching her mark from the market) to the end
that it may be admired for it self, and not for these transitory trappings.

Verse 13. As ye were a curse among the heathen] The people of Gods wrath, and
of his curse Esaias 34.5. ahhorred and accursed by all nations Ier. 24.9. lastly
a proverb and a pattern for any fearful imprecation Ezekiel. 14.8. as those that
had the bloody wailes of Gods visible vengeance on their backs, and (
Cain-like) had his manifest mark upon their persons and proceedings. The Turks
at this day so hate the Jews for crucifying Christ, that they use to say in
detestation of thing, I would I might d^e a ^ew then; Let me be a Jew if I
cozen thee etc. Such a taunt and a curse this wretched people are still. As
they curse Christ and his followers continually every day, so it comes into
their bowels like water, and like oil into their bones. Psalm. 10^.18.

O house of Judah, and house of Israel] i. e. Besides the two tribes of Judah
and Ben^amin, diverse of the ten tribes that revolted (for religion sake) unto
Judah were carried captive with them, and afterward returned out of captivity
also in their company. To them therefore, as well as to the house of Judah is
made the promise. Twelve thousand of these ten tribes returning are found by
computation in that (...) set down Ezra. 3.64. as the Jew-Doctours have
concluded. There are that understand the words of the general conversion of all
the Jews in the time of the Gospel; and this may very well be, for ought that I
see to the contrary.

so will (...) you] Lest you should say in the language of Ashdod, 1 Samuel ^.9.
It is a chance, I will do it says God.

and ye shall be a blessing] Not only a name and praise as Zeph. 3.20 but a
form to be used in blessing of others: such as was that Ruth 4 11, 12. And not
altogether unlike is that prayer of David Psalm. 119.132. Look thou upon me and
be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name.

sow not, but let your hands be strong] Be not diffident, but diligent in well
doing: in due season you shall reap, Gal. ^ ^.
if you feign not. See the Note on verse 9. ^ase fear expectorates and unmans
us: banish it therefore, or ye will be betrayed by it.

Verse 14. As I thought to punish you] He had promised to make them of a curse
a blessing, and here he shows them the cause of this change, namely, Gods
better thoughts of them, and toward them, upon their return unto him. And
because they might happily think that their Fathers had hard measure; he tells
them that their panishment was the fruit of their provocation. And whereas they
might expect that God should repent and relent toward them, He shows here that
He had repented so long, that He was even weary with repenting: and that he
therefore. Jer 15.6. Crudelem ^medicum intemperans ager facit. Mimus.
as implacable, because he found them incurable. Hence he resolved as Ezekiel.
24.13. and would not be altered. Lo thou far these Jews had sound and felt Gods
fingers: and that in his menaces he had been as good as his word.

Verse 15. So again have I thought] Sic conversus sum. This change was not in
God, but in the people, to whom He is now resolved to show mercy, and that from
a gracious purpose and determination, such as alters not.

sear ye no] Faith quelleth and kills distrustful fear: but awful dread it
breeds, seedeth, fostereth and cherishes.

Verse 16. These are the things that ye shall do] Heb. These are the words. God
will not so do all good for his people, but that they should reciprocate and do
something for him by way of thankfulness. Particularly; these are the words, or
commands, that ye shall not only know, but do. They are verba vivenda non
legenda: as lessons of Music must be practiced, and a copy not read only but
written after.

speak the truth every man to his neighbour] Let your words be few, and
ponderous, Lie not in jest, lest ye go to hell in earnest. Let Socrates be your
friend, and Plato: but the truth much more. Rather die then lie for any cause.

execuse the judgment of truth and peace] That is, upright judgment pronounced
or delivered with a calm and quiet mind: not angry, Jadicium pacis, d^st,
placidum and rite compositum. Calv. Deuteronomy. 16.20.
nor partial, nor of any distempered or toubled affection; such as hatred,
fear, favor etc. All that savours of self should be strained out, and Justice,
Justice, (as M^s^s speaks) that is pure justice wihout mud, should run down
as a river. That Magistrate has too impotent a spirit, whose services like the
Dial, must be set only by the Sun o^ self and sinister respect. He should
have, as nothing to lose so nothing to get: he should be above all price or
sale, 2 Chro. 19.7.
and (...) persons, nor receive gifts.

Verse. 17. And let none of you (...) 7.10. Take notice here that as (...)
proves one to he carnal E^h. 2.3. (...) the root o^ bitterness Deuteronomy. 29.18.
(...) something in it, that men are here, (...) to imagine evil (in (...)
particle in their hearts may seem (...) secret sins that lie conched in the
(...) man of the heart, and never show themselves to the world men shall be
acco^^able See Heb. 4.12. Eccles. 12.14. Jer. 6.1^. Rev. 2.23. The very want of
good thoughts is a sin against that (...) and great commandment (...) 22.30.
and concupiscence, even before it come to consent, is a sin against the last
Commandment Romans 7.7. But evil thoughts allowed and wallowed ^^ is a flat
(...) of every Commandment: so vain is their plea that say, Thought is fra^,
(...) thereupon lay the reins in the neck, and run riot in vain and vile
imaginations: O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness, if thou meanest to
be saved Jer. 4.14. How many (alas) have we that profess, large hopes of
heaven whose hearts are no better then dens of darkness, dungeons of
filth^nesse, cages (...) clean birds, brothelhouses, slaughter-houses,
pesthouses of maicious (...) Atheistical, proud, covetous, malicious and
fraudulent projects (...) continually hammering, and wherewith their wretched
hearts are (...) haunted and pestered? Contrariwise, a godly man is said to
(...) Prove. 12.5. holy imaginations Prove. 12.2. and that his desire (...) only
good Prove. 11.23. or if worse crowd in (as they will) he rids them (...) and
will not let them lodge there Ier. 4.14. he boyls out that filthy (...) Ezekiel.
(...) and purifieth himself of all pollutions of flesh and spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
he both (...) them Psalm. 119.113. and forsakes them Esaias, 55.7.

and love no false oath] As not only he that maeth a (...) is (...) out of
heaven, but he that loves it (though made by another) ^akes it up and divulgeth
it Rev. 22.15. So not only he that takes a (...) persuades another to it, or
that (...) is a Miosis, less is spoken, and more understood (...) Gods just
hatred.

for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord] And as the next effect
of hatred is revenge, he will not fail to punish such sinners against their own
souls.

Verse 18. And the word] See the of Note Verse 1.

Verse 19. The fast of the fourth moneth] wherein the city was taken 2 Kings
25, 3.

and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh] See (...)

and the fast of the tenth] Wherein Jerusalem was first (...) 25.1. This last
mentioned was first taken up, upon a like (...) Constantinople (when the city
was besieged by the (...) advertised of the enemies purpose for a general (...)
mended the defense of himself and the city to the (...) Turk. hist. (...) 345.
and prayer: and afterward appointed every Captain and (...) certain place of
the wall for defense thereof.

shall be to the house of Judah joy and (...)] God (...) into feasting, all
their sadness into gladness, all their (...) their tears into triumphs: and
so gives (...) about Fasting after a larger and most (...) preface (...) and
making much more to their benefit and (...) main question proposed by them to
the Prophet. (...) this with them by way of (...)

therefore love the truth (...)] (...) and the ceremonious observation (...)
wherein ye placed so much holiness) abolished (...) on, the duties of Piety
and (...) your selves and though of a good (...) an evil (...) much ado about
them, with neglect or the one thing necessary. And now learn and (...) the love
of the truth that ye may he saved 2 These. 2.10 to speak the (...) love Ephesians.
4.15. to do the truth 1 John. 1.6. (...) lest your lives give (...) the lie. So
will God say, Surely they are my people, children (...) will not (...) will be
your Savior. Esaias 63.8. So shall there (...) your (...) Should we have peace
upon any terms, peace without truth, it world be (...) short (...) between the
Egyptian plagues. Peace we may (...) yea peace we may have to buy turth: but we
may not give truth to (...) He purchases peace at too dear a rate, that pays
his integrity to get (...) it be passible, Romans 12. Esaias. 32.
as much in you lies, have peace with all men^ But if you (...) but with loss
of truth, and shipwreck of conscience, let it go. And (...) long the (...)
righteousness shall be peace, God will make thine enemies to be at peace with
thee. The Historian tells us, that Numa's Temple of (...) had this inscription
(...). The Temple of faith and peace: But Faith frist, and then Peace. Keep in
with God that he be not a terror to thee (as Jeremy prays) and then seek
peace with men and ensue it, 1 Pet 3.10.11.
as ever thou desire long life, and good days cheerful feasts, as here in
the text, (called good days, Esth. 8.17.) as ever thou hopest to have the
Calender of thy life crowned with many festivals.

Verse 20. It shall yet come to pass that there shall come people] The Prophet
cannot shut up with the former Corollary: but further comforts the Jews with a
promise of the conversion and conflux of the Gentiles to the Church; yea
Christ's people shall be willing in the lay of his power; Psalm. 110.3.
they are like the Isles that wait for his law Esaias ^.8. Esaias 66.20. Mar. 12.
they are set upon it to come for an offering to the Lord upon horses, in
chariols, and in litters; to make any shist rather then not come, in litters
rather then not at all. The kingdom of heaven shall suffer violence, and the
violent take it by force.

Verse 21. (...) of one city shall go to another] Not only come upon them when
they light on them, and they have a fit opportunity, but they shall go on
purpose, one city to another, to gain them to Christ. Propriissimum opus
viventis est generare sibi simile, says the Philosopher, It is the most proper
work of every living creature to (...) his own kind. The Divine says the
same. Grace is communicative charity (...) churl. Birds, when they come to a
full heap of corn, will chirp and call in for their fellows.

let us go speedily] As so many heavenly Cherubims, winged creatures, as the
doves to their windows with weariness of flight as counting him happiest,
that is first there. Many amongst us fall publicly and shamefully in want of
care to come time enough to God (...). It will be long enough ere such men beg
David's office of (...) of his (...): for the doorkeeper of Gods of house was
to be first in, and last out^ but these clean contrary. Mr. Fox speaking of out
godly Ancestors at the beginning of the Reformation here. To see, says he,
their travels, earnest seekings, burning zeal, readings, watchings, sweet
assemblies, resort of one neighbor to another for conference and mutual
confirmation, (...) and (...) 7^6.
may make us now, in these our days of free profession, to blush for shame.

to pray before the Lord] To see his face in Zion, to partake of his
ordinances, what gadding is these by Popish pilgrims to Hull, Loretto etc. Sic
videmus in Italia (...) ac se invicent coheort ari ad visitandam (...).i. e. So
we see whole towns and villages (...) and to call one upon another to visit the
Lady of Loretto, and to stuff her Churches with vowed presents and memories:
though all the thank they have for the same from God, is who required these
things, at your hands? (...)

and (...) to be informed of the right way and (...) instanted as (...)

I will (...)] Act. and Mon.
(...) as my old (...) will (...) Go ye, (...) others with duty: but themselves
would do nothing. M^t. 23.4. (...) good souls in the text: every of whom was as
forward for himself, as zealous for another. There are that make these to be
the words of the well-affected, in answer to the former invitaion. Let us go
speedily, say some citizens: Agreed, say the others; I will go also.

Verse 22. Yea many people and strong nations, etc.] The most populous and
potent people subdued by Christ, 2 Timothy 1.7. Esaias 16.1.
(not by an army, nor by power, but by Gods Spirit of power, of love and of a
sound mind) shall send a lamb to the Lord of the whole earth, submit to the
scepter and laws of Christ's kingdom, yield the obedience of faith, and be
proselyted to the Church.

and to pray before the Lord] Heb. to entreat his face, which they behold in
his Ordinances, those visible signs of his presence. Popish pilgrims, though
used hardly, and lose much of their estates, yet satisfy themselves in this, I
have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb Idol. What then should not men
do or suffer, to see God in his Ordinances?

Verse 23. Ten men shall take hold out of all languages] Ten, that is many, out
of all languages, therefore not by compact, or fraudulent convention: for they
were far asunder, and of diverse languages, ( nam quisque alijs est barbarus,
says Calvine.)

of the nations] for God manifested in the flesh, was preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16.

shall take hold, even take hold] as children do on their mothers garments.

of him that is a Jew] who shall not shake them off, as bastard Gentiles,
worthy (even the very best of them) to have their heads bruised with the
serpent, as the modern Jews say of us. Come unto me, says Christ: Therefore
my brethren, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in
the Lord, Phil. 4.1.
my dearly beloved, says Paul.

we will go with you] Be of your religion: not for fear, or any other
by-respect, as those Persians, Esth. 8.17. ( Josephus relates of the Jews,
that they were very careful how they received Proselytes in Solomon's time
(because then their state flourished) but out of sound conviction, and good
affection.

for we have heard] And by hearing, tasted. 1 Pet. 2.3.


that God is with you] Of a truth, as that plain Corinthian confesses, 1 Cor.
14.^5.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. THE burden] i. e. the bitter and burdensome Prophecy. See the Note on
Mal. 1.1.

In the land of Hadrach] Better; on the land of Hadrach: whereby is meant,
Because Messiah is chad sharp to the Nations, but rach gentle to the Israelites.
not thy land O Immanuel, or, O Messiah (as Hierom, after Rabbi Benaiah) nor a
country that is near, or lying round about another country, as Junius and
Danaeus expound the Syrian word. But either a province, or a city, of some Note
in Syria, not fat from Damascus: Diodate makes it to be an Idol of the
Syrians; which represented the Sun: from which the country took its name, as
Esaias 8. 8. Jer. 48.46. Hos. 10.5.

and Damascus] The Metropolis of Syria, built say some, in the place where Cain
slew Abel; and therehence called Damesech, or a bag of blood; a great scourge
to Israel, chiefly famous for Saint Paul's conversion there, and his rapture
into the third heaven, during that three-dayes darkness, Act, 9.9. with 2 Cor.
12.2.

shall be the rest thereof] sc. of that bitter burden which shall here abide,
and be set upon its own base, as chap. 5.11. See a like expression, Joh. 3.36.
the wrath of God abides upon an unbeleever, tanquam trabali clavo fixa: he can
neither avert nor avoid it.

when the eyes of man, etc.] That is, of other men the Gentiles also, who as
yet are carnal and walk as men, shall be toward the Lord, lifted up in prayer,
and confident expectation of mercy. See Psalm. 122.2.

Verse 2. And Hamath also shall border thereby] i. e. shall share in the same
punishment with Damascus, and fare the worse for its neighborhood.

though it be very wise] and think to out-wit the enemy: to be too hard for him
that way, (...). 1 Cor. 3.19. (...).
as Midian was for Israel, by his wiles rather then by his wars, Number. 25.18.
God takes these Wisards in their own craft, (as beasts in a toil) and makes
very fools of them, notwithstanding their many fetches; specially when they
boast of their wit, as Tyrus did, Ezekiel. 28.3, 4, etc. and trust in it, Prove.
3.5. The Phoenicians and Tyrians were wont to boast, that they first found out
the use of letters, etc. Sure it is that by much trading by Sea, they were
grown cunning and crafty Merchants, to cosen others: and this they colored
with the name of wisdom. Wise they were in their generation, Luke 16.8. but so
is the fox, the serpent, and the devil: who when he was but young, outwitted
our first parents. And we are still sensible of his slights, and not ignorant
of his wiles, his methods, and his stratagems.

Verse 3. And Tyrus did build her self a strong-hold] Thor did build her self
Matsor: An Elegancy not to be Englished. (such as are many in the old
Testament, but especially in Esaias) It is as if it should be said, A strong hold
(such as Tyrus which was naturally fortified) did build it self a strong hold,
sc. by the industry and diligence of men; so that she might seem impregnable:
yet all should not do. A Lapide.
Alexander, after seven months siege, took it and destroyed it.

and heaped up silver as dust] Pulverizavit argentum quasi pulverem. She had
money enough (by means of her long and great trade with all the world, Ezekiel.
27.) and so might hire what soldiers she pleased for her defense. The sinews
of war were not wanting to her. She heaped up her hoards as it were to
heaven: her Magazines were full fraught. The word here rendered, heapt up,
signifies to comport and gather in money, as men do corn into barnes and
granaries. Exodus 8.10. Psalm. 39.7. But riches avail not in the day of wrath.
And Tyrus converted, leaves laying up, and treasuring, and falls to feeding,
and clothing Gods Saints, Esaias 23.18.

Verse. 4. Behold the Lord will cast her out] Or, impoverish her, as some render
it: that is for her money. God can soon let her blood in the vena cava, called
Marsupium: and make her nudam tanquam ex mari. And then for her munitions:

He will smite her power in the sea] She was seated in a Island, upon munitions
of rocks: the sea was to her instead of a threefold wall and ditch. She was
better fortified then Venice is; which yet has flourished above nine hundred
years, and was never in the enemies hands: whence she has for her Motto,
Intacta manet. But Tyrus was taken Nebuchadnezzar, as his wages; and afterward
by Alexander, who never held any thing impossible that he undertook, how
unlikely soever it were to be effected. He found means to fill up the sea with
stones, trees, and rubbish, where it divided Tyrus from the Continent: and made
himself master of it.

and she shall be devoured with fire] though seated in the heart of the sea,
Ezekiel. 28.2. Curt. lib. 4. Plin. lib. 5. c. 19
and had motted up her self against Gods fire. Nothing shall quench the fire
that he kindles.

Verse 5. Ashkelon shall see it and fear] for, jam proximus ardet Vcalegon, her
next neighbors house was now on fire; and she might well fear she should be
dashed at least with the tail of that overflowing storm, that had swept away
Tyrus. The sword was now in commission: it was riding circuit, Ezekiel. 14.17.
and God had given it a special charge against Ashkelon, and against the
Seashore: there had he appointed it, Jer. 47.6, 7. Now Ashkelon, Gaza, and
Ekron, were situate all along the Seacoast, Southward of Tire and Sidon. All
these were bitter enemies to the Church: and were therefore destroyed by
Alexander the Great, that man of Gods hand.

Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowfull] like a travailing woman, as
Esaias 26.17, 18. where the same word is used: her heart shall ache and quake
within her: she shall have sore throws and throbs.

and Ekron: for her expectation shall be ashamed] Her hope has abused her, her
confidence is cut off, her countenance is covered with confusion. She looked
that Tyrus should have been a bulwark to her: or, at least a refuge, if need
were. But now she sees her expectation shamed: The expectation of the wicked
shall perish. They look out of the window with Siserah's mother, and say, Have
they not sped? have they not divided the prey, etc? But what says the Church,
So let thine enemies perish, O Lord, etc. Judge. 5.30, 31.

and the king shall perish from Gaza] Rex, id est, Regulus: for there were five
Princes of the Philistines; each great city having a Prince over it. The Prince
of Gaza that is here designed to destruction may very well be that Betis, whom
Darius the last king of Persia had set over Gaza. He having kept out Alexander
for two months, was at length taken by him together with the city, and put to
a cruel death, as Curtius testifies. Q. Curt. l. 4,


and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited] It was so wasted by war, and
dispeopled, that it became cottages for shepherds, and folds for sheep. See
Zeph. 2.4, ^. Howbeit after this it was reinhabited; for that bloody Herod that
slew the Infants was borne there, being surnamed Ascalonita: and at this day it
is a strong garrison of the Saracens. Saladine pulled down the walls of it: but
our Richard the first set them up again, as Adrichomius tells us out of Gul.
Tyrius.

Verse 6. But a bastard shall dwell at Ashdod] Perhaps he means Alexander: In
descrip^. Tur. san^
who was a bastard, by his mother Olympia's confession. The Greek here has
(...), a stranger, an alien, or one of another generation, as the Greeks under
Alexander, and afterward the Jews under the Maccabees. Whence the Chaldee
turns this Text thus; The house of Israel shall dwell in Ashdod, and shall be
there as strangers which have no father. In the Acts we find that the Jews
were scattered up and down Palestina, and some found at Azotus, or Ashdod,
chap. 8.40.

and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines] that is, their wealth,
strength, and whatsoever else they gloried in, and grew insolent, and injurious
to the Church.

Verse 7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth] That is, his bloody
prey, (for says Aben-Ezra, these Philistines did according to the salvage
custom of those times, eat of the flesh, and drink of the blood of their slain
enemies) and I will keep them from devouring my people any more.

and his abominations] Hoc est, praedas abominabiles, says Calvin, his
abominable spoils, his bloody robberies, and pillages.

and he that remains The small remnant of Jews not yet altogether devoured by
these cruel Canniballs, the Babylonians, Philistines, and other enemies.

even he shall be for our God] Though they be but an He, a small poor company
of them: yet God will both own them, and honor them.

and he shall be as a governor in Iudah] They shall all be Magnifico's, little
Princes, of high rank and dignity: even as Governors in Iudab; God will honor
them in the hearts of all men. See chap. 12.8.

and Ekron as a Iebusite] i. e. either slain, or slave and tributary. I know
this Text is otherwise expounded by Iunius and others: but I now like this
Interpretation, as most proper.

Verse 8. And I will encamp about mine house] Though it be otherwise but ill
fenced and fortified: yet I will see it safegarded and secured from the inrodes
and incursions of enemies, who are ranging up and down, and not only robbing,
but ravishing, Psalm. 10.9. For what was Alexander but an Arch-pirate, a strong
thief, as the Pirate whom he had taken told him to his teeth? And whether here
be intimated by these words, because of him that passes by, and him that
returneth] something of Alexanders voyages, who passed by Judaea into Egypt,
and to Ammons Oracle with his Army; and thence returned to Persia by the same
way, not hurting the Jews; or something about the many expeditions of the
Seleucidae, and Lagedae to and fro from Egypt to Syria, and back again: among
which hurly-burly the Jews State stood fast, though sometime a little shaken;
I dare not say, (says a learned Interpreter:) It may be both those and all
other the like dangers are here generally comprised.

and no oppressor shall pass through them any more] Chald. No Sultan: not the
Turkish tyrant, Lord of Greece, as verse 13. say those that take the text of
the Jew glorious state at last. Calvin thinks that by this clause, he only
expounds what he had figuratively said before. Danaeus takes it of violence and
oppression among themselves, or of wringing and vexing by their own rulers:
they shall be free from violence both abroad an at home.

for now have I seen with mine eyes] i. e. I have taken good notice of it, I
have seen, I have seen, as Exodus 3.7. and mine eye has affected mine heart. I
have well observed that the enemy is grown unsufferably insolent, and therefore
come to rescue and relieve my people. The Chaldee has it thus, I have now
revealed my power to do them good: Ahen-Ezra makes these to be the Prophets
words of himself, q. d. I have seen all this in a manifest vision. But this is
frigidum imo insulsum, says Calvin and odd conceit: unless we refer it (with
Montanus) to the following words, and make this the sense, (which yet I like
not so well) Behold I see in the spirit with the eyes of my mind, the Lord
Christ coming and entering with state, the city and temple.

Verse 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion] Draw all thy waters with joy out
of this welspring of salvation. Lo here is the sum of all the good news in
the world; Ier. 31.12.
and that which should make the saints everlastingly merry, even to shouting
and singing in the height of Zion, that their king comes. This should swallow
up all discontents, and make them sing Hosanna in the highest: Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord.

behold thy King commeth] Not Zorobabel, or Judas Maccabeus, as some Jews
interpret it: nor yet Alexander the Great (as some others) but a greater then
he, even Messiah the Prince, as Christ is styled Dan. 9.25. who shall cut off
the charret etc. as it follows in the next verse, yea all the 4 charret or
Monarchies, as some expound chap. 6. how much more Tyrus, Gaza, Ekron,
Damascus, etc. of which he spoke before in this chapter.

unto thee] i. e. merely for thy behoof and benefit, and not for his own.
Other kings are much for their own profit, pleasures, pomp, etc. Christ emptied
himself of all his excellencies, that we might be filled with his fullness.

he is just and having salvation] That he may justify thee by his
righteousness: and save thee by his merit and spirit. The Vulgar renders it,
Just and a Savior, so does the Chaldee. Salvation properly denotes the
negative part of man's happiness, freedom from all evils and enemies: but it
is usually taken for the positive part also, viz. fruition of all good: because
it is easier to tell from what, then unto what we are saved by Jehovah our
righteousness.

lowly] Or poor, afflicted abject, See them set together Zeph. 3.12. and Phil.
4.12. I have learned to want and to be abased. Poverty renders a man
contemptible, and ridiculous. Pauper ubique jacet, men go over the hedge where
it is lowest: the poor are trampled upon, and vilipended as Luke 16.30. This
thy Son, he scorned to call him brother: because he was poor. Now Christ became
poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8. Romans 2.7.
a worm and no man ( nullificam^n populi, as Tertullian phraseth it) that we
might be advanced to glory, and honor, and immortality. Neither was he more
low and mean in his estate, then lowly and meek in mind: as far from pride and
stateliness, as as his state was from Pomp and magnificence.

riding upon an asse] A poor silly beast used by the meaner sort of people.

yea upon a colt the foale of an asse] Heb. asses, because the colt whereon
Christ rode ran after two asses coupled together in one yoke, whereof one was
his damm Mat. 21.5. (...). 1.2.
See the Note there. These asses used to the yoke Hesiod calls (...)
wretched, or enduring great toil and labor. That Christ should ride upon the
foale of such a hard laboring ass, a young wild colt, not yet ready tamed and
trained to the saddle, as it shows his humility, so also his power over the
creature (Clarescente gloria inter humilem simplicitatem) and his
peaceablenesse too, as Kimchi thinks from that in the next verse, that the
Israelites under Christ's government should have no need of horses and charrets.
All this description of Christ's person and kingdom we know was punctually
fulfilled in our Savior according to Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Luke 19. Ioh. 12. four
sufficient witnesses. The old Rabbines and with them R. Galatin. lib. 8. cap. 9.
Solomon (though a sworn enemy to Christians) take the text of the promised
Messiah his solemn entrance into Jerusalem: Of Jesus the crucified son of Mary
they will not yield, because they stumble at his poverty and expect pomp: But
if they had consulted their own Prophets, they would have found, that Messiah
was foretold, as despicable Esaias 53.2. Poor, as here: crucified Dan. 9.26. Number.
21.9. among malefactors Esaias 53.9. nailed Psalm. 22.16. pierced Zech. 12.10.
mocked Psalm. 69.7. And that their very rejection of him for his meandness and
meekness proves him to be Christ Psalm. 118.22. Act. 4.11. It is reported of
Agesilaus, that coming to help the king of Egypt in his distress, he was
despised by the Egyptians, because of the plainness of his person, and the
homeliness of his attire: for they thought that they should see the king of
Sparta such an one, as the king of Persia was, bravely habited, and pompously
attended. Semblably the Jews expect a Christ like to one of the mighty
Monarchs of the earth: and they are strongly possessed with the fond conceit of
an earthly kingdom. Hence, when they saw Mahomet arising in such power, they
were straight ready to cry him up for teir Massias. The rich has many friends,
says Solomon, but the poor is hated, or slighted, even of his own noighbour
Prove. 14.20. Christ came to his own: but his own received him not. When it was
sometime disputed among the Romans in the Council using to deify great men,
whether Christ having done many wonderful works should be received into the
number of the gods? the Historian says, that they would not therefore receive
him, because he preached poverty, and made choice of poor men to follow him,
whom the world cares not for.

Verse 10. And I will cut off the charret etc.] This the same in effect with
that of Esaias chap. 9.7. Of the increase of Christ's government and peace there
shall be no end, and chap. 2.4. they shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruning-hookes: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Christ was born in the reign
of Augustus Caesar, then when having vanquished Lepidus, Antonius, and the rest
of his enemies both at home and abroad, he set open gates of Janus in token of
an universal peace: and reigned as Lord and Monarch of the Roman world. De
invent r^r. lib. 4.1.
Polydor Virgill out of Orosius tells us, that the self-same day wherein Christ
was born, Augustus Caesar made proclamation that no man should thenceforth give
him the title of Lord, manifesto praesagio majoris dominatus qui tum in terris
ortus est, says he, not without a manifest presage of a greater Lord then
himself then born into the world: greater 1. both for the peaceablenesse of his
government, as here; no use of weapons or warllike engines. The weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but spiritual. 2 Cor. 10.4. Christ shall bring both to
Jews and Gentiles the Gospel of peace and the peace of the Gospel.

he shall speak peace unto the Heathen] peace of country, and peace of
Conscience too: and 2. for the extent of his government, It should be as large
as the world, a Catholic kingdom.

his dominion, shall be from Sea to Sea] From the red Sea the Mediterranean
Sea, or the Sea of Palestina: for these two seas were the bound; of the land of
Canaan Number. 23.31. for the Jews scarce knew any other sea but these two. And
the Prophet here alludeth to the times of Solomon's reign, a^ appears by Psalm.
72.8. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea: and from the river unto the
ends of the earth: that is, from Euphrates to the utmost bounds of the holy
land which by a common custom of speech are put for the utmost quarters of the
world.

Verse 11. As for thee also] O daughter of Sion, O my Church: not, O Christ the
king of the church, as the Grreek and Latin fathers, and after them the Popish
comm^^tarours will needs have it; the better to establish their Chimera of
Limbus Patrum Christ here, by an Apos^^p^sis (an ordinary figure) or keeping
back something unspoken through earnestness of affection, bespeaks his people
in this sort: E^iam it is, As for thee also, I will surely impart unto thee the
benefits of that my kingdom, as I have already begun to do in delivering you
out of that (...) that ^irty dungeon of the Babylonish thraldom.

by the blood of thy covenant] by the blood of Christ figured, by the blood
that was sprinkled upon the people Exodus 24.8. Psalm. 74.20. Heb. 13.20. and by
virtue of the Covenant confirmed thereby.

I have sent forth thy prisoners] I have enlarged thy captives.

out of the pit wherein is no water] but mud only, Genesis 37.24. Ier. 38.6.
as in Joseph's pit, and Ieremies dungeon. The Saints have temporal
deliverances also by virtue of the covenant: and if any of Christ's subjects
fall into desperate distresses and deadly dangers, yet they are prisoners of
hope: and may look for deliverance by the blood of the covenant.

Verse 12. Turn ye to the strong hold] i. e. to Christ the rock of ages Isa.
26.4. the hope of Israel Ier. 17.13. the expectation of all the ends of the
earth. Luke 2.25, 38. Or, to the Promise, that strong tower, whereunto the
righteous run and are safe: that are Christi munitissima, as Cyrill here says,
strong hold of Christ. Thou art my shield, says David, I truth in thy word
Psalm. 119.114. And again, Remember thy word to thy servant wherein thou have
caused me to trust, Verse 49. When young Ioash was sought for to the shambles by
his murderous grandmother Athaliah, he was hid in the house of the Lord for six
years. But whence was this safety? Even from the faithful promise of God 2 Chronicles. 23.3. Behold the kings son must reign, as the Lord had said of the sons
of David, that he should never want a man to reign after him. Hence Psalm.
91.4. his faithfulness and his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Under
this shield, and within this stronghold of the promises God had made them in
the foregoing verses, these prisoners of hope, these heirs of the promises,
were to shroud and secure themselves amidst those dangers and distresses as
encompassed them on every fide. And that they might know that the needy should
not always be forgotten, Psalm. 9.18.
the expectation of the poor should not perish for ever, here is as precious
promise of present comfort.

even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee] Though you be
now at never so great an under, yet I do make an open promise unto you, verbis
non solum disertis sed and exertis, I do assure you in the word of truth, that
I will render unto thee thou poor soul that lie panting under the present
pressure, double, that is, life and liberty, says Theodoret: Grace and Glory,
says Lyra: Or double to what thou hopest, I will be better to thee then thy
hopes, says Hierom: Or double, that is, multiplied mercy; but especially
Christ, who is caled the Gift of God by an excellency Ioh. 4.10. the Benefit 1.
Tim. 6.2. that which shall abundantly countervaile all crosses and miseries
Mar. 10.30. Job had all double to him. Valentinian had the Empire; Q Elisabeth
the Crown. God will be to his Hannah's, better then ten children.

Verse 13. When I have bent Judah for me] God himself did the work though by
the sons of Zion, as his instruments whom he used, and prospered against the
sons of Greece, that is the successors of Alexander the Great, who led them
out of Greece against the power of Persia, and who seizing upon Egypt and
Syria, crushed and ground the poor Jews betwixt them, as betwixt two milstones.
This Prophecy was fulfilled in the Maccabes: but may have on eye to the
Apostles, who were some of them of Judah, some of Ephraim; that is, of the ten
tribes, as of Zebulon, Psalm. 45.5.
Nepthali etc. these Christ used as bows and arrows in the hand of a mighty
man, whereby the people fell under him; the sons of Greece especially, where so
many famous churches were planted, as appears by the Acts and the Revelation.
See Rev. 6.2. with the Note.

and made thee as the sword of a mighty man] given thee both arms, and an arm
to weild them. For it is God that strengthens and weakeneth the arms of
either party in battle Ezekiel. 30.24. It is he also that renders the weapons
vain or prosperous Isa. 54. ult. Ier. 50.9. This Judas Maccabeus well
understood: and therefore had his name from the capital letters of this motto
written in his Ensign, Mi camoca belohim Jehovah, who is like thee O Lord
among the Gods? St. Paul also that conquered so many countries, and brought in
the spoils of so many souls to God (whence the change of his name from Saul
to Paul, as some think, 2 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 15.
from Sergius Paulus the Proconsul, whom he converted to the faith Act. 13.9.)
The weapons of our warfare, says He, are mighty through God to the casting
down of strongholds. Not I, but the grace of God that is with me etc. And ye
men of Israel, why look ye so earnestly upon us, says Peter, as if by our own
power of holiness etc. Act. 3.12.

Verse 14. And the Lord shall be seen over them] shall be conspicuous amongst
them: he shall appear for them in the high places of the field, he shall make
bare his arm, and bathe his sword in blood. How many do you reckon me at? said
Antigonus to his soldiers, when they feared the multitudes of their enemies.
May not God say so much more to his? Has ever any waxed fierce against him and
prospered? If he but arise only, his enemies shall be scattered, Psalm. 68.1.
and those that hate him shall flee before him.

his arrow shall go forth with the lightening] Here the former matter is
illustrated by many lofty tropes and allusions, either to those ancient
deliverances at the red sea, and against the Canaanites, and Philistines, by
thunders, lightening, and tempest, or else, as Calvin rather thinks to the
terrible delivery of the Law, with thunderings and lightenings, and sound of
trumpets, to the great amazements of the people, insomuch as Moses himself
said, I exceedingly fear and quake. He confers Habak. 3.3, 4, 5. and further
alleges, that Teman here rendered the South, was the same with Sinai, and lies
South from Judaea. Lightening, thunder, and whirl-winds are a part of Gods
Armies, which he can draw forth at his pleasure against his enemies. Such
things as these fell out oft-times in the wars of the Maccabees. And how the
Lord mightily assisted his Apostles, whose arrows went forth as the
lightening, swiftly, suddenly, irresistibly, and whose thunder gave a loud
alarm to all Nations, I need not relate.

Verse. 15. The Lord of hosts shall defend them] Heb. Paulum quo^iescunque lego,
non verba mihi audire videor sed tonitrua.
shall hold his buckler over them, which none can strike through.

and they shall devour] sc. their enemies, that till then did eat up Gods
people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.5.

and subdue with sling-stones] with weak means, as David did Goliath.

and they shall drink and make a noise] Tumultuabuntur quasi temulenti, It Is a
Catechresis signifying the very great destruction of their enemies: so that
they might be even drunk with their blood, if they had any mind to it: the
tongues of their dogs should be dipped therein, as Psalm. 68.23, 24.

and they shall be filled like bowls, etc.] that held the blood of the
sacrifices.

and as the corners of the altar] which were all besprinkled with the blood of
the sacrifices. A Lapide applies all this to those heavenly Conquerours, and
more, that is, Triumphers, the Apostles and Martyrs.

Verse 16. And the Lord their God shall save them] Not defend them only as
Lord of Hosts, verse 15. but as a further favor, save them as their God in
Covenant with them.

as the flock of his people] rescuing them as David did his lamb from the lion
and bear, and tending them continually.

as the stones of a crown] Costly and precious, or Monumentall-stones, with
crowns on the top, and set up for Trophies.

Verse 17. For how great is his goodnesse] He shuts up all with this sweet
Epiphonema, or exclamation, admiring the singular goodness of God to his
people in all the former particulars: and yet promising them Abundance of
outward necessaries, even to an honest affluence: they should have store of
corn and wine; so much as should make them succulent and vigorous, full of
sap and good humors. Provided, that first they content not themselves with
the natural use of the creature, but taste how good the Lord is. And next, that
they put this promise into suit by their prayers, as chap. 10.1.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. ASK you of the Lord rain] Ask it and have it: Hos. 10.12.
Open your mouths wide, and he will fill them. Seek ye the Lord till he come,
and rain righteousness upon you: Surely as the Sun draws up vapors from the
earth and sea, not to retain them, but to return them: and as thin vapors come
down again in thick showers of rain: So God calls for our prayers, for our
profit: and does for us exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
Ephesians. 3.20. Ask we must, Ezekiel. 36.37. Prayer is an indispensable duty. Our
Savior taught his disciples to pray. He himself was to ask of his Father, and
then he should have the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. He could have had presently twelve
legions of Angels to rescue him: but then he was to send to heaven for them by
prayer, Mat. 26.53. I came for thy words, that is, for thy prayers sake, says
the Angel to Daniel. As well as God loved him, he looked to hear from him, Dan.
10.11, 12. for he will grace his own Ordinances, and make his people know both
their distance and dependence.

Rain in the time of the latter rain] Rain is the flux of a moist cloud; which
being dissolved by little and little, by the heat of the Sun, lets down rain by
drops out of the middle region of the air. This, if it come right in due time
and measure, it makes much for the fattening of the earth, Psalm. 65.11. laying
the heat, nourishing the herb and tree, Esaias 44.14. refreshing all creatures,
grass, fruits, etc. Lev 26.4. Jam. 5.18. Esaias 30.23. So if otherwise, it
proves a great punishment. Joel 1. Joel 1.10, 11, etc. 17, 19, etc.
Great expectation there was in Judaea and those Eastern parts of the former
and the latter rain. That, fell in the seed-time about Autumn: this, in the
Spring ^ide, causing the corn to ear, and kearn before harvest. Both were to be
sought of God alone. For are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that
can cause rain? or can the heaven give showers? No, no; These come by a divine
decree, Job 28.26. God prepares rain, Psalm. 147.8. he dispenses it in number,
weight, and measure, Job 28.25. not a drop falls in vain, or in a wrong place:
he also withholds it when, and where he thinks good, Amos 4.7. The Egyptians
used in a profane mockery, to tell other Nations, that if God should forget to
rain, they might all chance to starve for it. The rain they though was of God,
but not their river: which therefore God threateneth to dry up, Ezekiel. 29.3, 9.
Esaias 19.5, 6. Not. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2. Art am. l. 1. Jer. 2.13.
as also he did (as both Seneca and Ovid testify) in the reign of Cleopatra.
The creatures at best are but broken cisterns. Not fountains, but cisterns
only; and those broken too; there is no trusting to them: they were never true
to those that trusted them.

So the Lord shall make bright clouds] Nubes cursitantes, thin clouds, that
fly swiftly in the air, most commonly before and after very rainy weather. R.
Solomon interprets the word here used, not lighenings, which yet are signs and
forerunners of rain, Psalm. 135.7. Ier. 10.13. but clouds bringing rain. Clouds
are nothing else but vapors thickened in the middle region of the air, by the
cold invironing and driving them together: that they may be as so many heavenly
bottles holding water, to be seasonably distilled. How they are upheld, and why
they fall here, and now, and by drops, not by spouts (since they are vessels as
thin as the liquor contained in them) we know not, and wonder.

and give them showers of rain] Heb. rain, rain, that is, plentiful rain upon
his inheritance: Eccles. 12.2. Esaias 45.19.
the clouds shall return after the rain, and one shower is unburthened, another
shall be brewed. God scorns to say to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: or
that any of his suitours should go sad away, for want of an answer. David asked
his for life: and God gave him more, even length of days for ever and ever,
Psalm. 21.4. Many came to Christ for cure of their bodies, he cured them on both
sides: and was better to them then their prayers. Gehezi asked Naaman for a
talent of silver: nay, take two, said he: and he pressed it upon him. So says
God to his, Ask and spare not, that your joy may be full. Ye are not straitened
in me, but ye are straitened in your own bowels. Ye have not, because ye ask
not: and he is worthy to want it, that may have it for asking only.

to every one grasse] Grass for the cattle, and corn for the food of man, as
the Chaldee expounds it.

Verse 2. For the idols have spoken vanity] q. d. Therefore ask good things at
Gods hands, as rain, food, and all necessary provision: because Idols and
soothsayers cannot help you to these things. If they promise you (as they will)
believe them not: for they lie as fast, as once Rabshakeh did for his Master:
when he promised the people a land of corn and wine, Esaias. 36.17.
a land of bread and vineyards. And they will finally serve you, as Absaloms
mule served her Master: whom she left at his greatest need, to hang betwixt
heaven and earth, as rejected of both. Lo such are all creature comforts golden
delusions, lying vanities, apples of Sodom, nec vera, nce vestra, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
the fashion of this world, says Paul; the fantasies of men's brain, says
Luke, Act. 25.23. the semblances and empty shows of good, without any reality,
or solid consistency, says Solomon often. They are, says our Prophet here, a
wicked deceit, and cosinage. An arrant lie, a false dream, a vain or empty
comfort that utterly deceives a man's confidence, and makes him, in the
fullness of his conceited sufficiency, to be in straights. These here for
instance: viz. the Jews that had been carried captives as a flock without a
guide, sheep without a shepherd, and ye had not (till after some while at
least) abrenounced their Idols, Ier. 44.22. Ezekiel. 9.

therefore they went their way as a flock] Driven by the butcher to the
slaughterhouse. Idolatry is a land-desolating sin: as besides these Jews (the
more ingenuous of them at this day confess, that in all their punishments
there is still an ounce of the golden-calf made by them in the wilderness) the
Greek Church was undone by it. The worshipping of Images they defended with
tooth and nail (as they say) and established it in the second Council of Nice;
not long before the Turk took Nice, and made it the seat of his Empire, in
opposition to Constantinople, which at length he took also; and brought in
Mahometisme, that foul impiety, which quickly overspread the whole East and
South, like as Popish Idolatry did the West and North. But this iniquity will
be their ruin. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. She has fallen
culpably, she shall therefore fall penally. (...).
And why? She is become the habitation of devils, that is, of idols. See Rev.
9.20. 1 Cor. 10.20.

Verse 3. Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds] Pastores Impostores:
the greedy priests, and false prophets main causes of the captivity: because
through their default, there was no knoledge nor fear of God in the land, Esaias
5.13. Hos. 4.6, 7. See Ier. 23.1. Ezekiel. 34.1.

and I punished the goats] The Grandees and Governors, temporal and
Ecclesiastical. See Ezekiel. 34.17. They should have been as the hee-goats before
the flock, Ier. 50.8. worthy Guides to God. But they were goats in another
sense, unruly, and nasty, and lascivious (as those two filthy fellows for
instance, whom for their adultery the kind of Babylon roasted in the fire, Ier.
29.22.) and such as begat kids of their own kind, men of their own make, and
went before them in wickedness, as the goats lead the flocks.

for the Lord of hosts] Better to read it, but the Lord of hosts, etc. And this
is spoken for the comfort of those that called upon God, and abhorred Idols,
and Idol-shepherds, that were in special covenant with him, and therefore
owned by him, as his flock, or peculiar charge. Now, to such he promises to
feed them as him sheep, and to furnish them as his horse for service, his
goodly warre-horse, mainly respected by his Master, as Bucephalus was by
Alexander. Plin. l. 8. c. 41.
This may in part be understood of the Maccabees victories: but principally of
the Apostles, those white horses, upon which they rode through the world,
conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. Saint Paul is fitly compared to that
war-horse in Job, chap. 39.20. whose neck is clothed with thunder, and the
glory of his nostrils is terrible. He mocketh at fear, and turns not back
from the sword. He goes on to meet the armed man, and swalloweth the ground
with fierceness, and rage, etc.

Verse 4. Out of him came forth the corner] Angulus, not Angelus as some Vulgar
Latin translations have it: and A Lapide justly finds fault with it. Chap. 35.
A like fault Surius and Caranza (his fellow-popelings) are content to wink at,
nay to defend in the Laodicene Council, because it makes for their
Angel-worship. For whereas the Council truly says, (...), Christians must
not pray to Angels. They make the words to be Non oportet Christianos ad
angulos congregationes facere. Christians ought not hold their meetings in
corners; and they make the title say, the same thing. but is this fair dealing,
thus to falsify antiquity for their own ends, and to maintain their own
errors? As for the Text.

Out of his came forth, etc.] That is, Out of Judah shall be had all things
necessary, both at home (and here the Prophet proceeds from the foundation to
the nails, or fastening of the house together) and abroad: both for the
mastering of the enemy by the Battle-bowe, etc. and the making of him
tributary: for

Out of him shall come every exactour] sc. Of homage and tribute, as the fruit
of their victory. Danaeus senceth it thus. Out of Judah shall go every
oppressor which did vex his people before, God driving him forth.

Verse 5. And they shall be as mighty men] Or, as Giants, as Gabriels, they
shall be strong in the Lord, Ruth. 2.11.
and in the power of his might, they shall do worthily in Ephratas, and be
famous in Bethlehem: their bow shall abide in strength, and the arms of their
hands be made strong, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob: from thence is
the shepherd, the stone of Israel. Plutarch
Genesis 49.24. If it could be said of Mithridates, a mere Atheist, that he never
wanted any courage nor counsel; how much of Gods warriors, such as Judas
Maccabeus, especially Messiah the Prince, who treads down his enemies as the
mire of the streets, setting his feet in their necks and making them to be
found liars unto him, that is to yield him at least a forced and fained
subjection.

and they shall sight because the Lord is with them] This is enough to make
them fight up to the knees in blood, that they have God to stand by them: not
only as a spectatour, or Agonotheta (though that is somewhat: dogs and other
baser creatures will fight lustily when their masters are by, and to set them
on) but as a Captain of the Lord Hosts, as Christ is called, and a Coadjutor, a
Champion, a man of war Exodus 15.3. Yea, he alone is a whole army of men, he is
Van and Rei^e both, Isai. 52.12. The shields of the earth belong to him, the
Militia of the world is his Psalm. 47.9. he has magnleh choloth and matteh
choloth, as the Rabbis well observe, armies both above, and beneath, as his
horse and foot to fight for him people.

and the riders on horses shall be confounded] As they were in the conquest of
Canaan, where the enemies had horses and chariots, when the Israelites had
neither, as Orig^n observes: and as they were in all David's wars, and the rest
of the victorious kings of Israel, who according to the Law Deuteronomy. 17.16. made
no use of horses (but said An horse is but a vain thing for battle etc. God
takes no delight in the strength of an horse) and ever fought on foot with
singular success. So did the Maccabees, Zisca, and after his the Bohemians,
the English in France at the battle of Spurs (so the battle of Terwin was
called in Henry the eighth his time, from the French posting away to save their
lives.) Spied. 1000.


Verse 6. A Lapide
And I will strengthen the house of Judah] Robustos, as quasi Gabricles
efficiam. See Chap. 12.8. Esaias 10.34. See verse 5. of this chapter. The Saints
shall be strengthened with all migh. according to his glorious power, Col.
1.11. at the Resurrection especially, when Christ shall change their vile
bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body in strength, agility, beauty
etc. The bodies of the Saints, says Luther, shall have that power as to toss
the greatest mountains in the world like a ball. Auselme says such, as they
shall be able to shake the whole earth at their pleasure. Our Savior says,
that they shall be as the Angels of God Luke 20.36. more like spirits then
bodies, while they are here, In quiet and confidence is their strength Esaias
30.15. and again in the same chapter verse 7. their strength is to sit still.
They expected much strenght from Egypt: but the Prophet tells them that by
siting still and waiting for the salvation of God by faith, they shall have an
Egypt, Heb. 11.34.
and better, out of weakness they should be made strong, wax valiant in fight,
turn to flight the armies of the aliens, as the Maccabees did, and as Michael
and his Angels Rev. 12. the noble Army of the Apostles, who were more then
Conquerours: and Martyrs who tired their tormentours and laughed at their
cruelty: the valor of the patients, the savagenesse of the persecutours strove
together; till both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and astonishment
in beholders and readers. These were those lion-like men of the tribe of Judah
that took the kingdom by violence. Judah which signifies the Confessor, had
the kingdom, as Levi had the Priesthood, both forfeited by Reuben who was weak
as water. Genesis 49.

and I will save the house of Joseph] that is, Ephraim, but for the ten tribes,
whom God here promises to save, not to bring back, says the Geneva-Note on
Ver. 9. But others there are that gather from these words and these that
follow, that God will not only preserve them, but reduce and resettle them in
their own country, yea, and multiply them so abundantly, as that their
country shall not be able to hold them Verse 10. Whence comes Ashurs and
Egypts subjection to Christ; that is, all the tract of the East, and of the
South verse 1. and their perpetual establishment in the faith.

Verse 12 And I will bring them again to place them] I will place them in their
houses as Hos. 11.11. The Sept. render it, I will cause them to dwell. (...)
compos.
The Caldee I will gather together their captivity. Some special mercy is
assured them by this special word of a mixed conjugation.

for I have mercy upon I them] Here Is a double cause alleged, of these so great
and gracious promises: and both excluding works. First Gods mere mercy.
Secondly his Election of grace, for I am the Lord their God. This latter is the
cause of the former: for God chose his people for his love, and then loves
them for his choice. The effects of which love are here set down. 1. That he
hears their prayers, I will hear them. 2. That he reaccepteth and restores
them in Christ, as if they had never offenced against him. They shall be as
though I had not cast them off. That was a cutting speech, and far worse then
their captivity Jer. 16.13. When God not only threateneth to cast them out of
their country into a strange land, but that there he would slew them no
favor. Here he promises to pity them; and then they must needs think
deliverance was at next door by.

and they shall be as though I had not cast them off] And this the sooner, and
the rather, because they called them outcasts, saying, This is Zion whom no
man seeks after Jer. 30.17. The Jewish Nation, says Tully, show how God
regards them that have been so often overcome, viz. by Nehuchad-nezzar, Pompey
etc. God therefore promises to provide for his own great name, by being fully
reconciled to his poor people, whom the world looked upon abjects. for I am the
Lord their God And if I should not see to their safey, Psalm. 119.
it would much reflect upon me. This David well knew, and therefore prays thu,
I am thine, Lord save me.

and will hear them, Or, I will speak with them: speak to their hearts. It is
no more, says One, then if a man were in a fair dining room with much good
company, and there is some special friend whom he loves dearly, that calls
him aside to speak in private of business, that nearly concerns him: and
though he go into a worse room, yet he is well enough pleased. So if God, in
loss of friends, houses, country, comforts whatsoever, will speak with us,
will answer us, the loss will be easily made up. Philip Lantgrave of Hesse
being a long time prisoner under Charles 5. was demanded what upheld him all
that time? He answered, that he had felt the favor of God, and the Divine
consolations of the Martyrs. There be Divine comforts that are felt only under
the cross. I will bring her into the wilderness, and there speak to her heart
Hos. 2.13. Israel was never so royally provided for, with Manna, Quails, and
other cates, as when they were in the wilderness. The cross is anointed with
comfort, which makes it not only light, but sweet: not only not troublesome
and importable, but desirable and delightful, says Bernard. Thy presence O
Lord made the very gridiron sweet to Laurence, says another; How easily can
God make up our loss; and breaches?

Verse 7. And they of Ephraim shall be as a mighty man] The same again, and in
the same words, for more assurance; because the return of the ten Tribes might
seem a thing more incredible, Erant enim quasi putridum cadaver says Calvin
here: they were as rotten carcasses, and they had obiter only heard of these
promises; as if some grain of feed should be dropped by the high-way-side: for
they were now as aliens from the Common-wealty of Israel.

and their heart shall rejoice as throught wine] Which naturally exhilarateth
Psalm. 104.15. (...)
and is called by Plato one of the Mitigaters of humane misery See Prove. 31.6.
with the Note. Some nations use to drink wine freely before they enter the
battle to make them undaunted. Some think here may be an allusion to such a
custom. I should rather understand it of that generous wine of the spirit Ephesians.
5.18.

yea, their children shall see it] Therefore they were not to antedate the
promises, but to wait the accomplishment which should certainly be, if not
them, yet to theirs after them, even a full restoration in due season.

Verse 8. I will hiss for them and gather them] As a shepherd hisseth or
whistleth for his flock. See Judge. 5.16. where it should not be translated the
bleatings of the flocks, but the hissings or whistlings of the shepherds to
their flocks, when they would get them together. God, who has all creatures at
his beck and check, can easily bring back his hanished, gather together his
dispersed with a turn of a hand Zech. 13.7. with a blast of his mouth, as here;
as if any offer to oppose him herein, he can blow them to destruction Job. 4.9.
He can frown them to death Psalm. 80.16. He can crush them between his fingers,
as men do a moth Psalm. 39.11. and crumble them to crattle Psalm. 146.4. Like
sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them: and the upright
shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall consume in
the grave from their dwelling. Psalm. 49.14.

For I have redeemed them] I have in part, and that is a pledge of the whole; my
hands also shall finish it, as Chap 4.9. God does not his work to the halves;
neither must we: but if he shall be All in All unto us, we must be altogether
His, Cant. 2.16. His is a covenant of mercy, ours of obedience: which must be
therefore full and final, as Christ has obtained for us an entire, and
everlasting redemption. Heb. 9.12.

and they shall increase as they have increased] By verue of that promise to
Abraham Genesis 13.16. I will multiply thy seed as the dust of the earth: and Gen
15.5. as the stars of heaven. This promise was not presently fulfilled; for
when they came into Egypt they were but seventy souls of them. But under the
Egyptian servitude, they increased abundantly Exodus 1.7. they spawned (as the
word signifies) and bred swiftly: so that they went thence 600000. strong.
Exodus 12.37. So that they soon became a mighty and populous nation Dent. 26.5.
Judea was not above 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad: not near the half of
England by much; yet what huge armies had they, when the two tribes and the
other ten met in the field, one against another? And even at this day (whatever
is become of the ten tribes: whether they be in China, or America) the Jews are
a very great and numerous people. It is thought that there is not any one
nation under heaven so great in number as that is, if the dispersed Jews might
all be gathered together into one place: And who knows what we may (some of us)
yet live to see? The late Clavis Apocalypt^ica promises great matters to fall
out within these three or four years.

Verse 9. And I will sow them among the people] Scatter them indeed, but for an
excellent purpose, that they may bring forth fruit to God: and be a blessed
means of bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles harvest. Some kind of the
knowledge of God was diffused by the Jew wherever they came: and when at length
the Gospel was preached by the Apostles, they first dealt with the Jews (who
had their Synagogues in all places) as it was necessary Act. 13.46. that as
they had been the only people of God, so now they might be the first invited
guest. This invitation when they put from them and so judged themselves
unworthy of^ternal life, what remained but that the halt and the blind
Gentiles shoul be fetched in from the high ways and hedges, that so Gods house
might be full. So then their despersion was a semination: and their exile
opened a gate for the Gospel. hence also it is called (...) a dissemination, or
scattering: as when a man sows seed abroad. 1 Pet 1.1. Iam. 1.1.

and they shall remember me in far countries] Saint Paul testifies that the
twelve tribes instantly served God day and night Act. 26.7. a great deal
better, doubtless, then they do at this day; being as reverend in their
Synagogues, as grammer-boyes are at school when their Master is absent, Spec.
Europ.
says an eye witness.

and they shall live with their children, and turn again] They or their
posterity shall. Gods promises bear a long date many times, (...)
and the believing Hebrews are told that they had need of patience, or
tolerance: that after they had done the will of God, and suffered it too, if
need be, they might receive the promise. Heb. 10.36. And they are further
exhorted to run with patience the race that is set before them: Heb. 12.1.
wherein he that believes makes not have, but can want and wait for what he
wishes, till God please: being desirous rather that God may be glorified then
himself gratified, if both may not stand together.

Verse 10. I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt] whither they
fled for fear of the Babylonians Jer. 44. Antiq. l. 11. Chap. 2.
and where it seems they became a mighty people, if that be true which Josephus
writes, viz. that Ptolomic Philadelph sent back an hundred and twenty thousand
of them into Judea, and by that royal beneficence obtained the seventy
Seniours to be sent by Eleazar the High Priest, Gualther: praelat. in Com. in
Ma^e.
for the translating of the Hebrew Bible into Greek. His successor Ptoiomaeus
Lathurus was nothing so courteous: for he slew 30000. of them with unheard of
cruelty: and made the living devour the dead.

and gather them out of Assyria] whither the ten tribes were carried captive,
and scattered all abroad through the one hundred twenty and seven province, as
Haman suggested to the king Esth. 3.8.

and I will bring them into the land of Gilcad and Lebanon] that is, into Judea
(the bounds whereof were Lobanus and Gilead) a figure of the Church, that land
of delights. See Cant. 4.1, 8. Gods Hephsibah Isa. 62.4. O praeclaram illam
dieculam? when shall it once be? The comfort is, God can make a nation conceive
and bring forth, both in one day Esaias 66.8. O pray, pray, pray, as Psalm. 14.7.
and as the poor Jews pray at this day, Let thy kingdom come speedily, Bimherah
bejamenu.
and even in our days.

Verse 11. And he shall pass thorough the sea etc.] who shall? The people for
want of room, says Junius: they shall enlarge their quarters into Egypt,
Transiens per mare angu^^^^s.
Assyria and other nations subduing them to Christ. God shall (say others, and
I think better) he shall fright the sea, and miraculously deliver his people,
as once he did at the red sea, which threatened to swallow them, but God made
it to preserve them. He will remove all rubs and Remora's, all obstacles and
impediments: Neither Egypt, nor Assyria shall be able to hinder what God will
have done. See Isa. 11.15. The misunderstanding of this and the like texts to
this, might happily occasion that unhappiness that befell the Jews in Creet Anno
434, The devil under the name of Moses (whom he personated) persuaded those
poor creatures, that he was sent from God, to bring them home again to their
own country. This they soon believed (as they are wondrous apt to work
themselves into the fools paradise of a sublime dotage) and leaving all their
good to others, followed this seducer (who had spent a whole year in traveling
over the country for the purpose) together with their wives and children to
the top of a steep rock that hung over the sea. Thither when they were come,
this mo^^ Moses commanded them to wrap their heads in their upper garments, and
so to th^^^ themselves from the rock toward the sea, assuring them of a safe
passage. They readily obeyed him: and in that sort perished a great many of
them. And more had followed, but that (as God would have it) some Christian
fishermen, being there at that instant, took up some of them as they were
s^oting upon the waves, and ready to perish: who afterward returning to the
rest of the Jews, told them how they had been cheated, and how nar^owly they
had escaped: Funcc. Chron.
whereupon they being all enraged (as they had reason) sought for this Seducer
to put him to death. But when he could not possibly be found any where, they
soon concluded that it was the very devil that old manslayer: and diverse of
them, moved by this calamity, became Christians. The Jews generally believe
that their Messiah when he comes shall do such miracles as Moses wrought at
the red sea. Hieron. Remig. Huge.
They tell us also that in the time of the Maccabees, diverse Jews that had
sled into Greece passed through the narrow sea of Propontis, that runs betwixt
Chalcedon and Constantinople, to go back into their own country.

and all the deepes of the rivers shall dry up] As once Jordan did before
Joshuah and the people: and as Rev. 16.12. Euphrates shall do before those
kings of the East, which some make to be the Eastern Jews: and the drying up of
Euphrates, to be the downfall of the Turkish Empire. Event will be the best
interpreter, when all is done.

Verse 12. And I will strengthen them in the Lord] that is, in Christ the head
of the Churches: for by his own strength shall no man prevail, says holy
Hannah 1 Samuel 2.9. and without me ye can do nothing, says Christ the true
vine, Ioh. 15.5.
from whom we have both the bud of good desires, the blossom of good
resolutions, and the fruit of good actions. Only we must fetch our strength by
faith from Christ: and pray as Esaias 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm
of the Lord.

and they shall walk in his name] i. e. in his strength and to his glory. See
that sweet promise Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. See also the Note above on verse 6.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. OPen thy doors O Lebanon This chapter is no less comminatory, then
the two former had been Consolatory. The tartness of the threatening makes
men best taste the sweetness of the Promise. So wre and sweet make the best
sauce: Promises and threatenings mingled, serve to keep the heart in the best
temper. Hypocrites catch at the Promises, as children do at sweetmeats: and
stuff themselves therewith a pillow as it were, that they may sin more
securely. Here therefore they are given to understand, that God will so be
merciful to the penitent, as that he will by no means clear the guilty.
That Is the last letter in Gods name Exodus 34.7. and must never be forgotten. It
is fit the wicked should be forewarned of their danger; and the god^y
forearmed. This chapter h^ngs over Jeruslaem as that blazing-starr in the form
of a bloody sword is said to (...) none for a whole y^eres-space, a little
before that last destruction of it, that is here ^^ retold five hundred years
before it fell out.

open thy doors O Lebanon] i. e. lay open thou thy self to utter ruin: for it
is (...) cannot be avoided. Lebanon was the confine of the country on that
(...), whereby the Romans made their first irruption, as by an inlet Doors
(...) a^^^ttributed to this forest; because against Lebanus is set A^^thbanus,
(...) mountain; which is joined unto it as it were with a certain wail: so that
these were and are narrow passages and gates kep sometimes of the kings of
Persia by a special officer, (...) the defended (...) 2.
Neb. 2.8. and fortified by nature: yet not so strongly, but that the Romans
brake in this way, and much wasted the for^est, to employ, the tree^ for the
besieging of Jerualem; as Esaias 14 8. The Ch^^^ee Paraphrast by Lebanon here
understands the Temple, which was built of the Cedars of Lebanon: and Ezech,
17.3. Lebanon is put for Jerusalem: which also had in it that house of the
fo^rest of Lebanon, built by Solomon 1 King. 7.2. wherein he had both his
throne of judgment ver. 7. and his armonry chap. 10.17. So that by Lebanon may
be very well meant the whole country of Judea: but especially the city and
Temple, Lib. ^. de ^ell. Jud. cap. 12.
the iron gates whereof opened themselves of their own accord, that had not
been open in seven years before: and could scarce be shut by twenty men, says
losephus. This fell out not long before the city was taken by Titus, R. David.
I^^ra Gala^in. l. 4. c. 8.
whereupon R^ble Jonathan the son of Zach^i cried out, En vaticinium Zach^riae,
Behold the Prophecy of Zachary sulfilled: for he foretold this, that this
temple should be burnt, and that the gates thereof should first be opened.

that the fire may devour thy Cedars] War is as a fire, that feeds upon the
people Isa. 9.19. or like as an hungry man snatcheth etc. ver. 20. there is in
war no measure or satiety of blood. the Greek word to war signifies much
blood. (...)
The Hebrew word, devouring and eating of men, as they cat bread. The Latin
Bellum, a belluis. it destroys the Lord as well as the losell, the cedar as
well as the shrub. Tamberlanes coach horses were conquered kings. Adonibezecks
dogs, seventy kings gathering crumbs under his table. Let fire come out of the
bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon Judge. 9.15. that is, Let fire come
out s^om Abimeleck, and devour the men of Si^^^^en. ver 20.

Verse 2 Howl fir^rce that is ye of lower rank: or ye meaner cities, those
daughters of le^usalem, that felt the Romans force: (...), take up a loud
outcry, a doleful ditty after the manner of those that are carri^^^ captive by
the enemy. Psalm. 137 3. For there they, that carried ^s away captive, required
of us a song: and they that wasted us, qui contumulaban^ nos, that threw us on
(...) (so Tremellius ^endreth^t, conser Isa. 25.2.) or those that made us (...)
nostri, (so S^hindler) required of us mirth.

because all the mighty are spoiled] the magnifico^s, the men of power as they
are called Psalm. 76.5. stout hearted and every way able for strength, courage
and riches; (...)
which often take away the life of the owners, and exp^^e them to spoil; as
every man desires to lop the tice that has thick and large boughs and
branches.

howl O ye oaks of Bashan] Ogs country, who only remained of the remnant of
Giants Deuteronomy. 3.11. The Jews fable that he escaped in the flood, by-riding
astride on the Ark. By the oaks of his country understand, the strong and
eminent. The Chaldee renders it Satrapae provinciarum, ye provincial
Governors.

for the forest of the vintage] Or the defenced forest, viz. of Lebanon i. e.
Jerusalem that seemed impregnable, but at length came down ruit alto a culmine,
as a cedar that is felled by a Mighty One Esaias 10.34. Death hewed its way
thorough a wood or forest of men in a minute of time from the mouth of a
murdering piece, or some such warlike engine. When the sword is once sharpened,
it makes a sore slaughter: it contemns the rod Ezekiel. 21.10. q. d. what does
this silly rod do here? these lesser and lighter judgments? let me come, I Will
make work amongst them: down with these oaks, down with this defenced forest
etc.

Verse 3. There is a voice of the howling of the shepheards] Potentes potenter
torquebuntur. The loftiness of man shall be bowed down: and the haughtiness
of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Esaias
2.17.
The shepherds were grown foolish ver. 15. Idol-shepheards 17. they cared for
no other instruments but forcipes and mulctram the sheares and the milk-paile:
they were become greedy dogs, Esaias 56.11.
which could never have enough (they were sick of the bulimy or appetitus
caninus) yea they were as so many young lions ramping and ravening, as it is
here, and Ezekiel. 19.2, 3. Psalm. 78.72.
Both Princes and Priests were turned tyrants: and instead of feeding the
people in the integrity of their hearts, and guiding them with the skilfulnesse
of their hands, preyed upon them and plucked the skin from off them, and their
flesh from off their bones Mio. 3.2.

for the pride of Jordan is spoiled] the swelling of Jordan dried up by the
Romans, as Hierome interprets it: Or the proud and stately palaces and
possessions that the great Ones had gotten upon the banks of Jordan for
fruitfulness and pleasance, as a Lapide; Or the numerous and proud nation of
the Jews likned to the yearly overflowing of Jordan, whereof see Josh. 3.15.
Ier. 49.19. as Diodate.

Verse 4. Thus says the Lord my God, Feed the flock of slaughter] so lately
pulled out of the jaws of those lions ver. 3. with Am. 3.12. and yet destined
to destruction by the Romans, those Raptores Orbis (their former preservation
being but a reservation to future mischief) for their desperate obstinacy and
incorrigiblenesse.

feed them] says God to the Prophets: for their ordinary shepherds have cast
off all care of their good. Tell them what evil will betide them, unless they
repent: forewarn them to flee from the wrath to come: Mat. 3. Luke 21.36.
to take course that they may escape all these things that shall come to pass.
O the goodness of God to a nation so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked! Besides
himself, the Shepherd of Israel that led Joseph like a flock Psalm. 80.1. and
neglected no good office of seeking and feeding them, of handling and healing
them, of washing them and watching over them etc. how careful was he ever to
raise them up seven shepherds and eight principal men, Mic. 5.5.
till at length he sent the man Christ Jesus who is the chief of ten thousand,
the chief Shepherd as St. Peter calls him 1 Epist. 5.4. that One and only
Shepherd, as Solomon Eccles. 12.11. that gteat Shepherd of the sheep, as Paul
Heb. 13.20. who came to look up the lost sheep of the house of Israel, whom (to
move compassion and affection) here calls the sheep of slaughter, until the
time prefixed for their total dispersion, by reason of their ingratitude.

Verse 5. Whose Possessours stay them] flaying their skin from off them, eating
their flesh, breaking their bones etc. Mic. 3.3. feeding themselves, and not
the flock of God Ezekiel. 34.2, as if they had been Lords over Gods heritage 1
Pet. 5.3. Owners and Possessours as here, vel precio vel praemio: and as the
Pope and his Curia Romana quae non vult ovem sine lana, as the old Proverb was.

and hold themselve not guilty] Non peccant. They fault not themselves: they
are not found guilty by others. Such an illimited power over Gods people they
have usurped, as if they might use them at their pleasure, and never be once
questioned, or punished for the same; but escape scotfree. This was the
extremity of tyranny; such as the cruel Spaniards exercise over the poor
Indians: they suppose they show the wretches great favor, when they do not,
for their pleasures, whip them with cords; and day by day drop their naked
bodies with burning bacon; which is one of the least cruelties they inflict
upon them. World encompassed by S. F. Drake 53.


and they that sell them] Sell them for slaves (whom they ought to redeem
rather with their own blood) and grow rich by them: being greedy of filthy
lucre, not without foul blasphemy against God, whom they entitle to their
riches sacrilegiously and most theevishly gotten; whilst they say,

blessed be the Lord, for I am rich] Deo gratias, Blessed be God is a very good
saying, and was much in Austins mouth. But as the fountain of goodness will
not be laden at with unwashen hands: so fair words from a foul mouth, are
infinitely displeasing to him that inhabiteth the praises of Israel. Psalm. 22.3.
Hypocrites are not unfitly compared to Monkies, that have the gravest
countenances of all creatures; but are uncessantly doing mischief: or to the
Harpies, that are said to have Virgins faces, Vultures tallons. Mel in ore,
verba lactis: Fell in cord, fraus in factis. Pharisees, under pretense of long
prayers, devoured widows houses Mat. 23.14. whiles their lips seemed to pray
or praise God, they were but chewing and champing some sweet morsel snatched
from the flock, but sawced with the wrath of God Job 20.15. See how our Savior
sets them out in their colors Mat. 23.15, 16, 23. etc. Such fair professors,
but foul sinners were their predecessors, Esaias 66.5. who when they had done
evil as they could, thought to salve all by saying, Let the Lord be glorified.
And such also are their Successors, The Pope and his followers. Verba tua Dei
plane sunt, facta vero diaboli (said one once to Pope Innocent the third
preaching peace but sowing discord) you speak like a God, but do like a devil:
wherefore you shall receive the greater damnation. When one of our persecuting
Bishops read the sentence of excommunication against a certain Martyr: and
began as the usual form was, Act. and Mon.
In the name of God, Amen, the Martyr cried out, you begin in a wrong name. And
it grew to a common proverb, In nomine Dei incipit omne malum. All mischief
begins on that manner. Gentilis that impious Anti-Trinitarian gave out, that he
suffered for the glory of the most High God. Becket the Archtraitour pretended
to submit to his Sovereign, but with this false reserve, Salv^ honor Dei. The
Swenckfeldians entitled themselves the confessors of the glory of Christ. And
Conradus Vorstius his late monster has De Deo in the front: and Atheism and
blasphemy in the text.

and their own shepherds pity them not] Which yet they ought to have done,
had they had never so much right and reason to destroy them. A shepherd has
his name from friendly feeding: in Greek from earnest desire and love to the
sheep. David when he was hunted from Samuel the Prophet, he flees to Abimelech
the Priest: as one that knew Justice and Compassion should dwell in those
breasts, that are consecrated to God and his people. But these shepherds
through want of Gods holy fear Job. 6.14. had brawny breasts, horny
heart strings, their hearts first turned into earth and mud, did afterward
freeze into steel and adamant: cursed children they were, 2 Pet. 2.24.
having their hearts exercised with covetousness and cruelty.

Verse 6. For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land] Or surely I
will no more etc. A fearful sentence, written in blood, and breathing out
nothing but utter destruction, David knew what he did, when he chose rather to
fall into the hand of the Lord, then of men. For his mercies are many, and it
soon repents him concerning his servants: Prove. 12 10.
but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Those shepherds in the former
verse were grievous wolves: what wonder therefore that they spared not the
flock? Act. 20.29.
But yet whiles God pitied them there was hope in Israel concerning this
thing, as He said Ezr. 10.2. whereas now that Gods soul is disjoynted from
them, and his bowels shut up, desolation must needs be at ^ext door by Ier.
6.8. Jer. 17.17.
Be not thou a terror unto me, O Lord, said that Prophet, and then I care not,
though all the world frown upon me, and set against me. But woe be to
Lo-ruamah, the people of Gods wrath, and of his curse. I have noted before out
of Ier. 16.13. that Gods I will show you no favor, was worse then I will cast
you out of this land.

I will deliver the men] Heb. I will make them to be found, pulling them out of
their starting holes, and lurking places. Evil shall hunt the violent man to
destroy him. Psalm. 140.11.

every one unto his neighbors hand] As into the hang-mans hand. this was
fulfilled, especially during the siege by the seditious within the walls of
Jerusalem, Joseph^d bell. J^d. l. 6. cap. 2. and 4.
one man proving a wolf, nay a devil to another.

and into the hand of his king! The Roman Emperor, who disclaimed indeed the
name of a king to avoid the hatred of the people, and yet exercised the full
power of kings both at home and abroad. These lews first subdued by the Romans
and reduced into a province, did afterward rebel (though they had once in
opposition to Christ cried out, we have no king but Caesar) and were therefore,
after five months siege utterly ruined: For what with extremity of famine and
what with the fury of the sword, there perished in Jerusalem, and in the
province adjoining, Joseph, v^i supra
as Eus^buis affirms about 600000. able men to bear arms. Or as Josephus
holds, who was an eyewitness, and prelent in the war, there died 1100000.
besides others taken captive, to the number of 97000.

and I will smite the Land] So that it has lain, as it were bed-ridden ever
since.

Verse 7. And will I seed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the
flock.] Or, as M^ntanus reads it, for you, for your sakes, O poor of the
flock, i.e. O ye that are poor in spirit, pure in heart, my little little
flock, as our Saviors expression is in Luke. Even for your sakes will I yet
for a time spare the reprobate goats, feeding them by my Prophets, and
provoking them to repentance. The word and Sacraments, and all Gods common
temporal favors are, in respect of external participation, communicated to
Reprobates by way of Concomitancy only: because they are intermixed with the
Elect. Thus tares mingled among wheat, partake of the fat of the land, and
moisture of the manure, which was not intended for them.

and I took unto me two staves] viz. That I might therewith do the office of a
shepherd: and yet in more then an ordinary manner. For shepherds commonly
carry but one staff, or crook: or, at most, but a staff on their shoulders,
and a rod in their hands, as David shows in his Pastoral Psalm. 23.3. But here
are two staves taken: to show, says Mr. Calvin, that God would surpass all
the care and pains of men, in governing that people.

the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands] What these two should
mean, much ado is made among Interpreters. Some are for the two Governants:
Others for the two Testaments: Others for the order of Christ's preaching, sweet
and mild at first, terrible and full of threatenings at last, as appears in
Ma. 24.24, 25. But what a wild conceit was that of Anth^^^ Archbishop of
Florence, who understood the words of Dominick and his Order; construing them
thus: I, that is God took unto me two staves vir. Beauty, that is, the Order of
Preachers, Hist. Proph. 3 tit. 23.
and Bonds, that is, the Order of Minorites, who are girt with a cord? The
sounder sort of lixpositours make it to be a figure, of the two ways which
Christ uses at all times in feeding of his Church; the one by love, guiding
them by his word and Spirit: the other by severity, punishing them by the cruel
hand of their enemies. See Esaias 10.5. Thus Va^ai lus, D^odue etc. And that this
is the true sense, says A Lapide, it appears: First, because this oracle of
the Prophet is of the time to come, and not of the time past. Secondly the
event, (that best interpreter of prophecies) makes for it. For first Gods
government of the commonwealth of Israel was beautiful, and gentle in the time
of the Maccabees, and of Christ: and then terrible and destructory, in the time
of the Romans, of Nero, Vespasian, Adrian etc. Thirdly because that a little
after the Prophet says, that he brake both the staves, that is, he utterly
rejected the Jews, and brought his wrath upon them to the utmost, which cannot
be meant of any other time then that of Christ, and of Titus. Especially since
(in the fourth place) the Prophet declares Verse 13. that the st^ff of Beauty
was broken at the death of Christ, for their unworthy selling and slaughtering
of him, as if he had been some slave or base person,

and I fed the slock] q. d. I did my part by them. Thy destruction therefore is
of thy self, O Israel. England is a mighty Animal (says a Politician) which
can never die, except it kill it self. The same might be much more said of the
Jesish Commonwealth, which Josephus truly and trimly calls a Theocratia, or
a God-government for the form and first constitution of it: and Moses in this
respect, magnifieth that nation above all other Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7.

Verse 8. Three shepherds also I cut off in one moneth] That is, in a short
time, I took away and displaced even by the heathen Princes, many proud
princes, and Priests: such as were Menelaus, Jason the Aristobuli, Hireani,
Annas, Caiaphas, and others: Or, I removed those three sorts of shepherds of
the old Law, viz. Princes Prophets and Priests. Thus Theodoret and Vatablus.
Diodate understands the text of the three chief Empires that had tyrannized
over the people, ver. 6, 3, and 12,10. Namely the Caldean, Persian, and Grecian
Empire, which were destroyed by the Son of God, Dan. 2.45. But they do best in
mine opinion, that by these three shepherds understand those three sects among
the Jews at Christ's coming in the flesh; viz. Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes:
whereof, though the Pharisees were the best, and most exact for the outward
observation of the Law, yet are they in the Gospel for their putid hypocrisy,
first sharply taxed by our Savior (after the Baptist) and then plainly
rejected, and even sent to hell by a chain-shot of eight links of woes Mat. 23.

and my soul loathed them] Or, was taken off from them, or was straightened for
them; because I saw that they received my grace in vain, and considered not of
my care for their good. Theodotion and Srmmackus render it Anima mea exanimata
est, I am dispirited as it were, and even disheartened to do any more for them.

and their soul also abhorred me] And so they became God-haters as Romans 1.30.
and therefore hateful to God Tit. 3.3. hateful as hell (so the word imports)
yea more, (...).
and worse, for hell is but an effect of Gods justice: but wickedness is a
breach of his Law. The Prophet here seems to allude to those murmurers in the
wilderness, that disdainfully cried out, Our soul loatheth this light bread
Number. 21.5. Let Gods servants take heed how they hang loose toward him: and
lest, by disuse and discontinuance of a duty, there grow upon them an
alienation of affection, a secret disrelishing and nauseating at that which we
oughtmost deeply to affect, and duly to perform. Surely as loathing of meat
and difficulty of breathing are two symptoms of a sick body: so are
carelessness of hearing, and irksomness of praying two sure signs of a sick
soul.

Verse 9. Then said I, I will not feed you] Now the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, so that there was no remedy, as 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Now his
decree brought forth Zeph. 2.2. Now he grows implacable, inexorable,
peremptory. Wherein nevertheless the Lord might very well break forth into
that speech of the Heathen Emperor, when he was to pass sentence upon a
malefactor, Non nisi coactus, I would not do this, if I could do otherwise.
Christ could not tell Jerusalem without tears, that her day of grace was
expired, that her destruction was determined. As a woman brings not forth
without pain: as a he stings not, till provoked: so neither does God proceed
against a sinful people or person, till there be an absolute necessity; lest
his truth and justice should be questioned and slighted. See Ezekiel. 12.22, 23,
24, 25. Fury is not in God, till our sins put thunderbolts into his hands: and
then, who knows the power of his anger? Psalm. 90.11. Es. 33.14.
who can abide with everlasting burnings? If he but cast a man off as here, and
relinquish the care of him, he is utterly undone. Saul found it so, and
complains dolefully (but without pity) that God had forsaken him, 1 Samuel
28.15.
and the Philistines were upon him: all miseries and mischief came rushing into
him, as by a sluice. Let us so carry matters, that God may not abandon us: that
he may not refuse to feed us, and take the charge of us as a shepherd. He yet
offers us this mercy, as Alexande did those he warred against, while the lamp
burned.

that that dies, let it die] viz. of the murraine, or pestilence, For man
being in honor, if God but blow upon him, abides not, but is like the beasts
that perish, pecoribus morticinis, says Tremellius the beasts that die of the
murrain. Vatablus thinks pestilence, sword and famine, are here threatened
under the names of death, of cutting off, and of devouring one another. All
which befell the refractary Jews in the last siege: the history whereof will
make any man's heart bleed within him, that has but the least spark of grace,
or good nature. It went hard with them, when the rest, that the pestilence and
sword had left, fell to eating the flesh one of another; when the mother killed
and boiled the dead body of her harmless suckling, and eating the one half,
reserved the other for another time. Behold O Lord, and consider to whom thou
have done this? says the Prophet: Shall the women eat their fruit and children
of a span long? Lam. 2.20
Oh the misery, or rather mock of man's life! And oh, the venomous nature of
sin, that moves God (who is not (...), a man-hater, but delights in mercy) to
deal so severely with his poor creature.

Verse 10. And I took my staff even Beauty, and cut it asunder] In token that
he had cast off his office of shepherd, he breaks his staff the ensign and
instrument of his office: and this in token that he had broke his covenant
which he had made with all the people ^ i. e. with all the tribes of Israel,
which were as so many several peoples, over whom God had reigned (but now
rejected) and in whom He delighted more then in all the nations of the world
besides. The Saints are called All things, Colos. 1.20. because they are of
more worth then a world of wicked men, Heb. 11.38. And the Jews have a saying,
that those seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much as all
the seventy Nations in the world. What great account God once made of them
above others, see Esaias 43.3, 4. Deuteronomy. 33.29. But now behold they are discarded,
and discovenanted: I have broken my covenant, and ( ver. 11.) it was broken in
that day] that is, in the day that they put themselves out of my precincts, I
put them out of my protection. That peace that I had granted to my people, that
they should be no more molested by any strange Nation (which was verified from
the time of the Maccabees till a little before the coming of Christ) shall now
be forfeited. The glory is departed, the Beauty broken in pieces, the golden
head of the picture, Religion defaced, and good order banished: all things out
of order both in Church and State, for so they were when Christ came to his
own, and his own received him not: he found them in Dothan, that is, in
Defection, as Joseph found his brethren) therefore he now disowns and disavowes
them as much as once he did when they had made a golden calf. Thy people which
thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves, says God
to Moses; upon whom he now fathereth them, Exodus 32 7
as if he had never been in covenant with them. Danaeus upon this Text
concludes, that the Jews are now strangers from the covenant of God: and that
this is hereby confirmed, for that they are without Baptism, the seal of the
covenant.

Verse 11. And it was broken in that day] When they filled up the measure of
their fathers sins, and added this to all their other evils, that they
crucified the Lord of glory: the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. Now
they were, by an irrevocable decree, to bear their iniquities, and to know Gods
breach of promise, as once was threatened to their faithless fathers, Number.
14.24.

and so the poor of the slock] i. e. the lowly and meek, Mat. 11.19
the Apostles and other of wisdoms children, these all justified her, and
glorified God when they saw his severity against their refractary countrymen,
Eusebius. Hist, lib. 3. cap. 5.
and themselves sweetly secured and provided for at Pella. See the Note on
verse 7.

that waited upon me] Heb. that observed me, by obeying my precepts. Pagnine
tendreth it, Qui custodiunt me, sc. as their most precious treasure, wherein
they hold themselves very happy, and wealthy, though otherwise poor and
indigent.

Knew that it was the word of the Lord] Were sensible of Gods heavy displeasure
upon the land; which others passed by as a common occurrence, or a chance of
war. The Elect made benefit of that general visitation: and acknowledged that
the wars moved by the Romans were the effects of Gods providence, according
to the ancient prophecies. This the rich and noble (whose hearts were fat as
grease, Psalm. 119.70. Qui animas etiam incarnaverunt, who were desperately bard
and brutish) took no notice of.

Verse 12. If ye think good, give me my price] Pay me for my pains, lay me
down my shepherds wages. Is not the labourer worthy of his hire? Shall I be
forced to say of you as my servant David of Nabal, that unthankful churl;
Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow had in the wilderness, 1 Samuel
25.21.
so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him, and he has
requited me evil for good. If God will be David's shepherd, David will dwell in
Gods house to all perpetuity, Psalm. 23.1, 6. If the Lord deal bountifully with
him, he will sit down and bethink himself what to render unto the Lord for all
his benefits, Psalm. 116.7, 12. A Christian counts all that he can do for God,
by way of retribution, but a little of that much he could beteem him: and
thinks nothing more unbeseeming himself, then to receive the grace of God in
vain. His two mites of thankfulness and obedience, he daily presents: and then
cries out as the poor Grecian did to the Emperor, If I had a better present,
thou should be sure of it. (...).
But Ingratitude is a grave, which receives all the bodies (the benefits) that
are put into it; but will render none up again, without a miracle. Hence that
passionate expostulation, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish
people and unwise? Sic etiam stomachose loquitur Deus hoc loco, says Calvin
upon this text: i.e. So likewise does the Lord here in high displeasure and
with great animosity, or stomach bespeak his people, Give me my wages
howsoever: or, if not, forbear till I fetch it, till I recover it: you shall be
sure to pay then, not the debt only, but the charges likewise: I will be paid
both for my pains and patience too. In the mean space I need you not, nor care
for your wages; for I am no hireling, etc.

So they weighed for my price, thirty pieces of silver] that is, thirty
shekels, or shillings. The price of a slain servants life, Exodus 31.22. This
they weighed, as the manner of paying money then was, Genesis 23.16. Jer. 32.9.
But they heaved their hands very high, it seems, when they valued the Lord
Christ at so vile a rate. See Mat. 26.15. with the Note.

Verse 13. Cast it unto the potter] q. d. Do they deal with me as with some
sordid swineherd? Do they award me less then Carters wages? throw't away, let
the potter take it: and let us see how many tiles he can afford us for it, to
repair the roof of the Temple. Their undervaluing and vilipending of me in this
sort, is not only injurious, but contumelious: it is to turn my glory into
shame; to spet in my face: or to use me as homely as Rachel did her fathers
gods, which she laid among the litter, and sat upon.

A goodly price that I was valued at of them] So he calls it by an Irony, or
a holy jear. Poor Joseph was sold for less; for twenty pieces of silver, Genesis
37.28. They sold the just one for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoots,
Amos 2.6. The Hebrews tell us, Pirk R. Eliez. cap 38.
that of those twenty shekels, every of the ten brethren had two to buy shoes
for his feet. The Jews that bought Christ for thirty pieces of silver (this
goodly price) of the traitor that sold him, were themselves afterward (by a
just hand of God upon them) bought and sold thirty of them for a penny by the
Romans, Hegesipp. de excid. Hierosol. p. 680.
ad illudendum, says mine Author, for a scorn to their Nation. God loves to
retaliate; and to set the scales even; men's cruelty in the one, and their
reward in the other. If we be at any time under-rated by the world, (as we are
sure to be; for the world knows us not, 1 John 3.2.) what so great matter is
it, since Christ himself was no more set by? We must be content to pass to
heaven (as he did) as concealed men. It must suffice us, that our precious
faith shall be found to praise, honor, and glory at that great fair-day: when
all fardles shall be opened, and our best wares exposed to public view.

and cast them to the potter] I gave them for the potters field, 1 Pet. 1.7
as the Lord appointed me, says the Evangelist, expounding the Prophet, and
applying the words to Christ, Mat. 27.10
who is hereby also proved to be God. So true is that observation of Divines,
that the old Testament is both explained and fulfilled in the New, by an happy
harmony.

in the house of the Lord] That thereby he might the more sharply prick the
Priests: whose care it ought to have been, that God should be better prized by
the people, and his service better observed.

Verse 14. Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands] Or, Binders: the
the bond of unity, say some: by sending a spirit of perversities among them,
such as that was which made way for the ruin of Egypt, Esaias 19.14, 16, 17. But
see for the sense hereof what is noted on verse 7. of this chapter. God seems
to say, that he will now no more govern this people in mildness and clemency:
nor yet exercise his shepherdly severity in saving corrections and visitations,
as formerly he had done (...)

that (...) house of (...) Rehoboam besides (...) twelve thousand at (...) And
in Jerusalem (...) and of the children (...) brotherly conjunction, and (...)
it, or a national covenant. This God (...) to (...) (...)
so that Ephraim shall be against Manasseh, (...)
(...) and both against Judah, Not many, years hefore (...) two brethren
Hircanul and Aristobulus fell out about the (...) priesthood; and called in
Pompey, who subdued the (...) a province. And not many years after Christ's
(...) utterly broke the brotherhood between (...) them, that like those priests
in Ezra, they have (...) not one another by their tribe, or family, nor (...)
of them that were in Spain, and are now (...) they hold to be of the tribe of
Judah: and the other (...) of the tribe of Benjamin: who in honor of the more
(...) with them the better, do learn the Spanish tongue, which (...)

Verse 15. Take unto thee yet the instruments (...) present in a type, or
figure the wicked and depraved (...) punishment of their frowardness, and
(...) people The instru^^nts of a foolish shepherd, that (...) seeking
Magistrate, are not virg a and (...), a (...) mulctra, sheers to clip them, and
a milk-pail to, (...) they look after. Now it is threaten (...) hate you shall
reign over you (...) bed in the next verses England was (...) burdens and
impositions. (...)
An Emperor (...) the King of France was king of Asses (...) his Exactours
received from his subjects (...) says our Chronicler (...) ^^fections; the
joints (...) A (...) the third, became a precedent to the next (...) greatest,
popular insurrection that ever was seen (...) of our Historians. and what sad
effect (...) duct-money, and other opprelin (...) known to all. But, what (...)
lancthon; that when he want (...) of his, and reqire of him what he (...) would
knock out first one of his teeth (...) like by all the rest, in case the money
^^ere not brought in by (...) not this one of those foolish, or rather (...) in
the next (...) eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their (...) that shall (...)
drink thy milk, as another Prophet phraseth (...) lit^^ quam (...) Christ:
(...) plaineth. And no less (...) Another, Some follow the (...) as a trade
only: with an unquenchable, and unconscionable (...) justifies the common
(...) of ill Governors (...) the sheep (...) defense in weather, he is sure to
love (...) seek to Courts of Justice to he (...) his mind: who (...) to hell,
and the other to the (...) to (...) the other.

Verse 16. For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land] Evil she (...) is
Rulers in State, and (...), see Jer. 6.3. Nabum 3.1^. Eisay 44.28 ^^ are set
^^by. God for a punishment of a sinful people. See the Note on Verse 1, The
evil shepherd the pherd here meant; was Antiocha Ephiphanes, says Theodoret:
Herod the Infanticide, says (...) Titus and the Romans, says ^ Castro: All
the perverse Priests and Princes that (...) over the Jews, after the time of
this Prophecy, says A Lapides as Jason, Mentlaus, 2 Machab. 4. (...) Herod,
Pilate, Annas and Caiaphas, the Scribes, and ^^^^sees: But especially
Antichrist, (according to Joh. 5.43.) whose forerunners all the former were.
Of one Pope, it is said by those of his own side, that he entered upon the
government of the Church as a Fox, reigned as a Wolf, died as a Dog: and its
true enough of all the rest, and to them the following words do most fitly
agree.

who shall not visit those that be cut off] Or, look for the thing that is
lost. Illos ^^^ erraverunt, non quaeret, says the Chaldee: the word
signifies, such as are hid in thickets, hanged among thorns and briers, and
there like to perish without help.

neither shall seek the young one] the tender lambs of Christ, which Peter was
double-charged to feed. Stolidam non requiret, says the Tigurine Translation.
Lambs are silly things, very apt to straggle; and least able of any creature to
find their way home again.

nor heal that that is broken] David, by leaping over the pale (as it were) of
Gods precepts, brake his bones, Psalm. 51.8. and felt the fall the longest day
of his life: So may any of Christ's flock. The good shepherd therefore in pera
gestat unguentum, has his medicines ready in scrip, to apply as need
requires. Not so the Idol shepherd, who will rather break the sound, then bind
up the broken.

nor feed that, that stands still] Or, that is well underlaid, and is full of
vigor: Vatablus renders it, Eam quae restitat, non portabit. He will not
carry that which can go no further. Hitherto the negligence of these
evil-shepherds. Follows next their cruelty, and that is more then bestiall.
For the ravening beasts lightly leave some foot or bone undevoured, Am. 3.12.
But these do not only eat the flesh of the flock, and suck the fat, but
barbarously tear the claws also in pieces, exercise utmost immanity; as it is
here graphically and gallantly described.

Verse 17. Woe to the idol shepherd] The Vulgar has, O pastor and idolum, O
thou shepherd and idol: thou that have the show only, and semblance of a
shepherd; the name, but not the thing, thou that art the ape of a shepherd, non
verus sed vanus, non vivus sed pictus and fictus pastor, that art cleped a
shepherd, as an idol is a god: but should be called rather a dumb-dog, a
greedy-dog; a shepherd that cannot understand, Esaias 56.10, 11. a foolish
shepherd, as verse 15. an (...), (...) Per agnominationem alludit ad (...) ver.
15
one that has nothing in him of any true worth; but art vain and vile, and of
no value, as this word is rendered, Job 13.4. and 11.17. Vae, vae, vae, tibi.
Christ (the great shepherd of the sheep) will surely pull off they visour, wash
off thy varnifh with rivers of brimstone, brand thee for an hireling, that
leaves the flock] to shift, as it can, among thieves and wolves, Joh. 10.13.
See the Note there.

The sword shall be upon his arm, adn upon his right eye] i. e. The curse of
God shall light upon his power, Many Pastors say as He, Pan cures oves oviumque
magistres. Virg.
and policy, both which shall be blasted.

his arm shall be clean dried up] as a keck, or stick.

and his right eye shall be utterly darkned] Or, shrivelled up, wrinkled and
dusk: as in old bisons. The idle and evil servant had his talent taken from
him, and worthily. The barren fig tree was cut down from cumbring. God will
recover his gifts from those that misuse, Mar. 25.28 Luke 13 Mos. 2.9
or but disuse them, Away they go, as strength went from Sampson, wisdom from
Solomon: they cry unto God under our abuse, who thereupon gives them the wings
of an Eagle, and lays aside their owner, as so many broken vessels; causing
them to be even forg otter as dead me^^out of mind. Esal. 31.21. This is now
especially fulfilled among the Jews, who (...) son have been without God,
without a teaching priest, and without (...) 15.3.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. THE burden of the word of the Lord] That is, a declaration of his
mind and counsel for Isreal's comfort, and his enemies confusion. To the Israel
of God it is onus sine onere, such a burden as the wings are to the bird, a
burdenlesse burden. To the enemies, a burdensome stone, verse 3. heavier then
the sand of the sea, Job 6.3.

For Israel] Not, against Israel, though Calvin so takes it: and by Israel
understands the ten tribes, and those other captives that, loath to leave
those houses they had built, and those gardens they had planted in Babylon,
Ier. 29.5. neglected to return to Jerusalem for fear of the Samaritans and
other ill neighbors, whole ruin is therefore here foretold by three excellent
similitudes, after a stately preamble, drawn 1. From the power of God, whereby
he stretches forth the heavens, that huge expanse, as a curtain, or as a
molten looking-glass. Job 37.18 Job 26.7
2. From the wisdom of God, in laying the foundation of the earth, and hanging
it, by Geometry, as we say, in the midst of heaven, like Archimedes his pigeon,
equally poized with its own weight.

Terra pilae similis, nullo fulcimine nixa, Ovid. Fast. l. 5

Aere subjecto tam grave pendet onus.
3. From the goodness of God, who forms the spirit of man within him] who
has made us these souls, Esaias 57.16. which he does daily create and infuse
into men's bodies; yea and that alone, without any help of their parents: hence
he is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. and the spirit of a dying man
is said to return to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. This last text convinced
Augustine (who held sometime, with Origin, that the soul as well as the body
was begotten by the parents) far more then the peremptory rashness of
Vincentius Victor: who censured boldly the Fathers unresolvednesse, Chemnitius.
(when he doubted concerning the original of a rational soul) and vaunted
that he would prove by demonstration, that souls are created de novo, by God.
Aristotle (Natures chief Secretary) was much puzzled about this point of the
soul: which indeed cannot fully be conceived of, nor defined by man. Only
this we can say, that the soul as it comes from God, so it is like him; viz.
One immateriall, immortal, understanding Spirit: distinguished into three
Powers, which all make up one Spirit.

Verse 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling] Or, slumber, or
poison. A Metaphor taken from a cup of generous wine, but empoysoned; so that
those that drink of it, do presently tremble, grow giddy, sleepy, sick as heart
can hold. Poison in wine works more furiously. Thou have made us to drink the
wine of giddiness, says the Church, Psalm. 60.3. In the hand of the Lord is a
cup, and the wine is red, it is full mixed, etc. The Prophet here seems to
allude to Jer. 25.15. Esaias 29.8. Jer. 31.7. Ovid says of the river Gallus,
that whosoever, drinks of it runs mad immediately. Hierom tells of a Lake
near Naples, whereinto if a dog be thrown he presently dies. The like is
reported by Josephus of the Lake Asphaltites. Jerusalem shall be a murdering
morsel to those that swallow it. His meat in his bowels is turned, it is the
gall of aspes within him. He has swallowed down her spoil, and he shall vomit
it up again: Job 20.14, 15
God shall rake it out of his belly: He shall have as little joy of his
tid-bits, of his sweet draughts, as Jonathan had of his honey: whereof he had
no sooner tasted, but his head was forfeited. Pliny speaks of a kind of honey
that poysoneth: because it is sucked out of poisonous flowers. Our Chronicler
tells us, Speed. 1210.
that at Alvelana three miles from Lisbon, many of our English soldiers under
the Earl of Essex perished, by eating of honey, purposely left in the houses,
and spiced with poison. The enemies of the Church make a dangerous adventure,
they are even ambitious of destruction: they run to meet their bane, as did
those Philistines at Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. And had they but so much wit as Pilats
wife in a dream, they would take heed of having any thing to do with those just
men, of eating up Gods people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. of bowsing in the
bowls of the Sanctuary with Baltasar, who fell thereupon into a trembling,
Dan. 5.6
so that his loins were loosed, and his knees knocked one against another.

when they shall be in the siege] And so about to do their last and worst
against the Church. The people of Rome was saepe praelio victus, nunquam bello,
says Florus: they lost many battles, but were never overcome in a set war:
at the last, at the long-runne, as they say, they crushed all their enemies: so
does the Church. See Psalm. 129. thorowout: and the story of the Maccabees.

Verse 3. I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone] Such a stone as that
wherewith the woman brake Abimelech his brainpan, at the tower of Thebez, Judge.
9.53. He had slain all his brethren upon one stone, verse 5. he receives
therefore his deaths-wound by a stone: and that by the hand of a woman, which
was his greatest grief. The like death befell Pyrrhus, king of Epirotes, slain
at the siege of Argos, with a tyle thrown by a woman from the wall. So was Earl
Simon Mountfort, that bloody persecutour of the Albigenses in Irance. A woman
discharged an engine at him, Cades Justif. of the Church.
from the walls of Toulouse, and by a stone parted his head from his shoulders.
The virgin daughter of Zion shall do as much as all this comes to for her
besiegers: though all the people of the earth be gathered together against her.
For why? she has a strong champion; that, in maintaining her quarrel, will
dash them to pieces, and grind them to powder, Luke 20.18. They are no more
able to stand before him, then a glasse-bottle before a cannon-shot. Hence her
confidence, her laughing and shaking her head by way of derision at her
stoutest enemies, Esaias 37.22. She knows that all that burden themselves with
her shall be cut in pieces. Hamans wife could tell so much. If Mordecai (said
she) be of the seed of the Jews, Esih. 5.13
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but
shall surely fall before him. A Jew may-fall before a Fersian, and get up and
prevail. But if a Persian, or whosoever of the Gentiles begin to sall before a
Jew, he can neither stay, nor rise. There is an invisible hand of omnipotency
that strikes in for his own: and confounds their opposites. That little stone
cut out without hands, (Christ's humane nature is called a tabernacle not made
with hands, not of this building, Heb. 9.11. that is, not by an ordinary course
of generation) smites the four mighty Monarchies, and crumbleth them to
crattle, Dan. 2.34. Hierom upon this text (and after him other Interpreters,
both Ancient and Modern) tell us that the Holy Ghost here alludeth to a certain
exercise, or game, used much among the Jews, namely to take up a great round
stone for the trial of a man's strength; lifting it up from the ground,
sometimes to the knees, sometimes to their navels, sometimes to their breasts,
and sometimes as high as their heads, or above their heads. At which sport many
times they did grievously hurt themselves, or at least scarify and make cuts in
their flesh. See Levit. 21.5. where the same word is used. The Churches enemies
shall strive, and try who shall do her most hurt: but the stoutest of them all
shall be fooled and foiled in the end. The irrepairable ruin of Rome is
graphically described and even set forth to the eye ( Rev. 18.21.) by a notable
gradation. An Angel, a mighty Angel takes a stone, a great stone, which he not
only casts, but thrusts into the bottom of the sea, whence it cannot be
boyed up. This Angel might well be Luther, (with his Book de captivitate
Babylonica: confer Jer. 51.63.) whom God strangely preserved from the rage of
Rome and Hell: like as he did from that deadly danger by the fall of a stone,
whereof Mr. Fox writes thus. Acts and Mon.
Upon a time, says He, when Luther was sitting in a certain place upon a stool
studying; a great stone there was in the Vault over his head where he sat:
which being staid miraculously so long as he was sitting, as soon as he was up,
immediately fell upon the place where he sat, able to have crushed him in
pieces, if it had light upon him. But no malice of man or devil could antedate
his end a minute, whilst his Master had work for him to do: as the two
witnesses could not be killed till their business was dispatched, Rev. 11.7.

Verse 4. Turk. Hist.
I will smite every horse with astonishment] Great is the strength of the horse
and the rage of his rider: Jehu marched furiously; Bajazet the great Turk, of
his fierce and furious riding, was surnamed Gilderun or Lightening; But God can
make the Egyptians to appear men, and not Gods, and their horses flesh, and not
spirit: When the Lord shall but stretch out his hand. (and that is no hard
matter of motion) both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall
fall down, and they shall all fail together Esaias 31.3. See Psalm. 76.5, 6.
Psalm. 33.17.
An horse is a vain thing for safety, though a warlike creature full of
terror; but safety or victory is of the Lord Pro. 21.31. In nothing be
terrified, says the Apostle Philip. 1.28. The Greek word is a metaphor from
horses when they tremble and are sore affrighted: as it fell out in the
Philistines army, when the Angels made a bustle among the mulbery-trees 2 Samuel
5.24. in the Syrians army, when the Angels likewise made an hurry-noise in the
air, of charrets, of horses, and of a great host 2 King. 7.6. in the army of
Sennacherib, when at Gods sole rebuke both the charret and horse were cast into
a dead sleep Psalm. 76.6. Lastly in the German wars against Zisca and the
Hussites in Bohemia: where God smot every horse with astonishment, and his
rider with madness; Parei Medue, hist. Profan. page 785.
such a panick terror seized upon the enemies of the truth, though they came
in with three potent armies at once, that they sled before ever they looked the
enemy in the face. How this Prophecy was literally fulfilled to the
Maccabees, see 2 Mac. 10.30.

and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah] who before seemed to wink,
or to be asleep. Now will I awake, says the Lord, Now will I arise, Isa. 33.10.
now will I lift up my self, for the relief and rescue of my poor people: and
that because they called them outcasts, saying, This is Zion whom no man
looks after Ier. 30.17.

Verse 5. And the Governors of Judah] The Dukes of Chiefetaines: meaning the
Maccabes, who ware not any kingly crown, but were only Governors, Rulers, (...)
Commanders in chief, such as went before others: like as in the Alphabet Aleph
is the first letter: So, Omega nostrorum Mors est, Mars Alpha malorum. Says
the Poet wittily.

shall say in their hearts] i. e. shall say heartily, from the root of the
heart, and not from the roof of the mouth only. Profession of the truth and
prayer (for so some make this verse to be) are not a labor of the lips, but a
travel of the heart. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet,
as that which comes from the depth of the breast. As in instrument-musick, the
deeper and hollower the belly of the Lute or Violl is, the pleasanter is the
sound; the sleeter, the more grating and ha^sh in our ears.

the inhabitants of Iorusalem shall be my strength] Though now there be few
found in it: yet it shall be much repeopled and fortified: so that, under God,
it shall be a fortress to the whole country; and the Governor shall so take
it to be, Or thus.

there is strength to me and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the Lord of
Hosts their God.] Every governor shall say so for his own particular. (And
this seems to me to be the better reading) The Maccabes did so as appeared by
their posy (whereof before) their prayers, and their singular success, as
appears by their history, and by Josephus. Deo confisi, nunquam confusi, They
that trust in God shall never be confounded. Our fathers trusted in thee, and
they were delivered. O trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting strength. Look not down on the rushing and roaring streams,
lest ye grow giddy: but look up to the heavens from whence comes your help, and
fasten by faith on Gods power and promises. Faith unseined breeds hope
unfaileable, such as never miscarrieth. O trust in him at all times ye people
etc. Psalm. 62. for with God is wisdom and strength Job. 12.13. Plutarch says
of the Scythians that they have neither wine nor music: but they have Gods.
Say that the Saints have neither power, nor policy as their enemies, yet they
have all in God who is more then all.

Verse 6. In that day will I make the governors etc.] This is the third
similitude, whereof the scripture is full: according to that, I will open my
mouth in parables etc. These are of excellent use to adorn and explain: and yet
they are evermore inferior to the matter in hand. They are borrowed from
things well known, and easy to be conceived: as here from an harth of fire
among wood; Now we can all tell how great a matter (or wood) a little fire
kindles Iam. 3.5. As when Nero, for his pleasures sake set Rome on fire, among
other stately buildings that were quickly burnt down, the Circus or race-yard
was one: being about half a mile in length, of an ovall form with rows of
seats one above another, capable of at least an hundred and fifty thousand
spectatours, without uncivil shoulderings. As the fire burns a wood: and as
the flame sets the mountains on fire: So persecute them with thy tempest:
and make them afraid with thy storm, says the Church Psalm. 83.14, 15. Thus
they prayed, and thus it is here promised: and was accordingly performed in
those first wars of the Maccabees: as appears in the first book of their
story, Antiq. lib. 12.
and in Josephus. Diodate and others understand this text of the Apostles and
Evangelists, who should fill the world with wars and dissentions by preaching
the Gospel Luke 12.49. whereby the enemies should be ruinated, Hieron. Remig.
Albert. A Lapide.
and the church reestablished Obad. 18. thorough the spirit of judgment and of
burning Esaias 4.4. To which purpose Chrysostom says, that Peter was a man made
of fire walking amongst stubble. Basil was compared to a pillar of fire. John
Baptist is by our savior said to be a burning and a shining lamp. And Eliah
(in whose spirit the Baptist came) was a man of that transcendent zeal, that
to heighten the expression thereof, some have legended of him, that when he
drew his mothers breasts, he was seen to suck in fire.

and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place] sc. where she was
built at first, and not in another near place, as Tyrus was; and Rome is at
this day quite off her old seven hills: so that a man may look for Rome in
Rome. And Jerusalem that now is has mount Calvary in the very midst of it
(which was anciently without the city) and not one hundred families of Jews are
therein to be found. That they shall one day cast out therehence Gog and Magog,
inhabit it in the old place, Breerew. Enquir.
and have excellent strength and valor ministered by God to them, all equally
for their common defense, none lifting up themselves above another, but all
alike ascribing the glory unto God, is concluded by some (and those not
inconsiderable) Divines out of this and the following verses.

Verse 7. The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first] Or as at first,
sc. when they came out of Egypt, and had no strong holds to take to for their
defense. Lord, (says Moses,) thou have been our dewlling place in all
generations Psalm. 90.1. He was so of old, and ever will be: the faith whereof
made the fathers well content to dwell in tents Heb. 11.13. and those holy
Rechabites Ier. 35.7, 8. till Nebuchadnezzar came up into the land ver. 11. But
here God promises to deliver those Jews that dwelt in the open fields, without
the city; and then afterward to deliver Jerusalem it self from the rage of the
Antiochi; and so he did (1 Maccab.) in a wonderful manner: they were helped
indeed with a little help Dan. 11.34. to take away boasting; as it follows.

that the glory of the house of David etc.] that is, the glorious house of
David, and the glorious inhabitants of Jerusalem, by an Hypallage. Non est
gloriosior populus sub coelo, quam Judaicus. Alst. Chron.
There is not a more vainglorious people under heaven then the Jews are says
Alsted. They were so of old Ioh. 8.33. Mat. 3.9. Spaniards are said to be
impudent braggers: and extremely proud in the lowest ebb of fortune; so are the
Jews. But God will teach them better things, and make him that glories glory
in the Lord 1 Cor. 1.31.

Verse 8. In that day shall the Lord defend etc.] Prosequitur eandem sententiam
says Calvin. Prove. 21.24.
He proceeds in the former argument, to assure the feeble Jews (as Sanballat
that proud haughty scorner called them Neh. 4.2.) of safety and protection. God
will bless the righteous: Psalm. 5. vlt.
with favor will he compass them as with a shield. Now there is no coming at
the body but thorough the shield, if well handled; no coming at the Saints,
but through Gods own sides, as I may say. He bears his people as on Eagles
wings Exodus 19.4. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Now the Eagle carries her young upon her wings
(and not between her talons as other birds do) so that they cannot be shot, but
thorough the body of the old one. Oh the dignity and safety of a Saint! Well
might Moses sing, Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people!
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thine
excellency: and thine enemies shall be found (...) unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places. Deuteronomy. 33 29.
Let all that would be safe indeed, as in a tower of brass, or town of war,
labor to be found written among the living in Jerusalem Isa. 4.3. to be of the
Church of the firstborn which are enrolled in heaven Heb. 12.23. like as in
Jerusalem were records kept of the names of all the citizens Psalm. 48.3. Get
under Gods wing, and nothing can annoy thee. As if he be angry, where shall a
man shelter? Brass and iron can fence him against a bullet or a sword: but if
he be to be cast into a furnace of fire, it would help to torment him: if into
a pit of water, to sink him. Now our God is a consuming sire Heb. 12.29. and
his breath a stream of brimstone Isa. 30.33. To run from him to other refuge,
is but for a man to run his head into a barrel of gunpowder, for a shelter
against the force of a fire kindled over him.

and he that is feeble among them] So that he cannot stand but stagger (as the
word imports) as did Miles Cobelite a Christian soldier sore wounded, so
that he reeled like a drunken man and fell down diverse times, for want of
strength. This man drawing nigh to Amurath the third king of Turks, as he was
viewing the dead bodies after a bloody fight, making as if he would have craved
his life of him. Turk Hist: fol. 200.
suddenly stabbed him in the bottom of his belly with a short dagger which he
had under his soldiers coat; of which wound that great king and conqueror
presently died.

shall be as David] who was a mighty man of valor (as Hushai told Absalom and
bid him beware 2 Samuel 17.8.) and had such a band of worthies about him, as were
not to be matched 2 Samuel 23.8. These had a house by themselves to dwell and
exercise feats of arms: as Lyra gathers out of Neh. 3.16. where mention is
made of the house of the mighty. The Maccabes (slighted as abjects) did greater
exploits and got greater victories then David had done: and the condition of
this poor people was to be shortly after ( sc. under the preaching of Christ's
gospel) far better and happier then ever it had been under the rich and
flourishing kingdom of David: for then they should be able to say, Gods grace
is sufficient for me: his strength is made perfect in my weakness. I will
glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me: for when
I am weak, then I am strong. I can do all things, suffer all things thorough
Christ that strengthens me. The weak shall say I am strong Joel 3.10 And
indeed how can they be otherwise, that have a mighty strong God Esaias 9.6. a
strong word, the Lords own arm, the power of God to salvation Romans 1.16. Act.
20.32. a strong spirit 2 Timothy 1.7. strong consolations Heb. 6.18. Prove. 18.10.
strong armor both offensive and defensive Ephesians. 6.18. Isa. 40.31.
and the name of the Lord as a strongtower whereunto the righteous run and are
safe, and where waiting upon the Lord they renew their strength, they mount up
with wings as Eagles, or rather as Angels.

for the house of David shall be as God as the Angel of the Lord before them]
i. e. As Christ the Angel of Gods presence, and that went before the people in
the wilderness. Such were those of the blood-royall, and that succeeded David
in the government: but especially such were the Apostles, Christ's Mighties, who
should be endued with so many graces in majesty, Authority, Strength, and
truth, that men should receive them ( Cornelius like) as so many Angels of God,
yea even as Christ Jesus Gal. 4.14.

Verse 9. I will seek to destroy] I will make inquisition and diligent
scrutiny: I will draw them out of their lurking-places to execution: as Sa^l
went to seek David upon the rocks of the wild-goats; those high, steep and
craggy rocks, 1 Samuel 24.2.
which could not but be very tedious both to himself, and to his soldiers to
march in: But he was set upon it, and would leave no place unsearched. See his
charge to the Ziphites to take knowledge of all the lurking-holes where he hid
himself, and to bring him word that he might seek him thorough all the
thousands of Judah 1 Samuel 23.23. The Lord need not do so, to find out his
enemies; for in him they live, move and subsist Col. 1.17. they are everunder
his view, and within his reach. He sits upon the circle of the earth Is.
40.22. and can easily shake them out of it, as by a canvasse. Yea, he sits in
the height of heaven, and wherein they deal proudly, he is above them Exodus
18.11. disclosing their cabinet-counsels, as he did Benhadads; and blasting
their designs.

to destroy all nations God stands not upon multitudes; he takes not the tenth
man, but destroys all nations, be they never so many of them that come against
Jerusalem, that oppose or affront his people, either with their virulent
tongues or violent hands. When a rabble of rebels shall set themselves against
the Lord, and against his Christ, his mystical Christ the Church, he will
utterly destroy them; Mercer.
the word signifies he will destroy them ut nihil reliquum maneat, that there
shall be no remainder of them. Woe therefore to the Churches enemies; for their
destruction ever goes with the saints salvation Philip. 1.28, 29. Esaias 8 9.
Prove. 11.8. Gods jealousy Zach. 1.14. and justice 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. will effect it
surely, severely, suddely.

Verse 10. And I will pour upon the house of David] Pour as by whole pailefuls;
God is no penny-father; no small gifts sall from so great a hand; he gives
liberally Iam. 1.15. and is rich to all that call upon his name Romans 10.12.
abundant in kindness Exodus 34.6. plenteous in mercy Psalm. 103.8. the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ has over-abounded, (...).
has overflowed all the banks 1 Timothy 1.14. indeed it has neither bank nor
bottom. Oh pray for that blisse-full sight Ephesians. 1.18. and 3.18, 19. that Spirit
of wisdom and revelation.

of grace and of supplications] Or deprecations of that utter destruction that
shall befall other nations. God will save his people, but so as by prayer Psalm.
32.6. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Zach. 13.9. he will grace his own ordinance, draw many
suitours, and derive many praises to himself. See Ezekiel. 36.37. Psalm. 50.15. and
116.2. Some render it a spirit of grace and of lamentations, sc. before the
Lord, when they felt the nails, (...).
where with they had pierced Christ, pricking their own hearts Act. 2.37.
punctually pricking and piercing them.

and they shall look upon the whom they have pierced] Dacaru, whom they have
d^ggered or dug, as Psalm. 22.16. him they shall look upon and lament, (...),
Rev. 1.7. Lam. 3.
their eye shall affect their heart; for the eye is the instrument both of
sight and of sorrow; and what the eye never sees the heart never rues. The Sun
looks upon the earth, draws up vapors thence, and distilleth them down
again: so does the Sun of the understanding; which till it be convinced, the
heart cannot be compuncted. Sight of sin must precede sorrow for sin. The The
prodigal came to himself, ere he repented of his loose practices, men must
bethink themselves, or bring back to their hearts (as the Hebrew has it 1
King. 8.47.) ere they will say, We have sinned and dealt perversely, we have
committed wickedness. See Ier. 8.6. Psalm. 38.18. An infant in the womb cries
not because he sees not; but as soon as it comes into the light, he sets up his
note. Get therefore your eyes anointed with eye salve, with this spirit of
grace and supplications: so shall you soon see (says Mr. Bradford martyr) your
face foull arrayed, and so shameful, saucy, mangy, pocky, and scabbed, that
you cannot but be sorry at the contemplation thereof. It is the spirit that
convinces the world of sin; neither can the waters till his wind blows Psalm.
147.18. A sigh is not breathed out for sin, till the spirit imbreach the same
into us.

and they shall mourn for him] Or, for it, viz. for their crucifying the Lord
of glory in their forefathers, and having a great hand in it themselves; since
their and our sins were thorns and nails that pierced him, the lance that let
out his heartblood etc. We bound him with cords; we beat him with rods;
buffetted him with fists, reviled him with our mouths, nodded at him with our
heads, etc. We were the chief actours and principal causes, that set awork
Judas, Pilat etc. Oh stand a while with the devout women, and see him bleeding,
groaning, dying, by the wounds that we gave him; and mourn affectionatly over
him as here.

they shall mourn] with such outward pomp and rites as are used at fune ralls;
as wringing the hands, beating the breasts, shaking the head, and the like
external gestures and expressions of heaviness.

and shall be in bitternesse] by inwardnesse of extreme grief; as when David's
heart was leavened with it Psalm. 73.21. it was sowred with goodly sorrow, and
sowced in the tears of true repentance. So Peter went forth and wept bitterly
Mat. 26.15. waters of Marah flowed from Mary Magdalens eyes, which were as a
fountain for Christ's feet: here sorrow was deep and downright, producing
repentance never to be repented of. The sorrow we conceive for an unkindnesse
offered to Christ must not be slight and sudden, but sad and soaking: like that
of the Israelites met at Mizpeh, when they drew water before the Lord 1 Samuel
7.6. whereunto the Prophet Jeremy seems to allude, when he seriously wishes
that his head were waters etc. Ier. 9.1. and David with his rivers of tears
Psa. 119.136. His heart was soft and soluble: now softness of heart discovers
sin; as the blots run abroad, and seem biggest in wet paper: and as when the
Cockatrice egg is crushed, it breaks forth into a viper Isa. 59.5. Now to
make and keep the heart soft and tender, the consideration of Christ's dolorous
passion must needs be of singular use and efficacy: as the sight of C^sars
bloody robes brought forth, greatly affected the people of Rome, and edged them
to revenge. The hardest heart soundly soaked in the blood of Christ (the true
scapegoat) cannot but relent and repent for such a horrid villainy.

as one mourns for his only son -- for his first born] sc. with a
funerall-sorrow: such as was that of the Sunamite, and of the widow of Naim,
of Rachel, who refused to be comforted etc. There is an Ocean of love in a
fathers heart: as we see in Jacob toward Joseph, in David toward Absolam, in
the father of the Prodigal etc. Christ was Gods only son in respect of his
divine nature: he was also the firstborn amongst many brethren. And yet God so
loved the world etc. So? how? So as I cannot tell how: for this is a Sic
without a Sicut: Even so should our sorrow be, for having a wicked hand in his
dolorous death. The Prophet here seems to be at a stand as it were, whence to
borrow comparisons to shadow it out by. Great is the grief of children for
their deceased parents, as of Joseph for Jacob Genesis 50.1. he fell upon his
fathers face, as willing to have wept him alive again if possible. So our
Edward the first returning from the wars in Palestina, rested himself in
Sicily: where the death of his son and heir coming first to his ear, and
afterward of the king his father, he much more sorrowed his fathers departure,
then his sons: whereat King Charles of Sicily greatly marvelled, Speed. 646.
and demanding the reason, had of him this answer: The loss of sons is but
light, because they are multiplied every day: but the death of parents is
irremediable, because they can never be had again. Thus He, Howbeit, love
rather descends then ascends, and Abraham could better part with his father
Terah, then with his son, his only son Isaac whom he loved Genesis 22.2. Before he
had him, Lord God, said Abraham, what will thou give me so long as I gee
childlesse. Genesis 15.2.
His mouth was so out of taste with the sense of his want, that he could relish
no comfort. But now to be bereft of him, and that in such a manner, as he might
conceive by that probatory precept Genesis 22.2. this must needs go to the very
heart of him, for though he had put on grace, yet he had not put off nature.
Both Jacob and Jacobs father (as Iunius understands that passage Genesis 37,
35.) wept savourly for Joseph, and would go down into the grave unto their sen
mourning. True it is, that the loss of some wife may be greater then the loss
of some son, ( Abraham came from his own tent to Sarah's tent to mourn for her
Genesis 22.2. and she was the first that we read of in scripture mourned for) but
the Prophet here speaks of the mourning of husband and wife together: and
they can lose no greater outward blessing, then their firstborn, if an
onely-one especially.

Verse 11. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem]
Magnificabitur luctus (so the Hebrew has it) their mourning shall be
greatened, their heaviness heightened, they shall rise in their repentance
above all that is ordinary. The Casuifts and Schoolmen affirm sorrow for sin
to be the greatest of all sorrows. 1. In conatu: the whole soul seems to
send springs into it, out of every faculty. 2. In extensione: It is a spring
which in this life more or less is continually dropping; neither would God
have the wounds of godly forrow to be so closed up at all, as not to bleed
afresh upon every good occasion. 3. In appreciatione: the true penitentiary
does ever judge that a good God offended, a Savior crucified, should be the
prime cause of greatest grief. 4. In intensione: for intension of displicence
in the will; there being no other things with which, Adrian. Scotus. Soto.
or for which the will is more displeased with its self, then for sinning
against God. There is more cause of grief, say they, for sinning, then for the
death of Christ: because therein was aliquid placens, but sin is simpliciter
displicens. But is it not godly mourning, may some say, unless it be so great?
I answer, that other mourning may make more noise, like a dashing shoure of
rain, or a land-flood that by a small shallow channel comes down from an hill.
When a man mourns for his only son, or the like, this comes from God as a
judgment; it comes down hill as it were, has nature to work with it, and
nothing to hinder it: but this mourning and melting over Christ, is as a stream
that goes up hill, and through many reeds and flagges, M. Cotton.
as a Reverend man expresses it.

as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon] Where good Josiah
was slain, and where the people saw (to their unspeakable grief, and
heart-break) family, Church and Commonwealth plucked up by the roots, in the
loss of that one man, who was the very breath of all their nostrils, as
Jeremiah sadly acknowledges in his Lamentations, composed on that very
occasion, and when he died, all their prosperity here died with him; and
themselves were no better then living Ghosts, walking sepulchers of themselves:
a being they had, but not a life: those that before seemed to touch heaven with
their finger, fell down to the earth, -- nunc humi de repent serpere siderates
esse diceres.
as if they had been planet-struck, as Budaeus speaks of the French courtiers
at the death of Jews the twelfth. When Augustus died, orbis ruinam timueramus,
says Paterculus, we thought all had been lost, and that the world would have
fallen about our ears. When our Edward the sixth (that second Josiah) was taken
away, Cardan sung this sorrowful Epicedion; Flete nefas magnum, sed toto
flebitis orb
Mortales; vestruum corrit omnis honos,


Verse 12, 13, 14, And the land shall mourn] Not the generality of the Jews
(unless it be at their last general conversion, that resurrection from the
dead, as it is called Romans 11.15.) but the elect according to grace, who are
here called the land, because more esteemed by God then all the other Jews
besides: for he reckons of men by their righteousness, as he did of Lot at
Sodom.

every family apart] To show the soundness of their sorrow, the sincerity by
the secrecy: for Ille dolet vere qui sine test dolet. He grieves with a
witness, that grieves without a witness. There is a worldly sorrow that
hardens the heart: and indisposeth it for repentance; as did that of Nabal.
There is also an hellish sorrow, a desperate grief for sin, poenitentia
Iscariotica, as was that of Judas. There is no birth without travel: but some
children die in the birth: are killed with the pains of the labor. (...). 2
Cor. 7
Lastly, there is a sorrow according to God, whereby we weep kindly after God,
inquiring the way to Zion, with our faces set thitherward, and renewing our
covenant Jer. 50.4, 5. Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, says David
Psalm. 51.4. Lo, there lay this pinch of his grief, that he had offended so good
a God. It was the Myrrh and its scent, that Christ had dropped on the bars of
the door, that waked the drousy Spouse, and made her bowels fret Cant. 5. This
made her first weep in secret, and then seek out after him, whom her soul
loved. She first went to enquire of the Lord, as Rebecca did Genesis 25.22. and
then she hears from him those sweet words Cant. 2.14. Oh my dove! that art in
the clefts of the rocks, that have wrought thy self a borough a receptacle of
rest in the Rock of ages, in the secret places of the stars, whither thou art
retired as for security so for secrecy, to mourn as a dove, and to pray for
pardon. Show me thy face, which now appears most orientally beautiful,
because most instampt with sorrow for sin: Let me hear thy voice, which never
sounds so melodiously, as when thy heart is broken most penitentially: for
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely.

and their wives apart] Sarah had her peculiar tent Ge. 24.65. wherein she
dwelt Ge. 18.6. and died Ge. 23.2. Rebecca likewise had her retiring-room,
whither she went to enquire of the Lord Ge. 25.22. Rachel and Leah had their
several tents, apart from Jacobs Ge. 31.33. Miriam and her women do apart by
themselves praise God for deliverance Exo. 15.20. Esth. 4.16.
I and my maidens will fast likewise, says Esther. In a time of solemn
humiliation, let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of
her closet, Joel 2.16. See 1 Cor. 7.5. Amongst both Jews, Greeks, and Romans,
the women were separated from the men, in public acts and assemblies; in times
of common calamity especially, as may be gathered out of Plutarch, Athenaeus,
Virgil, Livy. -- ad templum non aequae Palladis ibant Iliades --
Stratae passim Matres crinibus Templa verrentes, veniam irarum coelestium
exposcant, says He; The men by themselves, and the women by themselves, sought
to appease the angry Gods. Here they are severed, to show that they wept not
for company, sed sponte and proprio affectu; as Calvin has it, but of their
own accord, and out of pure affection; they freely lamented not so much for
Christ's dolorous death, as for that themselves had a chief hand in it, and were
the principal causes of it. The best kind of humiliation is to love and weep,
as that woman did Luke 7. who made her eyes a fountain to wash Christ's feet in,
and had his side opened for a fountain to wash her soul in, as it is Chap.
13.1. A remnant according to the election of grace. Romans 11.5.


all the families that remain] Out of every family of this people, God will
have some converts. A thing so incredible, that to persuade it, the Prophet may
here seem to some profane person to use more words then needs.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. IN that day there shall be a fountain opened] Nunc fructum
poenitentiae adiungit, sath Calvin here. This is the fruit of their repentance.
No sooner mourn they over Christ, but they are received to mercy. I said, I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord: and (or ever I can do it) thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin; that is, both the sting and stain of it, the
guilt and the filth, Psalm. 32.5.
the crime and the curse. Repent and your sins shall be blotted out, says
Peter to those nefarious Kill-Christs Act. 3.9. God will cross the black lines
of your sins, with the red lines of his sons blood, 1 Ioh. 1.6. A fountain
shall be opened: not a cistern, but a spring: a pool better then that of Siloam
which is by interpretation Sent John 9.7. and so a type of Christ, who loved
us, and washed us from our sins with his own blood, and has made us kings and
priests unto God, and his father: to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen. To seal up this matchless mercy to us, Rev. 1.5.6.
he sent first by the hand of his forerunner, and baptized those that repented
for the remission of sins, Mat. 3.2. Act. 2.38. And afterward he set wide open
this blessed fountain, this laver of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost Tit. 3.5. Saying by his Ministers to every believer, as once to Paul,
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins calling on the name of the Lord.
Act. 22.16. whereunto salvation is promised Romans 10.13. Joel 2.22. Baptism
also is said to save us 1 Pet. 3.21. sc. sacramentally, for it seals up
salvation to the believer Mar. 16.16. and is of perpetual and permanent use to
him, for that purpose, his whole life thorowout, ut scaturigo semper ebulliens,
as a fountain bubbling up to eternal life. Here then the Sacrament of Baptism
is prophesied of and promised. And hence, happily the Baptism of John is said to
have been from heaven Mat. 21.25. All the Levitical purifications pointed to
this Kings-Bath of Christ's meritorious blood, this ever-flowing and overflowing
fountain: for the grace of our Lord Jesus has abounded to flowing over (as S.
Paul's expression is) with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. (...).
Neither can it ever be dried up, as was the river Cherith, the brooks of Tema
etc. but is an inexhausted fountain, a fresh-running spring, for all that have
but a mind to make toward it. Tam recens mihi nunc Christus est, ac si hac
hora fudisset sanguinem, says Luther; Christ is still as fresh and sovereign
to me, as if this very hour he had shed his blood. He was the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world; and shall be so to the end thereof. Cruci haeremus,
sanguinem sugimus, and intra ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam,
says Cyprian of the Lords Supper; i. e. We cleave to the cross at this holy
ordinance: we suck Christ's blood, we thrust our tongues into the very wounds
of our Redeemer, and are hereby purged from all pollutions of flesh and spirit.

to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem] i. e. To all sorts
and sexes of penitents, be they noble or ignoble, strong Christians or weak
(see Zach. 12.8.) none shall be secluded from this fountain, thus opened or
exposed to all, not sealed and shut up, as that Cant. 4.12. God is no respecter
of persons, but in every nation he that fears him, Act. 10.34, 35.
and works righteousness is accepted of him.

for sin and for uncleannesse] i. e For all sorts of sins, though they be
such, as in their desert do separate us from communion with God, and company of
men. (See Levit. 12. and 15.) render us worthy to be excommunicated,
proscribed, and banished out of the world, as pists and botches of humane
society by a common consent of nations: as the obstinate Jews are at this day
for their inexpiable guilt in crucifying Christ. The vulgar here has it, Ad
ablutionem peccatoris and menstru^^^, For washing clean the sinner, and the
menstruous woman: alluding (as does also the Chaldee) to the waters of
expiation made of the ashes of a red cow Number. 19.11, 17. See the Note there:
and importing the purging both of he sinners and she-sinners: Or, as some will
have it, both of Actual and Original sin. Lo this is the virtue of Christ's
merit and spirit, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. far beyond that of Abanah and Pharphar, of
Jordan and Siloam, which yet are said not only to wash and scour, but also to
heal and cure. The Saracenes naturally stink like goats: but by washing
themselves and their children in the pool of Siloam, Saligniacus. Adrichom.
Plin. lib. 31. cap 11. Isidor. lib. 13. Orig c. 13. Heyl Geog. 285.
they become sweeter. The Turks make use of it to sharpen their eyesight. At
Cyzicum there is a well called Cupids well, the water whereof is said to quench
the fire of lust. This is better yet then those Bathes of Rome: concerning
which Seneca no less wittily then truly complained, Postquam munda balnea
inventa sunt, spurciores sunt qui lavant: Or those wanton Bathes of upper-Badin
in Helvetia, much frequented, yet not so much for health, as filthy pleasure.
They that are in Christ, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
Gal. 5.24. they are not only washed from their wickedness Jer. 4.14 but
bereft of their swinish natures, ne tanquam sus ad volutabrum etc, 2 Pet. 2.22.

Verse 2. gnotsabim terriculorum scar-crows
I will cut off the names of the idols] Heb. of the fray-bugges (as they are
likewise called 1 Samuel 31.9. 1 Chro. 10.9. Psalm. 115.4. in contempt, as Priapus
in Horace -- furum qniumque Maxim formido --) Or grievous idols, as Psalm.
16.4. because they tormented the minds of the superstitious, and put them to
great pains to no purpose; as is to be seen in Popish Pilgrims, who though used
hardly, and lose much of their estates, and other comforts, yet satisfy
themselves in this, I have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb idol, as
Calvin notes on that place Seek ye my face. Now of these mawmets and monuments
of idolatry, these Balaams blocks, the Lord here promises to rid the land, as
he did under the Maccabees. And as in the Primitive Church he did by the
Christian Emperors, styled therefore by the superstitious Iconomachi, and
Iconaclastae: and of late by the renowned Reformers, as at Geneva, Bern, Basile
(where they were burnt all together on an Ash Wednesday of Gods own making) and
here in England by the command of King Edward the sixth: who the self same day
obtained a signal victory at Muscleborough-field.

and they shall no more be remembred] Unless it be with shame and detestation,
as Ezech. 16.61. Psalm. 16.4. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do
any more with idols? He shall pollute the idols which he once perfumed, and say
unto them, Get you hence, Isay 30.22. I was an obstinate Papist (says Latimer
of himself) as any was in England, and a gross Idolater etc. But after that he
came to a sight of his error, he so far forth abhorred idols, that being
brought forth after he was condemned to die to see a procession, Act. and Mon.
fol. 1230.
he ran as fast as his old bones would carry him to one Spensers shop near
Karfax in Oxford, and would not once look toward it.

and also I will cause the Prophets] So they will needs be called and counted:
when as they are no better then unclean spirits (see the Geneva-Note here) or
at least are acted and set on work by that unclean spirit the Devil, (See Mat.
12.43. Mar. 1.26. John 8.44. Rev. 16.13. with the Notes) indeed they are false
Prophets Mat 7.15. false teachers, who privily bring in damnable heresies 2
Pet. 2.1. vanae orationis, cui nulla veritatis vel virtutis ratio subest, sunt
artifices stulte loquaces and garruli, says Montanus, they are loud and lewd
liers, inspired by that unclean spirit the father of lies, Junius in loc.
ut impurati impurent alios and seducant seducti, that being themselves defiled
and seduced, they may defile and seduce others. For by corrupt teachers Satan
catches men: as a cunning fisher by one fish catches another, that he may
feed upon both.

and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land] This connection is worthy to
be noted, says reverend Calvin here: because it shows us the source of all
errors, viz. the letting loose the reins to perverse teachers. I confess,
says He, we are apt enough of our selves to run after falsities, such is the
corruption of our natures. Sed interea ubi grassatur licentia quidvis docendi,
necesse est corrumpi totam pietatem, and sic misceri omnia ut nihil differat
lux a tenebris, etc. But where in matters of Religion, every man may think that
he lists, and utter what he thinks, and defend what he utters, and publish what
he defends, and gather disciples to what he publishes, this libertas
prophetandi, this liberty, or licentiousness rather of prophesying (alas
poor England!) must needs bane the Church, and bring in confusion. God
therefore here gives us to know, that a Church cannot stand, unless false
teachers be forbidden to turn the truth into a lie, and to prate at their
pleasure against the word of God: and this, says He, is diligently to be
noted. Videmus enim ut hodie nebulones quidam, etc. For we see how at this day,
certain vile persons take it up for a principle, that the Church is not free,
unless every man may be suffered to preach, or broach what he pleases: and
that it is greatest cruelty to punish an heretic, and not to give him leave to
blaspheme the truth. But the Prophet here shows, that the Church of God
cannot be kept in pure state, nor stand entire and safe, unless the rashness
and impudency of such be restrained, as dare pervert sound and sincere
doctrine. Thus He.

Verse 3. And it shall come to pass that when any shall yet prophesie] Here
the Prophet shows how God will effect the former promise. He will first give
unto his people a spirit of judgment, and then a spirit of burning, as Esaias
4.4. so that they shall be able to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. 2
Pet. 2.17
and not be led away with the error of the wicked, to fall from their own
steadfastness. they shall also be adeo percici zelo, so carried on by a zeal of
Gods glory, and so blessedly blown up, as I may so say, in his cause, that they
shall fall upon their dearest relations in this case, and labor to bring their
own children to condign punishment, according to the Law of God in that behalf
provided, Deuteronomy. 13.8, 9. Neither let any object here, Ob. Sol.
that this is Old Testament: we find no such thing in the Gospel. For the
Prophet here speaks of the times of the Gospel ( chap. 12.10.) and of the
kingdom of Christ. Sequitur ergo, says Mr. Calvin here well and worthily, non
modo legem illam fuisse Judaeis positam, quemadmedum nugantur fanatici hemines,
qui vellent hodie sibi permitti orbis turbandi licentiam: sed extenditur ad nos
etiam eadem lex. It follows therefore, that that Law Deuteronomy. 13.9. was not made
for the Jews only (as some brainsick people conceit it, who would fain get
leave to trouble the world with their fopperies) but the same law extends it
self even to us. For if at this day thieves, and witches, and adulterers, etc.
are held worthy of punishment: how much more are heretics, seducers,
blasphemers, who poison men's souls, rob God of his glory, confound the whole
order of the Church, etc. See Rom 13.4. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and hold to that old
Rule, Non distinguendum, ubi scriptura non distinguit, Men must not
distinguish, where the scripture does not.

that his father] In whose heart there is naturally an Ocean of love to his own
child, as we see in David toward Absalom, in old Andronicus the Greek Emperor,
in our William the Conqueror, and Maud his wife toward their unnatural son
Robert Curtuoise, whom she maintained out of her own coffers, in his quarrel
for Normandy: which the king her husband knew, Speed. 452.
and took as a cause rather of displeasure then of hatred; as proceeding from
motherly indulgence for advancing their son.

that begat him] This is twice here repeated for honors sake to these zelots;
who forgot all natural and carnal respects for the vindication of Gods glory,
and his sincere service. See Mat. 10.37. with the Note there.

thou shall not live] sc. to do more mischief, and to draw more souls to the
devil, Non Catilinae te genui sed patriae, said Aulus Fulvius, when he slew
his, own son taken in Catalines conspiracy: I begat thee not for Catiline,
but for thy country. More to be commended a great deal then Philip that bloody
king of Spain, who said openly, that he had rather have no subjects, then
Lutheran subjects; that he would not leave a Lutheran in his dominions; that if
he thought his shirt smelt of that heresy, he would tear it from his own back:
And out of a blind zeal he suffered his eldest son Charles to be murdered by
the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favor our profession. For which
noble exploit, that mouth of blasphemy, Hieron. Catina.
the Pope, gave him this commendation, Non pepercit filio suo, sed dedit pro
nobis. He spared not his own son but gave hm up for us. O horrible.

for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord] Lies in hypocrisy, doctrines
of devils, 1 Timothy 4.12 Rev. 2.24
depths of Satan, that artificer of lies, and father of them, Joh. 8.44. which
yet he would fain father, and fasten upon the God of Amen, or of truth, as he
is called, Psalm. 31.5. like as varlets beget bastards, and lay them at honest
men's doors to be kept; Thou speak lies in the name of the Lord. This is to
substitute the devil in the place of God, or to transform God, so as that he
should nothing differ from the devil. No wonder therefore, though he that break
the least commandment, and teach men so, Mat. 5.19
be called least in the kingdom of heaven: especially if he pretend Gods
authority for it, as the false Prophets of old, and the Swenckfeldien heretics
alate entitle themselves, The Confessors of the glory of Christ. For this is
the highest indignity, or rather contumely, that can be put upon God: It is a
more detestable evil, then to kill an innocent man; yea to commit parricide, or
treason. Imo quaecunque poterunt numerare scelera non pervenient od hoc crimen,
says Calvin upon the text. Let Sectaries and Seducers look to it, those
harmless, hornlesse creatures, as they would be accounted.

shall thrust him thorough when he prophesieth] As Phineas did that stinking
couple, in the flagrancie of their lust, Number. 25.8. and as Levi, in like case,
consecrated himself to the Lord, even every man upon his son, and upon his
brother, Exodus 32.29. He said unto his father and mother (when Gods glory
required it) I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor
know his own children, Deuteronomy. 33.9. All natural relations and self-respects
should be drowned in the glory of God, and the good of our own and other men's
souls. They should be even swallowed up thereby, as the fuel is by the fire,
and as the sorcerers serpents were by Moses serpent, or the fat kine by the
lean.

Verse 4. The Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision] Of their
Midianitish dreams, which they had first dreamed, and then told it for gospel
to their fond neighbors. They shall be so clearly convinced, that they shall
blush and bleed to think how they have been besotted, how many souls they have
murdered, how often they have even stradled over hell-mouth, and yet have been
preserved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 12. See the Note. This makes them shame, and shent
themselves in the presence of God and his people, Ezra 9.6
saying, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God:
for our imquities are increased over our head, and our guilt is grown up to the
heavens. This was fulfilled in those Scribes and Pharisees that afterward
became believers, and said with Saint Paul, Beware of the concision. For we are
the circumcision, Philip. 3.2, 3
which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
considence in the slesh. Luther revolted from the Popish religion which he had
held and maintained, taking it for an honor to be called Apostate by them;
that is, as he interpreted it, One that had fallen off from the devil.
Bugenhagius when he first read Luthers book de captivitate Babylonica,
pronounced it to be the most pestilent piece that ever was published. Qui fidem
diabolo datam uon servavit.
But afterward, when he had better considered, he grew ashamed of that rash
censure, and protested that Luther only was in the right; and all that held
not the same that he did, were utterly deceived. Latimer was of the like mind
after that he had once heard Bilneys confession. Vergerius after he had read
Luthers books with purpose to confute them. Denckius, and Hetserus, two great
Anabaptists in Germany, retracted their former false doctrines, and repented of
their licentious and abominable practices. S^ultet. Annal.
the former of them, being converted by Occolampadius, grew ashamed of his
pretended visions, and died piously at Basile. The later was beheaded at
Constance for his multiplied adulteries: Ibid.
which first he sought to defend by Scripture, but afterward died very
penitently, confesting his former filthinesses, giving glory to God, and taking
shame to himself. These two were learned men, well skilled in the Hebrew: and
had joined their forces, in translating the Prophets into the Dutch tongue.
But, oh how few such as these, and of that sort of people shall a man meet with
now-adayes? Copp indeed that Arch-Ranter, Venereus ille furcifer, and Cleri
dehonestamentum, is said to have newly set forth his Recantation, which I have
not yet seen, and therefore cannot tell what to say to it. Only I wish he
deal not as Bernard Rotman that first Anabaptist, and Islebius Agricola that
first Antinomian did in Germany: who both of them having condemned their own
errors, and recanted them in a public Auditory, printing their revocation:
Sleidan. Horndorf.
yet afterward they relapsed into the same errors, and stoutly stood to them,
when Luther was dead, and more Liberty was afforded. So hard a thing it is to
get poison out, when once swallowed down; and having once said yea to the
devil, though but in a little, to say him nay again, when a man pleases: such
a man especially quem puduit non fuisse impudentem, Augustine. 2 These. 2.12.
who has gloried in his shame, and taken pleasure in his unrighteousness: qui
noluit solita peccare, as Seneca says of some in his time, that is, none of
the ordinary sort of sinners, but has sought to out-sin others, as unhappy
boys strive who shall go furthest in the dirt.

I will not say but such, by the almighty power of God, may be reclaimed, and
made to see that there is no fruit to be had of those errors and enormities
whereof they are now ashamed, Romans 6.21, 22
since the end of those things (in the desert of them) is death. But now being
made free from sin, and become servants to God, they will have very great cause
to be thankful to God for the cure: since Jealousy, Frensy, and Heresy, are
held hardly curable, the leprosy in the head concludes a man utterly unclean,
and excludes him the camp: Heresy is by the Apostle compared to a precipice
vortex or whirle-poole, that first turns a man round, and then sucks him in:
And by others to the Sirens banks covered with dead men's bones, (...) Heb.
12.9.
to Goodwins sands that swallow up all ships that come near them, or to the
Harlots house whence few or none return alive Pro. 7.26, 27.

Verse 5. But he shall say, I am no Prophet] (...) I am no Monk, no Clerk, I am
not book-learned was the ignorant man's, plea in Chrysostomes time, and so it is
still to this day; though it serves not his turn. But here the like speech is
taken up for a better purpose. Hoc et enim principium est resipiscentiae, says
Calvin here. Here begins their repentance, viz. in a free acknowledgement of
their ignorance and utter unfi^nesse for the office they had usurped. Si
ventribene, si lateri. Horat.


I am no prophet] (as for self respects that my belly might be filled, and my
back fitted, I sinfully took upon me to be one) but I am an husbandman: and can
better hold the plow then handle a text, feed and follow a flock of sheep, then
feed the flock of God (that have golden fleeces, precious souls) taking the
oversight thereof, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. 1 Pet. 5.2.


for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth] q.d. Shephardy and husbandry I
have been ever trained up to, and can better therefore skill of then of
Preaching, which is certainly Ars artium and scientia scientiarum, the Art of
Arts, the science of sciences as One said. Whereunto Melancthon. adds that it
is the misery of miseries. And of the same mind was his Colleague Luther, when
he said, An householders pains is great, a Magistrates greater, but a Ministers
greatest of all: and afterward added, that if it were lawful for him to leave
his calling, he could with more ease and pleasure dig for his living, or do any
other hard labor, then undergo a Pastoral charge. The mystery thereof is not
an idle-mans occupation, an easy trade, as some fondly conceit. The sweat of
the brow is nothing to that of the brain: besides dangers on every hand for the
works sake, and armies of cares that give neither rest nor respit, (...) 2 Cor.
11.25. agmen subinde irruens. Illyr.
but are ready to overwhelme a man. This made Luther affirm that a Minister
labors more in a day many times then a husbandman does in a month. Let no man
therefore, in taking up the ministry, dream of a delicacy: Neither let
slow-bellies either invade it, or hold it (as popish asses and some impudent
Alastores now-adayes do) to pick a living out of it. It was an honest complaint
of a Popish writer, we, says He, handle the scripture tantum ut nos pascat and
vestiat, only that it may feed us and cloth us. And Cardinal Cajetan not
without cause cries out, Com in Mat. 5.
that those amongst them that should have been the salt of the earth had lost
their savor: and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and
revenues of the Church. Now for such as these that serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies, that like body-lice live upon other men's sweat,
or like rats and mice, do no more but devour victuals and run squeaking up and
down; good is the counsel of the Apostle, Let him that stole steal no more:
but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. let him earne it before he
eat it 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. This is hard to persuade those Abby-lubbers that live at
ease in cloisters, feeding on the fat and drinking of the sweet: and those
Idoll-shepheards that feed themselves and not the flock. O Monachi vestri
stomachi. Erasmus truly told the Electour of Saxony, that Luther, Scultet:
Anna. page 52.
by meddling with the Popes tripple crown, and with the Monks ^^t paunches, had
procured himself so great ill will amongst them. One of them brake out in a
sermon into these angry words: If I had Luther here, I would tear out his
throat with my teeth; Act. and Mon.
and then make no doubt with the same bloody teeth to eat my maker at the
Eucharist. How much better were it for such false prophets with quietness to
work and eat their own bread 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. then to drink the blood of other
men with their lives (as David spoke in another case) yea with their souls
which perish by their insufficiency and gastrimargy? Sed venture non habet
aures. 1 Chr. 11.19.
But the belly has no ears. Ease flayeth the foolish. Non minus difficulter a
deliciis abstrahimur, quam canis ab uncto corio: Among other scaudals and lets
of the Jews conversion this is not the least, that they must quit their Goods
to the Christians? Spec. Europ.
And the reason is, for that in baptism they renounce the devil, and all his
works, part whereof (say the Papists amongst whom they live) are the Jews
goods; being gotten either of themselves or of their Ancestors by usury. Now
this is such cold comfort to men of their metal, that they have little mind
to turn Christian. And as little doubtless have such as with these in the
text, have got their living by lying: and through covetousness with fained
words made merchandise or prize of men's precious souls, to return to the hard
labor of husbandry or any other lawful but painful employment. Yet this was
done both in Wicklifes days by many Friars that fell to him, and embraced his
opinions: and in the reformation by Luther; many Monks and Nuns betook
themselves to honest trades; renouncing their Popish vows and orders; yea
Scultetus reports that at Aushborough in Germany, by the powerful preaching
of Dr. John Speiser Ann. 1523. some harlots forlooke the public stews, and
married to honest men, lived chastely, and were great pains-takers.

Verse 6. And One shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?]
Hierome here supposes the false Prophet crucified for his false doctrine, and
thereupon thus questioned. This is better then that of the Popish Interpreters,
who will needs have it to be meant of Christ, (...) Mat. 27 63. that cozener to
our very faces. Eustath.
and of his wounds on the cross, as a deceiver of the people. Lucian the
Atheist villanously terms him (...) the crucified Cozener. But the Text is
clear, that the person here spoken to, and returning an anser, is the
false-Prophet, now a true Convert; as appears by his fruits which he bears
quick and thick: being like Aarons rod soon changed from a withered stick, into
a flourishing tree. Ashamed he is at heart of his former falsities: and as in
heart, so in habit he is altered: for he will no longer wear a rough garment
(the garb of Prophets in those days) to deceive, as the Cappuchines and other
orders of Friars (or rather Liars) at this day. 2 King. 1.8. Isa. 20.2. Mat.
3.4.
He abrenounceth and abjureth quasi conceptis verbis his former profession of a
Prophet or chief speaker amongst others.

I am no Prophet] But a plain husbandman, or a shepherd: that is all I can
truly pretend to. And lastly, in this verse, having passed thorough the
churches discipline as a seducer, Josh. 7.19.
he shall do, as Ioshuah advised Achan, Give glory to the Lord my son, and
confess thy sin: he shall approve of the Churches severity used for his
correction, though he should go maimed or marked for it, to his dying day. In
point of seducement (says Mr. Cotton, descanting upon this text) if a man upon
conviction shall see the wickedness of his way, and humble his soul before
God, The pouring out of the 7. viuls.^ third vial. 11.
and give satisfaction to the Church and State, where he shall be convinced; on
such conviction and repentance we find liberty to pardon, but yet stigmatize
him. Thus He. But what reason had the Convocation held at Oxford to set a brand
of ignominy upon the cheeks of those outlandish Divines that came to assist
them, because they pleased them not in the point of Priests marriage, which
they defended? Or Bishop Laud for his Stigmata Laudis on renouned Mr. Prinne,
for his constancy to the truth? How much better his predecessors, Stephen
Langton (who crucified that Pseudo-Christ, who showed marks of wounds in his
hands, feet and sides, Anno 1206.) And Odo Severus (who burnt King Edwins
Concubine (whom he most doted on) in the forehead with a hot iron, and banished
her into Ireland, Anno 934, etc.)

Verse 7. Awake O Sword against my Shepheard] A powerful expression, containing
a commission given out to the sword by way of Apostrophe.

Awake] or, up, as the Septuagint: up and about, thou that have long lain locked
up in the scabbard. Thus the sword is of Gods sending; it is bathed in heaven,
Isa. 34.5. Ezekiel. 14.17. Jer. 47.6, 7.] It is he that awakes it, and sets it on
work: he commands it, Am. 9.4. and orders it, Jer. 50.25. Let this patient us
under it, as it did Job, Chap. 1.15, 17, 21. Among Philosophies, the most noted
sect for patience was that of the Stoics, who ascribed all to destiny.

O sword] Framea, which seems to come of (...) (the Septuagints word here) by
putting (...) before (...), or Gl^die, which comes a claae from destruction:
like as the Hebrew word Chereb, from desolating and laying wast. Hence the
sword is said to contemn the rod, Ezekiel. 21.10, 13. that is all lighter and
lesser judgments, which are but its forerunners, and whereof it seems to say,
What does this silly rod do here? Will not-men stoop? Let me come: I Will make
them either bend or break; either yield, or I Will have their blood.

against my shepheard] i.e. says Calvin, against Magistrates and Ministers,
Gods undershepheards and Associates in feeding the flock, Laborers together
with him, 1 Cor. 3.9. But because Christ is the great shepherd, Heb. 13.20.
and the good shepherd, John 10.11. Optimus maximus, that is, Gods fellow-mate,
and yet, suspending his glory, became a man, to seek him out a flock in the
wilderness: and afterward laid down his life for his sheep, John 10.11.
underwent the deadly dint of Gods devouring sword put into the hands of those
men of Gods hand, Psalm. 17.13. who put him to many a little death all his life
long, and at length to that cursed and cruel death of the cross: at which time
the Shepherd was smitten and the sheep scattered, as this Text is most fitly
applied, Matthew. 26.31. therefore I understand it thiefly of Christ, the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, Esaias 53.5.
who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, etc.
And this not by chance, or malice of his enemies only (though they laid upon
him without mercy, nailing him to the tree in the hands and feet, which in all
men are the most sensible parts of the body (as being fullest of nerves and
sinews) but in him much more as being of the sinest temperature and most
exquisite sense) but by the determinate counsel of God, as St. Peter shows
those Kill-Christs, Acts 2.23. and according to the Scriptures, that went
before of him, and foretold all his passion, even to the casting of the dice
upon his clothes, Psalm. 22. and Isai. 53 by the reading of which lively
description of Christ's sufferings in that Chapter, Hoc ego ingenue confiteuor
ait ille, caput illud ad fidem Christime adduxisse.
Johannes Isaac a Jew confesses that he was converted to the faith of Christ.
He is called Gods Shepherd, because God anointed and appointed him to that
Office, putting a charge into his hands, John 10. and 17. that he might tend
them and tender them, and at length return them up again to his heavenly
Father, without loss of any one. He is also called the Man by an excellency,
that matchless man the chief of ten thousand: as his mother is called hagnalma
that famous Virgin, whom all generations are bound to call blessed. He is
Man-God both in one: and is therefore also called Gods-fellow or Mate, as being
Consubstantiall to the Father according to the Godhead, and very near akinne to
him according to the Manhood, by reason of the hypostaticall union of both
natures into one person, the Man Christ Jesus.

Smite the shepheard] that that blessed Fountcin of his Blood (mentioned verse
1.) may be opened, and the flock of God washed, and healed, and satiated, as
the people were, when the Rock was smitten and so set abroach: and as when God
clave a hollow place in the jaw bone of the Ass, so that there came water
thereout, Sampson drank and was revived: And as when the Alabaster-box of
ointment was broke, all the house was filled with a sweet savor. Judge. 15.19.


And the sheep shall be scattered] scattered and scattered; shifting for
themselves, and leaving Christ to the mercy of his enemies, who seized upon
him, as so many Carrion Kites upon a silly Dove. Thomas (who once said come,
let us go dye with him) disappeares and is lost: Peter follows aloof off, but
better he had heen farther off. John (if at least it were he) flies away stark
naked for have: Judas comes nearer to him, but to betray him with a kiss. But
is this thy kindness to thy friend? Christ had indented with the enemy
aforehand for their security, Joh. 18.8. so that they needed not have
retreated so disorderly, and scattered as they did. But the fear of man
brings a snare. Prove. 29.25.
Howbeit man's badnesse cannot break off the course of Christ's goodness. For
though they thus unworthily forsake him, and leave him at the worst (as they
say) yet I will turn my hand, says he, upon the little ones, i.e. I will
recollect my dispersed flock (how little soever either for number, or respect
in the world) and bring back my banished. So soon does it repent the good Lord
concerning his servants. Mich. 7.18. Psalm 136 23.
He remembers not iniquity for ever, says the Prophet, because mercy pleases
him: and again, He remembers us in our low estates: for his mercy endures for
ever. He looked back upon Peter when his mouth was now big swollen with oaths
and execrations, and set him a weeping bitterly. He called for Thomas after his
resurrection, and confirmed his weak faith by a wonderful condescension. He
sealed up his love to them all again, restoring them to their ministerial
employment: and not so much as once upbraiding them with their base
dereliction, but only with their unbelief. Lyra and others sense the Text thus:
I will turn my hand upon the little ones, that is, I will so smite the
Shepherd Christ, that not only the sheep shall be scattered, but the little
lambs also, even the least and lowest Christians shall have their share of
sufferings, shall feel the weight of my hand, shall pledge the Lord Christ in
that cup of afflictions that I have put into his hand; shall be conformed to
the Image of Gods Son, as his co-sufferers, that he may be the first born among
many brethren, Romans 8.29. And this was fulfilled in the persecutions that
followed soon after our Saviors death. Ecclesia haeres crucis, says Luther:
and Persecutio ect Evangelij genius, says Calvin. Persecution is the black
Angel that dogs the Church, the red horse that ^ollows the white at the
heels. All the comfort is, that Gods holy hand has a special stroke in all
those afflictions that are laid upon his faithful people, I will turn mine
hand, etc.

Verse 8. Two parts therein shall be cut off and die] q.d. they shall, they
shall, how strange or incredible soever this sad tidings seem to you: it shall
be even so, take my word for it. Behold the severity of God, Romans 11.22. In the
Greek it is the Resection or Cutting off, as a Surgeon cutteth off proud and
dead flesh. The Just Lord is in the midst thereof: (...).
he will not do iniquity, etc. Zeph. 3.5. Fiat justitia, ruat coelum may seem
to be his Motto. In point of justice he stands not upon multitudes, Psalm. 9.17.
It is all one to him whether against a Nation or against a man only, Job 34.29.
National sins bring national plagues: heinous sins, heavy punishments. In the
universal deluge God swept away all: as if he had blotted out that part of his
title, The Lord, the Lord, gracious, merciful, etc. and had taken up that of
Attilas, Orbis flagellum, The worlds scourge, Sodoms sins were multiplied
above measure: therefore God took them away as he saw good, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50 and
has thrown them out, as St. Jude speaks, for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire. (...). Jude 7.
Herodotus a Heathen Historian says the very same of the destruction of Troy,
viz. that the ruins and rubbish thereof are set forth for an example of that
noted Rule, that God greatly punishes great offenses, and that heinous sins
bring hideous plagues. Here we have two parts of three cut off in the land of
Judea: as it fell out at the last destruction thereof by the Romans: at which
time more then a million of men perished, see Matthew. 24.21. with the Note. And
what think we shall become of Babylon the great? Her sins reach up to heaven,
whereunto they are even glewed and fastened as the word signifies, (...).
Rev. 18.5. therefore she shall be brought down to hell with Capernaum (for
flagitium and flagellum sicu^ acus and filum) therefore shall her plagues come
in one day (to confute their fond conceit of an eternal Empire) death, and
mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly overthrown with fire: for strong
is the Lord God who judges her, full able to effect it, Rev. 18.18:
seem it to Babels brats never so improbable, or impossible. It was never
besieged since it became Papal, but it was taken: whereas before, it was held
invincible. Sin that lies at the bottom, will easily undermine and overturn
the walis, though never so strong built: as the voice from heaven told Phocas
the Murderer. The blood of that innocent Lamb of God lies heavy upon the whole
Nation of the Jews to this day. Their last devastation and present dismal
dispersion is such, as that one of their own Rabines concludes from thence,
that their Mesliah must needs be come: and they must needs suffer so much for
killing him.

but the third shall be left therein] A holy remnant kept for a reserve. Good
husbands cast not all their corn into the oven, but keep some for seed. Esa.
6.13.
But yet in it shall be a tenth, says another Prophet: Es. 17.6.
there shall be 'two or three berries in the top of a trce, four or five in the
outmost branches. Gods Elect are so very few, that the world shall wonder; Esaias
8.18. and even hoot to see Christ's flock so very little, little, 1 Kin. 20.27.
as our Savior speaks, Luke 12.22. as Israel stood like two little flocks of
kids, when the Syrians filled the country. There were but a few names in
Sardis: and many bad in the best Churches: as at Philippi, Chap. 3.18. Christ
wondered at one good Nath. nacl, as rara avis in terris: and when he comes;
shall he find faith? How many (think you) shall be saved in this City? says (
Chrysostom in his fourth sermon to the people at Antioch. It will be a hard
speech to you, but I will speak it: Though there be so many thousands, yet
there cannot be sound an hundred, that shall be saved. And I doubt of them too,
etc. And again in his third Sermon upon the Acts, he breaks out into this
speech, Non arbitror inter sacerdores, multos esse qui salvi siant, I do not
think that there are many, no not among the Ministry, that can be saved, since
many are called, but few are chosen: like as all the people were called
together by Samuel, but Saul only was chosen king. Only the called according to
purpose are elected, and shall be glorisied, Romans 8.28, 29. Christ at last day
will do as Joshuah did to find out who had stolen the Babylonish garment: there
were many brought together, and all to find out one. So, all shall then
appear: out of them a small number deducted, that have heard of Christ. Josh.
7.
Out of them, those that have professed him, and out of them, those that have
professed him, in sincerity, and these will be Mithe mispar, a small few
indeed. They are as a fold in a wide field: as a garden in a wild wast.
Juvenal. P. de exculp.
Hence they are called pearls, which are but few to the number of pibbles:
Jewels which are but little to the lumber: strangers that are nothing so many
as home-dwellers: sons of God, and of the blood royal; and of such there are
but a few to common subjects. Rari quippe boui, says the Poet. And Pauci sunt
qui Philosophantur says UIpian the Lawyer; etc.

Verse 9. And I will bring the third part through the fire] Few they were, but
not faultlesse: they must therefore through the fire, that there they may leave
their dreggs and dross behind them. For Quod ignis cst auro, lima ferro,
ventilabrum truico, lixivium pa^no, sal carni, hoc tribulatio est viro usto,
says Corn. a Lapide upon this Text: that is, what the fire is to the gold, the
file to iron, the fan to wheat, the soap to clothes, the salt to flesh, that
is tribulation sanctified to a righteous man. God is said to have his fire in
Zion, and his surnace in Jerusalem, Esaias 31.9. to carry his through fire and
through water, Psalm. 66.12, from above to send fire into their bones, Lam. 1.13.
to put them to the fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.12. yea he himself is a Refiners fire
unto them, and Fullers soap, Mal. 3.2. (see the Note there.) He knows them to
be right gold, which will endure the seventh fire (Alchymy gold will not so)
and therefore he puts them to it: that the trial of their faith being much more
precious then that of gold that perishes, though tried in the fire, may be
found to praise, and honor, and glory, 1 Pet. 1.7. himself, meanwhile, goes
with them into the fire and pulls them out as a brand, Zech. 3. Non sic
impij, Psalm. 1.
not so the ungodly. True it is, the trial of their works also shall be by
fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 32.3.
and they shall give an account one day with all the world on a light flame
about their ears, 2 Pet. 3.12. Then shall they find, that the law they are
judged by is a fiery law, the tribunal is of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. the Judge a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.28. (...).
his attendants Seraphims, that is, flaming creatures, Heb. 1.7. his pleading
with sinners in fire of flame, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. the place of punishment a lakeof
fire fed with a river of brimstone, Isa. 30.33. a formidable fire it is, fed
with tormenting temper, and kindled by Gods own breath instead of bellows.
Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glimpse of this fearful fire were enough to
make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchoret and Monk, and to
live after the strictest order that can be. Pope Clement the fifth, upon the
death of a Nephew of his and one of his Catamites, sent his Chaplain to a
Conjurer, Jac. Ren. de vit. Pont. 159.
to enquire how it fared with him in the other world. The Conjurer showed him
to the Chaplain lying in a bed of fire in hell; This news so affected the
wretched Pope, that he never held up his head, but ( Nabal-like) died within a
few days after it. But oh what a dreadful shreek gave his guilty soul, to see
it self lanching into an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and to think that it
must swim naked therein for ever.

and will refine them, as silver is resined] This is all the hurt he does them
by the fire; he hides pride from them, Job 33.19, etc. and divides betwixt the
sin which he hates, and the son whom he loves. For by this the iniquity of
Jacob shall be purged: and this is all the fruit, the taking away of their
sin: which they may very well spare, Esaias 27.9
and never hurt themselves. Surely, as one poison is antidotary to another: so
is affliction to sin: when sanctified, it is no more penal, but medicinal;
not a curse, but a cure. As oil of scorpions is good against the biting of
scorpions. As the wine wherein a viper has been drowned cures a leprosy. As
the juice of hemlock (a deadly plant) heals hot corroding ulcers, and asswageth
the inflammation of the eyes: Or, as Rhubarb, though full of choler, does
mightily purge choler. Moses neglected to circumcise his child (as we do our
hearts, it is such a bloody work) till God met him and would have killed him.
David could never see the benesit of affliction, till God by those sharp waters
had cleared up his eyesight. Geheza's leprosy cured him: his white forehead
made him have a whiter soul. Surely, as the fining-pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold, so is affliction to the soul. Corrections of instruction, are
the way of life, Pro. 6.23. But he that refuses correction despises his own
soul, Pro. 15 32. Winds and thunder clear the air (whereof they are the
beesoms, says Ruperius) so do crosses the soul. ^f the outward man decay, the
inward is thereby renewed: and the winter of the one, 2 Cor. 4.16
is the spring of the other. As the viper when he is lashed, casts up his
poison: so does the good soul when afflicted, purge it self from all filth of
flesh and spirit, striving to perfect holiness in the fear of God. These Jews
after they had been in the Babylonish furnace for idolatry, hated and feared
that sin as much as the burnt child dreads the fire. They would die any death
rather then admit an idol. Josephus tells how stoutly they opposed Pilate, and
Petronius, that would would have set up Cesars statue in their Temples,
offering their throats to the swords of the soldiers, rather then they would
endure that idol in Gods house. What God is now doing with them, and for them,
in this long time of their sad desolation and dispersion, who can tell? There
are that think, that after much purging and proving, as here, God will gather a
Church of them to himself: according to that which follows; They shall call
upon my name, and I will hear them, I will say, it is my people, etc. And that
upon their profession of Christ, shall come the sorest time of affliction that
ever was, chap. 14.1, 2. when Gog and Magog with all his troops, and armies
shall compass the beloved city, Rev. 20.8, 9. But the Jews shall get a
glorious Conquest: for God himself from heaven will miraculously fight for
them, verse 3, 4, 5. together with all the holy Angels, the ministers of his
judgments, verse 5. Sure it is, that the Turks fear some such thing as this:
and therefore they cannot abide that any Jew amongst them should turn
Christian. In the year 1528. a certain Jew dwelling in Constantinople became a
good Christian, and was baptized: which the Turks understanding were vehemently
exasperated against him for it; fearing lest his conversion should prove
prejudicial to their Mohammedan religion, and therefore they apprehended and
cruelly murdered him.

and try them as gold is tried] viz. that when I have tried them, they may come
forth as gold, Job 33.10. Hence Gods people fall into manifold temptations,
Jam. 1.2. they fall, they go not into them step by step, but are precipitated,
plunged into them: and not into one of them, or a few, but into manifold
temptations, or trials: yea fiery trials, so afflictions are called, because
thereby God proves what is in his people, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Rev. 2.10. Not to better
his own knowledge of them neither; for he knows all things, and is intimo
nostro intimior nobis, Job. 2.25. Act. 1.24. Heb. 4.12. Artificers perfectly
know the nature and properties of their own works, and shall not God see, Psalm.
94.9, 10. But tentat ut sciat, hoc est, ut scire nos fac^at, August.
he tries us. 1. That he may make discoveries of himself unto us, especially
of his power and goodness: and so get him a name, as Esaias 63.11, 12, 13. 2
Cor. 12.9. Elias would have water poured upon the sacrifices, yea the Altar
covered therewith, that Gods power might the more appear, in consuming it with
fire from heaven, and the people thereupon might cry, Jehovah he is God, 1
King. 18.39.
Jehovah he is God: think the same here. 2. That he may make discoveries of us
to our selves, and to others; who are apt to misjudge and undervalue us: as not
only Satan did, Job chap. 1.9. but even Elihu, also (though otherwise a good
man, and the best of his friends) chap. 34.36. But when they see our holy
carriage under the cross, they can say of us as that Centurion did of our
Savior, Luke 23. Verily this was the Son of God: and as one Culocerius in the
Church History, when he saw the piety and constancy of the Martyrs, he cried
out, Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum, The Christians God is a great God
indeed. But as by afflictions we are made known to others, so to our selves
much more. We are apt either to overvalue, or else to under-value our selves,
till put to the trial: as is to be seen in the history of Saunders and
Pendleton. Hard weather tries what health; wind and storms what sap: withered
leaves soon fall off. Rotten boughs with heavy weights quickly break. Wooden
vessels, set empty to the fire, soon break and leak; not so vessels of gold
and silver. The best divination what men are is at the parting-way, as Ezekiel.
21.21. When the fire comes to green wood, it will appear what is within: when
the pond is empty, what is in the bottom. It is not known what corn will yield,
till it come to the flail: nor what grapes, till it come to the press. Grace
is like the stone Chrysolampis, quem lux celat prodit obscurum, which shine
brightest in the dark. The skill of a Pilot is unknown but in a tempest:
Solinus.
the valor of a Captain, but in a battle: the faithfulness of a wife, but in
an assault. The wicked tried are found to be but reprobate silver: or at best,
but Alchymy-gold, that endures not the seventh fire. They are (...), as
Crocodiles, Chameleons, Bats, Spunges, etc. They murmr when tried, as Psalm.
78.40, 41. Or curse, as Micah's mother, Judge. 17. Or fret, and howl upward, as
Wolves when hunge-rbit, Esaias 8.21. Or faint in the day of affliction, as Saul,
who lay upon the ground like a beast, 1 Samuel 28.20. Or Nabal, who lay in his
bed like a block. Or desert God and his cause, as those Renegado's, Dan. 11.32.
and those in the Palatinate, who fell to Popery as fast as leaves fall off the
trees in Autumn. Many titular Christians amongst us, were, in times of peace,
but as wolves in a cage, but as lions tamed by art: they wanted nothing but
liberty and opportunity to show their wolvish and worrying natures, which now
these late shedding and discriminating times have sufficiently discovered. Have
all these workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up Gods people as they eat
bread, and call not upon God? They shall call upon my name, and I will hear
them. Psalm. 14.4.
No time for hearing of prayers and obtaining of suits like that of affliction.
Those are mollissima fandi Tempora, the time of affliction is the very time of
supplication: then our hearts are largest, then Gods ear is openest. Then the
saints may have any thing for asking, Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15. Thus Lot had Zoar
at his request, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Paul had all the souls in the ship given him, Act.
27. Jacob greatly fearing to be bereft of his Benjamin prayed, God give you
bowels of mercy before the man, Genesis 43.14. He prayed it, and he had it, ver.
30. For Joseph made have: for his bowels did yern upon his brother, etc. God
reserves his best comforts for the worst times: as the feast-maker kept his
best wine till the last, Ioh. 2. as the mother brings forth her conserves and
cordials, when the child sis at sickest, Israel was never so royally provided
for, as in the wilderness. I will bring her into the wilderness and speak to
her heart, Hos. 2.13. As a bone once broken is stronger after setting: and as
lovers are never greater friends then after a falling out: so is it betwixt God
and his people. Affliction exciteth devotion,-as the bellows does the fire, and
excited devotion prevails much, Iam. 5.16.

I will say, It is my people and they shall say, The Lord is my God] by a
gracious compliance they shall with highest estimations, most vigorous
affections and utmost endeavors bestow themselves upon that God that has so
far owned and honored them as tossed rike a covenant with them: the fruits
whereof are sure mercies, compassions that fail not, all the blessings of this
and a better life. A covenant is the collection of many promises; as a
constellation is the collection of many stars: and though it be (in sum) but
one promise, I will be thy God, yet it is such an one as comprehends all: and
is therefore fifteen times, at least, mentioned in scripture. It is the
substance of the Covenant of grace, says Junius: the soul of it, says
Pareus: the head or top of it, says Musculus: Deus meus and omnia, says
Luther, God is mine, all is therefore mine. But then, as God must be our
All-sufficient, so we must be his Altogether: and when he cries out, Who is on
my side, who? One shall say I am the Lords: and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and
surname himself by the name of Israel Esaias 44.5. O it is ablessed sign that
God has chosen us first 1 Ioh. 4.19. when we choose God as Psalm. 73.25.
sincerely avouching him for our God. Sincerity (or Evangelicall perfection) is
the only absolute condition of the Covenant of grace Genesis 17.1. God and the
Saints have ever judged of men by this: Judge me, O Lord, according to mine
integrity, says David, The promises are made to it Psalm. 119.1. Mat. 5.8. Gods
eye is upon it as in David the man after Gods own heart. He blesses the little
that such have, as in Nathanael, Cornelius, the Eunuch. He passes by their
infirmities, as in Asa 1 King. 15.14. and accepts their services
nevertheless. as 2 Chronicles. 30.19, 20.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. BEhold the day of the Lord commeth] Jerusalem had her day, and knew
it not Luke 19.42. (Jerusalem was not Jerusalem: the vision of peace, saw not
the things that belonged to her peace) God therefore will have his day of
vengeance, as she had of visitation. He has his season, his harvest for
judgment Mat. 13.30. and when wickedness is ripe in the field, he will suffer
it to grow no longer, lest it shed and spread: but cuts it up by a just and
seasonable vengeance. These Jews were by their own confession the children of
them which had killed the Prophets: Act. 2 23.
and, by killing the Lord Christ with wicked hands, they had filled up the
measure of their fathers Mat. 23.31, 32. what could therefore the Lord do less
to a nation so incorrigibly flagitious, then bring wrath upon them to the
utmost 1 Thessalonians. 2.16? then send forth his armies and destroy those murderers,
and burn up their cities? When God did this execution here mentioned, is hard
to say: Mat. 22.7.
Whether by Antiochus Epiphanes (or rather Epimanes, as some truly called him,
Act. 26.11. Gal. 1.13.
for that being exceedingly mad against the Jews, he persecuted the Church of
God and wasted it) Or by the Roman spoilers at that last devastation under the
command of Titus. Or by Cosroes the Persian, and Homar the Arabian, who
successively harased and rased Jerusalem, rifling the houses, ravishing the
women, killing whom they pleased, and making the rest pay dear for the very
heads they wore: which servitude lasted till Godfrey of Bullin set them at
liberty: so the Gloss here senseth it. Or lastly by Gog and Magog, that is, by
the great Turk (for Magog is the Scythian nation from whom came the Turks,
Lords of Meshec and Tubal, that is, of Cappadocia and Iberia where they first
began to reign) as is before hinted; I take not upon me to determine. The most
understand it of the last overthrow of the Romans. The Spirit might have an eye
to the Antichristian persecutions of the Orthodox Professors of the Romish
Edomites.

and the spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee] Freely and fearelesly,
none rising up to make them afraid, the vanquished shall be so disabled and
dispirited. Thus the silly doves are glad to save themselves by flight, not
fight; sometimes they sit in their deve-coats, and see their nests destroyed,
and young ones killed, not daring once to rescue or revenge.

Verse 2. For I will gather all nations] The Romans that styled and held
themselves Lords of all nations, and who had levied a mighty army out of all
nations to fight against Jerusalem. See Joseph. lib. 3. belli Iud. chap. 1. and
3. Or Gog and Magog with all his armies and aslociates Ezekiel. 37.4, 5, 6. shall
compass the beloved city Rev. 20.8, 9. See Verse 1. with the Note. Would any
man take the Churches picture? Lec. com.
then let him, says Luther, paint a silly poor maid sitting in a wood or
wilderness, and compassed about with hungry lions, wolves, boares and bears
etc. and in the midst of a great many surious men assaulting her every
moment: Let him give her say I, that of Martial for her Motto.

In me omnis terraeque, aviumque, marisque rapina est. and the city shall be
taken] Non tamen ad exitium, sed ad exercitium. I have forsaken mine house: I
have lest mine heritage (says the Lord Ier. 12.7.) I have given the dearly
beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies. At which times there is
usually, as at Athens when taken by Sylla (...) a bloody butchery.

and the houses risled] As at the sack of Constantinople by the Turks: where
the soldiers are said to have divided money among themselves by whole
hat-fuls: and were therewith so enriched, that it is a proverb amongst them at
this day, if any grow suddenly rich, to say, he has been at the sacking of
Constantinople. Turk. bist. 347
The Emperor had in vain many times with tears requested to have borrowed
money of his covetous subjects, to have been employed in the defense of the
city; Hid. 345.
but they would still swear that they had it not: as men grown poor for want
of trade. Which in few days after, their enemies found in such abundance, that
they wondered at their wealth, and derided their folly, that possessing so much
they would bestow so little in the defense of themselves and their country.

and the women ravished] These are the common calamities of war: in the in the
lawless violence whereof those three commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal: as they are ranked together
in the law, so they are usually violated together, Hence Isa. 13.16. Their
children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes, their houses shall
be spoiled, and their wives ravished. The Irish rebels bound the husband to the
bed-post, whiles they abused his wife before his face. In the time of K. Edward
the third, Donec mulier fatigata spiritum exhalare^. Walsing.
the French soldiers at Winchelsey in Sussex took their lustful turns upon a
beautiful woman in the Church, and at the time of divine service, until they
had turned her out of the world, as a learned man phraseth it.

and half of the city shall go forth into captivity] An evil, an only evil,
threatened Deuteronomy. 28. and sulfilled to the utmost upon this nation, so
shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked, as can hardly be peered or parallelled. I have
noted before, that this their last captivity and dispersion is such, as that
one of their own Rabbines concludes from thence, that their Messiah must needs
be come, and they must needs suffer so much for killing him. They use to say
that there is still an ounce of the golden calf in all their public
calamities. There is another thing lies more heavily upon them to this day,
were they but sensible of it. Let us be sending up, and sighing out for them
that of the Psalmist, O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!
when the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice,
and Israel shall be glad. Psa. 14.7.

and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city] A remnant
shall be reserved as it were for royal use: whether a third part as chap.
13.8. or an half, as here, it is not much material: in numeris non est anxie
laborandum, says Calvin here; for the direct number, it is neither here nor
there as we say. God shall reserve unto himself a set and select number. He who
comfort those that are cast down, speaks this to his, for encouragement.
The Church may be shaken, not shivered: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast
down, but not destroyed 2 Cor. 4.9.

Verse 3. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations] Some
read it, Among those nations: He shall be the Archistrategus, the Commander in
chief of those Armies, which he has brought together against Jerusalem, to
revenge upon her the quarrel of his Covenant. But I like the other way better:
because it is purposely spoken for the comfort of Saints in evil times. When
therefore there is dignus vindice nodus, and periculum par animo Alexandri, as
he was wont to say, when it is time for God to arise, that his enemies may be
scattered, and those that hate him, fly before him; he will arise and have
mercy upon Zion; he will awake as in the days of old: he will come forth from
his holy place to the relcue of his praying people. There brake he the arrows
of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle, Selab. Psalm. 76.3, 4.
There he appeared more glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey.
There he did, and there he will: for this is a common and current
Scripture-medium. Esaias 10.
God shall fight against those nations, the very rod of his wrath: which after
he has worn to the stump, he will cast it into the fire. The wicked are called
Gods sword Psalm. 17.13. But it will fall out with them, as with that sword
which Hector gave Ajax; which so long as he used against his enemies, served
for help and defense: but after he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse
beasts, it turned into his own bowels.

as when he fought in the day of battel] with his own bare hand as it were,
Esaias 52.10. and in a miraculous manner, as he did for Israel at the red sea,
for Joshua, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah etc. and as he shall do at that last great
battle against Antichrist and his Adherents Rev. 20.8, 9, 10. which is here
(happily) pointed at. Let the Lord but arise only and his enemies shall be
scattered: but if he once take hold of shield and buckler, (for defense) he
draw out the spear and sword (those weapons of offense) and appear as a man of
war Exodus 15.3. or as a Lord and Victour of wars (so the Chaldee there has
it) he will charge thorough and thorough, he will burn them together Esaias 27.4.
and in the same place 2 Samuel 23.7.

Verse 4. And his fcet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives] that
is, he shall so put forth his power for defense of his people, as if he did
visibly appear amongst them, and beheld the fight from the top of a mountain:
like as Zerxes used to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking on his army
when in fight, to encourage them, and to send out orders. From this Mount it
was, that God departed after many former removes, from Jerusalem Ezech. 11.23.
And what wonder, when as Har Hamischa the mount of Unction was become Har
Hamaschith the mount of Corruption 2 King. 23.13? the bold lews having let up
their Idol in this mount Olivet, even in the sight of the Lord: so that he
never looked out of the Sanctuary, John 18. Mat. 26.30.
but he beheld that vile hill of abominations. From this mount it was that our
Lord Christ ascended into heaven, Act. 1.11. There he was apprehended by the
Jews: there therefore it is prophesied that he shall stand against them by the
Romans, say some, out of Josep. de Bello Jud. lib. 6. cap. 3. And that when
these things should come to pasle the Jews might know that their utter
destruction was near at hand. So God showed unto the Ninivites on what side
their city should be taken: and what at that time should be the power and the
attempts of the enemy against them, Nah. 2. and 3. and yet neither of these
repented for all this. Others (more probably) hold that here is promised such a
powerful presence of God for the relief of his people, as shall far exceed
the glory that appeared at the promulgation of the law, when the mountains
skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs: Psalm. 114.6. Heb. 12.21.
so terrible also was the sight, that Moscs said, I exceedingly fear and quake.
I also see and tremble at the resemblance (said an holy man) betwixt that
giving of the law, and the requiring of it at the last day. In the one Mount
Sinai only was on a flame: all the world shall be so in the other. To the One,
Moses (that climbed up that hill, and alone saw it) says, God came with ten
thousand of his Saints. In the other, thousand thousands shall minister to him,
and ten thousand thousands shall stand before him. Hereunto some refer that
obscure passage in the next verse, The Lord my God shall come, and all the
Saints with thee: and that at the day of judgment Christ shall descend with
all his Angels into mount Olivet, which hangs over the valley of Jehoshaphar,
that there he may plead with all nations, for his people, and for his heritage
Isracl, whom they have scattered, and parted their land Joel. 3.2. Further they
say, that mount Olivet shall then be shaken with a very great earthquake: so
that it shall cleave in the midst, and leave a very great valley: it shall
enlarge the valley of Iehosaphat, that it may be able to receive those that are
there to be judged by Christ. Thus Lessius, Sa, a Costa, a Lapide, who also
cites for his purpose Clemens Romanus lib. 7. Constit. Ap. cap. 33. speaking
thus, Mons ipse Oliveti gloriae venientis cedet and in quaetuor parts
dissectus longissime diffugiel, ut tribunali judicis theatrum totius orbis
assistat. i. e. Mount Olivet shall give place to the glory of Christ when he
comes; and being clest into four parts, it shall fly far afonder, to the
end that the theater of the whole world may stand before the tribunal of the
Judge. Thus He. and surely the following verses, 6, 7, 8, etc. seem to favor
this interpretation, and to have relation to the last Day. But in Prophesies
not yet fulfilled (as this may be one) it is better and more sure to expect and
stay for the explication by the event, then to give it without any certain
ground.

Verse 5. And ye shall slay to the valley of the mount ains] Or, ye shall flee
the valley of the mountains, sc. of mount Olivet, made by God ( verse 4.) by
whom the Romans were set awork to garrison Mount Olivet against the Jews: and,
Joseph. lib. 6. cap 13.
by digging down a great part of it, to fill up the brook Cedron or the
town-ditch, and to bring a wall (wherewith they compassed about the whole city)
through the midst of this mount: whereby the city was greatly pressed, and
much annoyed. This Mountain ye shall flee (as many of you as are Azal; that is
separated: confer Exodus 24.11. Esaias 4^.4.) and repair to Pella, a place of rest
provided for you. Not without some perturbation of spirit (though causeless)
as in common calamities it falls out; and the like shall befall the very
Elect also at the last day, till they have recollected themselves, till they
remember that now their redemption draws nigh.

And ye shall flec] sc. with utmost have and fright j death being that terrible
of terribles, as the Philosopher calls it, Natures slaughterman, Hells
Purveyour, etc.

like as ye fled from before the earthquake] which might be as sad and as
sudden as that at Pleures in Rhetia, Anno 1618. Aug. 25. Alst. Chronol.
the whole town was overcovered with with a mountain, which with its most
swift motion oppressed 1500. people.

in the days of Vzzaah king of Juda] Whether this earthquake fell out just at
that instant time when Vzzaah offered incense, and was therefore smitten with
leprosy (as the lewish Doctors affirm) i have not to say. But of the horror of
it (besides Am. 1.1. Joscphus relates, that a mountain toward the West cleft
in sunder and removed from its proper place the space of four furlongs, or half
a mile: and farther it had proceeded, had not a great mountain toward the East
stayed its course. Camden reports the like hereunto to have fallen out in
Heresord hire, Anno 1571. Call. Martij 12. about six of the clock in the
evening, a great hill lifted up it self with a huge noise, and ascending into
an higer place, carried along with it trees, Camd. Britan.
flocks of cattle, sheep-coates, walked about from Saturday night till Monday
noon, overturned a certain Chapel that stood in its way, etc. This kind of
earthquake Philosophers call Brasmatia.

and the Lord my God shall come] q. d. Let scoffers doubt and deride, saying,
where is the promise of his coming? My God will effect with his hand what he
has spoken with his mouth, he will, he will, Habac. 2.3. There is an Emphasis
in the word My (q.d. The God whose I am, yea (...) wholly his, as Aristotle
says of a servant) and another in the following Apostrophe.

and all the saints with thee] The Prophet in an holy indignation at his
hearers obstinacy and untractablenesse, turns him thus to God: like as does old
Jacob, Genesis 49.18. and our blessed Savior tired out with the peoples
perverseness, Mat. 11.25, 26. See the Note on both places.

Verse 6. And it shall come to pass in that day] that is, says Diod uc, after
the destruction of Antichrist shall the son of God come in, who shall bring the
Church into its glory: where, without any vicissitude or variation of day and
night, of calamity and prosperity, of knowledge and ignorance, it shall enjoy
eternal light by the sight of God, Isai. 16.19, 20. Rev. 21.23. and 22.5. Thus
he. Betwixt this fall of Antichrist and the Consummation of all, some place the
full and final restoration of the Jews, and make this a description of that
glorious Church they shall then erect. There shall be no darkness, but
perpetual light. It shall not be says our Prophet here, sometime clear,
sometimes mistie, (variable and uncertain weather, now fair, now foul) but one
day, not of day and night: for in the evening when night is wont to come it
shall be light: as if he should say, it shall be always day and no night (...)
a nightlesse day, a morning without clouds, a clear shining after rain, as
David in another case, 2 Samuel 22.4. Heres^ath d^ re rust.
and as^vith the Hyperborians the whole half year is said to be but one
continuate day; so that they sow and reap in a day.

Verse 7. Which shall be known to the Lord] And that should suffice us, without
further curious enquiries, Calvin.
de re nobis and toti mundo abscondita, concerning the set times and the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power, Act. 1.7. The Muscovites
use to say in a dark point, in a difficult question, God and our great Duke
know all this; Heyl. Geor:
And in other talk, all we enjoy health, and life, and all from our great Duke:
therefore let us leave all to him. hold not we much more to God? Time has
already confuted those learned men, who from Dan. 12.11. pitched their
calculation for the Jews restoration upon the year 1650. Those that shall
live a few years longer shall see what will become of their confidence? who
have undertaken to prove out of Daniel and the Revelation, Clavis Apocalypt p.
134.136.
that the Prophetical numbers come to an end with the year of our Lord 1655.
because then the seventh Trumpet shall sound; and then the six thousand years
from the Creation of the world do expire as they compute.

Verse 8. Living waters shall go out from Jerusalem] i.e. Abundance of
spiritual graces frequently in scripture compared to waters, for their
cooling, cleansing, quick ning property, Isai. 44.3. Ezekiel; 36.25. and 47.1.
John 7.38.. And of these waters without all doubt, our baptism ordained of God
is a figure and sacrament. Living waters they are called: that is running as a
Spring, not standing as a poole. The godly esteem of life by that stirring
they find in their souls, Isa. 38.15, 16. In all these things is the life of my
spirit: else they lament as over a dead soul. "O live, D. H^rris.
live (says a Reverend man) live quickly, live much, live long. Many live more
in a day then others in a year: for life consists in action: and so much
every man lives, as he acts graciously. Up therefore and be doing something
of worth: whereof ye may testify that ye have lived. And for this, get a
principle of life, the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, and then, if ye
live in the Spirit, y^^hall also walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. and not fulfill
the lusts of the siesh, verse 16. The waters of the sea, though by their
natural course they follow the center, yet by obedience to the Moon they are
subject to her motion; and so turn, and return, ebb and flow, and are kept in
continual motion, to keep them from corruption: so those that are spiritual,
though naturally they are carried downward, and the best that of themselves
they can do is but dead work: Yet so far as they are spiritualized,
heavenlized, they are acting for God, and all their deeds are wrought in him,
John 3.21. It is their great care to wear out, not rust out: to burn out, not
to be blown out: yea to flame out, not to smother out: to serve out their
generation, as David did not to idle it out: to live their utmost, and not (as
Job. 27.15. with 23.) to be buried, before half dead.

in summer and winter shall it be] such is the perennity and perpetuity of true
grace: it ever flows -- more perennis aquae. As it is not like the River
Araris of which Caesar says, C^s de bell. Gal. l. 1.
that it cannot with eyes be discerned whether it flow forward or backward (so
slow and still is its motion:) so neither is it like the brook Cherith, that
dried up before the Prophet, 1 Kin. 17.7.
because there had been no rain in the Land: or like the River Novanus in
Lombardy which (says Pliny) at every Midsomer solstice swells and runs
over the banks; but at mid-winter, is clean dry. But as the waters of the
Sanctuary, Lib. 2. cap. 130
Ezekiel. 47.4, etc. And as the poople of Siloe, which served all Jerusalem, and
was for every use to the citizens: or Hezakiah's watercourses, 2 Kin. 20.20.
Neh. 3.15, 16. whereunto some think that the Prophet here alludeth. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers
of living waters. But this he spoke (says the Evangelist) of the spirit which
they that believe on him should receive, John 7.38, 39.

Verse 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the carth] At the sounding of the
seventh Angel, the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ: and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15, 17.
Cosmographers tell us, that if we divide all the known world into thirty parts,
the Heathens part is as nineteen of this thirty: the Mahometans as six, the
Christians as five only. And of those that profess the name of Christ, three
parts at least of those five are possessed by Idolatrous Papists; who say they
believe in one only true God, but indeed set up many He-saints and She-saints,
whom they adore with divine worship: and therein are no better then Pagans.
Hence they are called Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. and are said to worship Devils, R^v.
9.20 with 1 Cor. 10.20. Cardinal Bombus says of their Saint Franci^, that he
was in numcrum Deorum ab^ Ecclesia Romans relatus. At Ruremund in Gelderland, a
play was acted by the Jesuits, In Hist. Ven.
Anno Dom. 1622. under the title of the Apotheosis of St. Ignatius the founder
of that Order. In the year 610. Boniface the fourth ordained the feast of
All Saints, after that he had obtained of the Emperor the Idol-temple at Rome
called the Pantheon; Jac. Ren. de vit. Pont. 309.
wherein he placed the Virgin Mary in the room of Cybcle the Mother of the
Heathen Gods. Now the time is yet to come (and oh that it were come!) that, all
false worship laid aside and abandoned, the fullness of the Gentiles shall be
brought in: and from the Jews (as some gather from this Text compared with
others) shall the Gospel go out to all Nations of the world, Isay. 2.3. who
with one consent shall submit themselves to Christ. Ashur and Egypt, all those
large and vast Countries, the whole tract of the East and of the South shall
embrace the faith of Christ and be converted, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. and 27.12,
13. Mich. 7.11, 12. Psalm. 68 31. and 72.9, 10, 11. Rev. 21.14. O dieculam
illam! Neither need we think it incredible: God can hiss for them and fetch
them in 'suddenly: he can cause a Nation to conceive and bring forth in one
day, Esaias 66.8, 9. A Text that Cardinal Poole in a letter to Pope Julius the
third abused: by applying it to the bringing in of Popery again so universally
and suddenly in Queen Mary's days.

shall there be one Lord] Be the Gods of the Heathen good-fellows says One,
the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his glory with another. Be it
that to Pagans and Papagans there are Gods many and Lords many: to us there is
but one God, and but one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
As for all others, say we of them, as that Heathen once did, Comemno minutos
istos Deos modo Jovem propitium habeam, I care not for those petty-deities, so
long as Jehovah favors me. Hear O Israel (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.4.) Jehovah
thy God, Jehovah is one. The Hebrew word there used for One has Daleth the
last letter (which also stands in number for ^our) extraordinary great in the
Original: to signify say the Jew-Doctors, that this one God shall be
worshipped in the four corners of the earth.

and his Name one] that is, One way of worship; all Superstitions being
abolished, see Mich. 4.5. Or, his Name, that is, his glory as Psalm. 8.1. his
transcendent excellency shall be supereminent: He shall have a name above all
names, that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow. Thus the word Name is used
both in Divine and Humane Authors, Genesis 6.14. Men of Name, that is, of Renown:
so Numb. 1.16. and 16.2. Acts 1.15. the number of Names, that is, of the
chiestaines that were fit to act in the Election. Contrary whereunto is men
without name, Job 30.8. men written in the earth, Jer. 17.30. shrouded in the
sheet of shame, -- ingloria vita recedit.
and whose happiness it is to be forgotten in the City, Eccles. 8.10. So the
Poets call Eminent and famous men Nomina, as Ovid does Augustus: Vive tibi, and
long No nina magna fuge.

And speaking of some famous person he says Claros inter habens nomina clara
viros.

Verse. 10. All the land shall be turned as a plain.] Or, shall be compassed about
as a plain, ut aquore plano, so the Tigurine translation. Godshal enlarge the
bounds of his Church; he shall lay all level, that people may come in amain
from all parts. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough-wayes
smooth, Luke 3.5. The wilderness, and the folitary place shall be glad for
them, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose: It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall
be given unto it; the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the
glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God, Esa. 35.1, 2. The Prophet
here shows that all the land shall be inhabited from one end unto another;
From Geba the North-confine, to Rimmon, the South-^order, Josh. 15.32, 57. And
from Benjamins gate unto the place of the first (or old) gate, Neh. 3.6. which
stood Westward, unto the corner gate (See 2 Chronicles. 26.9. and 25.23.) or the
gate that looks Eastward. The limits of the Church shall be greatly enlarged;
the rough and rugged mountains being made as the smooth and pleasant champions.
The saithful shall pass from Geba to Rimmon, Cant. 4.6
from the mountains of Myrrh and hills of Frankincense, to the Pomgranates (for
so Rimmon signifies, and from the plenty of that fruit there, Masius in Josh.
19.13.
this place seems to have taken its name) that is, from Humiliation and
Supplication for pardon and power against corruption, to Love and good Works,
looking up, and pressing hard toward the high prize proposed unto them; as the
many grains within the case of the Pomgranate do point, and as it were all look
up together unto the crown or circle that is without, upon the head of it. To
the kings wine-presses] which were on the West Side, where the so rmer two
half-compasses did meet to make up a whole compass. Certain it is, that
Jerusalem was a very large and spacious city, comprehending thirty furlongs at
least, say those that have written of it. There was in it the upper and the
nether town, Vide typ. Jerosol. ap. Adricho.
whence it is called, Iie-rushalaiim in the dual. There was afterward the old
town and the new, called Boretha, or Caenopolis. But Ezech. 40.41, 42. etc. God
shows the Prophet a new Temple bigger then all the old Jerusalem put all
together: and a new Jerusalem bigger then all the land of Canaan; by these very
dimensions showing, that these things cannot be understood but spiritually. And
the new Jerusalem in the Revelation as it lies four square, looking every way
to the four corners of the earth (like as Constantinople does, Turk. Hist.
which is theresore said to be a city fatally founded to command) so the
measure of it is twelve thousand furlongs: Rev. 21.16.
which (according to some) make no less then 1500 miles.

Verse. 11. And men shall dwell in it.] Heb. They shall dwell in it, sc.
Multitudes of men. The new Jerusalem, the Church gathered by the preaching of
the Gospel shall not be thinly inhabited, as the wilderness of Judea was: it
shall not lie waste for want of people, as diverse parts of Turkey do. It shall
not need to call in the country, Neh. 11
as in Nehemiahs days, to replenish it: but it shall be full thrust as an hive
is with bees, where they hang out on heaps through want of room within or as
Jerusalem was wont to be at the three solemn feasts; or lastly, as the Temple
was at those feasts where the people were so crowded, that they were glad to
stand and pray, for kneel or bow they could not. See Esaias 51.3. Jer. 31 38, 39,
40. Obad. 19.20. And there shall be no more utter destruction.] Heb. Cherem,
which the vulgar Interpreter renders, Anathema; There shall be no more curse,
no execrable or accursed thing; no casting out by excommunication; no cause to
do so. (See the same, Rev. 22.3. No Canaanite in the Lords house, as verse 21.
Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger pass through her any
more, Joel 3.17. such shall be her sanctity. Others expound it of her safety
and security (as in the following words, Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.
See the like, Jer. 23.6. and 33.16. In those days shall ludah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called,
Jehovah tsidkenu, The Lord our righteousness. A stately name indeed, and that
which carries safety in the front of it. In Ezekiel the Church is called,
I^hovah Shamma, The Lord is there: and the Psalmist gives the notation, and
this note upon it, God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God shall
help her, and that right early. (...). Mat. 1.21 Psalm. 130.8
But the Lord our righteousness is a more August name. It is Christ's own name:
and imports that Christ will save his people from their sins (which would lay
them naked to the wrath of God, and rage of enemies) he will redeem Israel from
all his iniquities, and then he need not fear what man can do unto him. It was
said of Achilles, that he was Styge armatus: But every child of the Church is,
Coelo, Christo, Deo armatus: he has the peace of God within him, and the power
of God without him; and therefore cannot but be safe as in a tower of brass, or
town of war. Ps. 90.1.

Verse 12. And this shall be the plague where with the Lord will smite, etc] The
precedent promises that were so great and glorious, the Prophet does now
farther enlarge, and illustrate in the following verses: and first the conquest
of the enemies, verse 12, 13, 14, 15. Next, the profession of Christ among all
nations of the world, verse 16, 17, 18, 19. And lastly, the sanctity of the
Church, verse 20, 21. The conquest of the enemies is set forth, First by Gods
strange judgments upon them, verse 12. Secondly, By the means, both they shall
dispatch one another; and Judah shall fight bravely against them, verse 13, and
14. Thirdly, their wealth and substance shall become a prey, verse 14. Fourthly,
their horses of service, and all the beasts they bring with them shall be as
strangely plagued as the men themselves, verse 15. That have fought against
Jerusalem.] God will go forth and fight against them, verse 2 so that they
shall wish they had never meddled. Haec erit plaga qua plagabit. God has a
mighty hand, Iam. 4.9. and it is a fearful thing to fall into it, Heb. 10.31.
for, who knows the power of his wrath? Psalm. 90.11. One stroke of this hard
and heavy hand, broke the angels backs, and cast them into chains of darkness,
to be reserved unto judgment, 2 Pet. 2.^4. Job felt but his little finger, as
it were, and yet cries out for help, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O
ye my friends; for the hand of God has touched me, Job 19.21. It had but
lightly tonched him, and yet he was hardly able to endure it. Oh the bloody
wails that Gods hand has left upon the backs of his best children! Woe then to
his enemies when he comes forth to fight against them. Their flesh shall
consume away, whiles they stand upon their feet.] They shall pine away in their
iniquities, Levit. 26.30. their beauty shall consume away like a moth. Psalm.
39.11. they shall melt as wax before the sun, or as the fat of lambs before the
fire. God if he be not unto them as a lion to tear the kell of their hearts in
sunder, yet he will be as a moth, and as a worm, insensibly to consume them,
Hos. 5.12, 14. If he break not their teeth in their mouths by smiting them upon
the cheek-bone, yet he will make them to melt away as waters which run
continually; as a snail which melts, and as the untimely birth of a woman
that never sees the sun, Psa. 58.6, 7, 8. God has secret ways to wast his
enemies, and to bring them on their knees when they are best under-set. He can
trip up their heels when they are standing upon their feet, and lay them low
enough in the slimy valley where are many already like them, and more shall come
after them, Job 21.31, 32. God has a Marasmus, an evil messenger for a
malicious persecutor; as he had for Antiochus Epiphanes; for both the Herod's;
for Maximinus the Tyrant; 1 Machab. 6. Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 11.
for Philip the second of Spain, Charles the ninth of France, Queen Mary of
England, Steven Gardener, Archbishop Arundel, Nestorius, Arrius, and other
odious Heretics, and enemies of the Church: amongst whom a Lapide the Jesuit
reckons here Calvin, and says, That like another Hered, he died a lousy
lothsom death: and for his authority thinks it enough to say, uti refert
Bolsecus in ejus vita. But it must be understood, that the lives of Calvin and
Beza were spitefully written by this Bolsecus their sworn enemy, that twice
banished and thrice runnagate Friar (liar I might have said) and Physician: for
those names his often changes and hard chances have given him. This man being
requested by the popish side (and its likely hired by them) to write thus,
Spec. Eur
is in all their writings alleged as Canonical. And their eyes shall consume
away in their holes.] Physicians tell us of two thousand diseases that annoy
man's body, two hundred whereof affect the eyes: All these are part of Gods
hosts, which are as much at Gods command as the Centurions servants and
soldiers were at his, when he said but, Go, or come, and they did accordingly.
He can make men's eyes drop and cease, not without any intermission, as Lam.
3.49. till they melt out, Mat. 8.9.
as the Hebrew here has it; even the very same word as before. he can smite
men with sudden blindness (as he did the sinful Sodomites, that had eyes full
of adultery) such as tormented their eyes, as if they had been pricked with
thorns, as the Hebrew word signifies, Genesis 19.11. Failing of eyes, and sorrow
of mind, is threatened as a judgment, Deuteronomy. 28.65. yea thou shall be mad for
the fight of thine eyes, which thou shall see is another piece of the curse,
verse 34. See 1 Samuel 2.33. And their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.]
As did the tongue of Nestorius the Heresiarch eaten out of his mouth with
worms: Tho. Arundel, and Steven Gardener, two bloody persecutors, died of a
like disease. Diodate understands all this to be a description of hel-torments.
Their flesh shall consume, yet never be consumed; for they still stand upon
their feet, or subsist, that they may still suffer; having no end, that their
pain may be endless. Their eyes shall consume, etc, that is, says he, though
they be alive and can see, yet shall they be deprived of light in infernal
darkness: having neither eyes nor understanding, but only to see and judge of
their extreme misery. Their tongue shall consume away, etc. as did the rich
gluttons, Luke 16.24. M. Calvin observes here, that all is delivered in the
singular number; his flesh shall consume; his eyes shall melt; his tongue, etc.
(for so runs the Original) to note that every of Ierusalems enemies shall taste
of Gods wrath; though some of them may happily hold themselves out of the reach
of his rod. And, Secondly, that God can as easily destroy them all, as if he
had to do but with one fingle man.

Verse 13. A great tumult from the Lord shall be among them.] He shall fright
them as he did the Philistines by a sound of a going in the tops of the
mulberry trees, 2 Samuel 5.24. and the Syrians by a hurry noise in the air,
causing a Pannick terror, 2 King. 7.6. Therefore some render it, Erit strepitus
vel fragor Domini magnus in eis, ut 1 Samuel 7.10. with 1 Samuel 2.10. Or, he shall
exasperate and imbitter them one against another; as he did Abimelech, and the
men of Shechem, by sending an evil spirit between them, Judge. 9.23. that is by
letting loose Satan upon them, that old manslayer, that kindle-coal and
makebate of the world: and this in a way of just revenge for their treacherous
conspiracy against the house of Gideon. Thus God first divided, and then
destroyed the Midianites by setting every ones sword against his fellow, Judge.
7.23. So he dealt by the Philistims, 1 Samuel 14.15, 20. So the Kings of Syria
and Egypt that succeeded Alexander, and were enemies to the Jews, destroyed one
another: So did the Primitive Persecutors, the Turk and the Persian, the
Spaniard and the French. In the year 1526. Charles the fifth Emperor of
Germany, set at liberty his prisoner Francis King of France, Scultet Annal.
Dec. 2. page 2
upon this condition (among others) that they should join their forces and do
their utmost to suppress and root out the Lutheran Heresy; that is, the truth
of the Gospel, out of both their Dominions. But soon after they fell at
variance amongst themselves, (the Pope blowing the bellows) whereby the Church
had her Halcyons, sic canes lingunt ulcera Lazari.

shall take the hand of his neighbour] as those yonkers of Helcath-hazzurim
did, that sheathed their swords in their fellows bowels, 2 Samuel 2.16.

Verse 14. And Judah also shall fight at Ierusalem] Shall fight like a lion,
and do great exploits for his country; as Judas Maccabeus did: as Hunniades,
that Maul of the Turks, and Scanderbeg, who killed 800. Turks with his own
hand, and fought so earnestly sometimes, that the very blood burst out at his
lips. So did Zisea, and the rest of Christ's worthy warriors: who by faith,
(and yet by force of arms too) waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
armies of the aliens, subdued kingdoms, fought the Lords battles, Heb. 11.32,
34. They saw by faith, what is on the other side of the shore of this
mortality: and that put mettle into them. The valor of the Gauls was admired
by the Romans: it proceeded from that instruction they had from their Druides,
The life of the K of Sweden by M. Clark.
of the immortality of the soul. The Swedes upon the same ground showed
incredible courage in the late German wars: running into apparent danger,
like flies into the candle (says One) as if they had not seen it. Faith fears
no colors. What brave spirits has God raised up amongst us alate, fighting as
it were in blood to the knees for Religion and liberty, resolved either to
vanquish or die, as the Black Prince; (...), with that Lacedemonian, either to
live with the Gospel, or to die for it? And how valiant the restored Jews shall
once be upon their enemies the Turks, who now hold their country till their
iniquities be full, who can tell? Sure it is that Israel after their victory
over Gog, shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them,
says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 39.10. And then perhaps it is, that the wealth of all
the heathen round about shall be gathered together (as a prize or booty) gold,
and silver, and apparel in great abundance] Look how Abraham stripped the four
kings of their plunder, Genesis 14.16. Gideon, the Midianites, Judge, 8. David, the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.18. Iehosaphat, the Ammonites, (they were three days in
gathering the spoil it was so much, 2 Chronicles. 20.25.) so it may fall out one day
with their posterity. The Jew Doctors, as they have a saying, that whatsoever
befell unto the Fathers is a figne unto the children: so of Abraham's victory
over the four kings, they write, that it befell unto him, to teach that four
kingdoms (those kingdoms spoken of in Daniel) should stand up to rule over
the world: and that in the end his children should rule over them, and they
should all fall by their hand, R. Menachem on Genesis 14.
and they should bring again all their captives, and all their substance.

Verse 15. And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel]
All the beasts of service, made use of by the enemy, shall consume in like
sort, as their masters. First, for a punishment to their owners, who must needs
suffer loss thereby. Hence Saul was so sedulous in seeking the lost asses.
Secondly, to show how God is displeased with, and will severely punish all that
are isntrumental to the Churches calamities, or serviceable to their sin.
The serpent is cursed, cut shorter by the feet, and made to wriggle upon his
belly, yea confined to the dust for his diet. So God curses and abhors all
instruments of idolatry, Esaias 30.22. Number. 31.22, 23. Deuteronomy. 7.25. The graven
images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: the very visible heavens, because
defiled with man's sin, are to be purged by the fire of the last day.

Verse 16. Every one that is left of all the nations] i.e. that has escaped
the plague, verse 12. and is beaten into a better mind: as those Hunnes, that,
vanquished by the Christians, concluded that Christ was the true God, and
became his subjects. God had promised before to subvert the Churches enemies,
but here to convert them, which is far better. And it shall appear to be so
(as conversion cannot be hid; you cannot turn a bell, but it will make a sound:
and report its own motion. See Gal. 1.23.)

for they shall even go up] sc. to the Temple, which stood upon mount Moriah:

to worship the king the Lord of Hosts]. Esaias 16.1^
to send a lamb (or an homage penny) to the Lord of the whole earth.

and to keep the feast of Tabernacles] In a due manner, which had not been
rightly done (a mavelous thing) all along during the reign of David,
Solomon, and all those succeeding Reformers, till about these times; as appears
Neb. 8.16, 17, 19. The sense of this text is, that the converted Gentiles shall
join with the Jews, in the sincere service of God according to his will, and
not according to their own brains and fancies: that they shall worship him with
the same rites, in the same places and assemblies which they do: that Jehovah
may be one, and his name one amongst them, as verse 9. that there may be no
more Jew, and Gentile, Barbarian or Scythian, bond or free, but Christ may be
all, and in all. Col. 3.11
That those two sticks being joined into one, Ezekiel. 37.16. all Israel may be
saved, Romans 11.26. and raised as from the dead, verse 15. the Gentiles also may
have their part in the same resurrection. All this is here set forth in such
terms, and under such types as were then most in request: as of going up to
the Temple, keeping the feast of Tabernacles, etc. All which expressions are
parabolicall, symbolicall, and enigmaticall: framed to the capacity of the
Jews, much addicted to these legal rites and shadows, then in use, but now
done away, Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. whatever the Jews conclude from this text for
their continuance under Messiah his kingdom. Christians have their feasts or
holy days too, 1 Cor. 5.8. yea their feast of Tabernacles in a mystieall
sense, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.1, 9.

Verse 17. Even upon them shall be no rain] i. e. Nullam misericordiam
assequentur, says Theodoret: They shall get no good at Gods hand. Judaea was
sumen totius orbis, as One says, a very fat and fertile country: but yet so,
as that her fruitfulness depended much upon seasonable showers, the former and
latter rain: and the Prophet seems here to allude to that of Moses, Deuteronomy.
11.10, etc, If God did not hear the heaven, and the heaven the earth, the earth
could not hear the corn, wine, and oil, nor those hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.19.
Judaea was not like that country in Pliny, ubi siccitas dat lutum, imbres
pulverem, where drought made dirt, rain made dust: but if the heaven were iron
over them, the earth would soon be brass under them, and not yield her
increase, (See Psalm. 65.9. Esaias 30.23.) and then where would they be quickly?
since Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, life would be lost, if not maintained
by daily food. Rain is in Scripture put 1. Properly, for water coming out of
the clouds, Deuteronomy. 11.11, Prove. 16.15. nourishing the herbs and trees. 2.
Metaphorically for Christ, his Gospel, and his graces, wherewith the souls of
men are made fruitful in good works, Esaias 45.8. Deuteronomy. 32.2. Hos. 6.3. The want
of rain is on the contrary made here, and Rev. 11.5. a sign of a curse. It
waits not for the sons of men, Mic. 5.7. but it accomplisheth what God
appoints, Esaias 55.10, 11. Why it falls here, and now, we know not, and
wonder.

Verse. 18. And if the family of Egypt] So called from one Aiguptos, a King
there. In the Hebrew it is called, (mostly) Mizraim, from one of that name,
Genesis 10.6. sometimes, for its power and pride, it is called, Rahab, Psalm. 87.4.
and 89.11. Esaias 51.9. The family of Egypt is here put for the whole Nation (see
the like Amos 3.1.) because, after the confusion of tongues especially, Nations
took their original and denomination from the head of some family; as did the
Egyptians from Mizraim, Chams second son.

go not up, and come not] But they did receive the Christian religion with the
first: had Christian schools, Doctors, and Professors, after that Saint Mark
had there planted a Church at Alexandria, now called Scanaeroon. This was
fore-prophecred, Esaias 19.21. The Lord shall be known to Egypt, etc And the Lord
shall smite Egypt, he shall smite and heal it; etc. he shall cause them to
pass under the rod, and to b^^g them into the bond of the covenant, as it is
Ezekiel 20.37

th^^ have no rain] Others read it thus, It shall not rain upon them. For they
also needed rain in some measure, as well as other nations. See Psalm. 105.32.
though not so much, by reason of the overslowings of the river (...): which if
it arise to a just height, (...)
sc. of fifteen or sixteen cubits, as Pliny ^ells us, it (...) the land very
fruitful: so that they do but throw in the seed, and have ^our (...) harvests
in less then four months. S. H. Blant^ (...)
Indeed where the Nile arrives not, (...) nothing, they say, in Egypt, but a
whitish fand, bearing no grass, but two ^tile weeds, colled Su^it and Gazul:
which, burnt to ashes, and conveyed to Venice, make the finest
thrystall-glasses. The Chal^ee ^enders it, Non cres^et ejus N^ns. God loves to
confute men in their confidences, to dry up their Nilusses, (See Ezck. ^^^,
(...)
9. Isa^. 19.5, 6.) as he did for two years together in the time of Cloopatra,
a little before Christ's birth: and once before for nine years space.

there shall be the plague] q.d. If they escape the forethreatened evil, a
worse thing abides them: their preservation from famine is but a reservation to
those everlasting burnings Verse 12. And though here they abound even to
satiety, and surfeit (the Egyptians were wont to boast that they could feed all
men, and feast all the gods, without any sensible diminution of their
provision) yet at the last day they shall be cut short enough, eat fire, drink
brimstone, God himself uttering those or the like words Esaias 65.1^, Behold, my
servants shall cat, but you shall ^e hurgry, ^ehold, myservants shall drink,
but you sh^ill be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but none shall be
ashamed. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall howl for ^exation of spirit.

Verse 19. This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment] Or sin:
Indeed the sin of sins to slight Gods Ordinances and offers of grace; and to
neglect so great salvation as is tendered in and by Christ. This very sin is it:
own punishment. This is condemnation, or hell asorehand, John 3.19. This
brought Capernaum down from heaven to hell, Mat. 11.23. Pagans that never heard
of Christ shall havean easier judgment then such, Mat. 10.23. for they shall
have a double condemnation. One from the law which they have broken, wherein
Christ found them: another from the Gospel for rejecting Christ, and the bath
of his blood, to the which even the Prin^es of Sodo^ are invited, Esai 1.10.
See John ^2.48. Mat. 21.44. It is with such as with a malefactor that being
dead in law, does yet refuse a pardon. Danaeus observes here that mention is
made of the feast of Tabernacles especially. 1. Because this least was now most
solemnly kept among the Jews, Neh. 8. And secondly, because it was a most
evident testimony of the first gathering together of the people of Israel. that
is of a free ordained Church. Therefore it was better liked of the people, and
a more evident sign of their uniting or knitting together within themselves, as
is unto us the holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse 20. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses] hanged upon
their heads, or about their necks: as Judge. 8.26. the Midianitish camels ^ad
rich collars and chains about their necks, for ornament sake. It was a witty
conceit of a modern Divine, D (...).
that many deal with their Ministers, as carriers do with their horses; lay
heavy burdens upon them, and then hang bells about their necks: they shall have
har^ work and great commendations: but easy commons, good words, but slight
wages. This was better then that bald conceit of Theodoret (...) others, Lib.
1. hist. cap. 18. Ruff. in lib. 1. c. 8. Soc^at. 1.1.
that this Prophecy was then fulfilled when as Constantine the Great (or h^^
mother (...) for him) caused the bits of his horse-bridle to be made of the
nails of the cross of Christ. I confess the word is by some rendered bridles,
by others trappings, Frontals, collars. It Is (...) read only here: and hence
this variety of interpretations. Calvin renders it stables of horses: which
although they are but contemptible places and usually stink: yet the Prophet
says, they shall be ^^ly to the Lord. Hereby the Prophet teaches, says He,
that God shall so be king of the world; as that all things shall be applied to
his worship: neither shall any thing be of so common and ordinary use that
shall not change its nature, and be sanctified to Gods service. The comparison
here is made betwixt things profane, and the inscription on the Highpriests
mitre, which was Holiness to the Lord. This is a manifest testimony of a godly
mind, when godliness runs thorough a man's whole life, as the woose does
thorough the web: whenordinary actions are done from a right principle, and to
a right purpose: according to that old and good Rule, Quicquid agas, propter
Deum agas, Whether ye eat or drink, or what soever ye do, 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Timothy
4.14. Holiness must be written upon our bridles when we war, upon our cupps
when we drink Dr. Harris.
de all to the glory of God. Receive every creature with thank sgiving: in
serving men, serve the Lord Christ: exercise your general calling in your
particular: do earthly business with heavenly minds: Content not your self
with a natural use of the creature, as bruit beasts do, but taste the
sweetness of God in all: and in all thy ways acknowledge Him, depending upon
him for direction and success, consulting with him, and approving thine heart
and life unto him. This is to go the upper way Pro. 15.24. which indeed is both
cleaner, shorter, and safer. This is to be of that royal Priesthood, that
has for its posy, Holiness to the Lord. This is to be harmless, and
blameless, the sons of God; known by their holiness as David's children were
by their garments of diverse colors. For as he that has called them is holy,
so are they also holy, and that in all manner of conversation and communion
too, even when they deal with carnal men, and in common matters.

and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the Altar] All
this must be understood of the spiritual service, which should be in the
Christian church: described by the ancient ceremonial service, as Isa. 60.7.
and 66.23. Mal. 1.11. And it is to show, that the efficacy, force, and
operation of the holy Ghost, shall be far more plentiful through Christ in the
Church of the Gospel, then it was in times past, under the law. See Heb. 8.6.
Ephesians. 3.5. Isa. 44.3, 4.

Verse 21. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem etc.] That is, says Danaeus, God shall
as God-like be worshipped of every faithful person in his own house, as he was
of old in his Temple by the Jews. Calvin adds, ut quicquid aggrediantur homines
sit sacrificium, so that whatsoever good men enterprise, shall be a sacrifice.
God shall smell a savor of rest from them, they of life and peace from him.

there shall be no more the Canaanite] The merchant, says the vulgar after
Aquila, and the Chaldee; that is, the Simoniack, the Church-chopper, such
monymerchants as Christ whipped out of the Temple Mat. 21.12. Ioh. 2.15. But
better render it Canaanite, The Phenicians those great merchants were
Canaanites.
who were indeed great Merchants Hos. 12.7. Ezekiel. 17.4. but here it stands for
a wicked man, an hypocrite, that botch of Christian society. Pura erit Ecclesia
ab omnibus inquinamentis, says Calvin: the Church shall be purged of all such
Pests. See Rev. 22.27. no such owls shall be seen flying in the Churches
welkin. God will, by the due exercise of discipline, and otherwise, be daily
purging out all scandals, as such men are called Mat. 13.41. and causing the
unclean spirit to pass out of the land Zach. 13.2. I conclude with Theodoret,
Dominus Omnipotens hanc vocem veram esse hoc tempore praestet etc. God Almighty
make good this promise unto us at this time: that there may be no cursed
Canaanite found amongst us; but that we may all live according to the doctrine
of the Gospel, and expect that blessed hope and coming of the great God our
Savior Jesus; to whom with the Father and holy Spirit be glory for ever. Amen.

A COMMENT OR, EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of MALACHI.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE burden] that is, the burdenous Prophecy (as Tremellius renders
it) A burden; as 1. enjoined and imposed upon the Prophet to utter, Lyra.
Figuicr.
to cry aloud, and not spare, to life up his voice as a trumpet etc. straining
every vein in his heart to do it; declayming lustily against sin and sinners,
and proclayming hellfire for them in case they amend not. This is a business
of some burden, Chrysostom.
onus ipsis etiam Angelis tremendum. This was typified in the staff-rings that
were made to continue upon the Ark: the Kohathites shoulders felt wherefore. If
God had not helped those Levites, they could never have borne the Ark 1 Chronicles.
15.26. St. Paul was very sensible of the ministerial burden, rolling upon him
daily 2 Cor. 11.28. And Latimer leaped, when lighted of his Bishopric. 2. As
burdening the people with their sins, and breathing out threatenings for the
same; for sin (how lightly soever accounted of) hales hell at the heels of it,
and procures divine vengeance, which is a burden unsupportable. It brake the
Angels backs, and made the son of God groan piteously, 1 Pet. 2.24.
then when he bare our sins in his body on the tree. His soul was heavy
therewith even to the death: and had he not had the better shoulders, had not
God laid help on One that was mighty (even the mighty strong God, as he is
styled Esaias 6.6.) he had fainted and failed under his burden. David
complains, that his sins were gone over his head, and like a sore burden,
were too heavy for him to bear Psalm. 38.4. That which comforted him was, that
no sooner he had said Peccavi I have sinned, 2 Samuel 12.
but the Prophet Nathan said, Transtulit Deus peccatum tuum, God has
translated thy sin upon Christ, has caused thy sin to pass over to him, and
(as it were) by a writ of Remove, has cast thy burden upon his shoulders.
And this incomparable merey David afterward celebrateth Psa. 32 4, 5. For day
and night thy hand was heavy upon me: the guilt of finne, and sense of wrath
quelled him and killed him almost; for his natural moisture was turned into
the drought of summer: he was turned into a very skeleton, or a bag of bones, a
bottle in the smoke, woefully wanzed he was, and wasted. But for remedy, I
acknowledge my sin unto thee (says he) I fled by faith to the true Scapegoat
Christ Jesus on whom was laid (as a burden) the iniquity of us all, Isai.
53.6. Romans 5.8. And thou presently forgavest the iniquity of my sin, that is,
the guilt of it, that till then lay like a load of lead upon my conscience,
and, as an obligation, bound me over to condign punishment. Came for want of
this comfort, ran roaring up and down, my sin, Genesis 4.13.
that is, my punishment is greater then I can heave. And a far better man
then Cain (even holy Job, with whom God was but in jest, as it were) cries out
that his calamity was havier then the sand of the sea, Job 6.3. and that yet
his stroke was heavier then his groaning, Chap. 23.2. Those that have ever
felt the misery of a laden conscience, can tell what an evil and bitter thing
sin is. Jer. ^
Those that now run away with it, and make as light of it as Sampson did of the
gate of Gaza, shall one day groan out Woe and alas, when God shall set himself
to load them with tortures in hell, who do now load him with their sins, and
weary him out with their imquities, Esaias 43.24. For prevention, oh that they
would be persuaded to believe the Prophets, that their souls might prosper, to
be sensible of sins burden, that Christ might ease them: to take upon them his
burden which is onus sine onere, and would be no more burden to them then the
wings are to the bird, whereby he is born aloft, that they would imitate
porters, who being called and offered money to bear a burden, will poise it
and weigh it in their hands first, which when they see they are not able to
stand under, no gain will entice them to undertake it. Do we provoke the Lord
to anger? are we stronger then he? Heb. 10.
Is it not a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God?
Is the the wrath of a King as the roaring of a lion, as the messengers of
death? surely they that tremble not in hearing, Bradsord. (...) 2 Pet. 3.3.
Job. 41.27.
shall be crushed in pieces in feeling, as that Martyr said, and let all those
scoffers that make childrens play of Gods dreadful menaces (as St. Peter's word
imports) that (Leviathan-like) esteem Gods iron as straw, that read his
Propheticke burdens, as they do the old stories of foreign wars, or as they
behold the wounds and blood in a picture or piece of Arras, which never makes
them smart or fear; Let all these, I say, read and ruminate that flaming
place, Jer. 23.33, 37. and let them know, that if they belong to God, Am. 5.12.
he will cripple their iron sinews by the sense of their many and massy or bony
sins. As if otherwise, he will fall upon them with his full weight, and grind
them to powder, Mat. 21.44. Cavete: cavebitis autem si pavebitis.

to (...)] The two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, with those few of the ten
Tribes that returned amongst them from the Babylonish captivity. These, though
we never find them again going a whoring after Idols (the sin that they had
paid so dear for, and had now bought their wit) yet forgetful of former both
beatings and benefits; (as children) are, they soon returned to their old
flagitions practices of Polygamy, blasphemy, sacrilege, defilement of Divine
Worship, unlawful marriages, etc. and so had lost in a manner, the fruit of
their sufferings: putting God to his old complaint, why should ye be smitten
any more, etc. and causing him to sigh out, as even sick of them, Ah sinful
nation, etc. Reprobate silver shall men call them, etc.

by Malachi] Heb. by the hand of Malachi, i. e. by his mouth and Ministry.
Isai. ^^ Jer. 6.
Hand is put for Mouth by a Catachresis: because the hand is the Instrument of
Instruments, as says the Philosopher. See the like, Exodus 9.35. Numb. 4.37,
45. (...).
Isai. 8.11. One Expositor notes here, that this expression by the hand is
used to teach us, that Prophets and Ministers must preach not with their
Tongues only, but with their hands too: lest they be found in number of those
Pharisees that say but do not, that bind heavy burdens, and hard to be born,
upon other m^ns shoulders, but they themselves touch them not with one of their
fingers, Mat. 23.3, 4. Let our hands also preach as well as our tongues, ne
dicta factis deficientibus erubescant, as Tertullian speaks, lest talking by
the Talent, and working by the the Ounce, our hands give our tongues the lie.

by Malachi] i. e. Mine Angel, or an Angelical man. Not an heavenly Angel, as
Origin held: Litera Jod in fine format nomen adjectivum, ut in Nochri alienus
Chopshi liber.
nor as told and taught by an Angel how to deliver and deport himself in his
office; like as when that Bath^gol or voice from heaven came to Christ, Joh.
12.28. the people that stood by and heard it, said, that it thundered, others
said, an Angel spoke to him, ver. 29. But either he was so called by his
parents at his birth and circumcision (as Angelus Politianus and others) or
else so surnamed by the good people of those times; as whose disposition,
communication, conversation, countenance and whole carriage were Angelical.
Chrysostom, for like cause, calls Paul, Angelum terrestrem an earthly Angel.
And the Author to the Hebrews speaking of those faithful Martyrs that lived
and suffered soon after Malachi's time, he says, Of whom the world was not
worthy, Heb. 11.38. Meaning, that they were fitter to be set as Angels in
heaven, to be fixed in the region of happiness, to shine sull fair upon the
Celestial shelf (as that Martyr said) then to abide here among sinners. Act.
and Mon.
Chrysostom in his 55. Homily upon Matthew calls certain religious men of his
time Angels, for their sanctimony and celestial conversation. And Dr. Tailor
Martyr blessed God, that ever he came in company with that Angel of God John
Bradford.

Verse 2. I have loved you says the Lord] Thou have loved us (might they
reply) whilst we were willing and obedient. Thou love them that love thee,
Prove. 8.17. and show mercy to thousands of them that love thee and keep thy
commandments, Lam. 5.22.
Exodus 20. But now thou have utterly re ecled us, thou art very wroth against
us. Nay says God, I do love you, so Tremelline renders this Text: I am
Jehovahs, I change not, Chap. 3.6. I do rest in my love, and will seek no
further, Zeph. 3.17. Surely Israel has not been forsaken nor Judah of his God,
of the Lord of Hosts, though their land was filled with sin against the Holy
One of Israel, Jer. 51.5. Thus it was before the captivity. But how after? See
Zach. 1.17. The Lord had professed before, that he had been sore displeased
with their Fathers, verse 2. and it appears ver. 3, 4. they were no better then
their Fathers: all which notwithstanding, see a sweet promise, ver. 17. Cry yet
saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, My cities through prosperity shall yet be
spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose
Jerusalem. There are four Yets in the Text, and all very gracious ones: to
show, that the fullness sin in us does not abate the fullness of love in God
toward his people. And the same in effect is thankfully acknowledged by those
holy Levites at their solemn fast, held much about the time of our Prophet
Malachy, Nehem. 9. where they make a catalogue of the many fruits and
expressions of Gods love to themselves and their fathers. Besides extraordinary
favors not a few, he gave them good Laws, verse 13. good Sabbaths, verse 14.
his good spirit to instruct them. 20. He forsook them not when they dealt
proudly against him, 16, 17. but crowned them with outward comforts, 21, 25.
afflicted them when they provoked him, 26, 27. sent them Saviors when they
cried to him, 27. after often revolts, was often entreated, 28. with held his
worst and consuming judgments for a long time, 30, 31. And was there not love
in all this? Might not God well say, I have loved you? Ribera thinks there is
an Aposiopesis in the words, as if God would have said more: but very grief
breaks off his speech, out of a deep sense of their detestable ingratitude.
David has such an abrupt expression, Psalm. 116.1. I love: because the Lord
has heard my voice. Such a pang, such a passion he felt, that he was not able
to say, I love the Lord, but I love, and so^breakes off abruptly. The like
whereunto may here be conceived of God; who cannot endure to have his love
lost, his grace undervalued, as it was by these obstreperous Questionists, who
put him to his proof, as those did, Jer. 2.25.

yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us] Their late captivity and calamity so
stuck still in their stomachs, that they could not see wherein he had showed
them any love. But had they considered Daniels weeks, they might have known
that (besides their free election, all blessings flowing therefrom, as verse
3.4.5.) for their seventy years captivity, they had seven seventies of years
granted them afterward for the comfortable enjoyment of their own country.
Sed ingrato quod donatur, deperditur, says Seneca. And Amare non redamantem
est amoris impendia perdere, says Hierome. All Is lost that is laid out upon an
unthankful people, who devour Gods best blessings as bruit beasts their prey:
haunch them up and swallow them, as swine do swil: bury them as the barren
earth does the seed: use them as homely, as R^chel did her fathers gods, which
she laid among the litter, and sat upon; yea, sighting against God with his own
weapons (mercies, I mean) as John. did against Ichoram with his own
messengers, as David did against Goliath with his own sword, as Benhadad
against Ahab with that life that he had given him: as i^ God had hired them to
be wicked etc.

was not Esau Jacobs brother] Did they not both tumble in a belly? Isay 51.1.
were they not both dug out of the same pit, hewn out of the same rock? and
yet (as the great Turk, and his brethren born of the same parents, the eldest
is destined to a diadem, the rest to an halter, so here) Esau, though the
elder, and heir, was rejected, at least he was less loved (for so the word
hated is to be taken, Genesis 29.31. Luke 14.20. M^^. 10.37.) Jacob though the
younger and weaker (for Esau was born a manly child, born with a beard, as
some think, and was therefore called Esau, that is, Factus and pers^^^us pilis,
a man already, rather then a babe) yet was Gods beloved one. And so were his
posterity too, the people of Gods choice, above the Edomites; who were now left
in captivity at Babylon, when as the Jews were returned into their own
country: yea, for the Jews sakes, and as a testimony of Godslove to them, were
these Edomites still held captives, and their land irreparably ruinated because
they showed themselves merciless, and bloody in the day of Jerusalems
calamity, Obad. 10.11. Psalm. 137.7. God had charged the ^raelites, saying, Thou
shall not abhor an Edo^^^te: for he is thy brother Deuteronomy. 23.7. But as E^au
began betime to persecute Jacob, bristling at him, and bruising him in their
mothers womb Genesis 25.22. so his posterity were bitter enemies to the Church,
joying in her misery, and joining with her enemies. wherefore thus says the
Lord God, I will also stretch our mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and
beast from ^t etc. Ezck. 25.13, 14.

yet I loved Jacob] And preordained him to a crown that never fades, as Paul
expounds this text Romans 9.13. of election to eternal life, which is the
sweet^st and surest seal of Gods love. Let us secure our election (and so Gods
special love to our souls) by those two infallible marks 2 These. 2.13. First,
belief of the truth, that particularity and propriety of assurance. Secondly
^^^^^^sication of the Spirit, ^^^o the obedience of the truth. And as God loved
Jacobs person, so he loved his posterity the Israelites above all other people:
not because they were more in number, or better in disposition, ex meliore luto
etc. But because the Lord loved you, therefore be set his love upon you, and
chose you, says Moses D^ut. 7.7, 8. the ground of his love was wholly in
himself; there being nothing in man, nothing our of Gods self, that can
primarily move, and incline the eternal immutable, and omnipotent will of God.
The true original and first motive of his love to his creature is, the good
pleasure of his will. See. Ephesians. 1.5. where all the four causes of Election are
showed to be without us.

Verse 3. And I hated Esau] i. e. I loved him not as I did I^^ob: I passed him
by, and let him alone to perish in his corruption, and for his sin. And for his
posterity; whereas they were carried captives by Nebuchadnez^zar (as Isreal
also was) I have not turned again their captivity, but laid their land
desolate; rased and harased their cities and castles made them an habitation of
dragons and devil^^ and all this as an argument of my deep hatred and utter
detestation of them. True it is, that Judea lay utterly waste, during the
seventy years of their captivity; the land kept her sabbaths resting from
tillage. Upon the slaughter of Gedal^ah all the Jews that were left in the land
fled into Egypt: and God kept the room empty, and free from invasion of
forreiners, until the return of the Natives out of Babylon. Now it was far
otherwise with Idumea: the desolation whereof is here described to be both
total and perpetual, (according to that foretold by Ezechiel Chap. 35. O mount
Seir, I will make thee to be most desolate, Ezech. 35 3, 7, 15.
or (as the Hebrew has it emphatically and eloquently) wastnesse, and
wastnesse, extreme and and irrecoverable. A (...), or utter ruin befell that
country, being part of Arabia Petrea (hence mention of their mountains) and
abounding naturally with with serpents, or dragons; it being in the wilderness
of this country of Edom where the Israelites were so stung with fiery serpents:
Number. 21.6.
hence it became afterward a very den of dragons lurking there.

Verse 4. Whereas Edom says we are impoverished] Or, thrust out of house and
home, and reduced to extreme indigency: yet we will return, and build the
desolate places. We will do it all, despito di Deo (as that profane Pope
said:) if it be but to cross Gods prediction, and to withstand his power and
providence. Thus these earthen pots will be dashing themselves against the
rocks, against those mountains of brass (so Gods immutable decrees are called
Zech. 6.1. Thus Lamech will have the odds of God seventy to seven (so Iunius
interprets it) Genesis 4.24. Thus, when God had threatened to root out Ahab and
his posterity, he would try that: and to prevent it, took more wives, and so
followed the work of generation, that he left seventy sons behinds him, 2 Kin.
10.1. Thus Pharaoh (that sturdy rebel) holds out against God to the utmost, and
sends away his servant Moses, threatening death to him, even then when he was
compassed on all hands with that palpable darkness. Thus the Philistin Princes
(while some plagued) gather themselves together again against the humbling
Israelites at Mizpch: 1 Samuel 7.
and so rum to meet their bane. Thus the proud Ephraimites Isai. 9.10. The
bricks indeed, say they, are fallen down, but we will build it again with hewn
stones. The The wild sigtrees are cut down, but we will change them into
Cedars. Thus the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves Luke 7.30. yea would needs be found fighters against God, Act. 5.39.
as Gamaliel truly told them. Thus those primitive persecutours would needs
attempt to root our Christian religion; the Jews by the leave and help of
Julian, to despite the Christians, would reedifie their city and Temple, Job.
de Columna in Marihistor.
but were hindered from heaven. Otho the Emperor would make the city of Rome
his Imperial seat (which was long before pointed and painted out for the Nest
of Antichrist) but could not effect it. The ^esuits would fain heal the Beasts
wounded head, and reestablish their kingdom of Idolatry, But this they must
never look for. Christ shall reign, and all his foes shall be his footstool;
The Romish Edomites shall come to rume.

thus says the Lord, They shall build, but I will throw down] Ruit alto a
culmine Roma, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen: her downfall is sure,
sore, and sudden, Versa eris in cineres quasi nunquam Rema suisses, said
Sibylla of old. And there was something surely in that which we have read, that
when the wars began in Germany Anno 1619. a great brass image of the Apostle
Peter (that had Tu es Pet rus etc. fairly imbossed upon it) standing in Saint
Peter's Church at Rome, there was a great and massy stone fell down upon it,
and so shattered it to pieces, that not a letter of all that sentence (whereon
Rome founds her claim) was left whole so as to be read; saving that one piece
of that sentence Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will build my Church, which was
left fair and entire. Surely when popish mountains and Monasteries shall be
desolated and demolished, when the Pope (who was wont to say that he could
never want money as long as he was able to hold a pen in his hand) shall be
miserably impoverished, Rev. 16.12.
and his Euphrates of revenues dried up, the mountain of the Lords house shall
be set above all the mountains, Ezekiel. 21.29.
and the Lord Christ alone shall reign in glory: he shall overturn, overturn,
overturn all Antichristian power and policy: he will utterly destroy those
crows-nests (as Henry the eighth called the religious houses that he pulled
down) ne iterum ad cohabitandum convolent, Sanderus.
lest those unclean birds should build again.

they shall build but I will destroy] It is the Lord then that both plants and
pulls up kingdoms, nations and peoples: that makes and destroys States public
or private at his pleasure: they are all in his hand and done by him, and fall
not out by any fortune, or fatal revolution, and vicissitude. Dan. 2.21. Luke
1.52.

And they shall call them the border of wickedness.] Chiefly for their
insulting over the people of God in their affliction, Obad. 10. That wicked
one, the Pope, is grossy guilty of this Edomitish inhumanity. What feasting and
sending of gifts was there, when the two witnesses were slain? What joy and
jollity when the Waldenses (those ancient Protestants) were worsted in battle?
What processions and bone-fires at Rome upon the news of the Parisian massacre?
Thuanus tells us, that the Pope caused it to be painted in his Palace: and that
the Cardinal of Lorrain gave him that brought the first tidings of it to Rome,
thirty thousand crowns for a reward. I do the rather parallel the Edomites and
Romists, because the Rabbis usually by Edom, understand Rome: and the Thargum
renders O daughter of Edom, Lam. 4.21. thus; Romi Reshignah, O wicked Rome,
which is answerable to this in the Text, The border of wickedness, that is,
the land of wickedness, happily called the border, or limit, as the Non ultra of
impiety, Philip of Macedony assembled all the infamous and wicked persons into
a certain city of Thracia and then called it Poneropolis The Preachers travels,
106.
of imparallel impiety: Or else because men shall only come to the bounds and
borders; and standing there aloof off, as abhorring to go further, shall as it
were point and say, Ah, wicked, Ah, wicked place, Terra de diables, as the
Spaniards call one country in America, or the Mouth of hell, as another place
is named. Italy is at this day little better; a second Sodom. M. Ascham, Queen
Elizabeth's Tutor, was but seven days in Venice, but he saw more wickedness
there, then he had seen in seven years in London. As for Rome (that Radix
omnium malorum) that once faithful city is now become an harlot; yea the great
harlot, Rev. 17. yea the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, verse
5. tota est jam Roma lupanar, it is turned into a great brothelhouse, the
habitation of devils, Petrarch.
and the hold of every foul spirit, Rev. 18.2. Bethel is become Bethaven; the
house of God, the border of wickedness: Har hamishcah, is become
Har-hamaschith, the Mount of Unction, the mount of Corruption, 2 King. 23.13.
What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high
places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem? Micah 1.5.

And the people amongst whom the Lord has indignation.] The people of Gods
wrath, Isay 10.6. and of his curse (so Idumea is called) Isa. 34.5. And such a
people was Amalck, with whom God ( laid his hand upon his throne, and) swore
that he would have perpetual war for their ill usage of his Israel Exodus 17.16.
He charged also his people never to forget them, Deuteronomy. 25.19. Neither did they:
Saul was sent to make an utter end of them, 1 Samuel 15. And wherein he failed of
doing it, God stirred up the Simeonites in Hezekiah's days to smite the rest
of the Amalakites that were escaped, 1 Chronicles. 4.42, 43. The like judgment
whereunto is befallen the Edomites long since: their very name is extinct, no
memory of them being left in posterity. The destiny of Doeg their countreyman
is come upon them, Psalm. 52.5. God has beaten them down for ever: he has
taken them away, and plucked them out of their dwelling place, and rooted them
out of the land of the living. Selah. It is ill angring the Ancient of days.
His wrath lasts longer then the coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.4. his judgments
are severe and durable; as we use to say of winter, they never rot in the sky,
but shall fall; if late, yet surely, yet seasonably. He that says, Vengeance
is mine, I will repay, repayeth often times when we have forgiven, when we have
forgotten; and calls to reckoning after our discharges, as he did Nabal. It is
dangerous offending any favorite of him who can have (as here) indignation for
ever: whose wrath and revenge is (as that of the Athenians is said to be)
(...), Everlasting, whose destructions are perpetual.

Verse 5. And your eyes shall see.] The righteous shall see and fear, and shall
laugh at him, and say, Lo, this is the man, etc. said David of Doeg the
Edomite: Psalm. 52.
And the same is here promised by God to his people as a pledge of his love,
and a special privilege: Others should hiss at Edom, and say by way of
byword, This is the border of wickedness, etc. but the saints should make more
of it (a Be can suck honey out of a flower, so cannot a fly) they should
busy their eyes, and regard the work of the Lord; Isai 5.12. Psalm. 35.27.
Ezekiel. 3.12.
yea they should so consider the operation of his hand, as to say sensibly, Let
the Lord be magnified: Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place. God
has delivered me out of all trouble, says David, and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies. The Edomites stood looking on, and laughing at the
Israelites destruction, Obad. 12.13. God saw this and it displeased him, (as he
is wondrous sensible of the least indignity done to his people) He therefore
pays them home in their own coin, and promises his Israel that they shall
rejoice when they see the vengeance; Psalm. 58.10.
they shall wash their feet in the blood of these wicked ones; become more
cantelous by their just destruction. Learn we hence,

First, To have our eyes open upon the judgments of God, whether general, or
personal: that nothing of this nature pass our observation, lest we incur the
curse denounced, Isa. 5.12. and be made examples to others, because we would
not be warned by the example of others. Lege historiam ne fias, historiae.
Sodom and Domorrah are thrown forth (as Saint Jude has it) for an example;
(...). June 7. Ingentia, beneficia, flagitia, supplicia. (...). Lib. 2.
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. And Herodotus says, That the ruins
and rubbish of Troy are set forth for an example of this rule, That National
sins bring national plagues, and that God greatly punishes great offenses. Let
him that looks upon me, learn to fear God. These words were engraven upon the
standing picture of Sennacherib (after that God had by an Angel slain his Army,
and sent him back with shame to his own country) as the same Herodotus
testifies.

Secondly, Learn we how far forth we may look upon the overthrow of the wicked
with delight: viz. Not as our own private, but as Gods professed enemies. Not
simply for their ruin, but as it is a clearing of Gods glory, and of our
integrity. Psalm. 9.16. 1 Samuel 25.39. Not out of private revenge, but pure zeal
for God and his cause. I say pure zeal: for it is difficult to kindle and keep
quick the fire of Zeal, without all smoke of sinister and selfe-respects.

And ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified, etc.] Or, The Lord has magnified
himself, i. e. has declared himself mightily to be a great King above all
Gods, by executing judgment upon these Grandees of the earth; Exodus 18.11
and making out, that In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above
them. H^nce it is that praise waits for God in Zion, 1 Samuel 12.28
his Name is great in Israel. He is sent unto (as sometime Ioab sent to David,
to come and take the city of Rabbah) to take the glory of all their
deliverances and victories. Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, say they, but to
thy Name be the praise. Hunniades would not own or accept the peoples applanses
and acclamations, Turk. hist.
but ascribed all to God. So did our Henry the fifth at the battle of Agincourt,
Speed 799.
where he won the day. He would not admit his broken Crown, or bruised Armor
to be born before him in show (which are the usual ensigns of warlike
triumphs.) He also gave strait order that no ballad or song should be made or
sung, more then of thanksgiving to the Lord for his happy victory and safe
return, etc. Dan. 101 Polyd. Virg. lib. 19.
So our Edward the third after his victory at Poictiers (where he took the
French King prisoner, Anno 1356.) took speedy order by Simon, Archbishop of
Canterbury, that eight days together should be spent in magnifying the Lord
from the border of England.

From the borders of Israel.] Or, from beyond the borders of Israel; viz.
thronghout the wide world. The Saints have large hearts, and could beteem the
Lord much more praise and service then they have for him. Psalm. 1.45.2. Psalm.
48.10. Psalm. 103.
They would praise him infinitely, and according to his excellent greatness,
filling up the distance as it were, and calling in all the help they can get,
of Angels, men, unreasonable and insensible creatures, as David did, etc.

Verse 6. A son honors his father.] Heb. Will honor his father. Nature
teaches him this lesson, to reverence his father. Pater est, si pater non
esset, said the young man in Terence; (...) Hierocl.
It is my father, I must not cross him. Our parents are our household Gods,
said another heathen, and to have all possible respect from us. To God and our
parents, says Aristotle, we can never make recompense. There is no nation so
barbarous that acknowledges not this natural axiom, A son must honor his
father, and a servant his master; as Eleazar did Abraham; the Centurions
servants him, (...).
by being at his beck and check in all things. Servus est nomen officii; A
servant is not one that moves absolutely of himself: but he is the masters
instrument, and wholly his, says Aristo^le: and therefore owes him all love,
reverence and obedience, as if he were many Masters in one: the word here used
for Master, is plural. Now from this Principle in nature thus laid down, the
Lord tacitly accuses them

First, Of Ingratitude for his great love to them, evinced and evidenced in the
former verses.

Secondly, Of contempt cast upon him and his service: as appears, first, by
the application of that natural law confirmed by the custom of all countries.

If then I be a father, etc.] As you commonly call me, and claim me, Ier. 3.4.
John 8.41. We have one Father, even God. And you have been long since taught Io
to do by Moses, and told by what right I come to be your Father, though with an
exprobration of your detestable undutifulnesse Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord --? Is not he thy Father (and is not he by the same right and reason
thy master too?) that has bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established,
or preserved thee? Has he not (more then all that) adopted and accepted thee
for his child; 1 Pet. 1.3
begetting thee again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, unless thou be still in thy sins, then the which thou can
not choose unto thy self a worse condition? All which considered, what more
equal then that I should have both love from thee as a father, and fear as a
master? A mixture of both is required of all Gods children and servants, that
they yield unto him an amicable fear, and a reverent love, that they look at
once upon his bounty and severity, Romans 11.12. and so call God Father, that
they spend the whole time of their sojourning here in fear: that they fear God
and his goodness, and Iacob-like, 1 Pet. 1.17
when they see nothing but visions of love and mercy, as he did at Bethel, yet
then to cry out, How dreadful is this place? Psalm. 130.4
There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.

unto you, O Priests] Whom I look upon as the chief of my children, given me in
lieu of Isreal's firstborn, the lot of mine own inheritance, that stand ever
before me, and should by soundness of doctrine, and holiness of life,
vindicate my name from contempt, and get me honor before the people. Singular
holiness is required of ministers above others: a double spirit they had need
to wish for, as Elisha. Things in the sanctuary were double to those that were
common; as the shekel, cubit, etc. Ministers are called Angels, and they must
walk as angels, ne sit nomen inane crimen immane, lest God renew his old
complaint, The leaders of his people have caused them to err, Isa. 9.16. It
was the complaint of Pope Pius the second, In hist. Austriaca.
that there was no notorious wickedness committed in the Catholic Church
cujus prima origo a sacerdotibus non dependeat, the first beginning whereof
arose not from Churchmen. John Hus cries out of the priests of his time, Multa
quae illi ordinem dicunt, etc. Bell. Hussit. p. 9
Many of those things that they call by the name of order, have brought all
things in Christendom out of order. Cornelius a Lapide upon this text, in his
popish way bewaileth it, that the ignorance and profaneness of many of their
priests, had given occasion to Luthers heresy to spread the further. We also
have no less cause to complain, that the insufficiency and impiety of some of
our ministry has opened the black mouth of Campian, and his popish accomplices
to bark out, Ministris eorum nihil vilius, Their Ministers are very base. For
prevention, let the souls of ministers be purer then the Sunbeams, as
Chrysostom says they should be; and let their lives be so unblameable, that no
man may speak the least evil of them without a manifest lie, etc.

that despise my name] This is the crime they are directly and expressly charged
with. They had not honored God as a Father, feared him as a Master; therefore
they had despised and slighted him. Not to do God right, is to do him wrong:
not to reverence him, is to rob him: not to bless him, is to blaspheme him,
Job. 1.5. That Is an excellent saying of Fulgentius, Deum si quis parum metuit,
valde contemnit: hujus qui non memorat beneficentiam, anget injuriam. i. e.
whosoever fears God but a little, slights him overmuch: and he that makes not
honorable mention of his bounty, does him a great deal of injury. The very not
serving of God, the not sacrificing to him, is a crime, Mal. 3.18. Eccles. 9.2.
How much more then a slubbered service, a corrupt sacrifice? There is a
contempt in this latter, which is worse then a bare neglect; and displeasing
service is double dishonor. Hence the present contest with those greasy
priests that despised Gods name: the Septuagint has it, Ye that esteem my name
at a low rate, that misprise it, (as the French translateth it) that have base
and bald conceits of me and of my nomen Majestativum, (...).
Majestic Name (as Tertullian terms it) that take me not into your hearts
under the name and notion of an infinite Highness, the great and mighty Maker
and Monarch of the whole world. Our safest eloquence concerning God, is our
silence, says Hooker: But if we take in hand to say any thing of him, Nullis
vocibus tam plene Deum significamus (says learned Scaliger) quam its quae
ignorantiam nostram praetendunt, We can set forth God so fully by no words, as
by those that set forth our ignorance of his excellency. The very heathens when
they would swear by their Jupiter, out of the mere dread and reverence of his
name, forbear to mention him. The Jews would not pronounce the name Jehovah,
Suidas.
here used in the text. The first among the Christians that pronounced Jehovah,
was Petrus Galatinus, Psalm. 111.
following the pronuntiation of the Syriacks and Greeks. If at any time we take
Gods holy and reverend Name into our thoughts, and (truly we should think of
him almost at every breath we draw, according to that Let every breath praise
the Lord) Remember to think of God as of One at all to be thought of; Psalm. 150.
as one whose Wisdom is his Justice, whose Justice is his Power, whose Power is
his Mercy, and all himself, Good without quality, great without quantity,
Everlasting without time, Omnipresent without place, containing all things
without extent, etc. This is to magnify God, to make roomth for him in our
hearts, and the contrary is, to despise his name.

And ye say wherein have we despised thy Name? Lo, the impudency of these
frontlesse Hypocrites. They traverse their aceusation, stand upon their
justification, and put God to his proofs. How ordinary is it with people still,
to palliate their sins and plead their innocence? Hos. 12.8. In all my
labors, they shall find none imquity in me: that were sin, that were a foul
business. But men have learned to draw a fair gloss upon a foul hand, to cast
a color, as the Calf-fish does, to deceive the fisherman: to hide their
sins as Adam, Job 31.33. by down right denial as did Cain, Gehezi, Ananias
and Sapphira, or else by excusing and extenuating, Genesis 4.9. 2 Kin. 5.25. Acts
5.8.
as Saul, 1 Samuel 16.20, 21. Or at least by a senseless silence, not
acknowleging their sins, or being affected with them; but rather out facing,
as Judas, John 13.21. with Mat. 2.24. Sin and shifting came into the world
together, and so they continue. Satan knows there is no way to purge the sick
soul but upwards: therefore he holds the lips close, that the heart may not
disburden itself, and have ease, Prove. 28.13.

Verse 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar] Bread, that is, Sacrifices
and Oblations (so Rabbi David expounds it out of Levit. 21.6. and Levit. 3.3.
and Number. 28.2.) For the Hebrews call all kind of meat by the name of bread,
though it be flesh of Ox, Lamb, or Goat, offered in sacrifice to God, whom
they made account that they feasted in their sacrifices. Psalm. 50.13.
Hence that of the Psalmist in the person of God, will I eat the flesh of
Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? Now the bread was reckoned polluted when
it was neither lawful, nor acceptable, but prohibited, and therefore abhorred;
as much every whit, as Ezekiels bread prepared with man's dung, Cap. 4.13. of
which he says, verse 14. Ah Lord God, behold my soul has not been polluted:
neither ever came there abominable flesh into my mouth. What sacrifices God had
flatly forbidden, see Levit. 22.20, 21, 22, etc. Take we heed that we despite
not the Lord with seeming honors: we pollute him with our sacrifices, whiles
either for the matter of them, we present him with will worship; as those of
old that sacrificed their children (in a foolish imitation of Abraham's offering
his son Isaac) and the Papists at this day in their unbloody sacrifice for
the living and the dead, and many other unwarranted fopperies. Or else, when
for the manner, devotion is placed more in the massy materiality of the outward
works, then purity of the heart, from which they proceed. This made God
complain, Isai. 1. that all his five senses, nay his very soul was offended and
vexed at their hypocritical performances, verses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. their
very incense (that precious perfume) that was made up of so many sweet spices,
and pure frankincense stank in his nostrils. Gods sharp nose easily discerns,
and is offended with the stinking breath of the hypocrites rotten lungs, though
his words be never so sented and perfumed with shows of holiness. Never did
the five cities of the plain send up such poisonous vapors to God, as the
prayers and other performances of a corrupt and carnal person. And God, not
able to abide these ill sents, sends down upon such, a counterpoyson of fire
and brimstone. Good actions from bad men displease: as a man may speak good
words, but we cannot hear them, because of his stinking breath: and as we
abhor to taste of a dainty dish, if brought to table by a foul nasty sloven
that has been tumbling in a jakes or wallowing in a quagmire. The very
Heathens, as they were very curious in the choice of their sacrifices, that
they were every way sound and of the best, Procul hine este profani.
so they carefully shut out all profane persons: the Priest cried out (...) who
is here? those that were present at the sacrifice answered, (...) here are
many, Erasm. Adag^ praefat:
and those all good men. And hence it was that Jehu sees and searches that no
servant of Jehovah be crept into the throng of Baals worshippers. Well might
this search have bred suspicion, were it not that in all those idolatrous
sacrifices the first care was to avoid the profane. Even Baal will admit no
mixture: how should the true God abide it? Let all Cainists take heed how they
draw nigh to him: so Luther calls offerentes non personam, sed opus personae,
all those that offer to God the work done, but do not offer themselves withal.
Luth. in decal.
We may fitly call those also Caimsts that offer polluted bread: as if Gods
table were contemptible; that think any thing good enough for God, that comes
next hand, Genesis 4.4. Heb. 11.14.
as Cain did: when Abcl brought of the sirstlings of his flock, and so offered
a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, God testifying of his gifts: as likewise
Christ did of Mary's spicknard of great price, defending her against Judas the
thief, that held it wast; whereas he secretly taxes those rich wretches of
baseness, who cast their brasse-money into the Treasury, (...). Mar. 12.41
as holding the worst piece they had good enough for God and his poor. Surely
Papists with their vowed presents of the very best they have to their He-saints
and She-saints: and Turks with their Moschees or Temples stately built, when
their private houses are low and homely, shall rise up in judgment and condemn
such sordid Christians, as cannot beteem God the best of the best. Solon the
Athenian Lawgiver appointed, (...). Rous Archae. page 57. (...). P^u^arch.
(...). Plu^: Cypr, de oratione Chrysostom.
that their sacrifices should be chosen and selected: that the sacrificers
should purify themselves some days before, and that none should serve God
obiter, slightly and slenderly, but in all best manner, and with the best
preparation they could make aforehand. Numa Fompilius King of Romans would not
have them worship their Gods (...) for fashion and dissolutely: but freed from
all other cares and cumbers: in the time of Divine Service, the Priests, to
prevent distraction, cried out often to the people, Hoc agite, mind the business
you are about. So in the Primitive times of the Church, the Deacons called often
upon the people sursum corda, lift up your hearts. And again, Oremus,
attendamus, Let us pray, let us attend. For why? Prayer without intention, and
hearing without attention, is as a body without a soul. This sentence is
written in Hebrew upon the walls of the Jewish Synagogues, et si nullibi minus
intentionis sit quam in ipsorum precibus, etc. says mine Author, Buxtorf.
Abbreviat. Spec. Europ.
though there is as little true devotion to be seen amongst them in their
services, as among any people, unless it be among the Papists (of whom perhaps
they learned it) whose devotions are prized more by tale then by weight of
zeal, whose holiness is the very outward work it self, being a brain-lesse
head, and soule-lesse body. In the Isle of Sardinia, as they give way, in the
very time of their Mass, to vain talking, and toying, and tumults, so after
Mass done, they fall to dancing in the midst of the Church: Heyl. Geog.
singing in the mean time songs too immodest for an Alehouse. Henry 3. King of
France Processiones religiosas non intermittit, at tepidius celebrat, says the
Chronicler would not neglect their religious processions, but showed little
devotion at them. For betwixt him and his Cardinal, there went at same time a
Jester, whose work was to make sport then, when the business required greater
seriousness. How much better the great Turk, who when he comes into his
Temple lays aside all his state, and has none to attend him, but a Professor
of their law, whose Office is to proclaim before they begin, that nothing be
done against religion?

yet ye say wherein have we polluted thee?] They well understood that by
offering polluted sacrifices they polluted God hinself (as much as in them lay)
and that the dishonor done to Gods service reflected upon himself, and was a
despising of his name verse 6. whereof his true worship is a part Mic. 4.5. and
1 King. 5.3, 5. Hence they say not, wherein have we polluted thine Altar? but
Wherein have we polluted thee? This is much more done under the New Testament
by all unworthy Communicants, and Unhallowed Worshippers, that present the
great God with dough-baked duties, slubbered services, careless and customary
performances; which they turn over as a task, holding a certain daily stint of
them, as malt-horses do their pace, or mill-horses their round, merely out of
form and for fashion sake. These do enough to pollute the God of purity, and to
cast contempt upon him from the sons of men; who will be apt to conclude, that
he is a contemptible God, since he will be content to take up with such
contemptible sacrifices and services. But more especially those that come hand
over head, and without due preparation to the Lords supper, are guilty of
polluting Gods holy things, and of crucifying afresh the Lord of glory, putting
him to an open shame. Dum enim sacramenta violantur, ipse cujus sunt
Sacramenta, violatur, says Hierome. When the Sacraments are violated, he also,
whose the Sacraments are, is no less violated. And as these in the text are
said to pollute God, in that they offered polluted sacrifices, though they
never touched God himself: so unworthy Receivers are guilty of the Lords body
and blood, 1 Cor. 11.27.
although they never touched either his body or blood with their impure
mouths. They are as very Kill-Christs as Judas was in a proportion: And look
whatsoever blasphemies, irrisions, scorns, contumelies, reproaches, the
miscreant Jews belched forth, and practiced corporally against Christ, the same
are spiritually repeated and iterated by the unworthy Receiver: who polluteth
the very outward elements that he touches, and so offers indignity to Christ
whom they represent: like as he that does rent, deface, trample under foot, and
villanously abuse the image, scal, or Letters Patents of a Prince or State, is
guilty of high treason: so is it here: The Donatists that cast the holy
Elements to dogs, did it to the disgrace of Christ: and by a just judgment from
him, were themselves afterward devoured of dogs. Dr. Monton reports a story of
his own knowledge, of one Sr. Booth a Bachelor of Arts in St. John's College
in Cambridge, who being Popishly affected, at the time of the Communion took
the consecrated bread, and forbearing to eat it, convei'd and kept it closely
for a time, and afterward threw it over the College wall. But a short time
after, Instit. of the Sacr. lib. 5. cap. 3. Sect. 5.
not enduring the torment of his guilty conscience, he threw himself headlong
over the battlements of the chapel: and some sew hours after, ended his life.
God seems to say of every one that comes to the supper of his son, as
sometime Solomon said of Adoniah, If he will show himself a worthy man, there
shall not an bair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found
in him, he shall die 1 King. 1.52.

in that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible] Gods infinite patience
in vouchsafing not only to reply to these malapert Priests, but thus to
rejoyne, and to approve the Assumption of the last Syllogism, which they so
shamelesly denied, is much to be admired. How justly might he have answered
them with blows instead of arguments: and have dealt with them as he did with
Pharaoh, that sturdy rebel, that proudly asked, who is the Lord? Hereunto God
made a large reply by a great many plagues, one after another, till Pharaoh was
forced to answer himself, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people am wicked.
And as Gods patience appears in his proceeding with these Priests in the
text, so hiswisdome too, in his thus instancing in particulars of their sins,
that he might the sooner evict them, and bring them to a saving sense and sight
thereof. Thus he dealt by our first parents in paradise: and afterward by
Cain. Whereas, without any more ado, the Lord God said unto the serpent,
Because thou have done this. cursed art thou etc. Genesis 3.
He was not so much as questioned, or convinced, because God meant him no
mercy: but presently doomed, because of mere malice he had offended.

ye have said] i. e. ye have thought, as Psa. 32.5. and 30.7. and as good ye
might have spoken out: for I hear the language of your hearts: I understand
your thoughts long before, Psalm. 139.2:
or at a great distance.

the table of the Lord] that is, the Altar of burnt offerings See Ezekiel. 41.22.
which is therefore called a table, because by their sacrifices God did as it
were feast the Lord, as is above noted. And as God prepared the Israelites a
table in the wilderness, so they also (in a sense) prepared him a table: Hence
Moses tells Pharaoh, Exodus 5.1.
that they must go to keep a feast to the Lord. And how God accepted of their
kindness, See Hos. 9.10. I found Israel, says He, like grapes in the
wilderness: which, to a wearied parehed traveller, how welcome are they? And
how the good soul still entertaineth her Christ, as Esther once did
Ahashuerosh at the banquet of wine, is sweetly set forth in many passages of
Solomon's song. See cap. 1.12. with the Note.

is contemptible] Or, lightly set by. Some are poor and cannot: others are
profane and care not to cover Gods Altar with their sacrifices. Hence the
whole ministry is slighted, because impoverished. For ad tenuitatem
beneficiorum, necessario sequitur contemptus Sacerdotum, Panormit. Horat. R.
David.
Lean benefices make contemptible Incumbents: And Nil habet infelix paupertas
etc. Poverty renders men ridiculous. Or thus, The table of the Lord is
contemptible, so they esteemed it, because the fat and blood powered upon the
Altar were things but base and despicable in themselves: and they considered
not for what end God had appointed these sacrifices, and how they were to be
led to Christ by them. For the ceremonial law was or ought to have been their
Gospel, it was Christ in figure. And this, if these Bu^zards had seen, they
would never have counted the Table of the Lord contemptible; as holding forth
the Lord Christ unto them, that Pearl of Price, who is better then Rubies; and
the Altar or Table, that typified him, or presented him to his people, was not
an oyster-board as the Papists in K. Edw. 6. Act. and Men Joseth Antiq. lib.
12. cap. 2. Cedron. comp. hist. page 817.
time scornfully termed our communion table; but far more precious then either
that rich table sent by Ptolemy Philadelph to Eleazar the Jews High Priest, or
that costly communiontable that had in it all the riches of land and sea,
offered up by Justinian in the temyle of Sophia in Constantinople.

Ver. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice etc.] Their profaneness in
polluting Gods Altar is here further evinced and evidenced. 1. By the
Illegallity of their practice, whiles they offered the blind and lame as good
enough for such a contemptible Altar. 2. By the incivility and indecency
thereof; whilst they presented that to the Emperor of the world, that they
would have been ashamed or afraid to present to some petty Prince, that had any
power to punish such an affcont. The Law for sacrifices see Levit. 22.20. Deuteronomy.
15.21. A blind sacrifice he offers, who worshippeth he knows not what Ioh.
4.22. that is, to seek, and grope in the dark Act. 17. when they yield not the
obedience of faith, bring not to God an intelligible reasonable service, Romans
12.1.
such as whereof they can render a sound reason out of the word of God; who
binds us not to any blind obedience, as the Popish Padres do their Novices. And
yet the most people are to this day woefully to seek for the warrant of their
worships; resting on that old Popish rule, to follow the drove, and believe as
the Church believes. Act. 19.32.
As at Ephesus (so in our Church Assemblies) the more part knew not wherefore
they were come together. They will say in general, to serve God. But who he
is, how to be served, wherein and in whom to be served, they know not. There is
in a printed sermon a memorable story of an old man, above threescore, who
lived and died in a parish, Mr. Pemble Sermon. misch. of l^^^r.
where there had been preaching almost all his time. This man was a constant
hearer as any might be, and seemed forward in the love of the word. On his
deathbed being questioned by a minister touching his faith and hope in God, he
made these strange answers. Being demanded what he thought of God? he answered
that he was a good old man. And what of Christ? that he was a towardly young
youth. And of his soul, that it was a great bone in his body. And what should
become of his soul after he was dead? That if he had done well, he should be
put into a pleasant green meddow. These answers astonished those that were
present to think how it were possible for a man of good understanding, and one
that in his days had heard at the least two or three thousand sermons: yet
upon his deathbed in serious manner thus to deliver his opinion, in such main
points of Religion, which infants and sucklings should not be ignorant of. But
we may be sure this man is not alone: there be many hundreds whose gray hairs
show they have had time enough to learn more wit, who yet are in case to be set
to their A. B. C. again for their admirable simplicity in matters of religion.
Blind they are, and blind sacrifices they offer: never once opening their eyes
till death (if then) as Pliny reports of the Mole; but always rooting and
digging in the earth, as if thorough the bowels of it they would dig themselves
a new way to hell.

is it not evil?] Or, as some read it, It is not evil. q. d. it is good
enough, and may serve turn well enough. Or thus, It is not evil in your
opinion, who rather then you would lose any gain, say, Melius est ill quam Nil
('it is Osianders rhyme) better that which is ill and bad, then nothing at all.
But they which count all good fish that comes to net, will in the end catch the
devil and all. The sense is much clearer in the interrogative, Is it not
evil? It is, It is: and therefore studiously to be declined and avoided, as
poison in your meat, or a serpent in your way, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil, says that great Apostle: how much more
from all apparent evils, such as stare you in the face, and are so directly
contrary to the plain word of God? Such are sins with an accent, wickedness
with a witness, great transgressions Psalm. 19.13.

and if ye offer the lame and languishing] He offers the lame that brings his
sacrifice with a wicked mind, Pro. 21.27. as Balac and Balaam did Number. 21.1, 2.
that walks not evenly before the Lord, and with an upright foot Genesis 17.1. that
halts between two opinions, as the people did 1 King. 18.21. inter coelum,
terramque penduli hanging betwixt heaven and earth, as Meteors; uncertain
whether to hang or fall. Such were Ecebolus, Baldwin, Spalatensis, Erasmus
(...), Cyprian calls such ancipites, palpatores temporum, in levitate tantum
constantes, doubtfull-minded men. St. James calls them double-minded men,
unstable in all their ways, Jam. 1.8. Bradsords letters. Rev. 3.14.
as he is that stands on one leg, or as a howl upon a smooth table. But what
said that Martyr? If God be God, follow him: if the Mass be God, let him that
will, see it, hear it, and be present at it, and go to the devil with it. But
let him do what he does, with all his heart. God cannot abide these
Neuterpassives (I would thou were either hot or cold.) He requires to be served
truly that there be no halting, and totally, that there be no halving. To halt
between two opinions, to hang in fuspence, to be in religion as idle beggars
are in their way, ready to go which way soever the staff falls, how hateful
is it? When some took Christ for John Baptist, some for Elias, some for
Jeremias, But whom say you that I am? said our Savior: to teach us that Christ
hates to have men stand doubtful and adhere to nothing certainly: to have them
as mills fit to be driven about by the devil with every wind of doctrine: or as
hunting dogs betwixt two hares, running as soon after this, as soon after that;
and so losing both. This for point of judgment: And for matter of practice,
the soul is well carried, when neither so becalmed that it moves not when it
should, not yet tossed with tempests to move disorderly. A wise man's course is
of one color, like it self: he is homo quadratus, a square stone fet into the
spiritual building 1 Pet. 2.7. he is Semper idem as Joseph was; no changling,
but one and the same in all places and estates of life: his fcet stand in an
even place (as David's did Psa. 26.12.) that is, in an equal tenor. Uniformity
and ubiquity of obedience are sure signs of his sincerity: when godliness
runs thorough his whole life, as the woof runs thorough the warp. But the legs
of the lame are not equal says Solomon Pro. 26.7. The hypocrites life is a
crooked life, he turns aside to his crooked ways, Psalm. 125.5.
says David, as the crabfish goes backwards: or as the Planets though hurried
from East to West, yet by a retrograde motion of their own, steal their passage
from West to East. It Is a crooked life when all the parts of the line of a man's
life be not straight before God; when he lifts not up the hands that hang
down, and the feeble knees, and makes straight paths for his feet, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.12, 13 (...)
and not rather healed and rectified, or set to rights, as the Apostles word
signifies. That Is a sick soul that is not right set for heaven: and that is a
gasping devotion, a languishing sacrifice that leans not upon Christ, and
that is not quickened by his spirit, fitly called by the Apostle, a spirit of
power, and of love, and of a sound mind 2 Timothy 1.7. Surely as a rotten rag has
no strength, so an unsound mind has no power to do ought that may please God.
Frustra nititur qui Christo non innititur, says a Father. He loses his labor
that leans not upon Christ (who is the power of God and the wisdom of God)
that leans not wholly upon him, but will needs have one leg upon the earth,
and the other upon the water, as that Angel in the Revelation: one foot upon
the solid ground, and the other upon a quagmire: that rest upon Christ, but as
a part-Saviour, as Papists: or trust to him, as the Apricock tree that leans
against the wall, but it is fast rooted in the earth: so some seem to lean upon
Christ in their performances, but are rooted (meanwhile) in the world, in
pride, filthiness etc. Or, lastly as the Ivy, which though it clasp about the
oak and draws much from it, yet brings forth all its berries by virtue of its
own root. Thus hypocrites also offer sacrifice, but its a sick facrifice,
because it is srom themselves and in themselves: they do all in their own
strength, that is, in their own weakness. For our strength is to sit still,
Isa. 30.7. Isa. 26.4.
and to work our selves into the Rock of ages. Trust ye in the Lord for ever:
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The blind and the lame
Jebusites when they had secured themselves in the strong hold of Zion, insulted
over David, as if he could not come in thither, 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7
though he did his utmost to get in to them: the very blind and lame there
enclosed should be able to withstand him. But both their hold and their hope
deceived them. Nevertheless, says the Text, David took the strong-hold of
Zion, the same is the city of David. But they that get into the Rock Christ
Jesus, shall neve be visited of evil, Deo confist nunquam confust.
nor disappointed of their hopes: but of weak they shall be made strong, Heb.
11.34. able to present their bodies a lively (not a languishing) sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God, Romans 12.16. they shall do all things thorough Christ
which strengthens them, Philip. 4.13.

Offer it now unto thy Governour] Be it but some petty Provincial President,
some Duke of Venice, or Despot of Servia. Jacob can tell, that the Lord of
Egypt will look for a present: and therefore bids his sons take of the
best fruits in the land in their vessels, and carry down the man a present, a
little balm, Genesis 42.11.
and a little honey; spices and myrrh, nuts and almonds, of every good thing
somewhat, though it were the less: for to do much, it was not in the power of
their hands; but see that it be of the best, says He. The poor Persian that
met Artaxerxes with a handful of water, out of the river Cyrus, went away well
rewarded. So did the gardener that presented the Duke of Burgundy with a
rape-root, because it was the best they were able to do. Semblably, the
Almighty takes any thing well aworth from those that are willing indeed, but
alas, not able to bring a better present. Vow and perform (says He) unto
the Lord your God: bring presents unto him, that ought to be feared, Psalm.
76.11. Say not, I fear to present, because I have nothing worthy of him. Send a
lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Esaias 16.1. Or, if thou have not a lamb, offer a
pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons: but see they be young, and that thy
lamb be the best in thy fold, and it shall be accepted. Every man cannot do as
Solomon did at the dedication of the Temple: 1 King. 8.63
when he offered two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty
thousand sheep: Or, as great Alexander, of whom Pliny reports, that in his
childhood when he threw incense upon the Altar in great plenty, his
Schoolmaster checked him for so doing; and bade him sacrifice on that sort when
he had conquered the incense-bearing countries, and not till then. Alexander
when he had subdued Arabia remembered his Schoolmaster, and presented him with
a ship laden with frankincense: largely exhorting him to spare for no cost,
when he sacrificed to the gods. But no man must come before the Lord
empty-handed: if it be but an handful or two of flour, or a corn or two of
salt. Lev. 5.6, 11, 12. and 14.30, 31. Casaub. in Theoph. Scholiost. Aristop.
So the Athenians thought the gods would be well-pleased with a poor man, if he
offered but meal; especially if he could mingle it with oil and wine: for they
held that every man was bound to bring his best, and not to be base in saving
charges in this case. Hence it was, that when the famous Artificer Phidias
advised them to make the statue of Minerva rather of marble then of ivory. 1.
Because it was more durable: this passed with allowance. 2. Because less
chargeable: at the mention hereof with insinite indignation they commanded him
silence. Their meat offerings were to be sound and without blemish, whether it
were an ox, sheep, goat, swine, calf. The more wealthy did cast frankincense on
the altars: and in their blind devotion, Vide Pollucem. lib. 1.
thought they could hardly over-do in honor of their dunghill-deities. What
then shall become of those base wretches amongst us, that think every thing too
good for God, too much for his Ministers? that study to beat down the price of
heaven, and will not deal except they may have it under foot?

Will he be pleased with thee?] I trow not. The Vulgar renders it, Si
placuerit, etc. If it please him, or if he accept thy person: q. d. then let me
never be believed. But the other reading is better, and more agreeable to the
Original.

Or accept thy person?] Heb. Accept thy face, that whores forehead of thine,
hatched with so much impudence, that thou dare bring him a worse present, when
thou have a better at hand, but hold it too good for him. Araunab, 2 Samuel
24.23
though a subject, yet as a king, he gave unto the king, oxen for sacrifice,
and threshing instruments for wood. And although David accepted of his
courtesy, but not of his cost, yet God has crowned him and chronicled him for
his munificence, Zach. 9.7. Ekron, that is, the barbarous people of Palestina,
shall be as the Jebusite, that is, as this famous Jebusite Araunah, a
Proselyte, a true Convert, as appeared by his ready parting with his freehold
to God, and the best that he had to his Prince. Let all those that look for
acceptance in heaven, honor the Lord with the prime of their age, with the
choice of their days, (as the Hebrew has it, Eccles. 12.1.) with the primrose
of their childhood, with the best of their time, and of their talents: and not
unworthily, and woefully wast and cast away the fat and marrow, the flower of
their age, the strength of their bodies, the vigor of their spirits in sinful
pleasures and sensual delights, in pursuing their fleshy lusts that hale hell
at the heels of them. Will they give the devil the best, and then think to
serve God with the dregs, the bottom, the snuff, the very last sands, their
extreme dotage, that themselves and their friends are weary of? Surely, God
takes no pleasure to pledge the devil, or drink the snuffes that he has left.
If men reserve the dregs of their days for him, He will likewise reserve the
dregs of his wrath for them. He will put them over to the gods whom they had
chosen. as Judge. 10. and make them to know the worth of his good acceptance, by
the want of it. He that should set before his Prince, a dish of meat that had
been half-eaten before by hogs, or dogs, would he not be punished with all
severity? What then shall become of those that serve God with the devils
leavings? that sacrifice to themselves, as Sejanus did, Dio in Tiberio.
that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies, as those Seducers,
Romans 16. that say to God, Depart from us, and to the devil, Reign thou over
us, that are serious at his work, sleighty in Gods, etc.

Verse 9. And now I pray you, besecch God] Heb. Weary God with your prayers,
press him till he be even sick of you: improve your uttermost interest in him,
if at least you have any. Pray hard, if ye can at least: for all men cannot
pray, wicked men are gagged by the devil: and their character is, They call not
upon God. They may cant or chatter out a charm when Gods chastening is upon
them, yea, be with child, as it were, of a prayer, and yet bring forth nothing
better then wind Isai. 26.16, 17, 18. In prosperity, they may have some few
short-winded wishes as Balaam (satan's spelman) had; yea, they may by strength
of wit or memory devise an handsome prayer, and seem to set it forth with much
life, that they may pass for men of parts and gifts: But will the hypocrite
pray always? Job 27.10. will he persevere in prayer when God seems to cast out
his prayers, and to multiply his crosses? will he not rather curse in that
case: as Job's wife, and Micah's mother? will he not how lagainst heaven as the
wolf, when hungerbit? and as the Parrot when beaten, leave imitating man, and
turn to his own natural harsh voice? But say that wicked men do ( Ioab like)
run to the horns of Gods altar, when in distress or danger: say they roar out
a consession, when they are upon the rack, Hos. 6. Psalm. 78.34
(as Pharaoh) and call for good prayers: say they seek him with their
sacrifices as Israel did, when he slew them, then they sought unto him etc. and
made their voices to be heard on high, as the prisoner at the bar, as the hog
under the knife, as a bull in a net; Say they weary out God with their many
words, as those sacrificing Sodomites Isai. 11. and those hypocrites in the
Gofpel, that hoped to be heard for their much babbling: Mat. 6.
yet all this is but the prayer of the flesh for ease, and not of the spirit
for grace: it is but the fruit of sinful self-love, to rid themselves of Gods
rod, or to still the noise of their consciences, or out of a vain hope to stop
Gods judgments, etc. And hence it is that they miscarry, that they pray to so
little purpose (as here is hinted) and that they are not a button the better
for all their long prayers. For either God answers them not at all, he has no
respect to their sacrifices (which was Cains and Saul's unhappiness. The
Philistims were upon him, and God was departed from him) Or else he answers
them according to the idols of their hearts, bitter answers; Or if better, its
but as he answered the Israelites importunity for a king, for a scourge to
them, and for quails to choke them: Deus saepe dat iratus quod uegat proprtius,
God often gives that in anger which he denies in mercy. If it were otherwise,
the devil should have received mercy from God, when, upon his suit, he was
suffered to enter into the swine. Let our chief and constant Petition therefore
be in all our our addresses to God, that he would be gracious unto us:] that he
would cast a loving aspect upon us, that what ever else he deny us, corn, wine
etc. yet that he would lift up the light of his countenance upon us. This David
preferred before his crown and scepter. He had a crown of gold, but he valued
not that, in comparison of that other crown, Psalm. 103.4. he crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies. Hence Saint Paul having himself obtained
mercy, begins and concludes all his Epistles with wishes of Grace, mercy,
and peace: as not knowing what better to wish those whom he wished best unto.
This was Abraham's prayer for Ismael, O that he might live in thy sight, that
is, be joynt-heire of the promise of grace with Isaac. God answers, Diverse
Dukes shall come of Ismael, but with Isaac (as a token of special grace) will I
make my covenant. This was also Joseph's prayer for Benjamin Genesis 43.29. God be
gracious unto thee my son. This the priests were appointed to pray for, as a
blessing upon the people, Number. 6.24, 25. The Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee. And hereunto the Prophet seems to allude in
this text, q. d. you are the Lords Priests, and your office is to preach and
pray Deuteronomy. 33.10. They shall teach Jacob, they shall put incense before thee.
Show now what ye can do in a time of necessity: Beseech the Lord that he would
be gracious unto us. This is the main, the mother-blessing that comprehends all
the rest. Every man seeks the face of the Ruler, Prove. 29.26. I humbly beseech
thee that I may sinde grace in thy sight, my Lord O king: q. d. that is better
to me then all the land thou have given me, said that crafty Sycophant Ziba 2 Samuel 16.4. How much more is the grace of God to be preferred before all outward
blessings whatsoever? The Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of
Zion, Psalm. 134.3.
says the Psalmist, intimating that blessings out of Zion are above all the
blessings besides, that heaven and earth can yield us; What is the air without
light? what was Haman the better for all his honors, when the king frowned
upon him? How can a wicked man be happy though wealthy, so long as God is his
enemy? As that father speaks of Ahab: he describes him sitting in his ivory
palace in the time of the three years famine in Samaria: he had gold, silver,
and jewels in every place: but what good did all that when the heaven was
brass above, and the earth iron beneath? Cry therefore as those in Zachary,
Grace, Grace unto us, pray for our selves and others, as David did for Ittai
the Gittite, mercy and truth be with thee, 2 Samuel 15.20. Stir we up our selves
to take hold of God, and to get of him Gaius-his-prosperity, dona throni,
soul-blessings, and such as accompany salvation. Jesus Christ when he came into
the world, brought grace and truth with John 1.17. And God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, Not imputing our sins, but stretching out to
us the golden scepter of his grace. Get in to him therefore till this be done;
though thou should spend thy time in gathering up pearls and jewels, thou
art an undone creature.

this has been by your means] Heb. From your hand q. d. You Priests have
effected it, and are in fault about it. It is long of you that I and my service
are so slighted, as has been before demonstrated, you have eaused the people
to abhor the offering, 1 Samuel 2.17. you should have better instructed the
people in their duties, and not have suffered them so to pollute mine altar
with their carrion-sacrifices, and if God reject your prayers, as here, and
even curse your blessings as Chap. 2.2. and curse your seed, ver. 3. you have
to thank your selves. All this is by your means. Accept therefore of the
chastisment of your iniquity, leave quarrelling, and lay the blame of all where
it should be, wash you, make it clean etc. For till then will he regard your
persons? will he receive you to favor, and hear your prayer? Or will he think
the better of you, for your office and dignity of Priesthood? No sure, but the
worse; For, scdes prima and vita ima, the highest place, and the basest life
agree not. Dignit as in indigno est ornamentum in luto, even royalty without
righteousness is but eminent dishonor: and men of mark are therefore the
worse, because they should have been better. Height of place ever adds two
wings to fin, Example, and Scandal, whereby it soars higher, and flies much
further. If the Sun be eclipsed and obscured, a thousand eyes gaze upon it: a
lesser star may be darkened, and none take notice. A small flaw is noticed and
noted in a jewel; a small spot in a swan, not so in a swine. One fly may
corrupt a box of precious ointment: when a hundred flies in a tar-barrel, do no
hurt to it.

Verse 10. Who is there amongst you that would shut the doors] To be a
doorkeeper in Gods house, to have any the meanest employment about him, David
(though destined to a Diadem) looked upon, as an high preferment. Those
Nethinims, mentioned in Ezra and Nehemiah, were none other but the Gibeonites,
who were made drawers of water to the Temple, as a kind of punishment. God (who
is a liberal paymaster) made this cross a mercy. Their employment so near the
House of God, gave them fit occasion to be partakers of the things of God. The
Lord did wonderfully both reward and honor them. So he did all others, though
but porters, that had any office about his house. Know ye not, says Paul, that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and
they which wait at the Altar (though but to kindle a fire upon it) are
partakers with the altar? 1 Cor. 9.13.
Even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel. Should have, if not tithes as they had, yet honorary stipends,
double honor, Calvin.
1 Timothy 5.17. daplex, id est, multiplex, as Esaias 40.1, 2. Jer. 17, 18. Or,
double, comparatively to that of widows indeed, verse 2. which yet was
honorable maintenance, Et ex publico alebantur. The Priests of the old
Testament were plentifully provided for by tithes and other revenews appointed
them by God. True it is, that in the captivity little commodity was made of the
priesthood: whereupon some priests who had married themselves into the noble
family of Barzillai, took scorn to be in the priests register, but called
themselves after the family of then wives. Now after the return from Babylon,
the priestood grew into some gain and grace again: and then these degenerate
priests, would fain have thrust in among the priests of the Lord: but the
Tirshatha would not suffer them, Ezra 2.61. Howbeit those priests that had
stuck to their offices, and been faithful in them, did not serve God on
free-cost: neither was he behind hand, or in arrere with any of them, as
appears by this text: but as they did their work, so they had their wages. God
put into the heart of good Nehemiah to take order, that these tithes were duly
paid in to the treasurers for that purpose appointed, Neh. 13.10, 11. What
reason had these priests therefore to be so gripple and greedy of filthy lucre?
as to take such lame and lean sacrifices of the people, or if fat and good, to
change them for worser of their own, as holding any thing good enough for God?
which because they did,

I have no pleasnre in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an
offering at your hands] I care not for your persons, I respect not your
performances. The Lord had respect, first to Abel, and then to his offering,
Genesis 4.4. and Psalm. 4.3. But know (says David, to those that vilipended him)
that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: and this he makes
the ground why his prayer should be heard. The blood of a swine may look
better, and brighter then the blood of a sheep; yet might it not be offered
unto the Lord, because it was of a swine. Sordet in conspectu judicis, quod
fulget in conspectu operantis. A piece of wood may shine in the night from its
rottenness: and that be fair in the sight of men that is abomination before
God, Luke 16. The swan was rejected for sacrifice, because of his black skin,
notwithstanding his fair feather, Lev. 11.18. The wicked man's incense stinks of
the hand that offers it: and all his devotion is but a beautiful
abomination. There is in Lombard this sentence quoted out of Augustine, Omnis
vita infidelium peccatum est: and nihil bonum sine summo bono, The whole life
of unbeleevers is sin, neither is there any good without the chiefest good.
Ambros Spiera the Postiller says, Crudelis est illa sententia, This is a cruel
sentence. But says not the holy Scripture the very same in effect, Prove. 15.8.
Heb. 11.6. Joh. 15.5? What though Papists talk much of Opus operatum? and teach
that good works by whomsoever performed are accepted of the Lord, as justice in
an Atheist is a good and acceptable work to him? Jam. 5.16
Saint James assures us, that it is the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man only, and of one reconciled to God, that avails much. Psalm.
32.6 Psalm. 50
And, for this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, says David. The
lepers lips should be covered according to the law. And to the wicked God
says, What have thou to do, etc? It is said of witches and their good prayers,
(as they call them) Si magicae, Deus non vult tales: si piae, non per tales. If
those prayers be abused to witchcraft, God will have none of them: and if they
be never so good, God will not have them from such kind of people. Before they
pray, men should see whether they are persons fit to pray: for God accepts not
of a good motion from an ill mouth, Jer. 11.10, 11. Joh. 9.31. 1 John 3.22.
Psalm. 66.16. A wicked man wants contrition, humility, faith, hope, feeling,
fervency: he has not a spirit of grace and supplication, to endite his
prayers; he has not an Intercessour in heaven to present and perfume his
prayers. The breath wherein our prayers ascend should be like pillars of smoke
perfumed with Christ's myrrh and incense. Otherwise our words will be like the
Egyptian pots, recking out the strong smelling onions and garlic of our own
corruption, such as God can take no pleasure in, neither will he accept such an
offering at our hands.

Verse 11. For from the rising of the sun etc.] where as they might object, If
you will not have service from us, you can have none at all: for other people
walk every one in the name of his God Mic. 4.5. and the Gentiles have their
vanities, and doctrines of vanities Ier. 14.22. and 10.8. wherewith they are
wholly taken up. Take you no care for that, says God here.

for from the rising of the sun, to the going down of the same, my name shall
be great among the Gentiles] I will provide for mine own great Name, that is,
for my glory (for so Gods Name is used in that sense Exodus 9.16. Psalm. 8.1.) I
will be no loser by your rejection: for I have other people that will more
reverence me, and do me better service; so that I need not be beholding to you.
I have from East to West those that will make hard shift but I shall have
service done me. I can set a sign, and send to Tarshish, Pull, and Lud etc.
that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory, Isa. 66.19, 20.
and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. And they shall bring all
your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and
in charrets, and in litters etc. that though sick, weakly, and unfft for
travel, yet they shall come on end; and rather in litters then not at all:
they shall be content to suffer any hardship for heaven, as the stone will fall
down to come to it is own center, though it break it self in an hundred pieces.
The Gentiles once converted shall fly as a cloud Isa. 60.8. that is, with
greatest pernicity and swistnesse: yea they shall in such flocks come to the
Church, as if a whole flight of doves, driven by some hawk or tempest, should
scour into the columbary, and rush into the windows. There are that have
observed, (...). Deus, Dieu Got etc.
that the name of God in all the maternall languages confisteth of four
letters, to intimate that he has his people in all the four quarters of the
earth, out of all countries, nations, and languages, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israeh
The Lord our God is one Lord. In the Original, the last letter of the word.
Hear, is greater then the rest, as calling for all possible heed and
attention. So likewise is the last letter in the word One, which being Daleth,
and standing usually for Four (as a numerall letter) signifies, say the
Hebrew-Doctours, that this One God shall be worshipped in all the four corners
of the earth. This, Cyprian has also gathered from the Greek letters of the
name Adam: A (...). A (...). M (...).
which do severally signify the four quarters of the world, East, West, North
and South: to teach, that Christ, the second Adam, will fetch his people from
all parts: and has therefore built his Church, his new Jerusalem four-squar
Rev. 21.16. and placed on the East three gates, on the North three gates, on
the South three gates, and on the West three gates, ver. 13. that all from all
parts may have free and open access unto him. Babylon was in like manner built
four square, as Heredotus testifies: Lib. 1.
and Constantinople is so situate betwixt Europe and Asia, as if it were
fatally founded to command both. This is much more true of Vranople, the city
of the great King, Turk hist. 1153.
open to all comers, as the Aedilis or Chamberlains house in Rome was. O thou
that hear prayers, to thee shall all flesh come (says the Psalmist) come
with a courage, Psalm. 65.2.
since they are sure as of access, so of success in all their suites thorough
Christ the Mediator, who has made both one, Ephesians. 2.14.
and has broken down the middle-wall of partition between Jews and Gentiles.
This the perverse Jews could never abide to hear of: nor can they to this day.
And therehence is it that they have in their expositions basely depraved this
text, and corrupted the true sense of it, as is to be seen in the Chaldee
Paraphrast, and David Kimchi: calling us still Goi Mamzer bastard Gentiles, and
cursing us in their daily prayers, which are not (sure) that pure offering
mentioned in this verse, and interpreted by them of the prayers of the holy
Jews every where dispersed. The rejection of the Jews and acception of the
Gentiles into grace and favor is a hidden mystery: such as makes the Apostle
of the Gentiles cry out, O the depth 1 Romans 11.23. yea it is a part of that
great mystery of Godliness 1 Timothy 3.16. that God manifested in the flesh
should be preached unto the Gentiles, and believed on in the world. Let us
pity the poor hardened Jews: and pray the rending of the vail that is yet
spread over them: that the rebuke of Gods people may be taken away from off all
the earth Isa. 25.7, 8. Let us also praise God who has made us Gentiles meet
to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light Col. 1.12. And take
heed that we sin not away our light, and cause God to take his kingdom from
us, giving it to a nation that will bring him better fruit Mat. 21.43. we have
a fair warning given us by the example of the Jews Romans 11. See thou another
shipwreck? look to thy tackling.

from the rising of the sun] from the East of Judaea the sun of Christ's Gospel
passed by the south of Greece to the West of the Latin Church, and these
Islands of ours that lie in the Sea, Vide Scapul. in Them (...).
into which the Sun is said to go down, or to lie down, as in its tabernacle of
rest (which is an expression of the old Greek Poets, and the Original word
here used agrees to it.) All the danger is, lest the Gospel in this it is
Solar motion, be traveling for the West of that other world, the American
parts; and quitting it is present places of residence and unworthy possessours;
And then sarewell England. Oh let us pray that that dismal day may never
arise, wherein it shall be said, that the glory is departed from our English
Israel.

my name shall be great] Name for fame as Exodus 34.5, 6. Philip. 2.9. Genesis
11.4. Renouned men are called men of name Genesis 6.4. and base men are called men
of no name Job 30.8.

shall be great] Not that God is great, or less. Magnum and parvum sunt ex
ijs, quae sunt ad aliquid, says Aristotle. But Gods name is said to be great,
when he is declared or acknowledged to be great, as the word (sanctified) is
used Mat. 6.9. and the word (justified) Mat. 11.19. Iam. 2.21. Gods fame and
glory is (as himself) eternal and infinite; and so abides in it self, not
capable of our addition or detraction. As the Sun which would shine in its own
brightness and glory, though all the world were blind, and did wilfully wink.
Howbeit, to try how we prize his Name, and how industrious we will be to
magnify and exalt it, he has declared that he esteems himself made glorious;
and accounts that he has received, as it were, a new being by those inward
conceptions we have of his glory, and those outward honors we do to his name.

and in every place incense shall be offered] Not at Ie^usalem only, as the
Jews held; nor in mount Gerizim, as the Samaritans Job. 4.20, 21. but any place
(without difference) be it but a chimney might make a goodly Oratory 1 Timothy
2.8. All religious difference of places was taken away by Christ's death.
Therefore so soon as he had said Ioh. 19.30. It is finished, he gave up the
Ghost, and presently the vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom
Mat. 27.51. And from that hour there was no more holiness in the Temple, then
in any other place. Though till then, the Temple was so holy a place, and such
religious reverence did Gods people bear to it, that after the Caldeans had
burnt it, they honored the very place where it had stood, and esteemed it
holier then any other. This appears by those eighty persons whom Ishmael
murdered Ier. 41.5. and by Daniels opening his windows toward Jerusalem, when
he prayed Dan. 6.10.

Incense shall be offered, and a pure offering] Insigne testimonium pro
sacrificio Missae. says Bellarmine. This text is a notable testimony for the
sacrisicing of the Mass, which Papists will needsly have to be the sacrifice
here meant and mentioned. Much like that Sorbonist that finding it written at
the end of S. Paul's epistles, Missa est, Bee-hive of Rome fol. 93.
etc. bragged he had found the Mass in his Bible: So another reading John 1.4.
Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion. We shall wave their arguments as
sufficiently answered by others: and take the meaning of the holy Ghost here to
be of such spiritual sacrifices of the new Testament, as all Christians, even
the whole royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5.
are bound to offer up to God. These are called Incense and Offering by
Analogy, the type for the thing thereby shadowed, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Rev.
5.8. Rev. 8.3, 4.
and Augustine interpret the Text. This incense is prayer, and praise, Psalm.
141.2. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 51.21. This pure offering is every saithful
Christian together with all the good things that he has or can do. It is
simplex oration de oonscientia pura, Cont. Marcion. lib. 4.
says Tertullian. Thus those good Macedouians gave themselves to the Lord,
says S. Paul, and unto us by the will of God. 2 Cor. 8.5. I hus the Romans had
delivered themselves up to the form of Doctrine, Romans 12.1.
that had been delivered unto them, Romans 6.17. and are yet further exhorted to
exhibit, present, make tender, yield up and offer as spiritual priests, their
bodies (and much more their souls) to God, as a living sacrifice, by a
willingness to do what he requires, Psalm. 40.6 Romans 15.16. and to die for his
fake if called thereunto. Phil. 2.17. 2 Timothy 4.6. Swenk feldians took away all
external service, says Zanchy. Libertines say, it is sufficient that we
sacrifice to God the hidden man of the heart. The Pope says to his vassals, My
Son, give me thy heart: be a papist in heart, and then go to Church, dissemble,
do what ye will. But God requires to be Glorified with our spirits and bodies
both, because both are his. 1 Cor. 6.20
The very Manichees that denied God to he the Author of the body, fasted on
sundays, and in fasting exercised an humiliation of the body. But (2) as the
true christian sacrifices himself to God, so all that he has, or can; and is
ready to say as that Grecian did to the Emperor, If I had more, more I would
bring thee. It comforts him to consider, (...). 2 Cor. 8. 1 Timothy 1.5
That if there be a willing mind, God accepts according to that a man has,
and not acaccording to that he has not. Noah's sacrifice could not be great,
yet was it greatly accepted, because of clean beasts, and offered in faith. It
is the godly man's care, that his offering though it be poor, yet may be a pure
offering, proceeding from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned;
and then he is sure it is pure by divine acceptance through Christ. 1 Pet.
2.5. In confidence whereof he lifts up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. And although
sensible of his impurities and imperfections, his heart misgives him sometimes
as Jacobs did, lest his father should discern him; yet when heremembreth that
he is clothed as Jacob was, with the garment of his elder brother, the robe of
Christ's righteousness (which is not a scant garment, as Bernard says, but
reaching to the heels and covering all the parts of the soul) he goes boldly
to the throne of grace, and covers Gods altar with his evangelical sacrifices.
Such as are contrition and self-denial, Ps. 51.17. Confidence in God, Ps. 4.6.
Obedience to the preaching of the gospel, Romans 15.16. Beneficence to the poor,
Phil. 4.8. etc. In all which his aim and endeavor is to worship God in spirit,
and to do all, more out of thankfulness, and less out of constraint of
conscience. For he knows that as the greatest growth of sinners is in spiritual
wickedness (as in those that sin against the holy Ghost) so the greatest
growth of grace is in spiritual holiness; in worshipping God more in spirit
and truth.

Verse 12. But ye have profaned it.] Ye Jews in general, though my peculiar
people, and called by my name. You that quarter arms with me as it were, and
should therefore lift up my Name as an ensign: that you should use me thus
coursely, and cast dirt upon my name by your irreligion: this moves me not a
little: so that I cannot but once and again complain of it. Had it been an
enemy, (...).
I should better have born it. But it was thou my familiar, etc. What, thou my
son Brutus? Friend, betrayest thou the Son of man, and that with a kiss?
Scipio had rather Hanibal should eat his heart with salt, then Laelius his
friend do him the least discurtesie. God will take that of a profane person,
that he will not of a professor. Philistines may cart the ark, and escape
scotfree. But if David do it, God will punish him in the death of Vzzah.
Augustus Caesar may send forth a decree that all the (Roman) world should be
taxed or numbered, Luke 1.2. but if David number his people, God will make bloody
wailes upon his back: and if he make Gods name to stinck among the heathen, God
will scour out that blemish cast upon his name with David's tears and blood, See
Ezekiel. 36.21. and 39.7. Amos 2.7. Levit. 10.3, I will be sanctified in all th^^
that draw near unto me. Sanctified he will be either actively or passively:
either in the sincerity of their conversation, or else in the severity of their
condemmnation. If Solomon forsake the Lord that appeared unto him twice, God
will chastise him with the rods of men at least. If Israel profess Gods name,
and yet profane it, God will cast them off, and turn to the Gentiles. And indeed
what could he do less to a nation so incorrigibly flagitious, a nation so
unthankful for mercies, so impatient of remedies, so incapable of repentance,
so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked?

The table of the Lord] that is the Altar: see verse 7.

And the fruit thereof.] Or the revenue, the income of it: It is a base
allowance that the Priests have; prisoners pittance: they live that is all. Or
thus, The table of the Lord is polluted, etc. That is, it is no better worth
then to be polluted; neither do his Priests deserve either countenance or
maintenance. So many wretched people in these days think there is more ado
made then needs in the worship and service of God, Colo Deum, ut par est.
Whereas indeed we that have received so many mercies, and have lived in such an
age of miracles, should not only servire Deo, sed and adulari as Tertullian
phraseth it, serve God, but be unsatisfiable in serving him. And as Gods
service is slighted, so his ministers are well night starved in many places:
the vulgar holding the ministry no better then a idle useless trade, taken up
to make a living of. How Shamefully are Gods ablest servants defrauded, mocked,
misused. A sad prognostic of a dying State, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Verse 13. And ye have said also, Behold what a weariness is it, and ye have
snuffed at i: etc.] At what? At the chiding you have had for your lame and lean
sacrifices. A little offensive breath has blown you up into rage: This is a
kind of blasphemy, Ezekiel. 20.27. when graceless men fall into a fustian-sume,
as they say, by hearing of their faults: and bristle against a reproof, though
never so just. Or thus, Ye have puffed and blown, as almost breathless, by
carrying some carrion sheep for a sacrifice: as if it were so fat and full of
flesh, that you could hardly bring it without breaking your wind; whereas ye
might have blown it away, it is so thin and light. Bern.
Hateful Hypocrisy! And it sped accordingly. For should I accept this at your
hand? No, no; Sapiens nummularius est Deus: nummum fictum non reciptet. God is
a wise mint-man: he will take no counterfeit coin. He not only detects the
cozener, and detests him as here, but curses him bitterly in the next verse.
He rejects the hypocrites sacrifice and plagueth such Prometheusses; when as he
wipes not out any of the good services of his sincere people, Neh. 13.4. but
abundantly blesses them.

Labor therefore for that truth in the inward parts, that we may be with
Appelles approved in Christ, Psalm. 51 5 John 1
Romans 16. and with Nathancel, an Israelite indeed. Be we the same that we would
seem to be: and, if not as the windows of the Temple were, wider within the a
without; yet to be no more in show then we are in truth. It stands us in hand
when to deal with God, to have the greater part of our ware in the inner part
of the shop, and not all on the foreside, on the board or stall: and to see,
that though our work be but mean, yet it may be clean; though not fine, yet not
foul; soyled and slubberd with the slur of a rotten heart. Sweet powders can
make even leather an ornament, when the Sanies of a plague sore will render a
rich robe lothsom, and infections.

Verse 14. But cursed be that deceiver] Cursed with a curse both verbal and
penal; temporal and spiritual. These last light heavy (such as are hardness of
heart, Mal. 3 9 Romans 1 28 Mat. 27 5 Psalm. 109 18
and horror of conscience) though less observed; because they come into the
deceivers bowels like water, and like oil into his bones: They soak and sink
into his soul insensibly. He has his death about him (as we say of one that
has drunk poison, or eatenah Italian fig) though he fall not down dead
immediately. He is accursed, and he shall be so, as (in a contrary sense) Isaac
said of his son Jacob, He is blessed, and he shall be blessed. But usually the
visible vengeance of God, dogs the deceiver at the heels: his sin finds him
out, and lays him open to others, as an accursed person. This was Cains case
and curse, Genesis 4.15. God sets a mark upon him; probably it was the perpetual
trembling of his hands and whole body through the horror of his conscience.
So, not long before, when Adam had played the deceiver, and hearkened to that
old Impostor the subtle Serpent, God spared him, but cursed the ground (as the
Persians, when their Noble-mens sons had made a fault, hanged up their coats and
whipped them in their presence) Cursed is the ground for thy sake: Genesis 3 17
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth. And the truth is, it was never
beautiful nor cheerful since that curse inflicted: but lies bedridden, waiting
for the coming of the second Adam to free it from that heavy curse. Romans 8.20.
The barren figtree felt the power of Christ's curse even to admication Mat.
21.20. For when the disciples saw it, they marvelled saying, How soon is the
sigtree withered away? They might marvel well enough: for the figtree is the
most juycefull of any tree: and bears the brunt of winter-blasts, without
withering. But the blasts of Christ's mouth are more powerful. Hecan blow men
to destruction Job. 4.9. as so many dust-heaps; yea frown, not some single
fig tree only, but the whole vineyard to desolation. It is burnt with fire,
it is consumed: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance, Psalm. 80.16. Men
may curse, and no hurt follow; the curse causlesse shall not come, Prove. 26.2.
Michah's mother cursed when she lost her money, Jud. 17.2. Act. and Mon.
But who cared or fared the worse for that? And the like may be said of Julius
Palmer the Martyrs mother, when he craved her blessing upon his knees, she
drove him out of doors for an heretic, and said, Gods curse and mine go with
thee.

What was David the worse for Shemei's cursing of him, or Jeremy for the
peoples, Jer. 15.10.
or the reformed Churches for the Popes? the silly people in Italy are made to
believe, that ever since the Pope excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, the people of
England are all as black as devils. The Pope is like a wasp, no sooner angered,
but out comes a sting: which being out is like a fools dagger rattling and
snaping without an edge. We may say of his curses (with bell, book, and candle)
as Vegetius says of chariots armed with sithes and hooks, that at first they
were a terror, and after a scorn. But Gods curses are terrible, and light
heavy. lib: 1. cap. 24.
Together with word there goes forth a power (as it is said in another case)
and what he speaks with his mouth, he makes good with his hand. And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God: those that
have felt his fingers will say so. This the deceiver is sure to do if timely
course be not taken. Currat ergo poenit entia, ne praecurr at sententia.

that deceiver] That fraudulent fellow, that crafty companion, that coz'ner,
Quadruplator, Machinator, that deals subtilely with the Lord, as the
Egyptians did with his people, and thinks to out-wit him, as the Medianites did
the Israelites. (See Number. 25.18. Psalm. 10.25. in both which places the same
word is used, as here) that casts and fetches about (versutulus and
versatilis) how to deceive both God and man with shows of devotion; not afraid
to be damned, so he may seem to be saved, and seeking so long to deceive
others, that in fine he deceives his own soul, (which is the worst kind of
deceit, as self-murder is the worst sort of murder) winding himself into the
fools paradise of a sublime dotage, and that in matters of greatest consequence
and concernment. Imposturam faciunt and patiuntur, as that Emperor said of
them that sold glass for pearl; they mock and are mocked, deceiving or being
deceived, as Paul says, like some drunken stageplayer, they have acted a kings
part so long, that now they begin to think themselves kings indeed: and like
sleeping Sisera they dream of a kingdom, when as Jaels nail is nearer his
temples then a crown. A curse he is sure of, set on by God (who then shall take
it off?) and seconded by men, yea by men that were without God in the world.
Witness that law of the twelve tables in Rome, Sacrum, sacrove commendatum qui
clepserit rapseritve, parricida esto. Let him be punished for a parricide, that
shall commit sacrilege of any sort. Now an hypocrite is by Basil rightly
called (...) a sacrilegious Church-robber: because he steals from God (...)
himself dedicated to God by profession of Christianity: and so becomes (...)
accursed, yea, Anathema Maranatha double accursed, and put over to God to
punish: who has prepared the hottest fire in hell for such, because their sin
is increased by their knowledge: as the sin of Solomon in honoring idols which
he knew to be no gods, was far greater then that of his wives, which believed
them them to be gods, as Tostatus truly observes.

which has in his slock a male] A flock he has then, and is a sheep-master:
able perhaps to say as he in the Poet -- mill meis errant in montibus agni.
Were he a poor man, he might be the better excused: of a little God accepts a
little. Again, he has a male in his flock, a sound, tidy, fat lamb, or ram:
and reserving that for his own use, though he had voluntarily vowed it to God,
he brings a corrupt carrion, or a lean starv'ling for a sacrifice. This
deceitful dealing is his sin, that subjects him to the curse. This was the sin,
(and became the calamity) of those in Jeremy Chap. 4.22. that served not God
with the best of their understanding: of those in Haggee. that dwelt in their
ceiled houses, and let the Lords house lie waste: Hag. 4.4.
of Solomon (some think) that bestowed twice as much time in building his own
house as Gods house: of all those that seek not Gods kingdom in the first
place, that give not God the best of the best, the primrose of their age, the
first thoughts in the morning, the fittest and freest times of the day for
prayer etc. Scipio went first to the Capitol every day, and then to the
Senate House. David prevented the night watches to pray. Christ was at it a
great while before day Mar. 1.35. Of Charles the Great it is reported, that he
spoke and conversed more with God then with man. Dan. hist. sol. 13.
Our King Alfred cast the natural day into three parts; Eight hours he spent in
prayer, study and writing: eight in the service of his body, and eight in the
affairs of his State. The Jews divided the business of the day into three
parts. The first, ad Tephilla, that is for prayer: the second ad Terah, for the
study of the Law: the third ad Malchah, for work: this they did on
working-dayes; besides their weekly sabbath and other holy days stricktly
observed, which made Seneca (that profane Heathen) say of them, that they lost
more then a seventh part of their time. How much better might he have bewailed
his own loss of time, and neglect of the one thing necessary in the words of
Bernard, Totum vitae meae tempus perdidi, quia perdite vixi, I have lost my
whole life, because I have lived without God in the world? what a happiness
had it been to him, if he had observed Aristotle's rule (and Thales his
examples, viz. that a Philosopher may get riches, (...). Arist. Pelit. lib. 1.
cap. vlt.
but that is not their main business. Many are so busied in the world, that
they think not of Gods kingdom (which yet they vowed to do when they were
baptized) as the Duke of Alva told the king of France, who asked him, whether
he had observed the late great Eclipse? No, said he, I have so much to do upon
earth, that I have no leisure to behold the heaven. How much better Anaxagoras
the Philosopher, who being asked wherefore he came into the world? answered, Ut
coelum contempler, that I may contemplat heaven? men should certainly mind
heaven most and first; and not suffer the lean kine to eat up the fat, the
thin ears of corn the good: but honor God with the best of their substance and
with the best of their abilities (if they stand bound by vow especially, if
they have vowed a male to God.) Let it not be according to the Italian Proverb
with us, Sciapat il morbo fraudato il Santo, when the danger is escaped, the
vow is neglected) lest else God curse them, as here, for a company of cozeners:
and make them know and rue his breach of promise. Number. 14.34. Surely if Jacob
was afraid when he went about to seek a blessing, lest his blind father should
discern him, and his deceit in dealing with him, Genesis 27.12.
and so he might get a curse instead of a blessing; How ought men to take heed
and fear to dissemble or deal deceitfully with the All-seeing God? especially
since he is so great a God (see him set forth in his greatness Deuteronomy. 10.17)
and therefore less patient of affronts and indignities: he looks to be served
like himself, and according to his excellent greatness.

for I am a great king says the Lord of Hosts] Yea a great King, because Lord
of Hosts. See the Note on Chap. 3.17) (...). He is absolute Monarch of the
whole world: and by him it is that all other kings reign, and Princes rule
Prove. 8.15. All other Sovereigns are but his substitutes, his Viceroyes; he
makes them, and unmakes them at his pleasure, as proud Nebuchadnezzar was
forced to acknowledge. Hence he is rightly styled a great King (a title
anciently given to the kings of Persia, Dan. 4:
and now to the Grand Signior) yea, Joh. Manl. loc. com.
he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in another sense then Maximilian the
Emperor of Germany said that he was, because the Princes and cities of the
Empire were free states, and yielded him little obedience. God has all the
Kings of the earth at his beck and check: Constantine the great, Valentinian,
and Theodosius, three Emperors, called themselves Vasallos Christ's, the
vassals of Christ, as Socrates reports. And well they might; inasmuch as all
nations (taken together) are in comparison of him, but as a drop of a bucket,
and as the dust of the balance: behold he takes up the Isles as a very little
thing, as one would take up a feather at his foot. And if a sacrifice fitting
for him should be prepared, Lebanon would not be sufficient to burn, nor all
the beasts thereof for a burnt-offering. All nations to him are as nothing etc.
Act. 1 (...)
Esau. 40.15, 16. Simon Magus gave out, that he was some great matter: and the
world has been troubled with Alexander the Great, and Pompey the Great etc.
But what is now become of all these Grandees, with their swelling titles, and
loud bragg's. Has not God long since cut off the spirits of these petty-
Princes, and become terrible to the kings of the earth? Psalm. 76.12. where the
word rendered cut off, signifies that he slips them off, as one would slip a
flower betwixt ones fingers, or a bunch of grapes off the vine. The kings of
Persia were wont to give laws to their people, sitting in a chair of State,
under a vine tree of gold, that had as it were bunches of grapes made up of
sinaragds, or em'ralds, and other stones of greatest price. Athen^us lib. 12.
The King of heaven sits upon a throne far more costly and stately: as may be
seen Ezekiel. 1. Esai. 6. Dan. 7. Omnino igit ur ^portet nos, orationis tempore,
curiam intrare coelestem, in qua Rex Regum stellato sedet solio etc. as Bernard
excellently infers, it behooves us therefore at prayer-time, to enter into
the Court of heaven, Bern de diverse 25.
where the King of Kings sits in his starrie and stately throne, environed with
an innumerable number of glorious Angels, and crowned Saints; with how great
reverence therefore, with how great fears, with how great humility ought a
poor base toad creeping and crawling out of his ditch to approach so dreadful
a presence?

and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen] It was ever so from the very
distinction of men into Hebrews, and Heathens. At the first, before the
covenant made with Abraham, all Nations were alike before the Lord. But as soon
as it was said, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, the
Church was evidently divided from the world, as light was from darkness at the
first creation. The Heathens God suffered to walk in their own ways.
Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness: but his Name was ever
terrible and tremend amongst them. Act. 24.16, 17.
The Hittites honored Abraham as a Prince of God, Pharaoh was raised up on
purpose, that on him God might get him a name throughout all the earth, Exodus
9.16. Jethro heard of his doings in Egypt, and became a Proselyte. The hearts
of the Canaanits melted, and they were made to say, The Lord your God, he is
God in heaven above, and in earth beneath, Josh. 2.11. The Philistines were
woe-begon when they beheld the Ark of the God of Israel brought into the field:
and were ready, as worms, to wriggle into their holes. The king of Babylon sent
Ambassadors and a present to Hezechiah, because he had heard that for his sake
God had caused the Sun to go back. Daniel records what a Name God had gotten
him in his days all the world over. And after the captivity near Malachi's
time, the famous victories gotten by the Maccabees were far and near discoursed
of. Judis M ccabaeus had his name from the capital letters of this motto
written in his Ensign Mi camocha Elohim Jehovah, who is like unto thee O Lord
among the Gods? But besides, and above all this, Gods name is dreadful among
the Heathen in a special manner now; since the calling of the Gentiles, and the
conversion of so many nations to the faith of Jesus Christ, Maugre the malice
of earth and of hell. This made Calocerius an Heathen say, Vere magnus es^ Deus
Christ anorum the God of the Christians is a great God indeed. And another
(...) your God is a most Majestic God. What a mouth of blasphemy then opened
that desparate Papist John Hunt in his humble appeal to King James? The God of
the Protestants, says he, (whom he knows to be the Father, Son, Chap. 6. of
that Pamphlet.
and holy Ghost) is the most uncivil, and evil-manner'd God of all those who
have born the name of gods upon the earth: yea, worse then Pan God of the
clowns, which can endure no ceremonies, nor good manners at all; True it is,
that humane inventions in his service, and Popish will-worships, our God will
not away with. Such strange fire if any presume to bring before him, they may
look to speed as N^dab and Abihu, Core and his accomplices did: but he expects
and requires that all his worshippers should come before him with reverence and
godly fear: For even our God (no less then the Jews God) is a consuming fire.
He is terrible out of his holy places Psalm. 68.35. Heb. 12.28.
And albeit he loves to be acquainted with his people in the walks of their
obedience: yet (as a great King) he takes state upon him in his ordinances, and
will be trembled at in his word and Sacraments. Hence Chrysostom calls the
Lords table, (...).
that dreadful table: and other Ancients call Sacraments (...) terrible
mysteries. He that comes to this table without his wedding garment may look to
be taken from the table to the tormentor. That Is a remarkable Text Exodus 34.10,
11. upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they
saw God, and did eat and drink. So dreadful is God, and so infinite is the
distance betwixt him and the greatest Noble that comes to his table, that it is
an honor they may be suffered to live in his sight: how much more then to
partake of his ordinances. Kings and judges are instructed to serve the Lord
with fear, and to rejoice before him with trembling, Psalm. 2.10, 11. This is
horror saccr, says a Lapide upon this text descanting upon their vulgar
interpreter, who rendereth the word dreadful horrible, Et nomen meum horribile.
But what an odd conceit was that of a certain Sophister at Paris, L. Vives de
cause. corr. art. l. 3
who would needs be called the horrible Sophister, non minerem eam
appellationem ratus q^^^ Africani aut Asiatici, says Vives. Perhaps he had
read this Text in the vulgar Translation. Unless they had the same law at
Paris that they had in Italy, Espenc. in Tit. 1
that none should read the Bible, lest they should thereby be made heretics:
but rather study Aristotle (whom Peter Lombard had brought into more request
then Saint Paul, as the Sorbon at Paris complained (or the Canon Law, whereof
Carolostadius had been eight years Doctor, ere he began to read the Scripture:
and yet at the taking of his degree had been pronounced, Sussicientissimus.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. ANd now, O ye priests, etc. Now, that is, Now again, I must have the
other bout with you, besides what I had chap. 1.6, 7, etc. for as once from the
Prophets (so now from the Priests) in Jerusalem profamesse is gone forth into
all the land. Jer. 23.15
Their white Ephods covered many foul sins: and their evil example proved a
public mischief. Hence the Prophet is so round with them: for he knew that a
wicked Priest is the worst creature upon earth. Unsavory salt is fit for no
place; no not for the dunghill. It is an old proverb, that hell is paved with
the shaven crowns of evil priests. The word priest is never used by the
Apostles for a Minister of the Gospel: De culiu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. Hem. 3. in
Act.
no not by the most ancient Fathers, as Bellarmine himself confesses. Indeed
in Chrysoscome I sinde this piercing passage; Non arbitror inter sacerdotes
multos esse qui salvi fiant, I do not think, says He, that among all our
priests, there be many that shall be saved. Bernard comes after him and
complains, that in the court of Rome good men failed, bad men grew amain: Lib.
4. de Consid.
and that the Bishops of his time, were not Doctors but seducers, not Pastors
but Impostours, not Prelates but Pilates. Yea Pope Pius the second has left it
in writing, that no villainous act had been for a long time committed in the
Catholic Church, In hist. Austr. apud Callenat. hist. Neap. l. 4.
the first beginning whereof proceeded not from the priests. Cornelius a Lapide
upon this chapter, cries out of the ignorance and wickedness of the Popish
Clergy, as the cause of the contempt cast by us upon them. And I would we had
not cause to say, that many of our Ministers neither feed liberally by charity,
nor soundly by doctrine, nor religiously by life: which opened once the mouth
of that dead dog Campian, maliciously to bark out, Ministris little nihil
vilius, Their Ministers are most vile and vicious.

this commandment is for you] i. e. that curse, chap. 1.14. implying a
commandment: that if you desire to escape that heavy curse, you forthwith obey
this commandment (Aut faciendum enim aut patiendum) to procure the purity and
integrity of my worships, and to see that there be a present reformation of
Religion. Reformation is a work that has ever gone heavily on, and has met
with much opposition. As that made by Elias, by Josiah, by Nehemiah, and by
Hezekiah, who found the Priests and Levites very backward: which the good king
perceiving, began first himself, and awaked those sluggards with these words.
Oh be not deceived, my sons: God has chosen you for this service, 2 Chronicles.
29.11. The like backwardness was found in the Popish Clergy to a general
Council, so much urged and called for by the Bohemians, Germans, and other
Nations, that groaned under the yoke of Papal tyranny. Luther truly and trimly
compared the Cardinals and Prelates that met at Rome about Reformation of the
Church, to foxes, Sleidan Comment
that came to sweep an house full of dust with their tails: and instead of
sweeping it out, swept it all about the house, and made a great smoke for the
while: but when they were gone, the dust fell all down again. When nothing
could be obtained of the Pope, Luther began to reform in Germany, where he had
a great door open, but many adversaries, and none more violent then the Pope,
whose tripple crown, and the Monks, whose fat paunches he so nearly touched,
as Erasmus merrily told the Elector of Saxony. Bucer and Melancthon framed a
form of Reformation with approbation of the Peers and States. But the Clergy of
Collen rejected it with scorn and slander, saying that they would rather submit
to the government of the great Turk, Melch. Ad. in vita Enc.
then to a Magistrate that followed or furthered such a Reformation. Here in
England something began to be done in the time of Henry the 8. but it was so
envied and opposed by the Churchmen, that little could be done to what was
expected. There are many (said He, sitting in Parliament) that are too busy
with their new Sumpsimus, and others that dote too much upon their old
Mumpsimus. The new religion though true, He and his Clergy envied: the old,
though his own, he despised. Magistrates are to have the main stroke in
Reformation of Religion, (though Papists would utterly exclude them for having
to do in matters Ecclesiastical) but Ministers also must move in their own
Orb, and do their part too. (why else are the priests here commanded and
menaced?) 1. By teaching. 2. By exercising discipline. And here Magistrates
must hemme Ministers in with boards of Cedar, Cant. 8.9. provide for their
security, whiles they do their duty, that they may be without fear among them,
as Timothy, 1 Cor. 16.10. Envied they must look to be, and hated for their zeal
to Gods house, which they seek to purge. But public respects must (like the
rapt motion) carry our hearts contrary to the ways of our own private
respects, or concernments: and consider, that as it is not the tossing in a
ship, but the stomach that causes sickness; the choler within, and not the
waves without: So the frowardness of men, that quarrel with reformation; and
not the work it self, which is Gods commandment, as here the Prophet calls it.

Verse 2. If ye will not hear] that your souls may live, Isa. 55.3. but
forbear, and so show your selves a rebellious house, Ezekiel. 2.8. so adding
rebellion to your sin. If you will needs resemble the deaf adder, which
although by spitting out his poison, he might renew his age, stops his ears
by applying one to the earth, and covering the other with his tail, lest he
should hear the voice of the charmer. Or, if ye do hear with that gristle that
grows upon your head only,

and will not lay it to heart] Heb. upon your heart, as a weight to keep it
down from rising in rebellion against the Lord. If you esteem my command a
light matter, and instead of pondering it in your hearts with Mary, cast it
behind your backs, Psalm. 50.17. or, suffer it to run through you as water runs
through a riven vessel, Heb. 2.4. If thirdly, you will not give glory unto my
Name, by confessing your sins, Josh. 7.19. (so submitting to my justice, and
imploring my mercy, which will make much to my glory) and redresling your
ways, Psalm. 50.23. by breaking off your sins, and bearing much fruit, Ioh.
15.8. studying mine ends more then your own, and drowning all self-respects in
my glory. If you will not observe and fulfill these three forementioned
conditions of exemption;

I will even send a curse upon you] that evil Angel of mine, that shall bring
with him fierceness of anger, wrath, indignation and trouble Psa. 78.49. The
Vulgar Interpreter renders it, I will even send poverty upon you; a curse well
suting with their covetousness, and agreeable to that threatened by another
Prophet: As the Partridge sits on eggs and hatcheth them not: so he that
gets riches and not by right (as these Priests had done) shall leave them in
the midst of his days, Jer. 17.12
and at his end be a fool. A poor fool God will soon make of the covetous
caitiff: and reduce him to extreme want; than the which he knows no greater
hell, no curse comparable. But the Original is more general, I will execrate
you, or pronounce a curse against you. Howbeit, Non nist coactus, No otherwise
then as compelled to it; as that Emperor said, laying his hand upon his mouth
for a good while, before he would pronounce sentence of death upon one that had
deserved it. Histories tell us of Augustus, that it went as much against the
heart with him, as it did against the hair with the malefactor, when he
adjudged him to condign punishment. Vespasian wept over those he sentenced.
Nero, in his first five years, being to sign a warrant for execution of
certain Malefactors said, Act. and Mon.
O utinam literas nescirem, O that I could not write. Our King Edw. 6. could
not be persuaded by all his Council to put his hand to a warrant for the
burning of one Ione Butcher, that had well deserved it. Our gracious God might
well say As I live, I delight not in the death of sinners, but rather would
they should convert and live: Ezekiel. 33.11.
why else does he here in threatening a curse, interpose condition of
repentance? why does he warn before he wounds, and premonish before he punish?
Well might the Heathen Historian say, (...) H redot.
God loves to foresig nisie. Well might that Father say, Minatur Deus ut non
puniat. God therefore menaceth misery that he may not inflict it. And another,
Ideo prolata est sententia, ut non fiat. The sentence is, therefore pronounced,
that it may not be executed. Witness that we read Am. 4.12. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee. Thus? how? He names not how, that they may fear the
utmost, (as Ribera notes) and yet he adds, Because I will do this unto thee,
prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Surely as a woman brings not forth without
pain; And as a be (usually) stings not, till much provoked: so neither does
God curse his creature, till there be no other remedy 2 Chronicles. 36.16 And then,
Patientia laesa fit furor: abused mercy turns into fury. If men will not accept
of conditions of peace, though never so fair and reasonable (as here) but
pervert his mercies to wantonness, his patience to presumption, he will not
always bear with their evil manners: but, repenting him of his kindness so
cast away upon those that prized it not, as David repented of the good he had
done unworthy Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21.
he will make them know the worth of his blessings by the want of them.

I will curse your blessings] says He here, I will recover mine own and be
gone, as Hos. 2.9. I will cut off the meat from their mouths, and blast all
your hopes of abundance, and destroy you after that I had done you good Josh.
24.20. Thus God dealt by his unfruitful vineyard Esaias 5.5. he pulled up the
hedges and let in the wild-bore. Thus also he dealt by the unprefitable
servant: he took away his talent, and turned him over to the tormentour. And
thus he deals by diverse now adays, in whom it is no hard matter to observe a
waine and decay of their gifts and abilities, upon their disuse, or misuse
thereof. How many have we that are woefully fallen from the affections of prayer
they were wont to find and express? how many idle and therefore evil
ministers, rejected by God, and laid aside, as so many broken vessels: whiles
he causes the night to come upon their divination, puts out their right eyes
and dryes up their right aermes Zach. 11.17? till at length they may say with
Zedekiah, When did the spirit depart from me? Woe to me, for I am spoiled Ier.
4.13. And in very deed what should a Prince do but take away a sword from a
rebel? what should a mother do, but snatch away the meat from the child that
marrs it? And what can God do less then take away his corn, Hos. 2.5, 9.
wine and wool from those that not only own him to it, but go after other
sweet-hearts with it?

yea I have cursed them already] for a pledge of more malediction. For as in
blessings, every former is a pledge of a future: so in curses. As one cloud
follows another till the Sun disperse them: so does one curse succeed another
till Repentance remove them. No sooner does that rainbow appear in our hearts,
but God remembering his covenant, clears up our coasts, and lifts up the light
of his countenance upon us. Take the bark from the tree, and the sap can never
find its way to the branches. Take sin from the soul, and God will soon be
reconciled. But if ye walk contrary unto me, I will punish you yet seven times
more, and seven times, Lev. 26.
and seven to that; till I have dashed you in pieces: as Dagon, never left
falling before the Ark till his neck was broke. Sin does as naturally draw and
suck curses to it, as the Loadstone does iron, or Turpentine, fire. The Chaldee
and the Vulgar make these words but a repetition of the former: for they read
the Text thus: Idem repetit and in culcat. a Lapide.
I will curse your blessings, and I will curse them: to intimate his
peremptorinesse in the thing, and that he was unchangably resolved upon it. Now
when God will do a thing, who shall hinder it? Nature may be resisted and
hindered in its course; as when the fire burnt not the three worthies, when the
Sun stood still in heaven, yea went backward. Men and devils though never so
potent may want of their will, and be crossed in their designs and desires.
But if God will have this or that to be done, there is no gain-standing him. If
he have a mind to bless his people, they shall be blessed. If he will have
pity for his own names sake, which the house of Israel had profaned Ezekiel.
36.21. If he will come in with his Non-obstante, Nevertheless he saved them
etc. and dealt with his servants not according to his ordinary rule, but
according to his prerogative, who shall contradict him? In like sort, if he
will redouble his strokes upon his enemies, and not only curse them, but curse
them bitterly, as the Angel did Meroz, who can hinder or object against his
proceeding in that behalf? Judge. 5
His judgments are sometimes secret, but always just: and if he once say, I
will curse, yea that I will, there is as little hope of altering him, as there
was of Pilate, when he had once pronounced, what I have written, I have
written, It shall surely stand.

because ye do not lay it to heart] As he had repeated their curse, so he does
here their sin; instancing in that branch of it that most offended him: and
that was their stupidity and senselessness either of their sin, or danger. This
is a God-provoking evil, often complained of, but especially when it proceeds
from presumption, as Deuteronomy. 29.19. Esaias 22.12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 24.13. The Lord
cannot satisfy himself in threatening such: as if the very naming of it had
enraged his jealousy: neither is he more absolute in threatening, then he will
be resolute in punishing.

Verse 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seed] And so mar your hopes of an
harvest: I will bring famine upon you, that fore judgment, worse then that of
the sword, Lam. 4.9.
which yet is the slaughterhouse of mankind, and the very hell of this present
world. By this scourge God will tame his prodigals, and starve their bodies;
Hag. 1.4.
who by the contempt of his ordinances starve their own souls. Either by
immoderate drought God can cause a famine, Joel 1.10. Or by immoderate
moisture, Verse 17. The seed rotting under the clods etc. to revenge the
quarrel of his covenant. Israel was plagued with famine for breaking their
faith with the Gibeonites. What may they expect that keep not touch with God? 2 Samuel 21.1.
David knew that the natural cause of that famine was drought: but he enquired
(though, twere long first) after the supernatural. As Jacob enquired who stood
on the top of the ladder and sent the Angels to and fro? so must we in case of
public calamities, Genesis 28.13.
ascend, to the top of them, and see who sends them, and what is the cause of
them, that we may cast the traitors head over the wall, and he may return and
repent and leave a blessing behind him. For till then, we may look that he
should cut off our provision and victuals, as wise Princes use to do from
their rebels whom they have gotten up into a walled town.

and spread dung upon your faces] cast contempt upon you, and cover you with
confusion: make you to stink above ground, so that men shall shun and abhor
your company. This is another fruit of sin, and piece of the curse: and many
wicked men are more afraid of it, then of the sin that causes it: as Chaereas
in Terence not ashamed to deflour a virgin, was yet ashamed to be seen in an
Eunuchs habit the sign of that sin. True it is, that the best may have dung
cast into their faces, as St. Paul and his precious companions had 1 Cor. 4.13.
We are faith he, the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things. The
later word signifies the dung-cart that goes thorough the city, (...).
into which every one brings and casts his filth: to note, that every fool had
some filth to cast upon those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy. And
truly all public persons that are faithful to their trust, had need carry a
spare handkerchief to wipe off dirt and drivell: which yet many times will
hardly stick, as dirt will not upon marble, though it will upon a mud-wall. The
wise shall inherit glory: when shame shall be the promotion of fools Pro.
3.35. A fair promotion: but good enough for them, unless they were better. If
the precious sons of Zion comparable to fine gold, be at any time esteemed as
earthen pitchers as Lam. 4.2. or trodden in the dirt by the fat bulls of Basan,
God will in due time make all his that have lain sullied and slurred among the
pots, to become as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers
with pure gold Psalm. 68.13. In the mean while, they have the Euge of a good
conscience, which is better then the worlds Plaudite. But profane and
profligate persons with their spiritual nastinesse and super fluity of
naughtiness, stink worse then these cities of the plain in the nostrils of
God and all good men, whiles they live, (according to that, The name of the
wicked shall rot, And again, Pro. 10.7. and 9
He that perverteth his ways shall be known.) And when they dye they shall be
carried thorough the dung-gate of death, to the town-ditch of utter
destruction. At which time, Job. 20.6, 7.
that in Job shall be verified of them, Though his excellency mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like
his own dung: they which have seen him (in his flourish) shall say, Where is
be? Let those dehonest amenta Cleri look to this; all idle and evil Ministers,
who as unsavory salt are fit for no place but the dunghill, even to be buried
in a dunghill, as Bishop Bonner was, and (meanwhile) to be trodden under foot,
which is a thing not only calamitous, but extremely ignominious. Mat. 5.13.

even the dung of your solemn feasts] i. e. for the iniquity of your most
solemn services, which you have slubber'd over and made to stink, I will make
you also abject and abominable: as the dung of sacrifices offered in great
number on festival days, was carried into some by-corner, and set out of
sight. And here it is remarkable that God calls the solemn feasts their
solemn-feasts, as if they had been none of his: he would not own them. So Ier.
7.21. in scorn he calls their sacrifices flesh, ordinary flesh, such as was
bought and sold in the shambles. And Hos. 9.4. he calls the same sacrifices,
their bread for their soul, or for their natural sustenance, and says it
shall not come into his house. And yet he speaks there of that meat offering
Lev. 2.5. appointed by God himself for a spiritual use, which is nevertheless
called the bread for their life, or livelihood: because God esteemed it no
other then common meat. In a like sense it was, that after the people of Israel
had set up the golden calf, God would own them no longer, but fathers them upon
Moses: Behold thy people, says He to Moses, whom thou broughtest out of Egypt
etc. Exodus 32.7. David also, when he had sinned in numbering the people, was
counted and called but plain David, Go and say to David etc. 2 Samuel 24.12.
whereas before that, when he purposed to build the Lord a Temple etc. 2 Samuel 7.
then it was, Go tell my servant David etc. The Saints themselves, when they
sin against God, are in a sort suspended from the covenant. Therefore it is
usual with them, when they seek the Lord for any special mercy, to begin with
humbling themselves, and taking pains with their own hearts, as David, Daniel,
Ezra, etc.

Verse. 4. And ye shall know that I have sent etc.] That is, ye shall know by
woeful experience: your punishment shall advertise you: the curse appendent to
the commandment shall teach you as Gideon taught the men of Succoth so. with
thorns and and briers of the wilderness, Jud. 8.16. and as David taught the
children of Ammon better behavior, by making them pass thorough the
brick-kilne, 2 Samuel 12.31 and as the Phrygians wax not wise, unless they be
beaten to it, when Gods judgments are in the earth, Judge. 3.20.
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness Isai. 26.9. Smart makes
wit, and vexation gives understanding. Ehuds poniard was a message from God;
who as he is said to hold his peace when he punishes not Psalm. 50.21. Esaias
42.14. so to preach and teach when he does Esaias 28.19. his scourges are men's
schoolmasters (...), One calls them, Gods free-school-masters,) curstand
crabbed enough, but such as whereby he opens men's ears to discipline, and
commands them to return from iniquity: Job 36.8, 9, 10.
Then he shows them their work, and their transgressions that they have
exceeded, that they have slighted the commandment which he had sent them, and
that now he would plead with them another way, so. with patience, and with
blood, Ezekiel. 38.22. and so would cause them to pass under the rod, that
thereby he might bring them into the bond of the covenant, purging out the
rebels, and them that transgress, Ezekiel. 20.37, 38. God should have no tribute
from men (as those Malignants suggested against the returned captives, Ezra
4.13: if he did not make them know his breach of promise Number. 14.34. if he did
not break covenant with them that first play false with him, and keep no
condition on their part required. See 2 Chronicles. 15.2. and when thou art making a
covenant with sin, say to thy soul, as Boaz said to his kinsman Ruth 4.4. At
what time thou buyest it, thom must have Ruth with it. If thou will have the
pleasure of sin, the wages of wickedness, thou must also have the curse etc.
and let thy soul answer as he there does, No, I may not do it, I shall mar and
spoil a better inheritance. Polanus and others dislike the reading of this text
in the future tense ye shall know that I have sent this commandment, and tell
us that the scope of the Prophecy requires, that it be read in the present
tense thus, Nam citis, For ye do know that I have sent etc. You know your
dignity and duty as Priests: Vos probe cognitum habetis etc. Polan. (...).
and yet ye wilfully cross your own knowledge and conscience. Knowledge is a
divine gift: it is the great talent of all other: there is a (much) set upon
it, Lak. 12.48. there is a special d^p^suum in it, as the word there used
imports. To know heavenly things is to scend into heaven says Agur Prove.
30.4. But as the devil (that knowing creature, that has his name in Greek from
the largnesse of his objective knowledge) was once an Angel of light till he
fell from his dignity, Jud. 6. (...) quasi (...)
so those that corrupt themselves in that they know Jude 10. Romans 1.18.
that imprison the light they have (as a prophet from God) in unrighteousness:
that know the commandment sent from God, as here, and yet after that they have
known the way of righteousness, do turn from the holy commundement delivered
unto them, the latter end will be worse with those men then the beginning 2
Pet. 2.20, 21. they have but aspired to an higher pitch that their fall might
be the more desperate. Neronis illud, Quantus artifex perco quadrabi t^in te
peritum and periturum says One. Thou do but carry Uri h's letters about
thee to thine own utter destruction. Thou may go to hell with much knowledge
in thy head: as a bull with a coronet and garland goes to the slaughter. Thou
may also, for this one fault meet with an hell aforehand in thine own
conscience, as Spira did; crying out to those about him, to learn of him to
take heed of severing knowledge and practice. What else was it that brought
such ^o ^ring and troubles both inward and outward on those Esaias 59.11, 12. and
that when salvation was looked for? Our iniquities, say they, testify to our
faces, and we know them. All sins offend conscience: but sins against knowledge
waste and destroy it. A dangerous degree, drawing near that sin to which
sacrifice is denied. For sins against the law, though against knowledge, there
was an atonement, Levit. 6.1. to the 8. and he instanceth in perjury. But to
persecute the known truth with malice, Heb. 19 26.
for this there is no sacrifice.

that my covenant might be with Levi] Levi did not thrust himself into the
Priesthood: but was taken by God into special covenant. See Number. 8.13, 14. 1 Samuel 2.28. Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. Or if he do he shall smoke and smart for it, as
Saul, Vzziah and others: no man might come uncalled to the king of Persia, upon
pain of death: much less to the King of heaven, as Kore and his accomplices,
whom God has hanged up in gibbets, as it were, for example to all bold
intruders upon that tremend function of the Ministry. Men out of office are
not sent of God, therefore they may not preach though gifted men Romans 10.15.
with Esaias 52.8. All that are in office to preach are Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors or Teachers Ephesians. 4.11. Elders only my preach Tit. 1.5. And
the contrary would prevent, the Apostle wills that in the Church all things
be done decent'y and in order, 1 Cor. 14.4.
which could not be if all were teachers: for then there would be no
distinction of Ministers and people. But Are all teachers? says the Apostle 1
Cor. 12.29. And he answers himself, No, but only those whom God did set, verse
13. like as he set apart the tribe of Levi, to execute the Priests office:
which whiles Corah, Dathan and Abiram sought to impugn, and level, they went
quick into the pit Number. 16.30. Meddle not therefore without a calling; that in
the day of Gods displeasure you may appeal unto him with Jeremy, and say, As
for me I have not hastened or thrust in my self for a Pastor after thee:
neither have I desired the woeful day, thou know: that which came out of my
lips was right before thee. Jer. 17.16.
And being able safely to say this, thou may bind upon it, that God who is
in covenant with all his Levi's, his faithful Ministers, will be their shield
and their exceeding great reward, how ever the world deal with them.

Verse 5. My covenant was with him of life and peace] Now Gods covenant (says
an expositour here) is of four sorts.

1. General made with all creatures Gen 9.2.

2. With the Church in general Genesis 17.

3. With the Church of the Elect Jer. 31.33.

4. With some particulars of some special graces, as here with Levi, of life
and peace. So then to ministers (above others) has the Lord bound himself by
special covenant to be their mighty Protector, and rewarder: to give them life
and peace! that is, long life and prosperous. See Number. 25.12, 13. Life of it
self, though pestered with many miseries, is a sweet mercy, and highly to be
prized. Better is a living dog then a dead lion, Eccles. 9.4. And why is the
living man sorrowful, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. As who
should say, let a man suffer never so much, yet if he be suffered to live, he
has cause to be contented. It is the Lords mercy he is not consismed. When
Baruc sought great things for himself, Jeremy tells him he may be glad (in those
dear years of life, Jer. 45.5. Genesis 45.26.
when the arrows of death came so thick whisking by him) that he had his life
for a prey. Jacob took more comfort of his son Joseph's life, then of his
honor. Joseph is yet alive etc. Quis vitam non vult? says Austin, who is it
that desires not life? When David moves the question, what man is he that
desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? Austin brings in
every man answering I do, and I do. Long life and happy days is every man's
desire. If God give these blessings to those that are graceless, it is by
virtue of a providence only, and not of a promise, and that is nothing so
comfortable; life in Gods displeasure is worse then death, said that Martyr, if
wicked men live long, it is that they may make up the measure of their sins;
and by heaping up sin, increase their torment. If godly men die soon, God
takes them away from the evil to come: as when there is a fire in an house or
town, men secure their Jewels: And though they fall in wars, yet they die in
peace, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. Hieren.
as good Josiah did: who also in brevi vitae spacio tempora vir^utum
multareplevit, lived quickly, lived apace, lived long in a little time. For
life consists in action Esaias 38.15, 16. The Hebrews call running water living
water. Now Gods faithful Ministers, if they work hard, and so wear out
themselves to do good to others, (as a lamp wastes it self to give light, or
as that herb mentioned by Pl^y, that cures the patient but rots the hand that
administreth it) if like clouds they sweat themselves to death to bring souls
to God, yet shall they be sure to find it a blessed way of dying: they shall
mori vitaliter die to live for ever. God will not send any of his to bed, till
they have done their work. The two witnesses could not be slain, till their
testimony was finished. No malice of man can antedate their ends a minute. The
days of mourning for my father will come said Esae, and then Hek^ll my brother
Jacob, Genesis 27.41. Here Es^u^, that rough reprobate, threateneth his father
also, as Luther conceives. For it is as if he should have said, I will be
avenged by being the death of my brother: though it be to the breaking of my
fathers heart. But what is the proverb? Threatened falk live long: for even
Isaac who died soonest, lived above forty years beyond this. My times are in
thy hands says David, and that is a safe hand; And blessed be God that Christ
lives and reigns, alioqui tot us desperassem, or else I had been in ill
case, said Miconius in a letter of his to Calvin. Ren. 1.
Ministers are stars in Christ's right hand, and it will be hard pulling them
thence; They must carry their lives in their hands, and be ready to lay them
down, when it may be for the glory of their Master: but they shall be sure not
to dye (whether by a natural or by a violent death) till the best time; not
till that time when, if they were but rightly informed, they would desire to
die. But whether their death be a burnt-offering (of Martyrdom) or a
peace offering, (whether they die in their beds as Elisha, or be carried to
heaven in a fiery chariot as Elijah) let it be a free-will-offering, and then
it shall be a sweet sacrifice to him who has covenanted with them for life and
peace. They shall by death, as by a door of hope, Esaias 56.2 Eccles. 5.12.
enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, yea, in Abraham's bosom: and
as the sleep of the laboring man is sweet unto him, whether he eat little or
much: so heaven shall be so much the more heaven to such as have here had their
purgatory. Mark the upright man, Psalm. 37.37.
says holy David, and behold the just, for (how troublesome soever his
beginning and middle is) the end of that man is peace.

and I gave them to him] Here Is the performance of Gods covenant to Levi and
his posterity. God does not pay his promises with fair words only, as
Sertorius is said to do: Neither is he like Amigonus (...) (ignominiously so
called, because) forward in promising, slack in performing. But as he has
hitherto kept promise with nights and days, Jer. 33.20, 25. that one should
succeed the other, so much more does he keep promise with his people: for as
his love moved him to promise, so his truth binds him to perform. See both
these together, 2 Samuel 18, 21. For thy words sake, and according to thine own
heart have thou done all these things. According to thine own heart, that is,
of thine own mere motion; out of pure and unexcited love thou did give thy
word and promise: and for thy words sake have thou performed it. There was
nothing in Aaron or his seed that God should make his special covenant with him
of life and peace. His rod was as dry and dead as any of the rest, til God made
it to blossom. But when God had once passed his promise, and so made himself a
voluntary debtor, he failed not to perform it to him and his. Aaron himself
lived one hundred and three years, Phineas three hundred, as it is thought, and
as some Chronologers do observe. Joshua the son of Josedech lived (according to
Helvicus) 110 years in the office of the high priesthood.

To these and others was expressly fulfilled a Covenant of life and peace: and
God would have been ready to have performed it to these to whom Malachy
prophecieth, had not themselves hindered. For they like men (or like Adam)
transgressed the covenant: Or (as Junius and Tremellius read it) not tanquam
homines, Hos. 6.7
but tanquam hominis, they made no more of breaking it, then if they had had to
do with dust and ashes like themselves, and not with the great God. Remember
them, Neh. 13.29
O my God, says good Nehemiah concerning these covenant-breakers, because they
have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the Priesthood and of the
Levites.

for the fear wherewith he feared me, etc.] that is, the good priests did so,
the bad did otherwise: but God reckons of men by their righteousness. and this
was the restipulation, or the condition on the priests part performed: for in a
covenant both parties undertake to do somewhat. As in the general covenant of
grace, God promises to be the God of his people, that is, an universal good,
All-sufficient, satisfactory, and every way proportionable and fitting to their
souls. And they (interchangeably) promise to be his people; that is, to bestow
themselves wholly upon him with highest estimation, most vigorous affections,
and utmost endeavors, giving up their names and hearts to the profession of
his truth. So that when he eryes out, Who is on my side? Who? one says, Esaias
44.5
I am the Lords: another calls himself by the name of Jacob: another
subscribes, etc. Semblably in this particular covenant with the tribe of Levi,
God promised them life and peace; and they assured him of fear and humility.
Fear is an affection of the soul shrinking in it self from some imminent evil.
Hereof there are three sorts, natural, carnal and spiritual.

The first is not to be disliked, if it do not degenerate into the second. The
next is a base fear of the creature more then of the Creator, who is God
blessed for ever. The third is nothing else but an awful respect to the Divine
Majesty. Spiritual fear we called it in respect,

1. Of the Author of it, Gods holy Spirit, called therefore, A Spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. 2. Of the object of it, The Father of
Spirits, who is therefore, by an Appellative proper, called Fear, Ps. 76.11. 3.
Of the effect, which is to spiritualize both us and our services: and was
therefore fitly vowed to God by those of the spirituality that stood before him
continually, and were to be exact in their whole deportment, at their peril:
God is of purer eyes then to behold evil. He cannot look on iniquity in any,
Hab. 1.13. Moses' and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call
upon his name: They called upon the Lord, and he answered them: he forgave
their iniquities: howbeit he took vengeance of their inventions. Psalm. 99.8. He
met Moses in the Inn and had much ado to forbear killing him Exodus 4.44. And
for Aaron; when, (together with Miriam) he murmured against Moses, (...)
l'olan. Conterchatur Consternebatur (...) Mar. 14.72.
and Mari^m was thereupon smitten with leprosy, Aaron was spared, not so much
for the honor of the Priesthood (as Chrysostom gives the reason, but because
of the fear wherewith he feared the Lord, and his humiliation that followed
upon that fear.
for he was afraid before Gods name] Or, as others better render this text,
Propter nomen meum humiliatus est, He was amazed, affeighted, humbled because
of my name, he withdrew himself (so some render it) or threw himself out of
doors, as Peter did into alone place where he might sowce himself in the salt
tears of godly sorrow. Or, he shrunk and shriveld up, and so testified the
trouble of his mind by the horror of his body. Horripilatus est, his heart fell
down, his hair stood upright. See Psalm. 119.53, and 120. His humiliation was
deep, and downright, soaking and sowring his heart, Psalm. 73.21. The word here
used is pailive, but Levi his humiliation was active: he was not humbled only,
but humble; low, but lowly: he knew that no sacrifice could be accepted, but
that which was laid on the low altar of a contrite heart, which sanctifies the
sacrifice.

Verse 6. The law of truth was in his mouth] Hitherto has been set forth what
the Priests of old were for their own particular, and as private persons: they
were not high-minded but feared God. Now as Pulpit-men and public Teachers,
they have here a fourfold commendation. And first, that Truth was their study
and trade: they were expert in it, and had an excellent faculty in
communicating their conceptions of it to others; so that if they did but open
their mouths almost, it was a sermon: they had a ready and easy way of
discourse, an holy volubility and dexterity of delivering themselves to the
benefit of others: as the law of God was in their hearts, so their mouths
spoke wisdom, and their tongues talked of judgment, Psalm. 37.30, 31. Out of
the good treasure of their hearts they could throw forth at pleasure good
things, for the edification of others: yea, like full clouds, they willingly
distilled, and like full paps they were in pain till eased of their milk.
Neither meddled they only with toothlesse truths, lest themselves should be
lest toothlesse, (as One said, Truth is a good mistress, but he that follows
her too close at heels, shall have his teeth struck out) as Balac bad Bala^m
neither curse nor bless at all: and as the Papists were wont to say, Missa non
mordet, the Mass biteth no man: Ezekiel 13.10
But they held, that truth must be spoken however it be taken: and abhorred to
be looked upon as the devils dire-dawbers, and upholsters, to dawb with
untempered mortar, or to sow pillows under their elbowes. They affected rather
to be styled (as Arrianus the Historian was) (...), Lovers of Truth,
plain-dealers: Ea liberate scripsit Imperatorum vitas ^ua ipsi vixe^^nt. Lib.
ult hist. Exodus 28.30
and, as it is reported of Suetonius, they took the same liberty to cry down
sin, that men did to commit it. Elian tells us that the High Priest among the
Egyptians wore about his neck a Saphir-stone, which was called (...), Truth.
This was but an apish imitation of Aarons Vrim and Thummim, s. e. light of
truth, and integrity of life. Mercuries Priests were wont to feed upon figs,
and then to say, (...), Truth is sweet. It is so indeed to those that have
their senses exercised to discern good and evil. Heb. 5. ult.
But most men cannot brook down right truth: the hearing of it galls them, as
they write of some creatures, that they have fell in aure, their gall in their
ears. Hence Truth breeds hatred, and plain-dealing is generally disgusted: it
is bitter in the stomachs of those that hear it, though sweet in the mouth of
those that utter it, Rev. 10.9. Micaiah would not budge, or be base in his
errand to Ahab, though he were sure to kiss the stocks for his stoutnesse.
Azariah the High Priest withstood king Vzziah to his face, and put him out of
the Temple. Which whiles Vriah did not, but wickedly complied with idolatrous
Ahaz, in making and setting up the altar of Damascus, 2 King. 16.11, 16. he is
branded with a black-cole for a court-parasite, and shall be infamous to all
posterity. His contemporary Esaias was of another spirit, Implevit post me. Number.
14.24.
and fulfilled after God. (as it is said of Caleb) He kept the law of truth in
his mouth, and rolled it as sugar under his tongue, though he suffered for it.
For (as Hierom tells us) he was sawn asunder by his wicked countrymen, for two
causes. First, because he said he had seen the Lord. Hier. in Isa. 1. ex Rabbin.
Secondly, because he called the great Ones of Judah, Princes of Sodom, and
Rulers of Gomorrah, Quintilian says of Vespasian the Emperor, that he was
patientissimus very, very patient of truth, though it never so much touched
him. But not many such to be met with. Asa though otherwise a good Prince, yet
fell out grievously with Gods Prophet, for his plain-dealing, and laid him by
the heels. Queen Elizabeth dealt little better with a Bishop that had in a
zealous Sermon admonished her to think on her last end, The Newlanders cure by
Sr. Will Vaugh.
by reason of her great age, which few Princes had attained unto, and of the
Clymactericall year of her life, which happened at that time. The Bishop had
the Queens Apage, but Gods Enge. And so shall all Truths-Chaplains have,
however the world entertain them. Wisdom shall be justified of her children,
Act. 20.26, 27
and God will see to their safety, modo audeant quae sentiunt, so they show men
all the counsel of God, and keep back nothing, that they have in charge to
deliver.

and iniquity was not found in his lips] Heb. Crossenesse or Crookedness:
Chaldee, No falsenesse. He did not preach distorted doctrines that produce
convulsions of conscience, as those Seducers did Act. 20.30. He did not handle
the word of God deceitfully, or fraudulently, as those deceitful workers did 2
Cor. 11.13. Neither did he broach errors, and writh from the right way for
self-respects, setting his dial by that Sunn; 1 Thessalonians. 2.3. But being of a
most masculine, disingaged, and noble spirit, that has received the truth in
the love of it, he will not be drawn to falsity or faulter, to huckster the
word, or handle it craftily and covetously: but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God etc. 2 Cor. 2.17.
Without mixture of errors, or humane inventions. Let Pharisees sour men's
souls with their leaven of false doctrine. Let those Inhabitants of the Sea
(as they are called Rev. 12.12.) Popish Padres set abroach gross, troubled,
brackish Tenants which rather bring barrenness to their hearers, and gnaw
their bowels, then either quench thirst, or yield good fruit: He that fears
God can pity poor souls made prize of by Sectaries and Seducers; Col. 2.8.
and knowing that he that breaks the least of Gods commandments and teaches
men so, shall be least in the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5.19. (that is, nothing
at all there Mat. 20.16.) Psalm. 19.104
he hates every false way with David: and takes care that no iniquity be found
in his lips.

he walked with me in peace and equity] i. e. He kept constant correspondency
and communion with me, so that we never disagreed or differed. For can two walk
together, and they not agreed? He was like-minded to me in all things, and
observed my law in every point and part thereof. An high commendation and a
necessary qualification in a minister, that he not only talk of God, but walk
with him: and that not loosely and at all adventures, but stricktly and
exactly, as a pattern of the rule, as a transcript of his own sermon, ne verba
factis deficientibus erubescant, lest his words blush for want of deeds
accordingy: Tertull.
ne virtutis stragulum pudefaciat, lest he put honesty to an open shame, as
Antipater did, when being vicious he wore a white cloak, the ensign of
innocence: lest his life gives his lips the lie, as it fared with those
Pharisees that said and did not Mat. 23.3. The foolish Virgins were found with
their Sic dicentes so saying, but the faithful servants shall be found with
their Sic facientes so doing. And when men come to give account, it shall be
enquired non quid legerint, sed quid egerint non quid dixerint, sed quomodo
vixerint, not what they have taught others, but what they have practiced
themselves. Origens preaching and living were said to be both one. Quod jussit
and gessit. So did Mr. Bucer, whom his friends could never sufficiently praise:
nor his foes in any point find fault with his singular life and sincere
doctrine. Bern. Act. and Mon.


and did turn away many from iniquity] The effect of his unspeakable labors
and unblameable life was conversion of souls, and those not a few. God
sometimes gives a Pastor after his own heart to such places, where he takes
but one of a city, or two of a family. Ier. 3.14, 15. Quod si decimus quisque,
si unus persuasus fuerit etc. says Chrysostom. If one in ten be gained, nay if
one of ten thousand be turned from iniquity, it is a great mercy. Nay (says
He) say that none be converted, the faithful Minister that endeavors their
conversion, though he effect it not, non minus praemii, shall have no less
reward, then if he had prevailed for their conversion. Some good Divines think
he shall have more then those that do convert; because they have praemium ante
praemium, that which may encourage them in Gods work: but he does his utmost
amidst all discouragement. Well may Ephraim love to tread out the corn, because
while he treads, Hos. 10.11.
he seeds on the corn: but to bear and draw, to plow and work, where no
refreshing was to be had till the work was done, this that delicate heifer
cared not to do. But he is an happy man that has any hand in turning men from
iniquity, though fruit, for present, appear not. The new birth of some is like
the birth of the Elephant, foureteen years after the seed injected into the
womb. And that divine Proverb is not seldom verified, One seweth, and Another
reapeth. Ioh. 4.37.
The Ministry is Gods arm to gather people into his bosom: and the weapons of
our warfare are mighty thorough God 2 Cor. 10.4. Surely as the rain comes
down and the snow from heaven etc. Esaias 55.10, 11. And as the rain from heaven
has a fatness with it, and a special influence more then standing water: so
has preaching more then reading. Howbeit there may be fruit and yet invisible,
as in Elias his time. Act. 18.10.
And that which does not yet appear, may hereafter, when the day of visitation
comes. See Job 33.14. etc. God may have much people in the city, and Paul, for
the present, not know so much. A master does not use to setup a light, but
there is some work to be done by it: and seldom does he send his servants
afield with their siths, to mow thistles only. Let Gods faithful witnesses
prophecy out their 1260. Rev. 11.3.
days: bending themselves to that office uncessantly, being instant in season,
and out of season, and turning themselves, as it were, into all shapes and
fashions, both of speech, and of spirit, to turn people from iniquity: 2 Chronicles.
19.
and then God will be with the good, as that Prophet speaks in another case.
The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life: and he that wins souls, is
wise Prove. 11.30. Say he cannot win as he would, but labor all night and take
nothing, yet he shall be paid for his pains: as the Physician is, though the
patient dye. Curam exigeris, non curationem, says Bern. It is the care, not
the cure of your charge that is charged upon you. You may speak perswasively,
but it is God only that can persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Sem: Paul
may plant etc. but God only gives the increase. You shall be held wise, and
shine as stars in heaven, whether you win souls or not. As there are
diversity of gifts, so of operations 1 Cor. 12.6. and the Holy Ghost may and
does work when and how he pleases: but usually he delights to honor those of
most sincerity, with most success as 1 Cor. 15.10.

Verse 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge] How else should he be
instant in lip-feeding? Dan. 12.3.
how should his lips present it, unless they preserve it? How should he wise
others, unless he be wise himself? The Pope brags of an infalibillity, and
pleads this Text for it: avouching, that he knows all things knowable, and
has all wisdom and skill locked up in scrinio pectoris, in the cabinet of his
breast. But what will they say of sundry of their Popes that have been manifest
heretics? John the 23. was accused in the Council of Constance, for denying
the Resurrection of the body, and everlasting life. And of all their Popes we
may safely say as the Venetian Ambassadors did: when the Pope laid his hand
upon his breast and said, Hic est Arca Noae, Lo here is Noah's Ark (meaning that
he was the Church virtuall, and was enriched in all knowledge and in all
utterance) One of them presently replied, that in Noah's Ark there were unclean
beasts, as well as clean: and so lest him further to apply. The Priests lips
indeed should keep knowledge. But those of Malachi his times, had forsaken the
way, and caused many to stumble ver. 8. How this was we shall see when we come
to it. Meane-while, we may take notice, that non libro sacerdotis, sed labro,
non codice; sed cord, conservatur scientia: knowledge should be kept, not in
the Priests book, but in his bosom, as a storehouse: neither should it lie low
or long there, but sit upon his lips, that all may have benefit by it. For the
manifestation of the spirit is given to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12.7. And it was
death for the Priest to enter into the sanctuary without his golden bells about
him, that he might be heard by all. (...) Greg. Pa^tor.
A minister must be both able and apt to teach. Praedicationis officium
suscipit quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, says Gregory. He Is no minister,
that is no preacher. Nor can he be a Preacher, that is not stored with knowledge
of Gods will, and peoples duty. See Mat. 13.32. with the Note. Walter surnamed
Malclerk was surely no fit man to be Bishop of Carlisle; as he was by evil and
corrupt means Anno. Dom. 1223. If the blind lead the blind both will fall into
the ditch Mat. 15.14. but the blind guides will lie lowermost, Vives in Aug. de
civ. Dei lib. 4. cap. 1. Pompon. Laet. de Romans Sacerdot.
and have the worst of it. Varro complained of the Roman priests, that they
were ignorant of many things about their own rites and Religions. Mucius
Scaevola (being their High Priest) derived Pontifex of Posse and facere. This
derivation pleased not Varro: but it intimated that such should both be able
and active to teach the people knowledge. B. Andr.
It was a witty observation of a Bishop who (was called in his time the gulf
of learning) that Doceo to teach governs two accusative cases: according to
that Esaias 28.9. Whom shall I teach knowledge? Ministers, says He, must have
whom to teach, and what to teach, viz. knowledge; and must therefore give
attendance to reading, that they may the better to exhortation and doctrine. 1 Timothy Ier. 3.15.
4.13. that they may feed the people with knowledge and understanding.

And they should seck the law at his mouth] as at an oracle; they should depend
upon the ministry, as the people hung upon our Saviors lips, Luke 19. vlt. as
David went into the Sanctuary to be resolved of his doubt Psalm. 73. though
himself were a prophet: and as Cornelius was appointed by the Angel, to send
for Peter, for further information. But what must men seek at the Ministers
mouth? The law, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 1. Lib. 1 de Consider.
the sincere milk of Gods word, the mind of Christ, the testimony of Jesus,
non nugas and fabulas, says Bernard, not trifles and fables, not strong lines,
and strains of wit, but the simple and plain words of God. Non Oratorum fili^
sumus sed Piscatorum, said Nazianzen. Ministers are not to study so much to
please as to profit, to tickle men's ears, as to work upon their hearts. They
must not so paint the window as to keep out the light: nor so put the sword of
the spirit into a velvet scabberd, that it cannot prick and pierce the heart.
Let them handle, and set out the Law as skilfully, and adornedly as they can:
but still remember, that it must he dispensed, sancte magis quam site, solid
potius quam floride, with fear and reverence, rather then with wit and
dalliance. If in King Edward the fourths days a citizen in Cheap Side was
executed as a traitor for saying he would make his son heir to the crown,
Speed
(though he only meant his own house having a crown for the sign) more
dangerous it must needs be to witwanton it with the Majesty of God, Loquamur
verba scripturae, utamur sermon spiritus sancti etc. Let us speak
scripture language, Pet. Ramus
let us use the speech of the holy spirit, and not go about to correct the
divine wisdom and eloquence with our sophistry and vain-babling. To the ears of
that which Saint Peter calls the hid man of the heart, the plain-song always
makes the best music. 1 Pet. 3. (...)
If heaven door may be opened to it by a key of iron, it cares not for a key of
goid. A sermon works not upon the heart as it is thus elegant or admirable, but
as well fraught with testimonies of holy scripture (that most powerful
Rhetoric) it is an instrument of God appointed to such an end. Let the people
hear often, This is the law, this is ipsissimum Dei verbum, the very word of
God; Show scripture for what you deliver, and that will carry it. But ut
drachmam auri sine imagine principis, sic verba hortantis sine authoritate Dei
contemnunt homines. Lipsius.
The Law carries a Majesty in it: and if Tully durst say that the law of the
twelve tables did exceed all the Libraries of Philosophers, both in weight of
authority, and worth of matter, how much rather is this true of the Law of God?
Wherefore as Aeschines said of an Orators, so let a ministers discourse, and
the Law be unisons: and let the people ask the Priests concerning the law, as
they did Haggee 2.11. (...).
and not be like tidlings, that will not eat their milk unless it be in a
silver-dish: but account it a singular happiness to live under those lips (how
thick soever, a thin lip is a sign of eloquence Job. 12.20.) which both keep
knowledge, and utter it.

for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts] Heb. the Angel (See the Note on
Chap. 1.1.) and so the Septuagint and Vulgar render it. His office is as to
stand before God and praise Him, so to carry messages from him to his people,
and to be in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. Know thou not, (says Chrysostom) who
the Minister is? He is Gods Angel: he speaks not of himself, if thou
despisest, thou despisest not him, but God that sent him. And to the same
purpose Ambrose: The minister is Gods Angel to set forth the kingdom of Christ
and eternal life: non specie tibi aestimandus sed munere; he is not therefore
to be judged of by his outside, Hom. 2. in ep. 2. ad Tim. Lib: de initiand cap.
2. (...)
but by his office. Those Sodomites that sought to abuse the Angels, are thrown
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. Behold,
Christ himself has assured us that Sodomy it self is not an heavier sin, nor
more severely punished in hell, then the dispising or abusing of a Minister in
the faithful discharge of his duty. We should therefore welcome such with
trembling, as the men of Bethlehem did Samuel, and as Cornelius did Peter;
Come thou peaceably? said the Bethlemites, as suspecting the purpose of some
judgment. Now therefore are we all here present before God (not only before
thee, Act. 10.33.
said Cornelius) to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. If Ahab had
been like-well-affected as these good souls, he would never have asked Eliah
that absurd question, Art thou he that troubles Israel? Alas what had the
righteous Prophet done more than what by his office (as Gods Ambassador or
Messenger) he was bound to do? he taxed their sin, he foretold the judgment: he
deserved it not, he inflicted it not: yet he smarts, and they are guilty. As if
some fond people should accuse the Herald, or the trumpet, as the cause of
their war: Or as some ignorant pesant, when he sees his fowls bathing in his
pond, should cry out of them, as the causes of foul weather. Says a Divine It
is a good thing to stand in awe of Gods Angels, and with reverence to receive
their message howsoever distastful unto us; considering they are but messengers.

Verse 8. But ye are departed out of the way] Heb. from that way, viz. that
good old way of your progenitors: you are nothing like Levi, but are woefully
degenerated from the practice of your Predecessors, and have swerved from your
fathers foot-steeps: though ye have the same place, and enjoy the same
privileges. This is a foul fault and condemned even by the Heathen Sages.
Seneca tells us with indignation, that Socrates his sons were more like their
mother, a froward woman, then their father the wisest of men: according to
that, saying, Partus sequitur ventrem, the birth follows the belly. Young
Cicero was for his intemperancy, Heroum filij nox^.
and excess in drinking sir named Tricongius. Caligula, that monster, was the
son of Noble Germanicus. But we have scripture instances not a few. Not to
speak of Eli his sons, and of Samuels, Solomon degenerates from his father
David who had carefully taught him better Prove. 4.4. and so had his mother
Prove. 31. (which one calls Bathsheba's Catechism, another Lemuels lesson)
Iehoran^ is taxed for his not walking in the ways of his father Iehoshaphat,
and his Grandfather Asa, as if there had been no intervention of an Hezekiah.
Jonathan the son of Gershom the son of Manasseh that Idolatrous Priest
mentioned Iud. 18.30. is thought to have been the grandson of Moses: so the
Hebrews tell us: and that therefore the Nun in Manasseh is suspended above the
rest of the letters. Euxtorf.
Certain it is that Nabal the fool was of the line of faithful Caleb 1 Samuel
25.3. to teach us, that virtue is not, as lands inheritable. All that is
traduced with the seed is either evil, or not good. Grace is by gift, and not
by descent. Hence that prayer of David's courtiers 1 King 1.47. God make the
name of Solomom better then ^thy name. Agreeable whereunto is Hectors prayer
in, Homer for his son -- (...) I wish he may be a better man then his father.
And that of Juvenal, Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.


ye have caused many to stumble at the law] Which is a very dangerous thing:
like as it is to stumble on a bridge: A bridge is made to give us a safe
passage over a dangerous river: but he who stumbles on the bridge is in no
small danger to fall into the river. The word is given as a means to carry us
over hell unto heaven: But he who stumbles at this means (as by snuffing at it
Mal. 1.13. chatting against it and contesting with it, as often in this prophecy,
casting reproaches upon it, Jer. 20.8, 9. gathering odious consequences from
it, Romans 3.8. etc.) shall fall in thither, from whence otherwise he had been
delivered by it. This mischief many fell into, in Malachi his days, by the
means of those ungodly Priests who either taught them not better, or otherwise
drew them into sinful courses by their corrupt glosses, or lewd practices. Evil
examples of ministers have a strong influence upon their people: and the sins
of Teachers are the teachers of sins: The leaders of this people have made them
to err Esaias 9. Corruption commonly (as in a fish) begins at the head; Cicero.
neque solum obsunt Principes, quod illi ipsi corrumpuntur, sed etiam quod
corrumpunt: plusquam exemplo quam peccato nocent, says the Orator: they that
are in office do a great deal of mischief by encouraging others in evil,
through their evil example. Jupiters adulteries drew the people to like
wantonness. Magis intuentur quid facerit Jupiter quam quid docuit Plato, says
Austin; They look more what Jupiter did, then what Plato taught. I have read of
a woman, who living in professed doubt of the Godhead, after better
illumination and repentance, did often protest, that the vicious life of a
great scholar in that town did conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul.
Mr Wards Sermon.
In the time of Pope Clemen^ the fifth, the Church was so ill governed, and
things so corruptly carried at the court of Rome, that Frederick King of Sicily
duobted much of the truth of the Christian religion: but was confirmed, and his
mind better settled by Arnoldus de villa nova who showed him, that Offenses
must come, but woe be to them by whom they come. Jacob. Reu. de vit Ponti. p.
198.
A scandalous priest is a singular mischief: for he falls not alone, but (as
when a main stone in a building, or a tall cedar falls) he draws many with him
into fellowship of errors, and enormities: as did Hymenaeus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.18. and as the dragon with his long and strong tail, drew the third part
of the stars of heaven, and threw them to the earth, Rev. 12.4. When the
Pastors become brutish, all the flocks are scattered, Ier. 10.21.

ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi] The covenant on Gods part with Levi
was a covenant of salt, and could not be corrupted, Number. 18.19. non comutres^^t
vetustate, says Flaccius, it putrifieth not with age, or long standing: as
that pillar of salt into which Loss wife was turned, and of which Josephus
says, that something of it was to be seen till his time. But these degenerate
priests had abandoned Gods holy fear, they did not humble and tremble before
his Name, as Lovi their father had done, verse 5. they had falsified with God,
and so forfeited his favor. It was with them as Cajetan complains, and
confesses of the Popish priests; that whereas by their places they should have
been the salt of the earth, they had lost their savor, and were good for
little else, but looking after the rites and revenues of the Church: therefore
God held himself disobliged, Comment. Matthew.
and was resolved that they should bear the iniquity of their priesthood, Lev.
18.1. that is, the punishment of their iniquity notwithstanding the priesthood.
That should be no protection to them, but an aggravation: because they fell as
if they had not been anointed: Ideo deteriores sumus quia meliores e^e debemus
Salvian:
and were therefore the worse, because they should have been better. God holds
himself not bound to perform covenant with them that break with him: for why
should he give the childrens bread to dogs? why should he cast away his favors
upon those that value them not? We have the Covenant, the Seals, the Ministry,
etc. (and this is a singular happiness, Esaias 19.25. Assyria is the work of
Gods hands, but Israel his inheritance.) But alas, are not these blessings
amongst us as the Ark was among the Philistines, rather as prisoners, then as
privileges? rather in testimonium and rninam quam in salutem, for a testimony
against us, and for our further ruin, then for our safety here, and salvation
hereafter? O consider how God has cast off the Israelites, notwithstanding his
covenant with their fathers: and when in their necessity, they would have
forced acquaintance with him, he would not look upon them, Judge. 10.14. The
sword has broken in pieces those seven golden candlesticks in Asia, merely for
their covenant breaking. See the Note on verse 5.

Verse 9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base [And so have
cried quittance with you, and returned you your own with usury. God loves to
retaliate, and to proportion jealousy to jealousy, provocation to
provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. frowardness to frowardness, Psalm. 18.26.
contrariety to contrariety, Lev. 26.18, 21. contempt to contempt, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and here How these unworthy priests had slighted God, and exposed his Name and
Service to contempt and obloquy, has been before set forth sufficiently. And
now it is come home to them. It was threatened before verse 3. (see the Notes
there) and now it is executed. Graceless men are apt to imagine that God
threateneth in terrorem only: and are ready, with those miscreants in the
Gospel, to say, God forbid: we hope he will be better then his word, and not be
so unmercifull as the Preachers would make him. They believe the predictions of
Scripture, but as they believe the predictions of an Almanac, which says,
such a day will be rain, and such a day wind: men think it may come to pass,
and it may be not. But shall God say the word, and not see it fulfilled? Is not
his dicere, his facere? his word, his deed? Yea, does he not sometimes, dicte
citius, break out upon his enemies, as he did upon Nadab and Abibu,
Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, etc. God had poured contempt already upon these
degenerate priests. And the like he had threatened to those, Jer. 23.40. See
Mich. 3.7. Zach. 13.4. Ribera upon this Text bewailes the business in their
Romish Clergy, now become despicable by reason of their evil manners. Petrarch
complained long before, that the stench of that sink the Court of Rome was come
up to heaven. Erasmus laid them open in their colors, and did them more
mischief jocando, by his jearing and jesting at them, then Luther did
stomachando, by dry blows and invectives, as One well observes. He made the
world look up (that had been long luld asleep) and take notice of the truth of
that which Chrysostom had long before discovered and lamented, Multi
sacerdotes, and pauci sacerdotes, multi in nomine, pauci in opere. There are
many Priests, and yet but few: many so in name, few so indeed. Marcidi.
rebaulde. Parisiens.
Fie on such rascal rebaulds said the excommunicated Barons in K. John's time
(in their declaration) concerning the Pope and his Cardinals, and yet they were
no Protestants. No more are the Venetians: and yet how they slight their Pope
(who is now, like the cuckoo in June, heard but not regarded by them) is
sufficiently manifested by their Manifesto's to the Christian world. In Biscany
(anciently Cantabria) a province of Spain, they admit no Bishops to come
amongst them: such an hatred they have taken against that order of men. And
when King Ferdinand came in progress thither, accompanied amongst others by the
Bishop of Pampeluna, the people arose in arms, drove back the Bishop, and
gathering all the dust on the which they thought he had trodden, Heyl. Geog.
page 55.
flung it into the sea. What our Bishops did in Q. Maryes days we all know:
that bloody Bonner especially, buried at length in a dung hill (too good a
grave for him.) Sure it was an unhappy proverb that was then learnt, The
Bishops foot has trodden here. They are now utterly cashierd, and lie wrapped up
in the sheet of shame for this very sin (amongst others) here charged upon
these Priests, their dishonouring Gods great Name, his services, and servants.
For it was come to that height of wickedness amongst us, a little before the
late troubles, as to cast odium in religionis Professores tanquam in
adversarios, an evil report upon the professors of religion, as so many
adversarles, as Bede says the ancient Britains did immediately before their
destruction by the Saxons. He that would not be an Arminian, was therefore
accounted a practical Puritan. He that was not for the Jure divino of
Episcopacy, was little better then a public enemy. If the Ministry of England
be under any abasures at present, as they are thorough the iniquity of the
times, and the overflow of errors and Atheism, let it serve to humble them
for their desire of vainglory, and not seeking the honor that comes from God
only Ioh. 5.44. let it also work in them a greater care to approve themselves
to God, that they may be glorious in his eyes and to his people, who dare not
but honor such as fear the Lord Psalm. 15.4. and have his Ministers in
singular esteem for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.

according as ye have not kept my wayes] q. d. your dignity is decayed, like as
your duty has been neglected: You are fallen out of the hearts of good people,
and are aviled by all. Neither is it any wonder: for a vicious life breeds
vileness of estimation: but virtue is a thousand escucheons. Hence that close
connection, If there be any virtue, if any praise Phil. 4.8. this treads upon
the heels of that as it were; follows it as close as the shadow does the body.
When Adam stood in innocence, the savage beasts did him reverence. And the same
God which did at first put an awe of man in the fiercest creatures, has
stamped in the cruellest hearts a reverend respect to his own Image in his
faithful ministers, as in Saul to Samuel, Herod to John Baptist, those
gallants of Israel to that mad fellow, as they were pleased to call the Prophet
that came to anoint Jehu: upon whose words (as mad as they made of him) they
will presently adventure their lives, and change the crown. Gods Image (as Gods
name Psalm. 111.9.) is holy and reverend: And they that would have good repute
and report amongst men, must carefully keep (or, as the word here used may be
rendered) watch Gods ways. He shall have enough that will watch for his halting,
and take any little occasion to revile him with open mouth, as Shimei did
David, when he had declined Gods way. It is therefore excellent counsel that
Solomon gives, and worthy of all acceptance. Pro. 4.25, 26, 27. Let thine
eyes look right on: and let thine eyelids look straight before thee. Ponder the
path of thy feet: and let all thy ways be ordered aright. Turn not to the
right hand, nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil. Lo, this is the ready
road to honor and estimation. Do worthily in Ephrata, and so be famous in
Bethlehem. Ruth 4.11. Sic famam extendere factis Hoc virtutis opus. But those
Balaams that persuaded by their Balacks, seek for honor by evill-doing, these
seek the living among the dead, figs of thistles, heaven in hell etc.

but have been partial in the law] Heb. ye have accepted or acknowledged faces
in the law. i. e. you accept persons; you deal partially in expounding and
applying the law, making it pinch the poor, and favor the rich. The Church
has ever been pestered with such Aretalogi, such parasitical Preachers, whose
practice has been like Ahabs Prophets, to speak magis ad voluntatem quam ad
veritatem, more to please then to profit. And there is a very great sympathy
between great ones that have first flattered themselves, and these false
flatterers, who prove a sit helve for such an hatchet, and meet lettice for
such lips. Such an one was Vriah the high priest to Ahaz 2 Chronicles. 28. His motto
seems to have been Mihi placet, quic quid regi placet. Such were those
dirt-dawbers for the devil in Ezekiels days chap. 13.10, 11. etc. the
Herodians, the Arians, the Arminians, Buchole.
Vtenbogardus etc. the Queen of Navarr's Preachers, who persuaded her, out of
politic respects, to consent to that unhappy match that gave opportunity for
the Parisian Massacre. 1 Timothy 5 21. (...)
The Apostle charge his son Timothy to do nothing of popularity or
partiality, by tilting the balance on the one side, as the word signifies:
but as a just law is an heart without affection, an eye without lust, a mind
without passion, a treasurer which keeps for every man that he has, and
distributeth to every man that he ought to have: so should a Minister be;
remembering that of Job chap. 13.10. He will surely reprove you, if you secretly
accept persons, that is, he will chide you, smite you, curse you for it, and so
set it on, as no creature shall be able to take it off. If you reprove meaner
men, and wink at the faults of great Ones, reproving he will repro^^^ you,
(...) will not do it to halves: no, he will rather do it double; you shall have
it both surely and severely. Let your resolution therefore be that of Elihu Job
32 21.22. I will not now accept the person of any man, neither will I give
flattering titles to man. For I may not give flattering titles, lest my Maker
should suddenly take me away, lest my Master, whose steward I am, finding me
unfaithful in the dispose of his mysteries, should confound me before you.
Ier. 1.17. Nisi fideliter dixerim, vobis erit damnosum, Timeo itaqu^ damnum
vestrum, timeo damnationem meam. Bern. de T. mp. 99.
mihi periculosum, If I should not deal faithfully and freely with you, it
would be to your loss, but to mine utter undoing.

Verse 10. Have we not all one Father?] Here begins a second contestation, viz.
with the people (as the former was with the Priests) for their unrighteous
dealing; where we have so many words, so many arguments. In brevitate verborum
est luxuries verum. How many Ones are here, and all to persuade to unity. See
the like Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. Let those that take upon them to persuade others to
equity and unanimity, learn to marshall their matter handsomely, and to fill
their mouths with arguments, such as may fall thick, and prevail, Job 21.4.
being seconded and set on with intimation of heartiest affection. Oh that I
could somewhere meet with you both together said Austin to Hierome and Ruffinus
(hearing of their differences) I would fall down at your feet with much love,
and many tears, I would beseech you for Gods sake, for your own sakes, Hei
mihi qui vos alicubi invenire non possum etc.
for weak Christians sake etc. not to suffer these dissentions to spread
further. So Mr. Bradford in a letter to a distressed Gentlewoman that was in a
despairing condition, I beseech you, says He, I pray you, I desire you, I
crave at your hands with all my very heart, I ask of you with hand, pen, tongue
and mind in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his name, blood, mercy,
power and truths sake, Act. and Mon.
that you admit no doubting of Gods final mercyes toward you, howsoever you
feel your self. Oh that I could get words (said Another holy man to his
hearers) to gore your very hearts with smarting pain, that this doctrine might
be written in your flesh? By this One Father in the Text is meant Adam, say the
most Interpreters, who was the common Parent of us all, and the very stock and
root, from whence all mankind did spring. It is therefore a sin against Nature
it self and common humanity, to deal treacherously against another, or to hide
thy self from thine own flesh Isa. 58.7. This is to be more unreasonable then
beasts, birds, and fishes, which love their own kind; and those that seed on
flesh will not eat the flesh of their own kind. But our Age over-aboundeth with
unnatural Maneaters, that (not only fike a pickrell in a pond, or shark in the
sea, devour the lesser fishes of another alloy, but also) eat up Gods people,
as they eat bread, make no more conscience, Psalm. 14.5.
nay take as much content in undoing a poor brother, as in eating a meals-meat,
when they are hungry: they make but a breakfast of a whole representative
Nation; as those gun-powder-papists designed to do. How often are wicked
Oppressors compared to hunters, for their cruelty, and fowlers for their
craft? to show that they spare none that fall into their nets: young, old,
male, female, all go together into the bag. This raised a great cry of the
people, and of their wives against their brethren, those usurious Jews, that
had both robbed and ravished them, Psalm. 10.9
Nehem. 5.1. And what could they say for themselves, but the same in effect
with this in the text. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our
children as their children, etc?

have we not all one father? has not One God created us?] Here the Prophet
rises higher, viz. from Adam to God, out of whose mint when Man came first, he
shone most glorious, for he was Gods own workmanship created unto love and good
works: Ephesians. 2.10
yea, as iron put into fire, seems to be nothing but fire: so Adam, come fresh
out of Gods hands, who is perfect love and goodness it self, was no other then
a very lump of love to God, and kindness to his fellow creatures. But now
alas, we may sit and sing, O quantum haec Niobe, etc. how strangely are we
altered, and fallen from our first love! and what great cause have we, with
those in Ezra, to think of this Temple that was burnt, and lament? yea, write
Lamentations with Jeremy, and say, as He; They ravished the women in Zion, and
the maids in the cities of Judah. Princes are hanged up by the hand, the faces
of the Elders were not honored, etc. Lam. 5. The wonder was the less, because
these that did all this were of a different re^^ion. ^^^ for those that serve
the same true God, the Creator of all, to jarre and war (as we, alas, do
at this day) this is lamentabile bellum, and speaks a great decay and defect of
the power of godliness: true religion being of an uniting nature: and the
strongest tie. Sanatior sane est copula cordis quam corporis. This Joseph's
brethren knew, and therefore held it their best plea, Genesis 50.17. And now we
pray thee forgive the trespass of the servants of thy fathers God. They had
one common father: but, as a better string to their bow, they had one common
God. The very Turks are found to be much braver soldiers upon the Christian,
Voyage into Leuant. p. 89.
then upon the Persian, because they begin alate to be infected with
Persianisme, whom they acknowledge better Mahometans then themselves.

why do we deal treacherously] Or, fraudulently. The Prophet puts himself into
the number though innocent, that his reproof might the better take with them.
That which he taxes them for, is their wrong-dealing (in general) one with
another; whether it were by force or by fraud, by violence or cunning
contrivance, which what is it else, (...)
but crimen stellionatus, the very sin of cousenage, and has God for an
avenger? 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Now it is dangerous offending him whose displeasure and
revenge is everlasting, and who often calls to reckoning after our discharges.
Take heed therefore of all sorts of injustice. Curse not the deaf, lay not a
stumbling block before the blind: but fear the Lord Jehovah, Lev. 19.14. And
considering that to deal treacherously with another (a brother especially) is a
sin (as has been abovesaid) both against nature and religion: both against
Race and Grace (which teaches righteousness as well as holiness, Tit. 2.12.
and turning the leopard into the lamb, etc. causes that none do hurt to, or
destroy another in all Gods holy mountain, Esaias 11.6.) let us so carry our
selves, as that, with blessed Paul, we may glory and say, We have wronged no
man, we have consumed no man, we have defrauded no man, etc. 2 Cor. 7.2.

by profaning the covenant of our fathers] i. e. by degenerating from the
promises, and practices of our pious progenitors. Of this see verse 8. A
certain popish Prince said, It is not amiss to make covenants: but woe be to
him that is necessitated to keep them. He had learned, (belike of Machiavel)
fidem tamdiu servandam esse quamdiu expediat, that covenants are to be kept so
long as a man shall see cause. Eos foedera nescire.
That which was anciently said of the Thracians is now verified of the papists,
that they keep no covenants, with heretics especially. The Turks (taught by
them) say, There is no faith to be kept with dogs, that is with Christians.
Their leagnes grounded upon the law of Nations, and solemnly confirmed by oath,
have with them no longer force then stands with their own pleasure and
profit. And if Turks and Papists only were truce breakers, and fedifragies, it
were the better to be born with. But what shall we say to those
Christianecategori (as Bellarmine says a certain sort of heretics were called
of old) those blots and botches of Christian religion, and holy society, that
can say and unsay at pleasure, De. eccles. triumph. l. 2. c. 11.
make vows to God in their distress, and break them as fast when delivered?
Just like those Jews in Jeremy, chap. 34. that set free their servants when the
enemy lay before the walls: but reduced them into bondage, when the siege was
raised, though they had cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts
thereof; a most solemn way of sealing up covenants. So dealt their fathers
before them, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. And so dealt here their Nephews after
them. They profaned the covenant of obedience to Gods commandments, that their
fathers, for themselves and their successors, entered into. But should men thus
play with covenants as children do with nuts? should they slip them at
pleasure, as Monkeys do their collars? should they snap them in sunder, as
Sampson did his cords? Had Shimei peace that brake his oath to Solomon? or
Zedekiah that kept not touch with Nebuchadnezzar? etc.

Verse. 11. Judah has dealt treacherously] Judah the consessour) as his name
imports) Judah that once ruled with God, and was faithful with the Saints:
Hos.: 1.12.
Ind^^h in whom God was known, his name was great in Israel Psalm. 76, 2.
Prospers conceit was, that Iudai were so called because thy received us Dei,
the law from Gods mouth: whence Ioscphus calls the Common wealth of Israel
(...) a God government. For, to them pertained (among sundry other precious
privileges recited Romans 9.4, 5.) the Covenants, that is, 1. The moral law in
two tables. 2. The giving of the law, that is, the Judicial law. 3. The
service, that is, the seremonial law, which was their Gospel: whence Judea is
called the glorious land Dan. 11.41. (or the land of delights, or ornaments as
the Hebrew has it) a pleasant land, or a land of desire Ier. 3.19. because as
it is Ezekiel 20.6, 15. it was the glory of all lands. Jerusalem the metropolis,
was not only the most famous of all the cities of the East, as Pliny
confesses it, Psalm. 31.21.
but also of the whole world si insignia Dei spectemus benesicia, as one says,
if we consider Gods mavelous kind csse showed to it in a strong city, as
David has it. But, as ingentia beneficia, flagitia, supplicia, the greater the
privileges of any place or people are, the more heinous are their offenses,
and the more hideous their punishments; so sell it out with this nation so
advanced, so obliged, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked. They were but newly
returned from captivity, scarce yet warm in their nests, when they fell afresh
to their old trade of treachery, doing wickedly with both hands earnestly.
Abomination was committed in Israel and in Jerusalem, even such as Gods soul
abhorred, and was ready to be loosened or dis oynted from them Ier. 6.8.
because in the land of uprightness they dealt unjustly, and would not behold
the majesty f^he Lord say 26.10. Indah had profaned the holiness of the Lord
which he loved, that is, the very place that he had espied out for himself, and
that was dedicated to his name and service, the holy and separate land, the
Isle, as it is called Tsai. 20.6. (though part of the continent) because
compassied about with Gods favor as with a shield. Psalm. 5.12. In such a
consecrated country to act their villainy, was no small aggravation of their
wickedness: this made it swell like a toad in the eyes of the Almighty, it was
an abomination. Filthynesse in a stews, in a strumpet, is nothing so odious,
as in a pretended Virgin. A nettle on the waste is better born with then in a
garden. To see the Devil in hell is no wonder: but what makes he in Paradise?
England was anciently called the kingdom of God it may much better be so called
now, Auglia reg^^^i Del. Pol. Vhg.
that Gospel of the kingdom is preached amongst us. It was also called Albion
quasi Olbion (Happy or fortunate, the fortunate Island say some) or ab albis
rupibus from the whiteness of the rocks. True it is, we were black all over
with superstition, first Pagan, and then Papagan; But Christ has made us white
again as snow in Salmon. And do we again sully and soil our selves with sins
filthiness, with that unclean kitchin-stuffe? do we profane the holiness of
the Lord, which he loved, to drive him away from us by degrees, as those Jews
did, Ezekiel 8.9, 10, 11. sin is the leaven that defiles our passover; and
urges God to pass away and depart from us. Sin is the snuff that dimmes our
candle-stick, and threatens the removal of it. Let those that live in Gods
good land, but not in Gods good Laws (as Aristotle complained of his Athenians
to like purpose, Laert. l. 5. c. 1
and as Seneca said to the Romans, that they were become more filthy since they
had bathes to wash in) look forward to the following verse, and tremble at that
utter destruction there threatened to such, Disperdet Dominus etc. And
thereunto Saint Paul seems to allude 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the
Temple of God, him will God destroy.

and has married the daughter of a strange God] This is that particular sin
whereby they had dealt treacherously against their brethren, profaned the
Covenant, polluted the Church, and committed abomination in Israel: they had
married with women of a strange worship, and joined in affinity with the people
of those abominations, as holy Ezra phraseth it Chap. 9.14. and withal sets
it forth for such a sin in those newly-returned captives, as he thinks heaven
and earth might well be ashamed of. A sin it is, flatly forbidden in both
Testaments, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 2. Cor. 6.14. and reasons added: as 1. Danger of
defection at least, from former forwardness: but most commonly of infection,
as in Solomon 1 King. 11. Nehem. 13.26. what is the reason the Pope will not
dispense in Spain and Italy, if a papist marry a Protestant; yet here he will,
but in hope to draw more to them. See 1 King. 12.25. and 2 King. 8.27. 2 Great
inconveniency: as 1. Of grief to the godly parents Genesis 26.35. and 27.36. 2.
Ill education of children, who commonly take after the mother (as did most of
those Idolatrous kings of Judah) and follow the worser side, though it be the
weaker, as the conclusion in a Syllogism follows the weaker proposition. The
birth, we say, follows the belly: and most men, we see, do matrissare take
after the mother, in matters of religion. Hereunto might be added, that Gods
service must by these unequal matches necessarily be hindered, if not
altogether omitted, (to gratify a froward Zipporah, or a mocking Michol) and
the better party forced to see and hear that, that cannot but grieve the Spirit
of God. Besides danger of disloyalty, and a cursed posterity, as Edomites of
the daughters of Heth. D. Hall.
Here then I could join with that Reverend Contemplatour in that holy wish of
his, that Manoah could speak so loud that all our Israelites might hear him; Is
there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all Gods
people, that thou go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? If
Religion be any other then a cipher, how dare we not regard it in our most
important choyces? how dare we yoke our selves with any untamed heifer that
bears not Christ's yoke? what mad work made that noble pair of naughtypacks,
Iezabel and Athaliah in the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, the later beginning
her reign in the same year that the former perished, as Bucholcer observes?
And who knows not what a deal of mischief was done to the poor people of God
in France, by Katherine de Medices, Q. Mother, with the advice and aslistance
of the Cardinal of Lorrain? Concerning which two it was said, Non audet
stygius Pluto tentare quod ander
Effraenis Monachus plenaque frandis anus.


Verse 12. The Lord will cut off the man that does this] Though the Magistrate
be careless and corrupt: though he either cannot punish this evil, it being
grown so universal, or will not (and so impunity in the Magistrate makes
impenitency in the offenders) God will take the sword in hand, and cut off
every mothers child that does this, Metaphora est a Medicis ^^^la. Polan.
(nisi currat poenitentia) as a surgeon cutteth off a rotten member, so will
God destroy such for ever: he will take them away, and pluck them out of their
dwelling places, and root them out of the land of the living, Psalm. 52.5.
Neither shall this be done to himself only, but to his wretched posterity
(such a legacy like Joabs leprosy, leaves every graceless man to his
children) for so the Chaldee here renders and interprets that proverbiall
expression in the text, both the master and the scholar, Sic and R. Salom.
filium and filium filii, his son, and his sous son, though he teach never
so well by wholesome instruction, and politic^ advisement, to prevent the
mischief: Agreeably hereunto for sense Piscator renders this text thus, The
Lord will cut off his children that does thus, the children that he begets of
the daughter of a strange god. An heavy curse surely, and frequently inflicted,
as upon Ahab: though he to avoid it, so followed the work of generation, that
he lest seventy sons behind him; which yet would not do.

and him that offers an offering etc.] that is, Although he be a Priest, Or
Although he seek to make peace with me by an offering: as hoping thereby to
stop my mouth or stay my hand to expiate his sin, or to purchase a dispensation
as those Mic. 6.6, 7. and Esaias 58.2, 3. Thus Saul sacrifices, Ahab trembles
and humbles, Ieroboams wile goes to the Prophet, Ioab takes hold of the
horns of the Altar: the king of Persia having lost some of his children by
untimely death as Ciesias reports) sends earnestly to the Jews for prayers
for him and his, Ezra 6.10. So did Maximinus in like case to the Christians.
Tully tells us that they which prayed whole days together and offered
sacrifice, (...) D^vr.
ut s^^ liberi superstites sibi essent, that their children might outlive
them, these were (...) called superstitiou persons: afterward the word was
taken in a larger sense. But devotion without holy conversation availes nothing
to avert Gods judgments Isa. 1.12.15. and ^6.3. He that kills an Ox unless
withal he kill his curruptions is as if he slew a man: he that sacrisiccth a
lamb, unless by faith he ley hold upon the Lamb of God, is as if he cut off a
dogs nick: he that effereth an old^tion etc. This men are hardly drawn to, viz.
to part with their sins, to cail the traitors head over the wall, to hang up
the heads of the people before the Sun. Sin harbored in the soul, is like
Achan in the army, or Jonas in the ship; much pains the mariners were at, and
much losle too, to have saved Jonas from the sea, they ventured their own
casting away ere they would cast him overboard: but there could be no calm,
till they had done it effectually. So it is here. Full fain men would keep
their sins, and yet lave their fowls: but that is impossible. God will not be
bribed Psalm. 50. nor brought to suster sin unrepented to escape unpunished.
Poor souls when stung by the Friars sermons, they set them penunces,
pilgrimages, all sorts of good works, which stilled them a while: and for them
they thought they should have pardon. So many run now amongst us to holy
duties, but with the same opinion they did them, a bribes for a pardon. These
dig for pearl, in their own dunghils, make the means their mediat urs, (...)
think to save themselves by riding on horses etc.

Verse 13. And this have ye done againe] Or, in the second place. q. ^. Nor
content to have married strange wives, yea have brought them in to your lowfull
wives, to their intolerable vexation, so adding this sin to the former, as a
greater to the less. This is still the guise of graceless men, to add
druake^^^sse to thirst, rebellion to sin, to amasse and heap up one evil upon
another, till wrath come upon them to the ut mest. For three transgressions and
for soxr I will not turn away their punishment Am. 1. that is, so long as the
wicked commit one or two in^^uities, I forbear them: but when it comes once to
threes and fours, (how much more to so many scores, hundreds, thousands, as one
cipher added to a figure makes it so many tenns, two so many hundreds, three so
many thousands etc.) God will bear with them no longer. Of those old Israelites
it is demanded, not without great indignation on Gods part. How often did they
provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert? Yea they turned
ba^^ and tempted God etc. Psalm. 78.40, 41. Good men, if they fall once into
foul practices, they fall not often. Of Judah it is expressly recorded that
he knew Tamar no more. Lot indeed committed incest two night; together: but the
orifice of his lust was not yet stopped by repentance. Think the same of
Solomon, Sampson, Jonah, etc. their acts were as it were continued acts: and,
in the interim, little or no remorse or regret. Let us that have received
merey, be admonished to sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto us. I^h. 5
There is a woe to such as draw iniquiey with cords of vanity, and sin as it
were with a cartrope Isa. 5.20. Babylons sins in the Revelation reached up to
heaven, or they were thwacked together thick and threefold one upon another
Rev. 18.5. there was a concatenation, or a continued series of them: therefore
she fell surely and suddenly. When wickedness is once ripe in the field, God
will not let it shed to grow again: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable
vengeance.

covering the Altar of the Lord with teares] That is, You caused your poor
wives, when they should have been cheerful in Gods service, as 1 Samuel 1. and
in many other places it was required of the Israelites to rejoice whenever
they appeared before the Lord, Earthly Princes love not the company of mourners
Esth. 4.4. to cover the Lords Altar vith tears, with weeping, and with crying
out, to throw themselves, blubbered and swollen with tears, upon the Altar, which
was a profanation of it: so that God regarded not the offering any more. 'Twere
happy if we could be so affected with our unkindnesse to Christ, our husband,
that we could cover his Table, when we come to it, with our tears. How should
the Lord regard our service so much the more? how should it be unto him as
Music upon the waters, far more harmonious! What a gracious respect had He
to the weeping women that followed him to the cross; and what an honor was
that to one of them, ( Mary Magdalen I mean) that she had the first sight of
the revived Phoenix, Psalm. 91.13.
whom she held fast by those feet that she had once washed with her tears, and
that had now lately trod upon the lion, and adder, etc? It was appointed by
Moses law that the bondwoman should bewail her father and mother a full monet
before she might become an Israelites wife. Deuteronomy. 21.13.
We, that are strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, as we cannot be
presented a chaste virgin to Christ, but as weeping over him that bled over us,
so we never please him better, then when we weep over our tears, Ipsae
lachrymae sunt lachryabiles, etc.
sigh over our sobbes, mourn over our griefs, as not proportionable to our
miscarriages. But to return to the Text: The Jews as they are noted for a
nation overmuch effoeminate, and given to women, (as they say) so when they
have satisfied their lust, and served their own turns, they are as willing to
be rid of them as Amnon was of Tamar. Hence those many cautions in the law to
put bounds to their petulancy: and that politic permistion of a divorce, for
the relief of the poor despised woman, lest she should come to a mischief, by
the hatred of the churl her husband, Deuteronomy. 22.13, 14 with chap. 24.3. At this
day they look upon women, as not having so divine a soul as men, but are of a
lower creation, made only for the propagation and pleasure of man. They use
them as their drudges, lay upon them with their unmanly fists, are ready to cut
out their tongues (as the Welsh-men dealt by their French wives, Heyl. Geng.
page 93.
lest they should corrupt the language of their children) put them away upon
every slight occasion, covering that violence with the garment of the law, as
verse 16. Or if they kept them, they took other wives to them, to vex them, and
to make them to sr^t, 1 Samuel 1.6. or (as the word there signisies) to thunder:
not only tabring upon their breasts, with the voice of doves, (as Nahums
expression is) but filling the air, yea covering the altar (as it is here) with
their laments and l^wings, Nah. 2.7. Lamentis gemituque and foeminco ululatu
Tecta fremunt-Virg. Aeneid.
fl^ctu and mugitu, (so the Vulgar renders it) for their husbands harshnesse,
and their concubines insolences, and indignities. Hierom tells us, that these
returned captives slighted their old wives brought with them from Babylon, (as
being by that tedions journey become infirm and deformed) and matched with
slrangers, who were fresh, fair, rich, etc. this he gathers out of Ezra 9. and
10. whereas they should rather have nourished and cherished them as their own
flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. they should have handled them gently, because of their
weakness, as so many chrystall-glasses. They should have given them all
lawful content, as Abraham did Saral, his faithful fellow-traveller. They
should have given all honor unto them, says Saint Peter; and why? 1 Pet. 3.7.
Mark his many reasons. 1. They are the weaker vessels, and are therefore to be
handled with all tenderness. Some translate it the weaker instrument: and (as
Luther speaks of it) as a knife with a tender edge men will not cut stones,
brass, or iron with it: so here. 2. They are heirs together of the grace of
life, that is, of the life of grace, and of glory too: for souls have no sexes,
and as every one is in Christ, all are equal, so that the husband is bound, in
this respect, to make his wives yoke as easy as may be, since she draws even
with him, though on the left side. 3. That your prayers be not hindered, as
they will be, where there is not so much conjugium, as conjurgium. How can they
pray together comfortably, that live so discontentedly? How can they bring
their gift to that altar that is covered with the tears, and moans of their
justly aggrieved and abused wives? Or, if they do, will God regard their
offering any more, or receive it with good will at their hands? Will not the
tears and groans of their distressed wives (who yet hold out their devotion,
and will not be hindered by their just grief, from praying to God, and pouring
out their souls before him) move God more then their sacrifices can do?
Especially if they bring them with a wicked mind, as Solomon has it: and as
Lyra makes it to be the sense of this Text: Prove. 21.27
Ye have covered the Altar of the Lord with tears, etc. but he regards not
the offering any more, etc. that is, (says Lyra, and he has it from
Chrysostom) you are resolved to retain your idolatrous wives, though God have
declared against it: And that ye may expiate this wickednesle, and make amends
by your good deeds for your bad; you run to the Temple, and there with many
tears, and groans you beg pardon. But all in vain, because you have no purpose
at all to break off your sins, but will needs persist in your unlawful
marriages. See more of this in the Note on chap. 3.16. doct. 4. use 1.

Verse 14. Yet ye say wherefore?] A senseless question: but there is nothing
more stupid, and stubborn then an hypocrite: he will not yield, though never so
clearly convinced, but will have still somewhat to say though to small purpose,
as had Saul to Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. and these Questionists here to God, whom (as
before often, and again after) they put to his proofs. (See the Note on chap. 1.
verse 2, 6.) and his answer is ready:

Because the Lord has been winesse between thee and the wife of thy youth] The
Heathen could say, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia siquid
Turpe paras: -- And again,
Turpe quid acturus te, sine test, time.
We should not do wickedly if but a child be by. And, when thou art about to do
ought amiss, fear thine own conscience, which is a thousand witnesses. But if
God be by as a witness, should not men fear to offend him? Tremble thou earth,
at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. He that dares
sin, though he know God be an eyewitness, is more impudent in sinning then
was Absalom, when he spread a tent upon the top of the house, and went in to his
fathers concubines, in the sight of all Israel, and of the Sun. These
treacherous husbands could not but know that they had entered into a covenant of
God, Prove. 2.17. when they married: that the bond was made to God, and that
upon the violation of it, he would be ready enough to take the forfeiture: for
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.3. That God had been
witness, Protestatus est.
or had protested (so Montanus renders it) and withal had, by interposing of
his own authority, confirmed the contract and compact, saying, verbis concept
is, as Hos. 3.3. Thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee,
and not for another woman, till God shall separate us by death. Indeed if the
husband or the wife be dead, Romans 7.2.
the surviving party is at liberty to marry again (whatsoever the Canonists say
against bigamy.) Hierome tells us of an old man in Rome that had buried twenty
wives, which he had married one after the death of another: and that he had
taken to wife the one and twentieth, who also had buried nineteen husbands. And
that, Hier. apud Lonicer in Theat. histor. p. 734.
burying that wife too, he followed the corpse to the Church (so his neighbors
would needs have it) with a garland of bays upon his head in manner of a
triumpher. But against Polygamy (which is, when a man or woman couples himself
or her self in marriage to more then one) here are an heap of arguments in the
text, which we shall take as they lie in order. Meanwhile it is worthy our
observation, that the first Author of Polygamy was that Thrasonicall Lamech,
noted for a profane and wicked person: as was likewise Esan another Polygamist.
Laban though he had cheted Jacob into the having of his two daughters to wife,
yet he could not but confess it to be a sin against the light of Nature.
Hence at parting he takes a solemn oath of Jacob, Genesis 31.50. If thou shall
afflict my daughters, or if thou shall take other wives besides my daughters:
no man is with us: see God is witness betwixt me and thee. Some of the Fathers
were herein faulty, as Abraham, David, etc. and some say it was their
privilege: but that is not likely. Rather it was their ignorance or
incogitancy, (they considered not that it was a breach of the first institution
of marriage) or, as some conceive, it was their mere mistake of that Text, Lev.
18.18. Thou shall not take a wife to her sister, to vex her, Confer Ezekiel. 1.9.
to uncover her naked esse, besides the other, in her life time. Here they took
the word (sister) for one so by blood, which was spoken of a sister by nation,
as those clauses to vex her, and da^^ghter life, do evince. One thing was, the
commonnesse of the sin, and the (...) custom of it. So long had it
continued, and was grown so fashionable, that it seemed to be no sin. But
debt is debt, whether a man know of it, or not: And sin, as a debt, may sleep a
long time, and not be called for of many years, as Saul's sin in killing the
Gibeonites slept forty years; and Joabs killing of Abner slept all David's
days, etc. Another thing that might cause desire of many wives, was want of
love and chaste affection to the wife of their youth. Isaac is noted for a most
loving husband to his Rebecca: and he never desired more wives then her. Re
oyce in the wife of thy youth: Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe,
etc. This will keep thee from being ravished with a strange woman, or ombracing
the bosomc of a stranger, Prove. 5.18, 19, 20. The Hind and the Roe are most
loving to their mates, and therefore most faithful to them. So, among birds,
are the turtledove, and the stork. The former, they say, as he keeps close to
his mate, while she lives; so when she dies, he groans and moans continually,
and never sits upon a green bough. The later are chaste, and severe, in
punishing those of the kind that are not. It iscredibly reported by some that
have seen it, that whole flocks of Storks meeting in a meadow, they have set in
the midst of them two of their company that have been found disloyal,
Sphi^^. Philos. page 231.
and runnning upon them with main force have killed them with their beaks. So
that the company breaking up, and all the rest flying away, the two offending
Storks only have been found dead in the place.

against whom thou have dealt treacherously] viz by superinducing another wife
contrary to thy covenant, This is not a simple injury against thy lawful wife;
but such as is joined with contumely, which the Greeks call (...): and the
children that come of such copulation they call (...), because they are subject
to contumelies. The Hebrews call them brambles; A^imelech was such an one,
Judge. 9.14. a right bramble indeed, who grew in the base hedge-row of a
concubine; and scratcht and drew blood to purpose. Lo, this is the Prophets
first argument against Polygamy: it is treachery against both God, who is
deeply interested in the marriage-covenant, and against the true wife, who is
hereby extremely desrauded, and defeated. Follows not the second:

yet she is thy companion] thy compeer, and copartner, thy consort, and
fellow-friend, such another as thy self (so the woman is called, Genesis 2.18.) a
secondself, a mate meet for thee, a piece so just cut out for thee, as
answers thee rightly in every point, in every joint. A wife is not a slave,
(says One) but a companion: a yoke fellow, standing on even ground with thee,
though drawing on the left side. From the left side (say some) she was taken
where the heart is, to teach, that hearty love should be betwixt married
couples. Made she was of a rib, a bone of the side; not of the head, (the wife
must not usurp authority over her husband) nor yet of the foot, she may not be
trampled upon, or disregarded as an underling. A bone, not of any anterior
part; she is not ^raela^a, preferred before the man: neither yet of any
hinder-part, she is not postposita, set behind the man: but a bone of the side,
of the middle, of the indifferent part, to show that she is thy companion and
the wife of thy covenant. A bone she is from under the arm: to put man in mind
of protection, and defense to the woman. A bone, not far from his heart; to put
him in mind of dilection and love to the woman. Neither can the rib challenge
any more of her, then the earth can do of him. And as he was ignorant when
himself was made, so he knew as little when his second-self was made out of
him: both that the comfort might be greater then was expected; as also that he
might not upbraid his wife with any great dependence or obligation; he neither
willing the work, nor suffering any pain to have it done. Shine she must with
the beams of her husband: Share she must with him, in his masterly government
of the family, as Sarah did with Abraham by Gods allowance, Genesis 16. and as the
Roman Ladies were wont to say to their husbands, Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia,
where you are Lord, I am Lady. That over-lordly carriage of husbands toward
their wives, and that usage of them as drudges, is condemned by the Heathen
Philosophers, in the very Barbarians themselves, as a great ataxy, and disorder
in the family.

and the wife of thy covenant] And is it nothing to be covenant-breaker with a
wife; especially where God also is engaged, as above said? Foedus (...). (...),
ab eadem radice, perform your trust, make good the troth you have plighted.
Otherwise, if the fruits of the flesh grow out of the trees of your hearts,
surely, Ser. of Rep. p. 70.
surely, says Master Bradford Martyr, the devil is at inn with you: you are
his birds, whom when he has well fed, he will broach you, and eat you, chaw
you, and champ you world without end, in eternal woe and misery.

Verse 15. And did not he make one] Another forcible argument against Polygamy,
and adultery. See our Saviors explanation of it, Mat. 19.4, 5, 6. with the
Notes there. The only wise God made but one woman for one man at the first
creation: and ordained that those two should be one flesh, two in one flesh,
not three, or four, or as many wives as a man is able to maintain, as among the
Turks, who (as a just hand of God upon them) are grievously vexed with
jealousy, not suffering their women to go to Church: nor so much as look out
at their own windows: B^unt. 106.
Or if they go abroad upon any occasion, they must go muffled, all but the
eyes. Sardus tells us, that the old Britains would ten or twelve of them take
one woman to wife. Belike women were rare commodities with them. As likewise
men were in Judaea, when seven women took hold of one man, saying, We will eat
our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by thy name,
to take away our reproach, Esaias 4.1. That is, we will maintain our selves and
thee: only be thou an husband to us, and let us have children by thee.

yet had he the residue of the spirit] Or, breath: so that he could as easily
have made more, and breathed into their faces the breath of life. And although
it is not said of the woman, that God breathed into her the breath of life, as
of Adam, (whence Tertullian concludes, that she had both body and soul too from
Adam) yet Austin rightly gathers, that their souls were both alike imbreathed
by God: 10. Lib sup. Genes.
Otherwise, the scripture would not have been silent in it, no more then it is
in the new manner of the creation of her body. Thence also it is that Adam
says not, This is soul of my soul, but bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh,
Genesis 2.23. Souls are not propagated by the Parents, but created of God, and
joined to the body, by an occult operation. Augustine following Origin, held
the contrary for a long time. At length he began to doubt, and after a while
changed his opinion: Hierom stoutly defending the contrary against him:
Aristotle also understood the truth hereof, and concluded, that the soul was
divine, and came from above: and. (...). Lib. 2. c. 9. de genesis anim.
though of nothing, yet is it made a matter more excellent then the matter of
the heavens, in nature not inferior to the Angels. An abridgement it is of the
invisible world, as the body is of the visible. And why may we not say, that
the soul as it came from God, being divinae particula aurae, so it is like him?
One, immateriall, immortal, understanding spirit, distinguished into three
powers, which all make up one Spirit. In this respect it is said, Genesis 9.6.
that in the image of God made he man. There is a double image of God in the
soul. One in the substance of it: this is never lost, and of this that text is
to be understood. The other is the supernatural grace, which is an image of
the knowledge, holiness, and righteousness of God, and this is utterly lost,
and must be recovered. This the ancient Heathens hammered at, when they fained
that the soul once had wings: but, those being broken, it fell head long into
the body; where when it has recovered it is wings, it flies up to heaven again.
That was very good counsel given by a godly man to his friend, not to busy
his brains so much in enquiring how the soul entered into the body, as how it
may depart comfortably out of the body. And seeing the soul is more excellent
then the body, (says another grave Divine) like as Jacob laid his right hand
upon the younger, but his left upon the elder, so our best care, and the
strength of our thoughts should be for the soul, younger as much as it is, then
the body; they should be but left hand thoughts for the body.

and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed] Heb. a seed of God: not a
bastardly brood, a spurious issue, a Mamzer, as the Hebrews call such, that is,
labes aliena, a strange blot, a seed of the adulterer and the whore, Esaias 57.3.
but such as God appoints, and approves, such as may be holy, with a federall
holiness at least, if not sanctified from the womb, as some have been, and
are.: lastly, 1 Cor. 7.14.
such as in and by whom the Church and religion may be propagated and not
idolatry spread and increased.

therefore take heed to your spirit] that is, to your wife, which is the
residue of your spirit; keep and cherish her: so Remigius and Lyra interpret
it. But they do better that expound it by that of Solomon, Keep thy heart with
all diligence, Prove. 4.23. and by that of the Apostle, Mortific therefore your
members which are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection,
evil concupiscence, etc. Col. 3.5. These are those that defile the man, Mat.
15.19, 20. These make his heart a filthy dunghill of all abominable lusts, and
his life a long chain of sinful actions, a very continued web of wickedness,
therefore take head to your spirits, that is, to your affections, keep those
pure and chaste: abstain from fleshly lusts that fight against the soul. Take
heed where you set gunpowder, since fire is in your heart. Austin thanks God
that the heart and temptation did not meet together. Look well to the
affections: for by those maids Satan woes the mistress. Look to the
cinque ports, the five senses: shut those windows that death enter not in
thereby. Take heed to thy fancy: we allow an horse to praunce and skip in a
pasture; which if he does when backed by the rider, we count him an unruly and
unbroken jade. So, howsoever in other creatures we deny them not liberty of
fancy, yet we may not allow it in our selves, to frisk and rove at pleasure,
but by reason bridle them, and set them their bounds that they shall not pass.
The Lord quieteth the sea, and turns the storm into a calm, Psalm. 107.29. If
then the voluptuous humors in our body (which is but as a cup made of the husk
of an acorne in respect of the Sea) will not be pacified when the Lord says
unto them, Be still, every drop of water in the sea will witness of our
rebellion and disobedience.

and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth] He had
convinced them of this sin before, verse 14. Now he admonishes them to
abrenounce and abandon it. Lo this is the true method and manner of proceeding,
in administering admonitions. The judgment must be convinced, ere the
affections can be wrought to any thing: like as in the law, the lamps were
first lighted, before the incense was burned: First, know thine iniquity, and
then turn from it, Jer. 3.13, 14. Exhortation is the end of doctrine, science
of conscience, reformation of information, conversion of conviction: and woe be
to those that being convinced, or reproved for their faults, get the bit
between the teeth, as it were, and run away with their rider. When I would have
healed Ephraim, then his iniquity brake out (as if it were to cross me) like
the leprosy in his forehead, Hos. 7.1. what can such sturdy rebels expect
better, then that God should resolve, as Ezekiel. 24.13. as if he should say, Thou
shall have thy will, but then I will have mine too: I shall take another course
with thee, since thou refusest to be reformed, hate to be healed: thou shall
pine away in thine iniquities, Levit. 26.39. O fearful!

Verse 16. For the Lord the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away]
Heb. Put away, q. d. God hates that Put her away, Put her away, that is so much
in your mouths. For, because you are justly reproved for Polygamy, for keeping
two wives, you think to mend that fault by putting away your old ones, and
plead you may do it by a law, licensing divorces. But the Lord would ye should
know, that he hates such your practices: and the rather because you maliciously
abuse his law, as a cloak of your wickedness. Divorce is a thing that Gods
soul hates, unless it be in case of adultery, (which breaks the marriage
knot) and malicious perpetual desertion. This last was the case of that noble
Italian convert, 1 Cor. 7.15.
Galeacius Caracciolus Marquess of Vico (as is to be seen in his life, written
by my much honored brother, Mr. Sam^el Clark, in the second part of his Marrow
of Ecclesiastical history, page 101.) who by the consent of Mr. Calvin, Peter
Martyr, and other learned Divines (who met and seriously debated the case) sued
out a divorce against his former wife, who had first maliciously deserted him,
and had it legally by the Magistrate at Geneva granted unto him: after which he
married another, Anno 1560. The Civil Law of the Empire permitted divorce for
diverse other causes. And these Jews, for every light cause (if but a blemish
in the body, or crookedness of manners) pretending to hate their wives, would
write them a Bill of divorce, and turn them off. Our Savior deals against
this, matthew. 5. and 18. See the Notes there. This sin was also rife among
both the Athenians (who were wont to put away their wives upon discontent,
Archcol Attic. 140.
or hope of greater portions, etc.) and the Romans, whose Abscessionale, or
Writ of divorce was this only, Res tuas tibi habeto; Take what is thine, and
be gone. It is ordinary also among the Mahometans: But the Lord God of Israel
says here, that he hates it: and it appears so by his practice to his
Spouse the Church. See Jer. 3.1. Joh. 13.1. and then say, that Gods mercy is
matehlesse; and that he takes not advantages against his revolting people, but
follows them with his favor: no otherwise then as when a man goes from the
Sun, yet the Sunbeams follow him, shine upon him, warm him, etc. Zanchy (and
some others) reads the text thus, If thou hate her, put her away, in that
discourse of divorces, which he wrote upon occasion of Andreas Pixzardus his
divorce, as indeed agreeing best with the matter he undertook to defend. But in
another book of his he utterly disliketh the doings of Luther, and some other
Dutch Divines, who advised Philip, Lantgrave of Hesse to marry, alteram, hoc
est, Zanch. Misc. Epist dedit.
adulieram, his former lawful wife being yet alive. Archbishop Grindall, by
cunning practices of his adversaries, Leicester and others, lost Queen
Elizabeth's favor, Camb. Elizab. Arslibishop Abbots also died in disgrace for
opposing Semmersets abhorred match with the Countess of Essex. Figuier.
as if he favored Prophecyings, etc. but in truth, because he had condemned an
unlawful marriage of Julio an Italian Physician with another man's wife,
whilst Leicester in vain opposed against his proceedings therein.

for one covers violence with his garment] This Text had been easy, had not
Commentatours (the Hebrew Doctors especially) made it knotty. Rabbi David in
opening of it, obscurior videtur, quam ipsa verba quae explicare conatur, seems
to be more obscure then the words themselves which he undertaketh to open;
says Figueir, who also recites the expositions of several Rabbines.
Concerning which, I may say as One did once, when being asked by another,
whether he should read such a Comment upon Aristotle? answered, Yes; when
Aristotle is understood, then read the Comment. The plain sense is this: These
wicked Jews pretended the Law of God, as a cloak and cover of their sin, that
it might be no sin to them. And though the Lord had protested to hate their
divorces, yet they pleaded I know not what liberty permitted them by Moses: but
this was but a politic coverture of iniquity, Mat. 18.8, 9. The like hereunto
was the sin of Saul, 1 Samuel 15. of Jezabel, 1 King. 21.13. of those Jews, Joh.
19.7. of those Libertines, 2 Pet. 2. Jam. 2.8, 9. of all Heretics, that plead
Scripture for their heresies: and some others impudently impious, who lest they
should seem to be mad without reason abuse Gods holy word to the defense of
their unreasonable and irreligious practices. These men's judgment now of a
long time lingereth not, and their damnation sleeps not, 2 Pet. 2, 3.

therefore take heed to your spirit] A repetition of the dehortation: of which
see verse 16. Good things must be often inculcated, Phil. 3.1. one exhortation
must peg in another, till they stick in our souls, as forked arrows in the
flesh. Men do not use to lay ointments only upon their lame limbs, but rub
them, and chafe them in; so here. Austin persuades the Preacher, so long to
insist upon a necessary point, till by the gesture and countenance of the
hearers he perceives, that they understand and relish it. Chrysostom being
asked by his people, when he would give over preaching against swearing?
answered, Never till you leave your swearing.

Verse 17. Ye have wear^ed the Lord with your words] Laborare sc^^stis Dommun^,
so the Vulgar renders it. Ye have put the Lord to pain, as it were; ye have
even tired out his patience, whilst ye have made him to serve with your
sins, and have wearied him with your iniquities, Esaias 43.24. I have long time
holdon my peace, I have been still and refrained my self, says the Lord: Esaias
42.14
Now will I cry like a travailing woman, that has long time bitten in her
pain, I will destroy and divour at once. God can bear and forbear as well as
any other: Who is a God like unto thee for this, says Micah, chap. 7.17? Were
the patientest man upon earth in Gods room, but for a very short space, to see
and hear the provocations, and indignities daily done unto him by the sinful
sons of men, he would soon be weary of it, he would quickly make a short work
upon the earth, Romans 9.28. It would trouble his patience to spread out his
hands all a day long to a rebellious people, Esaias 65.2. to give forty days
respite to Nineveh that bloody city, full of lies and robbery, Nahum 3.1. to be
grieved forty years long with a perverse people, and to suffer their evil
manners in the wilderness, Acts 13.18. to bear four hundred years with those
wretched Amorites, who had filled the land from one end to the other, Ezekiel.
4.5, 6
with their abominable uncleanness, Ezra 9.11. In the fourth of Ezekiel God
is brought in as lying upon his left side for three hundred and ninety years: a
long while to lie on one side, without turning on the other) and all to set
forth his long-sufferance. Our text tells us, that he is patient even ad
defatigationem usque, toward the wicked: he bears till he can bear no longer.
See the like Romans 9.22. and the reason, Romans 2.4. and the ill use that is made
of it, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. till they tire out him that is indefatigable, Jer.
15.6. and make him weary of repenting. But is this a safe course they take? 1
Cor. 10.22
Do they provoke the Lord to wrath? Are they stronger then he? Hear ye now, O
house of David: Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but ye will weary my
God also? Esaias 7.13. Will he not put an end to his abused patience, that
justice, Deuteronomy. 16.20 Ezekiel. 1.
justice, (as Moses has it) actual and active justice may take place? God in
Ezekiel is said to sit upon a throne, to show his slownesse: but this throne
has wings, to show his swiftness to come, if need require. His patience
passes along as a pleasant river. But if men stop the course of it by their
blasphemies, and contumelies as here, and press him with their provocations,
as a cart that is laden with sheaves, Am. 2.13. God will surely have his full
blow at them, Nah. 1.2, 6. Romans 2.4. Heb. 12.29

with your words] that is, with your continual contentions and quiblings: or
with those ensuing words, blasphemous enough, and Atheistical: together with
your bold justification of them: yet ye say, wherein, etc.

when ye say, every one that does evil, etc.] As if they should say, God
punishes not but prospers the wicked: therefore he loves and favors them
above better men. Job, Jeremy, and David were once, for a fit, in the same
error, but soon recanted it, when once the waters of the Sanctuary had cured
their eyesight, Psalm. 73.17. for such are sand-blind, and cannot see far off,
2 Pet. 1.9.

or where is the God of judgment?] q. d. No where: either there is no God: or
at least, Corn. a Lapid.
not a God of that exact, precise, impartial judgment. (such an Emphasis
there is in the Heb.) Diagoras turned Atheist, because his adversary that had
robbed him was not presently thunderstruck. The like is recorded of Porphyry,
Lucian, Averroes, and others. See the Notes, on chap. 3.14, 15.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. BEhold, I will send my messenger] It is well observed by the learned,
that this whole Prophecy of Malachy, though distinguished (as now) into
several Chapters, yet is but one entire Sermon, at once delivered. Those
Atheists that asked in the precedent verse, (and they did it with an accent
too, that they might not be slighted) where is the God of judgment? are here
fully answered: and that they might the better attend, they have it with a note
of pregnancy. Behold, I will send, etc. q. d. differtur quidem judicium sed non
aufertur. Tandem veniet, profecto veniet. Judgment comes not so soon as you
call for it: but come it will, be sure it will. For behold, I send (in the
present tense) my messenger, the Baptist, and (at his heels, as it were)
Messiah the Prince, who shall reform and rectify all disorders. For
judgment, says He, come I into the world, that they which see not might see,
and that they which see, might be made blind, Joh. 9.39. And then, you that
call for judgment shall have enough of it: when ye see my Messenger,
harbinger, or herald, know that I am hard at hand. Behold, this is set here as
the sound of a trumpet before some Proclamation, to arouse men's attention.

I will send] Heb. I do send, or, am sending: though the thing was not done
till four or five hundred years after: but in Gods purpose and promise it was a
done thing already. All things are present with him, for he is a pure act; his
whole essence is wholly an eye, or a mind: he is all things eminently,
exemplarily, and contains all things in himself. Hence he knows temporal things
after an eternal manner, mutable things immutably, contingent things
infallibly, future things presently. Hence he calls things that yet are not,
as if they were, Romans 4.17. and this, as in the works of Creation, Renovation,
Resurrection, so in the accomplishment of his promises, which we must not
antedate, as we are apt to do; but learn to live by faith, Hab. 2.2. Possibly
the Calendar of heaven has a post-date to ours. Strive to be strong in faith,
and glorify God.

my messenger] Not Christ, as Ensebius doated: nor Meslias the son of J^seph,
Lib. 5. de demon. Evang. cap. 28.
that is, of the tribe of Joseph, as Rabbi Abraham would have it. (For the Jews
soolishly expect two Meslians's, one the son of David, and the other the
son of Joseph) Nor an Angel of heaven, as Rabbi David interprets it,
according to Exodus 23.20. But John Baptist, as our Savior expounds himself,
Mat. 11.10. who is here called Christ's Messenger, or Angel, by reason of his
office: one, by whom he would manifest his mind to his people. He was a burning
and a shining light, Joh. 5.35
or lamp, and shone for a season, till the Sun of righteousness came in place:
as lights and candles are of good use till the Sun rises. See 1 Samuel 3.3.

and he shall prepare the way] Expurgabit, Everret, emund^bit. He shall clear
the way, sweep it, accoutre, or dress it. He shall remove all rubs, and
remora's out of the way, he shall pare and pave a path for Christ into the
soul, open those everlasting doors that the king of glory may come in, he shall
make ready a people for the Lord. Luke 1.17. Man's heart is full of mountains
and valleys, Luke 3.5. These must be levelled, ere Christ can be admitted: and
that is not done but by repentance unto life. As John Baptist was Christ's
forerunner into the world; so must repentance be his forerunner into the
heart: for he that repents not, the kingdom of heaven is far from him: (...)
viam apertam and oculis intuentium conspicuam faciet.
so he that cannot see it (as the Hebrew word here used imports he must do) for
his lusts that hang in his light.

and the Lord whom ye seek] Dominator, that Lord Paramount of whom David
speaks, Psalm. 110.1. and for whose sake Daniel desires to be heard, chap.
9.17. Messiah the Prince, verse 25. the Prince and Savior, Act. 5.31. Lord and
Christ, Acts 2.36. the God of judgment, whom they called for, Mal. 2.17. and
whom they are said to seek for. As God he is not very sar from any one of us,
says Paul Acts 17.27. not so far as the bark is from the tree; for in him we
all live, and move, and subsist. And as God-Man he shall suddenly come to his
Temple] suddenly, that is, in the fullness of time, (which is but a short time
in respect of the long expectation of the Patriarchs) and speedily after John
Baptists birth; suddenly also, because unexpectedly to the most, who stood
amazed at his preaching, and said, Whence has this man this wisdom, and these
mighty works? Is not this the carpenter, etc? To his Temple he came, when
presented there to be circumcised, Luke 2. when he put forth a beam of his
Divinity there, in his disputation with the Doctors, verse 46. But especially
when he purged the Temple: 1. By his Doctrine, Matt. 5. and 15. and 2. By his
Discipline, Joh 2.14, 15, 16. and 12.12. at which time, Tell ye the daughter of
Zion, says God, Behold, thy king comes unto thee, Mat. 21.5.
meek and sitting upon an ass, etc. Not upon a stately palsrey, as an earthly
Potentate. And that was the very cause, that these in the text that are said to
see him, when they had him amongst them, could by no means think well of him in
respect of his mean and despicable condition. They had a certain notion of the
Messiah: and were in expectation of him, and of temporal deliverance and
felicity by (...). Of which, when disappointed, they were as blank, as when
they saw the hoped issue of their late Jewish Virgin turned to a daughter: or
as when they saw Mahomet eat of a camel; whom till then, when they saw him
arising in such powetr, D. Halfs Peacemaker.
hey were ready to cry up for their long looked-for Messiah.

even the messenger of the Covenant] viz. of the covenant of grace: for in
Christ God reconciled the world to himself. And of this covenant Christ is the
Angel, or Messenger, because 1. He reveals it, and we must take heed how we
slight it, Heb. 2.3. shift it, Heb. 12.25. 2. He mediateth it, 1 Timothy 2.5. and
in, and by him it has accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1.20. Hence Esaias 9.6. he is
called the Prince of peace, and (according to the Septuagint there) the Angel
of the great Counsel. (...).
Let all that would receive mercy from God, get into Chrst, and so into
Covenant For as the Mercy-seat was no larger then the Ark, so neither is the
grace of God, then the covenant of grace: And as the Ark and Mercy-seat were
never separated, so neither are such from God, as are found in Christ.

whom ye delight in] They delighted in his day (the better sort of them) though
afar off, Joh. 8.56. they saluted him, and were resaluted by him, Heb. 11.13.
They promised themselves through Christ malorum ademptionem, bonorum
adeptionem, freedom from all evil, and fruition of all good. Hence he is
called, the desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.8. The Church in the Canticles, says
he is totus desiderabilis, altogether desirable, chap. 5.16. The Church in
Esaias desires him with her whole soul, chap. 26.9. and chap. 64.1. as impatient
of further delays, cries out, Oh that thou would rent the heavens, and
come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence. Drop down ye
heavens from above, and let the skies pour aown righteousness: Let the earth
open, and let them bring forth salvation, etc. chap. 45.8. Lo what earnest
pantings and inquietations were in those ancient believers after Christ, what
continual fallies, as it were, and egressions of affection.

behold, he shall come] He shall, he shall: nay he is even come already: for so
the Hebrew has it. Hinneh ba, behold, he is come: methinks I even see him. A
like text there is, Habak 2.3. The duty required is, Wait: the promise is
delivered, doubled, and trebled: It shall speak, it will come, it will surely
come. Nay doubled again. It shall not lie, it will not tarry. It is as if God
had said, Do but wait, and you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you
shall be delivered; you shall, you shall. Oh the Rhetorike of God! oh the
certainty of the promises! A Lapide his Note is not here to be passed by. This
word Behold, signifies that this coming of Christ in the flesh, should be 1.
New, admirable, and stupendous. 2. Sure and certain. 3. Desirable, and
joyful. 4. Famous and renowned.

says the Lord of Hosts] And that is assurance good enough: for has he said
it, and shall he not do it? Here is firm footing for faith: and men are bound
to rest in Gods Ipse dixit. Abraham did, and required no other evidence, Romans
4. He cared not for the deadness of his own body, or of his wives womb. He
staggered not at the promise of God through unbeleef, etc. No more must we, if
we will be heirs of the world, with faithful Abraham. Gods truth and power are
the Jachin and Bozez, the two pillars whereupon faith must repose: belee^ing
God upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against
reason, in things incredible.

Verse 2. But who may abide the day of his coming?] The Prophet Esaias asks,
Who shall declare his generation? Esaias 53.8. Daniel. 2.11.
that is, the mystery of his incarnation, (that habitatio Dei cum carne, which
the Magicians held imposlible) or the history of his birth, life, and death (as
some sense it) whose tongue shall be able to speak it, or pen to write it? Who
can think of the day of his coming? so the Vulgar reads this text: viz. of all
the glory, graces, benefits of that day? But the Hebrew word is the same, as
Prove. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: and is so rendered
here by the Chaldee and Kimchi. Who can sustain, or abide the day of his
coming, sc. in the flesh? What wicked man will be able to endre it? for he
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, (that is, the consciences of
carnal men glued to the earth) and with the breath of his lips shall he slay
the wicked, Esaias 11.4. And this is spoken of the Branch that grew out of the
root of Jesse, verse. 1. when th^^ goodly family was sunk so low, as from David
the king, to Joseph the Carpenter. With what terror struck he the hearts of
Herod, and all Jerusalem by the news of his nativity? Mat. 2.3. And si praesepe
vagientis Herodem tantum terruit, quid tribunal judicantis? If Christ in the
cradle were so terrible, what will he be on the Tribunal? The Text that
troubled those miscreants, was Mic. 5.2. which some (taking tsagnir in the
Neuter Gender) render thus: And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, it is a small thing to
be among the Princes of Judah: out of thee shall come a ruler, etc. This, Herod
and his accomplices could not hear of without horror: as neither could that
other Herod, of the same of Christ's mighty works, Mart. 14.1, 2. such a glimpse
of Divine glory shone in them. The sinners in Zion are afraid: fearfulness
surprizeth the hypocrites: and they run as far, and as fast as they can from
Christ, with these frightfull words in their mouths. Who amongst us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who shall abide with the everlasting burnings?
The Ruffianly soldiers were flung flat on their backs, when he said no more
but, Lam he, August.
Joh. 18.6. Quid autem judicaturus saciet, qui udicandus hoc fecit? What will
he do when he comes to judgment, who was thus terrible now that he was to be
judged? Oh that the terror of the Lord might persuade people to forsake their
sins, and to kiss the Son, lest he be angry. Though a lamb, he can be terrible
to the kings of the earth: and though he break not the bruised reed, Matthew.
12.20. yet his enemies he will break with a rod of iron, and dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings, etc. Psalm.
2.9, 10. And as the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars in Joscphs vision, did
obeisance to him; so let our souls, bodies, all our temporal, natural,
moral, and spiritual abilities be subject and serviceable to Christ, as ever
we hope to look him in the face with comfort.

and who shall stand when he appears?] Heb. at the sight of him. True it is,
that Christ coming to help us in distress, for the want of external pomp in
his Ordinances, and worldly glory in his Ministers, and members, and splendor
of humane Eloquence in his Doctrines, is despised by those that form and frame
to themselves a Christ like to the mighty Monarchs of the earth: like as
Agesilaus King of Spartans, coming to help the King of Egypt, was slighted in
that country for his mean habit, and contemptible outside. But if the
Centurion were worthy of respect, because he loved the Jewish Nation, and built
them a Synagogue; Shall not Christ much more, even as Prince of the Kings of
the earth, since he loved us, and washed us with his own blood, and has made
us kings and priests unto God and his Father, Revel. 1.5, 6? By whom also he
is made unto us, righteousness, (imputatively) wisdom, sanctisication, and
redemption, effectively, by way of inherency and gracious operation? Who is
able to stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20. Jer. 10.7.
as the men of Bethshemesh once said. Who would not fear this king of Nations,
says Jeremy, this king of Saints, says John? for to him does it appertain:
Rev. 15.3, 4.
since there is none like unto him: neither can any stand before him when he
appears, any more then a glass bottle can stand before a Cannon shot. O
come, let us worship, and bow aown, Psalm. 95.
let us keel before this Lord our maker. If we harden our hearts he will harden
his hand, and hasten our destruction. There Is no standing before this Lion, no
bearing up sail in the tempest of his wrath: you must either be his subjects,
or his footstool: either vail to him, or perish by him. Thine arrows are sharp
i^ the hoa^t of the kings enemtes, whereby the people sall under thee, Psalm.
45.5. What a world of miseries have the refractary Jews suffered, and do yet,
for rejecting the Lord Jesus? They might have known out of their own Cabalists
(besides D^ntels seventy weeks, and other Scripture-evidences) that the Mesliah
was amongst them: for it is there expressly recorded, Vide Malcolin. in Act.
18.28.
that Messiah should come in the time of Hillels disciples: one of whom was
S^^^on the (...), who embraced the child Jesus in his arms: who also foretold
that that child was set for the (...) and rising again of many in Israel, and
so^ a sign which shoui^^^ sp^k^n against, Luke 2.34, 35.
thou the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed. And to the same purpose
St. Peter 1 Epist. cap. 2. ver. 7, 8. But before them both, Our Prophet here.

For he is like a refiners fire] Intimating, that the times of the Messiah
would be discriminating, shedding times: and that he would separate the
precious from the vile, the gold from the dross, the sheep from the goats:
That Nabal should no more be called Nadib, the vile person liberali, the churl
bountiful, Esaias 32.5. but that good people should be discerned, and honored;
hypocrites detected, and detested, as was Judas, Magus, Denias, etc. slit up
and slain by Christ's two-edged sword, by his presence and preaching,. Surely
his sanne is ^^ his hand, though the devil and his imps would fain wring it
out, Augustine. Mat. 3.12. Jer 23.20.
and he will th^roughly pur^ge his ^loo (mali in area nobiscum esse possum, in
horrco non pessunt) he will drive the chaff one way, and the wheat another: for
what is the chiff to the wheat, says the Lord? he will purify the souls of
his Saints, in obeying the truth through the spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22. So that they shall be united to such, and separated from
sinners. Fire, we know, congregat homog nea, segregat heterogenea: for what
fellowship has light with darkness? The spirit of Christ, called a spirit of
judgment, and of burning, washes away (lo here resiners fire, and sullers
(...)) the filth of the daughter of Zion, and purges the blood of Jerusalem
from the midest thereof, Esaias 4.4. By silth and blood understand their
exceslive bravery, mentioned chap. 3. which now they had learned to call by
another name, since their own names were written among the living in Jerusalem,
verse 3. And here God made good to them that he had promised, Chap. 1.25. that
he would purely purge away theeir dross, and take away all their tin: and
that though their sins were as sear let, they should be white as (...):
though red like crimson, they should be as wool verse 18. Fullers (...), as
some render it) is of singular use to fetch out stains and spots, and to a
biter wool: 5 P^naria. ^^de Puin. lib. 1^. chap. 3. (...).
So (much more) is the blood and spirit of Christ, to whiten sinful (...), and
to make men his Candidates. Such were those Corinthians 1 Ephesians. 6.11. Such were
some of you, (that is, as bad as bad might be, lepers all over) but ye are
washed sc. by that Fuller of souls Christ Jesus. And if any ask, How washed?
It sollowes, but ye are sanctified, but ye are just ified in the name, that is,
(...).
by the merit of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The Jews in
their Talmud hammer at this, when they question, What is the name of Messiah?
Their answer is Hhevara Leprous ( sc. by imputation 2 Cor. 5.^0. Esaias 53.6.
August. de R^^na in Council. Basil.
whence also he is said by one to be Maximus peccatorum, the greatest of
sinners) and he sits among the poor in the gates of Rome, carrying their
sicknesses, according to that, Himself took our infirmities, and here our
^^knesses. There are two things in guilt. 1. The meit and desert of it (...)
took not. 2. The obligation to punishment: this he took, and so he (...), that
is, bound to the punishment of sin: which also he suffered even to the ^^^sion
of his blood (that true Pactolus, or rather Jordan) whereby he has cleamed his
people from sins both guiltiness and filthiness. We have inveterate stains,
which will hardly be got out till the cloth be almost rubbed to pieces (...)
leaves so close to us, Jer. 1^.13.
that fire and fullers soap is but needful to setch it off. Nature and custom
have made our spots like that of the Leopard, which no art can cure, no water
wash off: because they are not in the skin only, but in the flesh and bones, in
the sinews and in the most inner parts. Hence David prays again and again to
be washed thoroughly, to be purged with hyssop, to be washed and wrung in this
fullers soap of Christ's blood, and with the clean water of his holy spirit.
This is the only true Purgatory, the Kings bath, the fountain opened for sin
and for uncleannesle Zach. 13.1. Here Christ washes his, not only from outward
defilement, but from their swinish nature: that when washed clean they may not,
(as else they would) wallow in the next guzzle. Here are those sovereign
mundifying waters of the Sanctuary, which so wash off the corruption of the
ulcer, that they cool the heat, and stay the spread of the infection: and by
degrees heal the same. Hither poor sinners need not come as to the poole of
Bethesda one by one, but, as Turks to their Mahomet, Papists to their Lady, by
troops and Caravans, true Christians to their All-sufficient Savior, how much
more? In that poole of Bethesda, the Priests used to wash their sacrifices;
because no unclean thing might come within the Temple. Itinerar. Scrip. page 20.
The water was of reddish color, and ran into that place in great abundance;
and therefore it was called says One, the house of effusion. This shadowed
out, that every of Christ's sheep must be washed in the poole of his blood,
before they can be meet sacrifices, an offering unto the Lord in
righteousness, as it is in the next verse. Other blood slaines what is washed
in it: this blood of the spotless lamb whiteneth as fuilers soap, and
purifieth from all pollution of flesh and spirit Rev. 7.14. This is he that
came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ: not by water only but by water and
blood 1 Ioh. 5.6. The Priests of the old law were consecrated first with oil,
and then with blood: So was Christ, first with the spirit Esa. 61.1. and then
with his own blood for our benefit.

Verse 3. And he shall sit as refiner] i. e. he shall stick to the work, and
not start from it, till he bring forth judgment to victory Mat. 12.20. that
is, till he have perfected the work of grace begun in his people, (for he is
Author and finisher of their faith Heb. 12.2.) and by patience, made them
perfict and entire, wanting nothing, Iam. 1.4. Christ, who is the God of all
grace, and has called them to his eternal glory, will, after they have
suffered (...), in his furnace or fining-pot ( Pro. 17.3.) of afflictions, wake
them perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle them 1 Pet. 2 Cor. 9 8.
5.10. yea make all grace to abound toward them: that they always having all
sufficiency in all things may abound to every good work. For which holy
purpose, Christ our Refiner has his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem
Isai. 31.9. his conslatories, and his crucibles, wherein his third part being
brought thorough the fire shall be resined as silver is resened, and tried as
gold is tried Zach. 13.9. that the trial of their faith (who have glorified
him in the very fires Isa. 24.15.) being much more precious then that of gold
that perishes, may be found to praise and honor and glory 1 Pet. 1.7. True
gold will undergo the t^iall of the seventh fire, which Alchymy gold will not.
Christ Jesus after that he has been to his people as a refiners fire, and
fullers soap, that is, after that he has justified, and sanctified them also
in some part, will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, that is, he will be
serious, accurate, and assiduous in scouring them from corruption by
correption, in purging out the remnants of sin by affliction sanctified. For by
this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take
away his sin, Isa. 27.9. Christ has bought off all our corruptions, redeemed
us from all iniquity Tit. 2.14. and God will have the price of Christ's blood
out: what the word purges not, the rod must; like as what evil humors Summer
purges not out by sweating. Winter concocts by driving in the heat. And as
winter is of use for mellowing the ground, and for killing worms and weed etc.
so is the cross sanctified for quelling and killing fleshly lusts that fight
against the soul. He that hold, the winds in his fist, stays his rough wind,
Esaias 27.8. and lets out of his treasury such a wind as shall make his young
plants fruitful, and blow away their unkindly blossoms and leaves. Black soap
makes white clothes, if God set in and set it on with his battle-dore, as that
Martyr phrased it. Fowl and stained garments are whitened and purified, by
laying abroad in cold srosty nights. Scouring and beating of them with a stick,
beats out the mothes and the dust: so do afflictions, corruptions from the
heart. Aloes kills worms: so do bitter crosses crawling lusts. Rubarbe is full
of choler, yet does mightily purge choler. Hemlock is a deadly plant, yet the
juice applied heales ignis sacer and hot corroding ulcors: and much asswageth
the inflammation of the eyes. The sting of a scorpion, though arrant poison,
yet is an antidote against poison. Nothing is better to cure a leprosy, then
the drinking of that wine wherein a viper hach been drowned. The viper (the
head and tail being cut off) beaten and applied cures her own biting.
Affliction is in it self an evil, a fruit of Gods wrath, and a piece of the
curse. Christ alters the property to his, and makes one poison antidotary to
another, and cures security by misery: as Physicians often cure a letharby a
fever. Every affliction sanctified rubbs off some rust, melts off some dross,
empties and evacuates some superfluity of naughtiness, strains out some
corruption. Job 10.10. Christ strains out our motes, whiles our hearts are
powered out like milk, with grief and fear: he also keeps us from settling on the
lees, by emptying us from vessel to vessel: Ier. 48.11. when as the wicked have
no changes, and therefore they fear not God: Psalm. 73.
they come not in trouble like other men, therefore they face the heavens, and
their tongues walk thorough the earth: All that are Christ's people are sure of
sore and sharp afflictions, fiery trials and tribulations, piercing and
pressing crosles Psalm. 34.19. Iam. 1.2. He will be sure to plow his own ground,
whatsoever becomes of the wast; and to weed his own garden, though the rest of
the world should be let alone to grow wild. He will cast his purest gold into
the fire of afflictions: but they shall lose nothing by it. Gold cast into the
fire wastes not, cast into the water rusteth not. No saint was ever the worse
for his sufferings, but the better: the least that can come of it, is to do
good duties with greater zeal, and large affection Esaias 26.9. Now, who would
not fetch such gold out of a fiery crucible?

and he shall purify the sons of Levi] Whom he had before faulted chap. 1. and
2. Or he may mean the Ministers of the Gospel, called Priests and Levites Esaias
66.21. Or rather, all the royal Priesthood of Gods people, whose office is to
^ffer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus christ. 1 Pet. 2.5,
9. Romans 12.1, 2. Now for these, Christ 1. Of bad make them good, as he did
Joses the Levite Act. 4.36. and many priests Act. 6.7. He makes them pass
under the rod, and so brings them into the bond of the covenant Ezekiel. 20.37. 2.
Of good he makes them better and brighter, he powers them forth as molten
metal, so the Septuagint read this text. Gold that is melted in the furnace,
is not only purified, but also made malleable: yea fit for the mould. Their
bearts are brought down, they speak as out of the ground Esaias 29.4. in a low
language, and like broken men: they put their mouths in the dust, they lie low
at Christ's feet, and say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Thus haughty
Hagar humbled by a s^^tion harkeneth to the Angel, and submits to her
mistress: that young gallant, that in the pride of his prosperity, in the ruff
of his jollity would not be warned; when ^s flesh and his body was consumed,
when his bones clattered in his skin, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13.
and the mourners expected him at the doors, he is of another mind, and he
(...) talked with: then like the beaten viper casts up his poison both of
high mindedness and of earthly-mindednesse, and if you have any good (...) to
give him, he is ready to receive it. See the like Job 33.19, 20, 21. etc.

and purge them as gold and silver] Colabit cos, Si^ (...)
says the Vulgar. He shall (...) them as some liquor or liquid matter: so that
the purer part shall go thoro. the strayner or colander, and the dreggy may be
left. The same thing is again and again promised, as for more certainty sake,
so to show that the purity should be very great in the days of the gospel.
Howbeit for the comfort of his poor people who are conscious of more dross
then good oar, Christ has promised that he will resire them, but not as
silver, he will not be over-exact with them, Isa. 48.1^.
he will not mark all that is amiss he will not contend very much, lest the
choice spiri^^ of his afflicted people should fail before him Isae. 57.16.
when the child sworm^s in the whipping, Christ lets fal^ the rod, and falls a
kissing it, to fetch life (...) it again. As it is a rule in physic still to
maintain nature: so God (...) to keep up his peoples spirits by cordials;
though he purge them (...) till he bring them almost to skin and bone, that
there may be a spring of bett (...) its.

(...) the Lord an affering in rightcousnesse] Or a right offering, a (...)
holy d^ties from a right principle, and to a right purpose. Two things make a
good Christian, good (...), and good aims. Though a good a^me does not in ^e a
bad action good (as we see in Vzza) yet a bad aim makes a good action bad, as
we see in John. If Gods work be not duly done, we may meet with breaches
instead of blessings 1 Chronicles. 15.17. David fa^led but in a ceremony: yet God
wa^angry. J^h^'s ^eal was rewarded in an act of justice quoad sub^^^^tion,
aperis, in regard of the substance of the work: and yet punished as an act of
policy, quoad m^dum for the perverse end. Let no man measure himself by the
matter of things done; for there may be malum opus in bona materia, an evil
^^^k in a good matter: Works materia^ly good may never prove so formally and
(...) gion is a curious clock-work: if but one wheel be distempered, all may go
wrong. David in numbering the people omitted that duty Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15.
a^^ thence, the plagne.

Verse 4. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem] That is, of the
Latin Church, and of Rome, says Ribera. A partial fancy of a Ponish
Interpreter boldly pr^pou (...), barely proved: and therefore as he affirms
without reason, so h^ may b^ dism^ssed without refutation. Uaderstand it rather
of the whole church wh^^^so^ver, in Cities, or Countries: and observe, that
neither Judah nor Jeru^d^m, how highly soever honored or favored otherwise,
shall have their oftering accepted in heaven, unless their hearts be first
purified by faith. Till then, Romans 12.1
their sacrifices, how specious soever, are neither living (but dead works, as
the ^uthow to the Hebrews calls it) nor holy, that is, pure and unpolluted 1
Cor. 7.34. unless themselves be partakers of the grace of life 1 Pet. 3.7. and
can boldly say with David, preserve my soul, for I am holy, or one whom thou
favourest. Psalm. 86.2. So Psalm. 4.3. he makes this the ground of his hope, that
his prayer sh^^ld ^^ heard, that the Lord looked upon him as a godly person.
God regards (...) the pray, if the man be not right. The blood of a sheeep and
of a swine are like: yea, it may be the blood of a swine is better and sweeter
then of a sheep, yet was ^t not to be offered, because of a swine. See Heb.
13.16. Philip. 4.18. Joh. 15.16. Psalm. 147 11. Esaias 62.4. Heb. 11.6. Look how
light, says Chrys^st^ne, makes all things pleasing to men: so does faith to
God. True faith is like the salt that healed the waters 2 King. 2.21. O pray
Christ to cast in a curseful^^^ it into our hearts, or else we lose all our
services; nay we do worse then lose our labor, for displeasing service is
double dishonor: we do but take pains to go to hell. See more of this matter
in the Notes on chap. 1. verse 9, 10.

as in the days of old, as in former years] i. e. As the sacrifices of Abel,
Abraham, Aaron, etc. as the prayers and holy performances of David, Eliah,
Samuel (who is thought to be the same with Pethu^l lo^ 1.1. which signifies a
I'erswader of God, and that he was so called, because he could have what he
would of God) Cornelius, Paul etc. were very effectual and available, and did
wonders even to the opening and shutting of heaven, Job. 41 14.
as Eliab to the opening of the doors of Leviathan, as Jonah, to the
delivering even graves of their dead, as Heb. 11.35. etc. so they shall be
still, as effectual, as those Ancient Saints, we draw near with a true heart,
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water Heb. 10.22. See Iam. 5.16,
17, 18. and Hos. 12.4. The Prophet speaking of Jacob his wrestling with God by
weeping, and his prevailing by praying (so that he was knighted for his good
service, and dubbed Israel, or a Prince of God) subjoynes for our comfort, God
found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. So then, what encouragement
access and success Jacob had at Bethel, the same have we: provided that we so
carry the matter, that it may be said of us, as Psalm. 24.6. This is the
generation of them that seek him; of them that seek thy face: this is Jacob:
Provided that as Jarob wrestled in the night, and alone, and when God was
leaving him, and upon one leg: so do we, amidst all difficulties and
discouragements.

Verse 5. And I will come near to you to judgement] q. d. You conceit mea great
way off, and put far from you the thoughts of my coming, having been so bold
as to ask, Where is the God of judgment etc. Behold, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me. Not, as you desired, to avenge you of your enemies, but as
justice requires, to be avenged of you for your impieties which I have here
billed up against you. And that ye may not think to escape, know that as I am a
Judge at hand, so a present witness, test is festinantissimus a most swift
witness, to evict and punish you, for your most secret sins. So then,
howsoever the Lord spare long, yet he will be at length, both a hasty witness
and a severe Judge against those that abuse his patience: he will not always
stand them for a sinning-stock, but pay them home for the new and the old. Ier.
6.6. Mic. 1.3 God owed a revenge to the house of Eli: and yet at length, by the
delation of Doeg, takes occasion to pay it. It is a vain hope that is raised
from the delay of judgment: No time can be any prejudice to the Ancient of
days. If his word sleep, it shall not dye: but after long intermissions breaks
forth into those effects which men had forgotten to look for, and ceased to
fear. The sleeping of vengeance causes the overslow of sin Eccles. 8.11. and
the overslow of sin causes the a wakening of vengeance Psalm. 50.21. so that
sometimes he strikes ere he gives any sinther warning: as Absalom intending to
kill Amnon, spoke neither good nor evil to him. Subito tollitur qui diu
toleratur. Till the fiery serpents, God had ever consolted with Moses, and
threatened ere he punished. Now he strikes and says nothing. The anger is so
much more, by how much less notified. Still revenges are ever most daugerous
and deadly, when God is not heard before he is felt (as in hewing of wood, the
blow is not heard, till the axe be seen to have struck) or if he be heard to
say as Neh. 1.9. what do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter
end: affliction shall not arise up the second time: its a sign he is
implacably hent, and means to have but one blow. The wickeds happiness will
take its end surely and swiftly. The end is come, is come, is come, says
Ezechiel chap. 7. The Lord is come near to you to judgment, and he will be a
speedy witness, Judge and witness both: which in men's courts cannot be: but
God being infinitely both wise and holy, may be and will be both witness and
Judge against the workers of iniquity: and when they are (as Adonijah's guests
were 1 King. 1.) at the height of their joys and hopes, he confounds all their
devices, and lays them open to the scorn of the world, to the anguish of their
own guilty hearts, and the dint of his own unsupportable displeasure, which is
such as none can avert or avoid.

Ad poenam tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox,
Sed pensare solet vi graviore moram.
Poena venit grovior, quo mage sera venit.
against the sorcerers] Or Juglers, Wizzards, Negromancers etc. See the several
sorts forbidden, and to be punished Deuteronomy. 18.10. By Gods law such might not be
suffered to live, Exodus 22.8. yet did this evil prevail in Israel 2 Chronicles. 33.6.
Jer. 27.9. and here, It was done by unlawful means, as Saul said to the witch,
Divine unto me by the familiar spirit, 1 Samuel 28.8. and it was a thing hateful
to God, even as high rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.23. since the ground of this
familiarity is a diobolical contract ovort, or covert, explicit or implicit. It
is fitly called the black Art, for there is no true light in them that use it
Isai. 8.19. they depart from God and his testimony, ib. and so tempt the devil
to tempt them. This was Saul's sin, for which the Lord killed him 1 Chronicles.
10.13. and has threatened to cut off all from among his people, that do
enquire of such, Levit. 20.6. Thou have been partaker with the adulterer, Psalm.
50.18. so are such with sorcerers. Surely the wounds of God are better then the
salves of Satan; as Ahaziah found it. And they which in case of loss or
sickness etc. make hell their refuge, shall smoke and smart for it in the end.
Satan seeks to them in his temptations, they in their consultations seek to
him: and now that they have mutually found each other, if ever they part, it is
a miracle: He is an unspeakable proud spirit, and yet will stoop to the meanest
man or woman to be at their command (the witch of Endor is twice in one verse 1 Samuel 28.7. called the Mistrisse of the Spirit, because in covenant with him)
whereby he may cheat them, and their clients of Salvation. Every one that
consults with him, worships him, though he bow not, as Saul did: neither does
that old manslayer desire any other reverence, then to be sought unto.

and against the adulterers] Sept. the adulteresses. Adultrinum, qu ^si ad
alterum, out alterius torum, a going up to another man's bed, as Reuben did, and
was severely sentenced for it, Genesis 49.4 It was to be punished with death, even
by the law of Nature: because the society and purity of posterity could not
otherwise continue amongst men. Nebuchad. nazzar roasted in the fire Zedekiah
and Ahab two false prophets of Judah, because they committed adultery with
their neighbors wives, Jer. 29.22, 23. The Egyptians used to cut off the nose
of the adulteress: the Prophet alludes to this Ezekiel. 23.25. The Athenians,
Lacedemomans, and Romans were very severe against this sin; as Plutarch
records in his parallels. The old French and Saxons also, as Tacitus tells
us. By Gods law they were to be stoned to death; and the Highpriests daughter
was to be burned for this fault, Lev. ^1.9. a peculiar punishment, and not to
be paralleld in the whole law. If men fail to fall upon such (it is an heinous
crime says holy Job, and an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, Venus ab
antiquis (...) dicla See Pro. 5.8.
Chap. 31.10.) God himself will do it, Heb. 13.4. and did it effectually, 1
Cor. 10.8. and on the filthy Sodomites, Genesis 19. and on Charles 2. King of
Navar who was much addicted to this sin, which so wasted his spirits, that in
his old age he fell into a Lethargy. To comfort his benumbed joints he was
bound and sewed up in a sheet steeped in boiling Aquavitae. The Surgeon having
made an end of sewing him, and wanting a knife to cut off his thread, took a
wax candle that stood lighted by him. But the flame running down by the thread,
caught hold on the sheet, which according to the nature of the Aquavitae burned
with that vehemence, that the miserable king ended his days in the fire. But
say the adulterer be neither stoned, nor burned: yet God usually stoneth such
with a stony heart, Hos. 4.11. which is a most fearful judgment: and when they
die burns them with the hottest fire in hell. Prove. 2.18. the whores guests
go down to the dead. Heb. el Rephaim, to the Giants: to that part of hell where
those damned monsters are. See 2 Peter 2.10. and mark the word Chiefly.

and against false swearers] A sin of an high nature, condemned by the height
of nature, and punished by the Heathens. Perjurij poena divina exitium; humana,
dedecus; This was one of the laws of the twelve tables in Rome. God punishes
perjury with destruction: men with disgrace. Tissaphernes the Persian General,
being ovecrome by Agesilaus King of Spartans, craved three-moneths truce, and
had it: They both swear to be quiet on both sides. Tissaphernes soon brake his
oath: Cornel Nepos in vit. Ages.
but Agesilaus religiously kept it, saying, that Gods and men would favor him
for his fidelity, but curse and execrate the other for his perjury. God showed
Zachary a flying role long and large, ten yards long, and five broad, full of
curses against the false swearer, with commission to rest upon his house, Zac.
5.3.4.
which he he holds his castle, and where he thinks himself most secure. Michael
Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople made the Greek Church acknowledge the
Popes supremacy, and did many other things contrary to his oath: and therefore
lies obscurely buried, shrouded in the sheet of defame, says the Historian.
Turk. hist.
So does Rodulphus Duke of Sueveland, who by the Popes instigation broke his
oath of allegiance to Henry the Emperor, and by the cutting off his faithless
right hand lost his life. So does Sigismund the Emperor, for his false dealing
with John Husse. Ladislaus king of Hungary, for his perjurious setting upon
Amurath the great Turk at the battle of Varna, where he was deservedly
defeated. What a blur was that to the old Romans, if true, that Mirchanes the
Persian General should say of them, Roman is promitcere promptum est etc.
Procop. 1. de. bello Persic.
The Romans will promise any thing, and swear to it, but perform nothing that
makes against their profit? There were at Rome such as could lend an oath at
need: and would not stick to swear that their friend or foe was at Rome and at
Interamna both at once. How slippery the Papists are, and how bloody, both in
their Postions and dispositions, is well known to all. But God is the avenger
of all such: because they call him to witness a falsehood: and dare him to his
face to execute his vengeance. See Zach. 8.17.

and against those that oppress etc. Either by denying, diminishing, or
delaying their wages. The vulgar rendereth it, Who calamniate, or make cavils
to detain wages, which is the poor hirelings livelihood, whereupon he sets
his heart Deuteronomy. 24.15. and maintains his life; which is therefore called the
life of his hands, Isai. 57.10.
because upheld by the labor of his Hands. He gets it, and eats it: and is in
his house like a snail in his shell; crush that, and you kill him. This is a
crying cruelty Jam. 5.4. and has a woe against it Jer. 22.13. Jam. 2.13. Laban
is taxed for it Genesis 31.7. and for those that are guilty, if they mend not, and
make restitution, Master Latimer tells them they shall cough in hell.

the widow] A calamitous name: she is called in Hebrew from her dumbness
Almanan: because, death having cut off her head, she has lost her tongue, and
has none to speak for her. A vine, whose root is uncovered, thrives not: so a
widow, the covering of whose eyes is taken away, joys not. God therefore
pleads for such as his clients, and takes special care for them: the Deacons
were anciently ordained specially for their sakes Act. 6.1. 1 Timothy 5.3. and
Pharisees doomed to a deeper damnation for devouring widows houses, Mat. 23.14.
and Magistrates charged to plead for the widow, Isai. 1.17. as judge Job did
Chap. 31.16. and all sorts to make much of her, and communicate to her, Deuteronomy.
24.19, 20, ^^.

and the fatherlesse] We are Orphans, and fatherless, says the Church Lam.
5.3. And we are all Orphans, said Queen Elizabeth (in her speech to the
children of Christ's Hospital) let me have your prayers, and you shall have my
protection. That Hospital was founded by her brother King Edward the sixth for
the relief of father less children, after the example of the ancient Church,
which had her Orphanotroph Orphan-breeders. With God the fatherless finds
mercy Hos. 14.3. and all his vice-gods are commanded the like, Psalm. 82.1, 2,
3, 4. unless they will consult shame and misery to their own houses, and
Joab-like, leave the leprosy to their little ones for a legacy. Better leave
them a wallet to beg from door to door, then a cursed hoard of Orphans goods.

and that turn aside the stranger] The right of strangers is so holy (says
Master Fox) that there was never nation so barbarous that would violate the
same. When Steven Gardener had in his power the renowned Peter Martyr then
teaching at Oxford, Act. and Mon. fol. 1783.
he would not keep him to punish him: but when he should go his way, gave him
wherewith to bear his charges.

and fear not me] This is set last as the source of all the former evils. See
the like Romans 3.18. and Psalm. 14.1. where Atheism and irreligion is made the
root of all the sin in the world. Gods holy fear is to the soul, as the banks
are to the sea, or the bridle to the horse, it was so to Isaac, who reigned in
the reverend fear of God, when he saw that he had done unwilling justice, durst
not reverse Jacobs blessing, though prompted to it by natural affection and
Esaus howlings, Genesis 27.33. It was so to Job, Joseph, Nehemiah, Daniel etc. who
could easily have born out their oppressions by their greatness. And indeed
whereas other men have other bits and restraints, great men, if they fear not
God, have nothing else to fear: but dare obtrude and justify to the world the
most malepart misdemenours, because it is facinus major is abollae, Juvenal.
the fact of a great one, who do many times as easily break through the lattice
of the laws, as the bigger flies do through a spider-web, as Anacharsis was
wont to say of his Scythians. Exodus 18.
Hence Jethro would have his Justice of peace to be a man fearing God: And this
qualification he fitly places in the midst of the other graces requisite to
him, as the heart in the body, for conveying life to all the parts, or as a
dram of musk perfuming the whole box of ointment Exodus 18.21. Nothing makes a
man so good a patriot as the true fear of Gods blessed name, and a zealous
forwardness for his glory, goodness, and good causes. This, this alone is it
that can truly beautify and adorn all other personal sufficiencies, and indeed
sanctify and bless all public employments, and services of state. Whereas on
the contrary, sublat a pietate, sides tollitur, take away piety, and fidelity
is gone; as we see in the unjust judge Luke 18.2. in Abraham's judgment of the
Philistines Genesis 20.11. and in Constantinus Chlorus his experiment of his
Councillors and Courtiers: whence that famous Maxim of his recorded by
Eusebius, He cannot be faithful to me, that is unfaithful to God: religion
being the ground of all true fidelity and loyalty to king and Country. Hence
that close connection Fear God, honor the king: And that again of Solomon, My
son, fear thou the Lord, and the king: and meddle not with them that are given
to change Prove. 24.21.

Verse 6. For I am the Lord, I change not] I am Jehovah. This is Gods proper
and incommunicable name. It imports three things.

1. That God is of himself. This Plato acknowledged calling God (...), and
(...), Julius Scaliger by a wonderful word calls God (...) One that has his
being or existence of himself, before the world was, Esaias 44 6.

2. That he gives being to all things else, for in him they both are and
consist. He sustains all, both in respect of being, excellencies and
operations, Heb. 1.3. The greatest excellencies in us do as much depend upon
God, as the essigies in the giasse upon the presence of the face that causes
it.

3. That he gives being to his word, effecting whatsoever he speaks. Hence
when either some special mercy is promised, or some extraordinary judgment
threatened, the name of Jehovah is affixed. See Exodus 6.3. Esaias 45.2, 3. Ezekiel.
5.17. The Ancient Jew-Doctours make this distinction between Elohim and
Jehovah. By Elohim say they, is signified Middath dir, a quality or property of
judgment. By Jehovah, middath Rachamim, a quality or property of mercy. And
here unto they apply that text Psalm. 56.11. In God (Elohim) I will praise the
word, in Jehovah I will praise the word, that is, five ^ure agat mecum, five ex
aequo and bono, whether he deal strictly with me, or graciously, I will praise
him howsoever. But this distinction, as it holds not always; so not here. For
to show the certainty of the judgment denounced verse 5. is this subjoyned, I
am Jehovah etc. And if Jehovah come of Hovah (which signifies Contrition or
destruction) as Heronymus ab Oleastro will have it, what can be more suitable to
the Prophets purpose? it is somewhat like that in Esaias chap. 13.6. Shod shall
come from Shaddai, destruction from the Almighty, or from the Destroyer as some
interpret Gods Name Shaddai.

I change not] I am neither false nor fickle, to say, and unsay, to alter my
mind, or to eat my word Psalm 89.34. The eternity of Israel cannot he, nor
repent, said Samuel to Saul (and it was heavy tidings to him, as Ahi ah said to
Ieroboams wife, 1 Samuel 15.29.
I come unto thee with heavy tidings) For, he is not a man that he should
repent. Men are mutable, and there is no hold to be taken of what they say. Of
many it may be said, as Tertullian of the Peacock, all in changeable colors:
as often changed as moved. Italians all, as Eneas Sylvius said of Italy,
Novitate quadam nihil habet stabile, there is no taking their words. Of a certain
Pope and his Nephew it is storied, that the one never spoke as he thought, the
other never performed what he spoke. But God is not a man that he should
repent: or if he do, it is after another manner then man repents. Repentance
with man is the changing of his will: repentance with God, is the willing of a
change. It is mutatio reinon Dei, affectus non affectus, facti non consilii.
Gods repentance is not a change of his will, but of his work. It notes only,
(says Mr. Perkins) the alteration of things and actions done by him, and no
change of hi purpose and secret decree, which is immutable. What he has
written, he has written, (as Filate said peremptorily) there is no removing of
him. If the sentence be passed, if the decree be come forth, none can avert or
avoid it, Zeph. 3.5. Currat ergo poenitentia ne praecurrat sententia. Chrysolog.
Go quickly and make an atonement, as Moses said to Aaron, Number. 16.46. Prepare
to meet thy God, O Israel, Amos 4.12. Mite preces and lachrymas cordis legatos:
meet him with entreaties of peace agree with him quickly: who knows if he will
return and repent? for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil, Joel 2.13, 14. It should seem so
indeed by this Text: For even whiles he is threatening, and ratifying what he
had threatened, his heart is turned within him, his repentings are kindled
together, Hos. 11.8. And hence the following words, Therefore ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed. A strange inference, (considering the sense and
occasion of the foregoing words, as has been set forth,) and not unlike that
Hos. 2.13, 14. I will visit upon her the days of Baalim -- she went after ber
lovers, and forgot me, says the Lord. Therefore (mark that Therefore) behold I
will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to
her: And I will give her, etc. So Esaias 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth, and smot him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went
on frowardly, etc. I have sten his ways, and will heal him: Ways? what ways?
his covetousness, frowardness, etc. and yet I will heal him. I will deal with
him not according to mine ordinary rule, but according to my Prerogative. If
God will heal for his names sake (and so come in with his Non obstante, as he
does, Psalm. 106.8) what people is there whom he may not heal? Well may these
sinful sons of Jacob be unconsumed: well may they have for their seventy
years captivity, Ezekiel 20 8, 14, 22, 45.
seven seventies of years (according to Dans ls weeks) for the re-enjoying of
their own country: and Gods mercies shall bear the same proportion to his
punishments, which seven (a complete number) has to an unity. Provided, that
they return to the Lord that smot them (as in the next verse) for else he will
surely punish them seven times more, and seven times, and seven to that, Levit.
26.21, 23, 27, etc three several times God raises his note of threatening,
and he raises it by sevens, and those are discords in Music. Such sayings
will be heavy songs: and their execution heavy pangs to the impenitent.

Verse 7. Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine
ordinances] The more to magnify his own mercy (by a miracle, whereof they had
hitherto subsisted, by an extraordinary prop of his love, and long-suffering)
God sets forth here their utter unworthiness of any such free favor, by a
double aggravation of their sins. First, their long continuance therein, so
that their sins were grown inveterate, and ingrained, and themselves aged and
even crooked therein, so that they could hardly ever be set strait again.

from the days of your fathers, etc.] q d. Non hoc nuper facitis: nee somel ut
erroris mereamini veniam: sed haereditariam habetis impiet^tem, etc as Hi^rom
paraphraseth this Text. You are no young sinners: it is not yesterday, or a few
days since you transgressed against me: you are a seed of serpenis, a ra^e of
rebels: you are as good atresisting the Holy Ghost, as ever your fathers were.
Act. 7.51. Secondly, their pervicacy and stiffenesse: they would not yield or
be evicted. But ye say wherein shall we return? as if they were righteous and
needed no repentance. Still they put God to his proofs, as Jer. 2.35. and show
themselves an unperswadeable, and gainsaying people, Esaias 65.2, and this had
been their mu^n^r from their youth, Jer. 22.21. when they were in Egypt they
served idols there, Ezekiel. 16. and 23. In the wilderness they tempted God ten
times, and hearkened not to his voice. Number. 14.22. Under their Judges, and then
their Kings, they vexed him, and he bore with them, till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles 6.16. After the captivity, they do antiquum obtinere, and are found
guilty here of sundry both omissions, and commissions, calling for a just
recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2. All which notwithstanding, Deus redire eos sibi
non perire desiderat. God soliciteth their return unto him here by a precept
and a promise, Chrysolog.
two effectual arguments, if any thing will work: and ratifieth all with his
own authority, which is most authentic, in these words, says the Lord of
Hosts. A style often given to God, as elsewhere in Scripture, so especially in
these three last Prophecies to the people returned from Babylon, because they
had many enemies, and therefore had need of all encouragement: For God is
called the Lord of Hosts, quod ille numine suo and nomine terreat terras,
Alsted.
temperet tempora, exercitusque tam superiores quam inferiores gubernet, to
show that he has all power in his hand, and does whatsoever he pleases in
heaven and earth. See the Notes on verse 17. of this chap. doctr. 1 And for the
Doctrine of returning to God (from whom we have deeply revolted) by repentance,
see the Note on Zach. 1.3.

But ye said, Wherein shall we return?] This was their pride, proceeding from
ignorance: they were rich and righteous, as those Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17. not in
truth, but in conceit, vainly puffed up by their carnal minds, drunk with
self-dotage, as Luke 16.15. Elementum in suo loco non ponderat.
Hence they stand upon their pantofles, and none must say, Black is their eye.
Sin is in them as in is proper element, and therefore weighes not: till by long
trading in wickedness, they grow to that dead and dedolent disposition, Ephesians.
4.14. their heart fat as grease, their conscience cauterized, 1 Timothy 4.2. that
is, so benumbed, blotted, lenselesse, filthy, and gangrenate, that it must be
seared with an hot iron: whereupon it grows so crusty and brawny, that though
cut or pierced with the sword of the spirit, it does neither bleed nor feel:
and though handfulls of hellfire be flung in the face of it, yet it starts
not, stirs not: but is deprived of all even paslive power, and so Satanized,
that there is no help for them.

Verse 8. Will a man rob God?] Adam pillage Elohim? frail weak man seek to
supplant (so the Septuagint render it) the great and mighty God? Giant-like
boldness! Cacus met with his match, when he robbed Hercules. Mercury (say the
Poets) had a mind to steal Jupiters thunderbolts, but durst not meddle, lest
he should speed as Prometheus had done, for stealing fire: or lest they should
burn his fingers. The Eagle in the fable, that stole a piece of flesh from the
Altar, and carried it together with a live-coal that stuck to it, to his nest,
set his young and all on a light fire. Dionysius, that robbed his god, was cast
out of his kingdom, though he was wont to boast, Aelian. lib. 2. Var. hist.
that he had it bound to him with chains of Ademant. Belshazzar paid dear for
his bowzing in the bowls of the Sanctuary. Cardinal Wolsey and five of his
servants, employed by him in interverting consecrated goods, though perhaps to
better purposes, came all to fearful ends, as Scultetus notes, and thereupon
wishes, Vtinam his and similibus exemplis edocti discant homines res semel Deo
consecratas timide attrectare. Scult. Annal. 332.
It is a snare to the man that devoureth that which to holy, Prove. 20.25. They
may be compared to those that, being of a cold and phlegmatic stomach, eat hard
and choleric meats: well they may please their palates, but it cannot be for
their health: no more can the murdering morsels of such sacrilegious persons,
as devouring holy things, have their meat sawced and their drink spiced with
the bitter wrath of God. See Job 20.23. Polanus reads the Text thus, Will a man
rob his Gods? q d. Will any Heathen do so? did not they that worshipped Idols,
abhor sacrilege? Ws it not one of the laws of the twelve tables in Rome,
Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui clepserit rapseritque, parricida esto; Let every
sacrilegious person pass and be punished for a parricide? And does not Tully
affirm of those Laws, that they did exceed all the libraries of the
Philosophers, in weight and worth? Did not those old Idolaters freely bestow
their most precious things upon their Idols, Ezech. 16.16, 17, 18, 19. Exodus
32.3? yea their very children in sacrifice to Moloch, or Saturn? 2 King. 16.3.
and 17.17. being as mad upon their Idols, as ever was any wicked wanton upon
his harlot, lavishing out of the bag, etc? And are not our modern Idolaters
the Papists, as bountiful to their He-saints, and she-saints? so that their
Churches are not able to hold their vowed presents and memories, Spec. Europ.
but that in many places (as at Loretto, Sichem, etc.) they are fain to hang
their Cloisters and Churchyards with them? Shall they in their petitions to our
Parliaments plead for favor and forbearance upon this ground, because their
ancestors (they say) bestowed so great cost upon this land for
church-maintenance: and shall it be said (now that they are worthily cast out)
Possidebant Papistae, possident Rapistae, Wicked Papists had them, ungodly
Rapists have them: Improprietaries, I mean, that hold by an improper title, and
all others that appropriate that to them and theirs which the Almighty is
invested in. This is here instanced as a capital crime, and called robbing of
God, as well it may; forasmuch as ministers maintenance (being tithes) is
called the Lords, and holy to the Lord Lev. 27.30. because separated from man
and man's use, and therefore might not be altered. Verse 28. Or if any had a
mind to redeem them, they were bound to add to the price every fifth penny above
the true value. Verse 31. Nunquid homo fraudabit Deum? sic vertunt Aquila,
Symmachus and Theodotion.
Let all those look to this whether Impropriators false Patrons ( Latrones
rather) or others that either by force or fraud rob God of his right, doteyning
part of the due at least, as Ananias and Sapphira did; God has a Quare Impedit
against them, which one day they must make answer to.

yet ye have robbed me] Because ye have robbed my Ministers who are in my stead
2 Cor. 5.20. and in whom he receives tithes, of whom it is witnessed that he
lives, like as did Melchisedeck, as a Priest and tyth-taker, and type of
Christ. Heb. 7.7, 8, 9. And as God is sensible of the least curtesy done to a
Prophet to reward it, even to a cup of cold water Mat. 10.42. (so that he is
anggard to himself, that scants his beneficence to a Minister) so for those
that wrong and rob them, that deny them that double honor of countenance and
maintenance that he has appointed them, and hold them to hard allowance:
muzzling the Ox, or giving him but straw at the best, for treading out the
corn, they will dearly answer it before God, who holds all done to them as
done to himself. Legati quod erant appella i superbius, Corinthum Patres vestri
totius Graeciae lumen extinctum esse moluerunt. Cic. pro lege Man.
Surely as David could not but feel his own cheeks shaven, and his own coat cut
in his Ambassadors; they did but carry his person to Hanun: So here. And as
there was never any king so poor and weak, but thought himself strong enough to
revenge any wrong done, or abuse offered to his Ambassadors: So the king of
heaven will not fail to curse with a curse whole nations that forget God and
forsake his Levites Deuteronomy. 13.19. it being all one to God to deal in this case
against a nation or against a man only. Ioh 34.29.

in tithes and offerings] He had told them before they had robbd him: or (as
some ^ead it) stabbed him as with a poniard. And here they should have
confessed the action and craved pardon. But because they did nothing less;
standing upon their justification (as before often) God descends to the
particular wherein they robbed him, In tithes and offerings: The original has
it, Tithes and offerings, without the particle (in) and it is as if the Lord
should say, you may easily know my meaning without so many words, but that you
love to contest. You cannot be ignorant, that the Levites, for want of
maintenance, are sled every man to his field, and so my work and worship is
lest undone. Good Nehemiah was sensible of it chap. 13.10. and because he knew
that, by this means, religion it self would be soon undermined and overturned,
he contended with the Rulers, and made all the people pay their tithes: and
this he worthily reckons among his good deeds, praying God to remember him for
it, and not wise it out chap. 13.10. Hezekiah, that great Reformer, showed the
like zeal in commanding the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion
of the Priests and Levites, that they might attend upon the law of the Lord (so
the Vulgar) that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, so we read 2 Chronicles. 31.4. that is, that they might not follow their callings heavily for
want of maintenance, but cherefully bend themselves wholly to the service of the
Lord. And here (as Ferus once wished for the Romish synagogue) I would we had
some Moses, said He, to take away the evils of the times: non enim unum tantum
vitulum sed multos habemus, for we have not one golden calf, but many: So have
we of these times cause to wish we had some zealous Nehemiahs and Hezekiahs to
stickle and stand for Christ's Ministers, not defrauded of their due maintenance
only (a sign of gasping devotion) but trampled upon by the foul feet of the
basest of the people, as the filth of the world and the offcouring of all
things. Tithes they say are Jewish: but if Melchisedech tythed Abraham, by the
same right whereby he blessed him: Heb. 7.
and if tithes by all laws of God, Nature, Nations, have been hallowed to God,
as Junius and other modern Divines allege and argue: and lastly, if things
consecratd to Gods service may not be alienated, out of case of necessity Pro.
20.25. Gal. 3.15. it will appear to be otherwise. Or if tithes be Jewish, and
yet Ministers must have a maintenance (Christ having so ordained 1 Cor. 9.14.)
and that both honorable 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. and liberal Gal. 6.6. how else shall
they be given to hospitality, 1 Timothy 2.2? (if they be not hospitable, they will
be despicable) how will men satisfy their consciences in the quota pars: the
particular quantity they must bestow upon them? The scripture speaks only of
the tenth part. Sed manum de tabula. Enough of this, if not more then enough.

Verse 9. Ye are cursea with a curse] Vuig. ye are cursed with penury and
scarcity of victuals, according to Deuteronomy. 28.23. etc. and so great was this
peoples poverty, that they were forced for food to sell not their fields only,
but their sons and daughters Neh. 5. They had pinched on Gods side, and he had
paid them home in the same kind: they thought in the famine to have kept the
more to themselves, and they had the less, for keeping from him that which was
his. A just hand of God upon all church-robbers: for most part they are always
in want and needy, their wealth melting away as snow before the sun, and their
fields of blood purchased with the spoils of Christ, proving as unfortunate
and fatal to them as the gold of the Temple of Tholose did to Scipio's
soldiers: of which whoever carried any part away, never prospered afterward.
What get men by such a detiny that shall prove their fatal destiny? Say they
leave the gold behind them, yet they are likely to carry the guilt to hell with
them Iem. 5.1, 2. yea to cough in hell, as Latimer phrased it, unless they
make restitution, to digest in hell, what they have devoured on earth, as
Austin. Because Pharaoh faith the river is mine own, therefore faith God, I
will dry up the river Ezekiel. 29.3, 9. The Merchant that denies to pay his
custom, forseits all his commodities: so here.

for ye have robbed me] And therefore I have cursed you. God never punishes
people, but there is just cause for it, could they but see it: but that the are
hardly drawn to, as here, and Esaias 26.11. the root of the matter is in
themselves, as job speaks in another case; the plague of their own hearts 1
King. 8 38. procures them all the mischief, and may say to them as the heart
of Apo^^^^ us the tyrant seemed to say to him; (...)
who dreamed one night that he was steaed by the Scythians, and boiled in a
caldron, and that his heart spoke to him out of the kettle, It is I that have
drawn thee to all this. Let men therefore, when under any misery, lay their
hand upon their heart, thrust their hand into their besom with Moses, they
shall be sure to bring it out lepious: let them turn short again upon
themselves, and say every man, What have I done? what evil have I committed,
or at least admitted? what good have I omitted, or intermitted? Profane Esau,
beguiled of the blessing cries out of his fathers store, of his brothers
subtlety: not a word of his own profaneness in slighting and selling his
birthright: he had forgot since he did eat and drink, and went his way Genesis
25.4. The lerusalem-Paraphrast adds, that he also despised his portion in the
world to come, and denied the resurrection. But this he never takes notice of.
So Pompey beaten by Caesar out of the field blamed the divine providence for
his ill success: when he should rather have faulted his own retchlesse
security (that he never considered into what place he were best to retire if
worsted) and especially his sacrilege not long before that defeat, when he
sacked Jerusalem, and ransackt the Temple. He might have considered what became
(a little before his time) for the same offense of Alcimus, 1 Maccah. 9.54, 55,
56. 2 Maccah. 3.24, 25. and 4.39, 41.42. and 5.15, 16. and 13.4, 8. and 15.30.
34
Heliodorus, Lysimachus, Antiochus, Menclaus, and Nicanor, all notorious
Church-robbers, and all hanged u in gibbets, as it were, for example and
admonition to all that should come after. Sacrilege is a share (says Solomon,
Pro. 20.25.) that 1. catches suddenly. 2. holds surely. 3. desroyeth
certainly. Cavete.

even this whole nation] The disease was grown Epidemicall, like that which
Physicians call corruption totius substantiae, or that which: he Prophet Esaias
also complains of chap. 1.5, 6. The whole head is sick, the whole heart is
faint etc. This sin of sacrilege was grown National: there was a conjuncture
of all sorts in this wickedness; a rabble of rebels they were, ripe for
judgment: yea though Gods judgments were upon them, yet they persisted Neh.
13.18. and increased wrath Ezra. 9.13. God had smitten them, but they sorrowed
not: Ier. 5.3.
but to be revenged on him, as it were, for laying famine upon them, they took
away his tithes etc.

Verse 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the store-house] All, whether
praediall, or personal, all, and of every kind.

into the store-house] the standing place for tithes, as it is called Neh.
13.11, 12, 13. the tyth-barn, as the Vulgar has it.

that there may be meat in my house] Tereph, unde (...): and the English, prey:
that there may be maintenance for my Ministers; Cibus qui discerpi, dividi,
disiribuiq, polest.
enough not for themselves only, but for to be distributed to those that are
about them: that they may not cat their morsels alone, that they may not be
slaves to others, servants to themselves: that they may not bite with their
teeth, and cry peace, teach for hire, and divine for money Mic. 3.5, 11. that
is, be fain to maintain themselves with sordid and unworthy flatteries. Balaam
the false Prophet rode with his two men Number. 22. God; Levite had one man Judge.
19.11. Aug^^stin lived neither like a Lord, for he cate his meat in wooden and
marble dishes: neither lived he like a beggar, for he used to eat with silver
spoons. Possidon. in vit. Aug.
What pity was it that Luther was forced to cry out in his Comment on Genesis 47.
Nisi superesser spolium Egypti quod rapuimus Papae, omnibus ministris verbi
fame percundum osset. Quod si sustentandi essent die contributione populi
miserc profecto and d^^iter viverent. If it were not for the spoil of Egypt
which we have snatched from the Pope, all the Ministers of the word must have
been affamished. For if they should be put to live upon the free contribution
of the people, they would certainly have a miserable hard living of it. Alimar
ergo etc. We are maintained then, as I said of the spoils of Egypt: and yet
that little that we have is preyed upon by the Magistrate: for the parishes and
Schools are so spoiled and peeled, as if they meant to starve us all. Thus
Luther. Melancthon comes after him and complains in the year 1559. Principes
favebant Luthero: sed jam iterum vi letis ing ratitudinem mundi orga ministros
etc. The Princes did at first favor Luther: but now ye see again the
unkindnesse of the world to the Ministers of the word. Calvia was so ill dealt
with at Geneva (together with other faithful Ministers there that he was
forced once to say, Certe si hominibus servivissem etc. Truly if I had served
men in my Ministry, I had been very ill requited. Melch. Adam. in vita.
But its well that I have served Him who never fails his: but faithfully
performs with the better who sever he has promised them. Our Doctor
Stoughton observed, that the manner of very many in the City was to deal with
their minister as Carriers do with their horses; viz. to lay heavy burdens
upon them, and then to hang bells about their necks; they shall have hard work,
and great commendations, Sermon. ^n 1 Samuel 2.30.
but easy commons; be applauded for excellent preachers, have good words, but
slight wages. Thus in the City; but what measure meet men with in the Country?
Hear it from a Countrey-Minister mouth. How many thousands in this land (faith
He) stand obnexious in an high-degree to the judgments of God for this sin of
sacrilege, which is the bane of our people, and blemish of our Church? Some
there are who rob God of his main tithes, yet are content to leave him still
the lesses: they pluck our fleeces, and leave us the taglocks, poor Vicarage
tithes, whilst themselves and children are kept warm in our wool, the
Parsonage. And and others yet more injurious, who think that too much, would
the law but allow them a pair of sheers, they would clip the very taglocks off.
Mr. Reg. his Strange Vin. in Valest page 303.
These (with the deceitful taylour) are not content to shrink the whole and
fair broad-cloth to a dozen of buttons, but they must likewise take part of
them away, and nimme the very shreds, which only we have left. After they have
full gorged themselves with the Parsonage grains, they can sinde means either
by uncoscionable leases or compositions, to pick the Vicaridge-bones etc. Thus
He and much more to the like purpose. Our blessings (faith Another eminent
Divine) are more then those of old, our burden less. And yet how unwilling
comes even a little to the painsullest Minister? And those, that upon a kind of
conscience pay other duties, think all lost that goes to the maintenance of the
Ministry, D. Sclaiter.
and that wish such repining, as if that were money of all other worst bestowed
etc.

and prove me now herewith] Dignatio stupenda, A wonderful condescension, that
God should call upon man to take experiment of him, to make but a trial, to
put it to the proof whether he will not prosper the penitent. This is somewhat
like that other passage Psalm. 34. O taste and see that the Lord is good etc. or
that, Come and let us reason together. O the never-enough adored depth of Gods
goodness, that he should stoop so low to us clay and dirt, dung and
wormes-meat 1 He is so high, Psalm 113.6.
that he is said to humble himself to behold things done in heaven. If he look
at all out of himself, to see but what the Angels do, he does therein abase
himself. That he will deal so familiarly with us (who are no better then so
many walking-dunghils) as to bid us prove him what he will do for us, this
deserves acknowledgement and admiration in the highest degree. Should he have
used martial law with these malapert miscreants in the text that had robbed
him of his rights: and not only have reproved them and cursed them wit a curse
of penury, but have ( Draco-like) written his laws in blood upon them, he
might have justified his proceedings. But thus to commune with them, and not
only to prescribe them a remedy for removal of the curse, Bring ye all the
Tithes etc. but thus to persuade with them, Suhest jurandi spectes. Figuier.
and to permit them to prove his bountifulness in giving, and his
faithfulness in keeping promise with them, and that with an oath (as some
conceive.)

if I will not open the windows of heaven] then never believe me more; what a
wonderful goodness was this? Surely we may well say of it, as Chrysostom does
of the happiness of heaven, Sermo non valet exprimere: experimento opus est;
We can never sufficiently praise it, but must take the counsel he gives us,
and prove it, Prove me etc. There is an unlawful and damnable proving or
rather provoking of God, when men separate the means from the end, holiness
from happiness, will needs live as they lift, and yet presume they shall be
saved by the unknown mercies of God. Such were those that tempted and provoked
he most high God, and kept not his testimonies Psalm. 78.56. like as before they
had lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, Psalm. 106.14.
and tempted God in the desert; whilst, bearing themselves over-bold upon
their external privileges, they refused to observe his statutes, and keep his
laws. This sin, in the new Testament is called tempting the Spirit of the Lord
Act. 5.9. Ananias and Sapphira did so, when by a cunning concrivance they would
needs prove and make trial whether God could deicry and would punish their
hypocrisy: So did Judas the traitor when he boldly demanded, Is it I Lord. So
do all gross hypocrites that present unto God acarcase of holiness, like Cham,
or that cursed Cozener Mal. 1.14. Such also as refuse Christ's offers of grace:
and when he bids them as here, Prove him if upon their obedience to the laws
of his kingdom, he will not open the windows of heaven and rain down
righteousness upon them, even mercies without measure: and (for confirmation)
wills them as once he did wicked Ahaz, Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God,
Ask it either in the depth, or height above; they churlishly answer him in
effect as he did, I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord. Whereupon the
Prophet that made the motion, in an holy indignation, Hear ye now says He, ye
house of David, Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but ye will weary my
God also? Isa. 7.12.13.

if I will no open you the windows of heaven] Vulg. the cataracts or
floodgates, or spouts of heaven: meaning the clouds, those bottles of rain,
which God here promises to shour down abundantly, Gorn. and Lapid.
tanta copia, impetu, and fragore, ut ruere potius quam fluere videatur. A
phrase noting great plenty 2 King. 7.2. for in those hot countries drought ever
made a dearth. Hence the proud Egyptians whose land is watered and made
fruitful by the overflow of the river Nilus, were wont in mockery to tell the
neighbor nations, that if God should forget to rain, they might chance to
starve for it. They thought the rain was of God, but not the river. God
therefore threateneth to dry it up Ezech 29.9. Isa. 19.5.6. and so he did:
Creditur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva.
Imbribus, Ovid.
atque annis sicca fuisse novem.
To teach both them and us, that both plenty and scarcity, drought, and rain
are his work: he carries the keys of the grave, of the heart, and of the
windows of heaven the clouds, under his own girose. Vessels they are as thin as
the Equ^^^ which is contained in them. There they hang and move, though weighty
with their. burden. How they are upheld, and why they fall here, and now, we
know not, but wonder at it, as Gods handy work. In the island of ^t. Thomas,
^^^^s Grg. page 251.
on the backside of Airike, in the midst of it is an hill: and over that, a
continual cloud, wherewith the whole Island is watered. In the middle region
of the air, God (...) made druk^esse his secret place: has pavilion round about
(...) is d^^k (...) cloud of the sky, Psalm. 18.11. These he weighes by
measure, so that not a dr^^^ falls in vain, nor in a wrong place, Job 28.15.
When he utters his voice (...) is a multitude (or noise) or waters in the
heavens, and he causes the (...) to ascend from the ends of the earth: he
makes lightenings with rain, etc. Job. 10.^^. A wonderful thing surely, that
out of the midst or water, God setcheth (...), and hard stones out of the
midst of thin vapors. This is the Lords own do^^^ and it is (worthily)
mavelous in our eyes. Are there any among the vanit^^^ or the Gentiles that
can given rain? or can the heavens give snowres? (So the ^^^^ralisis will needs
have it: but what says the Prophet?) (...) Gad? therefore we will wan upon
thee: for (...), Jer. (...) A pious resolution surely, and that which the Lord
here would have this people to take up: viz. in the way of his judgments to
wait upon him, Esaias 25.3.
and work b^^^^^ him, to honor him with their substance, and with the first
fruits of al^ their increase. So should their barnes be filled with piency, and
their presses burst out with new wine, Prove. 2.9, 10. The (...) (...) shall be
(...), Prove. 11.25.

God will pour him our a blessing] because he (...), as the Hebrew has it in
that place of the Proverbs last cited, and he shall have rain (...) pl^v^a
erir, as K^^chr renders the last words there. ^e shall be a sweet and (...)
shower to himself and others. Theresore they shall (...) of Zion, and shall
flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for whe^^, (...) and for oil, and
for the young of the stock, and of the he^d: and their (...) a wa^ered garden,
and they shall not sorrow any more (...), Genesis 31.12. O precious promise, every
syllable whereof drops myrrh, and merey! (...) that (...) of (...), (so we may
call him as the (...) the ^ather of Vows, because he is the first we read of in
Scripture that vowed a vow unto the Lord) had this promise of abundance
plentifully performed unto him. So had (...) the first Christian Emperor, the
Churches great Benesactour. (...), De civ. Dei i 5. c 25.
faith A^g^stine, Constimum Alagnum (...) mullus under et. The good Lord filled
(...), with so many temporal blessings, as never any man durst with for.

There shall not be (...)] (...), Nop tan^^m quod sufficiat, sed^ti mquod
supersit Rah. Drvil. Vltra sufficiens. Montat.
so that you shall say, It is enough: Thus the Chaldee renders it. (...) shall
hove more then enough, as the areptan had, ^ King. (...) the cruse never ceased
running till there was no room. Borrow of (...), (...) the Prophet, but sh^^:
the doors (...). It was time to shut the doors, (...) One, when many greater
vessels must be supplied from one little one. she had a Prephets reword with a
witness. And so had the Shunamite. Her table, and bed, and stool was well
bestowed: That candlestick repaid her the light of her future life and
condition; that table, the means of maintenance; that stool, a seat of (...)
bed, a quiet rest from the common calamities of her nation. So (...) a
paymaster is God: his retributions are more then bountiful: he will not be
overcome by his creature in liberality, Jam. 1.5. They shall be sure to have
their own again with usury, either in money, or moneys-worth. What they want in
temporalls (a sufficiency whereof they shall be sure of, if not a (...)) he
will a (...) up in spirituals, joy and peace through believing, as much, or
more then heart can hold. Some holy men have so over-abounded exceedingly with
joy, that they have been forced to cry out, Hold Lord, stay thine hand, etc.
their spirits were even ready to expire, with an exuberancy of spiritual
ravishment: as the Church in the Canticles was sick of love, and therefore
calls to the Ministers, Cmt. 2.5.
to stay her from sinking and swooning, to bolsier her up, being surprised with
a love-qualme: as the Queen of Sheba rapt with admiration, had no more spirit
in her: as Jacobs heart saintd, Godfr. in ult. Bern. Epist I. 1. Confess. l. 6.
e. 22.
when he heard the good news of Joseph alive. Bernard, for a certain time after
his conversion, remained as it were, deprived of his senses, by the excessive
consolations he had from God. Cypran and Austin testify the like of themselves.

Ve^se 11. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes] Caterpillars,
Cankerwormes, and such hurtiull creatures, Gods terrible army, as they are
notably set forth in their march and mischief, Joel 2.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. with
chap. 1.4. to tame his rebels to ease him of his adversaries, and to avenge him
of his enemies, Esaias 1.24. These he will rebuke (for every creature is at his
beck, and check) as he rebuked the red sea, and it was dried up, Psalm. 105. and
as he rebuked the winds, Mat. 8.26. the fever, Luke 4.39. the devil, Mat. 7.18.
he will say unto them, Abite (...) hine. Get you hence, and that is enough, for
they are all his servants, Psalm. 119.91, He is the great Centurion (or rather
Lord of Hosts) that faith to this creature Go, and he goes, and to another,
Come, and he comes, etc. if he do but say, Who is on my side, who? all
creatures look out at their windows, as ready pressed to do his pleasure: neither
is there any so mean amongst them, or so despicable that cannot, if set on by
him, make the proudest on earth stoop, and say, This is the singe of God. But
of this see more in the 1. Do. on verse. 18. of this Chapter. Let all that
look for Gods blessing, either upon their persons or possessions, make their
peace with God (the genealogy of corn, and wine is resolved into him, Hos.
2.22.) and bring him all his tithes into the storehouse, etc. les he blast
their fair hopes, out off the meat from their mouths, take his own and be
gone, take away his corn in the time thereof, and his wine in the season
thereof, etc. Hos. 2.9. The Jews in our Saviors time, suis malis edosthi, were
punctuail in paying their tithes, even to a potherb, Marth. 23. And at this
day, though not in their own country, nor have a beviticall Priesthood, yet
those of them that would be reputed religious, Godw. Heb. Antiq p. 277.
do distribute, in lieu of tithes, the tenth of their increase unto the poor:
being persuaded that God does bless their increase the more: For their usual
proverb is, Dectma in dives fias, ^ythe and be rich. Of the young Lord
Harrington (the last of that name) it is reported by Mr. Stock, who preached
his Funeral, that he constantly gave the tenth of his yearly revenue to pious
and charitable uses. And of reverend Mr. Will Whately Minister of Banbary, it
is likewise recorded in his life, that he set apart and expended for many years
before he died for good uses, the tenth part of his yearly comings in, both out
of his temporal and ecclesiastical means of maintenance: and that he never
thrived in his outward estate, till he took that course. Besides the sweet
comfort that the spirits of his wealth thus distilled, as it were, brought to
his conscience, both in life and at death: and the blessing of a good name left
behind him, according to that which follows next in the text, And all nations,
etc.

Verse 12. And all nations shall call you Hessed] viz. for the abundance of
outward comforts and commodities, by the which the Nations measured men's
happiness saying, Blessed is the people that is in such a ease, Psalm. 144.15.
Cyprus was for this cause anciently called Macaria, that is, the blessed
country, as having a sufficiency of all things within it self: and England was
called Regnum Dci, the kingdom of God, or the Fortunate Island, and Englishmen
Deires, as those that were set safe de ira Dei, from the wrath of God. In the
time of Pope lement the sixth (as Robert of Avesbury testifies) when Lewis of
Spain was chosen Prince of the Fortunate Islands, and for the conquest thereof
was to raise an Army in France and Italy; the English Agent at Rome, together
with his company departed and gat home, as conceiving that the Prince was bound
for England, then the which they thought there was not a more fortunate Island
in the world. Of the Island of Lycia, Sol nus says, Lyciam Horatius claram
dicit.
that all the day long, the sky is never so cloudy, but that the Sun may be
seen there. Semper in Sole siva est Rhodos, The Rhodes is ever in the Sunshine,
says Aeneas Sylvius. And of Alexandria in Egypt, Ammianus Marcellizus
observes, that once in the day the Sun has been seen to shine over it. I
confess the same cannot be said of England: I remember also what I have read
of a certain Frenchman, who returning home out of England, and being asked by a
countreyman of his that was bound for England, what service he would command
him into this country? Nothing but this, said the other; When you see the
Sun, Per duos enim menses quibus ibi fui, Solemn mihi videre non licuit.
Garincieres de tabe Anglica. p 84. Vt finem atque initium lucis exiguo
discrimine in ternoscas. Nomentque ex eo sortitam. Polyh. c. 17.
have me commended to him: for I have been there two months, and could never
see him in all that space. Belike he was here in the deep of winter. For at
Summer Solistice Tacitus (in the life of Agricola) has observed, that the Sun
shines continually in Britanny, and neither sets nor rises there; but
passes so light by us by night, that you can searce say, we have any night at
all: But if we speak of the Sunshine of Gods grace and favor, either for
spirituals or temporals: as Delos is said by Solinus, to have been the first
country that had the Sun shining upon it, after the general deluge, and
therehence to have had its name: so was England one of the first Hands that
both received Christ, and that shook off Antichrist. And for temporal
blessings, all nations call us blessed, and count us a delightsome land indeed,
a land of desires, such as all men would desire to dwell in, for the exceeding
fruitfulness and pleasantness of it: it being the Court of Queen Ceres, the
granary of the Western world, as foreign Writers have termed it, the paradise
of pleasure, and garden of God, as our own Chronicler. The truth is, We may
well say of England, as the Italians do of Venice, by way of proverb: He that
has not seen it, cannot believe what a dainty place it is: and he that has
not lived there some good space, cannot understand the worth of it. Our Mr.
Ascham, Schoolmaster to Q. Eizabeth, had lived there some time, and had soon
enough of it: for though he admired the place, he utterly disliked the people
for their loose living. And the like (alas) may be too truly affirmed of us.
We live in Gods good land, but not by Gods good laws: we eat the fat and drink
the sweet, but we sanctify not the Lord God in our hearts, we live not as
becomes Christians. Our hearts (like our Climate) has much more light then
heat; light of knowledge, then heat of zeal; our lukewarmnesse is like to be
our bane, our sins our snuffes, that dim our candlestick, and threaten the
removal of it. O si siat id in nobis (says One) quod in Sole videtur, qui
quibus affulserit, ijs etiam calrem and colorem impertire solet! O that the Sun
of righteousness would so shine upon us, as to warm us, and transform us into
the same image from glory to glory, as by his Spirit! O that he would set up
his own kingdom here more and more amongst us! then should were be more happy
then the Israelites were under the reign of king Solomon, or the Spaniards
under their Ferdinand the third, who reigned 35. years: in all which time there
was neither famine nor pestilence in the land. Lopez Gloss. in prolog par. 1


Verse. 13. Your words have been stout against me] Or, reenforced, or strongly
confirmed. Superant me verba vestra, so some have rendered it. By your hard and
hateful words you have been too hard for me, as it were. And it is, as if God
should say, I have given you my best advice o break off your sins, and to
bring me my tithes, that I might bless you both with store, and honor. But I
have lost my labor: I see well, my sweet words are worse then spilt upon you,
who are so hardened in your error and blasphemy, Prove. 23.8. Verba quid
incassum non proficientia perdo. Mal. 2.17.
that you are still clamouring and casting out odious words against me. Once
before you had set your foul mouths against me, and like so many wolves (that
were wood) you held up your heads and howled out these ugly words, Every one
that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them,
etc. (was it possible that the wit of malice could devise so high a slander?)
And now you are at it again, creaking like doors that move upon rusty hinges,
nay clattering and blustering out such hellish and hideous blasphemies, as at
the hearing whereof, it is great wonder if the heavens sweat not, earth gape
not, sea roar not, all creatures conspire not to be avenged upon you: as the
very stones in the wall of Aphek turned executioners of those blasphemous
Aramites, when as being but ignorant Pagans, their tongues might seem no
slander.

Your words have been stout against me] Yea stouter and stouter: your
wickedness frets like a canker, and increases still to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2.17. Evil men and deceivers grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. as being
given up by God, Romans 1.28. acted and agitated by the devil, Ephesians. 2.2.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. which to satisfy is an endless
piece of business. Neither let any here say, they were but words that these
are charged with, and words are but wind, etc. for words have their weight, and
are mavelous provoking. Leviter volant, sed non leviter violant. You shall
find some, says Erasmus, that if death be threatened, can despise it: but to be
belied they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain themselves. As a
murthering-weapon in my bones, says David, mine enemies reproach me, Psalm.
42.10. Desperate speeches and blasphemies that impose upon the Lord any thing
unbeseeming his Majesty (a thing common among the Jews, even at this day) he
can by no means away with. See how God stomacketh such proud contumelious
language, Psalm. 73.11. and 94.4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Zeph. 1.12. Ezech. 9.9. See how
he punished it in him that bored thorough his great Name, Lev. 24.11. Ludovike
commonly called St. Lewis, caused the lips of blasphemers to be seared with an
hot iron. Philip the French King punished this sin with death, yea though it
were committed in a Tavern. The very Turks have the Christians blaspheming of
Christ in execration: and will punish their prisoners sorely, when as, through
impatience, or desperateness, they wound the ears of heaven: Yea the Jews in
their speculations of the causes of the strange success of the affairs of the
world, Specul. Europae
assign the reason of the Turks prevailing so against the Christians, to be
their blasphemies: and among other scandals and lets of their conversion, are
all those stout words darted with hellish mouths against God in their hearing,
so ordinarily and openly, by the Italians especially, who blaspheme oftener then
swear, and murder oftener then revile or slander. Andrew Musculus in his
discourse, entitled, The devil of blasphemy, has a memorable story of a
desperate dice-player in Helvetia, Anno 1553. at a town three miles distant
from Lucerna. Where, on a Lord's Day, three wretched fellows were playing at
dice, under the town-wall. One of them, named Vlricus Schraeterus, having lost
a great deal of money, swore that if he lost the next cast, he would fling his
dagger at the sace of God. He lost it, and in a rage threw up his dagger with
all his might toward heaven. The dagger vanished in the air, and was seen no
more: five drops of blood fell down upon the table where they were playing,
which could never be washed out, (part of it is still kept in that town for a
monument) the blasphemer (to say the best of him) was fetched away presently
body and soul by the devil, with such an horrible noise, as affrighted the
whole town. The other two came to a miserable end shortly after. The truth of
this relation is further attested by Job Fincelius, and Philip Lonicerus,
Theat. histor. page 142.

yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee?] Chald, What have we
multiplied to speak before thee? As if they should say, ^t is not so much that
we have spoken, that thou should make such a business of it. Nothing more
ordinary with graceless men, then to elevate and extenuate: great sins with
them, are small sins, and small sins no sins: when as every sin should swell
like a toad in their eyes, and the abundant hatred thereof in their hearts,
should make them say all that can be said for the aggravation and detestation
of it: since there is as much treason in coining pence as bigger pieces; because
the supreme authority is as much violated in the one as in the other. But this
sin of theirs was no peccadillo, as appears by the following instance.

Verse 14. Ye have said, It is vain to serve God] Vulg. He is vain that serves
God. Ye are idle, ye are idle said Pharaoh to the Israelites when they would
needs go sacrifice, and to Moses and Aaron, Ye let the people from their works.
Any thing seems due work to a carnal mind saving Gods service: that is labor
lost, time cast away, they think. But this is their want of spiritual
judgment; they see not the beauty of holiness, they taste not how good the
Lord is: they discern not things that are excellent, they measure all by
present sight sense, and taste, as do children, swine and other bruit
creatures: And therefore they themselves are vani and vanissimi, as an
Expositor here speaks, vain, and most vain, and that for two reasons, and in
two respects. First, for that they take themselves to be servers of God.
Secondly, they stick in the bark, serve him with the outside only, honor him
with their lips, and not with their hearts, to bring him vein oblations, empty
performances, serve him wih shows and formalities which he delights not in, nay
he rejects them with infinite scorn, as he did the Pharisees devotions, Luke
16.15. because they were but skin-deep, and not heart-sprung; therefore they
were not a button the better for them. God loves and looks for truth in the
inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. he looks that men should do his will from the heart,
Ephesians. 6.6. and serve him in their spirits, Romans 1.9. In doing whereof there is
great reward, Psalm. 19.11. praemium ante praemium, that Euge of a good
conscience: this the stranger medleth not with, conceives not of, the wealth of
Gods pilgrims standing more in Jewels, and gold, things light o^ carriage, and
well portable, then in house and land. His servants have that here that does
abundantly pay them for their pains aforehand: righteousness being it own
reward; and they knowing within themselves, that they have in heaven a better
and an enduring substance. Heb. 10.
But hereaster oh the rich recompense that God shall make them! oh the heaped
up happiness of such at the last! when these vain talkers in the text, and all
that are of their mind, shall roar out Nos insensati, We fools counted their
lives madness: But now etc. See more of this in the following Note on ver. 16.
doctr. 5.

what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance] The Chaldee has it, Quod
mammon adeptisumus? what mammon or wealth have we gained? Mammonists are all
for gain, their very godliness is gain, still they have an Eagles-eye to the
prey, when they seem to sly highest toward heaven: If they may not get by God,
they soon grow weary of his work. What shows soever they make of better, sure
it is their belly is their God, they mind earthly tings. These will follow the
chase, as Jonathan, till they meet with the hony-combe; or as a curr follows
his master till he meet with a (...), These come to Christ (as that young
Pharisee did) hastily, but the (...); because they consider not. that with the
Lord are durable rich's Prv. 8.18. and that godliness as it has many cross,
so it has many con^^^ts against (...); Virtus lecy^^^^ habet in malis
like as no countly has more venomous creatures then Egypt, (...) Antidotes.
This there Sensualists, having not the spirit, understand not (...) hence their
complaint of a disappointment; casting a stir upon Gods (...) as those spies
did upon the promised land, Number. 14.
and ready to run back into Egypt toth air flesh-^ots, garli^k, and onions
there. Lo, this is the guise of (...), wath whom th^' the best religion that
brings greatest advantage (...) thi^ life. if the Ark bring a bl^ling with it,
as it did to Ohed-Edom, it (...) upon as worthy of entertainment; but if a
plague of poverty (...), these Philistines will be glad to ^id their hands of
it. The garishnesse of ho (...), wealth, and pleasures do so ^azle their eyes,
that they think it the only happiness to have and to hold. Such fools they
are, and such great beasts, if David may judge Psalm. 73.22. to fly a
fooles-pitch, and to goc hawking after that that cannot be had, as Solomon
faith Pro. 23.5. Or if had, yet cannot be held, as being of swisrest wing, and
(...) soon gone, as a post that passes by. Godliness has the preomise of
^^th lives: and we read of some godly men in scripture, that were richer then
any other. But God will have it sometims to be otherwise that godimesse might
be ad^^^^d for it self: and to show that his people serve him not for (...) Job
1.9. But that none serves God for naught, no not so much as (...) a d^^ or
(...). See before chapter p. 1.10.

that (...) have kept his ordinances] which if they had done indeed, they would
never have th^^ ^^gged, much less blasphemed: they would have accused
themselves, (...) livine providence; they would have said with holy Ezra, All
this is come upon us for our ^vill deeds, and for (...): and thou, our God,
have punished us less then our iniquities deserve. A^^^^test thou not be justly
angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should the no remnant
nor eseaping? Ezr. 9.1^, 14. Thus the good wheat falls low at the feet of the
fan^er, when the chaff (...) and flies at his face. Thus the sheep, when shorn,
H^at and looks downward: whereas the hang rbit wolf looks up and
howlesagainst heaven. Hypocrites use to wrangle with God and expostulate the
unkindness of his non-acceptance of their services as Esaias 58.3. Wherefore have
we fasted, say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we aslicted our soul,
and thou take no knowledge? God was, in their opinion, far too short and much
behind with them; and therefore much to blame, and they must give him the
telling of it; They do so: and they have their answer. So they shall have here
in the following verses, and the next chapter, which ought not to be divided
from this, as some conceive. They upbraid the Lord as with their observances,
so with their humiliations.

and that we have walked mournfully] Or, in black, the habit of mourners:
whence that of the Heathen Orator, Athenienses non nisi atrati etc. The
Athenians are never so good as when they are all in black; that is, under some
heavy affliction. And a great Satesman of this kingdom had this verse written
upon his study door.

Anglica gens est optima flens and pessima ridens. Great Britain all in black,
is in its best condition. But what is it to wear sackcloth, 1 King. 21.27.
and walk softly, with Ahab, when he had sold himself to do wickedly? what is
an humbling day without an humbled heart? not only an irreligious incongruity,
but an high provocation; like Zimri's act, when all the congregation were
weeping before the door of the Tabernacle. Surely God may say to such
pretenders, as Isaac did to his father, Behold the fire and the wood, but
where is the lamb for a sacrifice? or as Jacob did to his sons that brought him
the bloody coat, Lo here is the coat, but where is my child? your garments are
black, but your hearts and lives are much blacker. Go, cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purisie your hearts, you double-minded. Be afflicted, in good
earnest, and mourn to some purpose, and weep, soak and souce your selves in
tears of true repentance: let your sorrow for sin be deep and downright: turn
your laughter to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Jam. 4.8, 9. And then
come, let us reason together, says the Lord. All these unkind contestations
shall cease, and all loving correspondencies shall pass betwixt us. God had
said as much as all this before to them verse 7, 10, 11. Sed surdo fabulam,
their adamant was too hard to be mollified. Their bulrushes, though bowed down
for a day, while some storm of trouble was upon them, was now so pierkt up, as
if it would threaten heaven. witness their continued contumacy, their
robustious language in the next verse also, stouting it out still with God.

Verse 15. And now we call the proud happy] Such as, boiling and swelling with
spite and spleen against God and his people, deal arrogantly and insolently,
doing wickedly with both hands earnestly Exodus 18.11. and 21.11. and working
their own ends confidently and daringly: these we call and count happy, because
wealthy and well underlaid, as they say, because they live in the height of the
worlds blandishments. But the whole book of Ecclesiastes is a clear and full
confutation of this fond conceit, had they but ever read or regarded it. How
can the proud person be happy that has God for his professed enemy? what was all
Hamans honor to him, when the king frowned upon him? what was Ahah the better
for his ivory palace, his gold, and his jewels in every place, when the heaven
was brass above, the earth iron beneath? Surely God abhors pride as an
abomination of desolation: Psalm. 31.23.
and though he preserves the faithful, yet sooner or later he plensifully
rewards the proud doer. Like metal in the fire when they shine brightest,
they are nearest to melting: and like a bulging wall, they will shortly fall.
Swelling is a dangerous symptom in the body, so is pride in the soul.
Telluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant. Neither are they therefore to be
reputed ever awhit the more happy, because they come not in trouble like other
men, but prosper in their wickedness. For God is never more angry with such,
then when he seems best pleased. Pharaeh had fair weather made him, till he
was in the midst of the Sea: fatting cattle are but fitting for the shambles.
Never was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury
shall depart from thee, I will be quiet and no more angry Ezekiel. 16.42. Nor
Ephraims, as when he said, I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom. And, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone Hos. 4.14, 17. sc.
till I come and setch my full blow at him. Clem. Alexandrinus cites Plato
expressing himself thus: Although a righteous man be tormented, although his
eyes be dug out, yet he remains a blessed man: and the contrary.

they that work wickedness are set up] Heb. they are built up] sc. in
posterity, and prosperity of all sorts. The Psalmist expresses it thus: They
are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
Psalm. 17.
Thus God built the midwives houset, that is, he gave them children, for their
mercy to those new-born-babes Exodus 2.21. Thus he builded David an house 2 Samuel
7. And thus those that return to the Almighty have a gracious promise that they
shall be built up Job 22.23. That these stout and stift Stigmaticks were built
up and prospered, though (after so sweet an invitation) they turned not to him
that smot them, we need not wonder, since it is their portion, as David shows,
all they are like to have, or must everlook for. Besides, Is not God the true
proprietary of all? Is not the earth the Lord; purse, with the sulnesse
thereof, Mat. 20.13.
and may he not do with his own as he pleases? Add hereunto that what wicked
men have, they have it with a curse, and for mischief: their table is a snare
to them; they are like to pay dear for their sweet morsels, as Haman did for
his wine at Esthers banquet. Bernard calls the wicked man's prosperity
misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem, In Psalm 91.
a merey more cruel, then any adversity. Austin affirms, Nullum mare tam
profundum, quam est Dei cogitatio ut mali floreant etc. No sea is so deep as
the divine dispensation that good men should suffer, bad men prosper. They are
built up with blessings, as they say the Phoenix builds her nest with hot
spices, wherein she is afterward burned. They build as those at Babel, and
feather their nests, as if their lives were rivetted upon eternity: but as
their foundation is laid upon fire-work, so brimstone is scattered upon their
habitations Job 18.15. If the fire of Gods wrath but touch it, all will be
quickly consumed. Dioclesian that bloody persecutour despairing of ever rooting
out the Christian religion as he had endeavored to do, gave over his empire in
a discontent, and decreed to lead the rest of his life quietly. But he could
not escape so: For, after that, Fuseb. de vita Constant. lib. 5.
his house was wholly consumed with lightening, and a flame of fire that fell
from heaven, he hiding himself for fear of the lightening, died within a little
after. Their inward thought is (says the Psalmist of such wicked Atheists)
that their houses, (honors, riches, nephews) shall continue for ever: and
their dwelling place to all generations; they call their houses after their own
names; as Cain called his new-built city Enoch after the name of his son, that
he might leave him Lord Enoch of Enoch. Nevertheless man being in honor
abides not: he is like the beasts that perish Psalm. 49.11, 12. The use to be
made hereof see ver. 16. Be not thou afraid when (a wicked) one is made rich,
when the glory of his house is increased etc.

yea they that tempt God are even delivered] Still these Miscreants are
grunting out their grudges aginst God. What this sin here instanced, viz. of
tempting God is, has been showed before in the note on ver. 10. of this
chapter: Here it is to be taken for an audacious daring of God to take
vengeance, as Number. 15. These very worst fort of sinners are sometimes not only
spared, but prospered Ier. 12.1. etc. Their Epha is not yet full, their
iniquity not found to be hateful enough yet. But the wicked is kept (by the
patience of God) unto the day of destruction: and shall be brought forth to the
day of wrath, as condemned Malefactors are to execution, some by posterns and
by-gates, others thorough the market place: so here. He that has stolen a
good horse, ride gallantly mounted for present, till shortly after, followed
close by Hu^ and cry he is soon apprehended, sentenced, and brought to condign
punishment. And this is the very state of presumptuous sinners, and will be. I
know well, that because sentence is not presently executed, therefore the
hearts of the sons of men are set in them to do wickedly. Felix scelus virtus
vocatur, as we see here, The proud are called happy, Eccles. 8. Cicero.
because, for present, in prosperity. See the like Ier. 44.11. Genesis 30.18.
Dionysius, after the spoil of an Idol-temple, finding the winds favorable in
his navigation, Lo, said he, how the Gods approve of Sacrilege. But the
weakness of this argument see set forth by Solomon Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3. with the
Notes there. God gives outward things to the wicked, no otherwise then as if a
man should cast a purse full of gold into a jakes. He gives them riches to
furnish their indictment out of them: as Joseph put his cup into their fack to
pick a quarrel with them, and lay theft to their charge. The sunshine of
prosperity ripens their sin apace, and so fits them for destruction. Let God
therefore be justified, and every mouth stopped.

Verse 16. Then they that feared the Lord etc.] Then: Gen 6.12. Hos. 4.1.
when all flesh had corrupted their ways: and the whole world turned Atheists.
Then when there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land
(none, to speak of) but that it was even darkened with profaneness, as Egypt
was with those very grievous locusts that covered the eye thereof, Exodus 10.14,
15. Then when the faithful city was become an harlot: Esaias 1.21, 22.
her silver turned into dross, her wine mixed with water: her people not dilute
only, but dissolute: her self exaurea facta est argentea, ex argented ferred,
ex serred, terrea (as One once said of Rome) of gold become (...), of (...)
iron, of iron earth, or rather muck.

(...) the Lord] Those few names that had not desiled their garments in so
(...) a season: Rev. 2.4. 1 Jch. 5.18.
but had kept themselves unspotted of the world, undefiled in the way; so as
that that wicked One had not touched them, had not thrust his deadly sting into
them, had not transformed them into sins image. These stood up to stickle for
God, to stop the mouth of blasphemy, and to stablish one another in persuasion
of Gods holy truth, and constant care of his dear children.

spoke often one to another] Montanus renders it, Tune vastati sunt timentes
Deminum; sc. ab impijs and Atheis impune cos invadentibus; That is, Then were
those that seared the Lord Wasted and destroyed, viz. by those wicked Atheists,
who fell from fierce words, to bloody blows: so the word is used, 2 Chronicles.
22.10. Psalm. 2.5. But this is far set, and nothing so agreeable to the mind of
the Holy Ghost here, as our English after other approved Translations. It is
the same word that is used verse 13. Those spoke not so much against God, as
these did for him, and about him to each other, Heb. 12.13.
for mutual confirmation, that that which was halting happily might not be
turned out of the way, but healed rather. Great is the benefit of Chrillian
conference, for strengthening the weak knees, and comforting the feeble minded.
Job 6.25.
How Forcible are right words? One seasenable truth falling upon a prepared
heart, has often a strong and sweet operation: as some speeches of Staupicius
had upon Luther: Lise of L^^k. by Mr Clack page 85.
Of whom it is also storted, that he was much cheared up by conference with an
old Priest discoursing about (...) by faith, and explaining the Articles of the
Creed to him. Latimer likewise was much furthered by hearing Bilneys
confession, and having frequent conference with him, at Heretikes-Lill, as the
place where they most used to walk in the fields at Cambridge, Acts and Mon.
fol. 1574.
was called long after. Surely, as a little boat may land a man into a large
Continent: so may a sew good words suggest matter s^^^^ient for a whole lives
meditation. This (...) well knows, and therefore as he did what he could to
keep God and Daniel asunder, Dan. 6.7. So he does still to keep the saints one
from another, that they may not build up themselves in their most Loly faith
pray in the holy Chost, pull one another out of the fire, etc. How were the
Ap^^ies persecuted for their Christian meetings, the primitive Christians
banished and confined to Hes and Mines, Jude 2^, 23.
where they could not have access one to another, as Cyprias complains: the
poor faints here in times of Popery, (...)
meeting as they could for mutual edification; and therefore accused of
sedition: for prevention whereof it was ordained, that if (...) should flock
secretly together above the number of six, they should be attached of treason:
(...)
so the Protestants at Milcenburg in Cermany were forbidden upon pain of death
to speak together of Scripture-matters And at Nola the Jesuits straightly
charged the people not to talk of God, (...)
either in good sort or in bad. See more of this in my Treatise on these words,
called The kighteous man's Recomponse. Chap. 4. Docl. 3. annexed to this
Commentary.

and the Lord hearkened and heard] He not only heard, but hearkened, or
lisiened; Gist us hit est diligenter auscultantis, Esaias 32.3. It imports, not
only attention of body, but intention of mind, (as when a man listeneth as
for life, and makes hard shift to hear all) and retention of memory. For which
purpose also a book of remembrance is here said to be written before him, or
by his appointment. Liber monnmemi, A book of Acts and Monuments, in allusion
to the custom of Kings. See Esth. 2.23. Tamerlan (that warlike Scythian) had
always by him a catalogue of the names and good deserts of his servants, Turk,
hist. sol. 227.
which he daily perused, and whom he duly rewarded: not needing by them, or
any others in their behalf, to be put in remembrance. Much less does the Lord,
who bottles up the tears of his people, files up their prayers, puts all their
holy speeches and practices on record, that he may make all honorable mention
of them at the last day, in that great Amphitheatre, that general Assembly:
not once remembering any of their misdeeds, Mat. 25.35. Heb. 8.12. See more of
this in the Righteous man's Recompense, Chap. 5. and 6.

and that thought upon his Name] That had God before their eyes, Psalm. 10.8.
that minded his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. that thought upon his commandments to do
them; Psalm. 103.18. that can truly say with the Psalmist, How precious are thy
thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum of them, Psalm. 139.17. See more
of this verse in my Righteous man's Recompense, Chap. 7. Doct. 16.

Verse 17. And they shall be mine] by peculiar right: Et suum cuique pulchrum:
we all affect and admire our own things most: God chooses them for his love:
and loves them for his choice. I will be a Father unto them: and they shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. which is all one
with that here, They shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts. Concerning all
which see my Righteous man's Recompense, Part 2. Chap. 1. and 3.

In the day when I make up my jewels] viz. from the worlds malignities, and
misusages. They shall not plunder him of his Jewels, rob him of his chief
treasure. None shall take, or pluck them out of Christ's hands, Job. 10.29. they
that attempt it, shall find it a work not seisable. When one desired to see
Great Alexanders treasure, he bade one of his servants show him not his gold
and silver, but his friends. Liban. prog^^. Chria. 1.
Henceforth I call you not servants -- but I have called you friends, Joh.
15.15. And a friend is as a man's own soul, Deuteronomy. 13.6. The Church is the dearly
beloved of Gods soul, Jer. 12.7. yea his dearly beloved soul, as the
Septuagint, and Vulgar render it, etc. See my Righteous man's Recompense, Part
2. Chap. 2.

and I will spare them] Or, indulge them, as David did Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
21.7. Vide ubi supra, Chap. 4. and 5.

Verse 18. Then shall ye return and discern] See The Righteous men's Recompense,
ad calcem.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. FOR behold the day cometh] This Chapter should not be divided from
the former: for here Gods different dealing with the righteous and the wicked,
proposed in the former verse, is further amplified by diverse effects of
Christ's coming in the flesh. And if any ask, says an Interpreter, how this was
verisied of that his first coming? we answer, It was inchoative, and by way of
preparation then: and shall be consummate in the day of the last judgment,
This day comprehends all that time that is called by the Apostle, the ends of
the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. and the world to come, Heb. 2.5. all the
administrations of Christ's kingdom, from his Incarnation to the end of all
things, which also is at hand, and, as it were, under view already, Behold, The
day, that notable day, so long-looked for by the Jews, who boasted of a
Redeemer, and promised themselves all possible comforts then: Tune ^n^m Deus
nos dignabitur clarissima visione, (says Jachiades on Dan. 12.4.) tunc
intelligemus res ipsas prout sunt. Then shall we have a most clear vision of
things as they are, etc. Lo that day comes: not such a day as you imagined,
but like that in Amos, A day of darkness, and not light: even very dark, Am.
5.20. Dan. 3. Ezekiel 7.6.
and no brightness in it. A day that shall burn like an oven: Nebuchadnezzars
oven, seven times more heated then it was wont. This day is come, the end is
come, it watches for thee, behold it is come. It was fulfilled in part upon
this people at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and their miserable
exile ever since for their unbelief. Howbeit, all these are but the beginning
of sorrows: their present sorrows but a typical hell, the pile whereof is sire
and much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of fire, does kindle it.
Isa. 30 33.
It is said to be prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25.41. as if the
All-powerfull wisdom did deliberate, and, as it were, sit down and devise most
tormenting temper, for that most formidable fire. The fire of the last day
shall surely be very terrible, when all the world shall be on a light fire, and
wicked men shall give account with flames about their ears, with the elements
melting and falling like scalding lead, or burning bell-mettall on their heads.
But all this will be but a shadow, or spark of that fire of hell, the smoke
whereof ascends for ever and ever, Rev. 19.3. Some have held the fie of hell
to be no true material, and corporeal fire, but metaphorical, qualem novit
Deus. The most conspire in the contrary Tenent: because bodies are to be
punished by it. De civ. Dei lib. 21. c. 10.
How spu its are also thus tormented as the rich gluttons Luke 16. Austin sits
down and admires he mystery: He tells us that for vehemence of heat, it exceeds
our sire, as far as ours does fire that is painted on a wall. I would we had not
cause to complain that preaching of hell is but as the painting of fire: which
men can look on and handle without hurt or affrightment. Esse aliquos Manes Nec
pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum are lavantur. Juven.
Surely he that observes the impiety of this age, may say to us as Cato did to
Caesar, Credo, quae de info is dicuntur, falsa existimas, I believe you think
hell to be a very fable.

and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly etc.] Those proud whom you
pronounced happy chap. 3.15. because jolly, and full of worldly prosperity,
rich and renowned: those workers of wickedness whom you looked upon as set up,
built upon a firm basis: God shall abase every one that is lifted up, he shall
repay the wicked-doer to his face Deuteronomy. 7.10. and into his bosom Esaias 65.6.
What ever arrows are in the bow-string, will one day sly and hit, and strike
deep. They shall be as stubble, says the text, as stubble that is fully dried
Nah. 1.18. even when they be folden together as thorns. Who would set these
briers and thorns against me in battle? says the Lord: I would go thorough
them, I would burn them together Esaias 27.4. Did he not deal so by Pharaoh,
Senacherib, Herod, the Primitive persecutours, etc? Those mighty Magnifico's
that here seemed fortes, ferrei, and aenei, strong, and made up, as it were of
brass and iron, shall appear to be but as stubble that cannot stand before
Gods fire.

the day that comes shall burn them up] Heb. shall so burn them ut flamma ex
ipsis excitetur, as to set them aflame. Here Ghrist burns up his enemies with
invisible judgments, inward terrors and torments, pangs and plunges, a very
hell in their consciences, a fore-tast of eternal torment, (as was to be seen
in Belshazzar, and our Rich. 3.) But what willthey do at the last day, when the
law they shall be judged by is a fiery law Deuteronomy. 33.2. the tribunal of fire.
Ezak. 1.27 the Judge a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29. his attendants flaming
Seraphims, his pleaing with sinners in flames of fire 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. the place
of punishment, a lake of fire fed with a river of brimstone Isa. 30.33? what
can be the fruit of such a fiery proceeding but utter excision? Surely this
fi^e will leave them neither root, nor branch.

Verse 2. But unto you that fear my name What shall be the condition of
gra^^esse persons, has been said already. Now for the righteous, that they
have not served God in vain, it shall well appear by the many benefits they
shall reap and receive by Christ: five whereof are he^e recited. 1 Imputation
of Christ's righteousness; which is compared to the illightening of this lower
world by the beams of the Sun. 2. Remission of sins, which is compared to the
healing or diseases. 3. Regeneration, which is likened to a sick man's walking
forth, when he is somewhat recovered. 4. Spirunall grouth, as calves of the
stall. 5. Victory over all enemies corporal and spiritual, which shall be
trodden under foot, as ashes of the furnace ver. 3.

shall the Sun of righteousness arise] So Christ is called (as by other
Prophets Isa. Psalm. 84.11.
60.1, 2, 19. Luks 1.78. Ioh. 8.12.) to signific the joy of Gods elect at the
sight of him: as those that have long layne in darkness count it a Pleasant
thing to see the light. A Sun of righteousness he is said to be. 1. As
afferting and vindicaing the righteousness of God, called in question by those
Blasphemers 2. As bestowing upon his people a double righteousness (Imputed
and Imparted) as the Sun does his light Ioh. 1.16. It is further said here,
that he shall arise, that is, he shall appear and show himself on earth, who
now lies hid, as it were in heaven; as the material Sun does under the
Horizon. God was manifested is the stesh 1 Timothy 3.16. Manifested out of the
bosom of his father, out of the womb of his mother, out of the types of the law
etc. In his Nativity he came forth as the Sun does, as a bridegroom out of his
chamber. In the whole course of his life he rejoiced as a Giant to run his
race. He enlightened and warmed the dark and dry hearts of men, he filled them
with the fruits of righteousness Ioh. 15.5. He could not be stayed or stopped
in his course: He made his gospel to run and be glorified. He was and is still
in continual motion for the good of his Church: as the Sun in heaven is for
the good of the world. He went under a cloud in his passion, and brake forth
again in his Resurrection. From heaven he daily darts forth his beams of
righteousness, and showers down all spiritual blessings in heavenly
privileges Ephesians. 1.3. The Sun sucks up foul water from the earth, draws it up
into the ayte, not to hold it there; but first purifies it, and then distilles
it down again with a fattening and fructifying property. Hereupon the thankful
earth brings forth most fair and fragrant fruits and flowers etc. Semblably
this ^un of righteousness took on him our sins and miseries, sordes nostras
induit, assumed our humane nature, not to retain it, and glorify it in himself
alone, Philip. 1 10
but that we might be conglorisied, and, in the mean space, filled with those
fruits of holiness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of
God. And as the Sun the nearer he runns to the earth, the weaker he is in
operation (as in wintertime) But the higher in heaven, the more effectual: So
while Christ was not yet ascended, the holy Ghost and his grace, were not in
that full measure imparted, nor Churches gathered as afterward Ioh. 7.39.
Lastly at that last and great day he will show himself in special manner a Sun
of righteousness: clearing all obscurities, bringing to light the hidden
things of darkness, causing his peoples most holy faith, that now lies hid in
great part, to be found to praise, honor and glory, Chearing up their spirits
after manifold tribulations, healing all their spiritual maladies; for he comes
with healing under his wings] and making them as so many Sampsons (whose name
signifies, a little Sun) in the Noon of their full strength. Ipse est ergo
nester Apolle sanitatis praeses. A Lap. Solisus.
For the righteous shall shine as he Sun in the kingdom of their Father Mat.
13. I shall shat up this discourse with that observation of an Ancient: When
the Sun of righteousness was yet in his Mothers womb, he might be said to be in
Virgo: when on the Cross, in Taurus: when he rose from death, in Leo: when he
shall come again to judgment, in Libra. And as when the Sun is in Libra the
day is of an equal length: so when Christ comes, all shall be perfected.

with healing in his wings] that is, in his beams. This implies sickness in
all, to whom Christ comes: the world being as it were a great Hospital, or
Nesoromium (though few feel it) and that true of every person that is spoke of
the whole people Esaias 1.6. The whole head is sick etc. O my head, my head, said
the Shunamites son: my belly, my belly, faith the Prophet, my leaenesse, my
leanenesse etc. And surely it were happy if men would be more sensible of their
malady, and make out to this Jehovah Rophe, this Almighty Physician, Exodus
15.26.
that wants neither will nor skill to cure all that come unto him. See him
hanging out his tables as it were, and setting to sale his eye salve Rev. 3.18.
for there he begins the cure Act. 26.18. Hear him. 1. Complaining of our
dullness, backwardness, frowardness Ior. 8.22. Ezech. 24.13. Hos. 7, 1. 2
Wishing we had more care of our poor souls. Oh that this people were wise etc.
Why will ye dye? 3. Threatening Ezekiel. 24.13. 4. Promising Hos. 14.4. mat.
11.28. 5. Performing Psalm. 103.3. 2 Cron. 30.20. Lastly providing all sorts of
physic for us preventing, purging, restoring, corrosives of the law, lenitives
of the Gospel, plasters of his on blood (for here Sanguis medici est curaio
phrenetici) and requiring us no more but to come unto him (as they of old did
to the brazen serpent) with sorrow for sin, and faith in his name, having a
good opinion of our Physician, and casting our selves wholly upon him for cure:
Calling upon him, as blind Bartimaeus did, and crying out as that Martyr did at
the stake, Son of God shine upon me; and immediately the Sun shone out of a dark
cloud so full in his face, Act. and Mor. fol. 1398.
that he was constrained to look another way. What shall I say more? this
blossed Sun of Righteousness must be sought in the West, if we will get the
kingdom (as Strato's servant in Justin did by the advice of his master, Lib.
18.
whom he had preserved) upon the cross I mean, and in the state of his
Abasement: so shall we be sure to find healing in his wings, that is, the
gracious influence of the holy Spirit convaying the virtue of Christ's blood to
the conscience, as the beams of the Sun do the heat and influence thereof to
the earth; thereby calling out the herbs and flowers, and healing those
deformities that winter had brought upon it.

and ye shall go forth] To show that ye are thoroughly healed, ye shall rise up
and walk? Where the spirit is, there is liberty: live things love to be
stirring: 2 Cor. 3.17.
and those that are restored to health after sickness, are not satisfied till
they can go about their business in their accustomed strength, Quod sanitas in
corpore, id sanctitas in cord. Holiness is to the soul, what health is to the
body. Let men (...) out, that Christ Jesus has wrougtht a cure upon their
souls, by being (...) and (...) in his work. Life consists in action Es^y
38.16. O Lord by (...) and in all the^^ things is the life or my spirit, says
Hezekiah: And, (...) in them says the Lord; as the fish lives in (...) lives
in the oil, and as the creature by his food. Up (...); Live betime, live
quickly, and apace. Some men live (...), then others in a month: as wi^e men
speak more in two words, (...) two hundred, or as one piece of gold is more
worth then twenty of (...) what to do for God, as David did Psalm. 116.12. serve
out your (...) as he Act. 13.36. do not idle it out, wear out, do not wast out:
slame out, Hie suns est Vacla.
(...) out: burnout, be not blown out. Be not buried alive as (...) out of the
world ver. 23. as ^acia in Seneca. Fall not from (...), (...)
as leaves in Autumn, as that saplesse fellow Nabal did: and as (...) in Sr.
Jude, Without fruit, twice (...), plucked uply the roots. God expects that,
(...) first by him, we should act as the inferiors do, when (...) by the
Superior, that when he has infused sap, we should fructify, (...) when he
has tuned u^ and does touch us, we should make music, when he (...) willing,
he requires that we both will and work that which is (...) When we set victuals
before an hungry man, we expect he should (...) socking child to draw the breast
when it is once put to the (...) as we use to say He that made us without us,
does (...); 2 (...)
but expects that our wills, which at first conversion were (...), should be
after ward (...) in adding to (...) out our salvation with sear and trembling
Thil. ^.12. Here^^ (...) us, as our Saviou^^d d^w^ finish the work which (...)
to do (...) 17.4. This work (...) him with our bodies (...) it be (...). 1.19.
Ye to glorify him (...) bodies, and nour (...), which (...) Cor. 16.2.20. God
selis ^s (...) of grace for sweat, (...) One. He gives it as (...) gave Ruck
corn, chap. 2.1^, 16, 17. He could have given her at (...) Ephah of (...); and
it had been no more charge to him: but he will have her gather it, glean it,
beat it out, use her endeavor, and that should be the price she should pay for
it. So here Gods people healed must go forth or leep about, use legs and have
(...) etc. This I had because (...). 119.^6. What had he? (...) an ability to
keep Gods law ver. 55. he kept it: because he kept it: (...) every new act of
obedience fits the soul for a following act (...) And to you that hear shall
be more given Mark. 4.24.

and grow up as calve^ of the stall] ye shall battle and (...) both in flesh
and fat, (...)1 2. Ioh. 15.2.
as ^^. David expound it: your (...) shall be (...) and (...) as waters of the
sanctuary they shall use higher, as threes plant (...) paradise, they shall
bring so th^n^w fruit every month: acth (...) shall shine more and more unto
the perfect day Pro. 4.18. 2 Timothy 3.13.
when the (...) growing worse and worse stumble in darkness ver. 19. so that
they lie down in for^^^ Isa. 50.10. Th^^ blessing on man in the first creation
was increase and multiply: in the second, Grow in grace Esaias 61.^, 11. A
Christian has his degrees of growth, and his several ages, of childhood,
youth, o^ will-grown age, full-grown, and old age 1 Ioh. 2.^^. These things
write I unto you, that believe in the name of the Son of God, that ye may
believe in the name of the Son of God, says the same Apostle that is, that ye
^^a^ grow in that (...), as ye grow in days and: (...), proceeding from faith
to faith: as the Church in the Canticles has her first light like the day
dawning, her second beauty like the Moon, her third degree like the Sun Cdnt.
6.10. A Christian (though in some sense perfect) yet has he still his
Plus-ultra, and may take for Motto Charles the fifth his Vlterius Further yet:
he must be still adding grace to grace, that he may have on entiance further
and further into Christ's kingdom 2 Pet. 1.5. and 11. as by step and stain they
went up to Solomon's temple. And the Apostle there gives us to understand, that
those that thus add not to their stock of grace shall have little comfort
either from the time past, for they shall forget that they were purged from
their sins; or from thoughts of the time to come, for they shall not be able to
see things far off ver. 9. because they delight not in high-flying as Eagles:
their wings, as the Ostriches, do little more then bear them above-ground. Many
care for no more grace then will keep life and fool together, that is, foul and
hell asunder. This is a low and unworthy strain, and comes not near that of St.
Paul, who set up for his mark the resurrection of the dead Phil. 3.10. that is,
that perfection of holiness that accompanies the refurrection. To the
attaining hereunto he followed har^on, reaching forth, and stretching out head,
hands, and whole body, to lay hold on the high prize proposed unto him. ver.
12, 13, 14. and would have all men to be thus minded. Runners in a race look
not how much they have run, but how much remameth: and although moderate in the
beginning, (for hot at hand feldom holds out) yet the nearer they grow to the
goal, the faster the speed their course; that their last days may be their
best days: accounting that day lost wherein they have not some sensible
commings in from Christ; like as good husbands in dead times when stirrings
fail, are discontented, when they have had no takings.

Verse 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked] Christ the Champion of his Church
has already won the field, and will shortly set his peoples feet upon the
necks of all their enemies. The broken horns of Satan himself shall be the
trumpets of their triumph and the cornets of their joy Romans 16.20. See what
honor all the saints have in this respect Psalm. 149.7, 8, 9. See what comfort
Ioh. 16.33. See what conquests Romans 8.37. How much more at the last day, when
the thrones shall be set etc. Mat. 19.28. Rabbi David Kimchi, understands this
text of temporal victories only. And no wonder, as being a Jew, and minding
earthly things, he ascends no higher. Such grasshoppers, if at any time they
leap above the earth, they soon fall down to it again: and as they are of the
earth, so they speak of the earth, and the earth hears them. Ioh. 3.31.
Petrus a Figuiero writing upon those words in the former chapter ver. 12. For
ye shall be a delightsome land, Nota modum loquendi, says He: Mark that
expression, He says not your land shall be a delightsome land, but ye shall be
etc. Forte exim tacit Judaeos percellit terrameos vocando. It may be the Lord
hereby closely meets with them for their earthly mindedness: as those that by
promise of earthly blessings, were soonest prevailed with to serve God, when as
these should have been but as steps or stirrops to mount their hearts up to a
desire of the things above. Victory in their sense is doubtless a special
mercy: and is so promised to the obedient Deuteronomy. 28.13. The Lord shall make thee
the head only and not the tail: and thou shall be above only, and not beneath
etc. Hence the Israelites, delivered from the Egyptians at the red sea, sang
The Lord is a man of war Exodus 15.3. the Chaldee there has it, The Lord and
Victour of Wars. The Grecians delivered from the Persians (vanquished and
driven out by Themistocles) called their Jupiter, thereupon (...) The
Deliverer. It was the thankful acknowledgement of General, Captains, and
soldiers at Edge-hill-fight, that the Lord was seen in the Mount, Never less
of man in such a business, never more of God. But what shall it prosit a man
to conquer countries, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and yet be vanquished of vices? to tread upon his enemies, and yet be taken
captive by the devil at his pleasure? to command the whole world, as those
Persian kings, and yet were commanded by their concubines, so by their base
lusts, by yielding whereunto they give place unto the very devil, and receive
him into their very bosoms Ephesians. 4.26. who therehence leads them away naked and
barefoot, as the Assyrian did the Egyptians Isa. 29.2. How much better
Valentinian the Emperor, who said upon his deathbed that among all his
victories over his enemies this one only comforted him, viz. that by the grace
and power of Christ Jesus he had got the better of his corruptions, and was now
more then a Couquerour, even a Triumpher.

for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet] Even the ashes of that
stubble burnt in Christ's oven Verse 1. This shows their utter and ignominious
destruction. And the like is foretold of mystical Babylon Rev. 18. Tota eris
in cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses, sang Sibylla of old. Fiat, Fiat. Our
corruptions also shall one day be incinerated (they are already buried Romans
6.4. Col. 2.12.) the fiery spirit of Christ will do with the body of sin, as
the King of Moab did with the King of Edom Am. 2.1. burn its bones into lime.

In the day that I shall do this] sc. partly here, but perfectly at the last
day. Mean while sin may rebel in Gods people, but it cannot reign. Satan may
nibble at their heel, but he cannot come at their head: the world may kill
them, but cannot hurt them: Re of good cheer, says Christ, I have overcome the
world, Joh. 16.33. All evils and enemies shall cooperate for their good, Romans
8.28.

says the Lord of Hosts] Who has also said, Heaven and earth shall pass, but
not one jot or tittle of my word etc.

Verse 4. Remember ye the law of Moses] viz. Now henceforth, in the fail of
Prophecy, for Malachy knew, that after him until the days of John Baptist, no
Prophet should arise. Hence this exhortation, to read and remember the Law, as
leading them to Christ: the Law I say in all the parts of it; not excluding the
Prophets, those Interpreters of the Law, and most excellent Commentaries
thereupon, with like reverence to be read and received. The Jews at this day
read in their Synagogues two lessons: One out of the Law, by some chief person,
another out of the Prophets correspondent to the former in argument, but is
read by some boy, or mean companion: for they will in no sort do that honor,
neither attribute they that authority to any part of the Bible, that they do to
their Law. But this their way is their folly: Psalm. 49.13
yet their posterity opprove their sayings, as the Psalmist speaks in another
case. Two things offer themselves to our observation from these first words.
First, the little coherence that this verse has with the former: the Prophet
choosing rather to fall abruptly upon this most needful, but too too much
neglected duty of remembering the Law, then not at all to mention it. See the
like Romans 16.17. where the Apostle breaks off his salutations, to warn them of
their danger by seducers: and that done, returns thereto again. Secondly, In
the Hebrew word rendered Remember, Buxtorf. in Comment. Mafor. c. 14.
there is in many Bibles, a great Zain: to show, as some think, the necessity
and excellency of this duty of remembering the law of Moses. It is well enough
known, that since the fall man's soul is like a filthy pond, wherein fish die
soon, and frogs live long: profane matters are remembered, pious passages
forgotten. Our memories are like sieves, or nets, that retain chafe and
palterment, let go the good grain, or clear water: Gods word ^uns thorough us,
as water runs thorough a riven vessel And as hour-glasses, which no sooner
turned up and filled, but are presently running out again to the last sand, so
is it here. And yet the promise of salvation is limited to the condition of
keeping in memory what we have read or heard, 1 Cor. 15.2. And David's character
of a blessed man is, that he meditateth in the Law day and night. Psalm 1.2
Hoc primum re^etens opus, Nor. ep. 6.
hoc postremus omittens. Bishop Babington had a little Book, containing three
leaves only, which he turned over night and morning. The first leaf was black,
to inminde him of hell and Gods judgments due to him for sin: The second
rod, to mind him of Christ and his passion: The third white, to set forth Gods
mercy to him through the merits of his Son. in his Justification and
sanctification. The Law of the Lord, as it is perfect in it self, so it is
right for all holy purposes, Psalm. 19.^, 8 It serves to discover sin, Romans
3.20. and 7.9. shows the punishment due to sin, Gal. 3.10. scourges men to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. And is a perfect rule of obedience: it being so penned that
every man maythink it speaks de se, in re s^a, as ^thanesivs says of the book
of Psalms: and must therefore be of all acknowledged to be (...), Gods own
invention. Demost.
Moses was but the Penman only, though it be here called his Law: because God
gave him the Moral Law written with his own hand, Deuteronomy. 10.2. adding it to the
promise made to Abraham, that thereby guilt being discovered, etc. men might
acknowledge the riches of free grace, and mercy: and that they might walk (as
Luther has it) in the heaven of the promise, Gal. 3.19
but in the earth of the law: (that, in respect of believing, this of obeying)
that they might live as though there were no Gospel, die as though there were
no Law, pass the time of this life in the wilderness of this world under the
conduct of Moses, but let none but Joshuah ( Jesus) bring them over to Canaan
the promised land. This the generality of the Jews could not skill of, (though
the Morall-law drove them to the Ceremonial, which was then, Christ in figure,
as it does now drive us to Christ in truth) they would needs have Moses for a
Savior: and being ignorant of Gods righteousness (wilfully ignorant) they go
about to establish their own, Romans 10.3. and so lose all. They jear at an
imputed righteousness; and say, That every fox must pay his own skin to the
fleare. They blaspheme Jesus Christ, and curse him in a close abbreviature of
his name; and call those among them that convert to Christianity Mtshumadim,
that is lost, or undone. Buxtorf syn. Jud. cap. 5. Schicard. de jure reg. Jiebr
Moses Law they extol without meature: It must not be written on any parchment
but what is made of the skin of a clean beast: nor read but in a clean place.
No man must touch it but with the right hand, and not without a kiss of
reverence (they usually carry it in procession about their synagogue, with many
ornaments of crowns and scepters, the children kissing it as it passes by
them) No man must sit in the presence of it, nor so much as spet before it,
etc. Whereas the Gospel of grace they utterlly reject, and abominate, as a
Volume of vanity: That Italian Translation that they had of the New Testament,
is called in, and taken from them, Evangel^^^ Aven gelaion Eliah in Thesh Rad
gillaion. Bux^orf syne^. cap. 1 p. 4.
for their horrible abuse of it: this being still the twelfth Article of their
Creed; I believe with a perfect faith, that the Messiah is yet to come. No
marvel if the Apestle would not have us ignorant, that blindness in part is
happened to Israel, Romans 11.23. That lesser part, or rather particle of them
that are proselyted to our religion, they pretend that they are none other then
poor Christians hired to personate their part. Voyage into Levant.
And yet they give complete dispensation to counterfeit Christianity, even to
the degree of Priesthood. In the day of their expiation their Rabbi does
absolve them from all their perjuries and deceits used against Christians. He
also assures them that they are not bound to keep any oath but what is sworn
upon their own Torah, or Law of Moses, brought out of their Synagogue; Weemse.
to the reading whereof they depute one third part of their day: and wherein
they are generally so expert, that they have it as ready as their own names.
The mischief of it is, Facilius qu^^ nomen soum recitat Joseph. Cont Appion.
lib. 2.
that they are too much affixt to it, and will needsly be saved by it; which
the Law cannot do for them, as being weak through the flesh, Rom 8 3. The Law
is a yoke of bondage, as Hierome calls it: and they who look for
righteousness from thence, are like oxen who coil and draw, and when they have
done their labor, are fitted for slaughter. Luther fitly calls such drudges,
the devils Martyrs: they suffer much, and take much pains to go to hell. And in
another place he says, Qui scit inter Logem and Evangelium disting siere,
grati^^ agat Dto, and sciat se esse Theologum. He that can rightly distinguish
between Law and Gospel, has cause to praise God: and may well pass for a
Divine.

Moses my servant] A far higher title then Son of Pharaohs daughter: for
this was to be Pharaohs God, Exodus 7.1. and higher then the kings of the earch,
Psalm. 89.27. No marvel though Moses so esteemed it: (...).
when N^^^t king of Romans an Heathen did: and Augustus the Emperou^,
c^^igratius fuit (...) pietatis quam potestatis, says Tertultian, he preserred
pretty before Monarchy: so did those three succeeding Emperors, C^^stantine,
(...) and (...), who called themselves Vassallos Christi, the vassals of
Christ, as (...) reports. It was noted, as a great both presage and desert of
D^^ins his ruin, when in his proud Embassy to Alexanaer he called himself the
King of kings, and Cousin of the gods: but for Alexander, he called him his
servant. That was worse in John Oneal, father to the Earl of Tirone, that
rebel, Anno 1398 who blasphemously inscribed himself in all places: 1 great
John Oneal, Cousin to Christ, friend to the Queen of England, and foe to all
the world etc. Camd Eliz. 2 Pet. 2
What big b^bbles of words were these, as Peter calls them? His pretended
Successor styles himself the servant of Gods servants: and one day in the
year, in an apish imitation of our Savtour, washes certain men's feet. But he
acts as Domin^s ^^gnorum mun^i, which is one of the Devils titles: and can
endure to be called by his Parasites. Dominus Deus noster Papa: Our Lord God
the Pope. Moses held it honor enough to be the servant of the Lord, and yet he
was Vir D^o long acceptissimus quo (...) habuit antiqua aetas, mitius,
sapientius, sanctius, highly accepted in heaven, and the most meek, wise, and
holy man that Antiquity ever had or mentioned, as Bellarmine himself
acknowledges.

which I commanded him in Horeb] Moses then was not the Lawmakers, (as Solon,
Lycurgus, Zaleucus, etc.) but only Gods Minister to utter what he would have
him deliver; or, at utmost, a Mediator, Gol. 3.19. not of expiation (for so
Christ only) but of communication of the Law to all Israel, Exodus 20.19.
wherein he was faithful in all Gods house as a servant, Hob. 3.5. Famulus
inginuus, a servant of the better sort, (...).
a man of worship, as the word there seems to import. The place where Moses
received the Law is mentioned, Horeb (the same with Sinai, Act. 7.30. Exodus
19.1, 18.) to inmind them of the terror of the Lord on that mountain, when
God came down upon it with ten thousand of his Saints: Deuteronomy. 33.2
from his right hand went a fiery law for them, Heb. a fire of law. And surely
that fire wherein the law was given, and shall one day be required, is in it
still, and will never out. Hence are those terrors, which it flashth in every
conscience that has felt remorse of sin. Every man's heart is an Horeb: and
resembles to him both heaven and hell. The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.

to all Israel] And it is reckoned as a singular privilege to that people,
Neh. 9.14. Romans 9.4. Prospers conceit was, that Judaei were so called because
they received Jus Dei, the Law of God. Josephus calls their Commonwealth a
Theocratie, or God-government. That of Philo is not so solid, that their law
was given in a wilderness, because it is to be learned in a wilderness,
seeing there we cannot be hindered by the multitude. But what a wretched
conceit is that of the Jews at this day, that the law of Nature shall bring to
heaven those that observe it: but the Hebrews (unto whom the Law of Moses was
peculiarly given) by keeping it, shall have a prerogative of glory? How shall
the Lion of the tribe of Judah roar upon them at that day, and say, Do not
think that I will accuse you: there is one that accuses you, Joh. 5.45.
even Moses in whom ye trust. Get you to him whom ye have chosen: but cold
comfort ye are like to have from him: a very froward generation he ever found
you, children in whom is no faith, Deuteronomy. 33.20.

with the statutes and judgements] that is, with the Ceremonial and Judicial
Law. But what meant that false Rabbin to add to this Text these following
words, Quamdiu non venit dies ju^icy; R. David.
Till the day of judgment comes: as if men were bound till then to the
observation of the ceremonial and judicial Law? But it is ordinary with those
Jew-Doctours to corrupt the Text for their own purpose; adding, and altering at
their pleasure. The judicial law was fitted to the jews, and was the best that
they could suffer, as Solon said of the Athenian Laws. The ceremonial law was
their Gospel, pointing them to Christ: and therefore abolished by him, as
having no use in the Church after his death, but by accident. As for the Moral
law, (called here by an excellency the Law of Moses) it is established for ever
in heaven: Psalm 119.89
and albeit some duties of certain commandments shall cease when we come to
heaven, yet the substance of every one remains. This perpetuity of the moral
law was noted by engraving of it in stone, Exodus 34.27 2 Cor. 3.7. The Jewshave
a saying, That God has more respect to the letters of the Law, then to the
stars of heaven, Mat. 5.
And Christ either alludes to, or confirms it in that saying of his, Heaven and
earth shall pass before one jot or tittle of the Law pass. Think not that I
am come to destroy the Law ( viz. the Moral Law) or the Prophets, who press
Moral duties, as explainers of the law: they do as it were unfold and draw out
that Arras which was folded together before. These therefore together with the
Law of Moses must be daily and duly read and remembered. Lege Melachim meum;
meum, inquam meum: quicquid enim didicimus and tenemus nostrum est. rolog in
lib. Reg. Scripturas sanctas memoriter tenebat.
His rom calls the books of Kings his own; because by the frequent use and
reading of them, he had got them by heart, and as it were made them his own. Of
Paula he testifies, that she had most of the Scriptures by heart. Of Nepotian
likewise, that with daily reading and continual meditation he had made his
heart Bibliothecam Christi, the Library of Christ. See my True Treasure. page
315.

Verse 5. Behold, I will send you Elijab the Prophet] Not Elijah the Thishite,
as the Septuagint corruptly read: and the Popish Expositours make no smail use
of it, to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist, because Enoch and Elias are
not yet come, and yet are to come in his time, before the day of judgment (as
they sondly fable) to preserve the Elect in the faith of Christ, and to convert
the Jews. But we have better Interpreters of this Text. 1. An Angel, who
applies it to John Baptist, Luke 1.17. 2. Christ, that Angel of the Covenant,
Mat. 17.10, 11 and 11.14. Hear ye him, against all Antichrists Agitatours.
Saint Mark begins his Gospel with these very words of Malachy: to let us know,
that this Elias is the Baptist, who is called Eliah the Prophet, because of the
like gifts, calling, and ministry, office of reforming habit, people with whom
they dealt, etc. The like almost may be said of Lather, a third Elias for
boldness, courage, zeal, knowledge, success, etc. But yet we see no footing
in this Text for Lucas Osianders conceit, viz. that the Prophet here pointed at
Luther as well as at John Baptist: and that men must receive his Doctrine, or
else look to be smitten with a curse. Howbeit this is more passable and
possible then that of the Jesuits, who presume to control Christ's own
Exposition: and give out, that as the Devil stirred up Luther to call the Pope
Antichrist. so God raised up them to resist Luther. But what a mad fellow was
that Spaniard (of whom Severus Sulpitius writes) that professed himself first,
to be the Prophet Eliah, and afterward when he had gained authority, Lib. 1 de
vita S. Martini fere in calce.
to be The Christ: carrying himself so cunningly in his collusion, that Bishop
Ruffus was led away with the error, believing in him, and adoring him as God:
for which he was justly deprived of his dignity? Had we not need receive the
truth in the love of it, lest God give us up to the efficacy of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.? lest being first infatuated, we be seduced, and then being
seduced we be damned, as Austin glosseth on that Text?

before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord] Great, in
respect of the good, and dreadful, or horrible, in respect of the wicked, as
Montanus interprets it, paralelling it with Mat. 3.12. Or, great, because it
shall be a beginning of great changes, both to the godly and the ungodly: and
dreadful to the bad, yea and to the best also at first; till they have
recollected and better bethought themselves, as Another senceth it; as taking
it of the last day, which is the general mistake of Popish Expositours, and
that upon this ground, because Christ's first coming was an acceptable time, and
a day of salvation. But though it be so to Gods people, yet to others it was
terrible, as has been showed in the Note on Chip. 3. verse. 2. and is so
described Luke 2.34. and 3.9, 17. and 19.44. Mat. 21.44. Esaias 11.4. He shall
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with his two-edged sword he
shall slay the wicked. See the like, R^v. 2.16. And by his Ministers he does it
still, 2 These. 2.8. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. 2 Cor. 10.6. Vengeance is as ready in
Christ's hand as in the Ministers mouth, for the disobedient. Some read the
words thus, Before the day of the great and dreadful Lord come: like as others
read that Jam. 2.1. Have not the glorious faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons, Both readings are good, and the Text will bear both.

Verse 6. And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc.]
John Baptists office and efficacy is here described; He shall, as a powerful
instrument (by preaching repentance, Mat. 3.2. and prevailing, as he did, with
all sorts, even to admiration; so that all men mused in their hearts, whether
he were the Christ or not, Luke 3.10, 12, 14, 15.) convert sinners from the
errors of their way, reduce them to the faith of the old Patriarchs, make
them unanimous in the love of God and of one another, and tie them up together,
as it were, by his Baptism. For the multitude of believers were of one heart
and one soul, Act. 4.32. ( animo animaque inter se miscebantur, as Tertullian
phraseth it) neither was there any controversy at all amongst them, as One
ancient Greek copy subjoyneth there. Controversies there were great store among
the Jews, when the Baptist came. As Joseph found his brethren in Dothan, (which
signifies Defection) so did he. They were all gone out of the way: and, being
led aside by the error of the wicked, they were fallen from their own
steadfastness. Many strange opinions and dotages they had taken up, and were
woefully divided: specially by those three different Sects, Pharisees, Sadduces,
and Essenes: which the Prophet Zachary calls three shepherds, that were to be
destroyed in one month, at John's coming, Zach. 11.8. The Pharisees were held
the best of those three, si ad legem respexeris, says Tremellius, if you look
to the law: and Saint Paul, who was once a Pharisee of the Pharisees, calls
them the most strictest Sect of the Jewish religion, Act. 26.5. (like those
district ssimi Monachi among the Papists:) and yet there were seven sorts of
Pharisees, Talm. tract. Suta. cap. 3.
as we find in their Talmud. Hence much alienation of affection amongst them,
and great animosities: father hating son, and son father, for truths sake,
as Mat. 10.35. So powerful should John be in his Ministry, that although the
leprosy were gotten into their heads, and were therofore held incurable Lev.
13.44. yet he should tuen the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord Luke 1.17. All headstrong and b^uti^h affections should be calmed and
corrected, as Isa. 21.6, 7, 8. and the peaceable v. isdome from above in^tilled
lam. Ephesians. 4.3.
3.17. so that they shall indeav^ur to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. And albeit some jarrs may fall out (a betwixt Paul and Barnabas) yet
Gods people can soon pecce again, and reunite. Job. Worver. in Polymath.
Vt (...) percussus non laeditur, into no dividitur quid^m, sed resundit ^es^,
and spissior redit etc. As the air divided by a stone or stroke, soon closes
and thickencth the more. Certainly, there is no such oneness, and entirenesse
any where as among the saints: their love is spiritual Cant. 6.9. The very
Heathen^ acknowledged that no people in the world, did hold together and love
one another so as Christians did. Tacitus observes of the Jews, that there was
misericordia in promptu apud suos, but contra om^^s alios hostile odium, mercy
enough for their own countrymen amongst them, but hostile hatred against all
others: they use to say, that there is no Gentile but deserves to have his head
bruised etc. But John Baptist by hi^ preaching made Jewish Pharisees, and Roman
soubliers (according to the phrase that Josephus uses of him) to convent, and
knit together in baptis^ne. (...). Anti^dib. 18. cap 7.


(...) I conte and sinite the earth with a curse] that is, lest coming I smite
etc. For there is no doubt to be made of his coming: and as little of his
smiting, if men amend not. These words menace as many as resisted John's
ministry, with utte^ destruction; whether it be done against the whole nation,
or against a m^^ only. Job 34.29. The Romans came and took amay both their
place and their Nation: not for le^^ng Christ alone (as they feared Job.
11.48.) but for laying wicked hands upon him, and putting to death the Lorn or
life. Act. 2.23. John also preached damnation to them Mat 3. and so did our
Savior A^at. 23. where by eight dreadful woes, as by so many links of an
adamantine chain, he draws chose irreformable hypoerites down to hell, their
place: and th^n l^aves them to be reserved unto judgment. S. Jerome wa^ called
(...) the Churchthunderbolt. Mr. Perkins was a most ca^^st preacher, and would
pr^n unce the word Damn with such an Emphasis, M. Fullers Holy State 90.
as lest a (...) in his Auditouts ears a good while after. And when, Catechist
of Christ-co^^eage, (...) p^unding the commandernents he applied them so home,
that he made his hearers hearts sall down, and their hairs to stand opright
almost. And surely this (...) the way to work upon hard-harted sinners: whence
the Apostle bids T^ns rebuke with all aut^o^ty: and then turning him to the
people (as Carvin s^^^th it) chang th ^^em not to despise him for so doing.
Tit. 1.15. The Apeille knew well that men are, for most part, of delicate
ears: and can (...) abide plain dealing. Ahab hates Mic^iah, and has him in
prison, ever since that creadsull denunciation of displeasore and death, for
dismissing Benhadad (for he was, probably, that disguised P^ophet:) for which
he was ever since sast in pris^n, deep in disgrace. But truth must be spoken,
how ever it be ^^ken: and those that will not be pricked at heart as Act. (...).
2. ^ut take up bucklers to ward oss the blow, must have the sword of the
spirit sheathed in their bowels, and b^thed in their blood: for mall this we
are a sweet savor unto God 2 Cor. 2.15. yea though a savor of death unto
death. The barren earth must be smitten with cu^sing, and they that mind
earthly things ( Terra autem sunt, qui terrona sapiunt, sai^^ A sbon) have
damnation for their end, De civ Deil. 20. c. 29.
so that St. Paul cannot speak of them (...) tears of comp^ssion Philip. 3.18,
19. Oh that it might express from them tears of compunction! Oh that they
would be forewarned to slay from the wrath to come! Oh that they would think
upon eternity, and by breaking ^f^ their sins, disarme Gods indignation justly
conceived against them. He therefore threateneth that he may not smite: he
proceed, not to punish till there be no remedy 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Crudelem medicum
intemperans aeger sacit: An un^^ly patient makes a cruel Physician. O that we
could all resolve to deal by our sins as Levis King of Fiance did by the Popes
Bulls (whereby he required the fruits of vacancies of all Cathedral Churches
of France, Speed. 496.
about the year 1152.) he cast them into the fire, saying, he had rather the
Popes Bulls should restin the fire, then his own soul should fiy in heil.

For a perclose of all, take an observation of Amamas, and before him of
Baxtorfes: that in many Hebrew Bibles, the last verse save one of this Propesy
(as also of Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, and Lamentations) is repeated again in the
end thereof, though without pricks, lest any thing should be thought added to
Gods word. Factum hoc ex Scriharum decreto etc. This the scribes thought fit to
do, either for the dignity of those repeated verses, that the Reader might
again ruminate and remind them: or else (as some will have it) because all
those books end in threatenings and sad speeches. And therefore, lest the Sun
of Righteousness should seem to set in a cloud, or not to shine upon the
departing passenger, they thought sit to leave the verse before to be last; as
being sweet and full of comfort, that the Reader might Sampson-like, go his
way, feeding on that honeycomb.

Laus Deo in aeternum.
The Righteous man's Recompense. OR, A TRUE CHRISTIAN CHARACTERIZED, AND
ENCOURAGED, Out of MALACHI 3.16, 17, 18.
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another: and the Lord
harkened, and heard it: and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name.
CHAP. I. The Text opened and analyzed.
THAT which was anciently spoken of John Baptust, who was more then a Prophet,
Math. 11.9.
may not unfitly be applied to Malachy the last of Prophets, Prophetarum
ultimum and veluti sigillum etc. Petrus a Figuiero proaem in Mal. Judaei in
hujus prophaeta obitum collocant. (...) id esi obfignationem proplietrae. In
ejus locum successisse aixnt (...) filam voci^, id est, oraculum divinum, quo
post prophetarwn tempo a dicunt suisse revelata futura. Alsted. Chron.
that he is the boundary Malachias a Terrulliano limes in tervetus and novum
Testam. vocatur, ad quem desineret Judaismus, and a que inciperet christianismus
and buckle Ioh Baptista fuit ut ita dicam legis and gratiae fibula Chrysol
of the Law and Gospel, the golden girdle that knitsup and ties together those
two breasts of Consolation If. 66.11.
the old and new Testament: between the which he seems to lie as a bundle of
Myrrh, or cluster of Camphire, the sweet scent whereof fills the whole house
of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and greatly affects all such as have their senses habitually exercised to
discern both good and evil Heb. 5.1. Summa libri est, quod cum Judaei nuper
reversi essent in patriam, statim simul redieru^^ ad ingenium: and immemores
gratiae dei, ita se dediderant multis corruptelis, ut nihilo melior esse^status
eorum, quam patrum ante suerat, quasi Deus operam lusisset castigando little
scclera. Calvin. in Malach. proem.
Such were these good souls, the subject of our text. Reserved they were to
those last and losest times of the Jewish Church after the return from Babylon;
where it seems their seventy years captivity had not much mended the most of
them: h such (alas) is the hardness of men's hearts, that till the Spirit
mollify and make them mallcable, Afflictions (Gods hammers) do but beat cold
iron. Little good is done, nay much hurt by accident: for unsanctified persons
grow worse with afflictions, as water more cold after a heat: witness these
proud misereants that gave the occasion of this text. Gods correcting hand had
lain long time sore upon them, to turn them from their enterprises, and to
hide pride from their hearts Job. 33.17.
. But he had not his end upon this untoward generation, Cohaerence.
nor they the best use of this affliction. Witness their words above the text,
where they stand stouting it out with the Lord of Hosts ver. ver. 13.
13. and stick not to charge him with deep oscitancy, and forlorn neglect of
his best servants, ver. 14. yea with flat iniquity, and most unequal
administation of his earthly kingdom. 14.
For now we call the proud happy, say they, and those that work wickedness are
set up, yea they that tempt God are even delivered. As who should say, 15.
Surely there is no reward for the rightcous: verily there is not a God that
does judge in the earth. Either things are not ordered by a divine providence,
but left at random, and let run at sixes and sevens, as it happens: or else,
there is not an equal hand held over the sons of men, but partiality, and
unrig hteousnesse found with the judge of all the earth: Genesis 18.25.
whiles the proud thus tempt God, and trample upon his people, and are not only
not punished, but even preferred for their labor. Thus they in their madness
set their mouths against heaven, Psalm. 73.9.
and spare not despitefully to spit their venom in the face of God himself. At
the bearing of which abhorred blasphemies, Mirum videtur coelum hoc dicto non
sudare, terram hiare, mare non conuno very etc Cart. Hist. Xpti.
I wonder, if the heavens did not swear, the Sun blush, the Earth wax weary of
her burden, and Hell gape wide and enlarge her self, Esaias 5.14.
for these prodigious Atheists, these Giants (...). Act. 5.39. and 23, 9.
these monstrous men of condition. I am sure the Godly of these times were much
affected with it, and met often about it; not without a great deal of good
conference, and much holy duty performed, on all hands, to that God with whom
they found all best audience and acceptance for the present, together with a
promise of fuller and further reward for the future, to the comsort of his
people, and consusion of his enemies. 16. The they that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another: and the Lord harkened and heard it, and there was a book
of remembrance written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name. 17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts etc.

The words present unto us 1. aduty performed: set forth 1. in the
circumstances. 1. of time, Then 2. of persons, they that feared the Lord.
thought upon his Name.

2. in the substance, they spoke often one to another
2. A mercy returned: and that is double. 1. Gods grcious acceptance, in that
for present, he regards what they did, the Lord harkened, and heard is. future,
he records it; And a book of remembrance was written etc.
2. his righteous retribution of 1. Mercy to his people, respecting. 1. their
persons which 1. own, they shall be mine etc. 2. honor, in the day when I make
up my Jewels.
he will 2. their performances, I will spare them, as a man spares his own
son that sorveth him.
2. Judgment to his enemies: ver. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern etc.



CHAP. I. Doctr. I. Saints must be best in worst times.
THem] men were arrived at this height of impudency and prophanenes, as to say,
It Was to no purpose to serve God: even then, when their black mouths were now
big swollen with such like blasphemies, Illis de Dei judicio blasphemantibus.
Hieron. Tunc cum blasphemi talia loquerentur. Pet a Figuiero in locum. Doct.
then, they that fcared the Lord were thus busied as in the text. Note hence,

That Gods servants must labor to show themselves best in the worst times: and
then most bestirr them in his businesle, when others are most careless of it,
and contrary to it.

SECT. 1. The Point consirmed ^ by precept 2, by practice.
THis you shall see confirmed, and commended to us. 1. by precept from Gods
mouth: 2. by the constant practice of his best children in allages. For
precept, first, what can be more direct and express, then those common texts,
Thou shall not follow a multit^ide to do evil. Exodus 23.2.
Save your selves from this untoward generation. Act. 2.40.
Come out from among them my people, and be ye separate. 2 Cor 6.17.
Be not ye conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the rencwing of
your mind. Rom 12.2.
Have no fillowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: but reproove them
rather Ephesians. 5 11.
. with a number more that I might add with ease. That one of Solomon for all,
My son, says he, if sinners entive thee, consent thou not. If yet they say
Come with us, let us lay wait for blood etc. Cast in thy lot amongst us, let us
all have one parse; My son, walk not thou in the way with them: resrain thy
foot from their path. Pro. 1 10, 11, 14, 15.
For their way (in the issue of it) is the way to hell, going down to the
chambers of death. Prove. 7.27.
Even that second death (as the scripture terms it) which though hand joyu in
hand Prove. 16.5.
and they muster up and unite their forces (as hoping happily to escape in the
crowd, or to carry it away cleanly, because a multitude) yet they shall never
be able to avoid or abide. For the wicked (be they never so many of them) shall
be turned into hell, and whole nations that forget God. Psalm. 9.17.


This the Patriarch Noah (that I may show you secondly the practice of the
point in some particular examples of ancient and later times) this, I say, Noah
believed ere he saw, and therefore lived to see what he had before believed: not
whole Nations only, but a world-full of wicked people swallowed up together in
one universal grave of waters: their spirits being now in prison, (...) in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day 1 Pet.
3.19.
The foresight whereof by a lively faith, ( being war^^^ of God of things not
seen as yet Heb. 11.7.
.) made him walk uprightly with God evea in his geaeration Genesis 6.9
. Now for him to walk alone in a diverse way to a worid of wicked people, as
Chrysoscome has it, Solus ipse diversa ^mbulavit via, virtutem malitiae
praeferens etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in cap. 6. Genef.
to keep himself unspotted in such a foul season, as anotherspeakes of him,
inter corruprissimos minere incorruptn^. Pare in Gen 6
nay, like a right orient and illustrious planet, not only to hold out a
constant countermotion to that of the vulgar, but also to shine so fair with a
singularity of heavenly light, spiritual goodness, and Gods sincere service,
in that da^k^st midnight of damned impiety; this was that whereby he condemned
the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith Heb. 11.7.
The next, in the Apostles roll there remembered and registered is Abraham, that
precious man, palled as a brand out of Vr of the Chaldees: from whence he went
forth (forsaking father. f Josh. 24.2.
house and friends who served other Gods beyond the slood) not knowing whither
he went, says the text, H^b 11.8.
nor much daring, so long as he had God by the hand. For whom also his first
care was, where ever he came: setting up Altars to Jehovah Genesis 12.6 7 8. and
13.4, 18.
in the midst of those Idolaters, and making open profession of his service
before the people or the land; which was a real confutation of their
heathenish fopperies. Thus Aoraham then: and thus, after him, Johua by his
example; which he therefore uses and urges in that parliament he called and
held at Shechem, a little before his death. I took your father Abraham (says he
there, in Gods behalf) from the other side of the flood, etc. Josh. 24.2
whose children ye shall shall well approve your selves, if ye walk in the
sheps of his faith Romans 1.12
, by putting away the ^trange gods from among you, as he, and serving the Lord
Josh. 24.14
. In which holy practue however you come off, choose you this day whom you will
serve (though in evils of sin there be no choice) whether the gods of your
sathers leyond the slood, Malorum non est electio. A^^^t.
or tke gods of the Amornes, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my
house, we will serve Jehoveh.

The time would fail me to tell of Job, who would not part with his Integrity,
to die for it, Job 27.5, 6
though instigated thereunto by the wife of his bosom, Job 2 9 Chrysostom.
set on doubtless by the Devil: who of all the parts of his body had le^t his
con^ue only free from blisters, if happily he might be drawn to curse God
therewith and die. To tell you (next) of David, who therefore lo^ed Gods
statutes exceed ngly, because min had made void his L^w ^sal. 119.126, 127. and
Psalm. 39 2 resolving first uqon filence among wic^ed company, could not hold
his spirit so burnt, etc. p 1 King. 19.10. Romans 11.3.
Of Elias, who though alone and singular, continued therefore zealsus for the
Lord of Hosls, because they had argg'd down has A^^s, etc. Of Mica^ah, who
would not flatter the King, though 400. false prophets had done it before him 1
King 22
Of Obadith, that fea ca God (...), in a common defection, 1 King. 8.12
etc. Look to the New Testament, and there you have our Savior eaten up with
the zeal of his F^^^ers house, when by all sorts polluted Joh. 2.17
: his Apostles, soon after his departure, resolving to obey God even comora
goutes, against whatsoever opposition, and not to swim down the stream of the
times for any menaces of the Council Act. 4.
. P^^ul, (that heavenly spark) burning in spirit against a Church full of
unbeleeving Jews at Corinth Act. 18.5. (...), intus and apud se aestuabat,
prae zeli ardore.
, and openly contesting with the Gentiles at Athens about their senseless
superstition Act. 17. So he gave thanks before meat in the midst of Infidels.
Act. 27.25.
. What should I stand longer to tell you of Timothy, so abstemious and
temperate among the luxurious Ephesians A people so dehauched, that they made a
law, (...), Let there be never an honest man amougst us. And it is storied,
that they therefore cast our one Hermodorus, as by an ostracisme, because he
was a good busband and a temperate man.
, that Saint Paul was fain to prescribe him a ^^le wine for hish alihs (...) 1 Timothy 5.23.
. Of Antipas, who held forth the word of life, even to the death, where Savans
^h^one was Rev. 2.13.
. Of Ne^o's family, to whom Saint Paul sends salutations Philip. 4 22.
: Of Poly^^^, that blessed Martyr of s^^us Christ, who being solicited by the
Tyrant to do sacrifice to the ^doll, and so to provide for his own safety, as
diverse others had done before him. Four^core and ^dde yzers, sud he, have I
served my Master Christ, and ^e never deceived me: an shill I now desem him?
God forbid me any such wickedness: I scorn to be delivered upon any such
dishonorable terms Octoginta sex annos illi servio, nec ulla in re me unquam
laesit, and quomedo possim maledicere, etc. Eusebius. Eccles. hist l 4. c. 15.
. Of Orig^^, who chose rather to continue a poor Catechist at Alex ind^^a, in
daily danger of his life, then with Plo^^nus, his fellowpupill. to live at
Court in great authority and favor, would he but, with him have reneagued
Christ, and renount'd the Faith Erasmus in vita Grig oper. praesixa.
. It were easy to come lower, and nearer our own times and to bring upon the
stage a great fort of such as held forth the word of life, by a bold and wise
profession, in the dar^est midnight of damned popery, and Satan's universal
reign Legatur Illyr^^^ Catalogue testium. Dr. ^sher, graviss. quaesti. Cade,
etc.
: But I shut up with (...), that notable Champion of Christ, and stickler for
the truth: to the defense whereof he stood stoutly, when all the Christian
world besides was turned Ar^^a^ Ingemuit orhis and mirabatur se fac^urn esse
Arrianum. Hieron. centrae Lucrferianos. Iste vir totius orhis impetum sustinuit.
; as a Father phraseth it. Whence, it went abroad of him, That the whole world
was set against Athanasius, and Athanasius against all the world. A brave
commendation, a stately praise. Such honor have all his S^unts Psalm. 139 ult.
. Wisdom ever has been, you see, and ever must be justified of her children
Marth. 11.19.
against all obloquies, and oppositions of the mad multitude Haud pe^^nd^ in
crimme incendij quam O^io H^m^ni generis convicti sunt Sic de Christianis sub
Nerone whis incensae falso accusatis. Tacit, lib. 15. Et Fertallianus in
Apologet. ait, in Christianis nomen damnari and puniri, non cri^^n and scoelus.
, ever besides it self in point of salvation.

SECT. II. The point confirmed by yeasons 1. from God. 2. scom men, both 1.
good. 2. and bad.
ANd there is good reason for it too, as you shall soon see, whether ye look up.
ward or downward, to God or men, the saints themselves, or others. All which
Reasons are grounded upon our Text, and shall be therehence gathered.

For God, first, his people should therefore strive then to be best, when
others are at worst. 1. Because he graciously accepts it, he hear kgns and
hears, Ver. 16.
says the text. 2. He plentifully rewards it, for there is a book of
remembrance, etc. that this, their labor of love may never be forgotten. H.
b.6.


For themselves next, Gods saints shall hereby well approve, that they are. 1.
True Christians, fearing the Lord. 2. Zealous Christians, such as think upou
his name.

Lastly, for others. 1. Good men shall be thereby notably confirmed, whiles
they speak often one to another for mutual quickening, and encouragement. 2.
Bad men shall be utterly confuted and confounded, while they return, that is,
change their minds, and discern, perforce, a plain and palpable difference
between themselves and Gods servants. Yea whiles they are constrained by the
testimony of their own evil consciences, and by the evidence of their own evil
experiences, to see and say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily
there is a God that judges in the earth Psalm. ^8 11
.

Here then to begin with the first Reason, taken from God, and therein (not to
urge his command, which yet is reason su^^cient, and tacitly implied in the
text: for what the Lord approves and rewards, that he certainly wills and
requires; since his approving and prescribing will are (though distinct yet)
not different the one from the other, but) to make use of so much only in the
text, as lies above ground for our present purpose. First, the Lord does
curiously observe, Res^. 1.
and graciously accept of such his servants as continue constant with him in
depraved times, in a genera^ declension, when sin is grown usual, and almost
^^versall. The Lorab. k^u^d and heard, says the text: It imports, that he was
much taken with their sweet conferences, and those savoury speeches that fell
from their mouths. No noise so delightful, no music so melodious to his
heavenly ears; which therefore he applies close, and lays near to their honey
lips (...). De Nestore suo Homerus.
, as loath to lose any part of that precious language. Well might Saint Peter
say, out of the Psalm: The eye's of he Lord are upon the righ cour, and his
care are (...) we read, are (...) to their prayers 1 Fet. 3.12 Psalm. 34. Reas 2.
, but the Original is more emphaticall, his ears are unto their prayers, or
rather into their prayers; so far is he affected therewithal. And look what
the Apostle speaks there of their prayers, by way of Instance) the same is as
true of their whole Christian practice. Not a prayer they make, not a good work
they do, not a good speech they utter, nay not a good thought they take up, but
he both notes it well, (he hea k^ed and h^a^d) and sets it down in his
note-book too: for a book of remembrance was wr^tion besere the Lord for them
that but thought upon his Name in an evil time, when men's words were stout
against God, verse 13, 14. and their thoughts Atheistical verse 15.

But what will the Lord do for such? (which is the second branch of this first
Reason drawn from God) It follows in the Text; And they shall be mine, says
the Lord of hosts, etc. His, not by a general right only, as his creatures,
but by a special title, as his saints; such as have made a covenant with (...)
by sacrifice Psalm. 50.5.
, and he, interchangeably, made a covenant with them of salt Mam. 18.19 2 Chronicles. 13.5
, that is, permanent and inviolable. And both sides hy a mutual stipulation,
that he will be their God, and they shall be his people: he shall be their
portion, and they his; for the Lords portion is his people Dent. 32.9.
, says Moses: they are his proper goods, and most esteemed treasure (...)
text: Peculium, proprium, fingulare, thesaurus.
, the top of his wealth, the best of his gettings, the people of his purchase
(...) 1 Pet. 2.9. Such as compreheud all his gettings.
(as Saint Peter after the Septuagint renders the word here found in our Text:)
in sum, his Jewels, whom he will highly prize, and safely set up by him in
the golden cabinet of his special providence, and fatherly protection. Not
casting them out for every small flaw, nor less esteeming them for every
little dust that falls upon them, and fouls them; but prizing them aright to
their utmost value, and giving them their allowance, (as men deal by light
gold) he will take them for current: And wherein they come short of what they
should be, he will spare them as a man spare^h his own son that serves him.
Then the which I know not what the Lord could have spoken more effectual for
the glory of his own rich grace, or the shirring up of our utmost affections to
an holy contention in godliness, be the times never so bad or boisterous: since
in doing thereof there is so great reward Psalm. 19 11 Perinde ut homo cum
homine amico, vel Domino suo ubique and judi^ulse inambulans, etc Aug.
. In which respect, how fitly does the Author to the Hebrews close up the
story of (...) hs heroical faith, with that golden corollary, He that comes
to God, (as Henoch did, who walked familiarly with God, as a man with his
friend * with whom he is in covenant: for can two walk together, (says the
Prophet) and they not be agreed? Am. 3.3.
) must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him Heb. 11.6
. The Greek text has it, that seek him out (...).
, namely when he is cast into a blind corner, (if I may so speak with reverence
to the Divine Majesty) conveyed out of the way and covered (as it were) with
the calumnies and stout words of the wicked, those hard words (against which
Malachy here, and Henoch anciently prophesied Jade 14, 15 (...). Verbum (...),
durum, inconveniens, etc.
) of ungodly persons, whose throats are as open fepulchres Psalm 5.9
to bury Gods Name in, as much as they may: were it not for Henoch and such as
he, that do daily and diligently vindicate that reverend Psalm. 111.9
Name, from their false aspersions; and as it were dig it out of the grave,
wherein they had villanously concealed, after a sort, and covered it. But what
lost Henoch by this labor of love Heb. 6.10
? had he not this testimony from heaven hereupon, that he pleased God Heb. 11.5
, was he not translated, as a Jewel of price, into the heavenly Cabinet (...).
Rev. 11.19
? and were not the fewness of his days on earth, in comparison of his
forefathers, recompensed in that longest life of his son Methuselah Gen 5.27
? And why all this? but because he walked with God (when others walked aster
the lust of their hearts, and sight of their eyes Eccles. 11.9
) seeking to take men off from their lewd and lawless courses, by the terrou
of the Lord, which he most powerfully denounced, Jude 14, 15. In doing whereof,
though (to his own thinking) he labored in vain, and spent his strength for
nonght, yet surely his udgement was with the Lord, and his reward with his God
Esaias 49.4
, whith was the first reason taken from God. The second follows, respecting our
selves. And so; by cleaving close to Jehovah in corrupt times, it shall well
appear; first, that we are the same we would all seem to be, Men searing God.
For, this is pure religion indeed, to keep a man's self unspotted of the world
Jam. 1. ulc.
. There must be heresies amongst you, says the Apostle, that they which are
approved may be made manifest 1 Cor 11 19
. And, by a like reason, there must Nen a Den, sed ab hominis corruptione
voluntaria. Beza.
be a perverse and graceless generation, a viperous brood Mar. 3.7
, amids whom Gods sunts may shine as lamps in the world, and so approve
themselves blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, Holding
forth the word of life Philip. 2 15 (...). Great lights.
for an Ensign (...).
, by a bold and wise profession, and practice of the truth that is in Jesus;
then, when it is most opposed, and oppressed by the sons of Belial. This is the
guise of a man that truly fears God: he cannot blow hot and cold Erasm. Adag.
p. 350. ex codem are calidam ^^frigidum esslare.
, as they say: he dare not swear by God and Malchom Zeph. 1.3
, he will not hold the truth in indifferency 2 These. 2.10
. God, he knows, must be worshipped trucly, that there be no halting 1 King.
18.21
, and totallr, that there be no halving Hos. 7.8
: for what communion has Christ with Belial? and what fellowship has the
temple of God with idols 2 Cot. 6.16
? Out upon those Rimmonites, that plead for an upright soul in a prostrate body
2 King. 5.18
. Thou shall not how down to them, nor worship them Exodus 20
, for any man's pleasure. And why? for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc.
therefore let my fear fall upon thee, as a strong counter-blast to the base
fear of any tyrant As the fifth commandment is the first with promise, so is
the second the first with punishment, which the Lord severely threatens there,
to them that worship him not aright, because men commonly inflict punishment on
them that do.
. For as one fire drives out another, so does the fear of God, the fear of the
creature. Obadiah (for instance) that good steward of a bad Lord, that
Non-such- Ahab. I mean, a man that had sold himself to do wickedness 1 King.
21.20
. Not so Obadiah: but (whatever my Lord the King, and the whole State do) I
fear God greatly, says he to the Prophet 1 King. 18.12 13.
. I, but how shall this appear, Obadiah? Why, when Jezabel ki^d up the Lords
Prophets, I (not standing to cast perils) hid them, and fed them by fif^y in a
cave, not without the hazard of my head if it should ever have been noticed.
Lo here is a man of courage fearing God, Exo. 18.21.
and he gave the best testimony of it, by ruling with God, and contiuuing
faithful with the Saints, as Judah; then when Ephraim compassed him about with
lies, and the whole house of Israel, with deceit. Hof. 11.12. Real. 4. c 2 Chr.
7.14.


But secondly, as the practice of this point proves one a Christian fearing
God, so a zealous forward christian, one that solicitously thinks upon Gods
name; that high and holy Name whereby he is called, and wherewith he is
intruded, 2 Chr. 12 13
with charge not to take it in vain, Exodus 20.
but to bear it up aloft (as the word (...) elevavit, evexiticonfer. Esaias 5.26.
elevabit vexillum ad gentes.
in that third commandment signifies) to lift it up as a standard, saying
Jehovah Nisi Exo. 17.15.
the Lord is my banner: or as servants do their masters badges upon their
shoulders, so they Gods Impress upon their forcheads, yea, upon the bridles of
their horses Zach. 14.20, 21.
(in their common conversation also) even Holiness to the Lord. Being
consident of this very thing, with Paul, that in nothing they shall be ashamed:
but that with all boldness, (...).
as always, so now Christ shall be magnified in their bodies, whether it be by
life or death. See an inslance of this in the holy Apostles standing before the
Council. We cannot, say they, but speak the things we have heard and seen,
what ever be the issue of it Act. 4 20.
. they being now (albeit before fearful and faint-hearted to the deserting of
Christ. and betraying a good cause by their cowardice, yet now being) not,
drunk with new wine, as those scoffers cavil^'d them, Act. 2 13. (...)
cavillantis. Beza contumeliam irrisionis indicat. Malcolm.
but filled with the holy Ghost Ephesians. 5.18.
(a wine that would mak^^^ven the lips of them that are asleep to speak Cint.
7:9.
) were necessitated 2 Cor. 5.14. (...) alludit ad vatum furorem. Beza.
to an holy fo wardnesse and forthputting: being like vessels, that when they
are filled and stopped up, must either vent or burst without remedy. See it again
in St. Paul, that precious man, who when once he became a chosen vessel to the
Lord Christ to bear his name, Act. 9.15.
never was he so mad Act. 26.11.
before in havocking those that called upon that name in all places Act 9.14, 21
Sunt qui prophetiam Jacobi de lupo processuio e tribu Benjam. Paulo applic.
as he was now fierce and fiery against all that did any thing contrary to the
Name of Jesus. Act. 26.9.
Not to meddle with his encountering of Elymas the sorcerer; he set his eyes
upon him Act. 13.9. (...). 10.
faith the text, as it he would have run thorough him: After which lightening
followed that terrible thunder-crack, O full of all subtlety, and mischief etc.
But more to our purpose is his handiing of Peter, a man that feared God as well
as himself, put yet thought not all out to well upon his name (for that time at
least) as he did: whom therefore Pa^l withstood to his face. Gal. 2 11.13
He did not halt with him for company, as good Barnabas had done (being carried
away (...).
by the author by of the man, against his old associate ^t. Paul, with whom
also he had once before had a bitter bickering Act. 15.39. (...). animorum
exacerbatio, in qua aliquid suit aceti (...) enim acetum senate.
a s^^tting fit:) but blamed him before a great sort of Peter's own disendes,
wh^^h found him temporizing shamefully Cavendo seand^lum levius-gravius dedit
idque geminum etc. pareque
and not footing it aright (...)
according to the (...) that is in Christ, 2. Cor. 11.3.
and the truth of the Gospel. Gal. 2.14.
Indeed Cardinad Baro^^^ withstands Paul as stiffly as ever Paul did Peter: and
dares maintain that Peter was net to be blamed, but Paul a great deal too busy
rather, A bod censure and well befitting a Jesuit, with whom what more common
(when they are in place where) then to vility Or mine own knowledge and
hearting, some of them teach in the pulpit, that St. Paut was not secure of his
preaching but by conforence with St. Peter: nor that he durst publish his
epistles till St. Peter had allowed them. I have heard also credibly reported
that some of their Jesuits of late in Italy, in solemn sermons, -- commending
St. Peter for a worthy Spirit, have c^ntured St. Paul for a hotheaded person;
who was so trans-Ported with the pangs of zeal, and eagerness beyond ad
compass in most of his disputes, that there was no great reekoning to be made
of his Assertions; yea he was dangerous to read, as savouring of heresy in
some places, and better perhaps he had never written. Agreeable to which Theard
other of their Catholics deliver, that it has been heretofore very seriously
consulted among them, to have censured by some means, and reformed the
epistles of St. Pauletc. Sr. Edoein Sands in his Relation of the western
Religion. Oh tongues worthy to be pulled out of their heads, cut into gobbets,
and driven down their throats, that durst utter such prodigious and till alate
unheard of blasphemies against the Lord Christ, and his heaven-inspited Apostle.
this prime Apostle, for dealing so roundly with their God Peter, and so to put
the lie upon the Holy Ghost himself.

But I hasten to the third and last rank of Reasons respecting others. And so
Good men first shall be, by our holding out in hard times, c (...)
much confirmed and comforted, whiles we cease not to speak, as these in our
text, and speak of ten one to another: for that's the force of the Hebrew word
here used ( sermonis frequentationem significat, it imports a frequency of
speech, says Kimchi) In Radicibus.
And that is the property of true grace, to knit men's hearts in a holy
communion, as always, so in evil times especially; for misery breeds unity.
And, although a friend love at all times, yet a brother is born for adversity.
Prove. 17.17.
Sheep when they are coursed, nay swine, when they are lugg'd, will get
together, and grunt together, and make what head they can against a common
adversary, for each others safety. And shall not the saints of God, who are
linked together by the same spirit, and knit together by the same bond of love
(that bond of their perfection Colof. 3.14.
that unites persons and virtues, and perfects them by frequent actions and
offices tending to mutual confirmation and encouragement) shall not such, I
say naturally (...). Philip. 2 21.
care for the estate one of another? and striving together for the faith of the
gospel, (...). Philip. 1.27.
build up each other in that most holy faith, keep themselves carefully in the
love of God, pray together in the holy Ghost looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ; of some having compassion, making a difference, and others save
with fear. pulling them out of the fire Jude 20.21, 22, 23. Hieron: vocat
sanctam violentiam, optabilem rapinam.
? Blessed Bradford reckoned that hour lost, during his imprisonment, wherein he
had not done good to some one or other of his brethren and companions in
tribulation, and in the king dome and patience of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1 9.
either by tongue, hand, or pen Fox Martyrolog. Ibidem. Ibidem.
Neither was the Lord wanting unto him in the good success of his holy
endeavors that way, as appears in the following instances. Bishop Farrar
being in the king's bench prisoner, was traveled withal of the Papists, in the
end of Lent, to receive the sacrament at Easter in one kind; who, after much
persuading, yielded unto them, and promised so to do. Then so it fell out by
Gods providence (says mine Author, in whose own words I relate the whole
story) the Easter-eave, the day before he should have done it, was Bradford
brought to the kings bench prisoner; where (the Lord making him his instrument)
Bradford only was the means that the said Bishop revoked his promise, and
would never after yield to be spotted with that papisticall pitch. At another
time, B. Ridley being prisoner in the Tower, had the liberty of the same, to
prove belike (says mine author) whether he would go to mass or not: which
once he did. But Mr. Bradford being then prisoner, and hearing thereof, writes
an effectual letter to persuade him from the same, which (God be honored) did
Mr. Ridley no little good: for he repented thereupon and did no more so. Hence
St. John, I write unto you, says he, that do believe on the name of the son of
God, that ye may believe on the name of the son of God 1 Ioh. 5.13.
, that is, that you may, by my writing, be further confirmed, continued and
increased in the faith once received. Memini, inquit Lutherus, initio meae
causae D. Staupicium-ad me dicere:boc mihi placet, quod de doctrina quam
praedicas, gloriam and omnia soli Deo attribuis. Deo nutem (quod luce clarius
est) nimium glory and bonitatis tribui non potest. Eavox me vehementer
confirmavit and consolata est Melchior Adam vit. staup.
The zealous forwardness, and godly care of good people in bad times being a
matter of singular avail for the settling, strengthening, and stablishing of
the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees which else would buckle and
warp, and turn out of the way. Heb. 12.12.13. Reaf. 6.


Lastly, as good men shall be hereby confirmed, so bad men convinced and
confounded, not only in the last and general judgment (when the Queen of the
south shall rise up and condemn such a sluggard as Herod the king, who desired
to see Christ Luc. 9 9. Tamen ne pedem regia extulit at illum videre, trametsi
sibi in animum induxerat deum propheta^ excitasse a mortuis. Ex que quam verum
illud sit Luc. 16. ult videre licet. Cart. Hist. Christi.
(of whose great works he had heard but would not stir a foot to find him
out) but in this present world also, they are made many times to return and
discern between the rightcous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not. Witness those two mighty Monarchs in Daniel,
Nebuchadnezzar and Darius. How was the first of these appaled and abashed, when
he saw the well-knit resolution, and redoubted courage of Gods three worthies,
in changing the kings word and yielding their bodies that they might not
worship a strange God Dan. 3.28.29
? And the latter, how was he amused, and amazed, when Daniel had stopped the
mouths of lions (like another Lysimachus) by the force of his faith Heb. 11.33.
after he had stood it out stoutly to the face of his adversaries, who could
find none occasion against him but in the matter of his God Dan. 6.5.
? How did the innocence and piety of these godly men triumph in the consciences
of those two tyrants; making them afraid of the name of God whereby they were
called, Deu 28.9, 10
and compelling them to vote and voice the same way that they had persecuted:
Dan. 3. and 6.
yea and to proclaim that God for the only true God, whom yet they had no
mind to set up for their own God. For so it is, that even natural conscience
cannot but stoop and do homage to Gods image fairly stamped upon the natures
and works of his people: so that when men see in such, that which is above the
ordinary strain, and their own expectation Di^^lesianus Imperium deposuisse
di^itur, quodam wentis stupo^e, and consternatiene, postquam singularem
Christianorum in morte constantiam perspexisset. Bucholcher. Chronol.
; their bearts ane within them many times, and they stand much amazed at the
height of spirit, and resolution that posses^eth their hearts, and at the sober
and undaunted majesty that shines in their faces Acts 6 15. Vnde judicature
cocouserentiae puritas cavsaeque bonitas. Malcolm. in loc. A godly man that is
immovable, and resuseth to praise the wicked, or justisie the ungodly, and when
he has cause will contend with them, and not be like a trenbled sountain, or a
coriup spring, he may sor the time receive ill words from the wicked, but their
hearts are afraid of him, and their consciences admire him, Prove. 24 25 and
28.4. 25.6.
.

SECT. III. Use 1. A sharp Reproof of 1. Lukewarm Laodiceans, 2. Timorous
Temporizers.

NOw for Application of all: Is this so, Vso 1.
that Gods liege people should shine most in the greatest darkness, and then
show themselves most zealous for their Lord, when others are most andacious in
sin? This then serves, first, for the just and sharp reproof, of all our
lukewarm (...), our Vespertilian-professours, (as one call them) the Neuter
passive Christians, (as another) the Politicians (...) our time: who against
one prescript rules of Gods holy word, the covstant practice of to many famous
Saints, the irrefragable, and endoubte^ truth of the point in hand, hold it
best and safest, when all is done, to serve the times Romans 12.11. Omnino
legendum puto (...), ^^za. non (...) us ^^as
, in a sense ^^rre otherwise then Saint Paul meant it, (if ever he meant it
(...) Epist. Tomi je^undi (...) ad Marcellam.
) to (...) down the common current, to keep them selves still on the warm side
of the hedge Ad latus navis falicius, (...) ^emporum ^atione, sese indimant;
pro re nata religtonem o^n, (...) nunc illuc in^^ectunt, and commedis sais
attemperant Bucholter. Chronol p. 559
, to comport and comply with the present company, though never to bad;
approving and applauding them in their wretched courses, studiously shunning,
as the greatest d^grace to be counted Seraphicall, and singular: and therefore
resolving to do as the most do, though in so doing they be utterly undone for
ever Marth. 7. 13. R^^^a^lus ^ex Phrys^^um (...)
. And (that they may not seem sine ratione insanice, to be out of reason mad)
they plead Seripture for defense of their baseness; would you think it? But
what marvel, when as the devili also. (their master in this black Art) can
come with b ble under arm, and pretend seriptum est Marth 4.
, perverting the holy Seriptures to his yet (...) damnation: as these unlearned
and unstable (...). 2 Pet 3.16.
also do, whiles they spare not to wrest and abuse to their wicked purpose that
of the Preacher, W^^^ him that is alone Eccies. 4.10. and 7.16.
: and again, Be not rightcous over much: and that of Saint Paul, Offer unto God
a reasonable sor^ice Romans 12 1.
, and i became all things to all men 1 Cor. 9.22. How shall these cry out one
day with Severus the Emper^^; C^nu^a jui and nihil exped (...)
. Hence they think themselves sufticiently secured, and shrouded from the dint
of any such reproof as this is: pleusing themselves in a cold and careless
mediocrity in spiritual matters; and fearing nothing more then to be esteemed
too precise, fellows of an odd humor, and engrossers of more grace then
ordinary. Which imputation to decline and avoid, they hold that for Gospel (...)
; He that (...) dissemble is not in case to live in a commonwealth, which was
all the Latin that Low is the eleventh of France would have his some to learn.
And that they may keep correspondency at once (as they fondly drea^^ it) with
God and the world (sooner then which, they may (...) fire and water, yea bring
heaven and earth together, and gripe them (...) in a fist) they can, Chamoeleon
like, turn themselves into any coloum accommodate themselves to any company;
and like the planet Mercury, they can be good in conjunction with good, and
bad with bad. (...) nature figuris. In quamcunque voles verte, decorus ero.
Propertius.
Such of old were those Assyrian Colonies, 2 King. 17.41. that seared the Lord,
and withal served their graven images Red^ald K. of East Saxons, the first of
his nation that was baptized: but asterwards seduced by his wife, he had in the
fels same Chapel, one Altar for Christ's religion, and auother for fact^^ces
unto devils Bid.
. And such for all the world, were their successors the Samaritans, of whom
Josephus records, that they could weather-cock-like, turn with the times Pro
prssentitemporum condirtone mutabiles (...). Quoties Judaeos faeheites degere
videant, cogn to^ eorum se appellant, utpote a Joseph or^un^i: quanao vero cos
re bus adversts cons^^^^ ^^ellig^nt, (...).
, and shift fail, with the seaman, to the sitting of every wind. The Jews,
while they flourished, should be their dear Cousins; but, if at any time
under-hatches they would not once own them. Such also may the ancient Nazarites
seem to have been, who (as the learned Junius in para^^sis.
conceive) misled at first by example of Saint Peter's Judaizing at Antioch Gal.
2 11.
, fell afterward to defend such halting betwixt two religions, and sought to
bring in a miscellany of both. In detestation of which new-bred heresy
(falsely fastened upon them by the infamous name of Nazarites) it is thought
that the Church of Autic^h protesting against that Sect and title, called
themselves Act 11.26.
by the (once honorable, but now among the Antichristian rout, despicable It is
noto^ioutly known, that the most honoutable name of Christian is in Italy and a
Rome a name of reproach, and usually abused to siguitie a fool, or a dolt.
Fuik. on the Rhem. (...). Act. 11. sect. 4 ^^t of (...). Franch Coll. Jesuit in
fine.
) name of C^ristians. Such were the ancient Ebionites, and the modern
Libertines, Nioodemites, Familists. Of the former, Eus^hius tells us, that they
would keep the Sabbath with the Jews, and the Lords day with the Christiaes:
like men that would seem to be of all religions, when in truth they were of
none Sabbata cum Judaeis, nohiscum diem Dom^^^um in honorem (...) observarunt.
Ebionaei vere pauperes in agnitinne gloriae Chrisli. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 27.
: Of the latter, Cal^^in and many others complain, that they held it no sin
to serve idols with their bodies among Papists and Pagans, so they kept their
heart free to God; pretending for their practice, that counsel of Apochryphall
Baruc, Chap. 6 Wherefore when (...) see the mul^ituae of people worshipping
them b^hind and before, say in your bears, O Lord is is thou that ought
only to be worshipped. Such a Politician was Eceh^lus Ecebolius se ad
Imperatorum ingenia and naturam conformans, etc. S^^rat. Ecclesbist. l 3 c. 11.
Such also were the Melchites, a kind of mongrell Christians that would be of
the kings religion whatever it was. Brierwoods E^^^isies ex Niceph.
of old, and Baldvinus alate: of whom Beza restifies, that he had religio^^m
ep^emevam, for every day a new religion, ab his ad illos, ab illos ad hos
leviter ieas and l^vius transiens Melchi-r Vius exter 225
; to day a Papist, to morrow a Protestant, in nothing so constant as in his
unconstancy. And have we not now adays (that I may come lower and nearer home)
more then a good many Heu quam mult^s tales ^um doctr^^a ^um morthus
Samaritanos -- inter Christianos hodie reperias qut et in religione sunt (...),
dubij atque neutrales, and ad latus navis foelicius, pro temporum ratione. sese
inclinant, etc. Buchol. Chronol.
, brats of the same breed, beasts of the same litter, that stand halting
between two, in utrunque paratt, unresolved to either, and ready to be any
thing with the State. These ask not of their father (says a Divine) a fish but
a scorpion: for a fish would teach them to go only forward, but a scorpion
does teach them to go backward and forward. Like they are to Barnacles, says
Saint Austin, that are neither flesh nor fish: to Bats, that are neither birds
nor beasts: to the mongrell Israelites, that spak both Hebrow and Ashdod Nchem.
13.24.
: to Balaam, that could both bless and curse Numb 23.
, to the sons of Issachar, mea skillful in the times 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
. Using religion for a cloak, to wear abroad, cast off at home; or to put on,
only upon high-dayes, when they are to converse with their betters, as
Jeroboams wife did her demure clothes 1 King. 13.2.
, when she was to speak with the Prophet. Of all which kind of persons, I may
justly ask, as Jacoh once of his lost Joseph, Here Is the coat but where is the
man Genesis 37.33.
? a party-colored coat, a double minded man James 1.8. (...).
, ^^stable in all his ways, imprisoning the truth in uarightcausmsse Romans
1.18. (...)
, and dissembling it ever and anon for carnal respects; palling in his horns,
with the snail, for every pile of grass, and ashamed of his Masters cognizance
for every light counterblast of disgrace or danger. Oh detestable
sheepishnesse, and dastardlinesse, fit for such a doom, even to be turned out
among dogs Pev 22 15.
and hell hounds. For the fe^r u^, and unbelreving, and the abominable, and
murderers, etc. shall all have their part in the burning lake Revel 21.8.
: but the fearful first. Lo these are heid worthy to be set in the front, and
to lead the ring-dance of such rehrohates, as shall be hurled into hell. The
Lord holds all such white-liver'd sould^ers in such special detestation, that
he will not employ them so far, as to break a pitcher or to bear a torch in his
service Judge 7.3.
. And for as many as are ashamed of Christ asore men, he will one day be as
shie every whit, and as much ashamed of them before his Father, and the blessed
Angels Mark. 8.38.
: at what time he will make most ample relation, and all honorable mention of
every such Oaesiphorus as was not ashamed of his chain, 2 ^nn. 1 10, 17, 18
but fed him hungry, clothed him nak^d, visited him imprisoned Mar. 25.53.
etc. the good Lord will grant them to fiade mercy, nay glory and honor and
immortality in that day Rom 2.7.


And lastly for all lukewarm Laodicean^, prosligate professors, and
temporizing Gospellers that can tune their siddles to the base of the times,
resolving to play nothing but what the company calls for, the Lord will spew
such parasi^es out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. N^hil Salvator medium amat, tepidos
evemiit Hieron.
as too loathsome a morsel for his nice stomach to brook or bear with. Now
when a man spues he gets him into a corner: so will Almighty God rid his
slomack of such into Hell. Ab, says he, I will ease me of mine enemies, Esaias 1.
I will lay up this loathsome stuff that lies so hard upon my stomach, which
done, the devil, as a dog, stands ready waiting to lick up Gods vomit: he
works up and down, says St. Peter for the nonce) seeking whom be may swallow
down: 1 Pet. 5.8. (...).
whence also he is eliewhere called thegreat red dragon: Rev. 12 3. (...)
c^uentur ^gn^us, insernalis. Use 2.
a dragon for his cruelty, and a greatred dragon, for the blood of souls he
has sucked, and wherein he has drencht and even dyed himselt red again.

SECT. 4. Use 2. A sortable Exhortation to courage for Christ, with four helps
(...).
WHose madness let us all learn to enjoy, Optimum est al ena s^ui ins^ia.
and (for a second use) be exhorted to set seriously in hand with the practne
of the most (...), but much neglected duty: laboring to shine forth in these
evil time, Ephesians 5.16
like the Lam? that shined out in the smoakie surnace: Genesis 15.17
like the bright Harr that shewe^ it (...) in the midst of darkness: Marthew 2
nay like God himself who then (...), best works when men are at worst, 1 Pet.
1 5 with 2 Timothy 3 1 2 Pet. 3 3
overcomming our evil with his good, and not sufrring our perverseness to
inte rupt the course of his kiednesse. Hos. 2 13.
Beye (...) herem of God, as dear children, ^phe^. 5 1 As (...) s^^rred up his
sheng (...) when he heard the Phili^^ns were upon him
let your piety and patience then most appear, when impiety and violence do
most prevail. Let your zeal (by an holy (...) ristasis) then slame out and
break thorough all impedimants, when most opposed and oppugned: like lime which
is k^ndled with water: like gold that g^^st^rs most in the fire: like the rose
that smells sweeter in the still then upon the stalk Saul's malice serves but to
enhance David's z^^l: the more outragiou, was the one, the more courageous was
the other; As the colder the air, the more the fire scorcheth, and as the
harder the weather the more the ba^h scald^th. And what though David here
traitor 1 Samuel 22.8
from Saul, and runnagate 1 Sav 25 10
from Na^al, and all that naught is from the abjects and base companims, that
came round about him and made mouths at him. Vsal. 35.15
It is a brave thing to do well and h^ar ill, (...): Mog. in Plut. Apaph (...)
his Martyr.
said that Heathen-Prmce. And, Do well and hear ill is written upon heaven
gate, said that Martyr u once, that was hasting thither Elias-like) in a fiery
charret. Gods way was ever evill-spoken of, and such a trodd it, as little
favored of the world, as David was of the Philistin-Princes. 1 (...) 29.9
But what says the son of D^vid, who himself also was called traitor and
Beelzebub, and had tr^^ll of cru^li mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of
bonds and imprisonm^nt? Heb. 11.36
(...) are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you for my sake, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in heaven. Mat. 5 11.12 Gentiles chrisitanos dixerunt
hemicidas. sacrilegos, incestos, hojies publicos, adoraiores asini etc Te^^ull.
Take up the reproach of the mad multitude (that speak (...) of that good (...)
know not, 2 Pet. 2.12
having hearts as barren of grace as Michols womb was of children) and say: It
was before the Lord 2 Saru. 6.22. Ego Datitem plu (...) cit. Gr^g lib. 27. cap
26.
who has done such and such great thing for me, and therefore if this be to be
vile, Ple be yet more vile to you, that I may be more preciously esteemed of
God. What though you find few or none that will set in, or side with you in
this important work, in this one thing neccssary? Lake 10.42
what though all men forsake you, as they did st. Paul at his first answer 2
Tia. 4.16, 17 18
and epperance before Neroes tribunal: yet the Lord will stand with thee, and
strengthen thee, as he did him, yea preserve thee safe and entire to his
heavenly kingdom. Lift up the hands therefore that hang down, and the feeble
knees: Heb. 12.12.
yea list up your eyes, and see heaven open over your heads with Steven, Act.
7.55.56 Agnotheae dicebantur, qui sacris certamimbus praeerant erantq^decem.
viri. Jul: Polie
God and his holy Angels looking on and applauding him: yea see Christ himself
(that heavenly Agonotheta) standing over thee, as there, Heb. 12.12.
and holding out unto thee an immarcesc^bl crown with this inscription,
VINCENTI DAEO. To him that overcommith, will Lgrant to sit with me in my
throne, even as Lalso overcume and am set down with my father in his throne.
Rev. 3 21.
In confidence of which high prize, let the saints be encouraged, Ioshua-like,
to advance forward in a holy singularity, with all sweet content, and
undauntednesse of spirit, toward that incorruptible and unfadeable 1 Pet. 1.4.
(...) Yea like pearls which though they grow in the sea, yet retain the color
and brightens of heaven Chrrs.
crown above: not swimming down the stream of the times, nor being carried
along by the swinge and sway of the place where they love: but like sishes
retaining their natural sweetness in the salt sea: Orcus ^^avius in Pencum
illabitur, quem nec Peneus recipit, sed instar osei super nuanteth brevi spatio
portatum abdicat, nec penales aquas, Dirisque genitas, argenteis suis aquis
misceri permittit. Solin.
like Salamander unscorchtin the fire: like oil that will overtop all other
liquors, but not commingle: Orcus ^^avius in Pencum illabitur, quem nec Peneus
recipit, sed instar osei super nuanteth brevi spatio portatum abdicat, nec
penales aquas, Dirisque genitas, argenteis suis aquis misceri permittit. Solin.
ever holding a constant countermotion to the course of the world, and the
corruptions of the time; that ainidst all, you may keep a good conscience, that
richest treasure, and dearest Jewel (as One sarth well) that ever the heart of
man was acquainted with.

To help you herein for it is a duty of greatest difficulty) take these few
rules and directions. Lirst. press upon your could nees the former precepts;
Follow not a melcitude Exodus 23 2. S^turham invitari volueritis, inter paucos
angustam cram amoulantes non eritis Aug.
etc. with the rest above recited: consider withail the equity and
reasonableness of those commandments: for there is not any one law of God but
is holy and just and good, Romans 7.12. Majer pars meliorem vincat. Non possamiss
negare plures esse masos; and tam plures^ut inter eosprorsus non oppareant
grana in area. Aug. in Psalm 47.
Could we but see into it. Who cannot say that the greater part overcomm^th,
the baster, and that the most are ever the wor^^; and shall we go against
common fense, and univer sall experience? Besides, the seriptures are plain in
this point as in all other, simply necessa y to salvation) telling us that the
way to hell is broad and well beaton: and the many go in there, at. But o^ how
straight is the gare, and narrow the way that leads to life, and how few there
be that sinde it. Mat 7.14. (...) In vetustis codicibus legitur (...) idque
Theophylactus interpretatur, quasi particula n sit admiran it is, and ita
seriptum esset (...);
Christ slock has ever been found a little flock: Luc. 12.32. (...).
standing, as the host of lsrad, like two little slocks of kids: when the
wicked (on to'ther side) like the Aramites, fill the country. 1 King. 20.27. in
This the put blind Philosopher could see, and therefore say, Sapiendum cum
p^^uc is: m and Diogenes thought he should ever do best, when he did least what
the most did. And Cassianus counsels us in his epistles. Vive ut pauci, etc.
Live as those sewest live; that with the few ye may be found in the kingdom of
heaven. ut cum paucis inveniri merearis in regno dei.
It was a brave answer of Liberius an orthodox Bishop in the primitive times
who when he was pressed by the Emperor Constantius to forsake the truth, and
vote for Arrianisme by this argument. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Quota pars es tu orbis terrarurn? Art thou wiser then all the world? Mali
undique persirepunt, Quare sic vivis? Tu solus christianus es, quare non facis
quod facium alijs Aug. in Psalm. Dementia est-re solum in doctrina relrgionis
majorem esse lucem consecutum putare, quam tot hominum millra multis jam
seculis videre potuerunt etc. Malvenda apud Senarchaenum in vita Johan Diazij
He very honestly and discreetly replied, The truth is no whit prejudiced by my
alonenesse in standing out: nam and olim tres soturn etc. for of old also there
were there only that would withstand the wicked edict of the king of Babel. And
remarka^le is the speech of Nicolas the first, Bishop of Rome to Michael the
Emperor of Constantinople. Numerus pusillus non obest ubi abundat pietas, nec
multiplex predest ubi abundat impietas.
It matters not how srnall the number he, if godly: nor how great, if ungodly:
since multitude and Antiquity are but ciphers in Divinity, and not much to be
stood upon, surther then they will bear waignt in the balance of the
Sanctuary. Non numeranda suffragra sed expendenda. Non numero haec judrcantur
sed pondere. Tull Off.
.

Secondly, study that great but much neglected art of self denial; and learn
to say peremptory Luc. 9.23. (...) with a stout and constant denial again and
again, to so unreasonable a request.
nay to any whether person or thing (theugh never so dear or delightful) that
would cool thy courage for Christ, or call thee cst this most savoury course.
And first, if carnal Reason come in and offer to obtrude that twise-sodden
colewort Crambe bis posita foetet. Eras.
of hers (persuading thereby to a politic forbearance of forwardness by the
fear of what may follow) Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over-wise Eccles. 7.16.
q. d. be discreet and wary, and stand not so strictly upon terms of
conscience: why should thou destroy thy self? why should thou incurr the
needless danger of envy and vexation, by thrusting thy self over-eagerly into
observation? Stop thine ears, I say, to this subtle enchantresse, Mat. 16.24.
and rather harken to the voice of Gods spirit in the verses immediately
following. Be not wicked overmuch (says he, in opposition to that former, Be
not just overmuch Eccle 7.17 See Pemble in locum.
) q. d. He that slackes, and remits but a little in goodness, and (for his
own ease and honor) qualifies it, though but with a little degree of
badnesse, the same is wicked, and overmuch wicked: Neither be foolish (in
opposition to that abovesaid, Be not wise overmuch) as all are, that temper
spiritual wisdom with carnal policy: for why should thou dye before thy
time? to wit, by an unseasonable death from Gods hand; then when it were better
for thee to do any thing then to dye: since after death there is judgment, and
hellfire, and all to be passed thorough by the poor soul. This is the voice
of heaven, wherewith ye are to still and stop the mouth of that wisdom which
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. Iam. 3.15.


Next, for carnal friends, deny your self also in them Deuteronomy 33 9.
if you mean to keep in with Christ. They Will be ready enough with Peter Mat.
16.22. (...).
to prompt you to be good to your self, and not rashly to run the hazard of a
singularitan, to your I know not how great disgrace and disadvantage If my
father stood weeping on his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck
behind me etc. I would sling my mother to the ground, run over my sacher, and
tread him under my feet, thereby to run to Christ, when he calls me. Hierome.
etc. For a counter-poison, consider: is there any friend to God? or any foe to
him? Did not Eli pay dear for displeasing the Lord, to please his children 1 Samuel 2.29. See the story of Rebezies the Prench martyr Act. and Mon f 842.
? and had it not like to have cost Moses his life for forbearing to circumcise
one child (as he had done another) for angring his wife Exodus 4.24.
? Tell me not here ^shall be mocked, and hooted at, if I refuse to be
fashionable. why, what of that? if a lame man laugh at thine upright walking,
will thou therefore halt (...) v. Plato.
? if dogs bark and bounce at the Moon, shall she therefore hide her head, and
cease to shine any longer En peragit cursus-surda Diana, suos.
? David becam the drunkards song, and a byword among the sons of Belial, who
came round about him, making mouths and mowes Ps 35.15, 16
was he ever a whit the worse man for that? Did not Paul hear Pest, Act. 24.5.
(...), a botch.
Elisha baldpate 2 King. 2.23. Ascend thou bald-pate as Eliah did before thee
Sarcastice
, our Savior himself Conjurer, ob.
traitor, madman? So true is that of Chrysostom, sol.
Mad sinners censure all for mad that come short of themselves in madness
Inter insanos. insanus videtur quisquis non insanit.
. A very Philosopher could pity those that set him at naught, and count it his
honor and happiness to be despised by the many (...).
. And Seneca's enemies could not faster learn to rail, then he to neglect.
didicit ille maledicere, and ego contennere
3 Deny your selves further, in your liberties I am in phson till I am in
prison said Sincere Saunders. Act. Mon. p. 1358. 1 King. 22 26, 27.
with Michaiah, who would not biasse for any man's pleasure, nor voice with the
rest of Ahabs parasiticall Prophets, though he were sure to kiss the stocks for
his stiffnesse, and there to be fed with hard-meat, till the kings return in
peace. Deny your selves astly in your lives, if called unto it. What cared the
three children for Nebuchadnezzars wrath, burning seven times hotter then his
furnace Dan 3.16.19. I occidere potes, lsdere non potest. Patus de Nerone apud
Dion: Cass:
? kill them he might possibly, Mihi vita eripi porest, at non consessio verit
atis. Basil.
burt them he could not Mat. 16.24. abdicat semetipsum, and perinde habet atque
si nihil adse pertineret. Beza
, and that made them so resolute. For he that truly fears God, and thinks upon
his name, dreads no danger, Hie est ille Farellius qui nullis difficultaibus
fractus, ruallis minis, convitiis, verberibus denique inflictis territus etc.
Melchior Ad. in vit. p. 115.
fears no colors, denies himself utterly, m takes Christ's cross upon his
shoulders, a faggot in his arms, and his life in his hand, 1 Samuel 19.5.
and so resolves to follow Christ thorough thick and thin, thorough fire and
water, poison and sword, or any thing else that stands in his way. *

Thirdly blow up thy smaller spark into a flame of zeal; which is an extreme
heat of all the affections, love, joy, defire, indignation, detestation, and
the rest This as it will make us come off more roundly in Gods hardest or
hottest services, ( fervent in spirit serving the Lord Romans 12.11. (...),
boiling. It is said of Baruch in, repai^ing the wall of Jerusalem, he repaired
earnestly; or as some read it, So accendit, he fired himself from others
chilness, and so simshed his portion in a thorter time.
, says the Apostle) so it will kindle it self from others coldness, sharpen
it self from others dullness, quicken it self from others slownesse and
heaviness to duty: like as the cold of the air makes in us our natural heat
the stronger, and as water causes the fire in the forge to flame the faster.
See an instance of this in David: My zeal, says he, has consumed me, because
thine enemies has forgotten thy Psalm. 119.139
word. Lo, his anger so burnt against the sinners of his time, that it eat him
up Psalm. 69 9.
, yea it inflamed his very hatred. So far was he from running along with them,
that he abhorred them in his heart: for do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee, and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them
with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies Psalm 139.21, 22. Verse 20. Quoed
Sol eodemi inere meabit, quo n^nc meat, eousque nunquam socieratem came Xerxe
coibimus I acedaem. ap. Plut.
. David knew well that patience in Gods cause, and in case of his offense, was
but blockishnesse; moderation, mopishnesse; connivence, cowardice; and that
madness here was better then meekness: which made him hate such wicked ones
as spoke against God, and took his Name in vain, with perfection of hatred: and
not make dainty upon any politic respect, to cast down the gauntlet of
defiance to the faces of them, as his utter enemies. Now the blessing of God
light on that Good heart that has a stomach (as David, and the good people in
the Text had) against God; dishonor. But it is a fearful thing, and a sore
sign of a spiritual declension, when Christians can comport with Gods
enemies; and digest their oaths and other outrages, with as much ease, as the
Ostrich does the hardest iron. The angel of Ephesus could not abide them that
were evil, nor away with those counterfeits, that called themselves A^ostles,
and were none Rev. 2.2.
, and is highly commended for it: though otherwise none of the forwardest Verse.
4. Avaritiae nomine taxari videtur bonus alioqui Episcopus. Pareus. Si fuit
Timothcus, u^ quidam centendunt, etc. ib. ver. 1.
. When the contentious Corinthians heard carnal, for coming so near, and
looking so like the wicked, that they could hardly be distinguished. Are ye not
carnal^, and walk as men 1 Cor. 3.3. (...).
? A foul fault in a Christian.

Lastly, Think sadly and seriously upon thine h^^h and heavenly calling Heb.
3.1.
, and labor to walk as (...) Apostle often exhorts Ephesians. 4.1. Colos. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
: And know, that God will (...) from others which he will not abide in his own.
(...).
Every cal^ing has a Decorum, a seemlinesse, a suitableness appertaining to
it. A Gentleman has another manner of behavior then a scullion, a Courtier
then a Carter, a Prince then a pesant: and so should a Christian too, then
another man. He should demean himself nobl^, heavely, gellantly (...), Heb. 13
18 (...), Rom 13.13. (...), Tit. 2.3. (...). 1 These 2.12. (...), Ephesians 5 15.
(...), to go to the utmos of a thing.
, worthy of God, and as becomes a saint Ephesians 5 3.
, a citizen or heaven, and a burgess of the new Jerasalem Ephesians 2.19.
: Not clownsnly, unworthily, basely foolishly Ephesians. 5.15.
, like an inhabitant of the earth Rev. 12.12.
, or a ^ree-holder or hell Mat. 24.51. (...).
. Greatest States afford least liberty In maxima fortuna minima licentia.
Salust in Cat.
, and therefore are such worse (says that ^ather) though they be no worse then
others, because they ought to be better Ideo deteriores s^mus quia meli^res
esse debemus. calvi.
. It is some singular thing M^t 547. (...).
that God looks for from his people; and that which is excellent,
extraordinary, and above vulgar pollibility. Should such a man as I she? said
good Nehemtah Neh. 6.11.
q. d. Though other men ^aply may, yet ^ may not do it: though the Philistines
might carry Gods Ark in a new cart, and hear no further of him 1 Samuel 6 10, 11
: yet if Israel attempt such a thing God will make a breach upon them 2 Samuel 6
8.
This is that which the Lord has said, I will be sanctified in all them that
draw near unto me L^vi^. 10 3.
, Sanctified he will be, one way or other; either in us or upon us Aut a nobis,
aut in nos Aug. Keeping their virtue f^ll like a pear in a puddle.
. It Is sure, he will be no loser by us: as he should be in a high degree,
should not we be harmless and blameless, the sons of God, without rebuke,
in the midst of a crooked and p^r^erse generation amongst whom we shine as
l^ghts Phil. 2 15.
. so that the Sun may go unseen, as soon as such Qai in excelso aetatem ag^nt,
eo^um facta cunclin. ^ales novire. Salust. ad Caesarem.
. And as the least aberrarion is quickly espied in those heavenly bodies, so in
the saints of God: nothing they do escapes sight and censure; all is marked and
observed Omnium oculi in te sunt conve^si S^m. S^ip.
They watch for my halting Jer 20.10. (...), 1 Pet 2.2 They are not observed
that do as the most: but if any vary from the multitude, all eyes are upon him.
Bishop Halls Contemp.
, says Jeremy, as those that would desire no better sport: they pore and pry^s
into every particular, if happily they may take us. tripping in any thing; they
search into our whole conversation more narrowly, more thoroughly, then Laban
once did into lacobs stuff Genesis 31.34
ready pressed, and prepared to blaze, and blaspheme for the least slip they can
lay hold on, be it but in a rash and indiscreet speech that falls from us, or
the like. Now what a glory is it to slaughter envy it self? to stop an open
mouth? nay to reprove their darkness by our light Ephesians. 5.11.
, their covetousness by our contentedness, their pride by our lowliness,
their peevishness by our patience and peaceableness, etc. and so to clothe them
with their own shame Psalm 109 29
, by our unblameable behavior, that they shall self condemned (...), Tit.
3.11. Justinius martyr fatctur se, conspecta Chrisi ianorum plotate in vita,
conslantia autem in morte. collegisse veram es. se, quam pros^terentur,
doctrinam.
return and discern between the righteous and tho wicked: and be forced to
testify of us, as Saul of David, that we are more righteous then they 1 Samuel
24 17
. This is to shine as lights (...). Psalm. 2.15.
in the world. Herein indeed, like the Sun, which although wicked men may at
sometimes hate, because it discovers their deeds of darkness, yet are they
so convinced with its beauty and excellency, that they cannot for shame speak
against it.

Now to wind up all in a word: Look to your s^lves that we lose not those
things that we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward 2 John 8.
. The ends of the world, you see, are come upon us 1 Cor 10.11
, cast we are upon the last and worst times of all his u^imis and pessimis
temporibus. Berrard.
, those hard and perilous times 2 Timothy 3.1. (...).
, which the Apostle long since prophesied of: wherein because iniquity
abounds, the love of many is waxen cold Mat. 24.12.
. Who sees not every age worse then other, and (to go no further) this then
the last It is remarkable that Mr. Fox relates of our Ancesio^s even in K. H.
8. time. Cerres the servent zeal of those Christian days seemed much superior
to these our times, as appeared by their sitting up all night in reading and
hearing, etc. To see their travels, earnest seekings, burning zeals, readings,
watchings, sweet assemblies, love. concord, godly living, saithfull marrying
with the saithfull, may make us now in these ci^^ days of sree pros^ession to
blush (...) shane Act. and Mon. or the Church. fol 750.
Do not diverse among us fall from the love of the Gospel? Is not religion
turned, with many, into a mere formality and policy? our ancient heat and
forwardness, into a general coldness in profession, lukewarmnesse in
religion, denying the power of it in our lives and conversations? Well, I say
no more to as many of you in our Thyatira as have not the doctrine of Iezabel,
and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, but this, That
which ye have already, hold fast till Christ come Rev 2.24, 25.
. And seeing ye know these things before, take head lest ye also, being plucked
away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own sledfastnesse 2 Pet.
3.17.
. Take heed that ye prove not, with the Prophet Esaias, men of polluted lips, by
living among a people of polluted lips Esaias 6.5.
: that ye learn not to swear, with Joseph Genesis 42.16.
, by conversing with swearers: and to curse with Peter Mat 26.74.
, by being awhile among the ruffianly soldiers. The worse any times are, and
the less comfortable, the better should we be, and the oftener in Gods
presence Mic^h. 7.6, 7.
: therefore walking exactly (...) Ephesians. 5.15.
, (or, as in a frame) and redeeming the time, by a redoubled diligence in all
holy duties, because the days are evil. Let others strange (...). 1 Pet. 4.4.
and wonder what is come to us alate, that we refuse to run with them (as once)
into the same excess of riot: say thou to thy self To walk with God is a
precious praise, though none do it but my sell ^and to walk with man, with the
world, with a town, or ^arish in wicked ways, is a deadly sin, though ^^lhous
do (...) B Babington upon Genesis 6.8
; Better go to heaven alone, and with the ill will of my neighbors, then to
hell with never so much company, and with the love of all the world. But indeed
ye are not alone, however it may seem so (as it did once to Elias 1 King 19.10.
): for ye have many fellows abroad, your brethren and companions in the kingdom
and patience of Jesus Christ Rev. 1.9.
, who will be ready, as here, to join with you in speaking often one to another
for mutual edisication, and encouragement Clouds of wimesses thousands
thousands of (...) and every of them worth ten thousand of others, as St
Chrysostom. speaks, Hom. 26. ad Pop. Antioch.
. Beside those other also above, (whom you may see by the eye of says) the
crowned and glorfied Saints, I mean: all which trod the same tract of
holiness with you, have gone to heaven alone, and been hated for it Joh. 15.15
: yet is not any one of them heard now to say. Oh what fools were we, when time
was, to be so strict and conscientious, to stand upon such nice points, to
sequester our selves from the corrupt courses and companies of others 2 Cor.
6.17
, to deprive and abridge our selves of the pleasures of sin, and delights of
life etc. Oh, no such word is ever heard to fall from their holy lips: but they
rejoice rather, and infinitely exult and glory in that God, that gave them an
heart to do as has been said, and in those rivers of exquisite and unmixed
pleasures, with the which their good hearts are even inebriated (...). Joh
2.10. Hag. 1.6.
, and (in a sober sense) made drunk again; whiles they continually behold his
face, with whom they once walked in the flesh, as a man with his friend. In who
e presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for ever more Psalm. 16. ult.
.

CHAP. II. Doctr. II. Of the several sorts of Fears, and That every faithful
Christian fears the Lord.
H^th rto of the Duty here performed, as touching the first circumstance, to
wir of time, noted in the particie Then: The second follows, and that is of
person, who they were that thus spoke often one to another. And these come here
described unto us, under a double notion, first as fearing the Lord, secondly,
an thinking upon his Name. As to the first: Constriciia cordis ex sensu mali
instantis. Pareus in M^t 25 Hinc G^eci (...) ^cant.^ lig^men^um, eo quod quasi
g^lu a^lringit Na^ianz^orat. 7.
Fear (in a general sense) is nothing ^lse out an astection of the soul
sh^inking in it self from some imminent evil. Hereof there are three sorts
usually reckoned. 1. Natural. 2. Carnal. 3. Spiritual. The first of these we
cannot justly fault, if it do not degenerate into the second: for every thing,
by an instinct of uncor^upted Nature, desires the conserva^ion of it self, and
fears the contrary. You may s^e an instance of it in our blessed ^aviour who,
to man^fest himself a true man, subject to like passions with (...), yet still
without sin, It being with Ch^^^t as with a crystal glass full o^^iear water
which is still pure howsoever is he shaken. P. B.
trembled at the appreh^nsien and approach of Death, which i^to nature of all
terribles the most terrible, as the Philosopher Aristot. Ethic. l 3.
: and the king of fears as Job defines it. Job 18.14.
To him, you must needs think, it was so (if ever to any) whose soul suffered
the very soul of sufferings, as one expresses it, Purchase Microc^sm:
which made him offer up prayers and sup^lications with strong crying and
tears to him that was able to save him from death; and was heard in that he
feared. Heb. 5.7.


Next, there is a carnal fear, and that is of the Creature Majore formidin
and callidiore ^^^^litate Caesarem (...) Sed (...) ratiore (...) sed meant
praesentatrae (...) etc. Tert. de To (...) Apologe^ ^op. 27.
more then the Creator, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God Nche. 9.32.
as Nehemiah styles him. itaris^th partly from want of faith in the power and
providence of the Almighty: the Aposties were therefore (...)
carnally-fearsull, because (...) petty-sidians or small-sauls Mat 8.25
: Partly also from want of Spiritual fear, to the which therefore it is
usually opposed in holy scripture, as in that of our Saviou^. Fear not them
that kill the body etc. but fear him which after he has killed, has ^ower to
^ast into hell: yea ^^ay unto you fear him Mat. 10.28.


And this latter is that third sort of fear, which being nothing else but an
awsull respect to the Divine Majesty, we therefore call Spiritual. 1. from the
object God, wh^ is both a Spi^i Ioh. 4.
and the father of Spirits Heb. 11.
, the proper object of this and all other affections of u^ns ^oule Luc. 10.27.
. Whence it is that by an appeilative proper he is (...) Fear, by the Psalmist.
^ring presents unto Fear^ Psalm. 76.11.
so runs the Origi^all; that is, to him that ought to be feared, as it is
usually read and rendered. 2. from the principal efficient and chief Author of
it, and that is Gods holy Spirit, called therefore a spirit of fear Esaias 11.2.
3. from the blessed effect it has upon the spirit of a man, for it
spiritualizeth and sanctisieth both us and our services Psalm. 2.11. (...), ^uae
parit. (...). Doct:
; and is therefore here rightly made the mark of a spirituall-minded man, the
constant charter of a true Christian, and a plain distinctive note, whereby to
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that ser^^th God, and
him that serves him not. What may we learn hence but this?

That every faithful Christian fears the Lord, neither is he any true
servant of God, that has not his heart possessed and seasoned with the
spiritual reverentiall fear of God.

SECT. I. The Doctrine cleared, and confirmed by Scripture.
THe truth of which Assertion will soon appear, if we take notice how the holy
scripture 1. conjoynes Gods service and his fear, making them go hand in hand,
as individual friends and companions 2. confounds them and takes them for one
and the same thing. 3. gives it ordinarily for a just description of a godly
Christian, that he truly fears the Lord.

First, you shall find Gods true service and his holy fear go coupled and
handfasted in sundry scriptures. Some few for a taste: Now therefore fear the
Lord, says Joshua in his last farewell to the world, and serve him in sincerty
and truth Josh. 24.14
: intimating that there is no sincere service done to God, where his fear is
not found. So the Psalmist, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him
with reverence Psalm. 2.11.
. Fear then, must be one thing in Gods works, and reverence another, whatsoever
be the third. Indeed it is the first second and third in Gods true service As
Demosthenes once said of Elocution in an Orator.
. Hence, the Apostle, Let us have grace, says he, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Heb. 22. (...) quae parit (...).
As who should say; A fearlesse heart is certainly a graceless heart: neither
let such a man think that he shall ever receive any wages at Gods hand for such
unacceptable work; since displeasing ^^rvice is a double dishonor.

But secondly, as Gods true fear and service are in some places of scripture
conjoined, so in other some they are confounded and indifferently taken the one
for the other as terms convertible. See for this Deuteronomy. 6.13. compared with,
Mat. 4.10. and again Mat. 15.9. with Esaias 29.13. whereupon Solomon the wise
makes this fear of God the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the
first and last in Gods business. The basis and beginning of all he sets it
for, in the beginning of his Proverbs Prove. 1 7.
: the end and upshot of all he concludes it, in the close of his Ecclesiastes.
Let us hear the end of all, says he, Fear God, and Eccl. 12.15. Hoc est enim
totus homo. Ergo si hoc est omnis homo, absque hoc nihil est homo. Bern. super
Cant ser. 20.
keep his commandments, for this is the whole man, Act. 13.16.
as Broughton (after the vulgar) reads that text.

Lastly, to persuade this, the scripture usually describes a godly person by
this property; sets him out by this periphrasis, not only here in the text, but
a few verses below chap. 4.2. But unto you that fear my name (set in opposition
to the proud and wicked ver. 1. as these here to those stout rebels ver. 13.14,
15.) shall the Sun of righteousness arise etc. So elsewhere up and down Gods
book. Men of Israel, says the Apostle, and ye that fear God give audience
Act. 13.16.
A close connection you see: for All that are Israelites indeed, Jews inwardly
Romans 2 29.
do fear God, according to that of Solomon, He that walks in his uprightness
fears the Lord Prove 14.2.
Whence it is pinned as a badge upon the sleeve of every faithful Christian,
as of Job (for instance) in the old Testament, Job 1.2. Act. 10.2.
and Cornelius in the New, that they f^ared God, and eschewed evil, u for by
the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Pro. 16.6. The scripture then is
express for us you see, that every servant of the Lord fears the Lord:
Neither need we want Reasons for it whether we look upon this holy fear in its
1. Causes 2. Consequents 3. companions. 4. cont^aries, the opposites I mean, in
either extremes.

SECT. II. The Doctr. further confirmed by Arguments drawn from the 1. Causes,
2. Consequences, 3. Companions, 4. Contraries to the true fear of God.
FOr the causes, first, partakers of the heavenly calling, Hob 3.1.
and that Covenant of grace, one special claus whereof is this, I will put my
fear into their hearts ('it is a fruit then of Gods own setting, and taken off
the tree of life, for they shall never depart from me, but I will rejoice over
them to do them good, and will plant them in truth with my whole heart, and
with my whole soul Ier. 32.40.
It Is a blessing of Gods own right hand. I will put my sear etc. I, is
emphaticall, and exclusive. q..d I, and only l. 2. And not a common blessing
neither, but such as he will bestow on his own alone, with whom he is in
special covenant: Thirdly, And this by way of infusion, that all may be of
grace: for he will put his fear into their hearts: Fourthly, and for the best
end; all this is, that they may never depart from him. For this is a filial
fear, out of ingenuity: and the servant abides not in the house for ever: but
the Son abides for ever, Ioh. 8.35.
says the natural Son of God that came out of the bosom of his father, knew
all his counfell, and upon whom the spirit of the fear of the Lord rested for
his members. Some other subordinate, and less principal causes also of this
grace in speech I might here mention, as making to ourpurpose: such as are 1. a
lively faith in all the glorious and gracious attributes of God, especially his
fatherly compassion and kindness, Hos. 3. vlt. Psalm. 130.4.
which is better then life, Psalm. 63.3.
2. an a^dent child-like affection to God as a father, whose displeasure we
therefore fear and feel more bitter then death Eccles 7.26. Neoffendamus quem
diligamus and ne ab eo separemur. M. Sentent: l. 3. did. 34. Reas. 2. In via
Dei a timore incipitur, ut ad fortitudinem venia. tur. Non si^ut in via seculi,
timor debilitatem; it a in via, Dei timor for^itudinem gignit. Greg.
. But these with some other graces that concur as principles to the
constituting of the right fear of God, ^ pass for have, and come to the second
Reason.

And that is taken from the effects and consequent of this holy fear, and they
also are such as suite only with Gods dear children, and are found in none
other besides. To instance only in two of them (till we come to the
Application:) First, Christian conrage, and a confident reliance upon Gods
fatherly love and affection for safety and salvation. In the fear of the Lord,
says Solomon, is strong confidence, and his children (for such only sear God,
which is the point in proof) have a place of resuge, Pro. 14 26.
what even siorme be up, they have God name to repair unto for shelter. Now the
Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run to it and are safe Pro.
18 10.
: safe, I^ay, it not from the common destruction, yet surely from the common
dis^raction; those slinging frights, horrible amazements, and woeful
perplexities, wherewith the hearts of those that sear not God are miserably
pestred, and even eaten up m^^e day of evil. Thou shall be mad for the sight
of thine eyes that thou shall see, Deuteronomy. 28.34.
says God to such: And again, they shall be at their wits ends, Psalm. 107.27
nay, at their lives ends for fear, and for looking after those things that are
coming upon them. Luc. 21.26. (...).
Nabal for example, whose heart even dyed within him ten days before he died
upon the apprehension of his late danger: and he became as a stone 1 Sa. 25.37.
But now it is otherwise far with those that fear God, that fear before him.
Eccl 8.12.
God is our refuge and our strength, says the Church, a very present help in
trouble. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be remooved, and though
the mountains be carried into the mi^st of the Sea Psalm. 46 1, 2. In pavidos
ferient ruinae. Hor.
. See an instance in David, he having made God his fear, could sing a requiem
to hi^ soul, Psalm. 116 7. Quid timet hominem hemo in sinu dei positus Aug.
rock it asleep in a holy security, and not once be afra^d for ten thousands of
people that had hemmed him in and desperately given out, that salvation it self
could not save him out of their hands. ps 3.2, 5, 6, 8
Against all which blasphemy, and bravadoes of his enem^es, he encourages
himself in the Lord his God, and comfortably concludes the Psalm, with,
Salvation is of the Lord, and I have devoted my self to his fear, Psa. 119.38.
therefore I cannot miscarry so long as he is in safety. If a child have his
father by the hand, though he be in the dark, he is not afraid: so is it with
us, whiles by says (the mother of this fear) we sit and see him that is
invisible Heb. 11.27.
at our right hand, Psalm. 16.8.
to support and save us.

A second effect of Gods holy fear is a careful thinking upon his name, a
reverencing of the commandments Pro. 13.13.
, a conscionable endeavor of doing his whole will, to the obedience whereof
this fear does strongly incline and enable us: For which cause it is, that the
Lord having delivered his law in great terror, wishes that the heart of his
people might be always fraught with his fear Deuteronomy. 5 29.
; which might be as a domestical chaplain, a faithful monitour in their
bosoms to quicken them to obedience. And the preacher in this respect
compriseth in this one grace alone, all other virtues and duties Eccl. 12.15.
because it involves and carries along with it a religious care of all the
commandments though never so harsh and uncouth, even to the denying of a man's
self in all his selves. 1. For his natural self: Isaac was reind in by this
religious fear from reversing Jacobs blessing (though natural affection
within, and Esau's roarings without prompted him thereunto, but,) he did not,
he durst not do it, because he trembled with a great trembling exceedingly Genesis
27.33.
, when now he saw that he had done unwilling justice. 2. For his carnal self,
^his own ease, honor, comfort, prosit, and other personal respect; and
conveniences: see it in Jonah, who after he had known the terror of the Lord 2
Cor. 5.11.
in the heart of the sea, in the belly of the whale, how willing was he on his
way to Nanveh Ion. 3 3.
? So the Prophet Esaias after he h^d ^^en God ^^ his majesty, was so subdued by
his fear, to the obedience of his will, that no sooner could the Lord say, whom
shall ^^en^? but he replied, here am ^, sand (...) Esaias ^ 8.
, though before he were wondrous unwilling to so unwelcome an er and. 3. in his
spiritual self, his own unde^itanding, judgment, reas^n, I mean. Abrahu^ was
excellent at this: for as in believing the promise of a son (...), he cens^^ed
not the dryness of his own body, nor the deadness of Sarah's woe ^nb: he cared
not for that, but silencing his Reason esalted his says, giving glory to God:
Rosq. 18, 19
so in parting with him again at Gods appointment he conserred not with slesh
(...) blood (as St. Paul speak, in another case Gal. 1.16.
) but getting up early Gen 22.3.
(which showed his wil^ingnesse on his way) he went an end with the work, and
therefore hea^d from heaven; Now I know that thou fear me etc. ver 12.


4. Lastly in his second self, wise and kind ed: a, Job, who retained his
integrity, and ^^nyed himself in his wicked wife that bad him cu^^e God and dye
Job 2.9. The Septuagint help Ioby wise to scold adding a whole verse of semal
passion: I must now, says she g^e wander, and have no place to rest in etc.
: for he feared God, and so eichewed that evil also. The like we may say of
Moses the servan of the Lord, who after he had met God in the Inn, and was
surprised with his fear, not only circumcised his son, though to the great
disconte^t of his froward wife, Exodus 4.26.
but also sent her away upon that occasion and trouble (as it is likely) to her
fathers house again; who met him at Eoreb, and reslored him his wife and
children. Exodus 18.2.
Thus the fear of God fame a man to an umversall self-denya^l and makes him
willing to be whatsoever the Lord world have him to be, in every part and point
of dut,: than which I know not what ^u^er sign can be showed of a sanc^isied
soul.

Thirdly for the companions of Gods fear, they are such as do accompany
salvtion Heb. 6 9. (...). Scholia^^ Ps. 119.155. ^eas. 3.
: which as far (...) the wick^d as they are from se (...) Gods shatu^es h.
These are,

First sound judgment and saving knowledge of God and his will, our selves and
our duties. Hence they are set so near together in the prophet. The spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord Esaias 11.2. ver 3.
. And in the next verse, This same spirn shall m^k^ him of quick understanding
in the fear of the Lord, to discern of things that be excellent: such as none
of the p^^n as of this wo^ld ever knew, but God h^th revede^ them to us (that
desire so fear his (...) with Ne^^on ^b Neh. 1.11.
) by that spirit of his, that s^^rcheth ad th^^gs, (...) things of God, causing
us (for a largess) to know the things that are sre^ly given us of God 1 Cor.
2.10.
. And this way it is that the secret of the Lord is with them tha^ (...), and
he will (yet) show them his Covenant Psalm 25 14.
. Such shall be both of his Court, and his Council, as Abraham (for instance)
betwixt whom and the A^mighty, was much mutual correspondency, and exchange of
curetesy. (...) was the (...) of God Esaias 41.8.
, and God was the Fear of Ab^aham: for I (...) the thus (...) me, said the
oracle, hooans^ thou hist not withheld thine enely sonre from (...) Genesis 22 12
Now if Abraham withheld not his son from God his Fear, shall God withhold
his secret from Abraham his friend? Noe: but he shall snow Gods mind with the
first Genesis 18.19
when the blind Sodomits shall not see, till they feel hell rame down from
heaven upon their hides (as a Father speaks) for sail of ten such men as
A^ra^^^ in five great townships Genesis 18.32
that feared God, and thought upon his name. For the froward is abomin it^on to
the Lord, but his secret is with the righteous Prove. 3 32
. And the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools (for want
of this fear) despise wisdom, and instruction Prove. 1 7


A second companion of this holy fear is sweetest complacency, and all dearest
delight in God and his ways. This also is an adjoynt of Gods holy fear, and an
indulgence granted only to his sons, and daughters. A good man is like a good
Angel Mat. 18 10 Timor transit in charitatem. Gregor.
, always looking upon the face of God: and the more he looks, the more he
loves, and the more he loves the more he fears: he loves in sear, and fears
in love: that like as in God, mercy and truth meet together Psalm 85.10
, so in the child of God, love and fear do kiss each other. By the first their
mouth is filled with laughter, and their hearts with joy Psalm. 126.2
, By the second they are troubled at his presence, and when they consider his
absence, they are afraid of it Job 23.15
. In respect of both, the Psalmist says, serve the Lord with fear, and
re^oyce before him with reverence Psalm. 2.11.
. These two concur in the godly in their journey to heaven, as they did in
Jacob journying to Padan Aram. How fearful is this place Genesis 28.17
says he, where yet nevertheless he saw nothing but blissful and beatifical
visions. Or as they did in the good women in the gospel, who departed from the
sepulcher with fear, and great Joy Mat. 28 8
. A strange composition of two so different affections: will you know a reason?
All other base-borne fear has pain in it 1 Ioh. 4.18 Omnis timor
supplicamentum habet. Tertul.
but this fear, that issues from love, carries meat in the mouth: for it is
not anxious and tormentfull, but delicious, and comfortable. Hence fear and
joy are set so close together by the psalmist. Blessed is the man that fears
the Lord, and (at same time) delights greatly in his commandments Psalm.
112.1.
(a practice proper to Gods free hearted people Psalm. 110.3. Neh 1.11.
) And the churches are said to walk in the fear of god, and in the comfort of
the holy ghost Act. 9.31
.

And here it might be easy to enumerate and reckon up many more Companions of
the fear of God, Timor virtuturn omnium custos est. Hierony.
such as are. 1. Humility for by humility and the fear of the Lord are riches
and honor and life Prove. 22.4
. 2. Care of sincerity and truth in Gods service: Now therefore fear the Lord
says Joshua, and serve him in sincerity and turth Josh. 24.14
. 3. Hope in Gods mercy, for Let them that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord,
says the Psalmist Psalm 115.11
. 4. Godly sorrow for the least sin 2 Cor. 7.11 Fuit Iosephi vita coelum
quoddam lucidissimis virtutum stellis exornatum: erga Deum quidem timoris ac
pietatisierga herum etc. Bucholcer: p. 211.
etc. But it shall suffice, in this have of time, and crowd of matter, to
shadow out unto you the lovely train of heavenly graces that guard and attend
the true fear of God in that on example of Joseph, a man famous for this fear,
and noe less eminent in the attendants and companions of it: as is well
observed by that divine Chronologer, in whose words I will relate it. Joseph's
life says he, was, a kind of heaven, gayly belpangled, and richly stored with
orient stars of excellent virtues. Toward his good God, he showed forth all
holy fear and piety: toward his loving master, thankfulness and fidelity:
toward his immodest mistress, shamefast'nesse and chastity: as touching
himself, all godly wisdom and continency: Toward his father (after this)
tender respect and more then Storke-like affection: Toward his brethren,
greatest mercy and tender compassion. In adversity, none so patient, Ferrum in
carcere transiit animam ejus Psalm. 105. Sed peccatum non transiit, vel
sauciavit conscientiam ejus ib. Reas. 4.
in prosperity, none so provident etc. And all flowing from this fountain of
Gods holy fear, most eminent and exemplary in Joseph, if ever in any, as ye
all know that are any whit versed in his heart-melting history.

Lastly, look a while upon the fear of God in the Opposite on either hand, and
you shall plainly see that none but the truly religious holds the mean. It
is he that walks in the middle way, though not without some stumbles in it,
and stragglings out of it otherwhiles, to the right hand or to the left: which
yet he quickly perceives, and as soon recalles and recovers. These extremes are
1. In the defect, a carnal security and senselesnes in sin. 2. In the excess,
an hellish and slavish fear of God, as a judge, or tyrant. The first of these
is nothing else but that bold venturousnes, whereby graceless and ungodly
persons presume to rush desperately, without fear Prove 14.2.
or wit, into sins of all sorts: flattering themselves with false hopes of
impunity Deuteronomy. 29.19
against all the judgments of God denounced in the word, and executed in the
world Exemplis tragicis non caret ulla domus.
, yea though their imiquitie be found to be hateful Psalm 36.1.2
. These the scripture terms fools, to whom t is a pastime to do mischief
Prove. 10.23 Heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur etc.
: living as if there were neither heaven nor hell, God nor devil; till (coming
at length to that dead and dedolent disposition of such as being past feeling
do work all uncleannes with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. (...).
) they work out to themselves their own damnation; and be made to feel that
unsupportable wrath and vengeance, which they would never be drawn to fear or
stand in awe of. For, Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that in a
desperate boldness or Cyclopicall contempt of the divine Justice, hardneth his
heart shall fall into mischief Prove 28 13
, yea shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy Prove. 29.1.
In executing of which dreadful sentence, though the Lord be slow, yet he is
sure, his forbearance is no quittance. But although a sinner, in high contempt
of Gods heavy displeasure, do evil an hundred times, and his days (through
Gods infinite patience) be prolonged, yet surely I know, says Solomon that it
shall be well with them that fear that Lord, which fear before him Eccles.
8.12.
. That is, that fear him in his ministers and deputies, trembling at his
judgments, while they hang in the threatenings Isa. 66.2.
melting, as Josich 2 Chr. 34 27
at the terror of his menaces; nay by the kindness of his mercyes, which
dissolves their good hearts, as weak water does some thin substances, or as
the hot ^un does the hard ice. An instance hereof ye have in that solemn
meeting at Mizpeh: where Israel, which had found the misery of Gods absence, is
now resolved into tears of contrion and thankfulness, when he was once
returned and settled in Kiriath-jearim. Then they met together at Mizpeh and
drew water and poured it out before the Lord 1 Samuel 7 6. In signum expiationis
iniquitatum ju^ta Job 11.15. R. S^lomon dicit quod h^c fe^erunt in signum
humiliationis q d sicut aqua effusa ad nihi 'um valet ultra. si^in conspectu
tuo nihil sumus aut videmur. 2 ^sal 86.11.
. Whether 'twere tears out of their eyes, or water out of their vessels (as a
ceremony, or pledge of their hearty humiliation) the difference is little.
Sure, it was to testify the tenderness of their hearts, which, having hanged
loose a long time from the Lord, began now to unite again unto his fear*. It is
certain that the mercies of God draw more tears from his children, then his
judgments do from his enemies: who as in prosperity bec use they have no
changes, therefore they fear not God Psalm. 55.19.
so in adversity their hearts are the more h^rd^ed thereby from his fear Is.
63.17. (...). Romans 8.15. (...). 2 Timothy 1.7.
(as in Pharaoh and Ahaz) till at last, by long trading with the devil in the
ways of sin, they come to lose, with him, all passive power also of being
wrought upon; and arrive at that that height of incurable hardness, that
neither ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy can possibly mollify:
Which is the greatest plague that can befall a man out of hell, and the very
next step into it.

But the second extreme, standing in as full opposition to that fear of God,
we are treating of, is, that slavish and hellish fear and terror that evil
spirits and men conceive of God, whom they look upon only as an implacable sin
revenging judge, or tyrant rather, ready to tear the very kell of their hearts
in suder Hos. 13 6. Quem metunnt Oderunt, Ennius. Odium timerem spirat. Tert:
and to send them packing to their place in hell. Hereupon follows an
exulcerate hatred of God, (according to that of the Poet, whom men fear they
hate) a desperate ^unning away from God, with Came, Saul, Ahrzath 2 King. 1.2.
Quem quisque odit pernsse expetit. Ennius.
etc. A secret rising up against God, and an inward desire, that there were no
such thing as God, that so they might never be called to an Audit and account
of their wicked ways, and sinful courses, as they are sure to be in that
dreadful day. This the Devil and his impes believe and therefore tremble Iam.
2.19.(...).
. The Greek word seems to imply such an excess of fear as causes gnashing of
teeth like the clashing of armor, or horrible yellings like the roaring of the
sea (...) est maris agnatio Hom: I^^ad: (...). vide Eustach: in locum. Nullum
maleficium sine formidine. quia nec sine conscientia sai. Tert. They have no
rest day nor night. Apoc. 14.11.
The reason of which outrage is rendered by Ter^u^iam. No sinner, says he,
escapes fear of Gods wrath, and all because he can never possibly shake off
Conscience: which (being Man's spy and Gods overseer) if it be not desperately
feared or sealed up securely with a spirit of slumber against the day of
slaugh^^r, does sting the evill-doer (betwix^ whiles Romans 2.15.
) with unquestionable conviction and horror. And thus it fares ordinarily with
a wicked person. But now it is otherwise with the godly, when they are out of
temptation (for then, you must know, it is ego non sum ego with them: they are
not themselves, neither can any right judgment, as then, be made of them) But
usually their hearts being purisied from an evil conscience Heb. 10.22
through the blood of sprinkling 1 Pet. 1.2
cast upon them by the hyssop bunch of faith Rom 5 1
, they have peace with god their reconciled father in Jesus Christ. Whom
therefore they love in fear, and fear in love, wishing nothing more then his
being. Let he Lord live Psalm. 18.44.
, says David) as the principle of their well-being: for it is good for me to
draw near to Jehovah Psalm.73.28
: Into whose presence they therefore flee, as the doves unto their windows
Esaias 69 8
. I will come into thine house in the mulutude of thy mercies, there is his
reverence Psalm. 5.7
Lo this is the guise of a godly person, whiles himself. He fears and loves,
fears and hopes, fears and prays, fears and feasts Jude 12.
, fears and works, yea works out his whole salvation with fear and
trembling: and all because he knows that it is not of himself, but of God (a
most free agent) that gives both to will and to work, and all of his own good
pleasure Philip 2.12.13.
, as the Apostle there enforces it.

SECT. III. Objections and Queries touching the Fear of God, cleared and
answered.
IF any object here that of Saint John, Perfect love casleth out fear 1 John
4.18


That is, Sol. Duo sunt timores Dei, servilis and amicalis. Bedain Prove. 1
(say we for abswer) servile and base fear, which love is perpetually purging
upon For as for filial and friendly fear, it is never cast out, no not in the
state of perfection neither: for the very angels cover their faces and feet
before God Esaias 6.2.
, as knowing their distance.

But is the fear of Gods children here purely filial, without all mixture of
that which is servile?

No:

Secondly, as it cannot be utterly cast out whiles we are here, so it is of
singular use to a Christian in his way homeward: for being pa^tly flesh, and
partly spirit, it is profitable for the unregenerate part (which is a slave and
not a son) to be contained in duty, and restrained from sin by the fear of
Gods justice, power and punishments. And hence it is (says One) that the fear
of God is so much urged in Scripture: Cum audis quod Dominus tuus dulcis est,
attend quid disigas: cum audis quod rectus, attend quid timea^: ut amore and
timore Dei excnatus legem ejus custodias. Cass super Psalm 25. Dulcis and rectus
Dominus. Si amor Deite tenere no^ potest saltem teneat and terreat amor
judicis, meius gehennae, laque^m^tis, ^olor^s injer ni, ignis urens, vermis
corrodens, etc. Hug. l. 3. de anima.
to show a difference between man's first integrity (wherein he needed no other
motive to duty then love) and the renovation of Gods image in us since the
fall; which being but imperfect, and in part only, therefore has God
purposely fixed in us the affection of fear, and sanctified it in his own, to
the restraining of them from sin, and provoking them to duty.

How far forth then may it be lawful to stand in fear of Gods wrath and
judgments?

Divines determine it thus: The chief object of godly fear is evil of sin: a
just man is one that fears an oath, Eccl. 9.2. Gods offense rather then his
own distress: which appears, in that however God spare him yet he will not
spare himself, he is a law to himself.
nor yet the punishment chirefly, and more then the offense: but the punishment
must be feared with the offense, the offense being feared first and most. And
this is both commanded by the Lord Christ Man 10.28, 29.
, and commended unto us in the examples of David Psalm. 119.120.
, Jostah 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
Habakkuk Hab. 3.16.
and diverse other saints. And the reason is ready rendered by Moses. Who
knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath
Psalm. 90.11.
: that is, As any man fears thy displeasure more or less, so shall he feel it,
as some understand that Text.

SECT. IIII. Use. 1. Information. They that scar not God are not his: and who
these are by their Character out of Psalm. 36.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Use. 1. NOw for Use of this point: Is it so, that every faithful servant of
God, fears God? hence then in the first place, will follow, as a consectary,
that all such as are destitute of this reverentiall fear of the Almighty, are
(notwitstanding all their other commendable parts and properties (to be
esteemed no better then graceless, and irreligious persons. Hence it is so
often made the brand of a son of Belial, that there is no fear of God before
his eyes: and this is purposely reserved in Scripture (after a large bedroll of
other abominations found in men's hearts and lives) to the last place of all
Romans 3.18 Mal. 3 5.
; to intimate: that the want of Gods fear is the ground of all the
forementioned mischiefs, the mother of all the misrule in the world: As in that
unjust Judge, (for instance) who was therefore unjust because he feared not
God, nor regarded man Luke 18.2.
. And surely the fear of God is not in this place, therefore they will slay me,
said Abraham of the men of Gerar Genesis 20.11.
. Lo, he could promise himself no good at all of that place and people,

God was not feared, may some say: what a reason's that? (...). Timendus,
terribili^, per Metony^^a^ Deus cui timor debetur. Shindler.
there is no people so barbarous, or person almost so brutish, that fears
not God.

For answer: I confess there is nothing more natural then to stand in awe of
a Deity. Whence also it is that God in the Greek tongue has his Name from
fear, as some derive it. And the Chaldee Paraphrast sometimes uses the word,
Fear or Terror, for God, because of the fear (confessedly) due to him. Hence
Jacob coming from Syria, and being to swear to a Syrian, swear by the fear of
his father Isaac Genesis 31.53.
. But that all fear not the true God, or, 2. that they do not truly fear him,
and so are none of his, it is more then evident.

First, it is certain that all men fear not the true God, but some thing else,
which they set up in his room. Who sees not that some fear idols and devils 1
Cor. 10.20. Lev. 17.7. Seghnirim of their horror, and terror which they cause
to men.
as Pagans: some hee-saints, and shee-saints, as Papagans: some the Queen of
heaven Jer. 44.17.
as the superstitious person, that consults his calendar, and scars nothing
more then to fall sick upon an evil day. Some again fear di^grace, as Saul 1 Samuel 15.30. see Jer. 38.19.
: danger and displeasure of great Ones, as Pilate; who feared, if he released
Clirist according to his conscience Caesote Caius Imperator.
should (as indeed afterward he did) pull his purple over his ears, and kick
him off the bench Contra propriae couscientiae testimoniu^, and ores sui
enuntiatum, he delivered up to death the Lord of life, and so not only drew
upon Casar and his throne the guilt of innocent blood (in which respect Christ
is said to have been crucified at Rome, Revel. 11.) but also ran himself at
once upon Gods and the Emperors heavy displea sure, and shortly after became
his own deaths-man. Eurrop. 1.7. Eus b.l. 2 c. 7.
: some fear loss of goods, as the rich young man, that went away sorrowful,
for nothing more, then that Christ should require such conditions as he was not
willing to yield to Mat. 19 20, 21
: Some fear loss of liberty, as those that forsook Paul the prisoner, and were
ashamed of his chai^ 2 Timothy 4.16
: some fear loss of life, making much of a thing of naught Psalm. 39.5.
, shrinking in the shoulder when called to carry the cross of Christ, or to
suffer with him, though it be to be glorisied together Romans 8.17
. Thus men can make a shift to fear any thing, so what they should fear; God, I
mean, (...) proper object of this, and all other our affections whatsoever.
There is (I confesie) a and of fear of God, abusively Timor Dei (...) sic
appellatus. Polan. Synt.
so called; a general fear, a fear at large, (...) in the wicked: such as were
those mongrell Samaritans, who feared the Lord, and worshipped their own Gods
after the manner of the nations 2 Kin. 17.33
. but this is rather a fright then a fear, a spirit of restraint, a p^nick
terror, falling eftsoons upon the foulest hearts, for the sa^egard of the
saints; curbing even the rebellious from outrage, that the Lord God may dw^ll
upon earth Psalm. 68.18
in his servants, and subjects: Which else these hard-hearted Labans, and
rough-handed Esat^'s would never suffer, did not Fear of their father Isaac
Genesis 31.53 Lupus venit ad ovile quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare. Vigilant
pastores, latrant canes, etc. Lupus venit fremens, redit tremens, lupus tamen
est and fremens and tremens. Aug^de verb. Apost. sermon. 21.
bridle them: did he not put his hook into their noses, and his bit into their
jaws, turning them back by the way they came out Esaias 37.28.
. This is thought to have been that hornel mentioned by Moses, wherewith the
Lord drove out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite before the Israelite
Exodus 23.27, 28
: causing them by the furies of their own evil consciences wherewith they were
haunted, to fear their own shadows, and to slre at a shaken leaf Lev. 26.36.
, as a sparrow out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Ashur Hos. 11.11.
. Thus Zebul was terrified with the shadow of the mountains Judge. 9.36.
: the Midianites with their own dreams and fancies Judge. 7.13.
: the Syrians with an imaginary noise of charrets and horses 2 King. 7.6.
French History. History of the Council of Trent. Catilina non mediocriter
solebat pertimescere, si quid crepuisset.
: the Burgundians (about to give their enemies battle) with the sight of long
thistles which they thought to be lances: Cardinal Cr^s^^ntius at his own
conceits, and fantasies. For as he was writing to Rome from the Council of
Trent, against the Protestants, he thought verily he had seen the devil like a
black dog walking in his chamber, and at last couching under his table: which
cast the man into such a melancholy dump, that he died of it. This was a
terror from the Lord, but this was not that fear of the Lord here mentioned in
the sent, and wherewith few are acquainted. For even of those that profess to
fear the true God, how very few are there found that do fear him in truth?
which is our second accusation, and action laid against most men, and comes now
to be proved.

And first, for the wicked of the earth, it is most certain, that they have
greatest cause to fear of any men (if they knew all:) for the direful and
dreadful threats of Gods mouth are against them: Sin lies sculking at the
door Genesis 4.7.
of their consciences, like a ban-dog, ready to worry them: the devil stands
watching to lay claim to them, and to devour them 1 Pet. 5 8
: the rage of all the creatures (though they little think of it) is ever armed
and addressed to seize upon them as traitors and rebels to the highest majesty,
and to drag them down into the bottom of hell In all which respects, the
sinners in Sion should be afraid, fearfulness should surprise the Hypocrites.
Cause enough they have to run away with those desperate words in their mouths,
who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings Esaias 33.14.
? Or rather (which indeed were more to be wished) to grow to that conclusion of
the Author to the Hebrews, Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence, and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire Heb.
12.28.29.
. But how little (alas) of this reverent fear, (and so consequently of any
other saving grace whatsoever, Timor Dei est virtus and vi^tutu n custos.
Bucholcer. Ps. 36.1, 2, 3, 4 expounded.
) there is in the hearts of wicked and unregenerate persons, appears in their
practice: and that the Psalmist makes good both in respect of evil to be
avoided and of good to be performed. Psalm. 36 1, 2, 3, 4. For evil first, my
mind gives me, says the Prophet, and I am verily persuaded that there is
nofear of God in such a man's heart. ver. 1. But what is the ground of this
persuasion? may it not be a rash and uncharitable censure you pass upon him?
Ob.
No says he: for, first, for evil thoughts, he makes no scruple, no
conscionce of them, for he holds that thought's free, and therefore lays the
raines in the neck: Sol.
and lets them rove any way, yea even then when his reins should teach him
better things, in the night season Psalm. 16.7.
. He devises mischief, says he, upon his bed. Psalm. 36.4.

Secondly for his words, as to God they are stout Malac 3.13.
, so to men they are slippery: so that ye cannot tell where to have him,
neither how to believe almost any thing that he speaks: the words of his mouth
are iniquity and deceit. ver. 3.

Thirdly for matter of deeds, he abhorrs not any evil. ver. 3. well he may
leave some sin, but he loathes it not: forbear it he may for some politic
respects (as fear of the law, shame of the world, and speech of people) but
it is sure he hates it not in his heart. A man may withdraw himself from some
particular sin, give it over, seem to be divorced from it, yet have a months
mind to it still. As Ahashuerosh, when the heat of his passion was over,
remembered Vashti and what was decreed against her Esth. 21.
, and could have wish it otherwise: Or as the husband of Michal, who when she
was taken from him, yet he came weeping after her afar off 2 Samuel 3.16.
. And this way a man may be as wicked in his fearful abstaining from sin, as
in his furious committing of it. But usually this generation of men that have
not the fear of God before their eyes, are so wedded to their wicked courses,
that they will at no hand depart from iniquity Prove. 3.7. Malach. 3.5.
, but are wise, and cunning to palliate and plead for that they do: Yea
against all the terrors of the Lord (casting handfulls of hellfire into their
faces in the ministry of his word) which should make them tremble and sin not
Psalm. 4.4.
, they (contrarily) sin, and tremble not. Yea (which is worst of all, and sets
them farthest off from mercy) they please and bless themselves Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
in that iniquity of theirs which God and good men descry to be hateful, Psalm.
36.2. not only not standing in awe of his judgments as they ought, while they
hang in the threatenings: but fleshing and slattering themselves, as if the
bitterness of death were past 1 Sa. 15.32.
, because sentence is not speedily executed, and for that God forbeares for a
time to punish Eccle 8.13.
, as waiting their return 2 Pet. 3.9.
, Lo, this is the disposition of wicked and ungodly people, as touching that
which is evil: and this sufficiently shows them utterly void of Gods true
fear, whiles they plunge themselves into sins of all sorts with all delight and
greediness.

Next for the performance of that which is good; it is manifest, says David,
that the wicked person has no fear of God before his eyes, for he has left
off to do good Psalm. 36.3. he restraines prayer Job 15 4.
and other holy duties, says Eliphaz: he sees not need to seek the Lord Psa.
34.9, 10
says the Psalmist again: he counts it a burden, a course of no boot or
benefit, to be religious, says our Prophet here above the text Mal. 3.14.15
. He is no whit troubled at his own insufficiency or infirmity, Job 37. ult.
he takes no notice of Gods great judgments abroad the world, he will not
declare his works Psalm 64.9.
. What should I stand to multiply words in a case so clear? Leave we these
Sons of Belial. (...)
yokelesse, fearelesse, frontlesse, people to the just judgment of God which
will surely seize upon them (if they take not course with him by timely
repentance) tearing off the brawninesse of their hearts, and washing off the
varnish, that is upon the faces of the more refined amongst them with rivers of
brimstone Esa. 30.33.
.

As for the better sort of men, be it that backsliding Israel have played the
harlot, yet why should Judah offend for want of this fear Ier. 3.8.
? And yet (with grief I speak) there is but too great a defect of this holy
fear to be discovered in Judah also: Gods own dear children, I mean, many of
them at least; as were easy to evince. For How should we all fear God in his
name, that we dishallow it not? Deuteronomy. 28.58
fear him in his presence, that we pollute it not Ier. 5.22.
? fear him in his ministers that we discourage them not 2 Cor. 7.5.
? fear him in his people that we oftend them not 1 Cor. 10.32
? fear him in the mysteries, of godliness, that we profane them not: fear him
in his promises that we neglect them not Heb. 4.1.
? fear him in the works of his providence, that we slight them not Esaias 5.12.
? How should we be godlyly jealous over our selves and one another, mistrusting
the corruption of our own natures 2 Cor. 7.1.
: and for others, fearing lest good men should fall from the simplicity that is
in Christ Jesus 2 Cor. 11.3.
, and lest bad men should be hardened, and hindered by us, or ruin themselves
when we might help them Jude 23.
? Lay your selves now, every man, to the rule laid before you, and see your own
swerving and be humbled. Take the rod into your own hands, and afflict your
selves seasonably, with voluntary sorrows for your defects in this duty; lest
else he stand over you, and tutoring you to his fear, at every lash let you
hear the rod say Micah 6 9.
, If I be a father, where is my honor? and if a master, where is my fear? Mal.
1.6.
But a word to these wise is sufficient.

SECT. 5. Use 2. Examination, where marks of the true fear of God, inrespect
1. of evil both in judgment, and practice. 2. of good toward 1. God, 2. men,
both rich and poor, 3. our selves in prosperity and adversity.
SEcondly, is this fear of God an infallible note of an honest heart? Let a man
then examine himself 1 Cor. 11.28 (...). as a Lapidary does his gemmes and
Jewels. Quest. Answ. Solus Dei timor est qui mentes corrigit, fugat crimina,
innocentiam servat, and omnis boni tribuit facultatem. Chrysostom ser. de Joan
Baptist.
, and so learn to settle the soundness of his gracious estate by securing
this to his own soul, that he is a man truly fearing God.

But how may I come to know it, will some say. I answer, enough has been said
to this already in the foregoing discourse. If any yet would have further
satisfaction, try your selves carefully by the effects, which this fear will
certainly produce, where ever it lodges; causing that man diligently to
endeavor 1. the shunning of all that is evil, 2. the doing of all that is good.

First this clean fear of God Psalm 19.9.
, (as David fitly styles it) is of sovereign and singular use to a man for the
casting out of all that is evil, whether in judgment or practice, as fast as
it comes to knowledge.

For point of Opinion, first, Fear God, says the Angel, that had the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell in the earth (understand it
you may of that heroical Luther, and the rest of the Renowned Reformers of
later times) fear God, says he, and give glory to him Rev. 14.7.
( viz. by abdicating and abjuring your heretical and erroneous conceits and
opinions, and receive the love of the truth that ye may be saved 2 These 2.10
.) It is the property of this fear to make humble Prove. 22.4
: Now an humble man can never be an heretic, for it is but showing him his
error, and he will quickly yield, and subscribe to truth. Ioannes Denckius
haereticus sed vir doctus and demissi animi, resipuit tandem conversus ah
Oecolampadio, and pie obijt Basileae. Anno. 1528. Scultet. Annal.


The like we say for matter of practice, The fear of the Lord is to depart from
evil Prove. 3.7.
, whether public, private, or secret. For the first, wherefore now, let the
fear of the Lord be upon you (says Jehosaphat in his charge to his judges, as
they were going their Circuit) take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts 2 Chr. 19.7
. And Job tells us that howsoever he could easily have borne out his
oppressions by his greatness, yet he durst not, for he feared God and eschewed
that evil also Job 31.13, 34.
. Next, as in public negot^ations, and places of judi^ature it casts out
corruption: so in private commerce, and enterdealing betwixt man and man. Thou
shall not curse the deaf says the Lord why what if I do (might a man reply) he
cannot hear me? Thou shall not lay a stumbling block before the blind, why what
it I do; he cannot see me? But thou shall fear the Lord Levit. 19.14 Deo
obs^ura clarent, mata resp^ndent, silentrum confitetur.
as it follows there) who both hears thy cur^es and sees thy stumbling
blocks. Night will conve^t it self into noone before God, and silence prove a
speaking evidence. Earth will cry Came guilty Genesis 4.10
, or if earth do not, heaven will reveal the iniquity Ier. 20.27 Servi ut
ta^eant, jementa loquentur luvenal.
. Yea the very beasts have a wordist to pass upon evill-doers, as the ass
upon Balaam 2 Pet. 2.26
: A bird of the air shall carry the voice, and tell the matter Eccle. 10 20
. Or it all tl^ese should fail, yet the eyes of the Lord run to and f^o
beholding the evil and the good Prove. 15 3 (...). Mus:
. Neither is he an (...) as the Epicures dreamt, but he has a revenging eye
(as the hrathen Poet.) and hand to Esa. 5.25.
: (as the holy Prophet assure, us) the remembrance whereof reyn'd in Joseph
from yielding to the wicked motion of his wan^ on mistress, though he might
have comm^tted that folly, and the world have been never the wiser Gen 39 9
.

Lastly, it cleanses also from secret sins, such as the world never comes
acquainted with; for such as fear the Lord shall not be ^^sited of evil Prove.
19.23
. It weeds by p^crisy Josh 24.14
out of the heart, and pride and arrogance and every (...) way Prove. 8.13
, be it but in thought: as is to be seen in Job, who durst not once (...)
(^^^ully) upon a maid, because God, he knew, saw his ways, and coumed (...)
Job 31.1, 1
. Lo this was it that m^de him retrain wanton looks, and (...) w^ckednesse,
cleausing himself from all filt himsse of slesh and spirit, so pers^^ling
hol^^ss (...) the fear of God. x2 Cor. 7.1.


Secondly this holy fear, as it frames the heart to a sh^^ing of sin, so it
forms it no le^e to the d^ing of duty: and that 1. toward God, 2. toward men.
For God, first, it m^keth a man 1. believe him 2. ^^^y him. First, it
trembles, all out as much, at the threats of God mouth as at the st^okes of
his hand Esaias 66.2
, as is to be seen in Habakkuk Hab. 3 16
. And the scripture notes (...) of the Patriarch Noah, that moved with fear he
believed Heb. 11.7 (...).
, And the denvered Israeli^^s, possessed with this filial fear, believed God and
^is servant Mo^es Ex 14. nlt.
. Thus it frames a man's heart to says in Gods word Prove. 13 13
. And so it does secondly, to the obedience of his will: for they that fear the
Lord, will keep his covenant Ps 103.13.18
, yea they will work hard at it Act. 10.35
, as afraid to be taken with their tasks undone.

Thus it orders us in point of duty toward God, and no less toward men, both
our selves and others.

For others first: this fear of the Lord teaches both rich, and poor, their
seve all duties. The rich it teaches 1. not to brow-beat or oppress their
poorer brethren Gen 42 18
. This do and live, says Joseph, for I fear God and that's your sec^^^ty: As if
he should say, ^^ntend you no hu^t. though ye are fallen into my danger; for it
stands not with that scar of God that has taken up my heart. And, ought ye not
to have walked in the fear of God Nehem. 5.9
? said Nehemiah, to those merciless usurions Israelites, that had engrated
upon their brethren.

2. To be hospitable and ha^borous, ready to relecve the necessitous: such
especially as are of the household of says. This we see in Obadiah 1 King.
8.12, 13
, for the old testament, and Cornelius, for the new: he feared God, says the
text, and he gave much alms Act 10.1, 2
. As on the other side, to him that is afflicted, says Job, pitry should be
showed from his friend, but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty Job 6.14
What cares Nabal the churl though worthy David dye at his door, so long as
he may sit warm within, eating of the fat, and drinking of the sweet. All his
Logic is little enough to conclude for himself. Shall I take my bread and my
flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men, whom I know not
whence they be 1 Samuel 25.11
? No, why should he, say: but the fear of God would have taught the fool Nabal
is his name and folly is with him
more wit.

But Secondly, as it forms the rich to their duties, so the poorer sort too;
whom it renders, 1. Content with their pittance, as knowing, that Better is a
little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble therewith
Prove. 17 12
2. Far from envying the rich, since God has meted out to each one the portion
of his allowance Acts 17 26 (...).
, with this condition, that where much is given, much shall be required Luke
12.48
. Let not thine heart envy sinners, says Solomon, but (for an antidote against
that evil disease) be thou in the fear of the Lord all day long Prove. 23.17
.

Lastly, for our selves (in what estate soever) the fear of the Lord will make
and keep a man in prosperity, 1. humble, 2. thankful; as in adversity, 1.
patient. 2. confident.

In prosperity it teaches: 1. Humility, according to that of the Wiseman; By
humility and the fear of the Lord are riches Prove. 22.4
etc. where you may observe a very close connection of humility and the fear of
the Lord, set forth by an elegant asyndeton in the original: there being no
grammatical copulative set between them; but such a near affinity intimated,
as if they were the very same thing, and the one praedicated of the other, as
terms convertible. 2. Thankfulness; as appears in the example of Job and
David: and may be gathered out of that text in Jeremy: Neither say they in
their hearts, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain, both the
former and latter rain in his season, etc. Jer. 5 2^
. One would think, he should rather blame them there, for not saying, Let us
praise the Lord our God, etc. but that former includes this latter: for he that
truly fears God, will not fail to be thankful.

Next, in time of adversity, the fear of God is of no small use and benefit;
for 1. It makes men patient, willing to bear Gods hand, and to wait his
leisure: to seek remedy onley in Gods ways, and to accept of it only upon his
terms: Thus those holy women in Peter, being under the cross of unequal
yoke-fellows, might not seek to win their loves by plaited hair, or garish
attire, but by a meek and quiet spirit, and by a chaste conversation coupled
with fear 1 Pet. 3.3
.

Add hereunto (in the last place) that the fear of God keeps men confident in
the evil day, holds up their hearts from dejection and disquietment. For it
brings a man before God in prayer Prove. 14.26
, as it did distressed David Psalm. 119 38
, and fainting Habakkuk Hab. 3 16, 17.
; who after he had poured forth his soul before God, with reverence and godly
fear, rose up off his knees as confident as might be, that Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, nor fruit be found in the vines; the labor of the
olive should fail, and the fields yield no meat: the flock should be cut off
from the fold, and there be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, says he: I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my
strength, etc. So true is that of Solomon: In the fear of the Lord is strong
confidence: and his children have a place of refuge Prove. 14.26
. And this is that fear of God that speaks a man truly religious. Apply your
selves now every one to the rule, and search and see in some of you an utter
nullity; in othersome, a fearful deficiency of this reverentiall fear of God.

SECT. VI. Use 3. Exhortation to get and grow in this holy Fear: with six
Motives,
ANd for a third Use of the point, learn we all, first, to get; and then to
grow in this grace. Let the fear of the Lord be upon you, and do it 2 Chro. 19.6
. Give all diligence to fashion your hearts to this reverent regard of God:
considering the terror of the Almighty, which we must needsly know either as
slaves or sons: but better as sons, that in the day of distress he may spare
us, as a man does his own son that serves him Mal. 3.17 Motives to the fear
of God.
.

If yet ye look for further Motives to this duty, Consider that the fear of God
is 1. But equal and reasonable. 2. Gainful and profitable. 3. Needful. 4.
Honorable. 5. Acceptable. 6. Comfortable.

It Is equal, first, for it is our bounden duty, since he has so often
commanded and required it upon our allegiance Psalm. 2.11 psalm. 33.8 prove. 3.7
Esaias 8.13 Heb. 12.28
: besides, that it of right appertains unto him as a due, though he should
never have called for it. Bring presents unto him that ought to be feared Psalm.
76.11
, says David, and who would not fear thee, o king of nations? for to thee does
it apprtain, because there is none like to thee Jer. 10.7 Eccles. 12.13
. It is then (you see) and act of justice to fear the Lord. And when we have
done our utmost that way, we have done no more then was our duty to do Luke
17.10
.

Secondly, it is a practice no less gainful then equal (whatever those
profane miscreants above the text blasphemed to the contrary.) Profitable it
must needs be, for it has the promises of both lives. In the life present, he
that has the fear of the Lord shall not be visited of evil Prove. 19.23
, in general: Not of the evil of sin, for te fear of the Lord is to hate
that evil Prove. 8.13
: Nor of pain, for the fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to escape the
snares of death Prove. 14.27
: Say he meet with troubles without, or terrors within, yet he that fears
God shall come out of them all Eccles. 8.12
. Thus for evil: And for good, both to us and ours after us. By humility and
the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life Prove. 22.4 Esaias 33.6
. One would think that were enough: yea, but then here is more then enough: They
that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good Psalm. 34 Ob. Sol.
. Ey. but what shall their poor children do when they are gone? Well enough:
for their seed shall be mighty upon earth, and their generation blessed, Psalm.
112. thoroughout. Thus for temporalls they are provided for: And for spiritual
blessings in heavenly things Ephesians. 1.3
, The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him Psa. 147.11
: he will teach such a one in the way that he shall choose Psalm. 25 12
, guide them he will with his counsel, and afterward receive them to his
glory Psalm. 73 24
. Surely Gods salvation is nigh them that fear him p, says David, and the
covenant of life and of peace was with Levi, because he feared God Mal. 2.5
, says Malachy. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the Lord Psalm
128.4
.

Thirdly, this holy fear is wondrous needful, for it inciteth and inableth to
all Christian duties: Whence it was that the Lord both delivered his Law at
first in a fearful manner Exodus 19.
, and afterward, wished that the hearts of his people might be seasoned with
his fear, that they might keep his commandments always Deuteronomy. 5.29
. Serve the Lord with fear, says David Psalm. 2.11
: yea, he thou in the fear of the Lord all day long Prove. 23.17
, says Solomon. The primitive Christians walked in the fear of the Lord (says
St. Luke Acts 9 31
) and it is a spot in your feasts to eat an drink without fear Jude 12 (...).
, says St. Jude.

Fourthly, it is honorable: for (besides that God takes himself highly honored
by it, and therefore calls for it in this Name; If I be a father, where is mine
honor; and if a Master, where is my fear Mal. 1.6
?) we our selves are not a little dignified hereby. The woman that fears the
Lord, she shall be praised: and though many daughters had done virtuously, yet
she excelled them all Pr. 31.29, 30
. This grace winnes a man a wonderful deal of respect both from God and men;
as it did Job, of whom God himself boasted Job 1.8
: and Abraham, who was a Prince of God to the Heathenish Hittites Genesis 23 6
.

Fifthly, it is a grace very acceptable: for it gives grace and virtue to all
other graces and duties; which else are unpleasing to the Almighty. For to him
will I look, even to him that trembles at my word Esaias 66.2, 3
: as to none else, be his sacrifice never so specious or costly. And to show
how highly God esteems this fear, you shall find it not seldom set for the
whole service of God in holy Scripture, as was said before.

Lastly, it is exceeding comfortable, for it freeth the heart of all base
fears; (which vanish out of sight before this, as the lesser lights before the
Sun) and fills it with strong confidence and consolations: making the man in
whom it is to hold up his head in the greatest hurly-burlie, and to walk about
the world as a conqueror, void of all fear what man or devil can do unto him
Psalm. 3 thoroughout.
.

You see that this holy fear comes commended unto you by many names: what
remains, but that ye set your selves in all good earnest, for the attaining
thereunto in a diligent use of the means. These are among others:.

First, Means of getting the fear of God.
set on serious meditation, and first upon your selves, Reflect, and see, 1.
your own miserable condition, by reason of sin imputed to you, sin inherent in
you, and sin issuing from you: together with the deserved punishment, all
torments here, and tortures hereafter, which are but the just hire of the least
sin Romans 6. ult.
. 2. Your utter inability to free your selves either from sin, or punishment.
From the former you can no more free your selves, then the blackmore from his
skin, or the leopard from his spots Ier. 13 23
: And for the later, there is no power, wit, or any other means in our selves
or the creature, either to abide or avoid it. This meditation made Peter's
converts cry out for fear, Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved Act.
2.3^
? Next, busy your thoughts upon God, be thinking upon his name, with those in
the text. See him as he stands described 1. in his word. 2. in his works.

The word sets out God for our present purpose, 1. as a God of transcendent
excellency and surprissing glory: and thence inferrs a necessity of his fear:
Who would not fear thee O king of Nations Ier. 10 7
etc. says Jeremy. And thou art more glor^ous and excellent than the mountains
of prey, that is, then the flourishing Assyrians, with all their goodly
Monarchy: therefore (as a consectary) ^ring presents unto him that ought to be
seared Psa 76.4, 11
.

2. As omnipresent and omniscient: one that beholds and takes knowledge of
all we do, as much as of any thing in his own heart: for all things consists
in him Collos 1.17
. And the ways of a man are before the Lord, he ponder^th all his paths Prove.
5 21
. And will ye not tremble at my presence says the Lord Ier. 5.24
. Joseph did, and so kept himself untouch^: and Job did, and so frighted his
conscience from sin by this wholesome consideration Job 31 1, 2.
.

3. As armed with infinite power and might, to reward us if we fear him, and to
punish us if we neglect him. Shall servants ^ear their masters, because the
have power over the sle^h Colos 3 23.
, and shall not we ^ear him that is a^le to cast body and sonle to hell ^at 10
29. No man will pu^ his hand into a fiery crucible to setch gold (...), because
he knows it will be r^e hi^^ did we as truly believe and f^ar the fire of hell
etc.
?

4. As infinitely just, and singularly careful to punish sin, where ever he
finds it; be it in the ^earest of his own, nay in his only son, who being ma^e
sin for us 2 Cor. 5.21
, and found in the shape and stead of sinful fle^h 3 (...). 8 2 (...) etc
Liturg. Graec.
, was made to undergo those dolorous and ^^concerveable sorrows, that drew
clotted blood Lue. 22.44 (...).
from his body: and were joined with a temporary desertion to his soul: yet
the very p^^es of hell, which he sel^^or a season Ps 22.1 etc.
Who would not therefore fear before this just and impartial God? See that
sweet song of the triumphant saints, that had overcome the beast by the blood
of the lamb. Just and true a e thy ways etc. who shall not fe^r thee, O Lord,
and glo^ifie thy name Rev. 15 4
. etc.

5. As abundantly and un^peakeably kind and loving to us in Christ. This
property in God thoroughly thought upon will inflame our hearts with his love,
and so make us fearful to displease him as the dutiful spouse her loving
husband, or the gracious child his indulgent father. This is to fear God and
his goodness Hos. 3 5
, to fear God through delight in his w^es Psalm 112.1
to rejoice in fear Psalm 2 11
and therefore to fear to offend, him with hope, because there is mercy with
him Psalm. 130.4
, as the psalmist has it. Thus meditate on the attributes of God, set forth in
the word. In the world next, you may see God in his works. And first, those
standing miracles, the hanging of the earth upon nothing Job 26.7
, the bounding of sea, that it cannot transgress his word Ier. 5.24
. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the host of them by
the breath of his mouth. He g^thereth the waters of the sea together as a he^p:
he laveth up the depth in storehouse^. Let all the earth se^^ the L^^d. let all
the (...) of the world stand in^awe of him. For he spoke, and it was done, he
comm^nded and i^ stood fast Psalm 33 6, 7, 8, 9
etc. Secondly turn your eyes and thoughts upon the judgments of God: and
first particular, executed upon others for our warning and learning. The
righteous hall see this and fear Psalm. 52.6
, as David speaks, and as D^v^d did too: as himself testifies, my st^
harembleth for fear of thee, and I am a^^aid of the udg ments Psl. 119, 120
. When one child is whipped in a school, the rest will tremble: so it should be
with us, when we see others pun shed: which because (...) did not Dan. 5 21,
22.27 D^scite just^i^ am monai and non temnere etc. P^ndit Herodotus suo
temnore consp^ctam esse in Aegvpto statuam S^na herib^ cum hac ins^^ptinne,
(...).
when his father was turned a grasing; therefore was he found too light in the
balance, and his kingdom given to his neighbor, that was better then he.

2. Premeditate upon the general judgment, and the unconceivable terror of
that dreadful day, when the heavens shall pass aw^^ with a gre^^nose, and the
el^ments shall mslt with fervent hea^^: the earth also, and the works that are
the^ein ^hal^ burnt up 2 pet 3 10
. Faelix (though a pagan) trembled at P^^ls discourse of this great day Act 24
25
. The devils when they think of it, shake and shadder: the joints of their
loins are loosed with Belhizzar, and their knees smite one against another Dan
5.6.
. And can any man think seriously of this last judgment, and not be moved with
fear? Fear God says Solomon, and, as a help hereunto, consider, that God will
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or
evil Eccles. 12.14
.

And this is the first means of getting Gods holy fear, viz. Meditation. The
second is like unto it, and that is faithful and fervent prayer to the father
of lights Jam. 1.17.
, for it is a supernatural gift to fear God as a father. Thus David goes to
God for this gift, Unite my heart (which of it self is woefully divided and
scattered up and down upon lying vanities) to fear thy name Psalm. 86.11
. And Eliphaz gives this as a reason, why men cast off fear, because they
restrain prayer Job 15.4
. And it may easily be observed, that to fear God, and to seek God, are often
in scripture (especially Psalm. 34.) used for one and the same: this being the
ready way to that, and indeed the only way. For, I will yet for this be sought
unto by the house of Israel, says the Lord Eze. 36.37
concerning the benefits and contents of the new covenant; One clause whereof
(for our encouragement to ply the throne of grace by prayer) is this, I will
give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever. I will put my
fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me for ever Ier. 32.39,
40
.

CHAP. IIII. The Text expounded, and the duty of Christian conference
propounded.
Then they, that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. etc.
THey spoke, (...) Sermonis frequentationem significat in hac conjugat.
and they spoke often: for that is the import of the Original word here used:
and that is the sum of the service here performed. The circumstances whereof
(so far as they lie in our way at least) being already dispatched, we now pass
on to the substance in these words, They spoke often one to another. Happy
souls that thus improved their holy meetings in laying out themselves to the
best advantage one of another in that general Apostasy. Gods holy fear had so
taken up their good hearts that they could never depart from him, no not in a
common defection Jer. 32.40
. Though all men forsake thee, Lord, yet I Will stick to thee Mat. 26.33 Melius
semper animatus quam armatus. Cart.
. So Peter promised (being better always affectioned then appointed, as one
well says of him:) but so such only have performed, as with these in the text,
having their hearts fraught with Gods fear, and solicitously thinking upon his
name, took all good occasions of uttering their holy thoughts among themselves
(at least) not without the inestimable benefit and edification one of another.
That which we may hence observe is thus much.

That Christians (in bad times especially) should,

SECT. I. Christian conserence and mutual confirmation confirmed by Scripture.
THus the good people here: they gat together, and spoke together: in
opposition doubtless to those wicked above, that multiplied to speak mischief
ver. 13. seeking to turn Gods glory into shame, and not knowing that God has
set up, yea and set apart him that is godly for himself Psalm. 4.2, 3.
: the Lord will hear him when he calls Psalm. 4.2, 3.
, nay, he will harken and hear and a ^ooke of remembrance was written before
him etc. as these ancient Christians ave^r'd by way of reply to these wicked
blasphemers, as some will have it. Tre^ellius Polanus alij.
Th^s they here combined together for muall strengthening: and thus, before
them, Abraham and Melchisedech Gen 14 19.
, Moses and Aaron Exodus 4.14, 15, 16
, Jethro and Moses Exodus 18.19
, Samuel and David 1 Sa. 19 18
, David and Jonathan 1 Sa 32.16
Eliah and Elisha 2 King 2 11
; they were going on and talking, when the charet of heaven came to divide
them. Surely had not that conference been needful and divine (says a right
Reverend Writer of our Church) it had given way to meditaion; and Eliah had
been taken up rather praying then talking. But he knew best what was fittest to
be done, and happy is that servant whom his master when he comes shall find
so doing Matt. 24.46
. And thus the master himself (in whose one example is a globe of proofs, a
cloud of witnesses Heb. 12.1
) He therefore (as himself was confirmed by Moses and Elias, who appeared unto
him in the mount, and talked with him of his decease Luc 9.31 (...).
, so) what pains took he with his disciples for their strengthening and
settling? But especially with Peter; forewarning him, first, of his suture fall
Mar. 26.34. praemonitus praemunnitus.
, calling him afterward out of it by the cock, but more by hi^ look Luc. 2^.61
: confirming him, after it, partly by his message to him by Mary Magdalen, Go
faith faild not Luc 22.32
: and partly by his threefold charge to him, feed my sheep, feed my lambs Ioh.
21.15
, (so assuring him that his sin was pardoned by his ministry restored:) And,
when thou art converted streng then thy brethren Luc. 22.32 Nemo enim ex
Aposlolis graviorem sententiam contra Apostatas sert. 2 Pet. 2. and tota illa
epyst^la ser^pta est confirmandis fratribus Par.
: which accordingly he performed to purpose, even to his dying day. Hear him
else, I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance. Nay, that is
not enough: Yea I think it meet so long as I am in this t^bernacle to rouse you
up 2 Pet. 1.12, 13 (...).
(so the Greck word sign^fieth) by putting you in remembrance of these things,
though ye know them and be established in the present truth. For (as good as
they were) they might nod sometimes with the wise vi^gins Mat. 25.5 (...).
Quandoque b^nus dermitat.
: and so have need of rowzing: as Peter himself had at Antioch; where he was
justly taken up for halting by St. Paul Gal. 2.10
: and as Paul himself might need to be served by Peter, or a far meaner man:
for I long to see you, (says he to his Romans) that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift, to the end ye may be establshed. That is, that I may be
comsorted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me To. 1.11,
12 (...). Nazianz.
. So that, there is, we see, no depth of knowledge, height of holiness, degree
of grace, or measure of z^ale, but may be blessedly increased, and inla^ged by
conference with other christians. And that shall be one Reason of the point (in
its proper place) if we shall first (by your patience) begin from him who is
the beginning and end of all our endeavors in this work of his. Whether then
we look to God or men, our selves or others, the good or the bad, we shall se
sufficient reason to confirm the po^nt, and to ensorce the duty.

SECT. II. Reasons of the Point. 1. from God, commanding, rewarding. 2 from
men, and 1. our selves shall be hereby sealed, se^ured. 2. others. 1. Good men.
Who shall be 1. curbed from sin, 2. quickened to duty. 2. Bad men. Who shall be
1. consuted. 2. defeated.
FOr God, first, he both requires it, and requites it: bids it be done, and
then blesses it in the deed.

First, I say, he commands it; aad therefore we should do it. In every thing
give thanks: And why? for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus 1 These 5.18
that ye be thankful: and so it is also that ye be, this way, useful and
profitable one to another. Not pleasing your selves, but every one pleasing his
neighbor for his good to edification Romans 15.112 (...).
: not forsaking the assemblyes of the saints as the m^nner of some is, (which
also is the high rode-way to final impenitency, to utter Apostasy, nay to the
unpardonable sin Heb. 10.23, 24, 25 (...).
) but exhorting one another daily, yea considering, and studying one another,
to where on to love and good works. Not making our selves our own mark only
Philip. 2.4 (...).
, but looking and aiming at, every man, the things of another, as being his
brothers keeper. Not living to our selves, or being all for our selves Man is
Natures good fellow (...). Arist.
(as wild beasts who delight to lu^k alone in their dens; or as swine, styed up
till ready for the knife) but as every man has received the gift, so
ministering the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God 1 Pet. 4.10
. No man is either born or born again for himself. The manifestation of the
spirit is given to every man to profit withal 1 Cor. 12 7
. What should I heap up more testimonies in a truth so clear? God, you see,
has plainly and plentifully revealed his will, that sovereign Rule, and most
sufficient Reason that swayes most with a Christian. So Paul presses it, and
so David held it (every where in his psalms) and has therefore this testimony
that he fulfilled all (not the will only, but the) wills of God Act. 13.22
(...):
though never so danger-full or difficult. The Rechabites were rigid observers
of their fathers command; Ier. 35 2, 3 etc.
, and were well rewarded for it. And shall not we much more of this command of
God? especially, since n doing thereof is so great reward Psalm 19.11
: which is the second branch of this first Reason from God, who as he commands
mutual confirmation, so he rewards it too, and that, many ways.

For 1. Donorum incrementum accipiunt qui concessis prioribus fideliter utuntur
Malcolm: in Act. 6
he listens and lays his ear to their sweet words, as loath to lose any part
of that precious language. He harkened and heard, says the text. 2. He books
them up, and writes them down in his register, as matters of mark. 3. He adds
to their stock of grace, which they husband so well, causing it to grow in the
use, as once the loaves did in Christ hands, or the oil in the widows cruse
4. He secretly and sweetly comfort their hearts, himself making one among
them (as our Savior dealt with those two Luc 24
traveling to Emaus) according to his promise, where but two or three are
gathered together in his name (and fear to do him service, and to help one
another toward heaven) there is he in the midst of them Mat. 18.20.
: to water and prosper their holy endeavors that way with the dewes of many
sweect and glorious refreshings: a very foretast unto them of that life
eternal. Where 5. the reward shall be according to their work in this kind.
He that has wised others shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and
he that has turned many to righteousness, as the sta^rs for ever and ever
Dan. 12.3.
. He that with his two talents has (by trading with others gained) five, shall
be made ruler over five cities. And he that has gained ten, shall be ruler
over ten Luc. 19.16, 17
. Besides (6) a free largess of his lords joy to boot: Enter thou, good
servant, into thy maste^ joy Mat 25.21
. A joy more fit for the Master then for the se^vant: and yet behold such a
master do we serve ( when we serve one another in love Gal. 5.13
,) as will reward his servants with such a joy. And thus stands the first
Reason for a srequency of christian conference, taken from God, who both
indispensably requires it, and abundantly rewards it.

A second follows taken from our selves: And so we should give all diligence
to this duty of mutual confirmation and encouragements: if but for our own
sakes, who shall hereby be 1. sealed up and settled in al^ good assurance of our
gracious estate for present: 2. secured, and well enabled to proceed and profit
therein for the future.

Come let us return to the Lord Hos. 5. ult. and 6.1
etc. And those three thousand souls Act. 2. were no sooner added to the
church, but they (to give proof thereof) presently made conscience as well of
christian society, as of hearing and praying and breaking of bread Act. 2.41 42
: which some understand, of receiving the Lords supper. And the Philippians so
soon as ever they were converted to Christ, held a fruitful fellowship in
thegospel from the first day until now. Which made St. Paul confident of this
very thing, that God had both begun a goood work in them (which was the first
branch of this second reason) and would also finish it to the day of Christ
Phili. 1.5, 6. Reas. 4.
: And that is the second.

This speaking often each man to his neighbor, as it comfortably assures and
seals us up for present, that we are of those righteous whose lips feed many
Prove. 10.21
(even as many as they can opportunely Gal. 6.10
and orderly 1 Cor. 14.40
extend themselves to) to it effectually secureth and setleth us for the
future: and is of excellent use and avail for our proceeding, and profiting in
the Ch^istian course. For 1. there is a secret tyc to constancy in the
communion of saints: But woe be to him that is alone Eccles. 4.^0
. He is not likely long to hold fast the profession of his faith, without
wavering or warping, that does not consider himself and others, to prov^ke to
love and good works Heb. 10.23, 24
. He that forsakes the assembling of our selves together (as the Apostle
speaks) is not far from inward or outward Apostasy ib and Heb 3.12, 13
. Against which woeful ev^ll, txhortation is there fitly prescribed as a
precious preservative. For indeed and that's a second settlement) he that has
exhorted another to duty, has after a sort engaged himself to the performance
thereof: and laid a new tie upon his own conscience to perseverance therein;
lest happily he hear, Physician heal thy self Luc. 4 23
, or, Thou that teach another teach thou not thy self? Rom 2
Besides, thirdly, the promise of increase made to this spiritual, no less
then to that other corporal alms; that he that sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully 2 Cor. 9.6
. And the liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things he
shall stand Isa. 32 8
. And to him that has (namely for use and increase) shall be given, and he
shall abound Mat. 25 29
. Whereas, from him that has not (in manner aforesaid) shall be taken away
even that he seemed to have, with the slothful servant he shall surely come to
poverty, for withholding that which was meet with Solomon's sluggard: when he
that scatter^th increases Prove 11 24
: He shall have his arm clean dried up, and his eyes u^terly darkened with
those Idol-shepheards Zach. 11.17
in Zachary that had eyes, and saw not, hands, and handled not, the law, I mean
which they ought to have seen into, and hanaled Ier. 2 8 (...)
: dividing it aright as St. Paul speaks 2 Timothy 2.15 (...)
and as good s^ewards of the manisold grace of God received, distributing to
every man his just measure of sit m^at in due season Luc. 12 42 (...) Servi
(inquit Donatus) quaternos modios frumenti accipiebant in mensem, and id
demensum dicebatur.
. So that it is a high point of spi ^ituall thirst to be much in holy
conf^rence and calling upon others to duty: which they that do often, are as
gardens whose spices slow out Cant 4.16
a, liberal house keepers, the doors of whose lips are a ways open to the
feeding of of many Pro 10.21
: their path is as the morning light that shines more and more to the perfect
day Pro 4.18
, they shall never be of those that draw back to perdition: but of them that
believe to the salvation of the soul Heb. 10. ult. Reas. 5.
. And that is a second reason drawn from our selves.

The third follows respecting others, and First the better sort shall be
hereby 1. curbed, and called back from sin: 2. quickened and confirmed in duty.
Next, the worser sort of people shall be hereby partly consut^d pa^tly defeated.

For the first of these: This mutual encouragement in well doing, this
christian confere^ (...) and grave advise, this turning of a sinner from the
error of his way, may (if God be so pleased) save a soul from death, a^^
hander or cover a multitude of sins Iam. 5. ult.
. Now sin is an evil so mischievous, so murtherous to mankind, that all sorts
should set against it, and do th^^r utmost to club it down where ever they
meet with it. As grace (of the other side) is so amiable so profitable, that
every one should strive by word or d^^d to propagate and further it
wheresoever, and whereinsoever he is able. A maine help to both which is godly
conference, and christian exhortation.

And 2. for recovering others out of their revolts, and relapses, who can tell
how far David would have run on in the revenge of a private injury, had he not
been timely taken off and disarmed by a discreet Abigail? Does he not soon
after bless God for her, bless her for her counsel, and her counsel for his
restraint from that bloody design 1 Sa. 25.23
? And another time when he had gr^fl^ly and grievously over-shot himself in the
matter of Vriah, did not the Prophet Nat^an joint, and restore him again Gal
6.1 (...).
after a long relapse, by a private admonition 2 Sa. 12.13
? So forcible are right words, Job 6.25
says lob: And a word upon his wheel^s, says Solomon is like apples of Gold
with pictures of Silver Prove. 25 11 (...) upon his circumferences. 1.
circumstances.
. Nathans private discourse (so God would have it to show his liberty of
working by what ordinances he best pleases) was at that time more effectual
with David, then any or all the lectures of the law, or daily services of the
Temple. And the words of Naamans servants greater in operation then the words
of that great Prophet Elisha 2 King. 5 13 In vita.
. Iunius professes of himself that being strongly tempted to Athei^me and
prevailed with, the very first thing that helped him out, was the talking with
a countryman of his not far from Florence, B. Ridly was converted by Bertrams
book of the Sacrament: and confir^md by conference with Cranmer, and Pet.
Martyr Act. an I Mon: of the church. Ib.
and his manner of expressing himself. And, I was an obstinate papist (says
Latimer) as any was in England. Insomuch that when I should be made Batchelour
of Divinity, my whole oration went against Philip Melancthon and his opinions.
Bilney (afterward Martyr) heard me at that time, and perceived that I was
zealous without knowledge: and came to me afterward into my study, and desired
me, for Gods sake to hear his confession. I did so, and to say the truth, I
learned more by his confession, then before in many years. So from that time
forward, I began to smell the word of God, and forsake the schoole-doctours,
and such like fopperies. I need not repeat here, how those two godly bishops
Ridly and Farrar were both taken off from their evil purposes and promises,
the one of going to mass, and the other of receiving the Eucharist in one
kind only, by the sweet and seasonable disswasion of blessed Bradford, their
fellow-prisoner.

Neither is this christian conference more availeable for the curbing of some
from committing of sin, then for quickening of others, to the doing of duty.
The words of the wise are not only like nails Eccl. 12.11
or shepheards-pinns (whereby they used to fasten their sheep-folds to the
ground) to rectify and restrain from sin, to hold up the hands that hang down,
and the seeble knees, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way Heb.
12.13.
: but also like goads to prick forward those that are slow of heart Luc. 24.25.
: like whetstones, to edge and encager them that be dull of hearing Heb. 5.11.
, (for as iron shar peneth iron, so does the face of a man his friend Prove.
27.17.
.) like cordials, to fetch again those that are fooeble minded 1 These. 5.14.
(...).
: lastly like bellows, to blow up that spark 2 Timothy 1.6. (...).
of the spirit in another man's breast into a lively flame, that else, like a
dull-seacoale sire (if it be not now and then blown or stirred up, though
there be no want of fuel, yet) will of it self at length dye, and go out. We
will remember thy loves more then wine, says the spouse, therefore the Virgins
love thee Can. 1.4.
This fruit comes upon the remembering and mentiong Christ's loves, that his
Saints are confirmed and increased in it. Those daughters of Jerusalem that at
first wondered Cant. 5.9.
why the Church should make such ado about Christ; when they had conversed
with her awhile, and heard her speak with such a deal of admiration and
affection, they are inflamed, and induced to seek Christ with her Cant. 6.1.
God usually fines and siles the tongues of his upright ones to be trumpetters
of his glory and beauty. In setting forth whereof, they have words at will,
their tongues never linn, but become as the pen of a ready writer, in speaking
forth the things they have made concerning the king, till such time as Gods
people accord together to praise him for ever and ever. Ps. 45.1. and ult.
Reas. 6. Contra sycophantae morsum non est remedium Seneca


Lastly, bad men shall be hereby 1. confuted, the mouths of (...) shall be
stopped as are ever complaining of, and accusing Christian meetings to be not for
the better, but for the worse: scarce to any other purpose, but to detract,
defame, slander, censure etc. Or if such mouths will not be shu, yet the
consciences of christians may rejoice in their contrary innocence, and not be
dejected by such false testimony. 2. they shall be deseated and disappointed
hereby of their devilish purposes and practices of casting down stars from
heaven, Rev. 12.4
and deceiving if it were possible the very elect Mat. 24.24 (...).
. So far forth as to be led away by the error of the wicked, and so to fall
from their own stedfastnes 2 Pet. 3.17
. All ungodly persons (and they have it by kind too from their father the
devil Ioh. 8.44
) are strangly ambitious of sending the plague to their neighbors with the
Ekronites 1 Samuel 5. Hab. 1.13
, of drawing others into partnership of their condemnation, of devouring the
men more righteous then themselves Mat. 23 15
. They compass sea and land, says our Lord, to make a Proselyte: which when
they have done, they make him twofold more the children of hell then
themselves Mat. 23 15
: The devil also is a busy walker 1 Pet. 5.8
, a great compass Job 1.7 Pecora fratris tui errantia jubet ut redueas fra^ri
tue, nedum ipsum sibi. Tertul.
seeking whom he may devour.

And is it not good reason that we should walk as fast, and compass our weak
brethren round, seeking whom we may deliver from the devil and his
instruments: who like a wall-nut-tree root labor to imbitter all the roots
that are about them.

SECT. III. Use. 1. Reproof of idle and evil speakers together.
NOw for Application: First, take notice with me, by this point, David, Help
Lord, for the godly man ceafeth, for the faithful fail from among the children
of men. They speak indeed, and speak often, but (alas) it is vanity they speak
every man to his neighbor, with slattering lips and with a double heart do
they speak Ps. 12 1, 2, 3, (...) Pythag. Inter mill secularium
sermonumtalenta, vix cemum denarios peteris invenire spiri. tualium verboborum
imo nec december q idem obolos Cassiod. in cap 1. Mat.
. How much better were it for such to keep silence then so to vent themselves,
as most men do in their carnal conventicles, and good-fellow-meetings: nay in
their trading and trafficking, and ordinary commerce and inter-dealing?
Wherein, what shall a man hear from them, the whole day throughout, but words,
at the best, waste and idle; but, for the wost part, grossly wicked and evil;
vile and venomous speeches, rotten and stinking communication Ephesians. 4.29
(...). ^^trefio.
; men bringing up their excrements as it were by a peristaltick motion (as
Physicians call it, in the disease they term (...)) through the dung-port Neh.
3.13
of their foul mouths, to the annoying of some, and corrupting of others. For
evil words corrupt good manners ^C 1.15.33 They are the Devils drivel.
. Thus it is with the more rude and outrageous. And for the civiller sort, of
those that are not yet fanctified, the plague of the serpent fies sore upon
them, always to be feeding upon dust Genesis 3 15
, talking of trash altogether. They are of the earth, they speak of the earth,
and the earth hears them 1 John 4.5 and 3 31. (...) terram redolet. Beza
terrenus est E^asm terra est. August.
. Amidst all which, let a man seek to charm their tongues, interrupting and
bespeaking them, as once the Prophet, with O earth, earth, earth, hear the word
of the Lord Ier. 22.29
. Ye that are earth by creation, earth by corruption, earth by resolution (for
dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return Genesis 3.9
) Hear and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken it. Give glory to
the Lord your God Jer. 13.15, 16
etc. they turn the deaf ear with the perverse adder, to such wholesome
enchantments Psalm. 58.5
, and grow as sick of such a one straight, as the Gergesites were of our
Savior Mat 8
. Good conference they count plain babbling, as the Athenians esteemed Paul's
preaching Acts 17.18 (...). Metaph ab aviculis quae gar^itu perpetuo sunt
molestae.
: they find no more relish therein then in the white of an egg, or a dry
chip. Nay, they hold it the only marre-mirth (as one speaks) able to damp all
the jollity, and to cast the whole company into dumps of Melancholy. Which to
prevent, they do their utmost to drown the shrikes of their awakened
consciences with a louder volley of the language of hell: pouring out
themselves in a great deal of froth and filth, refuse, and rotten speeches
Cyprianus notavit inter omnes parts divuis ^llius de quo habetur parabola,
Luke 16.24. ^^ and linguam perpeti acerbissima tormenta, quia plus lingua, and
ore peccaverat. Epist. l. 1 ep. 3
, base and bedlam talk, oaths, and blasphemies, scoffs and scurrilities
against the power of godliness, and professors of Religion. Lo this is all
that many men do toward the practice of the point in hand. ^nstead of
strengthening the hands and hearts of Gods people in well-doing, as good
Shechaniah did Ezra's; Arise, says he, for this matter belongs unto thee, we
also will be with thee, be of good courage, and do it E^r. 10.4
, they do their utmost to hinder and discourage them: as those spies of old,
did the people; as Elymas the sorcerer did the Deputy, and as those mercenary
prophets did the Incomparable Nehemiah. For they all made us afraid, saying,
Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done Nehem. 6.8
To such, I say no more, but only admonish them to remember that a bitter
curse Nehemiah in the spirit of prophecy wishd to such back-friends; Hear, O
our God, for we are despised, and cover not their imquity, neither let their
sin be blotted out from before thee neh 4.5
. A fearful execration, a heavy curse: which who so dreads not, but professing
himself an Israelite, dare yet express himself in the broad dialect of Ashdod
Neh. 13 23, 25.
, it were much to be wished that there were some good Nehemiah found to smite
him, and pluck off his hair, till he learn better language. Howsoever, let such
know, that their tongues be wray them what countrymen they are Mat. 26.73
. Certainly he cannot be of the Commonwealth of Israel, that speaks familiarly
the language of hell. Stinking breath argues corrupt inwards: so does unsavory
speech a rotten heart. If the discourse be naught, the religion is vain, says
St. Jame Jam. 1.26
: and they want the character of a true Christian, according to our text, that
speak not of good things, and that speak not often of them, one to another

SECT. IIII. V. 2.
WHich if it be so, how may we (for a second Use) justly complain of a double
defect, found in some of the more forwardly: who as they meet not so often as
they might for mutual edification, (Satan hindering them 1 These. 2.18
) so when they do, became either unprofitable, or idle in this work of the
Lord, to what they might be, were they but as they should. 1. Unprofitable they
prove to one another, whiles the precious time of their coverse is squandred
out and wasted in speculative curiosities, nice and impertinent questions, some
ceremonial unseasonable controversies, not tending to edification, but
contention rather, novelties, some more remarkable accidents and affairs
abroad, other men's matters and infirmities, which are brought forth upon the
stage, either untruly We must both (...). Ephesians. 4.15 1 John 3 18
or at least untimely, and not in an ordinance, as one speaks. These are the
canker wo^mes that eat out the heart of godly and profitable conference: these
are those trosis that nip better speeches in the bud: these are those leaner
kine that devour the fat, and leave no room nor time for mutual edification,
to the scandal of the weak, and scorn of the wicked.

A second sort here justly met with, are such as are idle and useless,
backward and barren in godly speeches when they light into good company: dumb
and dull Christians, that either say nothing there, or as much as nothing
Insulsus dicatur sermo qui vel nocet, vel minime prodest. Ep. Sarisb Colos.
I know there are a sort of such as are over-talkative, speaking much, but
saying little (...). De Alcibitade Plutarch. Nunquam desunt Domniones qui non
quid sed quanturn dirant ponderare consueverunt. Hiero. in Apologet ad
Domnionem.
. A fool also (quoth the Wiseman) is full of words, prodigal and profuse,
engrossing all the talk, as if himself were the only speaker. Which redious
and troublous custom of his is there elegantly set forth by way of imitation
(...).
of is vain tautologies. A man cannot tell what shall be: and what shall be
after him who can tell Eccles. 10.14 Sic Ov^d. de Batto (unde (...)) montibus,
inquit, erant and erant in montibus illis. Cui Mercurius par pari referens. Me
mihi perfide prodis? me mihiprodis? ait
? Here Is a great deal of small talk, you see, to as little purpo^e as may be.
And such babblers are to be found, not a few; bunglers ye may better call them;
for so indeed they prove themselves in the issue: dancing in the air, (...).
Socr. ap. Plat.
like light Meteors that want a sufficient Orb wherein to move: speaking great
sweelling woras of vanity 2 Pet. 2.18
: or (if they stumble upon a better subject, the high points of religion) not
knowing what they speak, nor whereof they affirm 1 Timothy 1.7
but doing all by roat, as Socrates taught his scholars, and betraying
themselves ever and anon, by their lisping Sibboleth Judge. 12.6
, to be Ephraimites and not Gileadites: counterfeits Jacob must name himself
Esau with the voice of Jacob. It Is hard if our tongue do not bewray us what we
are, in despite of our habit D. Hall.
or, at best, new converts, rank hypocrites, or else but indiscreet and
unexperienced Christians. For as ye may discern a lame man by the unevenness
of his legs: so ye may a lame Christian (many times) by his unequal discourse
in divine matters. For he usually exceeds, and speaks more then his part comes
to, and then he is able well to weild; or else his words agree not together,
his sentences are senseless, and unsuitable: in a word, he talks like a
bungler. But this only by the by, and as in a digreslion. We were speaking
erewhile to the other extreme, and finding sault with those, rather, that speak
not when they should, then that speak when they should not. I would not he
thought to inveigh against forwardlinesse in favoury discourse, so it be
seasonable (...). Isocrat.
and sober Act. 26.25
No: my quarrel is rather to such as having both opportunity and ability
thereunto, are over-shie and shamefast, or otherwise averse and awkward to this
godly conference: slipping or slighting those many fair occasions and
opportunities of doing and receiving good that way, that God even thrusts into
their hands. It is true, that every man is naturally possessed with a dumb and
deaf devil, till Christ say to his soul, Epphata be opened Mark 7.34
. But what, I marvel, should hinder the righteous from opening his mouth with
wisdom, when once the Law of God is in his heart Ps 37.30, 31
? Should not a good tree bring forth good fruit? and a good man out of the good
treasure of his heart being forth good things Mart. 12.35
? Should we not, as the Corinthians, abound in all speech, and in all wisdom 1
Cor. 1.5
? Should we not, with the believing Romans, be silled with all knowledge and
goodness, able and ready to admonish Romans 15.14
and comsent one another in love? The blessed Virgin could not conceal the
comfort she had conceived upon the conception of her Savior; nor rest, till
she had imparted it to her cousin Elizabeth Luk 1.3^, 40.
. The Apostles could not but speak the things they had heard and seen Acts 4.20
, they must do it. And Saint Paul was so constrained by the love of Christ Cor.
5.14
shed abroad in his soul, that he could do no less then persuade other men to
the like Christian coarse of life: yea he had aimest persuaded Agrippa also to
be a Christian Act. 26.28 Fox.
. Holy Bradford reckoned that hour lost wherein he had not done some good to
other, by tongue, hand, or pen. And how comes it then (beloved brethren) that
such a sore deadness, and dump of zeal and heavenly mindedness does haunt the
hearts even of Gods hidden ones Psalm. 83.3
in these unhappy days of security and form, that ye cannot find your
tongues in Christian company, nor have a word (hardly) to utter there to any
good purpose? Is it because ye need not learn, or be confirmed in the present
truth, that ye are so still? is there nothing yet lacking to your faith or
growth 1 These. 3.10
that ye are so tonguetied? God I am sure has commanded another thing: Thus
shall ye say every one to his neighbor, and every one to his brother; what
haeth the Lord answered, and what has he spoken Jer 23 25
? And again, They shall stand in the ways, and enquire for the old way Jer.
6.16
, etc. If a passenger know not his way, yet we say, he has a tongue in his
head, and he may seek direction; and so he will if he be his own worthy. Why
then do not we, that are travelers toward heaven, use our tongues when we meet
with company, asking of one another the way to Zion with our faces thitherward,
going and weeping, and seeking the Lord, and s^ying, Come and let us join our
selves unto the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall never be forgotten Jer
50.4, 5
. Is it fit to say to God with those in Job, Depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways Job 21.14
? or if we do desire, are we too good to ask with the Eunuch Acts 8 34
, to seek with the Church in the Canticles Cant. 3.1
, to knock at the door of their lips for a spiritual alms, who as liberal
housekeepers feed many Prove. 10.21
? is it stiffenesse in us, that we will not be beholding; or bash^^^nesse, that
we would not be thought too forth-putting? or is it not dullness rather, and
disaffection, that we receive no more good, and iron-boweld selfishnesse that
we do no more good? looking upon our own things only with Cain, as if we were
not our brothers keepers oGen. 4.9
: bearing fruit to our selves only with Ephraim Hos. 10.1.
, as if the Lord would be content with such empty vines: living and lording it,
as if our lips were our own Psalm. 12
, and we not bound to serve one another in love Gal. 5.13
; yea, and though free from all, yet to make our selves servants to all, that
we might edisie, some 1 Cor. 9.19
. I doubt not but dumb Christians are as well to be disliked and censured as
dumb Ministers. The manifefestation of the spirit is given to presit withal 1
Cor 12.7
: and the Philippians were all partakers, or fellow-partners of St. Paul's geace
Philip. 1.7 (...).
; which he elsewhere calls, the gift bestowed on us for many 2 Cor. 1.11
. Why should any of us then hide his candle under a bushel? thrust his hand
into his bosom? dig his talent into the earth? shall it not be taken from us
unless we improve it for common benefit? and our selves be laid by as broken
vessels, whereof there is no further use? How many have we known in our
little experience, that once flourished like green bay-trees, and yielded much
refreshing, like Jonas his Gourd; who yet ceasing afterward from Christian
exhortation, have been blasted as sorward buds with untimely frosts, and
withered, as Jonas his Gourd smitten with the worm? How is the door of their
lips (as one justly complains) that whilome was wont to open with the law of
grace Prove. 31.26
now locked up from good words, or moves as a door on rusty hinges, with
murmuring and complaining, and speeches tending rather to the perverting of the
hearers, then godly edifying? Oh look upon the fields of these slothfuil
persons, and when ye see them all grown over with thistles and nettles, for
want of manuring, receive Instruction Prove. 24.30, 31, 32
And that is a third Use.

SECT. V. Use 3.
INstruction, I say, and that in the Apostles words: Let no corrups
communication proceed out of your months, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers Ephesians. 4.29
. Covet after spiritual gifts, but chiefly that ye may edisie 1 Cor. 12.31
. Let no man please himself, but please every one his neighbor for his good to
edisication Romans 15.2
, being ready to distribute, willing to communicate 1 Timothy 6 18 (...). Ad
liberalem quorumvis bonorum cominunicationem respicit. Scultet. obser.
, and exchange common comforts, sweetest soul-secrets, spiritual consolations,
and consultations with whatsoever Christians. Bear ye one another burdens,
says St. Paul, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6 2
What is that law? hear it from his own mouth. Little children, yet a little
while I am with you: ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the Jews, whither I
go, ye cannot come, so now I say unto you. A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another as I have loved you, etc Joh. 13 33, 34. Post
consolationes quas ei cogitatio divinarum promissionum, and invocatio
adferebant, dicebat se non habere aliam levationem maestitiae, nisi coll quia
optimoru^ fiatrum, and alierum bonestorum ac doctissimorum virorum. De Georgio
Principe Anbaltino Melchior in vita.
which seepch of his, our Savior shows, that whereas they might be grieved at
the loss of his bodily presence, he had prescribed them a course for the
supply of that comfort; to wit, as loving friends and fellow members, to sort
together, side together, live together, love together, and by all means
possible to delight themselves in a fruitful fellowship one with another: than
the which I know not whether there be any thing in the whole earth more
comfortable and glorious. Sure it is, if there be any heaven upon earth, next
unto communion with God, it is in the communion of Saints; which differs only
in degrees from heaven: for there the Lord commands his blessing, says David,
and life for evermore Psalm. 133. ult Ne sitis negligentes corrigendis vestris,
ad curam vestram quoquo m^do pertinentibus, monendo, docendo, hortando,
terrendo, Aug. de verb dom. ser. 18.
. Away then with that sinful retiredness affected by some, that neglect of
profitable and comfortable fellowship with our brethren. Did Christ leave
heaven to converse with us, and-shall we stie up our selves, and live reclused?
Did he, at his return to heaven, lay this last charge upon us, the very night
before his death, to love one another, as he loved us, and do we neglect it? He
dwells still (by the presence of his grace) in the assemblies of his Saints
Psalm. 89.7
; yea there he has a delight to dwell. Why should not we account it our
happiness, yea our heaven, that we may have leave to dwell where the God of
heaven and author of all happiness loves to dwell? The Church is called by
Christ, Chephsibah Esaias 62 4
. And the Saints were David's chephsibam Psalm. 16 3
, his darlings, His eyes were upon the faithful in the land, that they might
dwell with him Psalm. 101 6
, and he with them: and although a king, yet he held it no disparagement to be
companion to all them that feared God, and kept his statutes Psalm. 119 63
, though never so mean in the worlds eye and esteem. Hence his thrift in the
trade of godliness; it being a course of incredible profit. For, when the
mystical body of Christ is so fitly joined together and compacted, that every
joint makes a supply, then there is a blessed increase of the whole body, unto
the edifying of it self in love Ephesians. 4.16
. As on the other side, it is no better then a sinful shamefastness, or
blancht-pride, when Christians are so retired, or reserved; choosing rather to
remain needy, then to discover their poverty; and like foolish and beggarly
shopkeepers, content themselves with a vain show, and a few painted papers
stuffed with straw or rags, rather then they will use any spiritual trading with
others, or lose the name and opinion of wealthy men, Ob.
by taking up such wares as they want.

Oh but I am so barren of matter, and unprovided of fit words, when I come into
good company, that I am even ashamed to show my head amongst them, and
exceedingly to seek. Sol.


To seek are you? of what? surely of affection rather then of expression; of
hearts rather then words. For love makes eloquence As in Croesus his son in
Heredot. (...). Kpoi^oov.
: as you may lee in the true mother of the child in controversy: who though a
harlot, and of mean rank and breeding, yet how does she pour forth her self in
a flood of rhetorical expressions in pleading for her child before the king 1
King. 3.17
, though a man of great majesty, and a master of speech Eccles. 12 9, 10, 11.
: and all because she loved it, it is the property of love to frame a man's
tongue to a ready and easy discourse of the thing beloved: as the scholar of
his books, the huntsman of his hounds, etc. and so the Saints of their God, and
the things of his kingdom: as is well to be seen in the Church in the
Canticles, whose heart being inflamed with the love of Christ, her tongue was
as the pen of a ready Writer: it ran with great facility and skill while she
spoke of the things which she had made of the king Psalm. 45.1
. Let the blame therefore rest where it should (hardly) and learn here to fault
your disaffection to goodness, in case you prove barren and unfruitful in
godly conference.

SECT. VI. Helps to an holy dexterity this way. How to 1. get it. 2. Use it.
BUt what is to be done when I find my self dull and indisposed to this duty?

First complain of it to God, and entreat him to open thy lips, that thy mouth
may show forth his praise. Complain of it also to others, where thou come.
For this, at least, will follow; that thou shall hereby minister occasion of
godly conference, to your mutual kindling, and quickening. When Silas and
Timotheus came, Paul burned in spirit Acts 18.5
, who before perhaps, was not altogether so forwardly. You see how one stick
kindles another, if laid together: nay take me two flintstones and smite them
together, and although both be naturally cold, yet by mutual collision, fire
will be expressed So 'twill be here between Christian and Christian. Let them
be never so dry and dull to this duty, if they but begin once to bewail,
betwixt themselves, their present indisposednesle, way will be made to a better
temper. For as when wicked men are mute and all amort (as they say) one evil
word sets abroach many: so will one good word draw on another among the godly,
to the singular advantage of the whole company.

Secondly, make use of all Gods means for the greatning of this gift, the want
whereof ye so much bewail; laboring to abound, with the Corinthians, in
knowledge, faith, and utterance 2 Cor. 8.7
: being full of all goodness with the Romans, able to admonish one another Rom
15
, or as these ancient believers in the text, to be often speaking one to
another by heavenly counsel, confirmation in grace, and spiritual
encouragement. For this purpose;

1. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all wisdom, this will
enable you to teach and admonish one another in Psalms and hymns, Colos. 3.16
etc. For there is edification also in the appointing of fit Psalms 1 Cor.
14.26
. The holy Scriptures are therefore called the word, among other reasons,
because they should be the matter and boundary of our words. If any speak
(says St. Peter) let him speak as the Oracles of God 1 Pet. 4
. And whatever ye do in word or deed, (says St. Paul, after he had laid down
this rule in speech) do all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and according
to his word dwelling richly in you Col. 3.16, 17
. They are also called chieftains, or leaders Prove. 8 6 (...).
, and Lords of collections Eccles. 12 11 (...)
(according to some) because they are as Leaders, and Lords Paramount above all
other words and writings of men that ever were collected into volumes. Hence
the Prophet sends us to the law and to the testimonies Esaias 8 20
(those sound words 2 Timothy 1.13 (...). Sa^rae literae hominum animos imbuere
solent hac art sapi^e loquendi. Nam in verbo sal ille recondi^ur, quo sermones
condiendi. Vnde Apostoli verbo divino instructi di^untur sal Terrae, etc.
Episcop. Sari^b in Coloss
that have a healing property in them above all filed phrases, and humane
expressions) assuring us, that if any speak not according to this word, it
because there is no light in them. This David knew, and therefore, By the words
of thy lips, says he (which I have well disgested, and by long practice made
my proper language) I have kept me from the path of the destroyer, and am fully
purposed that my mouth shall not transgress Psalm. 17.4
, or pass the bounds; to wit, of Gods holy word, which he had set up for a
Directory of all his speeches, both for matter, end, and measure. So of the
godly woman it is said in the Proverbs, that the law of grace is upon her
tongue Prove 31.26
, that is, she was so well versed in the holy Scriptures, that she had
there-hence gathered and gotten an ability of speaking with profit and power in
the things of Gods kingdom.

2. Pray for the gift of utterance, and beg the prayers of others for you, as
Paul does often with greatest earnestness of entreaty Ephesians. 6 19 Colosl. 4.3
: and yet he was a man passing well-spoken, and able to deliver himself in as
good terms as another: but what of that? he saw sufficient cause to send to
heaven for utterance and boldness of speech, and to use all the help he could
make for that purpose: For who has made man's mouth --? have not I the Lord
Exodus: 4.11
? There may be such and such preparations in the heart of a man, but, (when
all is done) the answer of the tongue is from the Lord Prove. 16.1
. Let a man be as eloquent as Aaron, as powerful in the Scriptures as Apollos,
as full of matter as Elihu, who was ready to burst for want of vent Job 32.18,
19.
, yet unless God open his lips, his mouth can never speak to his praise. This
David came to see and acknowledge upon second thoughts, Psalm. 51. For having
promised that his tongue should sing of Gods righteousness, he retracts, as it
were, and corrects what he had spoken in the next verse. Not as one that
repented of his promise, but as one that had promised more of himself then he
was able to perform, and therefore subjoyns, Lord open thou my lips, and then
my mouth Ps. 51.14, 15
, etc, The reason we speak no better to men, is because we speak no oftener to
God, to teach us to speak as we ought, knowing how to answer every man Colos.
4.6
.

3. Lastly, practice much this duty of holy conference: run into the company of
Gods people, that speak the language of Canaan naturally and familiarly; and
there imitate such as are most expert, and best gifted that way. Accustom your
selves also to speak there (as you have occasion, right words Job 6.25
, sober words Acts 26.25
, savoury words Colos. 4.6
, seasonable words Prove. 15.23
, wholesome words 2 Timothy 1.13
, the words of grace and of wisdom 1 Cor. 12.8
, the words of eternal life Joh. 6.68
, finally all such words as issue from those inward graces, (that good
treasure, as our Savior calls it) of knowledge, faith, love, joy, zeal,
desire, forrow for sin, etc. and advance those main ends, Gods glory, the
salvation of others, and our own safety. Not barrelling and hoording up our
gifts, as rich cormorants do their corn: nor yet so close and curious of our
words, as to say no more in company then what may breed applause and admiration
of our worth and wisdom, as proud self-seekers: but as good housekeepers,
having that honey and milk of good matter under our lips Cant. 5.15
, that we may plentifully pour forth to the feeding of many Not like a cursed
cow, that will not give down her milk; but opening our mou^hes for mutual
edification.
. Certainly the gifts of such shall not perish in the use as temporal
commodities do Cant. 5.15
, or be the worse for wearing, but the better, and brighter, as the widows oil,
or plow man's coulter. It is use that makes masteries in any skill, and so in
this. If your tongue shall ever be as the pen of a ready writer Psalm. 45.1
, inure it much to Christian communication Let your speech be with grace that
ye may know how to answer, etc. Colos. 4 6. so that by speaking well, we learn
to speak well.
. It is practice (and not precepts so much) that makes a good scribe: and
although a man be at first but a bungler at it, yet by use and exercise he will
attain to write both fairly and swiftly too, after a time. So here. I conclude
this second direction with that of our Savior. Wherefore, let every Scribe
that is instructed to the kingdom of heaven be like unto a good householder
that brings forth out of his treasure (as need requires) both new and old
Mat. 13 52
.

Thirdly, labor and learn the well-using, and wise ordering that ability of
discourse and utterance you have attained unto. A work of no less pains then
profit; hard, I confess, but highly concerning all that would give up a
comfortable account of the talents they have been entrusted with. And here
(that I may hasten) precious and worthy of all acceptance (...). 1 Timothy 1.15
is that counsel of St. Paul. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned
with salt, that ye may know how to answer every man Colos. 4.6 Non quod semper
loquendum sit; est enim tempus tacendi: sed quod curn loquimur, semper curandum
ut loquamur prout oportet. Daven.
. In which text there is not a word but has its weight, not a syllable, but
its substance.

First, Let your speech, says he, be with grace, and always so. Not that we
must be always speaking, for in the multitude of words wants not sin: but
he that refraineth his lips is wise Prove. 10.19 (...), a Luciano and Aristoph.
dicuntur stulti, quod aperto hianteq, ore esse, plerunque siultitiae sit
argumentum. Pasor. in (...).
. To lay on more words upon any business (though never so good) then the
matter requires, argues impotency of mind, excess of affection, or pride in
speaking. Be not therefore ever speaking (for an open mouth is a purgatory to
the master) but ever when ye do speak, let your speech be with grace. And so it
is: 1. When it proceeds from a habit of heavenly-mindednesse, from a principle
of grace, a good treasure within Mat. 12.35
. 2. When for manner, it is delivered with a grace: whiles we do not turn over
these discourses lightly and profanely, as news or table-talk, but with such
reverence and affection, as may show, we are inwardly touched with the majesty
of Gods truth; and that we speak not by rote, but experience; as having felt
the power of that we speak upon our own hearts and consciences. My heart is
inditing (or frying) a good matter. I speak of the thing I have made touching
the king Psalm. 45.1 (...) unde (...) sartago.
. 3. And chiefly, when the matter of our discourse is good, and such as
ministers grace, (not vile) to the hearers Ephesians 4.29
. Not but that it may be lawful for us to confer of moral and civil
business also, betwixt whiles: but this must be done, 1. More sparingly, as
chiefly minding that One thing necessary Luke 10.42
, and most expert in our own Country dialect. 2. Less affectionately; we may
not show that earnestness, life, and comfort here as in speaking of the things
above. Not jesting, or foolish talking Ephesians. 5.4
, (think the same of other less necessary (...). That do not so mainly conduce
to the chief end. (...). Xenoph. lib. 4. de dictis and fae Socrat.
discourses) but rather giving of thanks. There Is a great deal of force lies in
that word (rather.) 3. In communing of these common and ordinary things, we
should show the inward grace and sanctification of our hearts: soaring on high
(many times) in a low matter; and still keeping our souls upon the wing. As St.
Paul, who writing to Philemon of so mean and abject an object, as a poor
vassal and bond-slave, presently mounteth up into the very heavens, and sets a
grace, a gloss upon base matters by his holy character of gracious speech. Our
civil conversation, also (and communication too) should be in heaven Philip.
3.20 (...). Sicut rota quae in terra voluitur, pare ima and minima eam tangit,
cartera exstat, and est in alto: Sie nos oportet decurrere pey hac humilia,
optima part altos, and elevatos. Lips. in Epistol.
. Lastly, our speech is with grace, when for the effect, it renders us gracious
and acceptable in the ears of God and his people; and makes his remembrance of
us sweet and precious when absent, for the good fruit reapt and received by our
company and conference, when present.

Secondly, let your speech be seasoned with salt, says the Apostle: Downam.
Tenuissimus ingenij fructus jocuri Cicero. Linguam habes, non ut alios salibus
tuis mordeas, sed ut Deo gratias agas. Chrysostom.
he means it not of salt jeasts, close squibs (the foam and froth of wit, as
One calls them) scurrillous and bitter frumps, scornful and spiteful taunts
and abuses, impeaching the credit and comfort of our neighbors: This is not
that the Apostle here intends; but, 1. The salt of mortification, that dries
up, and drives out by degrees, that superfluous and sinful humor in evil
words, that easily corrupts good manners 1 Cor. 15 Sunt qui non salem in se
habent, sed tabe^, putredinem and pestem, quam aliis afflare satagunt. Episcop.
Sarisb. in locum.
: and sets such a blur upon the hearts both of speaker and hearers, as nothing
can fetch out again but the blood of Christ. 2. The salt of discretion,
teaching to observe all due circumstances; as when, where, and before whom we
speak. So shall we in profiting others reap the fruit of it in our own hearts:
for, as Solomon says, A man has joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word
spoken in due season how good is it Prove. 15.23.
? Good it is to the speaker, and good also to the hearers, every way
profitable, and precious, even as apples of gold in pictures of silver. Prove.
22.11. D. Staupicius ad Lutherum Augustae coram Cajetane Card. comparentem
dixit, memor esto, frater, te ista in nomine Dom. nostri Jesu Christi
incoepisse. Quod verbum non quasi a Staupicio, sed per eum dictum accepit
memorique animo semper tenuit.


Thirdly, the end of this Apostolical precept follows, and that is, that ye
may know; and, how to answer every man. There is a Science, an Art of
spiritual speech, of holy Rhetoric, which every Christian is bound to look
into: studying well to answer before we speak Prove. 15.2
, keeping us carefully within our line 2 Cor. 10.13
, both of our callings, and the measure of the knowledge and grace that God
has given us; being content to learn daily, as well how to speak, as how to
live; especially since we are bound to be examples to others, not only in
faith and conversation, but also in words, and communication 1 Timothy 4 12 (...),
a stamp for speech.
: The skill whereof is no where else to be learned but in Christ's school. For
though Reason yield us conceits, and Nature a tongue, yet it is God alone that
can give us to speak with the tongue of the learned, to minister a word in
season: that is, to time a word Esaias 50.4 (...)
, (as Esaias phraseth it) and to set it upon the wheels Prove. 25.11
, (as Solomon) that it may run right upon the proper object; whiles we know,
first, and know how, next, to answer every man, whether he be weaker or
stronger then our selves. For one kind of answer will not serve to all sorts of
men, but discretion is to be used here, as much as in any thing. Quod de
Solomone scribitur id ad omnes pios suo grade extendi potest. Quaesivit verba
utilia, and sermones rectissima conscripsit. Eccles. 12.12. Episcop. Sarisb. in
Col.
Every good man is not capable of every good speech, nor any man at all times
alike. Some weaker Christians, as they cannot bear all exercise of religion
Mat. 9.15, 16
, so neither all kinds of discourses of religion. The Hebrews (such was their
unskilfulnesse in the word of righteousness) had need of milk, and not of
strong meat Heb. 5.11, 12
. Him that is weak in says, says Paul, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations Romans 14.1
. Holy Job wishes that his friends would hold their peace, that it might be
imputed to them for wisdom Job. 13.5
: because they spoke many good things, but besides the purpose, and his present
necessity. For to him that is in misery pity should be showed from his friend
Job. 6.14.
. To such we must give good words and comfortable Zac. 1.13.
pleasant words, such as may be sweetness to the soul, and health to the bones
Prove. 16.24
, and more esteemed then necessary food Job. 23 12
etc. comfort the feeble minded, support the weak be patient toward all men:
address your selves wisely to each man's necessities, and state of soul, and so
comfort your selves together, and edify one another (says the Apostle to his
Thessalonians) even as also ye do 1 These. 5.14, 11
.

And as for such as are better then our selves, and beyond us in gifts and
abilities. 1, As at feasts and public meetings, we give the first place to the
more honorable, so yield to such prioritie of speech as Elihu Job. 32.6.17, 18
, laying our hands upon our mouths (though top-full of matter, as he) till our
turns come, which they that do not, but interrupt and disturb their betters by
their talkativenesse, as they bewray their own indiscretion, so they do no
small wrong to the whole company, being herein at least, worse then the foolish
Virgins (says one) who desired not to put out the lights of the wise, but
only to share with them Mat. 25.8
. 2. Be sure to put the abler sort of Christians upon such discourses as are
most proper, and wherein they are most excellent, observing well their
singularity of gifts, and specialty of endowments, wherewith God has graced
them, and accordingly framing your questions, and casting forth the occasions.
Many a good discourse lies buried in the breasts of abler Christians, and all
because the well is deep (as she said) and there wants a bucket Ioh. 4.11
. Some Christians you shall find more dexterous and sufficient at discussing
of controversies, some in resolving of cases, some in expounding scriptures,
some in comforting of consciences, some in discerning and discovering the
devils depth, and fetches, some in one thing, some in another, whenever you
come into the company of such, know that there is a price put into your hands
Pro. 17.6.
, and see that ye neglect it not.

3. Be still getting, and gathering from such: exact of your selves a sensible
addition to your talents by treading with these spiritual Merchants; who having
found the pearl of price themselves, do daily cast pearls before others, in
their gracious speeches Math. 7.6 Quae circumvolitas agilis thyma? Hor. epist.
, if we have but grace to pick them up. This were the way to be able to answer
every man for their spiritual use and benefit. Up therefore and be doing as ye
have any opportunity. Be still sucking from the wiser sort of godly people, as
the be from the flower, she will not off, ye know, till she have got somewhat
out of it) storing up in your lives that which may help in time of spending.
Suffer we should the word of exhortation Heb. 13.22. (...).
from those that come short of us: so did Moses from Jethro, David from
Abigail, Job from the meanst of his servants, Job. 31.13
being ready to learn of any body Act. 18.26.
, as knowing we have cause to say with Agur, surely I am more brutish then any
man, and have not the understanding of a man Prove. 30.2
etc. But from those that excel us we should covet it, drawing and draining
from them that milk, and honey that lies under their tongues Cant. 5.15
. Counsel in the heart of a man, is like deep water: but a man of understanding
will draw it out. And the more he draws, the more he adds to his own skill,
and the others store: it being here as with wells and fountains, which are
bettered by drawing, as Basil long since observed Prove. 20.5. (...). Basil
epist. 81. ad Eustathium. Salienti aquaerum fonti undas si tollas, nec
exhauritus, nec extenuatur, sed duleescit. Scientia, docendi officio,
dulcedinem sentiat, non sentiat minutias.
and is found true by experience etc.

CHAP. V. Doctr. IIII. The text further expounded: and withal the Doctrine of
Gods gracious acceptance of our upright performances propounded.
Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another: and the Lord
hearkened and heard it etc.
HEre begins the second general part of our Text, and that is Gods part. They
had done their best endeavor amidst an ungodly nation, for they feared the
Lord: and gave very good proof of it, whiles they both thought upon his name
for their own support and comfort, and spoke good of his name, for the
confutation of the bad, and confirmation of the better sort of people. Thus did
these good souls busy and bestir themselves, both within doors and without,
at home and abroad: among their foes on the one hand, and their friends on the
other. But what does God in the mean while? Verily no man serves God for
naught, as those wicked would needs have it: being (therein at least beyond
their father the devil, in lies and blasphemies Job. 1.9.
. Gods retributions are bountiful witnesses, the words following, the Lord
hearkened and heard etc. He heard not only but hearkened and heard, which is
the gesture and behavior of a very heedful hearer gestus diligenter auscul:
tantis. Shindler: in (...)
, one that is much taken with the discourse: according to that of the Prophet,
The eyes of them that see shall not be dim; and the ears of them that hear
shall hearken Esaias. 32.3
. It Is somewhat to hear, but more to hearken and; hear for it imports not
attention only but affection too; whether of grief or delight, as the matter
calls for. It was not then a little or light regard the Lord had to his people
here, when they thus gat togethe, and spoke together of him and his name: but
it appears that he took special notice of it, (for he heard) and singular
content in it, (for he hearkened and heard) which is a degree beyond the
former, in short, he was much affected and delighted with their godly speeches,
and other religious performances: and therefore earnestly listened, and laid
his ear close to their gracious lips, as loath to lose any particle of that
precious language: what may we hence observe but this?

That the Lord is very much taken,

SECT. I. The doctrine confirmed by Scripture.
THis to assure us of, it is, that the Lord every where almost in holy
scripture, 1. So commands and calls for service from us: and that upon terms
of greaest encouragement. For, thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and
his maker, Ask me things to come concerning my sons; and concerning the work of
my hands command ye me Esaias. 45.11
2. So seeks and sues for it, as a man would do for some matter of price and
good account. The father seeks after such, says our Savior, John 4.23. facem
and stimulum addat cultoribus Dei, quod se a Deo expeti sciant, er ei esse in
delicijs. Cart.
to worship him, as worship him in spirit and in truth. It was death to
solicit the Persian kings uncalled: for God is so pleased with our access,
that he sollicits fuitours 3. That he so indents and bargains with us for
service in lue of his love, in exchange of his blessings. Call upon me in the
time of trouble, and I will hear thee. and (...) other side shall glorify me.
This the people of God (knowing his mind (...) restipulate, and engage
themselves unto by covenant on their part: as Jacob in that vow of his, upon
the way to Padan-Aram, if God says he, Psalm. 50.15
will be with me and keep me etc. Then shall the Lord be my God, and I will
build him an house, and pay him tith of all Genesis 28.20
. So David in his poenitential, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, then
will I teach transgressors thy way. Deliver me from bloodguiltinesse, so shall
my tongue sing aloud of thy righteousness Psalm. 51.14.15
4. Hence it is, that the Lord so chides and blames his people for doing him no
more, no better service. Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labor for that which profits not? hearken diligently unto me Esaias 55 2
etc. And again, why will ye not come unto me that ye may have life Joh. 5.40
? And hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: ask and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full Joh. 16.23
5. Lastly he signifies and seals up his good account, and dear acceptance
of our service, when he can come by it, by the abundant content and complacency
he takes therein. He delights not in the strength of an horse, he takes not
pleasure in the legs of a man. the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him,
in them that hope in his mercy Psalm. 147.10.11
See this in two or three powerful expressions, and love-breathing passages in
that song of songs. O my dove that art in the clefts of the rocks, in the
secret places of the stairs (1. thou that art hid and laid up as a jewel of
price, in the golden cabinet of my gracious providence, and so set safe out of
the gunshot of hels power and policy) Show me thy sight (1. Appear often before
me in holy duties) le me hear thy voice (viz) lift up in prayer, godly
conference etc.) for thy voice is sweet and thy countenance comely Cant. 2.14.
expounded.
(so it seemed to him that had made it so by his comeliness put upon her: and
also accepting her for such, all wants and weaknesses notwithstanding.) So in
another place, Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thouhast
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, (that single eye of thine lift up in
prayer, and heavenly contemplation) with one chain of thy neck Cant. 4.9
, (thy profession and practice of my laws and ordinances: which is as an
ornament of grace to thy head, and chains about thy neck Prove. 1.8, 9
.) Lo here the Lord Christ himself, that was not moved one whit with the
proffer of the whole world, and all its glory Mat. 4.8 Amore incompa rabili ita
correptus esi, ut nostrum amorem ambiat. Joh. 15.9. Beza in loc.
, is yet lost in love to a sanctified soul: his heart wounded and won by her
religious deportments. So verse 11. of that same chapter, Thy lips, O my
spouse, says he, drop as the honeycomb, honey and milk are under thy tongue
Cant. 4.11
. Behold how sweet to Christ's palate are the gracious words of his people:
sweeter then any honey to his mouth psalm. 119.103
. Nay he eats not only of their honey, but of their hony-combe too, and
drinks not of their wine alone, but of their milk also; takes content not only
in their more excellent, and more exquisite performances, but in their meaner
services too; he not only bottles up their tears, and books up their prayers
Psalm. 56.8
and frutifull conferences, but harkens even to the sighs of his prisoners
Psalm. 79.11
, nay to their breathing Lam. 3.56
also and their chatterings; as of Hozekiah, who was so oppressed with grief and
extremity, that he could not speak but chatter Esaias 38.14
only, when he came to pray; and yet the Lord took such delight in that he did,
(weak though it were) as he presently bad Isaiah (before he was yet gone out
into the middle of the court) turn again with a quite contrary message: Yea
and yielded him more then he asked; full fifteen years Esaias 38 5
, which we commonly call two men's lives, with advantage. He asked of thee life,
says the Psalmist, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever and
ever Psalm. 21.4.
.

SECT. II. The Doctrine confirmed by reasons from God the father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.
NOw the reason of this so gracious disposition and dealing of the Lord, with
his faithful people respects either him,

The first Reason from God has a threefold prospect: for it looks 1. toward
the Father, 2. toward the Son, 3. toward the Holy Ghost (...)

For the Father first: It must be considered, that originally (...) mercy moves
him hereunto, without the least concurrence or contribution of any worth or
desert at all in the creatures. He takes pleasure in the saints and their
sacrifices, only for the good pleasures sake of his own will. Of his own will
begat he us by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first-fruites of
the creatures Jam. 1.18.
. And of the same his own will, does he take delight in the duty we do him,
being thus begotten: that like as natural parents delight to hear their own
little ones prattle, or do some small chare, and think it fine and handsome,
when others think it foolish and troublesome. So it is between God and his
dear children. Any good thing from them is very good, takes wonderfully with
him; and although it were easy for his pure eyes Habac. 1.13
to find out many flawes in their best works (as good Nehemiah well ^aw, and
therefore craved pardon Nehe. 13.2.
so often of his zealous reformations) yet he sees no sin in Jacob Number. 23.21
. Or if he do (as indeed he does) yet he spares them as a man spares his own
son that serves him Mal. 3.17.
. Thi^ is God the father.

Secondly, it is for God the Sons sake; and by means of his merits and
mediation, that our services (simple as they are) find any grace or favor
with the Almight: whilst our wants go covered with Christ's intercession: and
out suire and services are followed in heaven by his advocation 1 John 2.1
. Look what ever holy duty we perform, the Lord Jelus (the mediator of the
new Covenant,) not only presents it to his father, but refines it first and
perfumes it wi^^ his odours Rev. 5.8.
. And hence it is that God sinelles a sweet savor of rest and peace from our
sacrifices, which else would st^^ck worse in his nostrils, then the onions and
ga lick of the Egyptian fleshpots. Hence that of the Apostle, By him let us
offer the sacrifice of praise (and so any other spiritual service, that shall
find acceptance) to God continually Heb. 13.15.
. And, by him we have access, by one spirit, unto the father Ephesians. 2.18.
. This was shadowed out (of old) by the door of the tabernacle: which as it
never was or any hard or debarring matter, but of a veil easily penetrable; so
at the passion of our ^av^our, it did (of its own accord) rend in sunder; to
show our easy accosse unto, and high acceptance with God in any holy duty,
through Christ the peacemaker Ephesians. 2.14.
. This also was not obscurely typified by the high Priest's plate, wherein was
fairly engraven, Holiness to the Lord: which was to be upon his forehead, the
forefront of his miter, that he might bear the iniquity of the offerings,
which the children of Israel should offer in all their holy offerings, and it
should be always on his forehead to make them acceptable before the Lord Exo.
28.36, 38.
.

But thirdly, as it is by the mercy of the father and the me it of the son, so
is it also by the hand of the holy ghost upon them, that God is so greatly
pleased with the suite, and services of his people, the Ap^stie instancet in
^ne religious duty: we may safely extend it to all the rest. Likewise, says
he, the spirit helps our infirmities Rom 8.26. (...).
, he sets his shoulder to the work together with us, as th word there imports.
For we (silly souls) know not what we should pray for as we ought, we neither
know what for the matter, nor as we ought for the manner. But the spirit it
self (against all the roarings and repinings of the flesh) makes loud and
sh^ill intercessions for us in this case with groanings which cannot be uttered
Excitat vehemens desiderium liberationis, accendit quoque alios affectus ammi,
ut gaudium et amorem, adeo ut ardeant supra modum e^ naturam communem long
exaperent. Rolloc.
: and that thus.

1. He lets us see our want of God, which nature studiously covers. 2. He
sets before us the excellency and worth of finding favor with God; the thought
whereof never enters the natural man's heart 1 Cor. 2 9.
. 3. He stirs up and kindles in us strong affections in prayer, dictating
words and expressions answerable to those affections.
In short, he works all our works in us Esa 26.12. Quoties video te
susph^rtem, non dubito spiritum aspirantem. ^yprian.
, as the prophet says: for we cannot so much a suspirare, unless he do first
inspirare, breath out a sigh for sin, except the spirit do first breath it into
us. Much less can we make an effectual and comfortable prayer, or do any
thing else, that is truly good without him. Since prayer (think the same still
of any other holy duty) is the breath of the spirit, the pulse of the spirit:
without whom, what is prayer else but an empty ring, a tinkling Cymball? Pray
(says St. Jude) in the holy ghost. Iede 20. set 1 Cer 14.15. Ephesians 5 18.
And then he that searech the heart, will easily know the mind of the spirit,
that he intercedeth for us according to God Bom. 8.27. (...).
, or worthy of God, and to his greatest liking. Such another phrase the Apostle
has of Godly sorrow. 2 Cor. 7. where he calls it, A sorrow according to God
2 Cor. 7.10. (...) So Luke 6.12 he continued all night. (...) in the prayer of
God.
, that is a spiritual god-like sorrow, and such as issues from the spirit of
God. For the wind must blow ere the waters flow Psa. 147.18 Dike.
says the Prophet. And it is the fire of the spirit (says a Divine) in our
hearts (as in a still) that sends up those dews of repenting tears into our
heads, that drop forth of our eyes. Think the like of christian watchfulness:
Even Peter, James, and John, (those pillars Gal 2.9. (...).
,) will be ready to sleep and buckle; yea and that in the hour of remptation
Mat 26.41.
too, if the spirit do not quicken them, and as it were hold up with forks
their heavy eyelids. And for reading of the Scriptures, look how the
Philistines could never understand Sampsons riddle, till they plowed with
Sampsons, heifer Judge 14.18.
, so neither can we conceive or relish the deep things of God without the aid
and assistance of the spirit of God 1 Cor 2.10 (...).
. As on the other side: With his holy spirit, and by it, we are sanctified unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus 1 Pet. 1.2
, purified in obeying the truth unto unfeigned love of the brethren 1 Pet. 1.22
, quickened unto all goodness, righteousness and truth Ephesians. 5.9
, caused to keep Gods commandments Ezekiel. 36.27
, himself setting us to work (...)
, working all our works for us Esaias 26.12.
, sanctifying all the works of our hands, yea sanctifying the offering up both
of our selves and our services to God, as the Altar sanctifies the gift Romans 15
16.
, and opening us a welcome access to to God in all our performances Ephesians. 2.18
, who as he knows the meaning and mind of his spirit Romans 8.27 (...).
, so he cannot but accept that sacrifice that is kindled by the fire of his own
spirit, upon the true Altar Christ, his own son. This is the first Reason taken
from the three persons in the Godhead.

SECT. III. The Doctrine further confirmed by reasons from the Saints.
THe next respects the saints themselves, whose persons, first, are elect,
holy, and beloved: Colos. 3.12
whose performances in the second place have a true and real goodness in
them, and are therefore dearly accepted, and highly accounted of in the sight
of God.

For the first, It cannot be denied but that by nature all are alike hateful
to the Almighty; because he loves them Deuteronomy. 7.7
, the ground of his love being only in himself. He adopts them according to the
good-pleasure of his will Ephesians. 1.4
, without the least defect in himself, or desert in the creature. It is
otherwise with us then it was with those maids in Ah^shue^osh his time: they
were first perfumed and purified before he chose one for himself Esth. 2.10
. God found us in our blood when he said unto us live Ezekiel. 16.6
: and Christ gave himself for his people that he might sanctify and present
them to himself a glorious church Ephesians. 5 26
. What was Aarons rod better then the rest, that it alone should bud, and the
rest lie dry by it Number. 17.8
? every name was alike written in their rod: there is n^ difference in the
letters, nor in the wood: it is Gods choice that made the distinction. So, what
was the floor of a Jebusite to the Lord above all other so^les to build an
Altar on after the raging plague in David's time 2 Samuel 24.18
? As in places, so in persons God makes men to differ 1 Cor. 4.7
, and that is ever worthiest that he pleases to accept. Araunah a Jebusite by
nature, but made a Proselyte by grace, gives his freehold as a King to the
King 2 Sa. 24.23
. This deed of his, or rather this work of Gods free grace, is long after
remembered by the prophet (as some not improbably interpret him.) Ekron shall be
as the Iebusite Zach. 9.7
, That is, say they, the barbarous people of Palestina shall be as the famous
Araunah: by kindred indeed a Je^usire, but by Gods gracious acceptance and
adoption an Israelite. Like as (elsewhere) Jether that was by his country and
Ismaelite 1 Chro. 7.17
, is for his faith and religion called an Israelite 2 Samuel 17.25
. So then to sum up this reason; albeit by nature that is never a better of us;
but all are in the same hateful and woeful condition: all cut out of the same
cloth, as it were (the sheers only going between:) Yet when grace once comes
and sets a difference, when that divine nature 2 Pet. 1.4
(as St. Peter calls it) is transfused into a man, and he begins to be like
unto God in some truth of resemblance, the Lord cannot choose but love and
delight in his own image, where ever he meets with it. Now the persons of such
being once in acceptance through Christ (Gods beloved one Ephesians. 1 6 (...).
) their sacrifices cannot but be well accepted also. Thus the Lord had respect
to Abel and his offering, to Noah and his burnt-sacrifice, to Abraham and his
intercession for Sodom, to Jobs request for his friends, to David's for his
people, to Paul's for those in the ship. Will you know a reason? Abel was a
righteous person Heb. 11.4
, Noah his favorite Genesis 6.8
, Abraham his friend, Job his servant Job 1.8
. David his corculum 1 Samuel 13 14
or darling, Paul his elect vessel Act. 9.15
. Hence their high acceptance in the court of heaven: and hence that singular
delight and complacency that God took in their services. For, though the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, yet the prayer of the
upright is his delight Prove. 15.8 Psalm 4.3.
. The blood of a swine is as well colored and as fair, to see to, as the blood
of a sheep: but the former was an abomination to the Almighty, and present
death to the party that brought it: when the later might with good leave and
liking be powered about his Altar, and the sacrificer depart (with the publican)
justified and accepted.

And that is the second thing we were speaking to; respecting the services of
Gods people: in all which there is something of Gods, and something of their
own. This later God graciously overlooks, taking notice only of his own part in
that we do, and hence our acceptance. If this be not plain enough, take it
thus: The Lord leads his people by his spirit into good works by governing
the habits of grace infused, and producing therehence acts of grace: which
though mixed with corruption as from us (for who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean Job 14.4 Denominatio fit a potiori.
says Job?) Yet are they good before God, who winks at the imperfections; and
have a true goodness in them, being therefore denominated and called from the
better part, good works 2 Timothy 2.21
, good fruits Mat. 12.33
, fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5.22
, who exercises our faith, hope, love, zeal, fear of God, humility, and other
graces in producing them. Whence it is, that passing by infirmities in the
manner, God looks upon all our religious performances as fruits of the vine
Esaias 5.4
, whereupon he is pleased to feed heartily: the Church her self (as knowing
like another Rebeccah such savoury meat as he best loved) inviting him
thereunto; Let my beloved come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruits
Cant. 4. ult.
: which accordingly he did, as follows in the next chapter Cant. 5.1
.

SECT. IIII. Use 1. Its otherwise with the wicked. Their persons are hated,
their performances rejected, and why.
FOr Use of this point: God gives diligent heed to, Cursed with a curse, even
with Cains curse, the Lord had no respect to his sacrifice Genesis 4.5
, with Saul's curse, whom the Lord would not answer neither by dreams, nor by
Urim, nor by prophets 1 Samuel 28.6
: with Moabs curse, he shall come to his Sanctuary to pray, says the Prophet,
but shall not prevail Isa. 16.12.
: with the curse of David's enemies, who cried out, but there was none to save
them. Yea, to the Lord but he answered them not Psalm. 18.41
. Or if he do hear them (as he did sometime that Non-such Ahab 1 Kin. 21.29
: nay the devil himself Matt. 8 32
) yet it is for no other end, then that he may come upon them the more justly,
and consume them after he has done them good Josh. 24.20
: their preservation is no better then a reservation to some further mischief.

But usually the Lord frowns upon such, and turns the deaf ear unto them: and
worthily, for these three causes among many. First they cannot present him with
any service truly good and acceptable so long as they are out of Christ Heb.
11.6
. All their actions natural, civil, recreative, religious, are abomination.
Not the plowing Prove. 21 4
only, but the prayer of the wicked is sin Prove. 15, 8
, says Solomon. Pray they cannot indeed, (to speak properly) because they want
the spirit of prayer: that spirit of grace and of deprecation Zach. 22.10
. Say they may, (with those many in the Psalm) Who will show us any good? but
pray they cannot, as there, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us Psalm. 4.5.
. Wish they may with Balaam, the Soothsayer, O let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like unto his Number. 23.10
. But it is a David only that can pray in like case; Lord take not away my soul
with sinners, nor my life with bloody men Psalm. 2^.9
. The same we may say concerning Christian conference, or any other holy duty
whatsoever. How can ye which are evil speak good things, says our Savior to
the Pharisees Matt. 12 34
? Speak they may, (no doubt) and speak they do many times, more then their part
comes to, or then they have any thank for. Yea good things they may speak,
materially good I mean, and to the great good of the hearers, as those that
prophesied in Christ's Name, and yet were shut out of heaven Mat 7.22.23
. But for no good to themselves at all, because they fail still in the good
they do, either quoad fontem, or quoad finem. Either they bring not sorth those
good things out of the good treasure of their hearts Mat. 12 35.
, they want a good principle of grace within, or else they have not right aims
and intentions in the good they do, They bring forth fruit to themselves with
Ephraim Hos. 10.1
, when the Church (of the other side) keeps her fruit for her beloved Cant. 5.1
Spira cried ^^^nestly for grace, for a drop, because he could not be saved
without it He said he saw no excellency in i^, he desired ^ not for it self,
and therefore thought his prayers should not be heard
. They seek more the applause of men, then Gods approof in their religious
oiscourses; and the relief of their necessities, more then the setting forth or
Gods glory in their prayers and other services, which they perform to God more
out of carnal self love then any true delight in the duty. Will he delight
himself (says Job of the hypocrite) in the Almighty? will he always call upon
God Job 27.10
?

And that is a second reason why God rejects their services: which as they are
not right and real, so neither are they constant and continual. In an
extremity, happily, or when they have not whither else to turn themselves, then
God shall hear of them, then they run with Joab to the horns of Gods Altar,
which in prosperity they seldom or never compassed Psalm. 26.6
. Then they catch at Gods goodness, as a drowning man at a little twig, which
while ^afe upon the shore, he never looked after: then they cry and roar for
mercy, which till then they despised, as a prisoner at the bar, or as a pig
that is to be stickt. But all to no purpose; the justice of God so ordering of
it, and not without their own desert procuring it For to seek God in extremity
only, is no proof of a man's piety, no trial of his true affection: but
savours strongly of self love and hypocrisy. Let^s dog he riel up short, and
when he is hungerbit he will howl, and be heard all the house over. And verily
such service, done at such times, and by such persons, God no more regards then
a man would do the howling of a dog They ^ow^ upon (...) beds for corn and
wine, says Hosea Hos. 7.14
, they roar as bulls that are ba^ted Esaias 51.20
, says Esaias; and God must ome quickly to their help, or else he comes too
late; for they will try another course.

And that is the third defect God finds in the pretended services of
unsanctified persons; they are impatient of delays with Saul 1 Samuel 13.8
, they cannot stay, they cannot wait, they will not be deferred. If God come
not the sooner, they betake themselves to their own shifts, and seek to help
themselves another way: like the Chinois that whip their Gods when they answer
them not; or that resolute Russus, that painted God upon the one side of his
shield, and the devil on the other with this inscription: If thou will not have
me, here is one will be glad of me Si tu me nolis, isle rogitat.
: or that desperate King of Israel: Behold, says he, this evil is from the
Lord, and what should I wait for the Lord any longer 2 King. 6.33
? Lo this is the guise and disposition of a godless person; He seems to
serve God sometimes, but indeed it is to serve himself upon God: who, if he
will not be at his beck, and come at his whistle, away to the Witch of Endor
with Saul 1 Samuel 28.7
, to the god of Ekron with Ahaziah 2 King. 1.2
, to Baalim and Ashtaroth, with the revolted Israelites Judge. 10.6
. And therefore the Lord either answers them not at all, makes no reckoning of
their devotions, or shapes them an answer according to the Idols of their
hearts Ezekiel. 14.3
; as he did those ancient Idolaters. Ye have forsaken me, says the Lord, and
set up other Gods: wherefore (take it for an answer) I will deliver you no
more. Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in
the time of your tribulation Judge. 10.13.
. As for me, I will go and return to my place Hos. 5.15
, and woe be unto you when I depart from you Hos. 9.12
. Oh when it is come to that once, that Gods soul shall take no pleasure in a
man, that Heb. 10.38
Gods soul shall depart or be dis^oynted from him Jer. 6.8
, that not his senses only shall be offended Isai. 1.11, 12, 14
, but his very soul shall hate his new moons, and appointed feasts, when he
shall go to seek the Lord with his sacrifices, and shall not find him Hos. 5.6
; I know not whether there can befall a man a more hard and horrid condition
upon earth. Oh therefore the madness and misery both of these wicked and
wretched men and women, that are out of Christ! would God their eyes were once
opened, that they might see their rueful plight and estate, and at length
discern that direful dilemma that sin and the Devil has driven them to. Do
good duties they must, or be damned for their neglect: and yet they are damned
also for doing them, because they do them no better; that I say not
double-damned, and that for this very offense, if they had done no more: since
displeasing service is a double dishonor to God, because we displease him in
that, wherein he specially looks to be pleased. How then may we run by this
first use with terrors into the eyes and ears of unregenerate persons? but all
to no purpose, (no though we could cast handfuls of hellfire into their faces)
except God please to break up their hearts, and pierce their inwards. Rebeccah
may cook the venison, but it is Isaac must give the blessing, we may cry out
upon them with all our might, and forewarn them to flee from the wrath to come
Math. 3.^
, but unless God speak withal to their consciences, and (thrusting his holy
hand into their bosoms) pluck off the forskin of their hard and brawny hearts,
nothing will work or take impression, till out of the bottom of hell they roar
and bewail their own madness with desperate and bootlesse tears.

SECT. V. Use 2. admonition. Let the wicked break off their sins, that they
lose not their services.
Which to prevent, come we now to a second use of Exhortation. Daniel Dan.
9.23.
) in the court of heaven.

To the wicked, first, God says what have thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? so long as thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee Psalm. 50.16, 17
? even the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, says Solomon, how much
more when he brings it with an evil heart Prove. 21.27.
. As who should say; though such a man have never so good a meaning to serve
God in his sacrifice, yet he does worse then lose his labor, when he does his
best, for he commits that which is abomination before the Lord: and so in
seeking to shun hell, he does but take pains to go to hell. And to the same
purpose another Prophet, He that kills an ox, says he, (unless withal he
kill his corruptions) is as well-pleasing to God as if he slew a man. He that
sacrifices a lamb (unless he sacrifice his lusts too) is as if he cut off a
dogs neck, he that offers an oblation (unless he present also his body a
living oblation, holy, acceptable to God Romans 12.1
) is as if he offered swines blood: he that burns incense (if it stink of the
hand that burns it) is as if he blessed an idol. Isai. 66.3.
Even your incense is abomination Isai. 1.13.
says the Lord to those sacrificing Sodomites Isai. 1.10.
. Lo there, that precious perfume made up with so many sweet spices, and
fragrant odours, stanck odiously in Gods nostrils, he could not abide the scent
of it (...)
. Nay, not his smelling faculty only is offended by the sinful man's services,
but the rest of his senses also. For his taste, their burnt-offerings of rams,
and fat of lambs, he could not relish ver. 11.
, they delighted him not, but were sour to his palate. For his feeling, their
new moons and appointed feasts, were a burden to him, he was weary to bear
them. And for his sight, he tells them, though they spread forth their hands,
he will hide his eyes. And for his hearing, when they make many prayers he will
not hear. 15.16.12.
And for their whole service, he demands who required this at your hands to
tread in my courts? As if he should say, it were fitter, a fair deal for you to
be in your shops, or in the alehouse, or any where else then here, unless ye
were better. This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it
Psalm 118.20
. As for others, thus says the Lord, will ye steal, and commit adultery, and
swear, and then come and stand (goodly) before me in this house Jer. 7.10.11
? Do ye think to expiate your sins by your prayers, and set off with God by
your good deeds for your bad? No, that is not the way to get in with God, and to
be enfeoffed, into his favor. But what is? may some say. Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, ease to do evil,
learn to do well etc. Come now and let us reason together as friends, when this
is once well done to purpose, says the Lord. For then, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow Isai. 16, 17, 18.
etc. as till then, it boots not to bow your selves before the most high with
thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil: no not to offer your first
born for your transgression, the fruit of your bodies for the sins of your
souls Micah. 6.7.
. Away therefore will the love and liking of every lust, cast away all your
transgressions, throw all your sins out of service, your beloved sin
especially; be it as an hand for ptofit, off with it, be it as an eye for
pleasure, out with it: be it what it will, and never so near or natural to us,
if a sin, say of it as Haman did of Mordecai, what avails me any thing, if he
yet live? All that are Christ's (and none but such may appear before God in holy
duties) have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5.24.
. David would not presume to compass Gods altar, till he had washed his hands
in inocency Psalm. 26.6
, nor could he conclude that God would show him mercy or receive his prayer,
till he had brought his heart to an utter disregard of whatsoever iniquity Psalm
66.16. (...). Achilis Homericus.
. The lepers lips were to be covered according to the law, and our Savior
would not admit of a fair word from a foul mouth Mar. 1.25.
. The lip of excellency says Solomon, becomes not a fool Prove. 17.7.
: and the best dish (though never so well cookt) is extremely loathed, if
presented by a leper, or brought to table by a nasty sloven: so is any holy
duty (whether of piety or charity) displeasing to the Almighty, if performed by
one that is yet in his pure naturals, a stranger to the power of grace, and
unacquainted with the daily practice of mortification. Hence that of Saint
James, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you Iam. 4.8.9, 10. expounded
ob.
.

Oh but we dare not come near the Lord, neither can we serve him, for he is an
holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive our transgressions, nor our
sins Josh. 24.19 Sol.
.

No, be sure of that; except ye confess and forsake them Prove. 28.13
. Therefore wash your hands, ye sinners, says the Apostle there, (neither so
only for Pilate washed his hands, as if all the guilt had stuck in his fingers
ends) but cleanse your hearts ye double minded.

Yea, Ob.
but how must that be done? for, though thou wash thee with nitre, and take
thee much soap, yet thy iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God Jer.
2.22. Sol. (...) miseri estote. Par. (...) Pas. Curaeleves etc.
. Afflict your selves, says the Apostle: or, as the word there signifies, be
miserable: you are so, but see your selves such, and be sensible, even unto
godly sorrow, and the tears of true repentance: weep, says he, or if ye cannot
do that (as some constitutions are naturally dry, and do not yield tears, and
some sorrow is bigger then tears, and above them) yet mourn at least: and that
ye may not mourn a little, for so great sins as ye are guilty of, let your
laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Use al good
means to work your hearts to a through humiliation: turning all the streams of
your affections into this one channel, that serves to drive the mil for the
grinding of the heart. Thus humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he
shall lift you up, yea, thou shall lift up thy face unto God, and have delight
in the Almighty. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee
and thou shall pay thy vows Job. 22.26, 27.
. He shall remember all thine offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice. He shall
grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel. Psalm.
20.3, 4,
In the time of the Levitical service, there were two several altars; one
without the tabernacle, to slay the beasts on: and another within, to offer
incense upon. To teach us, that if we would be the temples, and tabernacles of
the living God, and have him pleased with our sacrifices of righteousness,
with our offerings and whole burnt-offerings Psalm. 51. vlt.
, we must slay our bullocks, on the outer altar, mortify our beastly sins, I
mean, that reign in the outward man; the deeds of the body, by the spirit Romans
8.1^
, before we kindle our incense of devotion in the inward man. So shall God
smell a sweet savor of rest from us, and we (interchangably) of life and peace
from him. But thus much be spoken to them.

SECT. VI. Use 3. Exhortation to the best., to be humbled for their 1. not
prizing their privilege. 2. not praising God for it. 3. not improving it to
the utmost.
NExt, to all such as are already in favor with God, and can tell as much by
his good acceptance of their services; mine exhortation from this point is
double.

First, to reflect, with Pharaohs butler, and calling to mind their sins this
day be humbled for a threefold evil.

First, for not prizing this privilege to the worth, of having Gods eye
always upon us, his ear open unto us, his presence with us, his providence
over us, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush round about us Deuteronomy. 33.16
, his goodness and mercy to follow us all the days of our lives, we dwelling
in the house of the Lord for ever Psalm. 23. ult.
.

Secondly, for not praising God as we ought, for this inestimable benefit. So
David held it and celebrated it often. Blessed be God, says he, which has
heard the voice of my supplication Psalm. 28.6
. Blessed be God which has not turned away my prayer nor his mercy from me
Psalm. 66. ult.
. Who am I? and what is my people that we should offer so willingly after this
sort? Now therefore O our God, we thank thee and praise thy glorious Name. 1
Chro. 29.13, 14.
. etc. O look upon this thankful man, and chide your selves soundly for your
unthankfulness; or at least, for your few and feeble praises, for so many
services well taken at your hands. Has God enlarged himself to us, and are we
thus straitened in our own bowels 2 Chr. 6.12.
? Has God harkened to Hezekiah's chattering, and shall he not render according
to what he had received 2 Chr. 32.25
, especially having vowed better things, so deeply as he did Es. 38.19.20
? It Is possible then ye see, that the best should forget themselves in this
kind: and twenty to one, but we have also. Oh see it by your selves, and be
humbled for this shameful unthankfulnes.

Thirdly, for not improving this indulgence, by making our best of it: falling
into that sin by supine negligence, that Ahaz did of stubborn wilfulness. Ask
thee a sign, says the Prophet, of the Lord thy God, Ask it either in the
depth or height above Es. 7.11.12 Expounded.
. Here was a fair offer to a graceless caitiff, that where sin abounded grace
might superabound. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I try the Lord:
as if he should have said: I Will ask no asks, I know a trick worth two of that:
let God keep his signs to himself: I crave no such curtesy at his hands etc.
This is that Ahaz, a stiff Stigmatick, an unworthy churl, a profane bedlam.
Now as in water face answers to face, so does the heart of a man to a man
Prove. 27.19 As there were many Merij in one Caefurt so there are many Cains and
Ahaz's in the best of us all.
. It Is certain, there is none of us but have within, that which may send forth as
great a wickedness as his: and it is well if the best of us have not coasted
upon his unkind usage of his God, by rejecting his sweet offers, or at least by
not making often trial of his gracious acceptance after manifold experience,
Oh how should we abound in Gods work 2 Cor. 9.8 1 Cor. 15. ult.
, yea abound more and more 1 Thessalonians. 4^1
, as the Apostle would have it: since he harkens and hears, and ever looks
upon our labor of love with an eye of delight: so that if we would but do him
eye-service, it were sufficient. How should we be daily and hourly serving such
a Master that gives such large encouragement, by his both assistance and
acceptance! how should we be continually sowing more good performances into his
bosom, the fruit whereof we should be sure to reap in our greatest need? for
as sin lies at our door to do us hurt Genesis 4.7
: so does every christian service lie at Gods door to do us good. It is
certain, that he is so far taken with them, that of his kingly munificence he
bids us ask what we will, and it shall be given us Josh. 15.17
. And surely he is deservedly miserable, that will not make himself happy by
asking a better condition. Oh that ever any beloved Esther, any faithful soul,
I mean, should sit feasting and banqueting with God, her Ahashuerosh, in the
ordinances of life, feeding on the fat, and drinking of the sweet; and not
bethink her self then, what suites she has to commence, what boones to beg,
what Hamans to hang up, what Mordecaies to prefer; what grace, I mean, to get,
what corruption to quell, what friend to speak for, what child to prefer etc.
How should she be sure of her request, even to the whole of Gods kingdom? why
art thou thus lean from day to day, said Jonadab to Amnon, Art not thou the
kings son 2 Samuel 13.4
? and so may have any thing for asking? why is thy countenance sad, since thou
art not sick Neh. 2.2
, said the king to Nehemiah? How sensible (says a great Divine thereupon) do
we think the father of mercies is of all our pensive thoughts, when a heathen
master is so tender of a servants grief? How ready should our tongues be to lay
open our cases and cares to the God of all comfort, when we see Nehemiah again
so quick in the expression of his grief to an uncertain ear? That we have come
off so heavily with our good God, and done so little heretofore in his work,
upon so great encouragement, let it heartily humble us.

SECT. VII. Use 4. Exhortation to the Saints 1. To admire this mercy: Helps
thereunto respecting God, and themselves.
ANd for the future (that I may speak forward) here is a threefold duty to be
commended from the point in hand to your christian care and practice.

First, the bridegroom is glad of the bride, does our God so rejoice over us
Isa. 62.5
? does he delight to see our faces, to hear our voices, to smell our odours, to
taste our fruits, to be handled and embraced Heb. 11.13. (...).
by our faith? Is he so far taken by the poor things that pass from us, that
he rests in his love, and will seek no further? Yea that he joys over us with
singing Zeph. 3.17
? Oh how should the due appehension of this dear love of his ravish and affect
our hearts with deepest admiration? and how should we even stand amazed at the
never-enough-adored depth of his love unto us in this behalf?

To help you herein, the wonder will appear the greater, if we first look up to
God, and there see 1. what he is. 2. how little either need he has of us, or
gain he makes of our services: and then, secondly, look down again to our
selves, and consider 1. who we are, 2. what are our best works in themselves.
For God, first, he is the high and mighty Monarch of heaven and earth, of
transcendent perfection and excellency, even above all degrees of comparison:
for he is great Psa. 77.17
, greater Job 33.12
, greatest of all Psalm. 95.3
, greatness it self Psalm. 145.3
. Again, he is good Psalm. 106.1
, better Psalm. 108 9
, best Phil. 1.23
, goodness it self Mat. 19.17.
. So that if men should attempt to serve God, and do sacrifice to him according
to his excellent greatness Psalm. 150.2
and goodness, all the wood of Lebanon would not serve to burn, nor all the
beasts that be in it suffice for sacrifice Esa. 40.15, 16
: Yea little enough would all the wood in the world be, and all the cattle
therein to make up but some one sacrifice.

Next, see how little this mighty and All-sufficieut God, either needs us, or
gets by us.

For the first, hear what he says Psalm. 50. from the seventh to the sixteenth.
Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify against thee:
I am God, even thy God. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy
burnt offerings etc. For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle
upon a thousand hills etc. Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me Psalm. 50.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
. Lo this is all he looks for at our hands. Not but that he could well enough
be without that too, since his glory (being eternal and infinite as himself) is
no way capable of any our addition or detraction. For, as the Sun would
shine, though all the world were blind: so should God be glorified, though we
were all condemned; Yea he could glorify his justice by our eternal
damnation: There Is all the need he has of us. And for matter of profit, If
thou be wise, thou art wise for thy self Prove. 9.12
, says Solomon, what shall the Lord gain by it? And if thou be righteous, what
give thou to him, says Elihu, and what receives he at thy hands Job 37.5
? And yet we see how highly he esteems, and how greatly he respcts that little
Nothing of our endeavors of doing him the least service, and bringing honor
to his Name.

Secondly, take notice what we are? and what the best of our works? To the
first, Abraham answers, I am but dust and ashes Genesis 18.27
, then when he stood before the Lord to mediate for Sodom. Jacob answers, I
am loss then the least of thy loving-kindnesses Genesis 32.10
, then when he wrestled with excellent wrestlings, and prevailed with God Genesis
30.8
. David answers, I am a worm and no man Psalm. 22.6
. Esaias answers, I am a man of polluted lips Esaias 6.5
. Peter answers, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, or a man a sinner Luke
5.8 (...).
; that is, a very mixture and hodgpodge of dirt and sin: for ever since the
fall, whole evil is in man, and whole man is evil. Lastly, the whole Church
answers, It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed Lam. 3 22
, that he plungeth us not in the ditch, and that our own clothes abhor us not
Job 9.31
. Especially since all our righteousnesses (which is an answer to that second
demand, what are the best of our works?) are but as filthy clouts Esaias 64.6
, such as a man would be afraid to touch, and ashamed to take up. The best we
can present God withal passes from us no otherwise, then as pure water through
a muddy sink, or sweet wine through a sour cask. See it in Jonas's prayer, or
rather brawl Jon. 4.1
. Jobs request, or rather curse Job 6.8, 9
. Sarah's heat and have to send for God by a post to arbitrate Genesis 16.5
. Moses his carnal expostulation, his former tergiversation, and at last cast
(when he had nothing else to reply) his flat and peremptory refusal to go upon
Gods errand to the King of Egypt Exodus 4.1, 13. and 5.22, 23
. The conscience of which weakness, or rather wickedness in himself, drives
holy David so often to pray for his prayers Psalm. 119.169, 170
: and good Nehemiah, to crave pardon for his best performances Nehem 13.2, etc.
Horreo quicquid de meo est, ut sim meus. Bern.
. In any of which if the Holy Ghost had not his hand, there would not be (as
from us) the least goodness; no, not so much as truth and uprightness:
without which the Lord Jesus would never present them for us to his Father: nor
the Father once vouchsafe to look upon, or hearken after such refuse stuff;
which yet he does; such is the dedelight he takes in the exercise of his own
graces, in the fruits of his own Spirit. And this is that that may justly drive
us into a deep extacie of admiration at his incomparable love, and more then
fatherly affection.

SECT. VIII. 2. To retain it, and if lost, to recover it, and how. With answer
to some Queries and Objections made by a misgiving heart.
SEcondly, you that are possessed of this privilege, to be ever at Gods elbow,
as his favorites, and to have the royalty of the kings ear; as you must admire
at this mercy, so labor and learn (in the next place) how to retain and keep
your selves in this love of God Jude 21.
, as Saint Jude exhorts. And that is done by keeping close and constant
communion with this God All-sufficient, walking before him continually, as
Abraham, and being upright Genesis 17.1
. The Lord is with you, (says that Prophet in the Chronicles) while ye be wi^h
him 2 Chro. 15 2
. He is with you in mercy, so long as ye are with him in duty. If ye se^k him,
he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. The Lord
is not so fond of his own children, but if they forget him, he may and
sometimes does forsake them in part Psalm. 119.8
, without breach of covenant. If they prove unconstant and start aside from
their station, he can quickly (and does otherwhiles) withdraw his grace to
their thinking, and the powerful operation thereof in very deed (for a time at
least:) as in David relapsed, and for a while deserted Psalm. 51.11, 12
. He also seems to frown upon their suites, and shuts out their prayersifight,
against them with his own hand, meets them, as the angel did Balaam with a
maked sword in his hand, as if he meant to dispatch them out of hand, and send
them packing to hell. Thus it fared sometime with David, I thought upon God
(saithhe) and was troubled Psalm. 77.3
: with Ethan, thou compassest me about with terrors Psalm. 88.16, 17
: with Jeremy, I shout and he shuts out my prayer Lam. 3.8
. God turns his back upon his Absoloms, his Joseph's, when they grow proud,
presumptuous, secure, slothful: nay he turns them into Bedlam, when he finds
them frantic; and to all other their afflictions adds this, that he will not
once come at them, call they never so long, never so loud after him. At such a
time, he seems to have less good remembrance of his dear children, then the
Ostrich of her eggs, which she leaes loose in the sand Job 39.14, 15
: or than the sea monster of her young, which resuseth not, (though cruel
enough,) o draw forth her breasts unto them Lam. 3.3
. He puts his Sion sometimes to that sorrowful complaint; the Lord has
forsaken me, my Lord has orgotten me Esaias 49.14
, yea to that desperate conclusion of the church in the Lamentations. First,
she prays, Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned: renew our
days as of old. But as if she had lst her labor in such a bootelesse suit,
she subjoynes this for a perclose of all, But thou have utterly rejected us,
thou art very wroth with us Lam. 5.21, 22.
.

Now in such a pitiful strait, in such a forelorne condition as this, what
can a poor soul do for the regayning of his God more then 1. make moan. 2 make
out in the use of the means, and then 3. wait his return with patience.

First, you must bewail the want of Gods gracious presence and acceptance:
make like moan as Rouben for Joseph Genesis 37.30 Heu quid agam perijt puer ille
puer, puer ille.
, as David for his Absalom 2 Samuel 18.33
, as Rachel for her children Jer. 31.15
: Sing no new song Psalm. 137.4
till thou have recovered him. Do in this case of spiritual desertion, as
Mephibosheth in the absence and exile of his Sovereign, he neither dressed his
feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes from the day the King
departed, until the day he came again in peace 2 Samuel 19.24
.

Secondly, set up a loud cry after him, as Jacob after his Joseph, Elish a
after Eliah, Micah after his lost gods Judge. 18.24
. Say ith Absalom, when out of savor, Let me see the Kings face, and if there
be iniquity in me, let me die 2 Samuel 14.32
. Return, O Lord: How long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servant
Psalm. 6.4. and 90.13
. I had rather be thy doorkeeper, then of Satan's privie-chamber. O Lord,
other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we
make mention of thy Name Esaias 26.13
. Incline thine ears: O Lord, and hear, open tine eyes, O Lord and see Esaias
37.17
. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thine own
sake, O my God Dan. 9 19
etc.

And then thirdly, if God please to hold off longer, refuse not to wait his
leisure, sustayning your selves, in the mean, with those two cordial places:
who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
though he walks in darkness and have no light, let him trust in the name of
the Lord, and stay upon his God Esaias 50.10
. Again, sine the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by
the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee what he has prepared
for him that waits for him Esaias 64.4
. In which waiting estate should thou be taken away by death (which seldom
falls out, says one) if thy heart be still set against sin, and linger after
the light of Gods countenance, thou shall be certainly saved, because the
spirit of truth faith, blessed are all they that wait for him Esaias 30.18
.

Thirdly, let such as have part and portion in this glorious privilege, of
having open access and all assured acceptance, with the most high in all their
holy performances; learn to improve this happy opportunity, by apprehending,
and making all best use of it for their everlasting advantage. Is any among you
afflicted? says St. James, Let him pray. Is any merry? Let him sing plalmes
Jam. 5.13
. Fear we any evil? want we any good? In nothing be careful, but in all
things by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made
known to God Phil. 1.6
. Note, that he bids us come with supplication and thanksgiving at once; as
intimating, that we need not once doubt of good speed, but have our thanks
ready in our hand, as sure of a gracious answer to our prayers. After which,
the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall guard your hearts, set
them in as much safety, as if they were in a tower of brass, or town of war.
Thus Esther, after she had been with God, took boldness to go to the king
(uncalled for) without fear of death Est. 4.16
. And thus our Savior, though at first afraid, yet when he had conferred with
his father by prayer, arise, let us go, saih he, behold, he is at hand that
betrays me Math 26.46 (...).
. Again, want we any good? it is no more but run to God for it; who takes it in
high scorn we should seek to any other. If any man want wisdmi,) and by
consequence any good thing else) let him ask it of God Jam. 1.5. expounded ob.
sol. ob. sol. (...) etc. Antigon. apud Plutar. ob. sol.
.

Oh but my deserts are nothing.

They are as much as he looks for, he gives unto all men, not sels, or pays
them for wages.

I know, his reward is with him to give unto every man according to his works:
and then my share will be a very small, or nothing rather.

Nay, he gives liberally, says the apostle, not as befits us to receive, but
as becomes him to give. Now no small things can fall from so great a hand as
his.

Yca, to such and such he will give, and liberally.

Nay, to all men without exception, can they but name the name of the Lord
Jesus in prayer, and do their good will to depart from iniquity, they shall be
saved.

Oh but I have these and these discouragements. My sins press me down, 2 Timothy
2.19 (...). oh.
that I cannot look up Psalm. 40.12 sol.
, and prick me in the foot that I cannot come near.

Fear not for this: God upbraides no man; neither with former faults, or
present failings, if heartily disclaimed, and soundly set against. The Publican
depart Gods presence never awhit the less justified for his former
extortions, because truly humbled Luke 18.14
. Take heart therefore upon all occasions, to go boldly unto the throne of Gods
grace in full assurance Heb. 4. ult
of finding him facile to stretch out his golden scepter, upon the first sight
of us, as we appear in his Christ, in whom he is abundantly well pleased Mat.
3. ult (...).
. Look what Zedekiah spoke faintly and flateringly to his Princes, you know
that the king can deny you nothing Ier. 38.5. Hence their style. (...).
: and what the Heathens falsely report of some of their Princes, that never any
departed pensive out of their presence the same is most true of our God. Never
came any unto him aright in his ordinances, but he received thus much comfort
and encouragement at least, that he would come again. Noah's dove brought an
olive leaf in her mouth at first, and that was encouragement to send out a
second time, and a third also, and then better tidings. So though the Lord hold
his people off at first, and seem to slight them, yet his heart is still toward
them, and his hand is still under them, there is a secret supporting grace,
upholding the Saints in their greatest desertions. God hears sometimes when he
seems to do nothing less: and love entirely where he makes show to hate
extremely; as David dealt with his Absalom, and s the son of David with the
woman of Canaan.



First, you may guess at Gods good mind and meaning toward you by a smile of
his face, by a cast of his countenace: as a petitioner may read in the kings
looks, while his petition is in reading, what the success shall be. If the
king smile upon it and look cheerfully, he is made, as if the king frown, and
bend his brows upon it, he is dashed. Just so it is between God and his people
in performance of religious duties. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, as well as his ears open to their cries Psalm. 34.15, 16.
. As, of to'ther side the face of the Lord (as well as his heart) is against
them that do evil, as the Psalmist there opposes them. A good man gathers by
Gods countenance cast upon him in his service, how he shall speed. And this is
his privilege, to be admitted into Gods presence chamber, when the wicked
stand without doors amongst dogs, and devils Rev. 22.15
. For an hypocrite shall not come before him Job 13.16.
, says Job, but the upright shall dwell in his presence Psalm. 140.13
, says David. The wicked man stands at the gate like a vagrant, but comes not
into the house, to see whether the master be preparing for him an alms, or a
cudgel, whereas a good man, like a good Angel, stands always before the face
of God, who does not hide his face from him, but when he cries unto him he
hears Psalm. 22.24
.

Secondly consult thine own sanctified conscience, for thy better satisfaction
and resolution in this case. Conscience is Gods spy, and man's over-seer,
excusing, or accusing, cheering or checking in Gods stead, as there is
occasion. It may fitly be called our God in the sense that Moses was Pharaohs
Exodus 7.1
. Come, see a thing that tells all that ever we have done Joh. 4.29.
, nay, all that ever God does (as touching our salvation:) being enlightened
and sanctified, by the holy Ghost. For as God knows the meaning of his spirit
Romans 8.27.
, so does the spirit know the meaning of God. Now this spirit witnesses
together with our spirits Romans 8.16.
. Nay it disdaineth not for our comfort, to give in evidence at the bar of our
consciences, that we are Gods children, and our services good in his sight:
refreshing our hearts, after holy actions, with a secret content, Weemse.
with a hidden approbation. Now therefore as the High priest of the old
Testament might read Gods mind in his Urim and Thummim born upon his breast,
though he heard no voice, though hesaw no shape: so may a christian inform
himself from within, what the Lord thinks of him and hi works, he need but
reflect upon his own conscience (if not bemisted or abused by Satan's
temptaions) and it will do him to know what his acceptance is in heaven. If
our hearts condemn us not, says Saint John, then have we confidence toward
God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him 1 John 3.21, 22.
either in the same kind we ask, or a better. By a clearing chearing
conscience God testifies (as once by fire from heaven) that he is well pleased
with our sacrifices, etc.

CHAP. VI. Doctr. V. God perfectly remembers, and plentifully requiteth all
our labors of love to him and his.
And there was a book of remembrance written before him for them that feared
the Lord etc.
A Figurative speech, Oblivis enim in Deum non cadit. Parabolicwc hac dicta
sunt, and pro humano captu. Pol.
and framed to our capacity: for it befalles not God to be forgetful, or to
stand in need of a remembrancer. It was in a distemper, you may be sure, that
David asked, Have thou forgotten to be merciful Psalm. 77.9
? and that Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me Esaias.
49.14
. The Butler may forget Joseph, and Joseph his former toil, and fathers house
Genesis 41.51.
, but God cannot forget his people whom he has chosen Romans 11.1
. Can a woman forget her sucking child Esaias. 49.15
? possibly she may: some tigresses have proved unnatural to their own birth,
and bowels Romans 1.31 (...).
, but so cannot God. He is not unjust to forget your labor of love Heb. 6.10.
: or if he should (as I abhor to imagine) beold there is a book of remembrance
written before him, for them that fear the Lord, and that think upon his name.
A borrowed speech (for our better apprehension) from kings and great
personages: who use, for memories sake, to keep a catalogue, a calendar of such
as whom they mind to reward for some special service; as Ahasuerosh did
Mordecai, when he had read his name in the roll of those that had deserved well
of the king Est. 6.3 So Tamerlane had always by him a catalogue of the names
and good deserts of his servants which he daily pernsed. Knol. Tu r hist. p.
227.
. Those stout rebels above my text, were grown so bold and bedlam, as to give
out, that Gods service was nothing worth: and that it was a course of no
profit, to keep his ordinances Mal. 3.13, 14 15.
. The contrary whereunto is here vouched, and the truth vindicated. God, (says
our prophet) both hearkened and heard the holy language of his people, and so
sealed up his dear respect unto them for present: and also caused a book of
remembrance to be written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name, and so settled it in his heart to requite them for the
future. That like as in the work of creation there went with Gods dixit, his
benedixit, and with his ordinavit his ornavit, so in the administration of all
things (especially in that which is special and proper, to the elect) with his
remembrane, there goes a recompense, and with his regard a reward. Note hence,
That God does perfectly remember,

SECT. I. The truth confirmed by Scripture.
HE not only harkened and heard what good things passed between them here, but
registered up and engrossed the same in his book of remembrance: called
elsewhere the book, by a specialty Dan. 12.1
, the writing of the house of Israel Ezekiel 13.9
, the writing to life in Jerusalem Isa. 4.3
, the book of life Philip. 4.3
, the book of life of the lamb Rev. 21.27
, wherein he records, and where-out he will relate, at last day, all the good
works of his children Mat. 25.
, not once mentioning their sins and infirmties, which he has promised to
remember no more Heb. 8.
Our labor of love he will not forget, but be ever mindful of his covenant
Psalm. 115.5
. The Lord has been mindful of us says the Church (and as an effect thereof)
he will bless us; He will bless the house o Israel, He will bless the house
of Aaron: He will bless them that fear the Lord both small and great Ps.
115.11 12
. Cornelius for instance, he feared God winh all his bouseholde, and he made
good proof thereof, for he gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God
always: and therefore both his prayers, and his alms came up for a memorial
before God Act. 10.1, 2, 4
. Thus God remembered his Noah Genesis 8.1
, Abraham Genesis 19.20
, Rachel Genesis 30.22
, Joseph Psa. 105.20
, whose fetters he changed into a chain of gold, his rags into fine linen, his
stocks into a charret, his goal into a palace, Potiphars captive into his
Masters Lord, the noise of his chains into Abrech; and all because heremembred
his Creator in the days of his youth Eccles. 12.1
, and thereby kept himself pure from the great Transgression Psalm. 19.13
.

SECT. II. The truth confirmed by six Reasons.
THe ground of which gracious dealing in God is first his incomprehensible
wisdom, Idoea, the perfect platform and paern within himself, of all persons
and things, together with the several occurrences of either. Hence it is that
he knows all things Simul and semel, together and at once; not successively or
by discourse, collecting one thing from another, as we do; but in one simple
and eternal act knowing and comprehending all things. He need but reflect upon
himself, and there he sees all things before him as in a glass. So that to
speak properly, there is neither foreknowledge nor remembrance in the Almighty;
all things both past and future being ever present with him. Tine eyes did see
my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book were all my members written,
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them Ps.
139.16
. In this foreknowledge of God (so we call it for teaching sake) as in a book
are recorded the persons, birth, quality and death of every man and woman;
together with their several deeds and practices, that they may receive
according to what they have done in the flesh whether good or evil 2 Gor. 5
.

And this is our first ground of this point. Known to the Lord are all his
works from the beginning Act. 15 18
. The Lord knows them that be his 2 Timothy 2.19
, Yea he knows the whole way of the righteous Psalm. 1. ult.
. And this his knowledge of them and their good works is a knowledge of
singular apprbation, yea of infinite delight and complacency, which makes him
wait to show them mercy Esaias 30.18
. Heremembreth, says the Psalmist, when he writes up the people, when he makes
up his jewels Mal 3.17
, that such a man was born Psalm. 87.5, 6
there: and that being born by a second birth, and having followed him in the
regeneration Mat. 19.28
, they shall not lose the things they have wrought, but receive a full reward 2
Ich. 8.
.

Secondly, Psalm. 62.12
, were they better then they be, or can be.

To thee, O Lord, belongs merey: for thou rewardest every one according to
his works Psalm. 62.12
. But this by the way. We were drawing a second reason for the point from Gods
justice and faithfulness. And this we borrow fom the Apostle Heb. 6.10. God,
says he, is not unrighteous to forget your works, and labor of love which ye
have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints and do
also minister Heb. 6.10
.

For the better understanding of which argument, it must be premised, that
there is a double Justice of God; one of Equity (which is the giving of every
man his own, as ye all know) and another of fidelity, according to that of St.
John, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins
1 Ioh 1.9. Posset alioqui justus esse Deus, etc. sed quia se verbo suo nobis
constrinxit, justus censeri non vult nisi ignoscat Calvin: in locum.
. And in this sense, as it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you (which is the justice of Equity) so, to
you that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe 2 These. 16,
7
, which is the justice of sidelity, for faithful is he that has promised who
also will do it. Take it thus: God having made himself our voluntary debtor,
not by receiving any thing from us ( for who has given unto him first and he
shall be recompensed Romans 11 35
? not one) but by promising all good things unto us; what ever unworthiness be
found in us, Yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself 2 Timothy 2.13
: nor forget to crown his own graces in us with that life eternal, which God
that cannot lie, promised before the world began Tit. 1.2
. He has, of his own accord, smitten a covenant with us of mercy, and given us
his band for ou security: nay his oath, nay his seal, both the privy seal of
his spirit Ephesians. 1.13
and the broad seal of the sacraments Rom 4.11.
, That by so many immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should
lie, we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold fast the
hope that is set before us Heb. 6.18. Reas. 3.
.

Thirdly God is gracious and hountiful, as well as righteous and faithful. He
is rich in mercy to all that call upon him Romans 10.12
, or do him any other business. Does Icb serve God for naught Job 1.9.
? No, nor any man living: he is a large paymaster. Who is there even among you
that would shut the doors for naught? neither do ye kindle a fire upon mine
altar for naught Mal. 1 10
: David indeed would serve him on freecost 2 Sa. 24.24
: but di the Lord dye in his debt? nay did he not pay him his charges are the
Sun went down the same day with usury? At another time David had but a purpose
to build God an house, and God promised thereupon to build him an house for
ever 2 Sa 7.2, 16
: Again, he had but a purpose of confessing his sins, and before he could do
it, the Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sin Psalm. 32.5
. The Apostle tells us, that a poor servant, if in serving his master according
to the flesh, he do withal serve the Lord Christ, doing it heartily as to the
Lord, and not as to men, let him know, says he, that of the Lord he shall
receive the reward of inheritance Coloss. 4.24
. He meets, it may be, with a hard master that both belly-beats him, and
back-beats him too; gives him very hard work and little or no wages; but Christ
will do all. Not wages only shall he receive as a servant, but inheritance as a
son. Nay, the poor beggar that gives but a cup of cold water, with desire of
doing more, if he had wherewithal; Verily I say unto you, says our Savior,
he shall not lose his reward Mat. 10 42
. Saul when he went to enquire about the Asses, had but five-pence in his purse
to give the Seer 1 Samuel 9.8.
: the Seer after much good cheer gives him the kingdom. Such is Gods deaing
with us: he liberally rewards the small offerings of his weak servants, when he
perceives them proceed from great love. How often does he send away his poor
Orators, as Boaz did Ruth wit their bosom full ofblessings Ruth. 3.15
, as David did Mephibosheth, with a royal revenew 2 Samuel 9.7
: as Solomon did the Queen of Sheba with what soever heart can wish 1 King.
10.13
: or as Caleb did his daughter Achsah Judge. 1.15
with upper and nether springs, a confluece of spiritual comforts: temporal
contentments, and all of the riches of his grace does he thus give us all
things richly to enjoy 1 Timothy 6.17 Reas. 4.
?

Fourthly, God is wondrous tender an chary of his own glory, seeking the
setting forth thereof mainly, (and indeed only) in all his works. Now the
glory of God is no way more advanced and enlarged then by keeping open house,
as it were: giving all best entertainment and encouragement to those that
frequent him: not forgetting the labor of love that is showed to his Name. For
this is it, that will draw in much ompany about him, and make men very
obsequious and observant, when they se^ for certain that there is a reward for
the righteous Psalm. 58.11
; yea, steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, as
knowing that their labor is not in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15. ult
. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion; and unto thee shall the vow be
performed Psa. 65.1, 2, 3 Sint mecoenates, non deerunt, Flacce Marones.
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt. Mart.
. But how comes it about that men are so officious and forwardly, as to stand
waiting at the posts of the gates of Wisdom, with free offer of their best
devotions and services? It follows there; O thou that hear prayers, unto
thee shall all flesh come. As who should say, It is for no marvel, though men
come thick about thee; and thou have followers good store: for a little
eutreaty serves turn for the obtaining of great suits, of all sorts, and
mercies without measure: And it is seldom seen, that a good housekeeper wants
company; 'is pity he should.

Fifthly, God rewards even wicked men that do his will, Reaf. 5.
though against their own will, and beside their own intentions: as he did
Nebuchadnezzar, (his involuntary and unwitting servant) to whom he gave Egypt
in way of wages, or military pay, for the long labor, and hard pains he had
taken in the siege of Tyrus Ezekiel 29.18
: Howbeit he thought not so, but imagined to destroy, and cut off not a few
nations Esaias 10.7
. Likewise those that serve him out of servile respcts, and sinful self-love,
he rewards out of the abundance of his bounty; as Ahab, to whom he requited a
temporary repentance with a temporal deliverance. Nay, those men of Gods band
Psalm. 17.14
, that do him no service at all, but walk upon the face of the earth with
hearts full of hell, and faces set against heaven, he not only commands his
Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon them Mat. 5.45
, but further fills their bellies with his hid treasure, and gives them more
then heart can wish Psalm. 73.7
: their prosperous success does oft-times exceed the conceitings of their
minds. And shall he forget his entire friends, that thus remembers to requite
his professed enemies? Never was Prince so served in his greatest pomp, as the
rebellious Israelites in the wilderness: how good shall we find him then to
those that please him?

Lastly, godly people themselves, nay honest Heathens are careful to requite
such as are diligent about them, and dutiful toward them. What honor has
been done to Mordecai, says Ahashuerosh, for this Esth. 6.3
? Surely Mordecai did but his duty: he had hainously sinned if he had not
revealed that wicked treachery: yet Ahashuerosh takes thought for his
remuneration. And shall not God much more remember to recompense the weak
obedience of us, though (at best) his unprofitable servants. So Revel, the
Prince of Midian, requiteth Moses, for assisting his wronged daughters, against
their rude countrymen, that sought to drive them from the water that
themselves had drawn Exodus 2.20
. Shall a courteous Heathen so bountifully reward the watering of sheep, and
shall not our God be as forward to recompense, be it but a cup of cold water
given to a disciple? If the king of Sodom could find in his heart to leae the
goods to Abraham, as a pension for his pains in the pursuit of the four kings,
whom he overtook and discomfited Genesis 14.21
: what marvel though the king of heaven appear unto him shortly after in a
vision, and say, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward Genesis 15.1
.

SECT. III. Use 1. Confutation of the contrary minded, that say, or conceive at
least, that its in vain to serve the Lord.
THis then serves, first, to confute and convince of singular impudency, lies
festring in all men's hearts, and does blister out upon the tongues of good men
sometimes, of bad men more frequently. Certainly, says David, I have cleansed
my beart in vain, I have washed my hands in innecency, or to very small avail
Psalm. 73.13
. This was his speech in a passion, for the which he found a time soon after to
befool and be-beast Verse. 22
himself well-favouredly, when he was come to himself, and the distemper a
little over. And good reason he should; fo^^^eside the dishonor done to God
hereby, in bringing up (as those spies) an ill report of Gods service, he saw
that in so saying, he had offended agains the whole generation of Gods children
Verse. 15
: from henceforth therefore he laid his hand upon his mouth. Once he had
spoken, ut he would not answer, yea twice, but he would proceed no further Job
40.4, 5
. With the wicked it is more ordinary. Their words are stout against the Lord
Mal. 3 13
, (says our Prophet) they stick not to give him out for a hard man, a slack
play master, reaping where he sowed not, and gathering where he strawed not Mat.
25.24
. Hear them awhile in their own language. What is the Almighty, say they, that
we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we should pray unto him
Job 2.15
? What profit is it that we have kept his Commandments, and that we have
walked humbly before the Lord of Hosts Mal. 3.14
? Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see it not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge Esaias 58.3
? Lo these many years do I serve thee, said that self-justiciary to his
heavenly Father, neither ransgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet
thou never gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends Luke 15.29
. Thus these Malcontents of old: and to the same purpose in effect many
now-adayes, that think and speak basely of Gods service, as if godliness were
not gain, but rather gain godliness 1 Timothy 6.5
, heaven a name, and not worth looking after: but the only happiness to have
and to hold. As appears when they spare not to foam out their filthy froth, and
say: What get these forward fellows by gading to sermons, reading so much,
praying so often, being so precise and conscientious? Tull.
Philosophandum sed paucis: it is good to be godly, but withal to be wise:
zealous, but with discretion: we cannot live (believe me) by hearing of
sermons: religion will ^ot buy food and raiment: we have our hands full of
work, and our houses full of children; and should we spend half an hour or
less in a morning, and as much at evening in prayer and devotion, all would
run to wreck, and our families be but ill proided for. It there not such
language as this, heard in some men's hearts, nay houses otherwhiles? Conceive
they not as dishonourably, and as disdainfully of Gods best and busiest
servants, as Pharaoh did sometimes of he Israelitish sacrificers. They are
idle, they are idle, said he, let them get them to their taks Exodus 5.17
. Moses speaks of devotion, Pharaoh of idleness: Moses talks of sacrifice,
Pharaoh of work. Any thing seems due work to a carnal mind saving Gods
service. He cries out of any time or pains laid out that way, as Judas once of
the Spikenard: To what end is this wast Mat 26.8
? As Seneca did of the Jews weekly Sabbaths; that they lost the seventh part
of their time: Or, as Jeroboam did of Gods public worship at Jerusalem, he
persaded the people that it was too much labor to repair t the Temple, they
should take a shorter cut to the golden calves at Beth-aven 1 King. 12.28
. Of this sort are such as send in their ecuse, when invied to the ordinances;
and say with those recusant guests in the Gospel, We have oxen and farms Mat.
22.5
and other fish to fry, we cannot intend it, and they were fools if they
should. Tell them of the unlawfulness of their lying, cogging, overreaching,
cozening, usury, they will answer you straight: What would e have us to do? we
are neither Saints nor Angels: we must do as the world does, or else look to be
undone for ever. Plain dealing indeed is a jewel: but (would ye should know) he
that uses it, shall die a beggar. Press them to works of mercy, and
liberality to Gods poor; alas, say they, we are poor men our selves, and have
many to care for. A man cannot tell what shall come after him, and what shall
come after him who can tell Eccles. 6.12
? O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have afore-time
spoken Luke 24.25
. Has not God said, The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal
things he shall stand Esaias 32.8
, not fall, or come to ruin. That he is able to restore any Amaziah more then
the one hundredth talents come to 2 Chro. 25.9
, lost or rather laid out for Gods sake, and in is service? that whosoever
forsakes all, and follows Christ shall receive a hundredfold here, and heaven
hereafter Mark. 10.30
. Ruth for instance: she (while Orphah wants bread in her own country) is
grown a great Lady in Bethlehem; and advanced to be great-grand mother to the
King of Israel, nay to Christ the heir of all. But the ground of this
perverseness and misjudgment made by men of Gods work, and is wages is, that
damned infidelity that is rooted in our natures: cansing that we dare not rely
upon God, nor trust his bare word without a pawn; but think it is beft every
man to shift for one: that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush (as the
prodigal, that called for his portion here; and that carnal Cardinal that
wouldnot part with his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise) that wherever
we see God it is best tusting to our selves: which what is it better then to
give God the lie, Cardinal Burbon.
to charge falsehood upon the Almighty? should some man promise me an hundred
pound, doing some small chare for him, though I told him not plainly, he did
but seek to gull me with words, yet if I should go my way from him, turn again
and laugh in his face, and never make use of his offer, or trial of his
courtesy, I should, in effect, say as much as all that comes to. Think the same
of such as reject Gods just precepts, and despise his large promises, slighting
his work, and slandering his wages, what do they less then put the lie upon
him in grossest manner? then the which I know not what greater indignity can
be offered to the God of truth: Whereat though he seems to wink for a season,
and they conceive basely and absurdly of him thereupon, as if he were
altogether such a one as themselves, yet he will shortly reprove them, and set
their sins in order before their eyes Psalm 50.21
, as they stand recorded in the roll of remembrance. For as there is a book of
remembrance written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought
upon his Name; so no less for them that despisd the Lord, and set light by his
Name. That therein (as in a table) they may run and read their own destiny
written fair, and so return and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

SECT. IIII. Use 2. The wicked shall be surely and severely punished.
ANd that is a second use of this point, and it is for terror to all graceless
and profane persons, that serve not God but Mammon, not the Lord Christ, but
their own bellyes Romans 16.18
, that forsake their Maker, and pursue after lying vanities Jon. 2.8
, that say, after all, The Lord has for sakenthe earth, he will neither do
good nor evil Ezekiel. 9.9 Zeph. 1.12
. He has said in his heart, (quoth David of the Atheist) God has forgotten,
he hides his face, he will never see it Psalm. 10.11
. And again by way of complaint. Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long
shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they bluster and speak hard things?
and all the workers of iniquity boaft themselves. They break in pieces thy
people etc. Yet they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it Psalm. 94.3 etc.
. They hide God from themselves, and then think themselves hid from God
Struthiocamelo cum delit escendum est, solum caput penitus in condenso loco seu
frutice occultat, reliquum corpus in aper to relinquit. Ita dum in capite
seeurus est. nudus qu^ m^^or ^^t. capitur totus (...) Capite. Plin. ^ 10. tap.
1. Impiorum dicta et facta similiter in Dei commentariis referuntur etc. Gualth
in textum.
. Whose folly we can better revince then in the following words. Understand ye
brutish among the people, and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted
the ear shall not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that
chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? He that teaches man knowledge,
shall not he know? Yea, the Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are
vanity. He knows them, and ponders them: he records and writes them down
particularly in his ook of remembrance. The sin of Judah is written with a pen
of iron, and with the point of a diamond Jer. 17.1
. Behold it is written before me, and I will recompense it into their bosoms
Esaias 65.6
says the God of recompense Jer. 51.56
. And as he writes up their actions for future vengeance, so (as men do their
chief evidences, which they are most careful to keep safe) God is said to lay
up these records in store with him, and to keep them sealed up among his
treasures Deuteronomy. 32.34
. And for what end does he this? but that he may produce them as so many swift
witnesses against the workers of iniquity in that day. Her sins have reached
to heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities: Reward her therefore even as
she has Rewarded you, and double unto her double, Mal. 3.5
according to her works, said that mighty angel concerning Babylon Rev. 18.5, 6
Jacob Revlus in hist. Pontific p. 177. Lent gradu, ad vindictam sui, divina
procedit ^^ura, tarditatemque supplicij gravitate compenset. De Dionysio Val.
Max. Iib. 1. cap. 2. (...).
. And the same sai th the mighty God concerning all impenitent persons, well
they may shuffle for a season, and shift rom side to side (as Balaams ass
before the punishing Angel) but surely their sin will find them out, and ring
them such a heavy peal, as Pope Innocent the fourth heard once from heaven,
and was found dead the next day in his nest, Veni miser in judicium, come thou
wretch and receive thy judgment. What though the Lord defer the execution of
his sentence: The master of that evilservant shall come in a day when he looks
not for him, and at an hour when he thinks not, and shall cut him in twain,
rend his soul from his body, and appoint him his portion with unbeleevers Mat.
24.51 Luke 12.46.
. What though they flourish awhile here, and spread themselves like a gren bay
tree Psalm. 37.35. exorientur, sed exurentur.
, it is that they may be cut off for ever. What is fairer then the corn-field a
little before harvest? then the vineyard, a little before the vintage? Thrust
in thy siclke, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes
are fully ripe, and cast t into the great wine press of the wrath of God. Rev.
14.18, 19.


SECT. V. Use, Let them therefore hasten out of the Devils danger, and get into
Gods service. How that may be done
KNowing therefore the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
; And oh that we could persuade all unregenerate prsons, first, by this point,
to do as Saint Peter advises all in their case, Repentye, says he, and be
converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord Act. 3.19.
: Bloted out, I say, and first out of Gods book of remembrance, where they
stand written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond Jer 17.1.
: Secondly, out of the book of their own consciences, where they stand recorded
for future time, as ye may see in Joseph's brethren. Their own hearts condemned
them, and called them miscreants, twenty years after the fact committed Genesis
42.21.
. their consciences also bearing witness, as says the Apostle, and their
thoughts between themselves, accusing one another Romans 2.15. (...) formavit
pinaeit
. Where it is remarkable that the Syriack translatour uses a word for
conscience that signifies a written or painted thing. For the conscience now
is as a table wherein are many things painted, which sort of writting is fitly
compared to that we write with the juice of an onion or lemmon, hold it to the
fire, and it is legible. So when the conscience is once put to the fire of Gods
wrath, all will out, and old sins come to a new reckoning. The only way to
sponge out this writing, is by weeping upon it repentant tears, that God may
wash us thoroughly with the blood of his Son. For if we confess our sins
against our selves with David u, he is faithful and just to sorgive us our sins
1 John 1.7, 9
; and to cross out of his debtbook the black lines of our sins, and arrerages,
with those red lines of his sons blood. I even, I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins Esaias. 43.25
. And again, I will be merciful to their unrighteousnesses, and their sins will
I remember no more Heb. 8.12.
. Lo, if we but remmber our misdoings, he will forget them: if we reveal them
with shame and sorrow, he will cover them Psalm. 32.1.
, if we but see them to confession, we shall never see them to our confusion,
if we but acknowledge the debt, he will cancel the bond, blot out the
hand-writting that was against us Col. 1.2, 14
, and cast all our sins behind him Micah. 7.19
, (as off-cast eidences that are past date) into the depth of the sea: so that
we shall never see them again, otherwise then the Israelites saw their enemies,
the Egyptians, dead upon the shore.

2 Next, does the Lord so remember to requite the services of his people? is
there such a lively remembrance, and ample recompense preparing for them (how
should this fire up the affections of all unregenerate persons, to hire
themselves out to God for servants Romans 6.13
, to swear with David Psalm. 119.106
, to vow with Joshua Josh. 24.14.
to serve Jehovah; renouncing the devils drudgery, to whom they have hithereo
damned themselves voluntary slaves, to their inestimable disadantage. It is a
point (I wot well) they will not hear of, that the devil is their good Lord,
that he sets them awork, and will pay them their wages. You know how ill the
Jews took it to be told as much by our Savior Christ Ioh. 8.44
. But that it is no better with them, the scripture is clear, and the joint
testimony of all Gods redeemed ones concurrent: for we our selves also (even I
Paul, and thou Titus) were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures Tit. 2.3
, hampered and enwrapt in the invisible chains of the kingdom of darkness,
being taken alive captive by the devil at his pleasure 2 Timothy 2.25 (...).
, hurried about by him as Bajazei in his iron cage: toiled out of all true
comfort, as Samson at his mill: oppressed with unreasonable tasks, and
insupportable burdens, as hrael in the iron-furnace: this is their work. And
for wages, they are exposed to a world of plagues and curses, armies and
changes of sorrows, and calamities here, their whole life being but one
continuate vexation Eccles. 2.17
, besides the fear of death (that upshot and center of evils to evil men)
making them subject to bondage all their life time Heb. 2.15
. And worthily: for terrors take hold of them (then) as waters, they make them
afraid on every side Job. 27.20 and 18, 19
. Trouble and anguish make them afraid they shall prevail against them; as a
king ready to the battle Job. 15.23, 24
. Death seizes upon them, as a merciless officer Psalm 55.15
, takes them by the throat as that cruel servant in the Gospel: feeds upon
their flesh, as a greedy lion Psalm. 49.14
, stings them to the soul as a fiery serpent 1 Cor. 15.55
, gripes them to the quick as a bear robbed of her whelps: comes upon them with
a firmae Ejectione as an inexorable Landlord: carries them away as Gods
executioner, yea as the messenger and forrunner of the second death, where the
worm never dies, where the fire never goes out Mar. 9.44.
: where they seek death but find in no^, yea desire it, but it flees from
them Rev. 9.6
. It is reported of Roger sometimes Bishop of Sal shury (the second man from
king Steven) that he was so tortured in prison with hunger and other calamities
usually accompanying people in that case, ut vivere noluerit, mori nescierit,
live he would not, die he could not. How much more true think we) is this of
all those that are thrust into that outer-darknesse, Nubrigensis. (...).
that darkness beyond a darkness (as the word seems to import) that utmost
dungeon of the damned, where there is nothing but weeping and wailing and
gnaihing of teeth. Weeping for extremity of heat, and gnashing of teeth for
extremity of cold. Weeping is the expression of sorrow, and sorrow cools the
heart; and cold makes the teeth to chatter. Thus those miserable creatures do,
at some time, freez and fry, weep and gnash, live and die, a dying life a
living death, not for a time, or times, or half a time Rev. 12.14.
(oh happy they, if ever they might hope an end!) but ever and ever, and beyond
all time, throughout all eternity. Oh considerchis, all ye that forget God,
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you Psalm 50.22
. Save your selves from this tormenting Tophet, and be forwarned to flee from
the wrath to come. See what miserable slaves ye are to Satan (being altogether
as much in his power and clutches Act. 26 18
as he that goes gyved is in the gaolers: or he that goes up the ladder
pininond and hoodwinkt in the hangmans) and for how little good advantage ye
lay forth your selves, and toil out your lives in wearisome Ier. 9.5 Psalm. 55.10
wickedness. Do but summon the sobriety of your senses before your own
judgments, and see what uncessant pains ye are at, and all to go to hell;
whiles you do wickedly with both hands earnestly Mic. 7.3.
, working hard at the works of the flesh, but putting your gets into a
bottomless bag Hag. 1.6.
. Nay that is not all: for he that sows the wind shall reap the whirelwinde
Prove. 22 8 Hos. 10 12
, says Solomon, that is, he that sows the wind of sin and vanity, shall reap
the whirlwinde of vengeance and misery. And he that sows to his flesh, shall
of the fiesh reap that corruption, that is contradistinguisht to life
everlasting Gal. 6.8.
: for the wages of sin is death Romans 6. ult. Sursum cursum nostrum dirigamus,
and minantem imminentem and exterminantem mortem attendamus, ne simul cum
corporis fractura, animae jacturam faciamus.
, temporal, spiritual and eternal. And is it nothing to lose an immortal soul?
to purchase an everliving death? hear then set thy self in good earnest to see
and sigh under Satan's servitude: be sensible of his yoke, as galling thy neck,
and let it make thee cry out, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me
from this unsufferable servitude! Behold, I am more miserable then Samson at
the mill: for he had hope in his death, Prove. 14.32
but what hope have I, When God shall take away my soul Job. 27.8
: I am more miserable then Zedekiah in cold irons; for though he los his eyes,
yet he escaped with his life: but I, alas, am am dead while alive 1 Timothy 5.6
, a very living ghost, a walking sepulcher of my self. I am more miserable,
then Jeremy in the dungenon: for he found friends, and means of enlargement:
but to which of the Saints shall I turn my self Job. 5.1.
, or where shall I find help or rescue in heaven or earth? I am more wretched
then Israel in Egypt: for if they performed their tasks, they escaped the lash:
but I, after all my best services done o the devil, am laden with stripes, and
shall be scourged with scorpions ^^^nsideret his quilibet quam jod 1 sir
servitus, servhe priacipi immo tyranno diabolo qui subditos sibi infandis
divexat modis. Bucer.
. Thus make moan to thy self, first: and tenmake out to Christ, next, for
manumission and enlargement: for if the son set you free, you shall be free
indeed Ioh. 8.36.
.

Cry to the Lord Christ in the words of the ancient Church, O Lord, other Lords
besides thee have had dominion over us, but we will remember thee only and thy
name Isa. 26.13.
. Thy name is as an oynt munt powered out, theresore the Virgins love thee Cant
1.3
. O pour upon my dry soul of that precious ointment, and stablish me with thy
free spirit Psalm. 51 12
, for where thy spirit is, there is liberty 2 Cor. 3.17
, from both the commanding and the condemning poer of sin and Satan. O deliver
not the soul of thy turtle dove to these wicked ones x: in thy righteousness
rid me and set me free. For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand
other-where. I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my God Ps. 84.10, 11
, then to be Satan's chlef-favourite, or one of the privy chamber: For the Lord
God is a Sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory; large wages!
grace and glory? what things be these? one would think that were reward enough
for such sorry service, as we can do him, a best: ey, but then here is more then
enough, for no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Oh
bountiful God! who would not choose and covet to be thy servant? who would not
gladly stand waiting at the posts of thy gates Prove. 8 34
, if happily at any hour of th day he might hear thy happy call, and be hired
into thy heavenly Vineyard? who would not ^un through thick and thin Quidam ad
omnia viae and vitae hujus exercitia non solum ambulant sed and currunt imo
potius volant Bern. Sermon. 3. de Asc. Dom.
to compass such a gainful service? And yet it is a world to see, a wonder to
behold how strangely men hang off here: how hard they are to be wonn to the
setting in hand with the works of the Lord: miserably slighting God; offers,
and letting slip their golden opportunities of getting into his employment.
They talk sometimes of the wages, but shrink at the work, as the Israelites
talked of the reward of Goliath's conquest, yet fled from it when they had done
1 Samuel 17.24, 25
. The land is good; said those faint-hearted spies, but the cities are walled
up to heaven, and the inhabitants unconquerable. They wish well other-whiles to
heaven, as he that kneeled to our Savior with good master Mat. 19.16 Turpe est
impios diabolo tam strenueservire, nos Christo pro sanguinis ^retio nihil
rependere Cyprian: lib. de oper: et eleemos:
in his mouth: they could be glad with Balaam to dye the death of the
righteous, but to live their precise and austere life, that goes to the heart
of them: they cannot frame to it. O blinder then Beetles! the merchant refuses
no adventure for the hope of gain: the hunter shrinketh at no weather for love
of game; the soldier declineth no danger for desire of glory or spoil: the
bear breaks in upon the hives, contemning the stings; And shall we fain to our
selves an ease in not understanding, or an idleness in not seeking after that
service that will be a means unto us, not only of avoiding intolerable, and
endless torments (which is the devils meed and wages) but also of attaining
immeasurable and immortal glory, pleasure and gain, which is Gods reward and
guerdon: For glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the lew
first, and also to the Gentile Romans 2 10
. And contented godliness is greatest gain 1 Timothy 6.6 (...) in pietate. 1 Timothy
4.8
, says the same Apostle, such as wherein all losses are recompensed, all wants
supplied, all curses removed, crosses sanctified, promises accomplished,
blessedness procured, Satan conquered, Death destroyed, the grave sweetened,
corruption abolished, sanctification perfected, and heaven opened for a more
happy entrance. What should I say more for a conclusion of this first
Exhortation to those that are in their natural condition? There is no gain to
that of grace, no increase to that of Gods service. The Usurer gains six in
the hundred, but the gain of godliness is an hundredfold here, and eternal
life hereafter. Oh who would not then turn spiritual purchaser?

SECT. VI. Use 4. Exhortation to Saints to abide in Gods love, and to abound in
his work: since their labor of love is not in vain in the Lord.
OUr second Exhortation is to be addressed to all those that are true of heart,
names are written in heaven heb. 12.23
, whose services are set down in Gods book of remembrance. How should these
first, rejoice in this privilege, more a great deal then if devils were
subdued unto them Luc. 10
: what a mercy is his, that God should set so highly by their poor
performances, as to record them in the high court of heaven: to gratify and
grant them thereupon great suites on earth; to glory and bost of them before
the Prince of hell; as he did of Job Job 1.8
, because he was jealous over himself and his with a godly jealousy Job 1.5
. How should the Saints delight themselves in such a master, and make their
boasts of God all day long Psalm. 44.8
? How should they sing with David, Lord thou have dealt bountifully with thy
servant according to thy word Psalm. 119.17
: carolling out, and calendring up the noble acts of that Lord Psalm. 105.5
, who shall count when he writes up the people Psalm. 87.6
, that such a man was born there, and there was faithful in all his house, as
a servant Heb. 3.5
, with Moses: kept his word, and not denied his name with Pergamus and
Philadelphia Rev. 2. and 3
: instantly served the Lord day and night, with the twelv^ tribes Act. 26.7
(...).
etc. These things he carefully records, and honorably mentions, and is it
not a shame for us to be slothful, and silent? to be forgetlull of him that
thus remembers us, and the poor things that pass from us? Of all things God
cannotabide to be forgotten: See how ill he takes it at the hands of his
people. They are a froward generation, children in whom ^^no faith says he.
For of the Rock that begat them they are unmindfull, and the God that formed
them they have forgotten. And when th Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of
this provoking of his sons and of his daughters Deuteronomy. 32.18 20
. And a fire was kindled in hisanger thereupon, even such as burns to the
lowest hell. For the wicked shall be turned into hell, and who too? With all
them that forget God Psalm. 9.17.
. But what shall become of them in the mean while? Behold, I even I will
utterly forget you (and so pay you home in your own coin) yea I will bring an
everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall not be
forgotten Ier. 23. 39.40
. See this exemplified in the rich glutton Luc. 16. who because he remembered
not that God gave him his corn and wine and oil, and multiplied his silver
and his gold Hos. 2.8
, but sacrificed to his own net, and burnt incense to his own yarn, because by
them his portion was fat, and is meat plenteous Habak. 1.16
, therefore is he not so much as once called by his name in holy scripture, but
lies wrapped up in the sheet of infamy, and buried in everlasting reproach which
shall not be forgotten. When as the poor beggar that set God always before him
Psalm. 16
, with David, that remembered his name in the night, and thereby kept his law
Ps. 119.55
, is thought worthy to have a name in Gods book, and a nail in Gods house
Ezra. 9.8
, the Lord saying unto him as once to Moses, I have known thee by name Exodus
33.12
, thy memorial shall endure to all generations Psalm. 112.
. Nay the Lord Jesus remembers such still, now he is in his kingdom Luc. 23.42
, that bestirr themselves all they can, and despatch a great deal of work in a
little time, as that samous thief did, who therefore by a commendable thest,
after he bad offered violence to Gods king dome Mat. 11.12 (...). Arripiunt,
vel diripiunt, ut citatur ab Hilario: Metaph. ^ castris aut arce quapiam quae
irrumpentibus hostibus diripitur. Beza.
, stole heaven, and supt in paradise.

SECT. VII.
BUt secondly, Does God remember his Saints and their services? then let us
learn hence not only to reciprocate by remembering him and his mercies, but also
(as his remembrancers) to put him in mind (in case he seem less forward to do
us good) of his ancient proceedings, and gracious promises. This is that the
Prophet exhorts unto: Ye that are the Lords remembrancers keep not silence Esaias
62.6, 7
. This the Psalmist constantly practiced; Remember O Lord, thy tender mercies,
and thy loving kindnesses, for they have been for ever Psalm. 25.9
. And this the Lord though he needs it not, yet every where stands upon. He
exacts and expects it from us, as a part of his service, and as a condition on
our part to be fulfilled in the new covenant. Where, after he had promised
great things (concerning Justification, Sanctification, and preservation) he
subjoyns. Yet I will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it
Ezekiel. 36.37
. So in another Prophet, I will blot out thy transgressions, and not remember
thy sins. But then, Put me in remembrance, lit us plead together: declare
that thou may be justified Isa. 42.25, 26
. Whereby you see what is to be done on our part, if we would be remembered with
the mercies of Gods people. Plead we must the gracious promises: spread them
before the Lord, as Hezekiah did Sennacheribs letter Esaias 37.14
. Pray them over, as David often, and so put him in mind of the good he has
spoken concerning us. He loves to be importuned in his own words, to be
burdened with his own promises, and to be urged with rguments taken from his
old proceedings Arise, as in the days of old, and perform the mercy which
thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old Mic. 7.14, 20
.

This Moses and Elias well understood: and therefore the former as in pleading
for the people, he minds the Lord often of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob Exodus 32.13
, and treats with him to that purpose by his Name Jehovah (that emphaticall and
comfortable Name Exodus 6.3
:) so when he had foretold a plague to the Egyptians, or the remove of it, yet
he omitted not to pray the accomplishment. And the later, when he had by
warrant from heaven promised rain to Ahab after three years draught yet he went
afterward to the top of Carmel, and prayed earnestly Jam. 5.17 (...).
, (says St. James) he prayed toughly, lustily, laboriously; he strained every
vein of his heart (as it were) in prayer, for he stoopt, and stretched, and put
his face between his knees, says the story, and this for a great while
together, till at length a cloud, and after this a cataelysme of rain and
waters came of it; when once he had prayed to purpose, 1 Kin. 18.42
and not till then. For the Lord, though he be liberal, yet he is not
prodigal: and although he reject not our weak services, yet he throws not
away his mercyes upon such as hold them not worth whistling after, as they say.
Be his children never so dear unto him, yet they shall know their distance,
and their duty: and although he love to be acquainted with them in the walks
of their obedience, yet he takes state upon him in his ordinances, and will be
sought unto for his mercies. Seek the Lord, says the Prophet, and then will he
rain righteousness upon you Hos. 10.12
. For like as the Sun draws up vapors from the earth, not to retain them,
but to return them to the moistening and so fattening of the same: so does the
Lord draw from us our devotions and other duties, not for any benefit of his
own, but to rain them down again upon us in so many blessings.

SECT. VIII.
LAstly, this (me thinks) should mightily encourage good peoples hearts and
strengthen their hands in well-doing, to consider, that the Lord does perfectly
remember plentifully to requite whatsoever service. The pains cannot be cast
away that we resolve to lay out, nay to lose for Christ. Master, says Peter,
we have labored all night, and have taken nothing. Nevertheless at thy word
we will let down the net Luke 5.5, 6
. And he sped accordingly; for he enclosed a great draught of fishes, even to
the breaking of the Net, etc. So true is that of the Apostle, He^ that is Lord
over all, is rich unto all that call upon him Romans 10.12
: He gives exceeding abundantly, even above all that we ask or think Ephesians. 3.20
. Thus David asked life of the Lord, and he gave him length of days for ever
and ever Psalm. 21.4
. Solomon asked wisdom (not wealth) and he had wisdom and wealth too.
Hezekiah asked one life, and God gave him two: added fifteen years to his
days, which we count two men's lives, and a year over. The palsy man seeking
health at Christ's hands, had health and heaven to boot. Zacheus striving to see
Christ, not only sees him, but hears him speal^ing salvation to him and his.

Yea, (may some say) God may crown his people with salvation: Ob. John Baptist
was without any law, right, or reason, beheaded in Prison, as though God had
known nothing at all of him. George Marsh Martyr. Act. and Mon. fol. 1423. Sol.
but they are hardly put to it in the mean while, many of them, and sorely vexed
by the oppressions of their enemies, who make pitiful havoc of them, and God
regards it not.

First, this is not for their diligence, but negligence rather in the work of
the Lord: lazy servants must be quickened.

Secondly, God hereby tries the truth, and soundness of their graces; makes
it appear that they serve him for himself, and not merely for provender, or for
a whole skin, as the Devil accused Job Job. 2.4
.

Thirdly, God in humbling them remembers them, for his mercy endures for ever
Psa. 136.23
. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since 1 spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for
him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord ^er 31.20
.

Lastly, heaven will pay for all, and the lesle they take up of their wages
before hand, the more they shall receive at the quarter day. It we suffer
together with him, we shall be glorified together Romans 8.17
. This made Abraham content to dwell in tents, because he looked for a more
enduring city Heb. 11.9.10
: Moses chose the repreach of Christ, (the worst part of him) before the honor
of Pharaoh's court: and this when he was no baby neither, but at man's estate
Heb. 11.24, etc.
and therefore knew well what he did; and all because he had respect to the
recompense of Reward. This made the believing Hebrews suffer with joy the
spoiling of their goods, as knowing that they had in heaven abetter, and more
enduring substance Heb. 10.34 Nudus opum, sed cui coelum terraeque paterent. De
Archimede suo Silius lib. 14.
. Ezekiel willing to deliver an unpleasing message, and suffer for it too,
because God took him up and let him hear the noise of a great rushing, saying,
Blessed be the glory of the Lord Ezekiel. 3 12
. Nay our Savior Christ helped himself over the hardship of his cross, by
casting his eye upon the Crown: leaving us an example to follow, a copy ^ Pet.
2.21 (...).
to write after. And indeed it is a matter passing difficult to obey God, when
carnal reason suggesteth likely hood or damage or other danger. But if it were
a sufficient reason to move Jacob to neglect his stuff in the land of Canaan,
because Pharaoh promised him the best things of Egypt Genesis 45.20
. How much more should the assurance of heaven (that true treasure) make us
careless of this earthly trash? How should the very forethought of that
exceeding, exceeding weight of glory 2 Cor. 4.17 (...). There ye have an
elegant treble Antithefis, and double hyperbole beyond englishing. A
superlative transcendent phrase (says one) such as is not to be found in all
the Rhetorike of the Heathens, because they never wrote of such a theme, nor
with such a spirit.
, make us plentiful in Gods work: cause and even compel us to hear much,
pray much, live holily, deal uprightly, be constant and abundant in welldoing,
what ever come of it: Not standing upon the worlds censure, who are apt enough
to call thee fool for thy forwardness, and two fools for thy
foolehardinesse, (so they usually call and count the care of good conscience,
and courage in a good cause:) let them work on, and spare not, but scare thou
God: and against all their Nigro carbone notandus. Juven.
black coals, comfort thy self with bis white stone Rev. 2.17
. Let them think basely of thy course, but do thou think busily of Gods name:
and he will think as carefully of thy recompense, even above all that thou
can ask or think Ephesians 3 20
.

Up therefore (that I may resume the exhortation, and shut up all) Up. I say,
and be doing, and the Lord shall be with you 1 Chr. 22.16
. Why stand ye here idle all the day long Mat. 20.6
? Why linger ye and look thus one upon another Genesis 42.1 Dies brevis est and
opus multum, and operarij pigri, and paterfam: urget. Quare castigemus mores
and moras nostras R. Simeon. Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam multa
tulit fecitque, sudavit and alsit, Hor.
? You see your work, you know your wages. It is but an inch of time you have to
take pains in, and then eternity of rest and recompense: Where it would
repent you nothing more (if 'twere possible there to repent) then that you had
begun no sooner, wrought no harder. It is no small encouragement (in the
meanwhile) to know, that he sets down in his book of remembrance, not how many
years only, but days, nay hours we spend in his service: what heat we suffer,
what cold, what hunger, what thirst: what loss, what straights: waht danger,
what difficulty, what every thing. There was found in a besieged city a poor
wise man, (says Solomon) and he by his wisdom delivered the city, yet no man
remembered that same poor man Eccles. 9.15. merces mundi
. This is the course of the world, but it is othewise with God. I know thy
works, and thy labor Rev 2.2
, says he to Ephesus: not thy work only, but thy labor in working: not thy
love only, but thy labor of love: not thy hope only, but thy patience of hope
in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our father 1 Thessalonians 1.3
: Not thy crosses only, but the number, time, place and measure of our crosses
are with God: Ille non tantum quat annes sed quat dies atque horas in illius
cultu consu imus apugillinribus suis notat; aestum, frigora, famem culturam
bonorum etc. Cart.
: Not thy peroson only, but thy flittings are in his book, and thy tearesin his
bottle Psalm. 56.9
: yea the hairs of thy head are numbered Matthew 10.30. Quae pretio habemus ea
numeramus etc.
, not one of them shall perish: much lest the head it self. But though washed
a little, with Paul in the shipwreck Act. 27.
, yet thou shall be landed safe at the Key of Canaan, the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. VII. Doct. VI. Such as fear the Lord, will be thinking upon his Name
what it is to do so.
And that thought upon his Name.
Here Is a further description of the parties in speech by a second property. As
they feared the Lord, so they thought upon his Name. Where comes to be
considered, first, what is meant by Gods Name, the object of their thoughts:
secondly, what by thinking upon this Name, which is the act of these ancient
believers, about that object.

Name here has reference to God: and his Name signifies. 1. Gods self, in his
unsearchable Essence, or that unutterable subsistence that each person has in
the Godhead Shindler: in (...) Pro. 30.4. Jud. 13.18.
. 2. All such names and titles of God, his attributes, actions, ordinances, and
al things else that have any special print of Gods image stamped upon them, are
said to be gods Name upon them: because by them he is known as a man by his
name.

Next, to think upon this Name of God, is diversely glossed, and expounded by
interpreters. He does best (in my opinion) that says, to think upon Gods Name,
is nothing else, but by sundry sad and serious meditations, well to weigh and
deeply to digest whatsoever a man has heard and learned of God, and his ways
Thus Polanus succinctly and pithily. This then was the guise of those godly
ones of old: and this is still the property and practice of Gods faithful
people: who as they feared the Lord, (which is the first sign they are here
set out by) so, as a fruit or rather root aestimantibus gloriam nominis ajus
Called. Paraprast. sapientibus cord, and peritis mysteriorum Dei R Abraham. in
intellectu suo inve nientibus omnes vias ejus judicium esse etc. R. David
Quigloriam Dei asserunt etc. Gualther. Qui supputant 1. in pretio babent nomen
Dei Calvin: Certain meminis cognitionein assidua mentis ruminatione
pensitantes. Folan in locum.
of that holy fear, they think diligently upon his Name; that is they bend and
busy their best thoughts upon the things of his kingdom. Hence we we may
learn,

That it is the part and property of a man truly fearing God to be much in the
meditation of he things of God. Such as fear the Lord in truth will be thinking
upon his Name. Hac lautione pietatis verae fontem indicat etc. Gualther: in
locum. Doct.


SECT. I. The Point proved by Seripture
YOu see they go coupled in the text, as individual companions: and other where
in scriptur, it is made the mark of a man truly religious that he hat right
thoughts, that is, well set upon those rightest objects, God and his Name. The
thoughts of the righteous are right Prove. 12 5
. And again, the desire of the righteous is only good Pro. 11.23
. Not that any man, in this viatory condition, is so happy as to have his heart
altogether empty of evil thoughts and desires: Magno studio superfluae
cogitationes am^ putandae sunt: Sed tamen amputare funditus nequaquam pessunt.
Semper enim caro superslua generat, etc. Greg. Moral.
but that is the thing he strives unto, and breaths after, he suffers not evil
motions to roost in his mind, to keep residence there, to lodge in his inwards
as Jeremies expression is: he serves God in his spirit with Paul (at least in
his general resolution and intention) He sets the Lord always at his right
hand Jer. 4 14. (...)
with David: he walks continually in the sense of his presence, and height of
his countenance, with Henoch, Noah, Abraham, and others, he wholly follows
after the Lord his God with Caleb Josli. 14 19. Number. 14.24 implevit post me. As
a ship under sail, which is carried strongly with the wind etc.
; in desire and endeavor at least he waits for God in the way of his
judgments with the Church in Isai. And the desire of his soul is to Gods name,
and the remembrance of him Jsai. 26.8
. In which holy course if he be at any time interrupted (as the best is many
times) he cries out mournfully with the Church in the same Chapter: O Lord our
God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us, Romans 1.9.
yet through thee only will we make mention of thy name Esaias. 26.13
. Psalm. 16.8.
I find a law in my members warring against the law of my mind (that frame of
holy thoughts) and carrying me captive to the law of sin and of death Romans 7.23.
. The law truly is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin; I consent to the
law that it is good, even then when I transgress it, and do that I would not.
Nay more, I delight in the law of God after the inward man: yea with the mind,
I my self serve the law of God, then, when with the flesh, the law of sin. Thus
the regenerate part in a christian still hankers and hangs toward God, as the
sea-mans needle toward the North Pole, as the miserable captive toward his own
country, as the distressed spouse toward him whom her soul loved: she slept
indeed, but her heart waked Cant. 5.2.
, all the while God is the proper and most pleasing object of a good man's
thoughts and affections, 14.
as David often avoweth him in the book of Psalms. 16.
And though he be hard laid at sometimes; ey, 22.
and not seldom seduced Iam. 1.14. (...).
and hurried aside by armies and changes of evil thoughts, noisome lusts,
satanical injections, 25.
and other grievous temptations both from within and without: Yet for the main
bent, the general inclination and intention of his thoughts and affections, he
is still with God, as David, when I awake I am still with thee Psalm. 17.
, says he. And oh how precious are thy thoughts unto me O God Psalm. 139.17
! how great is the sum of them? in the multitude of my perplexed thoughts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. And to like purpose the Church: All
this is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, Psalm 94 19.
neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back,
neither have our steps declined from thy ways. Though thou have sore broken us
in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, If we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God,
shall not God search out this? for he knows the secrets of our hearts Psalm.
44.17, 18, 19, 20, 21
. And that consideration as it kept their thoughts within compass: so it may
well minister unto us a ground of good reasoh for the point in the first place.

SECT. II. The Point proved, and enforced by five reasons.
GOds people are much taken up in the thought of his name, Heb. 4.13
(as he that makes a watch knows every turning and winding in the watch.) And
that as he knows them, so he owes them too: For it is he that made us these
spirits All tings are (for the outlide) (...) naked, and (for the inside) (...)
dislected, quar terd, clest thorough the backbone, as it were.
, and therefore he requires to be served in our spirits Ioh. 4.24
: It is he that gave us our thinking faculties, we cannot move (no not with a
motion of the mind) but in him Act. 17.28
. Both the preparations of the heart, and answer of the tongue is of the Lord
Prove. 16.1
. And is it not reason therefore that he should have a tribute of our thoughts,
a thought-service also? It is true our bodies with the members thereof, must be
offered up and presented to God as a living sacrifice Romans 12.1
. But that sacrifice can neither be living, nor well pleasing, where the heart
is wanting Isai. 29.13
. Hence he so called of old for all the fat of the inwards in the sin offering
Exodus 29.39
: and testified afterward by David that he delights more in a broken heart
then in all sacrifices Psalm. 51 17
; he rolls himself in it as in a bed of spices Cant. 6.1
, and seems to say of it to the sons of men, as sometimes Joseph to his
brethren concerning Benjamin his brother, or as David to Abner concerning
Michol his wife; ye shall not see my face except ye bring it Genesis 43.3
. He will have the heart Prove. 23.26 Deuteronomy. 6.6
or nothing, because it is the treasury of all our thoughts, speeches and
actions: but first of our thoughts, which are the next and immediate fruit and
issue of the heart, whence, the services done him by them, cannot but be most
pleasing, since they are most spiritual, and farthest off from pollution of
hypocrily; whereunto they cannot be so subject as outward services, which are
performed sometimes more out of respect to the Creature, then to the Creator.
Hence the Church in that fore-alledged Psalm, seeking to approve her selsto
God, pleades the sincerity and goodness of her thoughts, as a sufficient
testimony of her truth and integrity Psalm. 44.17. etc.
. But this is not all: Gods people are thoughtfull of his Name, not only moved
with fear (as the text here couples them, Animus est ubi amet, non ubi animat.
And so it is here. Gods Name is as an ointment powered out, therefore the
virgins love him Cant. 1.3
. They have tasted and seen how good the Lord is Psalm. 34.8
. They had often heard by the hearing of thee are, but now their eye has seen
him Job 42.5
. His good name has been sweeter to them, then a precious ointment Eccles. 7.1
; it has filled their hearts, as Mary's Spikenard did the house Ioh. 12.3
. This makes the virgins, that follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, that
stand with him upon mount Sion, having his fathers name written in their
foreheads Rev. 14.1.4
; to love him for the odor of his good ointments, though they see him not 1
Pet. 1.8
. And out of the dear respect and love they bear unto his Name, to be
continually thinking upon that which their soul loves. The more they love,
the more they think, and the more they think, the more they love: God having
shed abroad his love (that part of his Name) in their hearts Romans 5.5
as a sweet ointment, by the Holy ghost, that anointing that is given unto
them, and which teaches them all things 1 Ioh. 2.20
.

And that is a third Reason, know ye not that your bodies are the temples of the
holy ghost that is in you 1 Cor. 6 19
. And if their bodies are the Spirits temples, surely then their souls are his
Holy of Holies; wherein are continual pillars of incense ascending Cant. 3.6
; good and holy thoughts, (I mean) abounding, by the operation of the Holy
ghost; (whose immediate motions they are) we being not able of our selves to
think one good thought 2 Cor 3.5
. There never entered into the heart of a natural man, the things that God has
prepared for them that love him 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.
^ But God has revealed them to us by is spirit: whose work it is.

1. To enlighten. 2. To enlarge the heart, wherein he takes up.
His first work is to beat out new windows in the dark souls of men, to let in
a new light thereinto to give us thereby some fight of God, some sense of his
sweetness, some glimpse of his glory. Not as he is in himself, in the
brightness and perfection of his essence: for so he is incomprehensible, and
the light whereby he should be seen inaccessible 1 Timothy 6.16
. Nor yet so perfectly here, as he stands described unto us by his Attriutes
and actions, that is reserved for a better life. But his back-parts Exo. 33.23
only (with Moses) that holy and reverend Name of his, Jehovah Jehovah strong,
merciful gracious, longsuffering etc. Exodus 34.6
Thus much the spirit gives us to see of God, though somewhat obscurely, 1 Cor.
13.12 (...).
as through a grate only, or as in a glass, in a riddle, or as an old man
through spectacles: the greatest part of our knowledge being but the least part
of our ignorance. And Secondly, having thus opened our eyes, and turned us from
darkness to light, he turns us next, from the power of Satan to God Act. 26.18
: that whereas heretosore we were acted and agitated by the Prince of the power
of the air Ephesians. 2.2
, the God of this world, who had first blinded our minds 2 Cor. 4 4
, and then set abroad upon our hearts and affections, hatching out thence whole
swarms of evil thoughts, and litters of lusts that fight against the soul 1
Pet. 2 11
: So now, being possessed by a better spirit, we are enlarged and enabled to
captivate and conform our thoughts to the sovereignty of Gods grace, the rules
of his word, and the remembrance of his Name.

Fourthly, their new Nature, plants the heavens, and lays the foundation of
the earth, that he may say to Zion, Thou art my people Esaias 57.16
) This Divine Nature 2 Pet. 1.4
as Peter calls it, and renewed Image of God, this habit of
heavenly-mindednesse puts Gods servants upon a continual fresh succession
of holy thoughts. For besides that their phantasy or thinking-faculty (being a
chief inward sense of the soul) is seizedupon for God to the utter dessolving
of that old frame of vile thoughts and lusts (those strongholds wherein satan
had entrencht 2 Cor. 10.4 5 (...)
himself) the whole spirit, soul and body of a Christian is sanctified
throughout 1 These. 5.23
. God writes his law in our hearts Heb. 8.10
, stamps his image upon the spirit of our minds Ephesians. 4.23
, makes us partake of the god-like nature, having escaped the corruption that
is in the world thorough lust 2 Per. 1.4
etc. Hence an ability of holy thoughts and affections, for as the man is, such
are his dispositions and meditations. The liberal man devises liberal things
Isa. 32.8
. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things
Mat. 12.
: And as from within out of the old heart proceed evil thoughts Mark 7.21
etc. so from the sanctified heart proceed sanctified thoughts, and gracious
considerations and respects to God, and his Name.

Lastly, we may argue for the truth and certainty of this point of the godly
man's practice, from the many near and dear relations he stands in to God:
together with the daily dealings he has and often use he makes of his Name,
For God first, he is the good man's friend, and father, Prince and portion, God
and guide, his All in All Colos. 3.11
: he has given up his name to Gods truth, devoted himself to his fear Psalm.
119.38
, sworn himself to his service Psa. 119.119
, and endeavors nothing more then to love him with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with all his thought, which is that first and great commandment of
the law, whereupon the rest hang Mat. 22.37 (...)
, as a hing upon a nail, or as beads upon a string. And secondly for the name
of God, they run to it in any stresse, as to a strong tower Prove. 18.10
: they walk in his name Micah. 4.5
as in a Garden or gallery: they rejoice in it as in all treasure Psalm. 119 14
: yea what ever they do in word or deed they do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ Colos. 3.17
etc. Now can we possibly rejoice in Gods name, run to it upon all occasions,
walk in it, talk of it, do all in it, and yet not mind it, not be much in the
thought of it? Again, can we acquaint our selves with the Almighty, vouch him
for our God, set him up for our Sovereign, coverse familiarly with him as our
friend, walk before him 1 King. 9.4^
in uprightness and integrity, walk with him Genesis 6.9
in an humble familiarity, walk after him Deuteronomy. 13.4
by an entire obedience and ready conformity, and yet not frequently think on
him? it is not possible.

SECT. III. Use 1. Those that habitually think not upon God, fear not God.
NOw for application: Are all Gods people such as think upon his Name? evince
them void of Gods true fear, that think not daily and diligently upon God, that
make not his name the matter of their meditation, that say not in their hearts,
Let us now fear the Lord our God Ier. 5.24
etc. The wicked says David, through the pride of his countenance will not
seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts Psalm. 10.4
: Eating and drinking, buying and felling, building and planting, plowing and
reaping etc. are in his thoughts, but God falls not into his thoughts the whole
day thoroughout. Or if in a whole lottery of thoughts, he stumble happily upon
God and his Name, yet his heart is merely passive in it (as was Saul's and
Balaams:) it is only as a thorough-fair for such thoughts: they give him a joy
and away: they salute him as he in the Comaedy did his fellow with good morrow,
and farewell both in a breath. Salve, Vale.
He is soon sated, nay jaded and tired out at a sermon, or so, where he has
occasion of better thoughts then ordinary. He savours not these things of God
Romans 8
, he finds no more relish in them then in the white of an egg, or a dry chip.
Hence it comes, that they soon pass away from him, like Nebchadnezzars dream,
which himself could not remember by morning. Nothing settles or 'bides with him
of this nature. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness Hos. 7.2
. Some transient thoughts they may have that way, in cold blood other whiles,
but to little or no purpose. They turn not short again upon themselves with the
prodigal Luc. 15.17
: they sit not alone Lam. 3 28
with the Church in the Lamentations, to entertain and nourish good motions:
they call not themselves to a domestical audit, it is death to them to do any
thing that way: they do not commune with their own hearts upon their beds Psalm.
4.4
. They summon not the sobriety of their senses before their own judgments, to
set themselves down by right reason, to argue the case with their own
consciences, and to say every man to himself, what have I done Ier. 8.6 (...);
Pythag.
? what do I mean? what does God think of me? what will he do with me? what is my
case here? and what will be my condition a thousand years hence? These savoury
thoughts, these wholesome considerations seldom or never enter into the
confines of their hearts. Or if they do (as sometimes they do) upon some sudden
unexpected evil accident, (as the death of a dear friend, some more remarkable
loss in their estates, the hearing of a powerful sermon, or the like) oh what
shift will these men make to rid their hearts of such unwelcome guests, that
they may be no longer rackt and diseased by them? how do they bring their
buckets to quench such a spark of the spirit kindled in their breasts? how do
they choke and throttle, before it it draw breath, such a motion made them by
the holy ghost! desperately saying to God, Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways Job 21.14
. Casting Gods word behind them, Math. 24 39 (...)
as the old world did Noah's preaching (it was even more then spilt upon them,
whiles they would know nothing of all that was foretold them till the flood
came, and swept them away, as vermin) hating to be healed, resusing to be
reformed Ps. 50.17
, drowning the noise of their clamorous consciences, with the hurry, and
clutter of worldly businesses and employments; as the old Italians in time of
thunder used to shoot off their greatest ordnances, to ring their biggest
bells, Sigon.
and to make all the fragour they could, to drown, as far as they might, the
noise of the heavens, that it might not affright them. And for that other
faculty commonly called (...), to make all safe there, they lay fast hold upon
all the principles in their heads, and imprison them Romans 1.18 (...).
, as the Apostle speaks, tearing out their souls, as much as may be, those
common notions (...).
of truth and falsehood, right and wrong, good and evil, whether left in man's
nature at the fall, or superinducted since, I will not dispute: There, I am
sure they are by a good providence of God for the conversation of civil
society: till razed and rooted out, or locked up at least in restraint, by such
as would sin securely without disturbance, till at length they arive at that
dead and dedolent disposition Ephesians. 4.19 (...).
of the debauched Heathens, little differing from that of the very devils, and
so wrath come upon them to the utmost 1 These. 2.16
.

SECT. IV. Of those that think base and bald thoughts of God.
BUT secondly, if the bare not thinking upon God and goodness show a man to
be unsanctified; what shall we say of such as think of God indeed, but think
basely of him and unworthily: cast him, as it were into a dishonorable mould,
by those bald conceits they take up of God. They become vain in their
imaginations Bon. 1 23 Ann 403. quaestio quamvis stulta and ridicula videatur,
An Deus corporeus sit? id est, An divina essentia sit corpus quoddam manus
habens, etc tamen mazimas inter Monachos Aegypti turbas excitavit. Rudiores
enum ex ijs aliter non semiebant. Func ius Chronol. Alccranus trad ^ Deum
habere essentiam corpoream, etc. Alsted. Chron.
about him, as those Philosophers spoken of by the Apostle, that changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to a corruptible man. So
do many ignorant people, now-adayes, conceive of God (and will not be beaten
out of it) as of an old man sitting in heaven, with a crown on his head, and a
scepter in his hand, administering his kingdom, as an earthly Prince, etc.
Others that are not altogether so grosle-witted, but yield you, that God is a
spirit, and not a bodily substance; yet they set him not up for such a spirit
as he stands desert bed in the holy Scriptures; Holy, pure, just, jealous,
omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent, recompencing the righteous, and repaying
the wicked to his face Deuteronomy. 7.10
, etc. Of this sort of sinners were these above text, that denied Gods special
providence, and care of his people, etc. And such amongst us are found, not a
few, that conceive God either to be wicked altogether, such an one themselves,
because he keeps silence at their sins Psalm. 50.21
: or else so made up of mercy, that he will save them howsoever, and not
destroy the work of his own hands; or lastly, so ignorant and wretchlesse, that
although he reckon with them for other misdemeanors, yet thought shall go
free. By believing and pleading of which most false proverb, and pestilent
principle, what do they else but profane Gods spiritual nature, making a mere
mock and an idol of the Almighty, as if he knew not men's thoughts, and had no
sovereignty over them? But they shall find, to their sorrow, that God searches
the hearts, and tries the reins Jer. 11.20 and 17.10
, those seats of lusts, and most retired parts in all man's body: Yea, and kills
men with death, because they will not believe it Rev. 2.23
. That he knows (as the meaning of the spirit Rom 8.27
, so) of the flesh too; though it never put forth it self in the outward man:
that he sets our secret sins also in the sight of his countenance Psalm. 90.8
: and will not fail to bring every secret thing to judgment Eccles. 12. ult.
, even all their Atheistical, vainglorious, covetous, ambitious, adulterous,
malicious thoughts, and projects against the Lord and his Christ, his crown and
dignity. And that none may be ignorant, he makes Proclamation thereof (as it
were in open Sessions) by the voice of his holy Prophet, with a solemn Oyes;
Hear O earth, behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of
their thoughts Jer. 6.19
. Where ye have to observe; that the heavy wrath and vengeance of Almighty God
is both the just desert, and certain event of evil thoughts: and count you that
a small matter? Is it nothing to fall into the punishing hands of the living
God Heb. 10.31
? Is there not a fire kindled in his wrath (even for some one root of
bitterness, (that is inward distemper, and mental abomination harbored and
allowed) that burns as low as the nether-most hell? Deuteronomy. 32.22


SECT. V. Against thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, Infidelity, and Rebellion.
BUT in the third place, most of all to be condemned of want of Gods holy fear,
are such, as not only, not think of God, or not duly think of him; but unto
all other their sins, add this, that they think thoughts against him,
directly opposite to his Name, Devise things contrary to the Name of Jesus Acts
26.9
, taking up high and haughty imaginations, such as exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God, and obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10.4,5
. And of this sort of sinners is that heavy complaint made by God himself in
the Prophet Hosea; Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies
against me; though I have bound, and strengthened their arms, yet do they
imagine mischief against me Hos 7.13, 15
Hitherto may be referred; 1. Thoughts of Atheism, as to think there is no
such thing as God: or if any, yet that he sees not, cares not, does neither
good nor evil Zech. 1.12 Deos didici securum agere aevum: Nec siquid miri
faciat Natura Deos id Tristes ex alto coeli demittere tecto. Horat. sermon.
, walks in the circle of heaven, and hides himself in the thick cloud Job 22.13
, without any respect at all to this inferior world. 2. Thoughts of blasphemy,
as to murmur, grudge, and speak against him in our hearts: and secretly to mock
at his mighty works, his powerful ordinances 1 Cor. 1.23
, the promise of his coming, etc. 3. Thoughts of infidelity, and despair; as
that God does not heed me, will not help me Gen 4.13
, save me, make good his word unto me, etc. This is to make God a lier 1 Ioh.
5.10 Cum Leoni X. Papae Bembus Card. aliquid ex Evangelio obijceret, subridens
ille dixit. Nunquid non compertum abunde fuit quantum nobis and coetui nostro
contuler it haec de Christo fabula. Alsted. Chronol. p. 398
, says St. John, and (upon the matter) to aver and avouch that there is no
such thing as Christ: or at leastwise, no such virtue and efficacy in his death
and life, 2 Pet. 3.4
as to save all those that repose upon him. 4. Thoughts of high treason, and
open rebellion against heaven: as when men rise up against God in their hearts,
as the horse against his rider; thinking within themselves, (though they shame
to say as much) Who is the Lord that we should serve him Exodus 5.2
? Who made thee a Prince or a Ruler over us Act. 7.27
? Our lips are our own, who shall control us Psalm. 12.4
? The word that is spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord we will not do. No,
but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth Ier.
44.16, 17
; say the Prophets and Preachers what they can to the contrary. Against all
which detestable and damnable Atheists, yokelesse, and frontlesse Belialists.
Behold the Lord comes (says that ancient Enoch) with ten thousands of his
Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and (by vidicating his glorious Name,
from their base surmises, and blasphemous aspersions) to convince all that are
ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which (upon such false and
abhorred principles) they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have (out of the abundance of their hellish
hearts) spoken against him Jude 14.15
. Where we leave them for present, to chew awhile upon that fearful doom that
abides them, till we hear of their amendment, and hasten to a second Use.

SECT. VI. Use 2. Examination. Where trialls of the goodness of our best
thoughts, by their 1. cause. 2. effects.
IS this so, that the thoughts of the righteous are right Prove. 12.5
, and that wheresoever the true fear of God is, there are great thoughts of
heart Judge. 5.15
, concerning God and his Name? This then serves, next, for an Use of Trial:
And so, let every man learn hence, to take a true estimate, to make a right
judgment of his spiritual good estate, by the quality of his thoughts. For
ever as the man is, such are his thoughts: and as the thoughts are habitually,
and ordinarily good or evil, so is the man. Purity in the inward parts is the
most sound and infallible evidence of our portion and interest in the power and
purity of Christ's saving passion, and sancifying bloodshed. Whereas if our
speeches and actions be never so Angelical, yet if the thoughts of our hearts
be not forgiven us Acts 8.22 Verse 23. Quum reproborum mentibus occasto
perpetrandi peccati deest, desideriorum cogitationes eoru^ cordibus nullatenus
desunt: and quum non semper diabolum sequuntur in opere, valde tamen se illi
obligant in cogitatione. Greg. Moral. lib. 14.
, and we enabled to keep them in some good compass, by the spur of the first,
and curb of the last commandment, we are in no better case then Simon Magus
was: who for all his fair pretenses, stuck fast still in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of perdition. A civil honest man, a painted hypocrite, a
graceless and wicked persn dare insatiably mind, and muse upon those foul
evils, which, for want either of ability, or opportunity, or both, he cannot
act. Now such a man as this, (though his outward behavior be never so fair,
and unrebukeable, yet) the Scripture every where brands for a son of Belial,
one that has nothing of the spirit of God in him 2 Cor. 10.5
, but is filled with the devil (that foul spirit) from corner to corner: Act
5.3, 4
a man not washed from his wickedness Jer. 4.14
, such as has no part in Christ, nor portion in his kingdom Gal. 5.23
. Nay, he passes in Gods Book for a Pagan Romans 1.21
, such as has no blood of a Cristian in him; for an Epicure Phil. 3.19, 20
, the worst of Pagans; for an Atheist, the worst of Epicures Psalm. 10.4
for an hypocrite Acts 8.22.23
, the worst of Atheists; for an open rebel Esaias 65.2
, the worst of hypocrites; lastly, for a reprobate Phil. 3.23
, the most desperate of rebels; such as being enemies to the cross of Christ,
have destruction for their end, whereunto also of old they were appointed Jude
4.
.

I know what such kind of people (the ruder sort especially), are apt enough
to object. They will never believe, they say, that the matter is so heinous, ob.
the danger so great, as the ministers would make of it, for first, they have
as good hearts as the best: and although they be not so strait-laced as to make
such a business about idle and evil thoughts, as some would seem to do, yet so
long as none can tax them, for external outrages, and reproachful offenses,
they shall think never awhit the worse of themselves for all that.

Hereunto we answer, sol.
that this very brag of the goodness of their loose and lewd hearts speaks
them at once. 1. Ignorant. 2. Proud. 3. Impenitent person.

First, I say, Ignorant of God and his will, of themselves and their duties: as
if they were not bound to love the Lord their God with all their thoughts also
Math. 22.37
. Now without knowledge the mind is not good, says Solomon, and he that
(hoodwinkt with such blind conceits) hasteneth with his feet (in away good
enough as he fondly imagines,) sins Prove. 19.2.
.

Secondly, they are stuffed up with pride, and self-conceitednesse: as the
Laodiceans, who not knowing their own spiritual beggary, and blindness, gave
out themselves for great rich men, and in as good case as the best Rev. 3.16.
. The pure in heart, are withal poor in spirit Math. 5.3, 8.
, humbled for nothing more then their inward impurities; those vain thoughts,
deceitful dreams, carnal fears, worldly cares, endless and needless plodding
upon earthly things that haunt their hearts, and pass the forge of their
fancies every day, in despite of whatsoever endeavors to the contrary.
Together with those innumerable bythoughts and distractions that will needs
throng in upon them, even in the interim of divine duties, when they would be
most free and reserved to God. These be the things that most gall and grieve
the godly man, and bring him full often upon his knees for pardon of inward
failings in those duties, for the outward well-performance whereof other godly
people do many times both approve and applaud him. But now it is otherwise with
the wicked: if he can wash his hands with Pilate: keep his fingers from picking
and stealing, and his tongue from evil speaking: curb and keep in his
inordinate lusts from budging and breaking forth in his outward practice; he
ears not how fowl his inwards are, how irregular and enormous the motions of
his mind be: thinks though he never lay laws upon those but suffer them to
run riot, at pleasure, upon whatsoever vanities or villenies, yet he shall
speed well enough, and perhaps step into heaven before the purest of them all.
Here Is a heart as full of pride, as empty of goodnesse^ for he that lifts up
himself, his mind is not upright in him Hab. 2.4
.

Thirdly, They are impenitent (and so out of the state of salvation) till they
bethink themselves of a more thorough reformation Luke. 13.3
. For repentance, where it is sound, begins at the heart. It is not a cleansing
only of the outside of the platter, but a changing of the inward thoughts
affections and purposes: according to that of the Prophet, Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return to
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, etc. Esaias. 55.7
. not else. And that of Peter to Simon Magus; Thy heart is not right in the
sight of God: repent therefore, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee Act. 8.22. (...) postulat (...)
. And that lastly, of the Prophet to the people. Oh Jerusalem wash thy heart
from wickedness, that thou may be saved (no heaven to be had, you see,
where the heart is not washed) how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee. Jer. 4.14.
No surer sign, of a foul and wicked heart, then the residence and reign of
vain and vile thoughts. Let no man therefore bear himself in hand, or boast
hereafter of the goodness of his heart, if his thoughts be habitually and
allowedly evil.

Oh but we have many good and holy thoughts in our hearts: ob.
God and his name is much in our minds and mouths, and we think frequently
upon his word we hear, and his works we see etc.

You have many good thoughts you say, it is well: sol.
a reprobate also may have good motions in his mind: and not be a buton the
better for any of them. Try your good thoughts therefore before you trust too
much to them: and 1. By the causes. 2. By the effects.

For the causes, first, we will suppose them (for the matter) good and religious:
but for their efficient cause, first, whence be they, let me ask. Are they
inbre'd and native to your sanctified hearts, or are they only injected from
without and merely adventitions? cast in by God, who now affects thine heart by
a good motion, thy self no way concurring, but being merely passive in the
whole business? If so, Nebuchadnezzar might have as much comfort and hope
here-hence as you. God put into his heart a good thought, viz. to turn his
course against Israel the people of Gods wrath, and to revenge the quarrel of
his covenant upon an hypocritical nation. Howbeit he meant not so, says the
Prophet, neither did his heart think so, but it was in his heart to destroy and
cut off nations not a few etc Isai. 10.7.
.

Secondly, for the form and fashion of your better sort of thought; are they
set and solemn some times; with choice of fit matter, time and place? Do ye sit
in the door of your hearts (on set purpose) to entertain good motions, as
Abraham was wont, in the door of his tenr to entertain strangers? Or are they
not only occasional and accidental, falling in by the by, and besides your
intention by reason of some sudden occurrence? etc. These holy men in the text
did not only think upon Gods name, as a thing that fell into their thoughts by
chance: but sollicitously, thoroughly studiously, serously, they set themselves
to work in good earnest, and in Gods fear, to consider of his fatherly
providence, and most righteous proceedings damnably depraved and maligned by
the wicked of those times; and stayed up their hearts against all
discouragements with that wholesome meditaion Mal. 3.16.
.

Thirdly, see to the end of your good thoughts: both that of intention, and the
other of duration. For your drift and intention first. Do ye (in taking up some
holy thoughts) aim at God and the advancement of those main ends, the setting
forth of his glory in your own and other men's salvation? ordo ye not rather
therefore think of holy things.

1. That ye may set off with God, and make him some manner of amends, for your
other infinite worldly ploddings, and wicked imaginations? or,

2. Is it not to collogue with the Lord, and curry favor, to get off the
sooner, and easier when you are smarting, and it may be bleeding under his
hand? Thus the false Israelites served him in the wilderness: when he slew
them, then they sought him apace, Vexatio dat intellectum
they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their redeemer. These
were good thoughts, had they been as well intended. But alas their project and
device was only to ease themselves of God; and to get from under his hand; for
they flattered him with their mouths, and lied unto him with their lips. Their
heart was not right with him(that is, their aims and respects were sinister)
neither were they steadfast in his covenant Psalm. 78.34, 35.36, 37.
, and so they failed in the end of continuance also. 3. Is it not to still and
stifle the noise of your conscience, and to give it some sorry satisfaction,
when it shall tell us (from the Pulpit, or when we are all alone, that God is
to be thought upon, and his name to be had in remembrance of all that love him:
that such only as do so can be comfortably assured of their gracious estate
etc. For if we do this or any other holy duty, not out of any delight we taken
in it, but merely to stop consciences mouth, and to ease our selves of that
unrest and disquietment that we feel within, till the thing be done, our good
thoughts are defective in the end of intention, and can yield us little comfort.

Next for the end of duration and continuance: Are those good thoughts you bind
upon fixed and settled, Principium fervet, medium tepet, exitus alget.
constant and parmanent? Or are they not rather flitting and fugitive,
transient and temporary: as soon gone as come, almost like a flash of lightning
in the air, like a dive-dapper upon the water, like a post that passes
swiftly by the door, or (to speak with the scripture) like the morning dew that
meltaway Hos. 6.4
? such were Saul's resolves 1 Samuel 26.21.
, and Balaams wishes Number. 23.10
, Ephraims goodness Hos. 6.4
, and the stony-grounds fruit. The seed started up straight, and straitway also
withered. That is, says our Savior, ^ man hears the word and anon with ^oy
he receives it Luc. 8.6 Math. 13.20
, where by one affection of joy, ye are to understand any other: even that of
grief, if the nature of the discourse call for it, let comfortable matter be
handled in his hearing, he is wonderfully taken and ravished therewith (for he
doubts not with Haman but himself is the man whom the king will honor Esther 6.6
.) As if terrible or mornful his thoughts are suitable being affrighted,
affected, enlarged, distressed, disposed as the matter requires. O this is a
passing fine temper of soul, and thus it should be with us all, when we come to
hear Vide August lib. 4 de doct. Christ. cap. 12.
. But how long will this hold, think you, with the Temporary? so long only as he
is in the church, or not many hours after. This motion toward heaven is too
violent to be lasting with him. The good ground therefore is said to be such,
as brings forth fruit with patience Luc. 8.15 (...) oponitur (...) de qua Heb
10.38.
. The word signifies, with continuance or tarriance until the fit time of
fruit bearing: in opposition, doubtlesseto that (straight way) (...)
of the stony ground, whose fruit was no sooner ripe then rotten; much like the
Psalmists grass upon the house top, which withers before it grows up Psalm.
129.6 Like Charles 8. of whose expedition to Naples Guicciardine says, that he
came into the field like thunder and lightning, bt went out like a snuff: more
then a man at first, and less then a woman at last
. Lo such are the good thoughts of ungodly men, they take them wings and are
gone, they dye before they see the light, an untimly birth is better then they.

Secondly, having thus looked upon thy good thoughts in the causes: see next,
what effect they work in thee. Does the thought of Gods presence and purity
make thee tremble and sin not Psalm. 4.4
? of his mercy and patience, lead thee to repentance Romans 2.4
? of his power and All-sufficiencie work thee to an even-walking, and
integrity Genesis 17.1
? Do thy thoughts of heaven, weane thee from earth? of the vanity of life, fit
thee for death? of the uncertainty of things temporal, edge thy desires after
things eternal? David's holy meditations were driven all to this issue. His
thoughts of God and his Name made him turn his feet to Gods testimonies Psalm.
119.59
. The lively remembrance of Gods benefits, made him take the cup of salvation
Psalm. 116.12
etc. Apprehensions of mercy in God, wrought resolutions of obedience in him
Psalm. 23. ult.
. The consideration of his own present indisposition to do God service, made
him chide himself out of that distemper, with, why art thou so sad my soul
Psalm. 43. ult.
etc. I thought, says he, I would confess my transgressions unto the Lord,
and I did confess them Psalm. 32.5
. I will meditate on thy precepts: and what upshot will you drive it to? I will
have respect, says he, to thy ways Psalm. 119.15, 16
. Thus David and very Godly person: And thus if you can approve your thougts
truly good by the causes: and have improved them (thus good) to such holy
effects and purposes, you may safely thence conclude your good estate; and
comfortable condition.

SECT. VII. Use 3. Exhortation. Settle the soundness of your Sanctification,
by the goodness of your thoughts; motives thereunto.
THirdly, this point serves for Exhortation: and so it calls upon us all, to
make our sanctification sure to our selves by this infallible sign: Motives.


A subject (if you look for motives) for the excellency of it (first) woe thy of
your best thoughts; and such as will perfect and transform you daily into the
same image of his, from glory to glory 2 Cor. 3 ult.
: causing you to shine as the pearl, which being often beaten upon by the
Sunbeams, becomes at length lightsome and radiant as the Sun it self. By
walking much in the hot Sun men gather blaknesse: but there is a glistering
luster set upon their hearts and faces, that (with Moses) ascend up into the
mount of God, and behold his glory Exodus 34.29
: That take a turn or two every day upon Mount Tabor, and contemplate his
beauty and brightness Math. 17.2
. These get such an excellency of experimental wisdom hereby, as makes their
faces shine Eccles. 8.1^ valere est philosophari, inquit Seneca: Ego vero
dixerim valere est meditari eloquia divina. Horum meditatio valetudo mea, vita
mea. Scultet: Observe: in Marc.
, and their lives Angelical.

Secondly for the sweetness and pleasure of it, who would not wish himself an
Anchoret pent up in the voluntary prison-wales of Divine meditation? David met
with marrow and fatness, honey, and honeycomb, surpassing delight and cordial
comfort in his heavenly exercise: For, in the multitude of my perplexed thoughts
within me, thy comforts refresh my soul Psalm. 94.19
. How precious are thy thoughts unto me O God Psalm. 139.17
etc. And Moses after forty days converse with God in the mount (where he had
been rapt and ravished in spirit all the while) was so little satisfied
therewithal, that he presently after he came down again, makes a new motion:
I beseech thee O Lord, show me thy Glory Exodus 33.18
. Indeed this Divine meditation is a very heaven upon earth, a beginning of
that beatifical vision, a hansell of heavens happiness, an having of one foot
already in the porch of Paradise, a very foretast of eternll life. It is none
other to the Saints then as the fiery Charret was to Elias: for by it men are
transported from earth to heaven in their spirits, to have their conversation
above, and to be so far ravished sometimes in their thinking upon Gods Name, as
that they know not those things that are before them Augustinus dum sanctae
Trinitatis mysterium solus in cubiculo sedens contemplatur, ita a seipso
abscesserat, ut a muliere quae illum consulere cupiebat saepius interpellatus,
nihil responderet, imo ne respiceret quidem: mulier denique quia se contemptam
putavit, abiret tristis. Marul. lib. 2. cap. 4. and Sab. lib. 2. cap. 6.
, mind not those persons that are about them. But being in the body are
carried, as it were, out of the body Mat. 17.4
, and so far lost in the endless maze of spiritual ravishments, that they
could almost wish with Peter still to be there Mat. 17.4
, that they cannot well tell, with Paul, whether they are in the flesh, or out
of the flesh 2 Cor. 12.3
: this only they can tell, that they see unspeakable excellencies, taste
incomparable sweetnesses, in that good name of his, such as no tongue of men or
Angels is able to express.

Thirdly, as it is pleasant, so it is profitable, and that 1. to others: for
meditation makes a full man, and fit for Christian conference; which is nothing
else but the clothing of our mental conceptions, with suitable expressions
Verbaq, provisam rem etc. Hor.
. 2. to our selves: and first, for the avoiding of evil meditaion upon God and
his name, awakeneth the drowsy heart, weeds out inward corruptions, prevents
the intrusion of trifling fancies, deceitful dreams, vain hopes, carnal
fears, foul and fleshly lusts, which else will muster and swarm in the best
heart like the flies of Egypt; Leaves the devil no room, for his black, and
blasphemous suggestions and injections: defeats the world that wily adversary,
which else will be ready to catch us up and defile our hearts with spiritual
fornication: if, Dinah-like, she find them roving. And secondly, for
furtherance in good it is many ways profitable: for hereby we shall get
intimate acquaintance with God the fountain of goodness, grow up in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3.17
, (which is the groundwork of all true religion, and is therefore by a
specialty called Theology As St. John and after him Greg. Nazianzen (...).
:) attain to a great measure of spiritual wisdom and holiness above our
ancients: Ps. 119.97, 98
treacherous enemies: prove tall christians, expert christians, full of all
goodness, filled with all knowledge Romans 15.
: not without a comunication of Christ's secrets, even to have the mind of
Christ 1 Cor. 2. ult.
etc.

Lastly, is is also necessary: both in regard of God, and our selves. For God
first, he calls for it, requires a Thought-worship, a service of the spirit:
for why? himself

First, is a spirit Ioh. 4.
, and every one requires to be served like himself.

Secondly, he gave us these spirits, endued us with reasonable souls, with
thinking faculties, that we might return them upon him again, by thinking
industriously upon his Name 2 Cor. 6.20
.

Thirdly, he upholds man's mind in its thought and workings, for in him we
move, with the motions of the mind no less than of the body Act. 17.28
.

Fourthly, he will account with us for our thoughts, as his precious talents
Eccles. 9.11 and 12. ult. Romans 2.15.
.

Fifthly, he will reward us for the right managing of them, as he did David 2 Samuel 7.16
. the prodigal Luc. 15 18
, and these good people in the text.

Secondly, in respect of our selves this duty is necessary: Thoughts are the
principles of Action Pro. 4.23
. Cogitation is the fountain of all both communication and conversation;
causing the current of both to run either muddy or clear according to its self.
For this is the manner and method of it, as the learned have well observed.
Thoughts tickle andexcite the affections, first, which kindle upon a thought,
as tinder upon a spark. These stir and carry the will, as winds do the ship:
The will, as a Queen, commands all the inferior powers to execute what the
thoghts have suggested, the affections seconded, and her self accepted: And is
there not a just necessity then of well-imploying the thoughts?

SECT. VIII. Directions. 1. For the matter of good meditations.
BUt because he that exhorts to a duty, and directs not how to do it, is as he
that snuffs a lamp, and powrs not in oil to maintain it: let us lay down
certain Rules and directions for 1. the Matter. 2. Manner. 3. Measure. 4. Means
of better performing this piece of Gods service, and part of our duty.

For the Matter, first, of our best thoughts, it must be Gods holy Name
(according to the text.) A little word, but of large extent, and very
comprehensive. For besides that it signifies Gods self (as is above said) it
notes out also 1. all that is or can be known concerning God by the reasonable
creator Romans 1.19 (...).
: such as are his essential Attributes communicable and incommunicable (Indeed
they are all incommunicalbe, to speak properly and as the thing is, for they
are infinitely otherwise in God then thy are in the creature, in whom they are
only by some (...) resemblance and proportion) These are his Simplenes,
Infinitenes, Life, Love, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, etc.
All which are but one in God (for whatsoever is in God, is God) they are
distinguished only for our better apprehension: the Lord speaking to us of
these things as diverse one from another, only in regard of our shallow
capacities. And this truth though we cannot so well comprehend, yet we are
bound to believe Philip. 3.12 Credise vult Deus, non examinari, non judicari.
Aug. Our safest eloquence concerning God is our silence, Hooker. Deus sphaera
est, cujus centrum ubique peripheria nusquam Empedocles.
: though we cannot subdue it to our understandings, yet we must strive to be
subdue unto it. Here then think of God as one not to be thought of, as one
whose wisdom is his justice, whose justice is his power, whose power is his
mercy, and all himself. Good without quality, great without quantity,
everlasting without time, present every where without place, containing all
things, and yet sustayn'd of nothing. And here the well is deep, and we want a
bucket Joh. 4.11
. A wise ignorance therefore, in these high points, is better then a foolish
wisdom. It is sufficient here that we be of Gods Court, though we be not of his
Council We cansee but his backparts and live: and we need see no more, that we
may live.
.

But secondly, Gods Name, as it notes out the properties of God, so his
Ordinances also: I mean all these means whereby he is pleased to manifest
himself unto the world.

As 1. his works: whether common to the world, as Creation and providence, the
making and maintyning of all things: by both which he may be groped out Act. 17
27. (...)
, (as the Apostle speaks) in the dark, or rather, he is made visible Romans
1.20 (...). We cannot see the Sun in rota, as the Schoolmen speak, that is, in
the eircle wherein it runs, but only the beams of it: No more can we see God in
his essence: you may see him in his word, in his works etc. Preston of Gods
Attributes.
, as the same Apostle says elsewhere, to the dimmest eye; as the beams of the
Sun are by reflection, or as letters refracted and broken in a pair of
spectacles. And here in contemplating these general works of God, remember to
taste the sweetness of God in the creature, and to delight thy self more in a
spiritual, then in a natural use of the same.

Secondly, those works are Gods Name that are more proper and peculiar to the
Church; such as are Predestination, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification
etc. Precious blessings, and never enought thought upon and admired; no though
we should think upon nothing else all the days of our lives, nay as long as
the days of heaven shall last, as that Martyr once said. These are the works
of God: Secondly his word Act. 9.15 Mal. 1.9, 7, 11, 12 Micah. 4.5
and all other means of salvation, as the Sacraments, Prayer, discipline etc.
with whatsoever belongs else to Christian religion, is comprised under this
Name of God.

Here Is a large field then of matter, you see, wherein you may freely and
fruitfully expatiate and feed your thoughts with these sweetest varieties, and
most necessary, pleasant profitable, and excellent objects. And to them that
think upon these good things shall be mercy and truth Prove. 14.22
.

SECT. IX. 2. For the manner of doing this duty well, both for substance and
circumstance.
BUt then secondly see as well to the manner as matter of your meditaion. For it
is the manner that makes or marrs every action of religion: and as a good
garment may be marr'din the making, so may a good duty in the doing. The rules
here to be observed, if we would do this good work well, concern 1. the
circumstances 2. substance of this service. The circumstances are time and
place. For the time first, there must be a taking heed lest at any time there
be in us an evil heart of unbeleef to depart away from the living God Heb. 3.12
. But besides a continual care of keeping always a good conscience, and
communion with God, and of raising up the heart by occasional meditation,
taken up from matters ever where occurring and offering themselves to our
senses, that may mind us of God (as the spiritual man's fire will ever be
aspiring, Nehemiah Neh. 2.2
, for instance, that man of ejaculations, and much acquaintance with God:) But
besides this, I say, there must be a set and solemn thinking upon Gods Name on
set purpose; all the powers of the soul being concentricke, and drawn into one
point, that we may attend upon God all the while, as near as may be, without
distraction 1 Cor. 7 (...).
. And therefore I should judge it fit, that some convenient portion of time
should be redeemed from other occasions, and purposely allotted and appointed,
for the better and more thorough discharge of this most necessary, but yet much
neglected duty.

Secondly, for the place where we meditate, let it be retired and secret, for
the preventing of distraction, which else will certainly grow upon us, by the
singular policy and malice of the devil: who taking all advantages of our
carnality, and knowing how near and familiar earthly things are to our senses,
how remote and supernatural heavenly things Prove. 24.7
, he labors therefore (all he can) by outward objects to distract and divide
Divide and regna. Machia. Anima dispersa fit minor.
the faculties of the soul by uncomely motions, and impertinent thoughts: so to
slaken the earnestness of our affections, and bereave us, if possible, of the
benefit of our best meditations. Retire we therefore into some secret place,
whenever we would meditate. Peter did it upon the leads Acts 10.9
, Isaac in the field Genesis 24 63
, David in his closet Psalm. 4.4
, Jacob upon the highway to Mesopotamia Genesis 21.12
, to whom therefore so good a day was followed with so sweet a night: For he
saw the blessed Angels climbing up and down that sacred ladder, at the top
whereof is the Father, the whole length whereof is the Son, the Spirit firmly
fastening all such thereunto as duly meditated, that they may be transported
unto bliss eternal.

Now in the next place, for the substance of this duty, let it be done in
manner and form following.

First cheerfully: for God loves not to strain upon any, neither cares he for
an ill-willing service. Delight thy self in the Lord Psalm. 37.4 Virtus
nolentium nulla est.
, if he shall delight in that thou do: let it be thy recreation to walk into
Gds Garden, to muse upon his word, and works, to be thinking upon his Name.

Secondly, do it soberly Romans 12.3 (...). Qui scrutatur majestatem, opprimetur
a gloria Aug.
, not prying into Gods secrets further then he has revealed them: lest ye
lose your selves in the search, and be swallowed up in a maze, or whirl-pool of
errors and heresies.

Thirdly, do it spiritually, without framing any gross image of God in our
minds, or representing him by the similitude of any creature in our hearts;
for his is idolatry. Only this may help our understandings much: when we think
of God, to conceive that God is in Christ (that express image of his Fathers
person Heb. 13. (...)
) and there we may find firm footing for our fickle thoughts. He is that
ladder of ascension Joh 3.13
, by which we may climb safely up to God; whilst we fix the eye of our minds
upon his humane nature: in which the Godhead dwells bodily Colos. 2.9 (...).
We may not set before our eyes Christman, and so worship without any more ado:
but if we conceive of the Man-Christ, and then worship that Godhead that
dwells in him, we do right: and besides we attain to a point further, which
is, to conceive of God in Christ. Bifield on 1 Pet. 2. page 530.
, that is personally. So then, like as when I see the body of a man, there I
know his soul is also: and therefore I speak to his understanding, when and
where I see his body, because they are not severed: so viewing by the eye of my
mind, that humane nature of Christ, now glorious in heaven; I can there also
look upon the great God, because I know he is there personally united.

Fourthly, do this divine work reverntly, taking heed that we defile not his
Name Dent. 28.58
, by our slubbering services: as those greasy priests did in the beginning of
this prophecy Mal. 1.8
, whiles they thought any thing good enough for God. But undertake we this duty
with trembling hearts, and wel-composed affections, coming into his dreadful
presence with the best preparation we can get: considering that he is a great
king, and stands upon his seniority, as he tells them there: yea his Name is
dreadful among the Heathen. ib. Verse ult.


Lastly, do it constantly, never going off, nor giving over the holy matter of
our meditation (whatever it be) till we have made somewhat of it; till it be
formed and seated in our hearts, till it be well disgested, and improved for
practice. Else what will it profit us to knock at the door of our hearts by
some good thoughts of God and his Name, if we stay not an answer? Thon shall we
know, if we follow on to know the Lord Hos. 6.3
, says the Prophet.

SECT. X. Directions about the measure of divine Meditation: where is showed
how men offend 5. ways in thinking on earthly things.
HItherto the manner of our thinking upon Gods Name. The measure follows; and
that must be modus sine modo: For the general, it must be without measure Cum
Cypri^no modum esse putemus in pictate nullum tenere modum. Quocunq, tempore
non cogitaveris Deum, puta tempus illud amisisse. Casarius monit. 2. c. 3. Omne
tempus, quo de Deo non cogitasti, cogita te perdidisse, Bernardus, Magit Dei
meminisse debemus quam respirate. Heidfield.
. In particular, think we must upon the things of God more plentifully,
largely, affectionately, constantly then of all other things in the world laid
together. This is a duty of the first Commandment, yea this is that first and
great Commandment of the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all, etc.

Not, but that it is lawful to think also of other necessary businesses in
their due place and season: but te offense is, when 1. We think of them
primarily, and in the first place: letting them have the first fruits of our
thougts in a morning, which indeed is due to God alone, and was paid him in
kind by David: When I awake, I am still with thee Psalm. 139 18
, says he. And by Esaias, With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early Esaias 26.9
. That rule of our Savior is general, and holds here, Seek ye first the
kingdom of God Mat. 6.33
, etc. 2. Unseasonably, at prohibited times, as on the Lords day Esaias 58.13
, and in the Interim of divine duties any day Hoc age. Gel.
: for then to give way to earthly thoughts, is to commit dalliance with
strangers before Gods face: yea to think of the best things out of season, when
the duty in hand calls for the whole heart, is sinful: and in that case we
must answer the tempter, as Hushai did Ahitophel, Thy counsel is not good at
this time 2 Samuel 17.7
. 3. Too savourily, or with overmuch delight, or confidence in the same; being
wedded and wedged unto them in our thoughts, and affections, laying our whole
weight upon them (as it were:) as David did, when he had gotten him upon his
mount, and said, He should never be moved Psalm. 30.6, 7
, and as Job, when flourishing and swimming in all abundance of wealth and
ease, he made no other reckoning but to die in his nest Job 29 18
. 4. Sollicitously, distrustfully, anxiously, when ( Martha-like) we trouble
our heads about many things Luke 10.4 (...).
, and turmoil our spirits, with fretting, vexing, carking, and corroding cares,
and thougts of the things of this life, contrary to that Evangelicall precept,
Take no thoughts u, and again, In nothing be careful Ph lip. 4.6
. 5. Needlessly, endlesly, and superfluously; laying out far more thoughts upon
these earthly things then the matter amounts to Live not in careful suspense
Luke 12.29 (...).
The word sounds thus much, Hang not like Meteors, make no tedious and
superfluous discourses in the air. It notes out the covetous persons endless
framing of projects, and tossing of thougts, this way, and that way, and every
way, for the compassing of his greedy desires, and worldy designs. But do not
you so, says our Savior: rather be paring off superfluities this way, and
contract your thoughts into as narrow a compass as may be 1 Cor 7.29 Zacheus
converted prefac. Illuminati stamunt opud se nil agendum seri^ in tota vita
prater caelestia, reliqua obiter: Rolloc: in Ioh. 4.32
. It is enough to look at the world slightly, aloof off, and out at eyes end,
as it were: the main weight of our thoughts must be laid upon God, and the
advancing of his Name. It is affirmed, to his singular commendation, of a
worthy Divine of Scotland, that he did eat and drink, and sleep eternal life.

Whom that you may express, and imitate, harken lastly, to the means of
thinking fruitfully upon Gods Name. These are two. 1. Shun the hinderance, 2.
Use the helps to this duty.

SECT. XI. Directions to the means of fruitful thinking on Gods holy Name:
where 4. hindrances to be avoided, and 7. helps to be use.
THe hindrances are 1. pride and conceitednesse of a sufficiency in our selves
to conceive of God, or think of any thing else that is good, to good purpose 2
Cor. 3.5
God imparts his secrets to none such Psalm. 25.9
, but leaves them commonly to dote and busy their brains about questions, or
vain disputations that tend to nothing but strife and ostentation 1 Timothy 6.4, 5
.

2. Passion, He that is hasty of spirit, well he may exalt folly Prove. 14.26
, says Solomon, but he shall not lift up many holy thoughts; ('lle give him
that gift:) For these require a heart meek and at rest from the confused hurry
of troublesome passions.

3. Impenitency, a wilful continuance in any known wickedness. For the pure
in heart only see God Mat. 5.7
; since there must be some proportion between the eye and the object: so between
our minds, and God the object of our minds. Of all the body, the eye only
receives the light, and that because it is like the light. so he that has any
sound hope of sceing God (one day as he is, in the mean time as we may) must
purify himself as God is pure 1 Ioh. 3.3
. But as black can take no other dye: so an impenitent heart is incapable of
divine contemplation 2 Timothy 3.6
.

4. Lastly, Earthly-mindednesse: this distracts and divides the heart, and
indisposeth it to thinking upon God and goodness 1 Cor. 7.31, 32.
: Indeed it eats out the very heart of goodness, by eating all goodness out
of the heart. It causes that a man cannot care for the thing of the Lord, lb.
. mind and affect the things above Colos. 3.1, 2
, have our conversation in heaven, attend upon the Lord without distraction:
for who can serve two masters etc? Remove the hindrances first, rid thy heart
of these evil guests. And this done, make use of the following helps.

Fist, Accustom your selves to awak with God, and forget not to begin the day
with thoughts of him and his mercyes renewed upon you ever morning Lam. 3.23
every moment. This will sweetly season and supply the soul, putting it into an
happy and hevenly temper for the whole day following: as it did David's Ps.
108.1, 2, 3
. And here, remember to close up your heart, at your down-lying at night; and,
if possibly you can, to fall asleep out of some heavenly meditation: so shall
your sleep be the more sweet Prove. 3.21, 24, 25
and secure Pro 6.21, 22 Christian courseau. Ars artium est regimen animarum
Greg: in Pastor.
, and your heart in better plight whenever you awake. He that thus raketh up
his fire ore-night, shall find fire in the morning.

Secondly, keep your hearts with all custody the whole day thorowout. 1.
Countergard them continually from corruption within, from infection without:
especially that which is drawn from those three poisonous objects, mentioned by
St. John, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life 1
Ioh. 2.16
: that is, pleasure, profit, and preferment the worldly man's Trinity (as one
fitly styles them) A heart scatered up and down with these vanities will be as
far to seek when it should wait upon God, as a wild horse turned up in a wide
field, tat cannot be taken when he should be sadled. 2. Be often elevating, and
winding up your hearts as the weights of a clock, that bear downwards naturaly,
and are yet drawn lower by the sin that does so easily surround Heb. 12. (...)
begirteth us.
and oppress us as a talent of lead Zach. 5.8
: Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul, says David Psalm. 25.1
, and Nehemiah was often darting up some good desire to God, whatsoever his
emplyment, was. And our civil conversation also is in heaven Philip. 3.20
(...). Prove. 15.24 The godly man goes an higher way then his neighbor even in
the common business of this life. Quicquid judet dicere, pudet et cogitare.
Est tutissimum and perjecium ut assuescat animus sollicita semper and pervigili
custodia discernere cogitationes suas, and ad primum animi motum vel probare,
vel reprobare quod cogitat: vel bonas cogitationes a lat, vel statim malas
extinguat. Hier: in Epist: ad Demetriad: men's non cessat parere cogitationes:
tu autem malas evelle, bonas excole. Chrysostom. Dum in cogitatione voluptas non
reprimitur, etiam in action dominatur.
, says Paul: we exercise our general callings in our particular, and go about
our earthly businesses with heavenly minds using common things as a stirrup to
mount us up to things of an higher strain, and exacting (by a divine Alchymy)
heavenly meditaions out of earthly objects and occasions.

Thirdly, examine your thoughts often, and let not an idle motion, flying
fancy, or sinful dream pass without a sharp check, a censure of the word.
There is a sharp eye to be set, and a strict hand to be held over a man's
thoughts if ever he will have good of them; they being so infinite, nimble,
slippery, and in so secret a place, free from the worlds censure. Call them
therefore often to a domestical Audit, cherish the good, check the bad, let
them have the law if they be extravagants. Remember that an evil thought
uncontrolled, may vex thee on thy deathbed, as little and as light a matter as
many make thereof.

Fourthly, get a sound and clear judgment, able to discern of things that be
excellent, and to prefer God and the things of God incomparably before all
other things whatsoever. Make those things above your treasure once, and then
your heart will be chiefly set, and your thoughts will chiefly run on them Mat.
6.21
.

Fifthly, greaten your love to God and goodness: for strong affections make
strong impressions, and cause great thoughts of heart. A man cannot but think
much of that he loves. Oh how I love thy law, says David (and as an effect of
that love) it is my meditation day and night Ps. 119.97
. But especially, love to be Gods servants on the sabbath day Esaias 56.6.
; let the entire concurrence of the whole man be his alone that day, as much as
may be: so shall ye be the better able to think profitably of him, the whole
week after. Our infinite weekday wanderings, and woeful trisling out our golden
hours in idle and evil thoughts comes (much-what) from our customary and
carnal keeping of Gods holy day Esaias 58.13
.

Sixthly, exercise your selves in the word of life: be swift to hear and (...)
Gods holy word. Search and study the scriptures Ioh. 5.39
. These will 1. free the heart from impure lusts. Wherewithal shall a young man
(one that is in the heat of his passions) cleanse his way Psalm. 119.9 (...)
, or rub off his filth? (It is a metaphor from glass, which though rubbed never
so clean, will soon gather dust again.) Answer is made there, by taking heed
thereto accrding to thy word. 2. It will fill the head with good notions of
God, and his nature, his word, and his works etc. Hieronymus de Nepot: vit. cum
assidua lectione and meditatione diuturna, pectus suum bibliothecam christi
effecisse. Cogitationes innumerae sunt uno die: cas quis colliget, quis
corriget? quis reprimet, quis exprimet? Sphinx philos.
, so that no rome shall be left for worse thoughts, which else will be
stirring. For the thoughts of a man are never idle, as ye know, save when he
sleeps; nor then many times; but are like a mill that turns round uncessantly,
while it has water, and if it want other grist, will grind and grate upon it
self.

Lastly, (to set all the former awork) add hearty prayer to him that is both
the heart-maker, and heart-mender too. Pray him to make the meditations of our
hearts ever acceptable in his sight Psalm. 19.
: and when we are in a good frame, to keep it ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of our hearts, and to prepare our hearts unto himself 1 Chronicles. 19.18.
, as David beggs in the behalf of his people. Pray him to open your
understandings, to sanctify your wills and affections, to raise up and ravish
your hearts, to fix your quicksilver as one speaks; that is in meditating upon
good things to grant you strength of memory, steadfastness of imagination,
sta^ednesse of mind, sharpness of conceit, soundness of judgment, and all
other necessary gifts and abilities, that ye may so meditate upon Gods
precepts, that withal ye may have respect to his ways Psalm. 119, 15, 16.
.

SECT. XII. The Conclusion.
Lo this is the way, walk in it: Ands as many as walk after this direction
peace shall be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God Gal. 6.16
. For, Do they not err that devise evil? but to them that think upon good
things shall be mercy and truth Prove. 14.28
. Mercy and truth be with you 2 Samuel 15.20
Amen.

The Righteous man's Recompense. OR, GODS JEWELS MARKED AND MADE UP, FROM MEN'S
MISUSAGES.

The Text: MALACHI 3.17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in
that day when I make up my Jewels: And I will spare them as a man spares his
own son that serves him.


CHAP. I. The Text divided.
GODS gracious acceptance of his people and their holy services, has been
hitherto described, and discovered. Follows now his righteous remuneration,
and rich respects to their persons, which he highly prizeth; for They shall be
mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels. 2. To
their performances which he bountifully rewards. And I will spare them, as a
man spares his own son that serves him. Then shall ye return and discern
etc.

The former, without forcing points us to these three positions.

1. That God is the Lord of Hosts.

2. That this Lord of Hosts will have his day to do good to his people: and to
make them up as his Jewels from the worlds misusages.

3. That this people of his shall be graciously owned, and greatly honored in
that day.

SECT. I. That God is Lord of Hosts. What these Hosts are, why called Hosts:
what it is to be Lord of Hosts.
FIrst, God is the Lord of Hosts. So he is frequently styled in the old
Testament, Hugo will have it.

Now touching this title here, and elsewhere given to God, let us see, 1. What
these Hosts, or Armies are, whereof he is Lord. 2. Why they are called his
Hosts. 3. What it is to be Lord of these Hosts, and what honor accrues, and is
a scribed to God by this Attribute. In treating whereof, I must entreat my
Reader, the same that the Orator did His, (when he spoke of Socrates, Vt majus
quidd^m de ^is, quam quae ^^ripta sunt, suspicarentur: Cic. 3. de Oratore.
Loquimur de Deo non quantum debemus sed quantum possumus. Gratian. Imperator
and Lucius Crassus) that they should imagine some greater matter then here
they find written: forasmuch as in speaking of God we speak not what we ought,
but what we are able, as that Emperor has well observed in his Epistle to
Ambrose.

First then, these Hosts whereof God is said to be Lord Sovereign are all
creatures heaven, in earth, and under earth. 1. In heaven there are. 1. Angels,
which are cal^ed, The Host of heaven, 1 King. 22.19. An heavenly Army, or the
multi^ude of the heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. the armies that are in heaven,
following the Lord Christ upon white horses, etc. Rev. 19.13. The Author to
the Hebrews calls them the heavens (as some conceive it) Chap. 7.26. Not
because they were coworkers with God in the creation of the world, as the
Rabbis will have it: Goodw. Child. of Light, etc. 102.
for though Angels are called Elohim, Psalm. 8.5. yet it was Jehovah Elohim
only that made all things of nothing, Gen 2.4. Esaias 45.24. Neither yet,
because they move the heavens, and govern the whole world, as the Jews (after
the Platonists) believed, and thereupon fell into the sin of Angel worship,
Ratione pluralis Elohim, ex Hebrais aliqui existimant so iarchum Deo Angelos in
opere creationis, etc. Pareus in Genesis 1.1. Hebrai Platonicis imbuti opinionibus
Angelos coelorum motores t^tiusque mundi gubernatores esse putabant, etc.
Pareus in Heb. 2.5.
intruding into those things that they had not seen, Colos. 2.18. and curiously
prying into those secrets whereof there is neither proof, nor profit. Howbeit,
that they have, under God, a main stroke in ordering the course of natural and
civil affairs, it may be proved out of Ezekiel, Chap. 1. where the beasts are
said to stir the wheels, as themselves are stirred by the Spirit of God. And
for the manner of their motion, every one of them is said to have four faces,
that is, they can look every way at once; and to have calves feet round, that
is, they are apt to go every way: and this with the greatest facility that can
be.

Next below the Angels in Gods hosts, are the Sun, Moon, and Stars those
Celestial bodies, 1 Cor. 15.40 the glorious furniture of the visible heavens,
The Queen of heaven, Jre 44 17.
called also, the Host of heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Act 7.42. Zeph. 1.5. These fought
in their courses against Sisera, Gods enemy, Judge. 5.20. And so they do still
by their light, Vidore licebat in eodem loco aquam ignemque simul de coelo
cadere. Ignis non attingebat Romanos, neque imber juvabat barbaros, sed eos
non. secus inflammabat, ac oleum, etc. Dio Cass. in vita M. Antonin. Philos.
heat, and influence: causing stormy, tempestuous, and unseasonable weather, to
the annoyance of the Adversary, as once of the Quades, and Marcomans, upon the
prayers of the thundering Legion (as they were afterward called) in the days
of Marcus Antoninus the Phisosopher, Emperor. And as in the Battle between
Edward the third of England, and Philip of France (who being enraged with a
former defeat, marched with fury into the field, elevated with a false hope of
triumphant victory) there fell at the instant such a piercing shower of rain,
as dissolved their strings, and mae their bows unusefull. And at the breaking
up of the shower, Daniels Hist. of Eng. fol. 237.
the Sun shone full in the face of the French, dazeling their sight, etc. and
on the backs of the English, as it all made for them. Mili^es nobis, qui
a^^ant, retulerunt, extorta sibi esse de manibus quaecunque jaculibantur, cum a
Theodosij partibus in adversarios vehemens ventus iret, qui and ipsorum tela in
eorum corpora retorqueret. Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 5. cap. 26. Rupertus ventos
nominat scopas mundi, qued Deus ill^s everrat, and expurget aeris corruptionem.
Job 38.23.
Hence the superstitious Heathens, and some degenerate Jews in seremies time
worshipped this (...) of heaven (as they called it) set up the constellations of
heaven for gods. ^^oposition to which petty Gods, he is called Lord of Hosts,
God of these gods, maker and master of them all. And these are his heavenly
hosts, his cavalry, his high-land forces: not to mention here the meteors
(whether fiery, as thunder and lightning, or aerie, as wind and earthquakes,
or watery, as rain, hail etc. All which God is said to keep by him in his
treasury, and to bring them fort in the day of battle.

Secondly Gods armies in the earth are al terrestiall bodies 1 Cor. 15.40.
Rabbi Kimchi well obs^^^eth, that God has magnleh chelo b, and matteh cheloth
his upper and lower troops, as his horse and soot ready pressed. Mark 16.15
(...). Eurip. (...). X^noph. Ejus conciliis militant etiam qu^ ejus conci his
repugnant. Greg Agunt quod vult Deus, sed non volunt quod vu^ Deus Bern The
Turks bear no weapons but in travel, then some of them seem like a wall king
armory. Blounts voyage p. 79. D Willet on Romans Gorran in Romans 9.29. 1 Timothy 1,
20. expounded.
both lifeless and living creatures. All which continue and keep their station
this day according to hiae ordin^nce, says David: for they are all thy
servants: Psalm. 119.91. and at thy beck and check Esaias 45.12. Plato was wont to
say, that the earth was a kind of living creature, having stones for bones,
rivers for veins, trees for hair etc. Put Philo better says, that the world
is after a sort, a great man, and a man little world. In the Gospel man is
called every creature. Go forth into all the world says our Savior, and
preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, to man the Model of the whole
creation, the masterpiece of Gods handiwork. A wise Philosopher could say
that man is the end of all things in a semicircle: that is, All things else
were made for him, and he imself is made for God. His servant he is, and sworn
soldier, as Nebuchadnezzar is called and Cyrus: and Ashur, the rod in his
hand. For even the wicked also do the will of God, though unwittingly: partly
besides, and partly against their own wills. And in this sense, one nation may
be Gods host to punish another, or to sheath their own swords in their own
bowels, as Midian. But especially this holds true of the Church militant, which
is terrible as an army with banners, and every member thereof is a spiritual
warrior, harnessed, like a traveling Turk, capapee, with that heavenly
Panophe Ephesians. 6.13. resisting the devil, who flees from him, J^m. 4.7. The
Israelites marching out of Egypt are called the Lords hosts Exodus 12.41 In
relation whereunto, some have thought that God assumed to himself this title;
because the Ark, (that testimony of his special presence) marched in good array,
and all comely equipage, in the midst of the camp. But to speak forwards.

Thirdly, under the earth, besides those creatures that pass thorough the
paths of the sea, Psalm. 8.8. Whales and whirl-pooles, Dragons and Leviathans,
that serve to swallow up Gods Jonasses, and afterward to ship them to land
again. The very Devils also are at Gods command, and appointment: as is
intimated (according to some) in that Angelical ^risagion Holy, holy, holy Lord
God of hosts, that is says Gorran, of Angels, men, and devils. True it is, he
is called Prince of the air but that is by divine permission for a season. And
God of this world: but no otherwise then Absalom was once called the king, viz.
by usurpation. Take him in his greatest power, what is the Devil else but Gods
officer or executioner, to blind the reprobate, and to teach others that
belong to God, not to blaspheme: that is by afflicting their bodies, and
buffeting their consciences, to warn them not to walk unchristianly, to the
scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the wicked.

These then are Gods hosts. Hosts they are called (and so we descend to the
second quaere.)

1. Xerxes, Tamerlane, 2 Cor. 14.9.
the Ethiopians in Asa's time, that brought a thousand thousand into the field,
the biggest army that I remember to have read of in holy Writ: but no way
comparable unto the Lords hosts who (besides all other creatures innumerable
attendant) has thousand thousands of Angels ministering unto him, Dan. 7.10.
and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him, as waiting an errand,
and that would be glad of an office. He brings them out by number, and
calls them all by their names Esaias 40.20. which no earthly General can do.

Eutaxie, quasi milites in statione ^ collocati sunt. Shindler Pentag.
Acceperunt pro tsebi jucundites decus ornamentum. Ib. Reas. 3. Math. 8.
the comely and lovely order of them, keeping their stations, as it were in
martial manner, and battel-ray. Whence the Septuagaint commonly render this
word used for Hosts by (...) and Hierome, Ornatus; for order makes an army
beautiful.

3. For their obedience which is no less admirable, then their order amiable.
No soldier is so obsequious, so active, so ready pressed at the command of his
captain, as all creatures are at the command of God: So well disciplined are
they and trained to it, (not by rules of art, but by instinct of nature, Psalm.
119.91.) that if he say but to any go, he goes: if come, he comes, if do
this, he does it. Never was any Emperor so observed as he is, even to a nod
or beck. Psalm 123.2.

Fifthly, therefore is he styled sometimes Lord of Hosts, and other times Lord
God of Hosts, to denote and set forth his infinite and irresistible power, and
that there is no standing before him (thus armed and appointed) if his wrath be
kindled, yea though never so little: which is an answer to the third quaere.
Beza in Romans 9.29. exauditi sunt and domino multo potentiore quam ipsi sitis.
Ad infinitas ipsius vtres and copias explicandas. Beza. in loc. (...) sets
forth his absolute power and sovereignty over all creatures whence he is called
the one or only Lord. Ephe. 4.5. (...) est dissipare, perdere, quod victori
con^enit imprimis. (...).
Hoc epitheto summa tribuitur Deo potentia, says a grave and learned
interpreter, Chiefest power and sovereign authority is given and ascribed to
God by this attribute. For this, it is often used, and urged in the old
Testament; as in the new, the very Hebrew word Sabbath is retained for more
Emphasis, Iam. 5.4. The cries of them that have reaped your fields, and yet
received no wages, are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabbath: that is,
they are graciously heard by a Lord far more mighty then you are any, says the
same interpreter. And in his larger Annotations, this says he, is added to
show his infinite forces, and matchless might. The like may easily be
collected from Rev. 4.8. compared with Esaias 6.3. Where the holy Ghost rendereth
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, by Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty,
(...), not (...) only, such a one as has not the sole command alone, but the
whole command of all the creatures. In heaven he has good servants; in hell
bad: in earth both. The other Apostles call him Lord (it is Gorrans
observation) Judas calls him not so, but Rabbi Mat. 26.22, 25. because he had
shaken off the yoke of obedience, but they that will not bend must break, as he
did, when shortly after he became his own deathsman, after that he had
delivered up his master, and all by the determinate counsel of God, the might
strong God, as he is styled Esaias 9.6. the All-sufficient God Genesis 17.1. Aben
Ezra renders it The conqueror: and the Lord Christ is said to go forth riding
on his white horse conquering, and to conquer. Rev. 6.2. The Septuagint render
it Self-sufficient able to do all without help of any; how much more when
having such hosts at command. Aquila renders it (...) strong: lusty; valiant.
Pagnine and Iunius, Omnipotent. Now, dicitur Omnipotens, quia omnium tenet
potestatem, says Isidore. And this David the King acknowledges in all ample
manner (yea Nebuchadnezzar the tyrant Dan. 4.37.) Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty. For
all that is in the heaven is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art
exalted as head above all etc. 1 Chronicles. 29.11.12.

SECT. II. The Pope will needs be Lord of Hosts
Rev. 13.5. 2 These. 2. Psalm 100. Fran. Zabar. Bellar. lib. 4. de. Po^t. Roquia
in omnibus admirabilis, stuper mundi.
to boast himself so much in mischief Psalm. 52.1. to lift up himself above all
that is called God, sitting in Gods temple, and showing himself there as if he
were Lord of Hosts? For although he has but some angle, and not all the
corners of the earth, though he is but a fox in a hole, yet his discreet
doctors say of him, that he can do all that Christ can do: that God has put
all things in subjection under his feet; the beasts of the field, that is men
living on the earth, the fishes in the sea, that is souls, in purgatory the
fouls of the air, that is the souls of the blessed.

It suffices not Mosconius, to derive Pape of Papae the interjection of
admiring, because the Pope is the worlds wonderment: Rev. 13 3 Admiratio
peperit philosophiam, sic et Antichristianismum. habens in toto mundo utrunqe
g^adium etc. Dulia adorandus. De ministr. milit. Eccles. l. 1. cap. 1. Os papae
e^t eulus diaboli in eodem sunt praedicamento. Jgnatij Con. clavs. page 139.
vide Pareum in Apoc. 13.3. Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris habenas. et merito in
ter ris diceris esse Deu^. Super Angelos eleuatier papa, adeo ut eos
excommunicare possit, ait Joh. 23. in extravag Luke 4.6 Dr. Featly his Transub.
exploded.
(that beast, he should have said, in the Revelation, that all the world
wondered after) and Pontifex, because he makes men a bridge to blessedness, but
he will have him to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, having the power of
both swords throughout the world; yea command over all reasonable creatures.
Boniface the 8. wrote to Philip K. of France, that he was Lord of all, both
temporals and spirituals, in all countries, which is one of the devils titles.
Math. 4. Valladerius shames not to say of Pope Paul 5. that he was a god, lived
familiarly with the Godhead, heard Predestination it self whispering to him,
had a place to sit in council with the most divine Trinity. And another of the
same Popes parasites, dedicates a book to him thus: To Paul the 5. Vice-God,
the most invincible Monarch of the Christian commonwealth, the most mighty
defender of the Pontifician omnipotency. Our Lord God the Pope, says a
certain Canonist: And, to thee is given all power in heaven and earth, said
the Council of Lateran, the very year before Luther stood up against that
Romish Antichrist; who wears a triple crown, in token that he is Lord of
heaven, where he may canonize saints, of hell, where he may free souls out of
purgatory, of earth where he says, as once the devil did: All power is
delivered unto me, and unto whomsoever I will, I give it. But how haps it then
that he gives no more to many of his best servants? To instance in some of our
own fugitives: Allin had a Cardinals hat, but with so thin lining (means to
support his state) that he was commonly called the starveling Cardinal.
Stapleton was made professor of a petty universitie, scarce so good as one of
our free-schooles in England. Sanders was starved. Will. Raynolds was nominated
to a poor vicarage under value. On Harden his Holiness bestowed a prebend of
Gaunt, or to speak more properly (says mine Author) a Gaunt prebend etc. But
this by the by only.

SECT. III. Woe to Rebels against the Lord of Hoasts.
FOr a second Use. Job. 21.
sons of Belial, children of disodedience, that say to the King Apostata, that
break his bands, and send messages after him, saying, we will not have this man
to rule over us: that refuse to be reclaimed, and stick not to oppose with
crest and breast, whatsoever stands in the way of their sins and lusts. God
(says the Psalmist) shall wound the head of his enemies. But are there any
such, may some say? Psalm. 68.21.
so desperately mad, as to bear arms against heaven? yes, says the prophet,
and ye shall know who they are too. He shall wound the hairy scalp of such a
one as goes on in his trespasses. All those then that lie sucking at the
botches of carnal pleasures, grinding in the mill of worldly lusts, listening
(...) the suggestions of Satan the Lord professed adversary, -- caesariem
intonsam et capita alta ferentes. (...). Lacones coammnutriebant ad terrorem.
and principal Counter-factionist. All that against the rich offers of Gods
free grace, the menaces of his mouth, the strokes of his hand, choose to go on
still in their lewd and lawless courses, refusing to be reformed, hating to be
healed, all these are to be reputed Gods enenies. And although their scalps be
never so hairy, their locks never so bushy, their looks never so lofty and
haughty, fierce and furious: though they have marrow in their bones, and milk
in their breasts, though their natural moisture be no whit decayed, through age
or unbealthinesse, with Moses, much less turned into the drought of summer,
with David, which might occasion baldness (as in elderly people) but that
being young and youthy, yea strong and sappy, they had hair by weight,
Cruent^bit caput inimicorum suorum. Beza.
as Absalom, yea were rough all over with Esau, which which makes them look
grim and terrible with the Caldeans, that people of fierce countenance, yet
that shall little avail them, when God shall take them in hand He Will crack
their crowns, he will cleave their sculs, he will wound through the hairy
scalpes of all such, as obstinating themselves in an evil course, will needs
on in their trespasses, whatsever it stand them in. In the doing of which
fearful execution upon his enemies, the Lord of hosts will not much trouble
himself neither. For he needs no more but arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered: yea all that hate him shall flee before him, as it is in this same
Psalm, ver. 1. He needs not arm himself, as David, against this giant-like
generation, with weapons offensive or defensive: for with his bare hand only he
can beat the proudest of them, yea make a puny-boy and a very baby of him.

Thou have smitten all thine enemies says David upon the cheek-bone; Psalm. 3.7
thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. As if he should have said, Dio.
Those that think themselves tall fellows, and dare challenge the very devil
to a duel (as Caligula once did his Jupiter) are as children in thy great
hands, and fare accordingly, For thou boxest them about the ears, clappest them
on the cheeks with the palms of thy hands, buffetest the about the lips with
thy clutch-fist, till they spit blood again, and be made to look their teeth in
their throats, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. But if yet they will
not yield, but wrestle with thee, with the froward thou will wrestle Psalm.
18.26. Thou will be as froward as they for the hearts of them. If they will
needs try a fall with thee, thou will fell them, Act. 9.4 Joh. 18.6
and quell them, thou will lay them at thy feet, (as the Lord Christ did Saul,
and the souliers that came to surprise him) yea thou will smite them in the
hinder-parts (where we use to whip unruly boys) and so put them to a
perpetual reproach. Psalm. 78.66. But what need the Lord (as I was saying) be
at all this pains with himself, or once so much as foul his fingers with them,
who has such mighty armies, and so many Hosts afoot to chastise his rebels?
Pomp. Mag. nostra miseria tu es magnus. Pub. Minus.
so that if he do but once wag his little finger, or stamp with his foot only
upon the ground (as that Roman vainly vaunted) he can presently command and
call for legions of Angels to subdue Senacherib, millions of stars to fight
against Sisera, vollyes of thunder and lightning to blast and burn up the
Philistines, cart-loads of massy hailstones to brain the kings of Canaan. These
are Gods hosts in heaven. Neither is he to seek of sufficient forces here
beneath, both by sea and land. There he has whales and dragons to devour his
enemies: here he has, besides armies of diseases within them (Physicians
reckon 2000. several sorts, 200. whereof belong to the eye) that lie in wait
for the precious life: let him but say with Jehu, who is on my side? who? and
all beasts, fouls, and exeeping things innumerable will straight look out at
their windows, and tender him their service. God cannot possibly want a staff
to beat his dogs with; a weapon to wound his rebels with. Facile est invenire
baculum quo canem caedas.
If He set against a world-full of wicked doers, the water will take his part:
If against Sodom, fire: If against murmurers, earth: If against blasphemers,
fiery serpents: If against Idolaters, lions: Dan. 6. If against mockers, bears:
If against Herod, worms: 2 King. 2.24 Act. 12. Hatto Bonosus Praesul
Moguntinus, a muribus devoratus An. Dom. 969. ut ait Wilderogus episcopus
Argentinensis A. D. 997. Alsted Chron. Fit cruor ex undis, conspurcant omnia
ranae. Dat pulvit cimices, postea musca venit. De in pestis post ulcera,
grando, locusta, tenebrae. Tandem prototocos ultima plaga necat.
If against Hatto, mice: If against Pharaoh, all. Now a host of frogs distress
him, now of flies, now of lice, now of Caterpillars, now of grasshoppers etc.
God made the earth fight against him, the air fight against him, the fire
fight against him, the water fight against him: he left him not till he had
beaten the very breath out of his body with stroke after stroke, and so made
good with his hand, what he has also said with his mouth. The Lord knows how
to reserve the unjust to the day of punishment: And, In the thing wherein they
deal proudly, he is above them. 2 Pet. 3, 9. Exodus 18.11. He has an eye to
follow them, a goard to look to them, and a jailer to bring them forth,
whenever he shall call for them. In case they should make escape (as they
cannot) he has armies above them, armies below them, armies about them, armies
upon them, yea armies within them, to bring them back to execution. For a
wicked person is not safe from his own tongue to peach him, from his own hands
to dispatch him, from his own phantasy to disquiet him, from his own conscience
to affright him, from his own friends to betray him, from his own beasts to
gore him, from his own fire to burn him, from his own house to brain him. Thus
it is with him, whiles at home: as if he look abroad, to every creature he
meets he may say as Ahab once said to the Prophet, Have thou found me O mine
enemy? For as every good soldier will fight for his General; and as a
Noble-mans servants will soon draw, if their Lord be set upon; so there is not
a creature in all the world, that is not ready pressed to fight Gods battles, and
revenge his quarrel upon an ungodly person. Gen 4.14
What Cain sometimes said he has good cause to take up and second; Job 18.15
Every thing that finds me shall slay me. Brimstone is strawed upn the house
of the wicked, says Job, so that if the fire of Gods wrath do but lightly
touch upon it, Job 9 5 Eccles. 6.13 Necesse est ut eum omnibus doct^orem
agnoscam qui triginta habet legiones Phavorm: de Adriano ^mp: apud Spartian.
they are suddenly consumed: they walk all day long upon a mine of Gunpowder,
either by force or stratageme they are sure to be surprised. Had Zimri peace
that slew his master? Has ever any waxed fierce against God and prospered? Oh
that these graceless men would once learn to meddle with their match, and
(according to the wise-mans counsel) beware of contending with one that is
mightier then they, this Lord of Hosts, I mean, the Lord mighty in battle,
Psalm. 24.8. this man of war as Moses calls him whose name is Jehovah sabbath:
before whose dreadful presence, and unresistible puissance they are no more
able to stand, then is a glasse-bottle before a cannon-shot.

SECT. IIII. Tremble before this mighty Lord of Hosts.
THirdly,

And first to tremble before this mighty God: who having so many millions at
his beck and obedience, can with as much ease, and in as little time undo us as
bid it be done. So Caesar once threatened Metellus in a bravado; but so, God
only and easily can do indeed to such as set against him. If the breath of God
blow men to destruction Job 4.9. for we are but dust-heaps: if he can frown us
to death with the rebuke of his countenance, Psalm. 80.16. what is the weight of
his hand (that mighty hand as James calls it) wherewith he spans the heavens,
Jam 4.1^ Isay 40.22
and weighs the earth in a balance? He sits upon the circle of the earth,
and the inhabitants are as grasshoppers: he shakes them out of it, at pleasure,
as it were by a canvass, or as out of ones lap, so much the Hebrew word imports
Job 38.13. Who would not therefore fear thee O King of Nations? Jer. 10.6, 7
Mat 22.21 (...).
for to thee does it appertain; forasmuch as thowart great, and thy Name is
great in might. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, says Christ, and
unto God the things that are Gods. Where it is remarkable that the Article in
the Original is twice repeated when he speaks of God, more then when he speaks
of Caesar, to show, says a Divine, that our special care should be to give
God his due: Now shall we f^ar to break the penal laws of a King, Prove. 19 12
Prove. 16.14 Prove. 20.2
because his wrath is as the roaring of a lion, and as the messengers of death,
so that whosoever provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul? And shall
we not fear this King of Nations, who has Armies of creatures to do us to
death, and after that, legions of devils to torment us in hell? shall we fear
fire, water, lions, leopards; bulls, bears, and other common soldiers, yea the
wrath of a fool, because it is heavier then the sand of the sea Prove. (...).
Mat. 10.28. Philip. 3. ult.
27.3, 4. An shall we not fear the great Emperor of all these, that has them
all at his beck and obeisance? These may kill us, but they cannot hurt us, as
he once told the tyrant destroy they may the body, but neither keep the good
soul from heavents nor the body from a glorious resurrection. But God can do
all this, yea more then this: and shall we not fear his heavy displeasure?
Especially since according to his fear, so is his wrath, Psalm. 90.11. That is
(according to some) as any one does more or less fear Gods indignation, in the
same degree and measure shall the feel it: as he trembles at it, he shall taste
of it. Or as others, (and perhaps better) Let a man stand in never so great awe
of thy wrath, yet his fear shall not prove proportional, or ever be able to
match it: he shall never fear thee so much as thy wrath amounts to, let him
fear his utmost. For there is a fire kindled in his anger, and it burns unto
the lowest hell Deuteronomy. 32.22. Now Bellarmine is of opinion that one glimps of
hell, were enough to make a man not only turn Christian and sober, but
Anchorite and Monk, to live after the strictest rule that can be. I conclude
with the Apostle, Wherefore let us have grace, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire Heb.
12.28, 29.

SECT. V. Trust in his power for fulfilling his promises.
SEcondly, is He the Lord of Hosts? This should teach us to rest confidently
upon his power, for the fulfilling of his promises: For what should hinder?
First, God is not as Man that he should lie; he pays not what he has
promised, Plutarch.
as Sirtorius is said to do, with fair words. Secondly, he is not off and on
with us, he does not say and unsay, Mal. 3.
he is Jehovah that changes not.

Thirdly he is the Lord of Hosts, and cannot be resisted, or interrupted in his
course. Nature may be, and was, when the fire burnt not, the water drowned not,
the Lions devoured not, etc. Men may be withstood though never so mighty, as
the potent Prince of Persia was, Daniel 10.20. And as Asa was, who although he
brought five hundred thousand men into the field, yet was he encountered and
overmatcht by an Army of a thousand thousand and upward, so that he was fain to
flee to the old Rock for refuge. Devils may want of their will, though never so
many, Esaias 26.4.
as that Legion in the Gospel, and though never so well united, as they there
were: for though many, Squama Leviathan ita cohaerent, ut quasi loricatus
incedat Satan and cataphractus. Luther. D. Preston.
yet they say, My name, not Our name, they speak and act as One in that
possession. But God does whatsoever he will in heaven and earth, without
control or contradiction.

In the creatures, (says One) there is an essence, and a faculty whereby they
work; as in fire, the substance, and the quality of heat: between these God can
^inder, and so hinder their working, as in the Babylonish fire, Dan. 3. In the
A ^geis there is an Essence, and an executive power. God comes between these,
o^te^, and hinders them from doing what they would. But now its otherwise in
God: he is most simple, and entire, without mixture or composition. Hence his
Almightinesse is his Essence, and his whole Essence is Almighty. He is not
mighty in respect of some part, or faculty, as the creature is, but all in God
is mighty. He is not dependent upon another for new supplies, as the creature,
whose power will cease and determine, if not renewed and confirmed by God, Jer.
32.18, 19. He is El-shaddai, absolutely self-sufficient, not needing any
subsidiary help from without, though he please otherwhiles to make use of the
creatures, as his Hosts, to tame his enemies, and perform his word to his
people. Tamen tantum effecit ut tota Aegyptus deficiens exclamare ^^geretur
hunc esse digitum Dei Philo.
Quid ciniphe v^lius? says Philo. What Is more base then a lowse? yet all
Egypt could not stand before this poor creature, but was forced to acknowledge
it the finger of God. If any Pharaoh oppose to him, he can soon subdue the
strongest Rebel by the weakest instrument. As if any Gideon build and bind
upon his promise, of weak he shall become strong, Heb. 11.34. Deo confici
nunquam confusi. He that believes shall not be ashamed, he need no more but
stand and see the salvation of the Lord.

The Lord shall fight for you, Exodus 14.14
says Moses to Israel, namely by his red sea, that shall cover your enemies,
(as it did ours in 88.) but ye shall hold your peace. Commit your ways
therefore unto the Lord, trust also in him, Psalm. 37.5
and he shall bring it to pass. Stand not upon these and these dangers, and
difficulties that stand in the way. Found your faith fast upon the infallible
promises of God All-sufficient; put them also in suit by faithful and fervent
prayer, and then though you see not how, or which way such a mercy should be
attained, or deliverance compassed; yet give glory to Gods power with Abraham,
Romans 4.18. and buy the field at Gods bidding with Jeremy, Chap. 32.17-27.
thought the captivity were then foretold unavoydable. What talk we of any
thing impossible, or improbable to the Lord of Hosts? This is to limit the Holy
One of Israel, with those Rebels, that asked, Can the Lord provide a table for
us in the wilderness? or with that Infidel Lord of Samaria: Behold, if the
Lord should make windows in heaven, might this thing be? Can the Lord? and,
Might this be? Why? what a questions that? He can give bread from heaven, and
drink out of a rock: He can command the ravens to feed Elias, and the most
hurtful creatures to be useful to us, as poison in Physic. He can do more
then ever he will, as he could have rescued his Son Christ by a legion of
Angels, Mat. 26.23. Some things God can do, but will not, 2 Timothy 2.13. Heb.
6.18.
Mat. 3.9. Some things he neither will, nor can; as he cannot lie, die, deny
himself, break his promise, etc. But whatsoever God wills, that without
impediment he effects, Esaias 46.10. For who has resisted his will? And yet I
know not how, it is natural and usual with us in an exigence, to question Gods
power one while, (If thou can do any thing, help us) his will another while,
(Master, if thou will thou can make me clean) and to tie him so to the means,
that if they fail, he cannot help. When the bottle was spent, Hagar falls a
crying as utterly undone. Whence shall we have bread to feed so many thousands?
Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? Ioh. 6 Number. 11.13.22.
Ver. 23. Dei dicere est facere.
shall the flocks be all slain, and all the fish of the Sea gathered together
for them to suffice them, said Moses? But what said the Lord to it? Is the
Lords hand waxed short? thou shall see now whether my word shall come to pass
unto thee, or not. Gods word is his deed, his promise sure-hold: never any yet
miscarried that could produce and plead it: since he wants neither power nor
will to make it good. Peter had a good will to deliver Christ out of the Jews
hands, but wanted power. Pilate had power enough to do it, but wanted will. God
wants neither, but will put forth both forth safety and salvation of his
faithful people. Hence holy Job, having spoken of Gods power speaks of his
thoughts, (as Calvin observes) to tell us that his power and will are things
inseparable, his mind and hand agree together, the one to determine, the other
to execute. Job. 42.2. All his shall have whatsoever heart can wish, or their
condition require, 2 Samuel 22.2.3. even mavelous loving kindness from God in a
strong city above all that can be uttered: The prophet is fain to express
himself above it, by an exlamation Psalm. 31.19, 20, 21. The Lord of Hosts is
for them, the God of Jacob is their refuge. He has entered into a covenant with
them both defensive and offensive, so that all his is theirs, as Iehosaphat
that told his confederate King of Israel. 1 King. 22.4.

SECT. VI. Stoop his power, and submit to his Sovereignty.
THirdly, is he the Lord of Hosts? what then should we rather and sooner do
then stoop to his power, and submit to his sovereignty? And since we must be
either his servnts, or his slaves, his subjects or his footstool, choose the
former condition, that we may escape the latter? for certain it is, he will
fetch us in by one Pursivant or another (and he has enough ready) if we make not
have with Shimci, to come down, and meet the Lord with entreaties of peace,
that he may embrace us, and take us in to his princely favor. Do not ask me
here, (as Pharaoh once did Moses) who is the Lord that I should serve him? God
Attributes are of two kinds, which either show what he is? or who he is? to the
question of Moses what he is; God gave a short answer: I am. To the second of
Pharaoh, who he is, he made a large reply by his armies of lice, flies, hail,
locusts etc. Till Pharaoh was compelled to answer for him, The Lord is
righteous, but I and my people are wicked, This was a fair confession, but
extorted: for he was no sooner off the rack, but he bit it in again, and became
more hard and hardy, as water grows more cold after a heat. And such, for all
the world, was the forced and fained obedience of those Israelites im the
wilderness while God slew them (by fiery serpents, and others his warriors)
then they sought him, yea they returned, and enquired after God, Psalm. 78.34.36
as if they would have done the deed. Nevertheless they flattered him with
their mouths, and lied unto him with their lips. So must not we do, if ever we
mean to do well: but throwing away our weapons, lay our selves low before his
footstool, unfainedly submitting to the scepter of his kingdom, obeying from
the heart that form of doctrine whereunto we have been delivered. For, what a
shame is it for us not to do that homage to God, Romans 6.17.
that all other creatures so gladly pay and perform? what a monstrous thing
that man amidst al Gods handy-works that revere the Almighty, and readily do
his will, that he I say, should prove a great Heteroclite, an open rebel, a
professed adversary to God his sovereign Lord, his crown and dignity? Oh send a
lamb (in token of homage and fealty) to the ruler of the world Vow and pray to
the Lord your God, bring presents unto Fear, that is, to him that ought to be
feared. And for as much as with your ten thousand you are not able to encounter
this great King, that comes against you with twenty thousand times twenty
thousand; send an embassage quickly of prayers and tears, whiles he is yet on
the way, Irent prope, ne remorando iram victores exasperarint. Tacit hist. lib.
2 Mittamus preces and lacrymas cordis legatos Cyprian 1 Kin. 20.32. The British
Ambassadors came in torn garments with sand on their heads, in the time of
Valentinian the third. Daniels hist. of Eng. The Callice men came to Ed. 3 bare
headed, barefooted in their shirts with halters about their necks etc. lib. p.
240. Psalm. 27.
and desire conditions of peace. Luke 14.32. You know how Jacob disarmed that
rough man Esau that came against him with 400. cutthroats at his heels: how
Abigail appeased that enraged man David, that had desperately vowed the death
of so many innocents: how the Syrians prevailed with that non-such Ahab, for
the life of their Lord Benhadad. Having heard that the kings of Israel were
merciful men, they put sackcloth upon their loins and ropes upon their heads,
and in this form of humble suppliants they came to the King, and said, Thy
servant Benadad says, I pray thee let me live. And a like address we read of
in our own histories of the old Brittones to Aetius the Roman Governor, and of
the Calice-men to one of our Edwards; Oh let their practice be our pattern. We
have heard abundantly that there is a matchless mercy in God for all penitent
persons, above that ever was found in the best king of Israel: this mercy we
have a promise of, if we submit to the condition, ( in thee the fatherless
finds mercy Hos. 14 3.) So had not the Syrians: their best encouragement was
a general hear say. This condition is no more then what every man will yield to
be reasonable, viz. that we lay down the bucklers first: that we come before
him in lowliest manner, with ashes on our heads (so they of old) as unworthy to
be above ground, with sackcloth on our loins, as unworthy the coursest
clothing, with ropes about our heads, as deserving to be destroyed: yet humbly
begging that we may live in his sight with Ismael, yea that we may serve in his
presence with Moses, and dwell in his house with David all the days of our
lives, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.
This is all that God requires, and this was that one thing that David begged so
dearly at Gods hands Psalm. 27.4. and accordingly obtained it. Hence he so
confidently calls his soul to rest amidst a multitude of molestations and
encumbrances. Hear him else, Psalm. 3. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of
people that have set themselves against me round about. I laid me down and
slept, I awaked etc. He never brake his sleep for Absalom and all his forces,
the up in arms against him. For why? salvation, says he, is of the Lord, his
blessing is upon his people. ( Ver. 5, 6, 8.) whereof I am one, and shall
therefore be in safety. Behold I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed,
said Isaac of Jacob: says the God of Jacob, of all those that rest confidently
upon his power for their preservation, that hope to the end for the grace that
is to be brought unto them, at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.13 At
destruction and famine thou shall laugh, says Eliphaz, neither shall thou be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. For thou shall be in league with the stones
of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Job.
5.22, 23.

SECT. VII. Set his power awork, by prayer. The power of prayer.
LAstly, is God Lord of Hosts? how should this consideration quicken and call
us up to a constant instancy in prayer to that God, Ephesians. 3.21. 2 Cor. 8
Phillip. 4 Oration fidelis omnipotens est. Luther. Est quaedam omnipotentia
precum. Alsted syst. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 2. Luke 18.6.
who is able to do for us above that we are able to ask or think, that we
having all sufficiency always in all good things, may abound unto every good
work through Christ that strengthens us. Many and glorious things are spoken
of the power of prayer in the book of God. Indeed there is a kind of
Omnipotency ascribed unto it, and not without cause. For certainly whatsoever
God can do, prayer can do: since prayer sets God awork, God sets his power
awork, and Gods power sets the creature awork (as at Peter's "enlarge meant) and
then what wonder the thing come on an end, though never so difficult. For shall
any thing be too hard for God? or shall not God avenge his praying people that
cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he
will avenge them speedily. Asa and Iehosaphat prayed down their enemies, so did
the Jews in Esthers time, the Saints in the acts, the thundering legion. The
death of Arrius, Acts 4. Secrat. lib. 1. cap. 15.
was precationis opus non morbi. He was brought to confusion by the prayers of
Alexander the good Bishop of Constantinople. Luther had obtained of God, that
whilst he lived the enemy should not plunder his country: when I am gone said
he, Acts and Mon.
let those pray that can. So, when the states of Germany were once assembled to
consult about points of Religion then in controversy, he, though thirty miles
distant, at the very house wherein it was concluded, that the reformation
should be established, came leaping out of his closet, (where he had been
tugging with God by prayer) with Vicimus, Vicimus in his mouth, we have
overcome, we have overcome. Spec. belli sacri Dr. Powell in Cambr. histor.
Non disputationibus sed rogationibus, says Bodine. The business of religion is
more dispatched by prayers then disputes, yea or then by force of arms. A great
Queen is reported to have said, that she more feared the fasting and prayers of
John Knox and his disciples, then an army of thirty thousand men. Leoline
Prince of Wales, when by some about him he was moved to make war upon our third
Henry; I am more afraid, sad he, of his prayers and alms, then of his
preparations and armies. Alius insaniat utibellum inferat ei qui c^ns^^itse
deum defensorem habiturum. Bucholc. Index Chron. Idem in Cron. Cruciger. Ber
medi. devotis. cap. 5.
The like we read of a cor am Duke of Saxony, that having raised forces to
fight against the Bishop of Magdeburg, and understanding by his Intelligencers,
that the Bishop made no kind of Warlike provision, but said that he would
wholly commit his cause to God, who would not fail to fight for him. God
bless me said the Duke, from waging war with him that trusts in God for
defense and deliverance. Numa (a Heathen) reposed so much confidence in his
gods, that when he heard the enemies were at hand, he laughed and said, At Ego
rem divinam facio. But I am about the service of the gods; and so long I can
not but be in safety. Jacob wrestled with God by prayer, and had the better of
him. Of Luther it is said, that ^e could have what he would of God. St. Bernard
in his meditations giving diverse rules of strictness, purity of heart,
humility and holiness: Et cum talis fueris, says he, memento mei, when thou
art thus fitted for prayer, thou may have any thing, pray for me. God
requires no more of us but to bring before him lawful petitions, and honest
hearts, and then doubt not, but if the thing be feasible, prayer can effect it;
Especially, if in prayer we rest upon Gods infinite power engaged for our
relief, and plead it, he cannot say us nay.

It was a notable and an imitable piece of policy in the ancient church, Psalm.
80. to found her prayers upon Gods Power. Stir up thy strength, and come and
save us. Verse 2. And in suing for her liberty, to press God with this
prevayling argument, Thou art the Lord of hosts: yea by waving her wings often,
to gather that wind under them, that might mount and bear her up to the
presence of the Almighty with more facility and efficacy, growing every time in
fervency by her threefold iteration and repetition; of the self same petition
in prayer. Turn us agine O God, Cumin colloquium descendimus cum Dee,
replicemus licet, duplicemus, triplicemus, et quadruplicemus Alsted, in Genesis
(...) Tantus fulminator ad Jesabelis minas (...) trepidat fachis seipso
imbecillior Buch (...) (...) cognationem habet cum verbo (...), attendere,
intendere. Novarin.
says she (ver. 3.) and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. This
was a good prayer, but somewhat flag: therefore she stirs up her self again,
and takes better hold of God, by this title in my text: Turn us again, O God
of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved; ver. 7. Here ^he
is somewhat thriven in her devotion. Before 'twas O God only, without any
further attribution. Now it is O God of hosts, Thou that have all power in thine
hands, do it for us. But lastly, as if that were too little, she trebbles her
forces (as Abraham did for Sodom) and by a new addition, Turn us again, says
she. O Lord God of bests, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. And
having thus said, she rests satisfied; so dosing up her prayers, as not
doubting in Gods due time, of a gracious answer. The effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man, says St. James, avails much, or is greatly powerful.
And this he exemolifies in Elias; a man (says the Apostle) as other men are,
and therefore had original sin in him, mixing with his prayers. And a
passionat man too, subject to like passions as other men are: for we read how
on a time, when he sat under the Juniper: he would have died in a passion: and
yet he prayed, and prayed that it might not rain; and at his prayer, it rained
not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed
again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth gave her fruits, not without a
miracle of Gods mercy. For rain in an ordinary course had come too late to a
land that had lain so long parcht and scorcht: the very roots of herbs and
trees being now decayed and dried up, and all in a manner past recovery. (...).
But faithful and fervent prayer never comes too late, and that because God
never comes too late. Prayer is a great wonder-work in heaven and earth. No
good thing can match it, nor evil overmatch it.

The flood could not drown the old world, till praying Methuselah was laid up
in peace. The fire could not consume sinful Sodom, till praying Lot was
provided for. It is not in the power of Labans hand to hurt Jacob, because,
Quasi manu facta, Deum ambiunt orantes. Tertull. Preces sunt bombardae and
instrumenta bellica christiano^um Luth. Ligatum habent Sancti Deum, ut non
puniat, nisi permiserint ipsi. Bern in Cant. sermon. 30.
upon his yester-nights prayer, God had rebuked him. Nor could Esau touch him,
because Jacob had wrestled with God all night, and would not away without a
blessing of deliverance, and a guard of Angels. The plague cannot fasten upon
the people, for Moses will not yield to it: nor Amalec prevail in the vale,
because he held up his hands on the hill. If ever the enemy shall do good on it,
and God have decreed it so, he first takes order for the silencing of his
prophets, whose prayers would, as it were, tranfuse a dead palsy into his
hands, that he could not smite, Ier. 7.16. pray not says he for this people,
neither lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for
I will not hear. As if the Lord should have said thus: Had there been any good
to be done in this case, prayer would have done it. But I am fully bent: and
therefore though Moses and Samuel (those men of prayer) stood before me, yet my
mind could not-be toward this people. I am inexorable Ier. 15.1. what then?
shall Gods servants lose their prayers? No, this they shall have of my hand,
they shall deliver their own souls, they shall have their own lives for a prey.
Something there is that God will yield to prayer then, Cartwr, in loc.
when he is most bitterly bent against a people or person Mat. 24.20. Pray
says our Savior (after he had foretold such an affliction as never had been,
nor should be the like) pray says he, that your flight be not in the winter,
for that will be tedious, nor on the sabbath, for that will be grievous.
Whereupon a learned Interpreter makes this note. In maxima severitate aliquid
permittit precibus. Something God will graciously yield to prayers, in his
greatest severity. Admirable is that, and for the present purpose most apt and
apposite, that Polanus reports of a terrible earthquake in the territories of
Berne in Swisserland: by means whereof, a certain high mountain carried
violently over other mountains, 'ore-whelmed and covered a whole township, that
had ninety families in it, one half house only excepted, wherein the master of
the family with his wife and children were with bended knees calling earnestly
upon God. This fell out no longer ago then in the year 1584. Polan. Syntag.
Theolog tom ^. lib. 5. cap. 21. de terr aemotu mortuus est Polan: Anno. 1610
Mat. 21.21
and is related by Amandus Polanus a famous Divine, who lived not many years
since at Basil, not many miles distant from the place where the thing fell
out. In which notable example who sees not, as in a mirror, the marvelous
force and efficacy of faithful prayer, standing, ( Aaron-like) with his
incense, betwixt the living and the dead, and verifying that of our Savior:
Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall say unto this
mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove: yea be thou
removed and cast into the sea, and it shall be done? And, All things whatsoever
ye shall ask in prayer, believing; ye shall receive? Oh blessed Savior! Ephesians.
1.19
what could have fallen from that sweet mouth of thine more for the glory of
thy free grace and our greatest encouragement to ply the throne of grace with
daily suites, that God would open our eyes to see the exceeding greatness of
his power toward us that believe, according to the working of his mighty
power. There is in the Original a sixfold gradation, and all too little. Words
are too weak to utter it.

SECT. VIII. Be comforted in the consideration of his power: where diverse
objections of weak Christians are answered.
SIngular comfort to all that belong to the Lord of Hosts,

For their preservation, Dan. 3.17
first, Our God is able to deliver us, either from the fire, or in it: this was
the support of those three brave Worthies in Daniel, and may be ours, that lean
on the Lord and the power of his might. Shall the Philistines rely upon their
Goliath, Papists an their he-saints and she-saints, Turks on their Mahomet,
Heathens on their Tutelaries, and not we encourage our selves in the Lord our
God as David? not cheer up our hearts in this man of war, whose name is the
Lord of Hosts, the Lord mighty in battle? Oh say with the church in Micah,
Micah. 4.5.
All people will walk, every one, in the name of his God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. For their rock is not as our
Rock, Deuteronomy. 32.31
our enemies themselves being Judges. Contemno minutos istos Deos, modo Jovem
propitium habeam, said that Heathen, If God be for us, what need we fear what
man or devil can do unto us? Romans 8 31 Ob. Sol.


Oh but mine enemies are many, and mighty.

Yea but thy champion is the Lord of hosts, with whom it is nothing to save
whether with many or with no power. I his staid up Asa's heart against a
thousand thousand enemies. 2 Chronicles. 14 22


But they are fierce and furious. Ob. Sol.


What of that? I know whom I have trusted, says Paul, and I am sure that he is
able to keep that I have committed to him against that day 2 Timothy 1.12. I have
been delivered out of the mouth of the lion; And the Lord shall deliver me from
all evil etc. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. Did not the Lord appear to Joshuah with a naked
sword in his hand, Nudatum nimirum ensem suum nunquam deposuit, sed inde usque
ab Adae lapsu eum in Ecclesiae suae defens. etc. Bucholc.
as captain of the Host? Did not the Angels fight for Hezekiaeh, and environ
Jacob at Mahanaim, Elisha in the mount etc? and has not the Lord charged them
still to pitch their tents round about the righteous. They appear not unto us,
(it is true) now as of old, because the church now needs not such confirmations,
and Christ being ascended, and the spirit plentifully bestowed, God would that
our conversation should be in heaven, and not that the Angls should converse so
visibly with us on earth. But they still pity our humane frailty, and secretly
suggest both counsel, and comfort: they also keep us from perils and dangers
of body and soul, who else could not subsist, no not an hour.

Next for provision of necessaries, God has taken and bound over the best of
the creatures to purvey for his people, and to bring them in maintenance, the
heaven, Pro. 20.30, 31 Rex ferarum Isidor. lib. 10. c. 2. (...)
the earth the corn, the wine, the oil, the best of the best is for them.
Hos. 2.20, 21. The Lions says the Psalmist (and the Lion is the king of
beasts) or, the ricb among the people (as the Septuagint have it) shall hunger
and starve, those that will be sure to have it, if it be to be had: wicked rich
men not only rob but ravish the poor, Psalm. 10.9, 10
when they have gotten them into their nets, that is, their debts, bonds,
mortgages, as Chrysostom expounds it. Hence they are called men-eaters,
Cannibals Psalm. 14.4. Lo these Cormorants, these young Lions, shall lack and
suffer hunger, but those that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good.
Psalm. 78.14 Pluviam escatilem petram aquatilem. Tertull. Vix unquam major fuit
gloria illius populi in terra Canaan quam in deserto. Buchol.
He will rain down bread from heaven, and set the flint-stone abroach, and turn
the wilderness into a Paradise, before his people shall pine and perish. Never
was Prince so served in his greatest pomp, as the rebellious Israelites in the
desert. How good shall we find him then to those that please him? Elias is fed
one while by an Angel, another while by a Raven. But if both should have
failed him, as the brook Cherith did, yet he that took away his meat, could
have taken away his stomach, as he did also, for 40. days together in the
mount of God. In a word, the Lord of hosts has a thousand means ready and at
hand to provide for his people: his strength and wisdom ever busieth and
bestirreth it self for their comfort. The Lord (says Peter who had tried it)
knows how to preserve his own, 2 Pet 2.9 Phil. 4.12.13 1 King. 22. Heb. 11.
Act. 7.
and to deliver the godly out of temptation. And I can do all through Christ
that strengthens me, says Paul, whether it be to be full or to be hungry, to
abound or to be abased. A believer walks about the world like a Conqueror, as
Michaiah did after he had seen the Lord on his throne, with all the host of
heaven about him: So Moses after he had by faith seen him that is invisible:
and Steven after he had seen the son of man on the right hand of God, Angels,
authorities and powers being made subject unto him. 1 Pet. 3.22,

And as in temporal so in spiritual regards also, this holds true for the
soul and inward man of the heart, much distressed many times by wicked spirits
in high places Ephe. 6.12. (...) about our interest in heavenly privileges.
(...). De Xerxis exercitu, Aristi. (...). Phil. 1.19.2 Cor. 12 9 Luke 22.31
Rev. 12.8, 11 (...). Rom 8 37
They have the upper ground of us (which is no small advantage) they assault us
out of the air, and there-hence buffet and batter us with their fiery darts (so
called for the dolor and distemper they work in us, like a fire in the flesh,
and the likest hell of any thing) with the haile-shot, hell-shot of their
temptations. But God succors us by the supplies of his spirit, and by the
visible ministry of his angels, as he did our Savior in his agony, and after
his great temptations. His grace is sufficient for us, his strength made
perfect in our weakness. The serpents head is broke, his work dissolved; his
trenches thrown down, and himself driven out of the field, by the Captain of
our salvation, the author and finisher of our faith, who has also prayed that
our faith fail not, even at such times as Satan desires to have us, as a
challenger Goliath-like, desires to have one of the other side to combat with.
Michael and his angels, have disarmed and driven out the dragon and his angels,
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb: yea, the saints do overcome, or are
more then conquerours, because through faith in Christ they overcome before
they fight, they are sure of victory aforehand. And although Satan is said to
make war upon the Saints, and to overcome them, Revel. 13.7. yet this is but
spoken according to humane conceit, and in regard of outward persecutions. But
thanks be to God, who makes us always to triumph through Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against us: that is, Mat. 16.18
all the power and policy of hell combined: for in the gates sat the Elders to
consult in time of peace; and at the gates was planted the best munition in
time of war. Impostours should deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect
(as that third part of the stars of heaven) but that cannot be.

Object not here, that Satan with a full mouth (as a fell Lion) roars upon you,

It is a Spanish Proverb, The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted: Sol.
Satan in sidiis tanquam Leo (...), 1 Pet. 5 8. Christus insub. sidiis tanquam
Leo (...) 1 These. 1.10 Obj. Rev. 12.15 Draco multis (...); Scaligero (...) Quia
animal venenatum and homini infestu^. Sol. Romans 16.20 Colos. 2.15 1 Cor. 15.55
1 John 4
nor is the Devil so powerful, (...) he makes himself: well he may shake his
chain at us, but he cannot set his fangs in us: well he may nibble at the heel,
but he cannot hurt us in the head. He that is born of God keeps himself, and
that wicked One touches him not, that is, Tactu qualitative, says Cajetan,
with a deadly touch. Besides, Christ is a Lion also, even the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah (the victorious Tribe) that can out-roar Satan, and easily over-master
him. As for thee that humblest thy self at his feet for mercy, assure thy self
he will never trample on the yielding prey.

Oh but Satan is not only a Lion, but a dragon: he not only roars, but spets
poison, yea spews out of his mouth floods of venomous and violent temptations:
yea he is a great red dragon, colored and died red, as it were, with the blood
of souls he has swallowed; and besides he has seven heads to plot, and ten
horns to push me into the pit of perdition, Rev. 12.3.

True all this: but Mi-ca-el? who is as the strong God? Christ, our only
Michael, has with his sore, and great, and terrible sword, punished Leviathan,
that crooked piercing serpent, and slain the dragon that is in the sea, Esaias
27.1. Under our feet he will tread him shortly, as he has done already under
his own: triumphing over him on the cross, with Death, where is thy sting!
hell, where is thy victory! To be brief: The Lamb with his two horns can do
more, then the dragon with his ten. Stronger is he that is in you, then he that
is in the world. Christ is that stronger man, that casts out the strong man
armed out of his castle, and spoils his goods.

Oh, but he has so strongly entrenched himself in my heart,

The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, Sol.
but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds (or trenches)
casting down imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, every thought to the obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Christ's Ministers are called his white horses,
whereon he rides about the world, conquering, Rev. 6.2
and to conquer. And although for their persons, they be mean and contemptible,
yet their message and ministry is that power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16
Luke 10
which the Devil cannot stand before. Our Savior saw Satan falling as
lightning from the heaven of men's hearts, when the Apostles were abroad
preaching the Gospel. We preach Christ crucified, says St. Paul, unto the Jews
a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness. But unto them that are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,
1 Cor. 1.22, 23. And a verse or two before. It pleased God by the foolishness
of preaching, to save them that believe.

As unlikely a means in the worlds eye, to do such a feat, as the blowing of
rams horns, to over-turn the walls of Jericho. But what matter is it, how
unlikely the means are, if in the hands of Omnipotency? An Ox-goad in the hand
of a Shamgar, an Asse-bone in the hand of a Sampson may do much: so here. The
Devil must needs down, if God once send forth his Paul's, to open men's eyes, to
turn them from darkness to light, Acts 26.18
and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in Christ.

Oh,

Settle that first (be sure) by sound and infallible evidences: Sol.
See that thy faith and other graces be of the right stamp, effectual faith,
laborious love, patient hope, etc. 1 These. 1.3. and then sing a Requiem to thy
self, as Luther once did (after a grievous conflict) the Psalm De profundis,
Joh Manly. loc com:
in contemptum Diaboli, in defiance to the Devil. Only be advised, not to pore
overmuch upon thy sanctification, which in the best is unperfect, but to take
comfort of thy Justification, which is complete, and absolute. In confident
consideration whereof, St. Paul triumphantly cries out; Romans 8.33, 34
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? so long as it is God
that justifies? Or, as Austin reads it, Shall God that justifies us? Who is he
that condemns? Do Angels? No, they rejoice in our conversion, and call us
their fellow servants. But who then? Do the insensible or unreasonable
creatures? They, in their kind are in covenant with us, Hos. 2.18. and in
earnest expectation groan, nay travel together with us, waiting (and, as it
were lying bed-ridden the while) for our full manifestation, ^^en the
redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.19, etc. But who is it then? Do our own hearts
condemn us? No neither, if not bemisted, and abused by Satan: for being
justified by faith, we have so far peace with God, that we glory in
tribulation by the confident intergatory of a good conscience toward God. Romans
5.1.3 (...). 1 Pet. 3.21 1 John 3.20
But say our own hearts do wrongfully accuse us, yet God is greater then our
hearts, as well for good as for evil; to do us right, notwithstanding a
misgiving, or misguided heart of our own. But say then: who is he that
condemns us? Is it the Devil and his wicked imps? Let them do their worst.
(...). Rev. 12.
He is indeed the accuser of the brethren: but Christ our Advocate is ever
ready to nonsuit and cast out all his accusations. The Spirit also is in
direct and full opposition to this Accuser, called (...), the Comforter, or
Pleader for us, Yea, what apology, or clearing of your selves. Rev. 12.10
pleading our evidences to our spirits, and helping us upon true repentance, to
make apology for our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. such as God admits of and accepts. As
for that old Serpent (the Accuser of the brethren) he is cast down already, and
all his limbs shall be cast after him ere long, into the burning lake. In the
mean while, what cares the prisoner at the bar, though the jailer and his
fellow prisoners pass sentence of death upon him in the jail, so long as the
Judge acquits him from the bench. And as little need any servant of the Lord of
Hosts stand upon the censurs of earth, and hell, so long as God thinks well of
him, and all the Hosts of God combine for his comfort.

Oh, 1 Pet. 2.11
which like armed soldiers, lie billetted in my bosom, and ever and anon
fight against my soul.

Yet be of good comfort, the spirit also lusts against the flesh, so that
thou can not do what thou (naturally) would, Sol. Gal. 5.17
thy new nature will not suffer thee: as Paul would have gone to a certain
place, but the Spirit forbade him. As for thy lusts (be they never so lordly)
God can easily cut the combs, nay the throats of them, and let out their
lifeblood. My Father is stronger then all, and None can take you out of his
hands. The weak brother shall be holden up (amidst a world of scandals without,
Joh. 10 Romans 14.4
and staggerings within) for God is able to make him stand. He can preserve a
fire alive upon the face of the Ocean, a spark of the spirit, amidst a world of
wickedness within. He can cause weak and worthless grasshoppers to become a
great nation Joel 1.6. a mighty people chap. 2.2. a huge army ib. Esaias. 30.22.
Psalm. 19.5.
He can make the house of Israel pollute the idols, which they had once
perfumed with incense, and to say to their familiar devils, get thee hence. He
can stop or strike back the course of the Sun, though it rejoice as a strong
man to run his race. Naturally and freely it gives light, but he can turn it
into darkness and blood. The mountains of themselves are ponderous and
pressing, yet at Gods command they skip like lambs.

Think the same of our dull and undutiful hearts. God can quickly oil them and
nimble them, drawing us by his free spirit, so as we shall run after him: as a
baldder of it self is a heavy substance, and unapt for motion, but being filled
with wind, it will scarce 'bide in a place. So we being filled with the holy
Ghost shall find our feet as hinds feet upon the everlasting mountains: no
longer shackled by corruption, Psalm. 119.
but at very good liberty to run the ways of Gods commandments.

Its most sure we are not strained at all in God, but in our own bowels. He is
both able and ready both to cover and cure our sins and sicknesses. In the
days of his flesh, he offered himself to his patients, and was found of them
that sought him not. He healed them also of diseases hereditary, and such as
all the Physicians in the country might have cast their caps at. Now he has
lost nothing by heaven, you may be sure, neither of his will nor skill to do
the same cures upon men's souls, as once he did upon their bodies: nay he cured
their bodies only in reference to their souls, and still hangs out his table
of cures, Math. 8.17.18
to draw custom Rev. 3.18. Lo thus we have searched, and so it is, Hear it and
know it for thy good. Job. 5.27.

CHAP. II. The Lord will find a fit time to make up his jewels from the worlds
misusages.
And they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels
Confirmat haec locutio Deo esse suam opportunitatem etc. Calvin in locum.
Baiom, in isto die. Jom significat per Synechdoch tempus certum atque id
praecipue cum de juturo agitur Shindl. pentag: 2 These. 1 10. 1 These. 5.2. 2
These. 2.2. 2 Pet. 3.12. Rom 2 5.16. Gua^^ber. Figuter Alii. 1 Timothy 5.24.25.


This Lord of Hosts will not fail to find a fit time for the making up of his
jewels, from the worlds misusages.

There is a day here specified in the text, a set and solemn day, a particular
time, a certain season, wherein God will make himself glorious, and to be
admired in all them that believe in that day. So speaks the Apostle of that
last day, called elsewhere the day of the Lord, the day of Christ, the day of
God, and the day of the declaration of the just judgment of God according to
the Gospel. And of this last and great day of general judgment, the most
interpreters understand this text. And truly I believe it is partly, if not
principally intimated, and mainly, though I cannot think only here intended.
Some men's sins are open aforehand, going before to judgment, and some men
they follow after. Likewife also the good works of some are manifest before
hand, and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid. Some sinners are here
punished, that we may acknowledge a providence: and yet not all, that we may
expect a judgment. But a day there will be, as sure as day, (whether sooner or
later I have not to determine) wherein God will take out the precious from the
vile, the corn from the chafe, the sheep from the goats, the good fish, and
good figs from the bad, wherein he will set a price upon his pearls, make up
his jewels, advante his favorites, his darlings, his peculiar people, and put
away all the wicked of the earth as dross, Psalm. 119.119. And albeit he delay
happily to do it, because his hour is not yet come: yet his forbearance is no
quittance to the bad, Vide Calvin in loc.
nor deniance to the better sort. God first writes things down in his book of
remembrance, and then afterward executes them, which requires some time
between. But a time he will find, and that must needs be so, for these
reasons, some respecting God, and some the saints themselves: but both sorts
grounded upon the text, and there-hence borrowed.

SECT. I Reason 1, From Gods providence.
Sic spectat universos quast singulos: sic singulos quasi solos. Aug. 1 Timothy
4.10. Curiosus and plenus negotij Deus Tull. de. not deor.
first, there be many things in Him, that may well infer the point in proof, as
his providence, power, Faithfulness, Goodness, and Justice.

First his good providence, which like a well-drawn picture eyeth each one in
the room. Neither is he a bare spectatour only, but as chief Agent, he wisely
orders all the worlds disorders to the good of his children. He saves, that
is, he preserves all men, but especially those that believe, says the
Apostle, he is curious and full of business, says the Heathen, my father
works hitherunto, and I also work, says our Savior. And this is meant by
those seven eyes of the Lord Zech. 4.10. That run to and fro through the whole
earth, causing that none shall have cause to despise the day of small things,
(Gods jewels are little in bulk, great in worth) for as small as they are they
shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubb bell with, or by those seven. And
the eyes of the Lord, says another Prophet, run to and fro through the earth,
to behold the evil and the good, and not so only, but to show himself strong in
the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him, and to give them an
expected end. And this reason is secretly couched in that clause of our text.
There was a book of remembrance writ^ before him: Est autem hic liber
providentiae, 2 Chronicles, 16.9 Jer. 29.11
(says Polanus) this is the book of Gods providence, wherein as all our
members are written, which in continuance of time were fashioned, (had he left
out an eye in his commonplace book thou had wanted it) so are all our
services, Polan in loc. Psalm. 139.16.
that they may be recompensed, yea and all our sufferings too that they may be
remedied and revenged, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord. Act. 3.19.
Thou tellest my wanderings, says David, put thou my tears into thy botile, are
they not in thy book? And there-hence he rightly concludes the point in hand,
ver. 9. Then shall mine enemies turn back in the day that I call: this I know
that God will be for me, Psalm. 56.8.9.
or that God will be mine as the same phrase is rendered in this text.

SECT. II. Reason 2. From Gods power.
NExt there is an almighty power in God (called therefore Lord of Hosts in the
text) exerted and exercised for the relief and rescue of his poor people
trampled on by those fat bulls of Basan with the foul feet of contempt and
cruelty: whereby he takes course that they be not over-trod, or too long held
under by the insolences and insultations of their enemies. But when they shall
seem to themselves and others utterly forlorn, and undone, so that salvation it
self cannot save them, (which was good David's case Psalm. 3.2.) then shall the
Lord be a shield for them, their glory, their strong tower, and the lifter up
of their head. Ver. 3. And this he shall do with a great deal of ease and
expedition, as being Lord of Hosts, that is, of all creatures, by the hands of
whom he shall send from heaven, and save them from the reproach of him that
would swallow them up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.
Psalm. 57.3.

SECT. III. Reason 3. from Gods Truth.
ANd that passage points us to two other reasons for the point; God will send
forth his mercy and truth.

And first his truth: I mean his faithfulness, intimated also in these words
of our text. Says the Lord of Hosts. These things says he that is faithful
and true, they shall be mine in the day etc. I will have a time to make up my
Jewels in much mercy. Now has God said it, and shall he not accomplish it? Is
not his decree his facere? shall he not fulfill with his hand, what he has
promised with his mouth? God is not as man that he should lie: (...). Mal. 3.6
neither is he unconstant as other friends, that he should change: no, nor yet
unmindfull that he should forget; least of all is he unfaithful that he should
falsify. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able etc. 1 Cor. 10. He will give patience under the temptation, a good use
of it, and a good issue from out of it, in the best time.

SECT. IIII. Reason the 4. from Gods goodness.
BUt besides; God will send forth his mercy, as well as his truth, for the
^alvation of his people. This mercy moved him at first, to make a sure covenant
with them, and to mark them out for his own, and does still to show himself
(as he did often for Moses) seasonably and sweetly for their support and succor.
For they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts etc.

So they were ever, may some say. Ob. Sol.


Yea, but then they shall be mighty and mercifully declared to be the children
of God, by a kind of resurrection from the dead, as the Apostle speaks of
the head, and it holds as true of the members. Romans 1.3. Thus God left his
people in Egypt, and afterward in in Babylon till their civil estate was dead
and buried, as it were. As after the captivity, these good souls in our text,
seemed so far given up and cast off by God, as if he had had no further care of
them, or part in them. But they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts in the
day etc. That is, the time is at hand, when it shall well appear by my mercies
to the one, and judgments on the other, who are mine, who not, which are
pearls, which are pibbles, which precious Jewels, which reprobate silver,
which are sons, which bastards; though all things now seem to tend to a
confusion, and no such difference be yet discerned and acknowledged. And the
sooner shall this day come, because the proud adversary looks upon my people
as outcasts, my servants as abjects, my children as fatherless. For in thee
the fatherless finds mercy. Hos. 14.3. And, because they called thee an
outcast, saying, This is Sion, whom no man seeks after, therefore I will heal
thee of thy wounds etc. Jer. 30.17. The righteous shall see this and rejoice:
but all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these
things, even he shall understand that it is of the loving kindness of the
Lord. Psalm. 107. ult.

SECT. V. Reason 5. from Gods, Justice.
LAstly, I might easily (and not unfitly) argue out of ver. 18. of this
chapter, from the Justice of God, engaged for his oppressed people. For being
judge of the whole, earth, Genesis 18.25
(as Abraham once urged it for his Nephew Lot) he must needs deal righteously
between man and man, rendering to every one according to his works. Now who
sees not for present that daily verified, that above was wickedly objected.
Behold we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness are set up etc.
ver. 15. when godly men, o'tother side, are usually held under hatches, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, even such of Gods worthies as the world is not
worthy of, yet such unworthy usage they mostly meet withal. Now that Gods
Justice may be cleared and every mouth stopped, what more requisite then that
God should set forth a fit time to set all to rights among the sons of men, and
to rectify those things which even to godly men, other-whiles, seem less
equally carried, that Gods dear children being propitiously pardoned,
preciously esteemed, and graciously recompensed, the wicked may self-condemned
return and discern between the righteous and themselves, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not. It is even ^ righteous thing with
God to render tributional to them that trouble you, but to you who are troubled
rest with us (if not before, yet certainly) when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. etc. 2 These. 1.6, 7.

SECT. VI. Reasons from the Saints themselves.
SEcondly from God, Sub persecutione Ariana Basillo Magno ista aliquando
injecta est cogitatio: An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit Dominus? an
novissima hora est? Psalm. 34.19, 21
his Jewels, his sons, his servants, his serviceable sons, his righteous
servants, and can such be always unremembred? So some have feared, but time
has confuted them. 2. By their rare qualifications.

For 1. habitually they are men fearing God, religious and godly persons, and
therefore heirs of the promises of good things for both lives 1 Timothy 4.8. And
for evils be they never so many or great, he that fears God shall come forth
of them all, Eccles. 7.18. Many says David the father, are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all: but one affliction
slays the wicked, because his shadow is departed from him. And of the same
mind is Solomon his son. Though the righteous man fall seven times into
misery, yet he has time to rise again: but the wicked at one evil fall
downright Prove. 24.16.

2. They actually express this holy habit of Gods true fear in their hearts.
1. by setting their thoughts awork, to chew upon Gods holy name, and to roll it
as sugar under their tongues, that thence (as Sampsons out of his honeycomb)
they might suck out strong consolations. For the Name of the Lord is a strong
tower; the righteous run to it and are safe. And, In the fear of the Lord is
strong confidence, and his children have a place of refuge. Prove. 10. Prove.
14.26
Now shall the saints think upon Gods name, and he not think upon their needs?
Yea, I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of
peace, and not of evil, and all to give you an expected end. Jer. 29.10, 11
For after 70. years be accomplished at Babylon (lo they must have their time
of suffering, as he has his of saving) I will visit you, and perform my good
word toward you, to cause you to return to this place. 2. By setting their
tongues a work to vent those holy thoughts of theirs, as opportunity was
offered: And first for the vindicating of Gods glory so much opposed and
obscured by those abovesaid Belialists moved with a great zeal for the Lord of
hosts, as Elias once was against the pleaders for Baals service, and saying (as
some will have this text to be read) Verily the Lord (whom you blasphemously
charge with deep oscitancy or foul iniquity) does harken and hear, both your
detestable contumelies, and his peoples pious performances, and there is a book
of remembrance written before him etc. Next, they spoke often one to another,
as often as they met and might, for mutual help and encouragement: stirring up
themselves among themselves to take better hold of God; and not, by a shameful
recidivation or comporting with the times, to lose those things that they had
wrought, but that they might receive a full reward. a Ioh.
Thus were those ancient Christians occupied both within doors and without, at
home in their own hearts and houses, and abroad also among their foes on the
one hand, and their friends on the other: and what their practice was then is
still the guise of godly persons. Now should God in the meanwhile be
unrighteous to forget their work, and labor of love, that they have showed
toward his Name, Heb. 6.10
which they have stoutly vindicated, and toward his saints to whose souls they
have ministered, and do minister by wholesome admonition, and Christian
encouragement?

SECT. VII. When God will make up his Jewels.
BUt what is that time, and when is that day,

1. Generally and indefinitely, at any time, no one day excepted, or exempted.
God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. Psalm.
7.11. Thus God judged David, that is, he justified him, and avenged his
qua^rell, when he was angry with Nabal the churl, Nabal pamphagus.
and after ten days sickness struck him with death. Blessed be the Lord,
(says he upon the news thereof) that has judged the cause of my rebuke at the
hand of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.39
and so has cleared his own glory, and mine integrity. There is no time
wherein the righteous may not rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, Psalm. 58.10
11
and wash his feet in the blood of the wicked: So that he shall be able to say,
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, Verily He is a Go^ that judges in
the earth.

Particularly, and for instance, there are three more special days of
deliverance to the people of God.

First, in an exigence, and utmost distress, when they know not what to do
with Jehosaphat, nor whither to turn them with David: Cum duplicentur lateres,
Venit. Moses. Capino.
when they are at a dead list with Jonah, and at their wits end with the
children of Israel under the Egyptian bondage, and at the red sea: when the
children are come to the birth and there is not strength to bring forth, as in
Hezekiah's days. Senacherib had already in his hopes and conceit swallowed up
the city, Omnibus Judaeis, per^^de ac si unum jugulum haberem, extremum ictum
intentabat. Bucholc Statuae Senache ihi inscriptum refert Herodot lib 2. (...).
1 Sa 23 26, 27 Esaias 37.7, 9 Canes lingunt ulcera Lezari. Turca mitigat edictum
Augustanum. SculAnnal.
and was fetching his deadly blow at all the people of God, as if they had all
had but one neck: when God put a hook into the nostrills of that great
Leviathan, and turned him back: yea sent sorth an Angel that destroyed his
army, to the terror of other nations. God delights to bring his people to the
mount with Abraham, yea to the very brow of the hill (as the Nazarenes brought
our Savior Luke 4.) till their feet slip, and then delivers them. In the Mount
will the Lord be seen for the saving of his Isaacs from the fatal stroke, of
his Peter's from the destroying sword, of his Daniels from the lions gripe, of
his whole Church from Hamans plots and Papists conspiracies. When Saul had
hemmed David in on every side to take him, there came a messenger (in the nick)
to Saul saying, Have thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land.
When Senacherib had taken all the defenced cities of Judah, and was advancing
toward Jerusalem, God sent a blast upon him, and made him hear a rumor that
Tirhakab King of Ethiopia was come forth to make war with him. When Charles
the fifth was mustering his forces to root out the Lutheran heresy out of
Germany, he was called off by God to fight with the Turk who at that very time
made an irruption into Hungary, and the cosine countries.

Secondly, in a common calamity, in an overflowing scourge, a sweeping shower,
that takes all before it. Such as was that horrible devastation and destruction
of Jerusalem, first by Nebuchadnezzar, when God manifestly made up his Jewels,
graciously provided for his Ieremies, Baruchs, Ebedmelechs, Gedaliahs, whose
father Ahikam had formerly freed the prophet Jeremy out of danger, chap. 39.24.
and 48.5. and 26.24. As for those faithful ones that went into captivity, God
had for their sakes sent the good figs ( Daniel with his three fellows and
others) before them in a former captivity under Jeconiah, Jer. 2.4.
as so many Joseph's to provide for them in a farre-countrey. Next, when the
City was razed, and harased by the Romans: which calamity seems to be here
principally and particularly pointed at, as appears by the first, second, and
third verses of the fourth Chapter. For behold, the day comes that shall burn
like an oven, Repetit eorum verba non sine spe ie ironicae. Calvin.
and all the proud, and all that do wickedly (which those blasphemers above had
pronounced happy, and high above others) shall be stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch, that is, neither son, nor nephew, as the Chaldee
Paraphrast, and after him Kimchi expounds it. This was literally and punctually
fulfilled upon the unbeleeving Jews, thirty eight years after our Saviors
Resurrection. 1 These. 2.15, 16 Quodvis verbum exaggerat crimen. Rolloc. in loc.
Joseph de bell. Jud lib 6. c 4. and l. 7. c. 18
Who forasmuch as they would not know, at the least in that their day, the
things that belonged to their peace: but both kill led the Lord Jesus, and their
own Prophets and Apostles, being displeasing to God, and thwart to all men, so
filling up the measure of their sins, therefore came wrath upon them to the
utmost. But what will God do for his Jewels in this common combustion, in this
utter desolation, and dissolution of the Jewish Nation? See what follows: But
unto you that fear my Name (the proper badge and character of a true Christian)
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, (It is fair
weather with Gods children mostly, when it is foulest with the wicked: At once
the fire falls upon Sodom, and the Sun rises upon Zoar: Abraham stands upon
the hill, and sees the cities burning) and ye shall go forth ( sc. to Pella,
and other hiding places provided for you, and there) shall ye grow up as calves
of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes (in
reference to the burning oven abovementioned) under the soles of your feet, in
the day that I shall do this, (that is, in the day when I thus make up my
Jewels) says the Lord of Hosts. Which second and third verses of the fourth
Chapter (for the first verse depends on Chap. 3.18. and explains it) as they
contain a just Comment upon my Text, so do they acquaint us with diverse
precious pledges and privileges, whereby God will seal up his dearest love to
his most esteemed Jewels, in most afflicted times of common calamity.

These are, ^1. Light, (that is joy) by the arising of the Sun of
righteousness upon them. See Esther 8.16. 2. Health to their souls, and
healing to their state: for this Sun shall arise with healing under his
wings, that is in his beams. See Psalm. 60.1, 2. with 2 Chronicles. 7.14. 3. Liberty,
for ye shall go forth, Calvin. (...)
to wit, out of the strait prison, the little-ease of Affliction, and grow up,
or frisk about for joy (so some render it) as fat calves, and young cattle in
the spring. 4. Prosperity, ye shall grow up, as the Palm tree, notwithstanding
your oppressions: Vtaer percussus non loeditur, ime^^ne dividitur quid^e, sed
refundit sese, and spissior redit. Job. a Woover.
ye shall break out, and get up, as blown bladders aloft all waters, as the
Sun from under a cloud, as the seed from under a clod. 5. Victory: for ye
shall tread down the wicked, and they shall be as ashes under the joles of your
feet, which, erst, rode over your heads, and made you pass through fire and
water, Psalm. 66.12. But when shall all this be? In the day that I shall do
this, says the Lord, q. d. Not so soon as your selves would, for then it
should be presently, you would be pulling at the fruit before it were ripe, and
plucking off the plaster before the sore were healed) nor so long hence as the
enemies would, Hoc esset poma acerba adhu^ decerpere. Cyp.
for then it should be never: but in Gods good time, when he sees fit, who
has kept that key of times and seasons under his own girdle. Not seldom, in
this life; as when Constantine overcame, and trampled upon Dioclesian,
Maximian, Maxentius, Licinius, and other persecuting Tyrants, according to that
of Solomon. The evil bow before the good, Prove. 14.19
and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.

But most certainly at the day of judgment, (which is the third particular day
of deliverance we have to speak to) called, that day, by an appellative proper.
Then, at utmost, God will make up his jewels in much mercy, (and of this last
day, the most interpret it) then will he both bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, Vatablus Figuier Gualther, etc. Psalm. 83.3
and also those Hidden ones of his, that are all glorious within, though for
the outside mean and despicable; together with all their secret services, and
mental performances, even the counsels of their hearts shall be made manifest;
and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.5. That is, every jewel,
every Jew inwardly, every Israelite indeed whose praise is not of men but of
God, shall be graced by the judge himself, Romans 2.29
before a world of men and angels. For without the least mention of their sins
Ezekiel. 18.22. Rev. 14.13. Their good parts and practices only and amply, shall
be remembered and rehearsed. And those not strictly censured (for he will spare
them as a man spares his own son that serves him) but only produced as
proofs and evidences of that effectual faith of theirs, whereby they have a
plentiful entrance further and further into the kingdom of God 2 Pet. 1.10.11.

SECT. VIII. Comfort under public Calamities.
For application: the main use of this point, and that which the holy Ghost in
this text chiefly drives at is,

First then, for the laboring church, what can be a greater comfort to every
good child of hers then to hear that God will have his time ere long, to ease
her of her adver^aries, and avenge her of those her enemies that now revel in
her ruins, crying, down with her, down with her, even to the ground? Psalm.
137. Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. Ovid. Trist. Cuique fere paenam
sumere paenasua est. ib. Lam. 3.31.32 33. Ier. 30.7 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Niteris
incassum Christi submergere navem. Cant. 2.2.
This is the horrid and hideous voice of Babels brats, and Edoms rufflers,
flesht in blood, and used to the spoil, as birds of prey: But what says the
Oracle? Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God, speak ye to the heart
of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her set time is expired, that her iniquity
is pardoned, and so the quarrel fairly ended: for she has received of the
Lords hand double for all her sins. So it has seemed to him, that waited all
this while to show her mercy, and thought long of the time she was in misery,
as being himself afflicted in all her afflictions, and bearing a part. Surely
it is not willingly (or from his heart, says the original) that he does at any
time afflict, or grieve the Children of men, said that church that was even
then under the lash: but though he cause grief (such is our untowardnesse that
will not else be ordered) yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his merceies; he will not cast off for ever. This was her comfort
and this may be ours: when we hear how ill it fares with Gods people abroad,
and what preassures and grievances they groan under at home, say, This is the
time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. Troubled the Saints
are on every side, but not distressed: doubting but not despairing, persecuted
but not deserted, cast down, but not cast off. Tossed the Church might be with
Noah's Ark, but not orewhelmed, washed with Paul in the shipwreck, but not
drowned, fired with Moses bush, but not consumed, pressed with David's baytree,
but not oppressed, pricked with Solomon's lilly among thorns, but not choked,
growing in a bottom with Zacharies myrtle tree. Chap. 1.8. Yet not overtopped:
a burdensome stone, a torch of fire, a cup of trembling in the hand of her
enemies ( Zach. 12.2, 3, 6.) who have but a time Dan. 11.24, 39. The wicked
plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord shall
laugh at him, says the Psalmist, for he sees that his day is coming Psalm.
37.12, 13. And thereupon afterward he infers, mark the upright man, and
behold the just, for (let his beginning or middle be never so troublesome,) the
end of that man is peace. God delights to make fools of his enemies, and lets
them bring their designs to the utmost, and then defeats them, 2 Chro. 32.21
Esther. 7.10 1 Samuel 17.51
suffers them to proceed very far that they may return with the greater shame
as Sennacherib; that their high hopes may end in a haltar, as Hamans, that
their own swords may be sheathed in their own throats as Goliaths. When they
are tumultuating, and triumphing, as if they day were their own, and they were
masters of the field, with Gog and Magog, then shall God come down as it were
in an engine, to rescue his saints, and to dissolve the Gordian knots of all
Antichristian power and policy. (...). Psalm 112.4 2 Cor. 4 6
This he does also for his own greater glory, to make himself a name in the
earth, when thus in a moment, in the turning of a hand, he turns the wheel;
causing light suddenly and sweetly to spring forth, not only in, but out of
deepest darkness.

All that we have here to do is to leave the laboring Church in Gods
everlasting arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27. (...), agens de (...) Melch. Adam. Jer 8.20.
Psalm. 90.13.14.15. Isai. 45.15.
as Moses speaks, crying out unto him day and night; How long Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? How
long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation these threescore years; Thou shall arise and
have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come
Psalm. 102.13. (The sight of the rubbish moved affections of prayer, hence they
knew the set time of help was at hand, as when we bid our children ask us any
thing, it is because that we mean to give it them) the harvest is past, the
summer is ended, and we are not saved. Return O Lord, how long? and let it
repent thee concerning thy servants. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that
we may rejoice and be glad all our days make us glad according to the days
wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil etc.
This was the course that Daniel took in like case, when he understood by books
the number of the years, that the set and appointed time was now past, he set
his face by earnest prayer, to seek out that God that hides himself; and so to
draw him out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
cruelty, and to plead the cause of his oppressed people. Isai. 26.21. A time
there is set we all now, for the fall of Antichrist. Roma diu titubans vartis
erroribus acta Corruet, and mundi^ desinet esse caput. Luke 18.7, 9
This cannot be far by all signs and tokens well nigh fulfilled and
accomplished. And for the elects sake should not those days be shortened, would
they but cry day and night to him that hears prayers, though he bear long
with them, I tell you that he would avenge them speedily. And that he does it
no sooner, may we not thank our own dullness and slacknesse to ply the the
throne of grace with faithful and fervent prayer. For when the son of man
comes (to destroy that wicked one, with the brightness of his coming) shall
he find faith upon earth? 1 These. 2.
such a vigorous and victorious faith as would make Gods remembrancers pray and
faint not (which is the drift of that parable of the importunate widow) to make
mention of the Lord, and to give him no rest till he establish, and make his
Jerusalem a praise in the earth Isaiah 62. 6, 7?

SECT. IX. Comfort under personal crosses and grievances.
NExt, (...). Athanas. apud Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 14. Isai. 26
Heb. 10. Hab. 2 Rev. 22. Psalm. 37. Hab. 2. Heb. 10.38. (...). A military word
from soldiers who recoyle and leave their standing. Prove. 31. (...). Heb. 11.
here is a word of comfort and encourragement to each particular Christian as
touching his personal crosses and encombrances whatsoever. Let none faint or
shrink under the heaviest burden of their light affliction, since it is but for
a moment, as Paul has it; for a few days only, while you would say what is
this? as Jacob computed it: Mourning lasts but till morning, says David, for
a very little while says Esaias, for a small pittance of time says the Author to
the Hebrews after Habacuc, and then he that shall come, will come and will not
tarry. Behold, I come quickly, says Christ, and my reward is with. me. But
what shall we do in the mean while? Feed on faith, says David, The just shall
live by faith, says Habacuc; yea, and make a good living of it too. For 1. It
will rein him in that he shall not run from his colors, forsake his captain to
seek for help of the God of Ekron, to bring it in by the backdoor, that he
shall not make more have out of his, present presures then good speed,
according to that, He that believes, makes not have, he can be content to
wait Gods leisure, and not to anticipate his time. 2. Faith again fetches
comfort and support, as the merchants ship does treasure from afar: it makes a
man look thorough the present durance to the furure deliverance, which faith
saluteth afar off, and rests as confident of the accomplishment of Gods
promise by hope, as if it were already in hand. Faith takes, and individuateth
the promise, applies and appropiates that to it self. He shall deliver thee in
six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. No devoratory evil,
as Tertullian, terms it shall touch thee, tactu qualitativo, as Cajetan has
it, with a deadly touch. Touch thee it may to thy smart, but not at all to thy
hurt. Touch it may thy feet, as Jordan did the Priests feet that bore the Arc,
but sure the proud waters shall not go over thy soul. Psalm. 124.5 Psalm. 94.13
Ezekiel. 36.11
For God will give thee rest from the days of adversity, until the plt be
diged for the wicked. Yea I will settle you after your old estates, and will do
better unto you then at your beginnings and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
Now all these and the like promises, says takes for present pay, counts them
sure-hold, and so lives upon them, and the just by it. 3. Faith puts a man's
head into heaven; gives him to walk with God in affliction, sets him as it were
into the upper region, above all storms, as Henoch: who seeing and walking with
him that is invisible, was taken up even before he was taken up. Here below are
many changes of weather, but above with God, there is a continual serenity.
Now the way of the righteous is on high, says Solomon: and as waters abide not
on ground that lies high, so neither does the sense of afflictions lie long on
minds lifted up in heavenly contemplations. I will not say but such may be
surprised by a common calamity, by a deluge of destruction that overspreads the
whole land: But usually God does either hide his Jewels then in the golden
cabinet of his gracious providence, that they shall not be much the worse for
it, as he did the Israelites in Goshen, the disciples in Pella, the marked
mourners in the hollow of his own hand: Or if they be wrapped up in a common
condition with others, Psalm. 129.3^4
yet God will make a manifest difference in that day. For either he will give
them their lives for a prey (Thou have afflicted me sore, says David, but not
given me up to death. The plowers plowed upon my back, but thou have cut
asunder their traces) and provide liberally for them in the land of their
captivity, as he did for Ezekiel, Daniel, and others, he will be a little
sanctuary unto them there, and supply the defect of all other comforts. Or if
he call them to higher sufferings, he will give them an higher spirit: if he
free them not from the common destruction, yet certainly from the common
distraction. If they resist unto blood, yea unto loss of life, yet in the
midst of death, they shall live, conquer and reign. For blessed are they that
dye in the Lord (especially if withal they dye for the Lord) for they shall
rest from their labors; rest in their beds, each-one walking in his
uprightness. Esaias. 57.3 Heb. 4
There remains then a rest unto the people of God, an eternal Sabbatisme,
such a day as knows no evening, or end, or toil of travel, that great
Sabbath Day that comprehends and accomplishes all the Sabbaths of the law.
These were first the weekly Sabbaths, wherein they rested from their weekday
labors. Secondly, the seven-yeares-sabbath: for every seventh year the ground
also rested from tillage and manuring. Thirdly, the fifty-yeares-sabbath: for
every seventh seventh year was a year of Jubilee. And then, all debts were
remitted, all prisoners released, and all mortgages restored to their right
inheritours. Heaven involves all these: And that great day of the Resurrection
(when God shall chiefly make up his Jewels, and redeem Israel out of all her
troubles, called therefore the day of Redemption of the purchased possession
for Gods peculiar, Romans 8.21 Psalm. 16.11 Rev. 3.21 2 Timothy 4.8 Rev. 2.26 2 Pet.
3.13 Heb. 12.22 Psalm. 16 9, 10, 11. and 17. ult. Romans 8.19. (...). as a bird
out of a cage, as longing for liberty or as a prisoner out of a grate looking
for a pardon: or as one out of a turret, expecting his friends coming.
the people of his purchase) This day, I say, shall set Gods people at rest
from their labors, and the creatures (which now lie bed-ridden, as it were,
waiting the good hour) at rest from all their burdens and bondages, into the
glorious Jubilee of the children of God. Who shall then have all their wrongs
righted all their sins pardoned, debts discharged, bonds cancelled, graces
perfected, desires satisfied, and that heavenly inheritance (mortgaged in
paradise, and long since forfeited) shall be then restored. Where they shall be
possesed of all the pleasures at Gods right hand, seated as Princes in thrones
of Majesty, crowned with diadems of immarcessible glory, having power over all
creatures, and plenary possession of that now heaven, and that new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness. Beholding, and being filled with the vision,
and fruition of Gods glorious presence; amidst a world of blessed angels and
crowned saints, even all the court of heaven, who shall joyfully meet and
welcome them. Oh let the forethought of those unutterable varieties,
felicities, eternities lighten our spirits, smooth our countenances, and cheer
up our hearts, as it did David's; and does all the servants of God, who with
stretched out necks, look up, long after, and even hasten that happy day, crying
all with one mind, and with one mouth, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and
exhaling their broken spirits in continual sallies and egressions of love,
affecting not only a union but a unity with Christ.

SECT. X. Reproof of forwardness and saintheartednesse in affliction.
SEcondly, will the Lord indeed find a set time to free his poor people of all
their sorrows and sufferings? this then serves sharply to reprove that
impatiency and shortness of spirit found in not a few of Gods dearest Jewels:
who because they are vilipended, and undervalued by the blind world, who know
not the price of a heavenly Jewel, and for that they are trod under foot for a
time by these swine, and slurried with the mire of their contempt and cruelty,
are drawn thereupon one while to fret, and another while to faint; begin to be
out of all heart, and hope of a better condition, and to make against
themselves these or the like desperate conclusions: Surely I shall never wind
out of these disgraces and distresses, Esaias 38.15
I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul: My state is past
recovery, I never look to see joyful day more. Abraham had a spice of this
disease, when he could enjoy nothing, because he wanted one thing. Genesis 15. 1,
2. But Jacob was far over-gone with it, when (together with his wife Rachel)
he refused to be comforted, Genesis 37.35
and would needs go down into the grave unto his son Joseph mourning, as if all
his merry days were past. So the children of Jacob in Egypt, Exodus 6.9
that could not take comfort in the sweet words of Moses and Aaron, for the
greatness of their oppressions: The ear that tries words as the mouth does
meat, Psalm 34.
was so imbittered with their extreme bondage that they could not relish any
thing, nor taste how good and sweet the Lord was. This was Jobs fault, when he
cursed his day, and the consolations of God were small unto him. Elias also
wished himself dead in a passion, and wist not that he was to be carried up ere
long in a fiery charret. And what can we say for David, when he repented him of
his repentance Psalm. 73.13. and another time said, I shall surely fall one day
by the hand of this same Saul, notwithstanding Gods promise to me of the
kingdom. 1 Samuel 27.1 Genesis 25.32
Were it not better for me to save one, ( Behold, I am going to dye, and what
profit shall this birthright do to me?) and to shift for my self by flying to
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 27.1 Psalm. 116.11
then by 'biding longer here to hazard my life upon the hopes of a kingdom,
being a mere uncertainty, since all men are liars, not the Prophets themselves
excepted. Thus he in have. And thus the whole Church upon as little good
advice, Lam. 3.18, 19. I said, my strength, and my hope is perished from the
Lord: Remembering mine affliction, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.
Lam. 3.18, 19 Lam. 4.22 Fidei murus tentationem ariete, durius aliquanto
pulsatus, and concussus, facile nutare acruinam minari incipit nisi divinitus
sustentetur. Bucholc. Psalm. 43.7.
This made her desperately conclude the book: But thou have utterly rejected
us, thou art very wroth against us. And the very truth is, the best faith, long
tried will something flag and hang the wing. The best minds when troubled yield
inconsiderate motions, as water that is violently stirred sends up bubbles.
Adoo nihil est in nobis magni, says One, quod non queat minui. But, for this
we must take up our selves roundly, and chide our hearts out of these
distempers, with, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Why do fret? Why do faint? Hope in God: for I shall
yet praise him etc.

Should I conclude that it will never be better with me, either I should deny
that I am Gods child, and one of his Jewels, which were to belly my self, and
deny the work of Gods grace in my soul: or basely and blasphemously to join
with those rank Atheists abovementioned, that charge him with heedlesnes and
improvidence, as one that laid his Jewels at his heels, and cared not what
became of them. Which were to set my mouth against heaven, and like a
breathing-devill to belly the Almighty, whose secret is upon my tabernacle, Job
29.4. that is, his secret and singular providence, who orders my
down-sitting, and mine uprising Psalm. 139.2. who cutteth out my whole
condition, and not only keeps my bones, not one of them is broke, but
numbreth all my hairs, not one of them is missing. Things are therefore
numbered, that none of them may be diminished. Lo, the hairs of our heads are
numbered (as the three childrens were in the Babylonish furnace) not one of them
can fall to the ground without your heavenly father. And if not a hair much
less the head it self. Mat. 10.29
Zion may say, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord^hath forgotten me. But
that was but her mistake, and misprision of the matter. Esaias 49.14 Psalm. 94.14
For the Lord will not utterly cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance
for ever. For a small moment he may forsake them (to their thinking) but with
great mercy will he gather them: In a little wrath, he may hide his face from
them, for a moment: Esaias 54.7, 8 Esaias 57.16
but with everlasting kindness will he have mercy on them. He will not contend
for ever, nor be always wroth, for the spirit should fail before him. When
the child swouns in the whipping, God lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing
it, to fetch life into it again. In some diseases blood must be let usque ad
deliquium, till the patient faint again: Yet it is a rule in Physic still to
maintain nature: so does God uphold the spirits of his children by cordials of
consolation in their deepest affliction. This we should never doubt of, but
constantly shame and shent our selves in Gods presence for our forwardness and
faintheartednesse.

SECT. XI. Exhortation to diligence in duty.
THe last use we shall put this point to, for present,

For the first: It Is encouragement enough to show all good Conscience and
fidelity in our general and particular callings, to consider that sooner or
later God will not sail to requite our labor of love even to a cup of cold
water, or a bit of bread cast upon the waters, and so cast away, (as a man
would think) but after many days thou shall find it. Give a portion to seven
and also to eight: Eccles. 11.1
for he that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, and that which he gives
will he pay him again. Not down upon the nail, it may be, Prove. 19.17
but he is a sure and a liberal paymaster, he gives double interest, Mat. 19.29
nay a hundred fold here (as Isaac had a hundred sold increase of the seed he
sowed in the land of Canaan) and eternal life hereafter. When we have laid our
grain in the ground, we look not to see it the same day in the barn or garner
(as he says of the Hyperborean people far North, that they sow shortly after
fun-rising, and reap before sunset; Heresbach: de re rustica. Spes alit
agricolas: spes sulcis credit aratis Semina, quae magno foenore reddit ager.
Tibull.
for with them the whole half-yeer is but one continual day) but we are
content to wait for a crop till the year be run about, living in hope
meanwhile, and therewith sustaining our selves. And shall we not show like
patience in waiting Gods good leisure, without being dismayed or dishartened,
though not presently requited? light is sown for the righteous, and joy for
the upright in heart. Lo it is but seed-time with the saints, while here, and
that is commonly a wet time and dropping. But they that sow in tears shall reap
in joy. He that goes forth, and weepeth bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, Psalm. 126.5, 6 Ob. Sol. Rev. 22.12 Act.
13.36 Act. 13.25 2 Timothy 4.7, 8 Gal. 6.9 1 Cor. 15. ulc
bringing his sheaves with him.

Ey, but when?

Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give unto every man
according to his works. David served out his time, and it entered into his
masters joy. John Baptist did up his work, and is gone to take up his wages.
St. Paul finished his course, and has received his crown. Wherefore let us not
be weary of well doing: for in due season we shall surely reap, if we faint
not. Yea, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord: for as much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

SECT. XII. Exhortation to patience in misery.
NExt let this Doctrine of gods day of delivering, and doing good to his
people, patient our hearts, and quietly compose our spirits in an humble
submission to Gods holy hand, and a hopeful expectation of the day of grace,
walking and waiting in the midst of our houses till he come unto us. Psalm. 101.2
It is but a little while that we have to wait: that he futures us yet, and
comes no sooner, it is for the more effectual trial of our faith and
patience, and for the better exercise of our hope and prayerfulnesse. When
that is once done, He will send his Mandamus (as Psalm. 44.4.) by some swift
Gabriel, who brought an answer to Daniels prayers, with weariness of flight,
Dan. Esaias 64.1
9.21. Yea he himself will break the heavens and come down, he will come riding
upon the wings of the wind, he will come leaping as a hind over the mountains
of Bether (all lets and impediments) to our relief and release. In the Courts
of Princes there is (...), Cant. 8
delays, and discardings. But God is quick to help, and constant in his care,
even when he seems to cast off: he hates putting away, Jam. 5.7
whatever he makes show of. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of
the Lord, says St. James: and sweeten your present tears, (yea though God
should make you a diet-drink of them) with the hope of future comforts. Look
upon the husbandman, says he, who, although his barn be empty, and his seed
cast into the earth, not yet appearing above ground, yet he waits for the
crop, and has long patience for it, until he receive the former and latter
rain. Verse 8
And what of all this? Be ye also patient therefore, and stablish your hearts,
for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. And to the same purpose St. Paul:
Philip. 4.5
Let your patient mind be known to all men. Why? the Lord is at hand, to right
your wrongs, and plead your cause against an ungodly Nation. Yea it may be God
will look upon David's affliction the sooner, and do him good the rather, for
Shimei's cursing this day. 2 Samuel 16.12
God gives over the wicked many times to exceed their commission, that he may
hasten deliverance to his chosen, destruction to their enemies, Genesis 15.16
their sins being once full. See for this, Psalm. 119.126. Jer. 51.33, 34.
Zach. 1.15. I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, that are at ease. For I
was but a little displeased (with Israel my people) but they helped forward the
affliction: that is, they were excessively outrageous, above that they were bid
to do: I gave them an inch, they took an ell. Now therefore, lest the righteous
(put beyond his patience) should reach forth his hand to iniquity, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that puffs at him,
Psalm. 12.5. God sees it but high-time to make us heav^e (other-whiles) with
manifold afflictions. But blessed is the man that endures temptation, for
after he has suffered awhile, he shall receive the crown of life. For this
light affliction, which is but for a moment, Jam. 1.12 2 Cor. 4.17 (...). A
levitate and agilitate cervgrum nomen habet. Chemnit Leve pondere ^^ pluma
Cornel. a Lapide. Heb. 5.8 Luke 17 Psalm. 27.14 Eccles. 3.1, 11 Deuteronomy. 5
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. An
exceeding, excessive, eternal weight of glory is wrought out unto us by our
short and light afflictions. God will look upon us as those that have been
judged already, and account the present sufferings sufficient unto us, 1 Pet.
4.13. Good therefore is the counsel of our Savior, who himself was perfected
by sufferings, In your patience possess your souls. And that of the Psalmist,
Wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord. He has appointed a time for all, and every thing is
beautiful in its season. The Israelites had their flesh at Even, and bread in
the Morning. God will be waited on, and give the consummation of his blessings
at his leisure. Their journey from Egypt to Canaan, might have been dispatched
in three days, as Philo tells us: but God led them up and down the
wilderness, as if they had been treading a maze, and held them sometimes a
year together in a place, to their grief no doubt, but for their good, that He
might humble them, and try them, and do them good in their later end. Water was
not turned into wine, till the wine failed. Joseph was not set out of prison,
till the set time came. The Israelites went not out of Egypt, till the very
last day of the four hundred years was well-nigh at an end. Smyrna must be in
prison ten days at least, that she may be tried, and that the trial of their
faith being much more precious then that of gold that perishes, though tried
in the fire, might be found to praise, honor, and glory.

The day of the churches restoration by Christ here promised was not performed
of 400. years after: yet when the fullness of time was come, Rev. 2.10. 1 Pet.
1.7 Gal. 4.
God sent his son made of a woman, made under the law etc. Say it had been 4000
years, a thousand years is to God but as one day, because in him there is no
flux, nor motion. Our purblinde eyes see nothing but that which touches the
lid, as it were, when Gods quick sight vieweth that as present that is a world
off. But now, when all was at worst in Church and commonwealth, and scarce a
Joseph or a Simeon left, that looked for the consolation of Israel, scarce a
Mary or an Anna that waited for salvation in Jerusalem, then came the desire of
all nations: Hag. 2
then the sun of righteous broke out, with healing under his whings. What shall
I say more? Christ himself, the Captain of our salvation was forty days, and
forty nights tempted by the devil, before the Angels ministered unto him; his
soul was heavy unto the death, ere his heart was glad, and his glory rejoiced.
Math. 4 Psalm. 16.9. Romans 8.17.
We also must suffer together, ere we can be glorified together, as two pieces
of iron cannot be fastened, till both has passed the fire.

SECT. XIII. Helps to patient waiting upon God for deliverance.
Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12.12.
and for suport, consider

First, that life it self, in its full length and latitude, is but short: the
afflictions therefore of life cannot be long. To live, says one, is but to lie
a dying. Venire me. oper. tet and praeterire ut horam. Epist. Multos often dunt
terris bona fata, ultra esse sinunt --. (...). Hom. Iliad. l. 12. Thetis de
Achille, Dego a de and ago. Ita degimus quum quia (...) minus fit, and nos una
Bedman. de Orig. Rev. 7.16.
There is a time to be born, and a time to die, says the wiseman. He says
not, There is a time to live, for death borders upon life; and a man's cradle
stands in his grave. Oh what a short cut has the longest liver ab utro ad
urnam, from the womb to the tomb, from the birth to the burial. We chop into
the earth before we are aware, like a man that walking in a field covered with
snow, falls suddenly into a marle-pit. Few and evil are the days of my
pilgrimage, says old Jacob. Evil they are, but few and evil. Man that is born
of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. Troublesome his days are, but
soon determining, sharp his sufferings, but short withal: as the pains of a
traveling woman, whereunto they are often compared. Every day we yield somewhat
to death: and death at utmost cures all diseases, as that Martyr said.

Secondly, this life once ended, heaven begins and makes amends for all. For
they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nor shall the sun light on
them, nor any heat, but the lamb shall feed them, and lead them to the waters
of life, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, as a nurse does
from the eyes of her tender babe. Now she is a sorry spouse, says one, that
cannot make shift with an uneasy horse, while she rides to see the
consummation of her love with her betrothed husband. I reckon, says that great
Apostle (that had seen as much of this, and the other world as ever man saw)
that the afflictions of the present time, are not worthy to be compared, or are
in no comparison, worthy of the glory that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18.
For (that ye may see the inequality of the comparison) our light and momentary
affliction works for us, a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of glory.
In which text there is well observed to be a triple Antithesis, with a more
then superlative description of heavens happiness, 2 Cor. 5.14. Mr. Leigh of
the promises. Hicsi usquam. Claudicat ingenium delirat linguaque mensque Lucret.
by an hyperbole above an hyperbole. For, for affliction here is glory for light
affliction a weight of glory, a heavy massy substantial glory; for momentary
affliction an eternal excessive weight of glory. A lively and losty kind of
expression, but such as falls far short of that inexplicable felicity, that
abides us, and is wrought out unto us, by our shortest sufferings; Words are
too weak to uter it.

Thirdly, Rev. 21.4.
consider that its here that God must meet with us, or no where. Hereafter
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. Here we must
have it, or in a worse place. This world is our purgatory, our little-ease, our
washhouse our place of penance, penalty, pilgrimage. Here he rubs off our rust,
scours off our scurf, hewes us (as in the mount) to be living stones in the
celestial Temple. (...) ^^9 54.
Here he fines us, files us, polisheth us, thresheth us out of the husk, that
we may be meat for the masters tooth, as that Father phrased it. In a word this
is all the hell, we are like to have, let us make us merry with it, and sing
sweet songs, as David did, in this house of our pilgrimage. Home's hard by.

In the mean while, fourthly, life is a mercy, though never so full of misery.
A living dog is better then a dead lion. Eccles 9.4. Lam. 3.39.
Joseph is yet alive, that is more, then Joseph is the second man in the land.
Why is living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin. q. d. Suffer he never so
much, never so long, he receives but the due desert of his evil deeds, as that
penitent thief told his fellow. And that he yet lives amidst all, and cuts not
off, as a weaver the thrum of his wretched life, Hezekiah held it a precious
indulgence. The reason whereof he yields a little after. The grave cannot
praise thee: they that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth. Death
cannot celebrate thee, that is, dead men cannot be exemplary, and so shine
before men that they may see their good works, Esaias 38.12.18.19.
and glorify thee. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this
day, the father to the children shall make known thy truth.

Add hereunto for a fist consideration, that no man is so hard beset with
sorrows behind and before, but he has some lucida intervalla, some
refreshings, some respits, and breathing-whiles betwixt. Jobs case is not every
man's, nay, it is scarce any man's, to be visited every morning, to be tried
every mom^^: to be held uncessantly on the rack, and not so much liberty left
him, as while he swallows his spittle. This was an hard case, and might be any
of ours, as well as Jobs. Now that it is not, see ground of patience, nay of
thankfulness to that God, that might have doomed man at first to be ever in
sweating out a poor living (called therefore the life of his hand, Esaias. 57.10
because it is upheld by the labor of his hand) and women to be ever laboring
in the extreme pains of child birth, neither yet to be saved after all, 1 Timothy
2.15.
no though she should continue in faith and charuy, and holiness with sobriety.

Sixthly, God is with us all the while we are in durance; and optimum sola^ium,
sodali^^um can we have better company? He goes along with us into the fire, as
with the three children, and into the water, as with Jonas: yea though hell had
closed her mouth upon us, and swallowed us up into her bowels, yet it must (in
despite of it) render us up again, because God is with us and for us. Hels
stomach could not long hold us, no more then the whale could brook Jonas, which
if he had light upon the mariners, he would devoured and disgested twenty of
them in less space.

Seventhly, God accounts what we suffer now sufficient for all: and looks upon
us as those that have been judged already, yea that have received double for all
our sins. The time is now that judgment begins at the house of God 1 Pet. 4.17
And when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be
condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11.32. Abiathar, though worthy of death, shall
live, because he had been formerly afflicted with David. So shall we, which
have suffered with Christ reign for ever with him, Psalm. 94.12. Prove. 6.23. 2
Cor. 7.6. Esaias. 30.13. Sustine tu illum qui sustinuit te. Sustinuit ille te,
dum tu corrigeres vitam malam: sustine tuillum, dum coronet vitam bonam. Aug.
Esaias. 26.9. 1 Pet. 5.6
who else had been but dead men, had not God chastised us, and taught us in his
law, by those corrections of instruction that are the way to life.

Lastly, consider that God, that comfort the abject, has set a certain time
for our deliverence, a day to do us good in: waiting (meanwhile) to show
mercy, and counting, as it were, the slow minutes till we become capable Job.
13.36. Now shall he wait upon us, and sall not we wait for him? Yea, we have
waited for the Lord, says the Chruch in the way of thy judgments. And humble
your selves under the mighty hand of God, says Peter, and he will lift you up
(...) in the opportunity of time. To prescribe to the most wise God were
intolerable presumption, and to antevert his season, dangerous precipitancy: to
set him a time with that king of Israel 2 King. 6.33. to send for him by a post
with those Bethulians, either be must save us now or not at all, how can he
endure it? Rebeccah was too nimble with her, If it be so, why am I thus? and as
ill-advised, when she said; I am weary of my life because of the daughters of
Heth. And she and her son Jacob should have had the patience, to wait Gods
leisure for the blessing, and not to have gotten in by the backdoor. But we
are all naturally impatient of delays, and too ready to think we should sow
and reap both in a day. As our grandmother Eve, who having received the
promise of a Messiah, thought that her firstborn Cain must needs have been
the Man: and therefore, as pleased with the conceit thereof, she said, I have
gotten that Man (that famous Man, even the man Christ Jesus) of the Lord. But
she was fairly deceived: and so are all such like to be, as are in like have,
and cannot frame with patience to wait for the Lord, as David-Psal. 40.1. Yea
to pant, and sometimes to faint, as Jeremy, with long looking after his coming.

Now the God of all grace, who has called us to his twofold kingdom of power,
and of patience, by Jesus Christ, Regnum Patientiae. Potentiae.

Rev. 1.9 1 Pet. 5.10.
after ye have suffered awhile (for so you must) make you perfect, settle,
strengthen, stablish you. To him be glory and power for ever and ever Amen.

CHAP. III. God will own, and honor his Saints.
And they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up my
Jewels etc.
OF the three points gathered out of the former part of the 17. Verse. Two are
already dispatched. The third now follows.

Nota quod ipst futuri sint Deo inter (...), quo die suum peculium sit
confecturus. Polan.
yea preciously esteemed and accounted of in that day. They shall be mine,
says the Lord of Hosts: there he ownes them. And I will make them up as my
Jewels, there he honors them.

I know the words are by some, somewhat otherwise read and rendered, as thus:
They shall be to me in the day that I shall do this (or that I shall make or
set out) for a flock. So the Geneva Translaters, after the vulgar, Vatablus,
Pagnine, Calvin, and the whole stream of Interpreters. Our last most accurate
Translation, after Tremellius, Polanus and Shindler, has it better, and nearer
to the natural genuine, grammatical sense of the Original, thus: And they
shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts. In die quo confecturus sum peculium,
(...). 1 Pet. 2.9. (...). Tit. 2.14 Deuteronomy. 32.9 Job 22.25 Psalm. 148.14 Psalm
125.2 (...). Plato. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 2.9 Heb. 13.15
in the day that I make up my Jewels, or peculiar treasure, my proper goods and
most precious substance, my silver and my gold, my gemmes and my Jewels, the
people of my purchase (as St. Peter after the Septuagint renders it) and those
that comprehend, as it were, all my gettings: they are as it were, all he has,
that he makes any account of. The Lords portion is his people, says Moses, and
Jacob the the lot of his inheritance. God is their portion, and they are his.
They his glory and gold, and He theirs: they are round about him, and he
interchangably, round about them, as the mountains are round about Jerusalem.
They make their boast of God, and God boasts as fast of them. Have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is not such a man in all the earth? He
avoucheth them for his people, high above all nations in praise, in name, and
in honor: And they o'tother side (such a sweet correspondency there is) avouch
him for their God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, to show
forth his virtues, as examples of the Rule, and as a kingdom of Priests to
cover Gods altar with the calves of their lips, and to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ; in whom he has chosen them (as
vessels of honor) before the foundation of the world etc. Ephesians. 1.4.

SECT. I. Reason 1.
Greevinchomius. Tales nos amat Deus quales futuri sumus ipsius done non quales
sumus nostro merito. Council: Arausican: sec: canon 12. (...). Sic Beza testatur
in vetustis: suo cedice, nec non in comment: Chrysostom. and Origenis plurimis
locis legi. In hominibus beneplaciti Sic Vulgata, In hominibus bonae voluntatis.
The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people (or, a Jewel) to
himself above all people, his mere mercy making the difference. Thou can not
say as that proud heretic did in answer to the Apostles quere, who made thee
to differ? Ego meipsum discerno. For lest any should dream of foreseen faith,
or previous merits, the Lord, says Moses, did not love or choose you because ye
were more or better then others, but he loved you because he loved you: And out
of this preventing love, he chose you for a peculiar treasure to himself above
all people Exodus 19.5. The Original word there used is the same with that in
our text, and the Chalde Paraphrast expounds it by another word, that signifies
beloved ones. For as his love first moved him to make us his own, so being now
his own, he cannot but love us. He chose whom he would love, and now loves for
his choice. For ownenesse makes love. Having loved his own, to the end he loved
them, Ioh. 13.1. and therefore loved them because his own, because the people
of his good pleasure, as the Angels call them Luc. 2.14. and as Gabriel had
before called Daniel a man of desires, or greatly beloved of God. Dan. 9.23.

SECT. II. Reason 2.
Ephesians. 2.10^^ (...). Ut quando quis aliquid opus producit secundum praecepta
artis proprie dictae. (...). Factura. Valla. Rev. 3.14 Esaias 51.16 Ephesians. 1.19
For we are his workmanship, his artificial curious exquisite workmanship,
whereon he bestowed like skill and industry as he did in making man's body Psalm.
139.15. or the third heaven, whereof he is called the Artificer, Heb. 11.10.
and it is called not the work of his hands, but of his fingers, Psalm. 8.4. Lo
thus are we his facture or workmanship, created unto good works in Christ
Jesus, who is not ashamed to style himself the beginning of this creation, and
to say that he planted the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth that
he might say to Zion, Thou art my people. St. Paul also testifies that God
puts forth the same almighty power in the working of says in us, as he did
in making the world for us: that being as great a wonder as this, and the
analogy is very excellent. The first God creates here also is light of
knowledge: next (as on the second day) the firmament of faith. 3. seas and
trees, repentant tears, and worthy fruits. 4. the sun, heat of zeal with light
of knowledge. 5. fishes to play, and fouls to fly: so to live and rejoice in a
sea of troubles, and to fly heavenward by prayer and contemplation. 6. And,
these things performed, man is made a new creature, advanced to a dominion over
all the works of Gods hands, yea to a blessed fellowship with Gods only son,
who rejoices in this habitable part of Gods earth, and his delights are with
the sons of men. Prove. 8.31


SECT. III. Reason 3.
3. HE has bought us with a price: the church is an Acheldama a field of
blood, a field purchased with blood, goodly price the Jews valued our Savior
at, 2 Cor. 6 20 Zech. 11.13
the price of a slave; but with the blood of God, Act. 20.28. For we are not
redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold (poor things to purchase a
soul with, more likely a fair deal to drown it desperately in perdition and
destruction) but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, 1 Timothy 6.9 1 Pet. 1.18, 19 1 Pet. 1.2 Tit 2.14
and without spot: who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify us to himself (by that blood of sprinkling, that saved us
from the Destroyer) a peculiar people, and present us to himself a glorious
church not having spot, wrincle, or any such thing Ephesians. 5.27.

SECT. IIII. Reason 4.
4. HE has effectually called us with an high and heavenly calling. Heb. 3.1.
Peter, after the Prophet, has it) or if any, a disobedient and gainsaying
people Romans 10.21 a people laden with iniquity Isay 1.4. a people of Gomorrah,
ver. 10. a naughty people, Ier. 13.10. good for nothing, but to be cast off as
a rotten girdle (ibidem) and therefore the people of Gods wrath, Isa. 10.6. and
of his curse Esaias 34.5. are now by a gracious calling, and special privilege
become the people of God, a righteous people Esaias 60.21. a holy people Esaias
62.12. wise and understanding above all people Deuteronomy. 4.6. a people in whose
heart is Gods law Isa. 51.7. the epistle of Christ written not with ink, but
with the spirit of the living God, known and read of all men 2 Cor. 3.2. whiles
we walk, Phil. 2.15.
as examples of the Rule, harmless and blameless, the sons of God without
rebuke in the midst of a crooked and corrupt nation, amongst whom we shine as
lights in the world, holding forth the word of life (as an ensign or badge of
our high and honorable vocation) and as an holy nation, a peculiar people,
showing (or preaching) forth the virtues of Christ that has called us out of
Egypt into Goshen, out of palpable darkness into his marvelous light. And this
the rather, 1 Pet 2.9 1 Cor. 1.24
because not many wise, mighty, or noble are called: it is a wonder that any.
But God has made known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which
he had before prepared unto glory, even us whom he has called according to
purpose, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. As he says also in
Osee, I will call them my people which were not my people, and clepe her
beloved which was not beloved Romans 9.23, 24. yea, I will betroth her unto me in
faithfulness, and marry her in mercy for ever. Now marriage in it self is
honorable among all men: Hos. 2.20 Heb. 1.2
How much more when to such and such an honorable personage as the Heir of all
things? Especially since to make her a fit spouse, he purifies her, as they did
Esther, and beautifies her as Abraham's servant did Rebeccah: for he puts a
Jewel upon her forehead, earerings in her ears, and a crown royal upon her
head, Ezekiel. 16.12. he decks her as a bridegroom, and as a bride adornes her
self with Jewels Isa. 61.10. thus is her beauty perfect through his comeliness
put upon her. And herein the Lord Christ goes beyond all earthly bride-grooms
whatsoever. Moses married a blackmore, and could not change her hue, Solomon an
Egyptian, and could not convert her to the truth. But Christ's conveys and
communicates his beauty to his bride (every grace in that chain about her neck
wherewith Christ is ravished Caent. 4.9. being as a costly Jewel set in fine
gold) and whenever he calls a man to an heavenly kingdom (as once Saul to an
earthly) he makes him to be of another spirit then before, and to walk worthy
of God, and worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called. Ephesians. 4.1.

SECT. V. Reason 5.
LAstly, God has already glorified his people (so the Apostle doubts not to
deliver himself of sanctification begun here, Romans 8.30
and to be perfected hereafter) set them together with Christ in heavenly
places, given them the earnest of their inheritance for a pawn of the whole
bargain, Ephesians. 2.6
the first fruits of the spirit as a foretaste, a pledge of the whole harvest,
garnished them with that grace that will one day be glory, nay is so already:
for what is grace but glory begun? and what is glory, but grace perfected; They
differ not in kind: but degree only: whence it is that grace is in scripture
put for glory; and glory again, is used for grace: yea that Gods people, 1 Pet.
4.14
for their graces, are called, the Glory, Esaias 4.5. and 46.13. as having the
spirit of glory and of God resting upon them. Indeed there is a natural glory
stamped upon the very persons of true Christians ( Colos. 2. ult.) such as those
that are but mere civil men cannot choose but honor, as the Hittites did
Abraham; Thou art a Prince of God among us: nay the wicked and worst of men, as
Jehoram did the Prophet Elisha, over whom, when sick, he wept out, O my father,
Acts and Mon.
my father, the horsemen of Israel, and charets thereof: And Master Bradfords
death is said to have been bewailed of many Papists also that knew his piety in
his life, and patience in his death: so much honor God did him, in the
consciences of his very enemies. Vnde indicatur conscientiae puritas, and
causae benitas. Malcolm. in Act. 7 Ephesians. 4 Mat 4 Cant. 4.
Wisdom makes the face to shine, as it did St. Servens. They saw his face as
the face of an Angel: such was the goodness of his conscience, his cause, and
his courage. And could they have seen his inside, they should have discerned
and admired a far greater glory; that new man, I mean, that new world
abovementioned, that after God (or according to the likeness of the heavenly
pattern) is created in righteousness and true holiness. The transcendent
beauty and bravery whereof is such, that the Lord Christ himself, who was
nothing moved with an offer of the glory of the whole world, professes himself
ravished, and lost, in love toward a sanctified soul. For albeit we are
sanctified but in part, and there be yet many flawes, and blemishes in the
best, whiles here, yet he considers us as we are in himself, and as we shall be
in the state of perfection, (like as we do kings children, Colos. 3.3
whiles yet in their nonage.) For when Christ, who is our life shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in glory. Israel, in the meanwhile, is his
glory, Esaias 46.13. a crown and a diadem in the hand of Jehovah, actually
possessed of heaven aforehand, as it were by turf and twig, Joh. 5.24. 1 John
3.14. And albeit the Saints have not yet attained to the full degree of the
shining brightness of their immortal happiness, 2 Cor. 4. ult.
yet from glory to glory they shall be transformed and translated, till at
length they become like the Ancient of days. It does no^ yet appear, says
Saint John, what we shall be, (hence the world so much mistaketh, and
misuseth us) but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, in
the quality of our glory, though not in an equality, 1 John 3.2. For we shall
shine as the most radiant Jewels and Jaspers Rev. 21.11. Nay that is not all: we
shall shine as the firmament, with its glittering furniture, Dan. 12.3. nay as
the Sun in his strength, Mat. 13.43. nay like Christ the Sun of righteousness,
Col. 3.4.

And this 1. In regard of our souls, which shall be filled with knowledge,
wisdom, purity, as the air is with light, 1 Cor. 13.11. Moses and Elias
appeared in the transsiguration, Luke 9.31
and conferred with Christ, concerning his death: the mystery whereof they
understood far better now, then when they were in the flesh. 2. In regard of
our bodies, which though now muddy and massy, shall then shine as
transparent-glasse, Rev. 21.11
or clearest crystal: partly from the glory about them, and partly from the
spirit within them, (as a lantern shines from the candle put into it) being
clarified from all dregs, fashioned like Christ's most glorious body the
standard) in respect of incorruption and immortality, beauty and brightness,
grace and favor, strength, Ecclesia in fine saeculi expectat quod in Christi
corpore praemonstratum est. Aug. (...). Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia. 1 Cor.
3.21, 22
and nimblenesse, majesty, and such Angelical excellency, as shall render them
rather like heavenly spirits then earthly bodies, for the surpassing glory that
shall be put upon them. Lastly, for our totum compositum, the whole person
together considered; Every true Christian is the spouse of the Lamb, and so
actually invested into his dignity, and made partaker of his glory. For Vxor
fulget radiis mariti (it is a Maxim in the civil law) the wife shines with the
beams of her husband; and whatever he has, she has; all is in common between
them: so that as Luther says, there is nothing differenceth man and wife but
sex only. Think the same to be true in the mystical marriage betwixt Christ
and his people. All is yours, because you are Christ's: His treasures, riches,
beauty, glory, power, kingdom, all is yours, so far as you are capable. For
you shall be next unto Christ, Luke 22.30. yea one with Christ, Joh. 17.21.
even as He and the Father are one: and so above the most glorious Angels: for
are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall
be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14? Bucan. loc. co^n. p. 76.
This (according to some) the devil and his black guard (once bright Angels)
could not brook, or bring their hearts to, and therefore fell (through envy and
malice to the known truth, Joh. 8.48.) from their first estate, and left their
own habitation to dwell in darkness, rather then they would endure to honor
such a Mordecai as man, a clod of clay: a bag of wind, so poor a thing, merely
made up of soul and soil, of breath and body (a puff of wind the one, a pile of
dust the other) nay now since the fall, a very mixture and compound of dirt and
sin. (...)
But whether the devil will or no, the Church shall be brought unto the king in
raiment of needlework: the virgins her companions also shall be brought, unto
him. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought, they shall enter into
the kings palace, and be set on his right hand (a place of dignity and safety)
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 45.14, 15, 9. Psalm. 16. vlt.
For quality, there is joy and gladness: for quantity, a fullness of both: for
certainty at Gods right hand, and for perpetuity, for evermore.

SECT. VI. It shall be far otherwise with the wicked.
NOw for Application: this in the first place, David grew stronger and
stronger, the house of Saul waked weaker and weaker: and as Mordecaies rise was
Hamans downfall: so when God shall make up his Jewels, he shall put away the
wicked of the earth as dross and ofscouring, and when soever he does best to
his chosen, Psalm. 119.119.
then does he worst of all to reprobates. This is so constant a thing with God,
that could we but go as far back with the feet of our minds as Gods decrees,
and then come hand in hand with him again, and view all his particular acts of
Execution, we should soon see, that when he is choosing the one, he is refusing
the other, when he is redeeming one, he is renouncing another, when he is
comforting one, he is terrifying another, when he is converting the one, he is
hardening the other, when he is rewarding one, he is revenging another, when he
is quickening one, he is killing another, when saving one, he is damning
another. And yet all his works are holy, and just and good, though he do not
always (as often he does) give a reason of his proceedings. (...)
Job. 33.13. This day of the Lord, here mentioned in the text, wherein (God
shall mercifully make up his Jewels) as it shall be to them a day of light,
life, liberty, prosperity, and victory Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. so shall it be to the
wicked, a day of blackness and darkness, for it shall burn them as an oven,
and themselves shall be as stubble, whereof neither root nor stalk shall be left
untou ht, but all turned to ashes, (in the day that I shall do this, says the
Lord) under the feet of those that fear my name. Then shall the sinners in Sion
be afraid, horror shall surprise the hypocrites, who shall run away with those
sad words in their mouths. Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire?
who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? But whither alas will
they run from him that is every where? Esaias 33.14.
If to the creature, a horse is a vain thing for help, the Egyptians are men
and not God, their horses flesh and not spirit etc. If to the creator, he does
utterly disclaim and disown them: for if any have not the spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his, Romans 8.9
be he whose he will be. These indeed, shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts
etc. such a good man I know, and such a godly woman I know, but who are ye?
Then shall they say unto him, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name,
and eat and drunk in thy presence, that is communicated at thy table, and heard
thee teaching in our streets. But he of to'ther side will as deeply disavow
them, as they do boldly lay claim to him: Math. 7.23.
for then will I profess to them I never knew you, depart from me, ye that
work iniquity. And if they shall offer yet to make request for their lives with
Ham^^, and to speak for themselves, as once those Israelites, we have sinned,
do thou unto us, whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray
thee, this day; he will answer them according to the idols of their hearts, as
he did those of old, Ezekiel 14.4
and say, Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods; wherefore I will deliver
you no more, go and cry to the gods that your selves have chosen, let them
deliver you in the day of your tribulation: Jud. 10 13, 14, 15. Formidaehilis
erat Adamo Dei vox cum leniter and pattern eum al^oquehatur in paradiso in aura
aurorae, nedum cum in furore and turbine etc. Ca ^w. Heb. 9.27. Dan. 12.2. At
the day of Judgment, secr^t things shall be brought to light, as packs and
fardels are not opened till they come to the fair or market D. Willet.
than the which I know not what more dreadful or direful sentence can possibly
fall from Gods holy mouth, unless it be that last irrevocable doom of
damnation, go ye cursed etc. At the first hearing whereof, their very heart
strings shall crack, and their hearts fall asunder in their bosoms, like drops
of water. Well were it with the wicked in that day, if they might trudge
directly on to damnation, and not be forced to see the face of the Judge, that
they have buffetted, and to hear his voice that they have despised. But (alas
for their misery!) it may not be. For after that all in vain, they have tired
out the deaf rocks and mountains, with their continuate cryings, Fall upon us,
cover us, hide us, dash us, and quash us to pieces, grind us to powder, do any
thing to dispatch us, they must perforce, in person, measure the place and race
of judgment. It is appointed for all men once to die and after death
judgment. Not a man that sleeps in the dust of death, but must needs awake,
some to everlasting life, and preferment, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt; as those that have all their evil deeds, as it were written in their
foreheads, so that all shall see and say, Behold the man, and behold his
works. These and these things have thou done, will the Judge then say, and I
kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such as thy self, but I
will set thee down, and set them down in an order before thee to thy perpetual
confusion. As the word goes forth of the kings mouth their faces shall gather
blackness, and be covered as Hamans, and themselves shall be speechless. They
shall be confounded, and troubled for ever, they shall be put to shame and
perish. That men may know that he, whose name is Jehovah, is the most high over
all the earth. Psalm. 83.17, 18. Enoch foretold this day of judgment before
Noah foretold the flood. That day is longer ere it comes, but shall be more
terrible when it is come.

SECT. VII. Terror to those that set themselves against the Saints.
Secondly, Daniel, highly favored inheaven, Dan. 9. (...). Luke 1. (...). Act.
7. Heb. 12. Romans 8 Psalm. 45. 1 Cor. 4.13. Romans 3.8 Nemo me impune lacessit.
Irascipop. Romans nemo sapienter possit. Tacit.
as Mary, dearlings to the Almighty, as David, fair to God as Moses, and not
only faithful as he in all Gods house as servants, but such as have a nail and
a name there, better then of sons and of daughters Esaias 58.5. For they are the
firstborn whose names are written in heaven, as free denisons: yea, they are
heirs of God, and coheires with Christ, who is not ashamed to call them
brethren, fellows, friends, favorites, any thing, every thing that may evidence
the dear respects he bears unto them. Now were it a wise-mans part to fall out
with the Kings favorite? to lowre upon his son and heir? to deface his
picture, to tread under foot his Jewels, to spit upon his royal robe, or
imperial diadem? How as Balaam slain by the Lord, for but wishing evil to his
Israel? Goliath for but defying his host? Nabal for reviling his David, which
was scandalum Magnatum, and in the new Testament termed blasphemy? How was Cain
schooled for but scowling upon Abel? and Laban threatened for but following
after Jacob? and Abimelech plagued for but an unwittingabuse to Abraham? Thus
he suffered none to do them wrong, yea, he reproved even kings for their sakes
Psalm. 105.14. will ye know the reason? he remembered his covenant to Abraham,
and his oath to Israel, ver. 8.9. There is a straight league betwixt God and
his people, such as was that betwixt Jehosaphat and Ahab, nay such as passed
betwixt David and Abiatbar. Look what David said once to him, the same says
god to his. Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeks my life, seeks
thy life, but with me shall thou be in safeguard. He is a Sun, says the
Psalmist, to refresh his people, 1 Samuel 22.23 Psalm. 84.11
and a shield to shelter them. As the shield is betwixt the body and the dart,
so is God betwixt his people and their hurt. He carries them on his wings, as
the Eagle does her young; so that there is no wounding of them but through his
sides, Deuteronomy. 32.11 Aquilae pullos suos in alis portant, alites reliqui inter
pedes. Munster ^ ex rabbi Solomon. Zach. 3.8 Acts 9.4 2 King. 19.22
nay no touching of them, but ye touch the apple of his Eye.

As the eye is vexed with the least mote that gets into it, so is he with the
least indignity done to his people. If Saul tread upon the least toe in Christ's
my sticall body, the head will try out from heaven, why hurtest thou me? If
Rabshakeh rail upon Hezekiah, Against whom have thou railed, says God, and
whom have thou provoked to wrath? even the Holy one of Israel. In pushing at
any of these lively stones in Gods temple, men spurn at the cornerstone it
self, and so kick against the pricks. In offending the least of Christ's little
ones, they presently proclaim open war against Him; who keeps all their
bones, bottles up all their tears, yea numbreth all their hairs, not one of
them is diminished, but he accounts himself damnified. You know how dearly the
proud Ammonites paid for the hair they shaved off from David's servants. 2 Samuel
10 Luke 18.7 1 Samuel 2 Psalm. 91
And shall not the son of David avenge his own elect, though he bear long with
them? He keeps the very feet of his Saints, says holy Hannah, and charge
his angels with them, to bear them in their hands, lest at any time they dash
their feet against a stone. If they stumble and fall, yet they shall get up
again: for the Lord puts under his hand Psalm. 37.24. Yea the everlasting arms
are underneath Deuteronomy. 33.27. Am. 1^
They that swear by God and Malchom shall fall (as old Eli did) and never rise
again: but the Saints of God, though Ioseph-like, they fall into a pit, yet,
as prisoners of hope, they shall come forth, by the blood of the covenant.
Zach. 9.10. Good Mordecai, a Jew, may fall before a Persian and get up again;
yea prevail and prosper. But if wicked Haman begin to fall before a Jew, (that
is in covenant with God) he can neither stay when he stumbles, Esth. 6.14
nor rise when he is down. God himself is so far interested and engaged in the
quarrels of such (as I was saying erewhile) that who so touches them, touches
the ball of his Eye. The eye is a tender part we know, and a small matter
offends it. God is every whit as choice and as chary of his people, What part
is more sensible of the least touch then the eye? or being hurt canseth greater
sm^rt and rage? or if put out, brings more deformity to the face? God is as
tender of us etc Pemble on Zach. 2.8
as a man is of his eyes. Now a good thump on the back is better borne then a
light touch on the eye. Take heed, I advise you, how you meddle with Gods Eye,
lest you hear of him to your cost. For although we must turn the other cheek
also, yet he will not take a blow on the eye for the proudest of them all. No
man will stand still while his eyes are pecked out, much less will God. Thou
know, says dying David to his son Solomon, what Ioab did to me. He means
it of the slaugher of Abner and Amasa, which David appropriats, and makes it
his own case. The sovereign is smitten in the subject, neither is it other
then just, that the arraignement of mean Malefactors runs, in the style of
wrong to to the Kings Crown and dignity. Gods people are his crown, let none
presume to attempt against it: his dignity, his glory, let none turn it into
shame Psalm. 4.3. His pearls, let no swine trample them, his holy things, let
no dogs profane them, by holding their lives madness, and their ends without
honor, by speaking basely of their persons, actions, sufferings, as if they
were vile and inglorious. It was an heavy indictment doubtless Psalm. 14.6. You
have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge. Thus
those miscreants, that mocked and railed at Christ upon the cross, upbraided
him not with any evil, but only for the good he had done in saving others, for
his trust in God, and prayers to God. Thus also they deal with David, they
that render evil for good, are mine adversaries (or hate me like devils) and
why? Psalm. 38.20 they satanically hate me.
Because I do the thing that good is. And the very truth is, that were wicked
men's insides turned outward, it would well appear, that when they disgrace
those that make conscience of their ways under the infamous names of puritans,
singularitans, zelots, and the like terms of reproach, it is for the good that
is in them, and for the true glory that God has stamped upon their persons and
performances. This savours strongly of the Devil of hell, Tertull. 1 Ioh. 3.12
Graecinum Julium virum egregium Caesar occidit ob hoc unum, quod melior vir
erat quam esse quemquam tyranno expediret. Sen. l. 2. de benef. c. 21.
whose property it is to hate and persecute any footstep of Gods holy image,
wherever he finds it (as the Tigre if he see but the picture of a man, he
flies upon it and tears it to pieces) And it proves men to be the posterity of
Cain, the devils Patriarch, as one calls him, who was of that wicked one (of
the serpents seed) and slew his brother, And wherefore slew he him, but because
his own works were evil, and his brothers good? That was all the quarrel
then, and is still. All that viperous brood bear an aching tooth to the better
sort, they do maliciously and mortally hate all holy impressions of grace
wrought upon any by the sanctifying spirit, though they restrain sometimes the
expression and exercise of this hatred for advantage and in policy, by
accident, and for by-respects, it may be.

SECT. 8. 9. 10. Exhortation to honor them that fear the Lord: and what great
cause men have and shall have so to do.
LEt us that know and profess better things approve our selves to be of the
family of heaven, contemning a vile person, though never so glorious a
magnifico in the worlds eye and esteem, but honoring them that fear the Lord,
though never so much under-prized and vilipended by the wicked of the earth.
This is a note of Gods houshold-servant Psalm. 15.4. Nabal shall not be styled
Nadtb. 1 Ioh. 4.17. 1 Pet. 2.17
and of one that has share in Christ's kingdom, wherein the vile person shall
no more be called liberal, nor the churl bountiful. Esaias 32.5. Further,
would we have boldness in that last and great day, and be able to lift up our
faces before the son of man, let love be perfect in us toward the brotherhood,
loving them in truth, and for the truths sake, and being ready to serve the
saints in love, to wash, yea to kiss their very feet, and to lay down our
lives for the brethren if called thereunto. And because this can never be done,
except men see more in them then ordinary to move them; labor and learn to
know the price of a saint, and to esteem them very highly in love, for their
worths sake. The Jews tell us, and truly, that those seventy souls that went
with Jacob into Egypt were as much worth as all the seventy Nations of the
world besides. It is not for nothing (sure) that the saints are called All
things Coloss. 1.20. and Every creature Mar. 16.15. Mat. 5. Is. 6.11. statumen
terrae. Tren.
and the salt of the earth, that keep the rest from putre fying the substance
and support of the earth, that keep the rest from shattering, I bear up the
pillars of it, says David, and the Innocent delivers the Island, says
Eliphaz. Job. 22.30.

For their sakes it is that God spares and prospers the wicked as he did Laban
for Jacobs sake, Potiphar for Joseph's, Sodom for Lots, when they were carried
captive by Kederlaomer. Whereas else he would make a short work upon the earth,
Romans 9.28. If the mourners were once marked, and set safe out of harms way, he
would soon say to the Angel, Ezekiel 9.
Smite and spare not. Look what Elisha once said to Jehoram King of Israel, the
same says God to all ungodly persons. Surely were it not that I regard the
presence of Iehoshaphat the good king of Judah, 2 King. 3.14
I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. Add hereunto, that God not only
spares, and blesses, but also graceth and gifteth the wicked with excellent
abilities and endowments for his peoples behoof and benefit: as Saul with a
spirit of government for Isreal's sake, and of prophecy, for David's safety: the
Egyptians with Jewels for the use of the sanctuary, and those that shall hear,
Depart ye, with the power of prophesying and doing miracles for the Churches
use and benefit: Nay more, Prove. 21.18
the wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressour for the
upright. Thus God gave Egypt, for Isreal's ransom Isa. 43.3, 4. I gave Ethiopia
and Seba for thee. And why? Since thou wast precious in my sight thou have been
honorable, and I have loved thee: Therefore will I give men for thee, and
people for thy life. Thus is the righteous delivered out of trouble, and the
wicked comes in his stead. Prove. 11.8.

SECT. IX.
OH but we see it otherwise often, that those you call righteous are not
delivered. Ob. Sol.
And what more sure then sight?

First, sight (though the most certain sense) may be deceived about its own
object, if it want a clear middle. For example: A man beholds a staff, part
through the clear air, and part through the dark water, and so deems it
crooked, when indeed it is straight: So the purblind world beholding the
Christian life thorough the dark middle of prejudice, judges it miserable and
disconsolate: not knowing that to the righteous there arises light out of
darkness, joy out of grief, good out of evil, comforts out of crosses, and
those equivalent to deliverances. Those mentioned in that little book of
Martyrs Heb. 11. though tortured and tympanized, yet they would not be
delivered, that they might obtain a better resurrection. (...).
It was never merrier with the three children then in the midst of the furnace
where the son of God was walking with them. Dan. 3. Genesis 28.
Jacobs heart was never so light as when his head lay hardest.

Secondly, there is a double deliverance: One keeping us from the evil, and
another keeping us under it, that it shall not hold us, much less hurt us. And
this later way, at least, every of Gods Jewels is made up and delivered. For,
though ye have layne among the pots, all burnt and swooty, yet shall ye be as
the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers of yellow gold. Psalm.
68.13
Delivered then the righteous are, we see, though not delivered. That they are
not here fully freed from trouble, they may thank themselves in a great
measure. For as the subjection of the creature to us depends upon our
subjection to God; and our peace with men upon our keeping peace with him, Job
5.23. So our subjection to God, and peace with him here being only inchoate and
imperfect, we recover our safety from the creatures and peace with men, but in
part, and unperfectly. But look what is wanting therein, is recompensed with
spiritual peace even here, Ioh. 16 ^3. how much more hereafter?

And say that God suffer his Jewels to be killed all day long, and counted as
sheep to the slaughter: yet precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of
his saints, Psalm. 116.15 Romans 8.
and neither life, nor death, shall sunder them from Gods love in Christ Jesus.
So that if they 'scape not his sword without, yet they shall 'scape the terror
within, which is that that sets an edge upon the sword, and makes it enter into
the soul. The godly man shall be able in the worst times to call his soul to
rest with David, Psalm. 116.7 1 Samuel 30.6 Luc. 21. Deuteronomy. 20.
and to comfort himself in the Lord his God in a common combustion, then when
others shall be at their wits ends, and even mad again for the sight of their
eyes, and perplexity of their spirits. Death, he knows is the worst that can
befall him, and that (ever since it ran through the veins of Christ crucified)
is so sweetened unto him, that he is little or no whit amazed at the foregoing
gripes, which are but as the throws of Childbirth, by which the soul is borne
out of this loathsome body into endless felicity. Oh therefore the safety and
dignity of a true Christian, whom very pain eases, whom death reviveth, whom
dissolution uniteth, whom lastly his very corruption preserves, and sin
glorifieth!

As for our full deliverance from all annoyances, we groan within our selves
and with patience wait for it, even the redemption of our bodies Romans 8.23, 24.
Pectatum tametsi non bonum, tamen in b^num. Aug.
And when that happy day once begins to shine forth, then look up if ever, for
your redemption draws nigh, Luc. 21.28. The Lord Christ will then lift up
your heads as Pharaoh did his Butlers, take you from the prison to the palace,
and restore you to your ancient honors and offices loft in Adam: as to be
Kings, Priesty, Judges, Benchers etc. He shall say unto you then as once to
Israel, Behold I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better
unto you then at your beginnings, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. Ezekiel.
36.11
This meditation settled David ^^eedingly Psalm. 17. where having spoken of the
men of this world, Psalm. 17.15
which have their portion here, he presently subjoynes, As for me, I shall
behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake (that is,
out of the dust of death) with thine image. This also kept Jobs head above
water, when else he had been overwhelmed with floods of affliction. Job 19.25,
26
I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. And though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. Daniel 12.1, 2. Though things be
otherwise darkly delivered, yet when the Jews were to lose land and life, then
plainly the Resurrection is named. And Heb. 11.35. we read of some that were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Joh. 11.24
I know, says Martha, that my brother shall rise at the Resurrection, at the
Consolation, says the Syriack Translator. And well he might call it the
Consolation to the righteous, for these prerogatives and privileges that shall
befall all such in that day.

SECT. X.
FIrst, to sleep, and to sleep in Jesus, and to be dead in Christ, who shall
raise our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body, etc. like
unto the Angels in heaven, Mat 22.30. nay like unto God himself, whom they
shall resemble as children do their father. Luke 20.36
Hence they are called, children of the resurrection, in a like sense, as when
God raised up Jesus again, he said, (as the Apostle Paul applies it) Thou art
my Son, (...) Psalm. 1 5. pro quo Graecus interpres reddidit, (...), unde postea
emanavit eorum error qui resurrectures negarunt. Mali resurgent, sed non
beneficio resurr. Christi, sed illius maledictionis vi quo die comederis,
m^rieris, ad condemnationem. Malcolm.
this day have I begotten thee, Act. 13.3. Reprobates also shall rise again
(though some of the Ancients, grounding upon that, Psalm. 1.5. thought
otherwise) but after an other manner, by another mean, and for another end.
They shall be dragged, as malefactors out of the prison of the grave, and
driven before Christ's tribunal, by virtue of his judiciary power, and of the
curse of the law, to be tumbled thence into torment, Rev. 1.7. but the Elect
shall be raised, as members of Christ's body, by virtue derived from his
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20, 22, 45.

A second privilege they shall then have, the dead in Christ shall rise first,
and those that are alive and remain shall be caught up, together with them, in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.16, 17.

Thirdly elevation, Revel. 1. (...), Luke 21.36 (...). Consistatis,.i. ita
apparentis ut judicis vultum and sententiam sustinere possitis. Beza.
and look ghastly: their hearts failing them for fear of what will follow. The
godly shall then stand before the Son of man, with much courage and confidence,
Romans 8.33, 34. Luke 21.36.

Fourthly,

Fifthly, 1 These. 4 16, 17.
For as birds being hatched do fly lightly up into the air, which being eggs
were a heavy and slimy matter: so the bodies of Gods Elect (which by nature are
massy and ponderous) being hatched, as it were, by the Resurrection, Zanch. de
oper. Dei.
shall be made pure, powerful, nimble, and able to mount up into the heavens.

Sixthly Aggregation, or gathering together to the sign of the Son of man, 6.
Math. 24. Cartwr. Hist. Christi in Mat 24.31. (...) 2 Cor. 2.14.
that flag, not of defiance, but of deliverance, that he shall then hang out,
those colors that he shall then display for an ensign or royal standard, that
his people may repair unto, not to give battle to the enemy, but to share with
the Conqueror, to divide the spoil, and take part in the triumph. 2. Cor. 2.14.

Seventhly, Collocation, or placing them at his right hand, as Solomon did his
mother for honour-sake, when the goats shall be on the left. Math. 25.33. Deuteronomy.
29.11. where the six freeborn tribes bless the people from mount Gerizim on
the right hand, and the six other curse from mount Ebal on the left.

Eighthly, Inchoation, or taking beginning of the judgment from them. 8. Math.
25.34. (...). Ita ut nihil ad eam salutem possit amplus defiderari Beza. in loc.
For the separation being made, then shall the king say (first) to them on the
right hand, Come ye blessed, etc. glad to see them, as Jacob once to see
Joseph, or as ever any father to see his child, that had been long absent.
Thus, as judgment here began at Gods house, insomuch as the righteous scarcely
were saved: so there, the judicial sentence shall take beginning from the
righteous, who shall thenceforth be saved with a mighty salvation: to the
utmost Heb.. 7.25.

Ninthly, Commemoration or an honorable recital of all their good parts, 9.
Luke 7.44.45.46.
and practices (as once of that good woman's that washed his feet with her tears,
and wiped them with the hair of her head) together with an open declaration of
all their righteousness desired or done 2 Cor. 5.10 and that with such
fervency of affection in the judge, that he will see and set forth nothing but
their goodness, not so much as once mentioning their faults and frailties
Math. 25.34 to 41. For in this day of making up his Jewels, he will spare them
as a man spares his own son that serves him: their good works only shall
follow them. Rev. 14.13.

Tenthly Pronunciation of that sweetest sentence of absolution, 10. Math. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world. A speech that breathes out nothing else but crowns,
scepters, kingdoms glories, beauties, Angelical entertainments, beatifical
visions, unutterable exstasies, sweetest varieties, felicities, eternities.

Lastly, Execution of the sentence, and first upon the wicked.

1. That they may rejoice when they see the vengeance, being wholly swallowed
up with a zeal of Gods glory Psalm. 58.10. and 79.10.

2. That they may more fully acknowledge the greatness of their own felicity,
in the sight of the others remediless misery. For these shall go away into
everlasting punishment, into eternity of extremity, but the righteous into life
everlasting Mat. 25.45. Math. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2.3.
They shall not only sit with Christ as Assessours and approvers of this
righteous sentence, but the judgment once ended, they shall triumphantly
ascend with him into heaven, and there enjoy the most exquisit and unmixed
pleasures, the highest pitch of preferment, plenty without want, and fullness
without satiety. Rev. 6.9, 10.
For their apparel it shall be long white robes (washed in the blood of the
lamb) such as betoken perfect purity, clarity, dignity, and festivity. For
their habitatition, they are stately Mansions in a lightsom city. For their
company, the sacred Trinity, the glorious Angels, the crowned Saints. Ioh.
14.2. Rev. 21.23.
And if it be such an honor to converse. familiarly with kings, and great
personages, what is it then with the King of glory, and all those heavenly
courtiers, to enjoy the company of the blessed Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, our dearest friends and acquaintance, whom it is probable
we shall know, as Adam did his wife upon the first sight in paradise, (...)
etc. Chrys^^^.
and as Peter and John did Moses and Elias in that glimps of heavens glory they
had in the monnt? Sure it is, we shall perfectly love them as our selves, and
rejoice in their happiness, as much as in our own, whereby our joys shall be
according to their innumerable number, multiplied and increased.

Next for their dignity, and glory, they shall sit upon Christ's throne with
palms in their hands, and crowns on their heads. Now beyond the excellency of a
crown mortal men's wishes extend not. But the crown we are speaking of is a
crown of glory 1 Pet. 5.4. A crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.8. A crown of
life Iam. 1.12. an incorruptible crown 1 Cor. 9.25. A crown not consisting of
some precious thing without us, Corona significat absolutionem, consummationem
and perfectionem and evinciendo capiti destinatur, quae and absolutiss. and
eminentissima pars est. Scultet. (...). 2 Cor. 12.4.
but of royal excellency, such as wherewith our souls and bodies bedight and
adorned shall outshine the sun in his strength: what shall I say more? but
indeed why do I say so much? For as one being asked what God was, answered, Si
scirem, Deus essem. So if I should undertake to describe heaven, it were
requisite, that I should have been at heaven. And yet he that had been there
(St. Paul I mean) could say no more then that he had heard there wordless
words, words unspeakable, not possible to be uttered. And when he does speak of
heavens happiness, he commonly uses a transcendent kind of expression, as
finding words too weak for such a purpose.

Lo thus shall it be done to the man whom the king immortal will honor in the
day when he makes up his Jewels. Consider him well, as God bad the devil do
Job, and know that there is none like him in the whole earth again. Go forth
(says the spouse) and behold King Solomon, with the crowns wherewith his
mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals. So say I, behold the godly
Christian as crowned with all the forenamed privileges and prerogatives: Cant.
3.11.
look upon him as once the city of Shushan did upon Mordecai when the king
would do him honor, and then tell me whom you have to esteem and account of,
to set up and side with, to prize and prefer in your best affections and
expressions: Not the rich, but the righteous, not the great, but the gracious,
not the worlds minions, though never so accomplished with all the ornaments of
nature, art, policy, preferment, but Gods Jewels and darlings, righteous and
religious persons, Psalm. 16.3. Sape sub attrita latitat sapientia vest. Heb.
11 Sic Bruti baculus apud Plutarch: cujus intus solidum aurum corneo velabatur
cortice. Joh. 6. Esaias. 53.2 Vt templo Dei corporaliter in eo habitantes. Bez.
those excellent ones of the earth, in whom was all David's delight, and should
be ours also. Despise them not for their outward meannesse: the true treasure
is carried in earthen vessels, and there may be a precious pearl in a leathern
purse: John Baptist had a girdle of skin about his loins, and Elias was a rough
hairy man, for his outward habit it was course and homely. Those ancient
worthies went about the world in shipskins and goat skins, but they were like
the Ark whose outside was of goats-hair, and badgers skins, but the inside
pure gold. Christ himself whom that Ark typified, was hid for awhile under the
carpenters son. The carnal Capernaites could see nothing in him more then in
another man, how can this man, said they, give us his flesh to eat? he had no
form, nor comeliness, says that Evangleical Prophet, and when we shall see
him, there is no such beauty that we should desire him. And yet in him the
Godhead dwelt bodily, that is, personally: and in him were hid all the
treasures of wisdom and worth Colos. 2. And the like may be said of many a poor
Christian cast out by the world as unworthy their company or countenance, but
readily received, and highly honored by God himself the blessed spirit, and
all men that have their senses exercised to discern good and evil. But as the
root of Iesse was rugged and unsightly, so are his branches, many of them.
Howbeit the kings daughter is all glorious within, that is her comfort, black
she is, Cant. 1.5.6. vide Plin. lib. 6. c. 28. and Solin. cap. 36 Psalm. 83.3.
See Ptov. 15 24
but comely as the curtains of Solomon, as the tents of Kedar which were rough,
but rich, as pitched in the deserts of Arabia. Gods servants are called his
Hidden ones. According to the fashion of the wealthy, he pleases himself in
hidden treasure. It is enough that his own eyes behold his Jewels, and such to
whom the father shows them. The idiots of the world set a very low rate, a
light price upon Gods precious ones: but its all the wit they have, for wisdom
is above to the foolish, says Solomon, he cannot skill of it. It suffices to
wisdom that she is justified of her children, who know how to do her reverence,
in what garb soever she please to show her self. I know thy poverty says
Christ to one of the seven churches, but that is nothing. Rev. 2 Jam. 2.5
God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of his
kingdom in Christ. Who can have the face to despise any one for his outward
wants and indigence, when Abraham the father of the faithful, and heir of the
world, had not a foot of land, that he could call his own, more then a
burying-place? when Christ's mother was not wealthy enough to bring a lamb for
her purification? when Christ himself had not twenty pence at hand to pay the
tribute money, nor a pillow to rest his head on, (...) Syllarium vocabat Caesar.
Dio. Act. 12.
when tired out with hard toil and travel? And who o't'other-side would admire
any for his worldly wealth, and outward magnificence, when Pharaohs horses had
costly trappings Cant. 1.8. and the Midianites camels had chains of gold about
their necks? Judge. 8.26. when Dives ruffles in his silks every day, and Herod
glitters in his cloth of silver: who yet to the eye of heavenly wisdom were no
better then so many stinking carcases stuck over with flowers, magnified dung,
gilded rottennes, golden damnation? who knows not how sharply St. James takes
up the partial Christians of his time, for admiring men's ease, wealth, and
pomp, rather then grace, and true spiritual worth? This, says he, is to
despise Christ's poor, and to be judges of evil thoughts. Tanti vitrum ^ quanti
Margaritum? Melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum. Ber. in cant. 6.
David's desire, by Rob. Abbots
Virtue is a thousand Escucheons says one, and it is grace alone that
animateth and ennobleth, all other good parts and abilities, which else are but
as a glassy bugle, says Hierome after Tertullian, to the pearl of price, or
as gold to brass, says Barnard; and a little of the palest and counterfeit
gold, is far better then much of the finest and brightest brass: so is the
meanest of Gods servants better then the most magnificent glorious worlding
that ever trod upon earthly mould, and so let us esteem them.

Mr. Fox, when he was asked whether he knew a certain poor man who had
received succor from in time of trouble, answered, I remember him well: I tell
you, I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such.

SECT. XI. Exhortation to practice holiness, that is so honored.
FOurthly, are those that are sound faithful so highly honored in heaven?
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Rev. 21.8. Job. 29.
in the kingdom of heaven, and themselves shut out amongst dogs: to see such
as they would have disdained to have set with the dogs of their flocks, to be
set then upon thrones judging their judges, and having power over the Nations,
to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron; To
execute upon them the judgments written, 1 Cor. 3
and yet this honor have all his Saints ( Psalm. 149.8, 9.) For know ye not,
says the Apostle, that the Saints shall judge the world? yea the angels. Who
would not therefore rule with God, as Judah, by laboring to be faithful with
his Saints? Hos. 11.12. We see with what a deal of eagerness, honors and
offices, rich prizes and great places are sought and pursued after. Balaams
ass never gallops fast enough to fetch in profit and preferment. Set but a
wedge of gold in sight, and Joshua that could stop the course of the Sun,
cannot stay Achan from courting and catching at it. In cepeet allium impensa
1600 talenta in pyramidum una extruenda refert Heredot. Viri beni aviditas tuta
est. Seen. epist. 23. (...) Ambitiese quippiam contendere, sic ut te non
patiaris ab alio vinci. Eras. (...) Sumpta est metaphora a procis Zelotypis.
Beza. (...). Act. 24.16. (...) subaudi (...) interea duut resurrectiouem
expecto. Beza. (...).
And yet what are riches, and honors, but golden gyves the Noble miseries of
this wretched life? And what do they that are so set upon them (with the
neglect of heavenly honors, and that wealth of a better world) but prefer the
onions of Egypt, before the bread of angels, paltry pibbles before precious
pearls, thick clay before pure gold, counterfeit coin before true treature?
Oh see and bewail this so great a folly in your selves and others: and (for
future) learn to covet spirituals, to be greedy of grace, to encroach upon God
for more and more of his favor and fellowship as Moses did. Exodus 33.12, 13,
14, 17, 18, 19. and chap. 34.9. To be ambitious of peace 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. And of
pleasing God 2 Cor. 5.9. To seek for honor and glory by well-doing Romans 2.7.
To be zealous of the better things 1 Cor. 12.31. To pursue after the perfect
knowledge of Christ, having it as it were in chase (as St. Paul had Philip
3.4..) as the hunter has his prey, or as the persecuter has him that he
persecuteth. He had once been mad in persecuting the saints Acts 26.11. And
breathed out threatenings, lay panting, as it were for breath, like a tired
wolf. Acts 9.1, 2. Now when God had turned the stream, he was judged by some
as mad the other way. 2 Cor. 5.13. Whilst, knowing the terror of the last day,
he persuaded men, and in the meane-while, he laid his policy and bent his best
wits (as the word there signifies) to keep a good conscience, that richest
treasure, and most precious Jewel, that ever the heart of man was acquainted
with.

SECT. XII. Why.
TO quicken you to the pursuit and practice of this duty. Consider that Grace
is the only thing that God looks after in this world. God looked down from
heaven says David, upon the sons of men, to see, not who were wealthy, witty,
mighty, Psalm. 14.2
magnificent etc. but to see if there were any that did understand or sought
God And he bids the Propher Jeremy run to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, to s^e^f he could find a man, Ier. 5 1, 2 (...). Diog. Lucerna
accensa Hominem qua^^bat Aesopus. Ipris ^^stijs best^^^^or est h^m^^^atione
vigers. and ratione non vivens. Bern in Cant. 5 Ratione homines jurentis
religione hommes hominibus antestant. Boet: de consol. l 4. Pros. 3. Vltra
homines prove nit probitas sola, infra horninem detrudit improbitas tb. (...).
Hom.
that is, a righteous man that fears God and kept his commandments: Hoc est
enim torus homo, for this is the whole man, says Solomon. And it is as if he
should say, He is not a complete man that is void of Gods holy fear, framing him
to obedience, though otherwise never so west accomplished. This is that whereby
one man does as far excel another, as any man excells a beast, says Bernard
and Boethius. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, laith Solomon,
let him dwell where he will. He is of better birth and breeding, of better
alliance and atendance, of better place and office, of higher degree and
dignity. The Holy Ghost styles such the Nobles of the earth Ps. 16.3.
honorable personages Psalm. 45.9. plants of renown, Esaias 5.3.
privy-councellours to the great King Psalm. 25.14. Princes in all lands Psalm.
45.16. Kings and Priests to God Rev. 1.5. yea higher then heathen kings Psalm.
89.27. and better then those mighty Monarks Dan. 7.37. Where it is very
remarkable, that the Prophet having set forth the greatness and glory of the
Princes, Potentates and mighty states in the four Monarchies, comes to speak at
last of a kingdom which is the greatest under the whole heaven, and that is
the kingdom of the saints of the most High.

Hence is it that God himself makes a challenge to all the world besides in the
behalf of his Israel Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto
thee O people saved by the Lord! meaning mdeed, that no Nation under heaven,
how happy so ever, was comparable to them. And hence it is also that the kings
of the earth shall bring their glory to the church (as Constantine did) and
coming to see, (as Theodosius did) an excellency in grace, a beauty in
holiness above any outward trappings, they shall leave the throne and palace
to seek the sweet delights of the faithful, and to sing their songs, Psalm.
138.4, 5. Aencas Sylvius relates of Ingo King of Draves and Veneds, Chap. 20.
that making on a time a stately feast, he invited thereunto all his Nobles (at
that time Pagans) together with a multitude of poor christians. His Nobles he
set in his hall below, and those poor Christians with himself in his
presence chamber, giving them all royal entertainment and attendance. At which
when his Nobleswondred and stomacked, he told them this he did, not as he was
King of Draves, but as King of another world, wherein these poor ragged people
should be his compeeres and fellow-Princes. These HeathenNobles might happily
stumble hereat, as the Saracen Prince once did at a like speech of Charles the
great His custom was to have ever at his meals a board of beggars, feeding not
far from his table. This Prince Aigoland (for so was the Saracens name) coming
gallantly accompanied to the French Court, pretending that he would be
baptized, Viri annis pannisque obsiti. Melancthon apud Ioh. Manl. loc. com.
page 361.
and become a Christian, and being feasted by King Charles, asked what those
Lazars and poor people were? Answer was returned, that these were the friends
and servants of our God, whom we Christians worship. Whereupon he speedily
depatted, desperately protesting, that he would not serve that God which could
keep his servants no better. This man knew not that God has chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of his kingdom of glory. Smyrna the
poorest of the seven Churches has the richest price set upon it. The poor man
indeed speaks supplications, and the rich man answers him roughly. Prove. 18.23
The world despises the poor though never so ve^t^ous, as the Prodigalls
elder-brother did him, This thy son says he, not this my brother, he disdains
to call him brother, because of his poverty. So does not the Lord Christ. Of
Queen Elisabeth it is said, that she hated no less, then did Mithridates, such
as maliciously persecuted virtue forsaken of fortune. Camdens Elisa. fol. 531.
The poorest bondslave (if a freeman of Christ) when he suffers hard words,
and ill usage from his master for well-doing, does herein find acception with
God. 1 Pet. 2.19, Quales sunt plerique verae Ecclesiae cives. Beza.
20. Be a man never so poor in estate, if withal he be poor in spirit, and
pure in heart, the kingdom of God is his, Mat. 5.3. Gods kingdom indeed is
not of this world, comes not by observation, neither consists in meat and
drink, in pomp and outward splendor, but in righteousness and peace (as did
that of Melchisedech) and joy in the holy Ghost, unspeakable and glorious joy,
Mr. Boltons Disc. of true Happ. Epist. dedicat.
concerning which hear him that had felt it, and spoke by experience: Certain
it is (says a late Reverend Writer) that if a man were crowned with the royal
state and imperial command of all the kingdoms upon earth: if his heart were
enlarged to the utmost of all created capacity, and filled with all the
exquisite, and unmixed pleasures that the reach of mortality and most ambitious
curiosity could possibly devise, and might (without interruption and distaste)
enjoy them the length of the worlds duration, they were all nothing to the
precious and peerlesse comforts of the kingdom of grace, but even for an hour.
I speak the truth in Christ, and use no hyperbole, the spirit of all comfort,
and consciences of all true christians bearing me witness. Hitherto He and I
cannot better conclude this discourse, then he does that, with a little
alteration. Be we all entreated with a proportionable zeal and fervency to
incline and enlarge our affections to the pursuit and practice of so excellent
and glorious a happiness, that God may guide us with his counsel, and
afterward receive us to his glory Psalm. 73.

SECT. XIII. Let the Saints see their dignity, and be thankful.
LAstly, let Gods Jewels be hereby excited to a double duty.

1. Let them be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the
high praises of God be in their mouths, Jam. 1.9, 10
and a two-edged sword be in their hands Psalm 149.5, 6. Let the brother of low
degree rejoice in that he is exalted (to that Christian parity spoken of Colos.
3.11.) but the rich in that he is made low: that is, that he is taken off from
that high esteem he once had of outward honor and excellency before his
conversion: whereas now he sees they are but fading flowers, things not worth
the while: and is therefore called upon here to rejoice in that true treasure,
that fellows him with his poor brother, poor in purse but rich in faith,
before him happily in the best things, though far behind him in worldly wealth
and worship. The best is, that in Gods kingdom money bears no mastery, (as
that Martyr said) neither is there respect of persons with God, Act. 10.
but in every rank and degree of people, he that fears him and works
righteousness is highly accepted in heaven. One such shall stand before him to
turn away wrath, as Abraham and Lot, when ten thousand Sodomites shall not be
looked upon. And this is that that may stay up the heart of a poor despised
christian against all the contempts and oppositions of the ungodly. God is his
gold and his portion for ever Job 22.25. Neither does any covetous person so
entirely love his gold (his god) and so set by his hid treasure, as God does by
his dear children: He will surely see to his own (will not every Infidel do as
much?) and makes up his Jewels safe in the golden Cabinet of his gracious
providence; as he did Noah in the Ark, Jeremy in the prison-court, Luther in
his Pathmos, as he called it etc. God will one day right their wrongs, and
clear their innocence, Psalm. 37.6
bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgments as the
noonday. The Church in the Canticles was wounded by the watchmen as an
evill-doer, judged as a dishonest woman, whose feet would not abide in her
house, no not in the nightseason: they beat her, and took away her vail,
branding her thereby with a note of infamy and disloialty to her Lord, Ez. 23:
25, as
and husband whom she went to look out Cant. 5.7. All which notwithstanding the
daughters of Jerusalem, the truly religious, discetned her beauty in the dark
night of her tribulation, and confessed that she was fair and glorious, Chap.
6.1. Christ also passing by her former remissness, and unworthy usage of him,
professes that she was as amiable in his eyes as ever: her hair, teeth,
temples, all, as fair and well featured, yea that she was fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun, that Sun of righteousness, having blotted out all her sins,
as a cloud, Isa. 44.22. so that none of her transgressions could be found:
though looked for, Fer. 50.20. but every tongue that rose up against her should
she condemn, Isa. 54.17. Further, he has provided that every body do love and
honor his people, he has given a charge to that end in diverse scriptures.
Now what is wanting in men, himself will make up, honoring and pleading for
them in the hearts of their very enemies, who cannot but be confounded many
times, and stand amazed at the height of spirit, and resolution that possesses
their hearts, and at the sober and undaunted majesty that shines in the faces
of those that fear the Lord. Now if he say, Grace, Grace unto us, it should
suffice to encourage us in building the tower of godliness. Yea it should make
us hold out, to lay the very last stone thereof with joy, Zach. 4.7. being
vexed at nothing more then at the vile dullness of our hearts, that are no more
affected with there indeleble ravishments.

SECT. XIV. Let the Saints see their duty and be careful.
2. Next, 1 Pet. 2.9 Mat. 5.14 Qui in excelso aetatem agunt, little sacta cuncti
mortales novere. Salust. ad Caesarem. (...). 2 Thessalonians. 3.2 compact of mere
incongruities. (...). Nazian in Mat. 19 Ideo deteriores sumus, quia meliores
esse debemus. 1 Samuel 6.3 In maxima libersate minimalicentia. Salust. Deus in
circuitu sanctorum. (...). Ephesians. 5.15 (...). Posse and nolle nobile est.
Benesicium postulat officium.
as Gods servants must see their dignity, and take comfort in it, so must they
also look to their duty, and take care about it. And thisis to walk worthy of
the high and heavenly vocation wherewith they are called: remembering always,
that they are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a peculiar people, the
light of the world, the salt of the earth to season the rest, a city seated on
an hill, conspicuous to all the country. The Sun may go as soon unseen, as
they unobserved: there are that watch for their halting, and snatch at any
thing, whereat they may snarl and cavil; be it but an indiscreet speech that
falls from such, it is enough to break down the banks of blasphemy. Oh labor to
silence these absurd men, to stop an open mouth, to cut off all occasion of
obloquy. Any spot is spied in white apparel, and the least stain does evil
upon a royal robe. A small flaw in a jewel is a great blemish, and so is a
small defect in a Christian. His heart is made pure by the blood of Christ, and
fine white linen is sooner and deeper stained then course rags. Therefore are
such worse, says Salvian, though they be no worse then others, because they
ought to be better. Add hereunto, that it is some singular thing that God
requires of his servants. He will take that from Philistines, that he will not
brook from Israelites; who thought they might carry Gods Ark in a new-cart, as
those Pagans had done before them, but they paid for their presumption.
Greatest States afford least liberty. His Saints are round about him, and, like
good Angels, they stand always in the presence of their heavenly Father. All
holy circumspection therefore and exact walking is required of them, even an
excellency above ordinary. Every Calling has a comeliness appertaining to it.
The Scholar behaves himself otherwise then the clown, the Courtier then the
carter, the Prince then the pesant: so should a Christian otherwise then an
unbeleever, then a profligate professor, a carnal Gospeller. He should walk
nobly, bravely, gallantly, worthy of God, and as becomes a Saint, considering
that of Bernard, in every enterprise of his, an liceat, an deceat, an expediat:
whether the thing be lawful, seemly, suitable to his state. Not stretching
always to the utmost of his chain, lest he break a link, but beating off a
solicitation to sin, as Nehemiah did to cowardice, Shall such a man as I do
it? God forbid that I should part with my patrimony, said Naboth: that I should
leave my fat, and my sweet, said the Vine in Jothams parable: that I should
look back with Lots wife, having set my hand to Christ's plow: that I should
flinch from my colors, having taken his pressemoney, disgrace his house, being
received into his retinue. Great things are bestowed upon me, great things are
expected from me. Every mercy calls for duty: every deliverance commands
obedience. God has elected me for a vessel of honor, shall I defile my self
with the kitchin-stuffe of uncleanness? He has bought me with a price shall
not I yield my self up to his service? He has adopted me for his child, shall
not I carry my self as a child? he has sanctified me by his spirit, shall I
pollute his temple? He has inrighted me to a kingdom, and keeps a crown for
me, shall I lay it to gage for ever trifle? shall Isay with Esau, what is this
birthright? Oh let there be no root of bitterness, no profane person amongst
you, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright, and is therefore
so often branded for it with this is Edom.

CHAP. IIII. God is a Father to all his faithful servants. And I will spare
them, as a man sparethhis own son that fears him.
What gracious respects and high honors the God of heaven puts upon the
persons of them that fear him, Psalm. 115.13.
both small and great, has been said already. That which follows in the text,
concerns their performances. Psalm. 19.11.
For every child in Gods house know's his own work; in doing whereof as there
is great reward, so there is no little favor showed him, in case it be not all
out so well done. For I will spare them, says the Lord of hosts, as a man
spares his own son that serves him, I will be no less propitious unto him,
then is the most indulgent parent to his most obedient child. Videmus ergo
etc. We see then, says judicious Calvin, the Prophets purpose in this precious
promise.

1. That they shall serve God, and serve him as sons do, that is, ingenuously
and freely.

2 That God will graciously accept the service of such, taking in God part from
them what they are able, and pardoning the rest.

These are his notes upon the text, and these shall be ours.

Deus nobis est, Pater, and nos sibi reconciliavit in Christo Calvin in loc.
He looks upon such as serve him in sincerity as upon sons and daughters.

2. That he will surely show like mercies and mildness to his children in
their faults and failings, in their wants and weaknesses, as the kindest father
would do to his dearest son that serves him.

For the former point: The promise of pardon is here fitly made sub patris
parabola, says Gualther, under the similitude of a father. Figuier in loc.
And the sense is thus much, says another Interpreter,: although I seem for a
time to the blind moles of the world, to be negligent of those that are
diligent about me, of my best, and busiest servants; yet I think upon them
still as my dearest children, and when I may be thought most careless and
cruel toward them, then am I a most propitious and sin-pardoning father, fully
reconciled unto them in Christ, for there comes in the kindred, according to
that of our Savior in his message by Mary to his distressed disciples after
his resurrection, I ascend unto your father, John. 20.17.
and my father, mine and yours, and therefore yours because mine. For as many
as received him, says St. John, to them he gave privilege to become the sons
of God. Ioh. 1.12.
And again, when the fullness of time was come, says another Apostle, God sent
forth his son (his natural, only begotten son) made of a woman (and so by
personal union of the two natures in one Christ, his son by a new relation,
Gal. 4.4.
according to that, This day have I begotten thee, and all to the end,) that we
may receive the adoption of sons. That we which by nature were children of
wrath, and by practice, children of the devil, might by divine acceptance and
grace be made the children of God: who had predestined us unto the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, Ephe. 1.4, 5.
to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in
the beloved One.

SECT. I. Reasons hereof drawn from the causes.
IN which heavenly Text,

1. The fundamental and original cause, Gods decree of election by grace; we
have an act for it in Gods eternal counsel. According as he has chosen us in
Christ before the soundation of the world etc. For which cause also the
predestinate are called the Church of the firstborn who are written in heaven.
Heb. 12.23, And whom he did foreknow, says Saint Paul, them he did
predestinate also to be conformed to the image of his son: like him in glory,
as well as in sufferings, like in being sons, as he is a son, that he might be
(even according to his humanity) the firstborn among many brethren. Romans 8.29.


2. The meritorious and procuring, or working cause of our adoption, is here
set forth to be the Lord Christ, in whom he (as a father) has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things Ephe. 1.3. but all in Christ, and
all in this order. A christian by the Gospel is made a believer. Now faith
afteran unspeakable manner engrafteth him into the body of Christ the natural
son, and hence we become the adopted sons of God: it being the property of
faith to adopt as well as to justify, ratione objecti by means of the object
Christ, up whom faith lays hold. For ye are all the children of God by faith
in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.26. Children, I say, not by creation as Adam is called
the son of God Luke 3. because he was produced in the similitude of God; but by
marriage and mystical union with Christ the fecond Adam, the heir of all, who
has

1. Laid down the price of that great privilege Heb. 9.15. even his own most
precious blood, redeeming us thereby that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons Gal. 45.

2. He has sealed it up to us by his spirit, that earnest of our inheritance
Ephesians. 1.13. called therefore the spirit of adoption, and the spirit of Gods son
(as springing out of his death, Romans 8.15. Joh. 16.14. Gal 4.6
and procured by his intercession) For because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the spirit of his son into your hearts crying Abba, father.

3. Here is the motive and impulsive cause: and that is the good pleasure of
his will, Joh. 1.12 1 John 3.1. 2 Timothy 1. vlt.
his absolute independent grace and mercy was the sole inductive. He gives us
this dignity, says St John in his Gospel. And what more free then gift? he
shows us this love, says he in his epistle, because it was the time of love,
that we should be called the sons of God. So that our Adoption is not a
privilege purchased by contract of justice, Romans 8.23. Prove. 16.4.
but an inheritance cast upon us of free grace and goodness. The Lord show
mercy to Onesiphorus in that day when our adoption shall be crowned with its full
accomplishment. Lastly here we have the final cause of our adoption,:
^hepr^^ise of the glory of his grace. This is the end God propounds to himself
in this, as in all other his works, as having none higher then himself, to whom
to have respect, for he is the most highest. God has made all things for
himself, yea the wicked also for the day of evil: viz. for the glory of his
Justice and power (as he told Pharaoh Romans 9.17.) but especially of his grace:
since all that his justice does in the Reprobation of some, tends to this
ultimate end of all, that the riches of his grace may be the more displayed in
the election of others.

SECT. II. Reasons from the effects of his father-hood.
A Second reason follows from the effects, and those are no less
demonstrative of the point then the causes.

These are 1. Gods fatherly affections. 2. His expressions, both which speak
him a father to all his.

For his affection, first, to his people: Albeit they be but his Adopted
children, yet he loves them more then any natural father does his own bowels.
Jam. 1. ult.
Hence he is called the father by an eminency, as if there were no father to
him, none like him, none besides him, as indeed there is not originally and
properly. Called he is the father of all mercies, Ephesians. 3.15 (...) Paternitas,
paerentela. Math. 23.9
the fountain of all that mercy; that is found in any father: all is but a
spark of his flame, a drop of his ocean, Yea he is styled the father of all the
fatherhoods in heaven and earth. Whence also our Savior, Call no man, says
He, your father on earth, for one is your father, even God. To enter comparison
in some few particulars.

First a father loves freely, not so much for that his child is witty, or
wealthy, Patriam amat quisque, nonquia magna, sed quia sua. Sen. ep. 66. sic et
prolem De mercatore pro filijs suis duobus captis seipsum offerente, ut filijs
servatis ipse interficeretur; lege Sozom. lib. 7 cap. 24.
or wel-favour'd, as for that he is his. There needs no other argument to a
father but that, this is my child. So is it with God. Deuteronomy. 7.7. Ezekiel. 36.32.

Secondly, a father loves hugely: there is an ocean of love in a fathers heart:
he loves his child as well if not better then himself; as Joab twitted David
with his excessive love to his unnatural Absalom. There is also an immense,
incomparable, incomprehensible love in God toward his children, an hyperbole,
an excess of love, a love passing knowledge Ephesians. 3.19. And that passes all
the dimensions. It is higher then heaven Psalm. 36.5. deeper then hell Psalm.
86.13. longer then the earth, and broader then the sea Psalm 98.4. and Psalm.
104.24. a transcendent, boundless, bottomless love, truly exalted above the
love of natural parents, which yet is wondrous great. Psalm. 103.13. Esaias,
49.15. But infinitely short of Gods love, it makes not the tith of it.

Thirdly, a father loves constantly and unchangably, yea though his child be
never so untoward and disobedient, as David did his Amnon, and his Abs^^em,
even to the last of them did he love them. So, and much more then so does God
his children. For as himself is an everlasting father, so is his love
everlasting. Esaias 9.6. and 49.14. His compassions fail not. Lam. 3.22. He
cannot grow out of kind, nor be weary of loving. Having loved his own, says
the evangelist, to the end he loved them. Ioh. 13.1. Frown he can, if need be,
hate he cannot: hide his face he may for a while, but his heart is ever earning
toward them, his bowels are turned within him, his repentings are kinled
together: sco^^e them he does (other-whiles) with the rods of men, Hos. 11.8
Psalm. 89. Esa. 57.7, 8, 9^ (...) Romans 1 Psalm. 27.10 (...) Heb. 13.
but the sure mercies of David he will never take from them. Natural parents
may prove unnatural: not so our heavenly father, he is all bowels: they may
hate where they loved, they may loath whom they liked; but he rests in his
love. Zeph. 3.17. He hates putting away. Hos. 2. David's father and mother may
cast him out, but then God will gather him. Father Abraham may forget us, and
Israel may disown us. Esaias 63.16. But God has said, I will not leave thee. I
will not not not forsake thee. The Fathers and governors of the Church may,
under a fair pretense of zeal, cast us out, and say, let the Lord be
glorified: but then shall God appear to our joy, and they shall be ashamed.
Esaias 66.5. The fathers of our flesh are mutable, and fickle-minded, Jam. 1.17
but with the father of light is no shadow of change, his love lasts to all
eternity without any alteration.

SECT III. Other reasons from the effects of his fatherhood.
NExt, as Gods affection to his children is more then fatherly, so are his
expressions and provisions for them too.

For, 1. Besides his eternal electing them to the adoption of children Ephesians.
1.4. It was he that took us out of the womb Psalm. 22.9. Hos. 13.13 (...). Math.
28.19
that we might not ( Ephraim-like that unwise son) stay overlong in the birth,
and dye before we saw his marvelous light. It was he that baptized us into his
own name, whereby we are called as a child by his fathers.

2. He loves the very places they first breathed in the better for their sakes
Ps. 86.7. and the very ground they tread upon. Hence Judaea, the seat of the
church, is called a delightsome land Mal. 3.12. the glorious land, Zach. 7.14
^om. 4.13. Psalm. 89.12
the land of desires or ornaments Dan. 11.41. yea Canaan, for this, is called
the whore world, and Tabor and Hermon is put for the East and West of the world.

3. He charge all sorts, as they love him to love his lambs, his little ones,
to handle them gently for his sake. He feeds them with sincere milk streaming
from those fullstrutting breasts of consolation, the lively oracles, he brings
them forth butter in a lordly dish Judge. 5.25. he makes them ready and unready,
Esaias 66.11 Act. 7. Ezekiel. 36.25
as new-borne-babes, lulling them asleep in a holy security, shifting them in
their scapes by the clean water of his spirit in their sanctification, and the
clean linen of Christ's righteousness in their justification. He keeps them
from fire and from water, the fire of temptation which the Dragon spers, and
the water of persecution which he spews out of his mouth, as a flood, Rev.
12.4, 15
to drown the^t avelling church, and to devour her babe as soon as it was borne.

All this God does for his children as soon as they are any thing. Afterward,
as they grow up to any bigness, he bears them in his bosom as a
nursing-father bears the sucking child Number. 11.1^. carries them in his arms
till such time as they can go Esa. 46.4. guides them with ^is eye when they
begin to find their feet (I taught Ephraim also to go, 1 These. 2.7
taking them by their arms Hos. 11.3. leads them in his hand, as a horse in
the wilderness Es. 63.13. If the way be too rough for their tender feet, or
too long for their short legs, he lifts them over by his spirit, he charge
also his angels to bear them in their hands, who are as glad of such an office
as the servants are to get their young master in their arms. It Is certain that
no young Prince goes better guarded and attended then a child of God. Heb. 1.
ult.

Next for their diet and apparel: God feeds his children with the kidnyes of
wheat, with the hidden Manna, with the bread of life, with the best of the
best, fat things full of marrow, Genesis 47 12 Luke 15. (...). Diog: apud
Plutarch. Prove. 15.15
wines on the lees well refined Isa. 25 6. Thus he nourishes them (as Joseph
did his fathers family in Egypt) as a little child is nourished. And for
appa^rell they have it of the finest. Bring forth the best robe, and the best
ring etc. the righteousness of the saints, even the red upper-coat of
Justification, and the white under-coat of sanctification. They are ever in
their holy day clothes, their festival apparel every day-being the christian
man's holy day, and he having within him a continual feast.

6. For their teaching and tuition, (...) Prove. 1.4 (...). Ioh. 16.8 Ephesians 5.9
Cant. 2.4 Such comfort there is in Christ's presence, (though but in the womb)
as it made John to spring. Luc. 1 Shindler: Pentag. Buxtorf. Lexic. Cartw:
Harm. The North is a nippingwind, the South a cherishing wind, but both for the
saints. D. Sibbes
they are all taught of God Esaias 54.13. who 1. by his word makes them wise to
salvation, gives subtlety to the simple, and to the youg man knowledge and
discretion. 2. by his spirit of revelation convinces them of their false
principles, refells their fallacious reasonings, unteacheth them the devils
learning, and then leads them into all truth and goodness: for the fruit of
the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and truth. And of this teaching
speaks St. Paul 1 These. 4.0. and St. John 1 Epist. 2.27.

7. Next for their delight and recreation, he allows them his garden to walk
into, his wine-cellar to go down into. He pleases himself wondrously in their
company, be they but two or three of them, he is in the midst: as once he made
the third with those two going Emaus. He sets them between his legs (as it
were) so some read that text Deuteronomy 33.3, He loved tho people and (as an effect
thereof) they sat down at thy feet, or, they were set between thy feet, as the
fathers darlings. Moreover, when he has them there, he rejoices over them
with joy, yea he rejoices over them with singing. Zeph.p 3.17. like as earthly
parents dandle, dance, and sing their little ones upon their knees.

Further, he is wondrous choice and chary of his children, so that he cannot
abide the cold wind should blow upon them. The sun must not smite them by day,
nor the moon by night, and what wind soever blow, whether North or South (and
what more contrary then those?) they must blow good to Gods children Cant. 4.
ult. In a word, he thinks nothing good that he has to himself, except they may
share a part. And is not this the part of a loving parent?

8. Lastly, for matter of maintenance, and outward subsistence, your heavenly
father knows that ye need these things also Mat. 6.32. and it is enough for you
that he knows it. He holds them to hard-meat sometimes, but then they have it
of free-cost, when the wicked pay dear for their tid-bits, and dainty morsels.
Their meat is sawced, and their drink spiced with the wrath of God, Job 20.14.
their very table is a snare to them. The Inne-keeper gives his guests the bests
dishes, but reserves the inheritance for his children: so here, God gives his
people money in their purses, so much as will serve turn to bear their charges
home, to buy them necessaries, and to keep them true men at least; though they
have not to lavish and riot, because he knows their weakness that way; and
therefore holds them (mostly) to straight allowance. Not out of niggardize, I
must tell you: for he could beteeme them more means, and so he does also to
some of his better children, that have grace to use it, and make them friends
with it. But the less he allows them here, the more he lays up for them in
heaven. Psalm. 89.28, and 31, 19. And when they are once come to the full
stature of a man in Christ (for now they are in their nonage) the whole
inheritance shall be given them of the father Romans 8.16. They shall have power
over all creatures Rev. 2.26. and possession of that new heaven and new earth.
2. Pet. 3.13. And if these be not the expressions and provisions of a
bountiful father, pray y' what is?

SECT. IIII. God no Father to the wicked, what ever they pretend to him.
NOw for Application, Does God the Lord look upon such as sons and daughters as
sincerely serve him? but their own bellies their base lusts, this present evil
world, nay the God of this world, Matthew. 6. Romans 16. 2 Cor. 4.4 Ioh. 8. 1 Ioh.
3.8 Ver. 9.10 (...).
whose works they do, and will do, and are therefore of their father the
devil. This, says St. John, entitles the devil to a man; for he that commits
sin is of the devil, that is flat. And again, In this the children of God are
manifest and the children of the devil, He that is borne of God does not
commit sin. Well he may slip into it of infirmity, and at unawares Gal. 6.1. A
sheep may slip into a slough, but delights not to wallow in it. He does not
work iniquity on set purpose, he does not sell over himself to sin with Ahab,
Romans 6. Ephesians. 4.
he does not hire out his members as weapons of wickedness, working all
uncleanness with greediness. No, this is not the guise of a child of God,
but of an impe of hell, of a brat of fathomlesse perdition. They have corrupted
themselves, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.5
their spot is not the spot of his children, they are a perverse and crooked
generation. And yet who so forward as these to claim kindred of the Almighty,
to fawn upon God, and call him father? Will thou not from this time (says He
to Idolatrous Israel, that had in this behalf an whores forehead, a wainscot
face hatched all over with impudence) will thou not from this time cry unto me,
My father, my father, art thou not the guide of my youth? Will he reserve his
anger for ever? will he keep it to the end? Here were good words: Sed quid
verba quaero, facta cum videam? How can thou say, Judge. 16.15 Ier. 3.2, 3, 4,
^.
thou love me, when thy heart is not with me? Behold, says God in the same
place, thou have spoken and done evil things as thou could, thou have
polluted the land with thy whoredoms and wickedness, and have thou yet a sace
to call me Father? Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God 2 Ioh. 9. He that walks not in the steps of Abraham's
faith, Abraham to his father Romans 4.12. whatever he pretends to him with those
braving Jews. Ioh. 8. Tell me not here that God has blessed you, as a father,
sustein'd you with corn and wine Genesis 27.37. given you of the fatness of the
earth, and of the dew of heaven etc. for Esau had as good a portion as this,
and yet a castaway: and Abraham gave the movables to the children of the
concubins, whom he less respected, but Isaac had the inheritance.

Oh but we are children of the freewoman, Esau, and yet was hated of God, so
did Judas, and yet a firebrand of hell. Mat. 3.


Neither is it any such business, as many make of it, that they have had their
Christendom. For unless they be withal baptized with the holy Ghost and with
fire, with the spirit of judgment and of burning, Esaias 4.4
whereby they have so put on Christ, as that they are become the children of
God, by faith in him, Gal. 3.26, 27. Its pity that ever Font-water was spilt
upon their faces. Saul was circumcised, and yet David calls him Cushite, Psalm.
7. Title.
or Ethiopian; and unregenerate Israel is to me as Ethiopia, says God, Amos
9.7. and as Gomorrah, Esaias 1.10. notwithstanding all their external services,
and sudibrious devotions. Christ shall one day rid his house, and wash his
hands of all such unworthy hang-byes, and powerless pretenders. Depart from
me, shall they hear, to their everlasting amazement. Go, get ye to the gods
whom ye have chosen. Esaias 51.1
Look to the rock from whence ye were hewn, and to the hole whence ye were
dug: see what your father the devil will do for you, for I Will take no further
charge of you: his work ye have done, and his wages ye shall have. And since ye
have run out with the Prodigal, and loathing such wholesome fare as my house
afforded, ye have fed hungerly on those murdering morsels of iniquity, the
devils husks, therefore shall they stick in your throats, like the envenomed
arrows of the Almighty, thoroughout all eternity.

SECT. V. Terror to those that malign or misuse Gods children.
BUt secondly, It is a Spanish proverb: He that wipeth the child's nose, kisseth
the mothers check. Genesis 4. Number 12.14
imagine worse of God? It Is more then evident to him that has but half an eye,
or does observe any thing at all in Gods word, or works, that as he takes
notice of smallest courtesies, even to a cup of cold water, to requite them, so
of their least or lightest indignities, and injuries to repay them, be it but a
frown or a frump. Cain shall answer it before the Lord, if he but lowre upon
Abel. Miriam shall be a leper seven days at least, and stand ashamed of her
fathers spetting in her face, if she but mutter against Moses. An Ammonite, or
a Moabite shall be bastardized, and banished the beauty of holiness, the
threshold of the Sanctuary, to their tenth generation, merely for an omission,
because they met not Gods firstborn Israel with bread and water in the
wilderness: How much more because they hired Balaam to curse him, Deuteronomy. 23.3,
4. which when he could not do, God turning his curse into a blessing unto his
children, because he loved them, verse 4. yet for that he showed his good will
to have done it, and moreover taught Balac to lay a stumbling block before Gods
Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, Rev.
2.14. therefore was he slain by the sword of the Lord. Genesis 34.31
For is she not our sister? should be make our sister a whore? said those two
brethren in iniquity: which if it seemed a sufficient plea to them, (as
likewise to Absalom, in the behalf of his sister Tamar) for that barbarous and
bloody massacre, how shall the Lord drench and drown the sword of his justice
in the bowels of such as wrong his children to his face, and do them all the
despite that may be? Esth. 7.8
what will they force the Queen also in the house? will they offend Gods
little-ones, rake into his bowels, pollute his presence with the slaughter, or
but misusage of his children? Job 9.3
Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? Has ever any waxed fierce against God
and prospered? Look to it, all ye that smite any child of his, either with hand
or tongue. 'Twere better a millstone were hanged about your necks, and your
selves drowned in the depth of the Sea, then that ye offend one of these
little-ones, Mat. 18.6, 10
if a believer. For I tell you (Christ tells you) that in heaven their Angels
do always behold the face of their heavenly Father, waiting for a commission to
do speedy execution on the enemies of his children.

SECT. VI. Try your title to God as a Father: Marks.
EXhortation, and first, to try our title to God as a loving Father,

First, cheerfully and willingly: Every one that is born of God, serves him
with gladness, Psalm. 100.2. loves to be his servant, takes hold of his
covenant, counts it his meat and drink to do the will of his heavenly Father,
in whose house therefore he has a name better then of a son or daughter,
Esaias 56.6.

Next, reverently, with a filial fear and awful respect to God as his father,
Heb. 12.27. 1 Pet. 1.17. Psalm. 2.11. How fearful is this place, said Jacob?
where yet he had seen visions of love. Genesis 28


Thirdly, confidently and with an humble boldness, Abba, Father, also
imports. See Heb. 4.16.

Sincerely, and entirely, both 1. For subject, not having a heart and a heart,
(as that desperate Neapolitan said, he had one for God, Haymo and Remigius:)
which double-dealing is most detestable in a child toward his father, (we say
of an arrant dissembler, He would not spare to cozen even his own father) and
no good child will offer it. But serving him with singleness of heart; yea
with all the heart, Dent. 10.12 Romans 12.1 2 Cor. 6.20
and all the soul: presenting our bodies also, as a whole burnt sacrifice,
which is our reasonable service, yea glorifying him with both our spirits and
bodies, which are the Lords: Not offering to detain from him that has bought
us with a price, any part of his purchase; for why should we lie to the Holy
Ghost? All Gods children are such as will not lie, Esaias 63.8. Act. 5.3, 4
but obey from the heart that form of doctrine, whereunto, denying themselves,
they have been delivered, rather seeking to be good, then seeming to be so. 2.
For object: Every true child of God obeys his father in all, as well as in any
part or point of duty. Romans 6.17
He is a doer of righteousness, 1 John 3.10. a fulfiller of all
righteousness, Mat. 3. 1 John 3.10
something (at least) he is doing at it, as he is able (and this distinguishes
him from a child of the devil, says St. John) he follows after it (as Solomon's
expression is) as a man follows his trade, wherein use makes mastery: he lifts
at the latch, though he cannot do open the door: he shows his good will, and is
humbled for his failing: when either he misseth of his work, or marres it in
the manner. So purifying himself by the practice of mortification, as God is
pure, in some truth of resemblance, and all out of a right hope, that he is his
child, 1 John 3.2, 3.

Constantly, and unweariably. A good child will be serviceable to his father,
in whatsoever he can, so long as they two shall live together. Semblaby, Luke
1.75
Thus David, as he swore himself to Gods service, and promised to dwell in his
house for ever, without shifting his service, so he performed it accordingly:
for he served out his whole time, as an Apprentice to the trade, Act. 13.36,
22. and spent all his days (after he was once bound) in doing all the wills of
God, (...).
one as well as other.

Lastly, unanimously with the rest of his fellow servants, with one consent,
one shoulder, as the scripture speaks, Zeph. 3.9. observing our Lords last
charge, the same in effect with that of Joseph to his brethren: Fall not out by
the way, but be at peace among your selves, loving one another out of a pure
heart fervently. For, by this shall your selves know, that ye are my children,
1 John 3.10, 13. and by this shall all men know, Heb. 4
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another: and seal up this love by
stirring up your selves, among your selves, to love and good works.

Lo, These are the signs of such a servant of God as he will own for a son,
and account of as a Jewel to be made up in his Magazine. If ye be such, ye are
made for ever: As if otherwise

SECT. VII. Settle this, that ye are Gods children, and how.
MY second Exhortation is, that ye give no rest to your eyes, nor sleep to your
ey-lids, till you have secured and settle this to your selves: it being a
matter of that moment, that without nothing can be safe, nothing comfortable.
Now to become children of God there is no other way under heaven, then to pass
thorough the narrow womb of repentance, and be born again. For flesh and blood
cannot inherit: 1 Pet. 1.3 Gal. 5.21
and all unrighteous persons are utterly excluded from the benefit of Adoption,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And yet such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified. And how justified? but by the name, that is,
by the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, which adopts as
well as justifies? And how sanctified? but by the spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6.10: 11 Homo templum Dei: Deus ara hominis.
whose office and operation it is, to transfuse the divine nature into us, and
to erect that fair fabric of the new man in our hearts for a temple to
himself; that he may dwell in us, and walk in us, yea secretly and sweetly say
to us, being now separated from all il I courses and companies, I will be a
father unto you, 2 Cor 6.1.6, 17, 18.
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

SECT. VIII. Let all Gods children know their Father: and how.
INstruction to all such as are received into the number of Gods children,

And first to know their father: So to know God as a child does his father, not
only with an apprehensive but an effective knowledge, that unites the heart
unto him, labors not only after an union, but a unity with him. We are all by
nature like runagate children, who would never have kept near their parents
house, Hos 4
but assembled themselves by troops, in harlots houses, with the prodigal,
where whordome and wine, and new wine has taken away our hearts: the things of
this life are so near and natural to us, so present and pleasant, that we
cannot ascend into heaven to learn wisdom, to get the knowledge of the Holy
One, Prove. 30.3, 4. The spirit of fornication has so besotted us, that we have
not so much as a mind to look toward God. Hence that complaint. I have brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knows his owner, and
the ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know; my people does not
consider. Do ye thus requite the Lord, Isa. 1.2, 3 Deuteronomy. 32.6 Psalm. 14.3 Esa.
64.7 Judge. 18.24 Isa. 65.1 1 Chronicles. 28.9
O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father etc? But there is none that
understands, and seeks God, none that stirrith up himself to take hold of
God etc. Graceless and heedlesse impes we are all, that will not once take
knowledge our of father, or cry after him though lost, as Micah did after his
lost idols: albeit we have so tasted of his sweetness, and he has said,
Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by his name. But thou,
Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, yea God thy father: for, I
will be his father and he shall be my son, said the Lord to David. 2 Samuel 7.14.
Telemachus apud Homer. Odyss. a. 1 Ioh. 2 13
We use to say (and we have it from the Greeks) that he is a wise child that
knows his father. But he is no child of God, that knows not him for his
father. I write unto you babes, says St. John, because ye have known the
father. Lo he is not yet a babe in Christ that has not some knowledge of
this, that God is his father. True it is that the most gray headed, and most
experienced Christian knows but in part, and imperfectly, because he is taught
but lamely, we prophecy in part 1 Cor. 13.9. (...). Exodus 33. Isa. 6.2 Pet.
3.18 Heb. 1.3 (...) Lumen de lumine.
we see here but as in a glass obscurely, we see but Gods back-parts, the
later end of his train: we hear of him here by the hearing of the ear, but it
is no more then as the later end of a sentence, or so much only as the Echo
resounds. But we must be getting and growing in this grace, even in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the brightness of his fathers glory,
and the express image of his person. The beam of the Sun is not so like the
body of the Sun, the character on the wax is not so like the seal that imprints
it, nay milk is not so like milk, as Christ is like his father. He is up and
down the self-same that his Father is: they differ in nothing, Christus est
alius a patre, non aliud.
but that the one is the father, and not the son, the other is the son, and not
the father. Hence that of our Savior to Philip, when he said, Lord show us the
father, and it suffices us. Jesus says unto him, Have I been so long time
with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? He that has seen me, Ioh.
14.8, 9
has seen the Father, and how say thou then, show us the Father?

The very same All-powerfull God, who in fellowship of his sacred person has a
soul and body glorified, the same spiritual nature is the nature of the
Father: As if the same soul and body that is in you, were communicated with the
person of your child. Well might our Savior therefore say, If ye had known me,
ye should have known my father also. John 14.7. Oh learn and labor therefore
to profit more and more in the mystery of Christ, to know him better in his
natures, in his offices, in his works both of Abasement and Advancement, of
Humiliation and Exaltation: but especially to know him as St. Paul did (for the
other you may easily know out of every Catechism) to know him and the power of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable
to his death Phil. 3.10. This is the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus ver. 8. this is life eternal Ioh. 17.3. We know no more of God and his
will, then we practice, and have experience of: Christ is said to know no sin,
because he did none: and Eli's sons knew not the Lord; (though priests) because
they feared him not: they detained the truth, they knew, in unrighteousness,
as those Philosophers did Romans 1.18.

SECT. IX. Let them thankfully acknowledge his free grace in their adoption:
and why.
A Second duty we owe to God as his children is thankful acknowledgement of
that never-enough adored depth of his singular love in our Adoption. The
absolute and independent freedom of his grace herein was such, that without
any the least color of cause, or show of reason in us, without any defect on
his part or desert on ours, He drew us out of the most vile and servile
condition that could be, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. David
was to be gathered to his fathers, Psalm. 132.11 Esaias 9.6 1 Timothy 1.17 Psalm. 2.
and it was therefore a singular favor to him that he should have children to
sit upon his throne after him. But God is the King immortal, as St. Paul
styles him, the everlasting Father, as Esaias, and therefore needs no son to
succeed him. But if he did, he had a son of his own as like him as is possible,
whom also he has set as King upon his holy hill of Sion. Amongst men, those
that have children of their own, if they adopt another man's child, it is
commonly because their own are unfit for succession either from some bodily
weakness as not likely to leave issue, or for baseness of spirit, and
badnesse of behavior, as incapable and unfit for government. Now none of all
this can without horrible blasphemy be said of the Lord Christ. But admit the
case had so stood with God, that it had been requisite he should have adopted
any for his sons, and heirs, the good Angels might have drawn away his
affection from us by their holiness, or the evil angels his compassion, for
their wretchedness: or he could, for a need, of very stones have raised up
children to himself, to be heirs of his kingdom in Christ. It was his will
only, and nothing else, that moved his will to set his love upon us, as we may
see both in the type Deuteronomy. 7.7. and in the truth E^h. 1.5. Surely as there was
no defect or need in him, so there was as little merit or desert in us. For
whereas in the civil adoption (as when Pharaohs daughter adopted Moses,
Mordecai adopted Esther, Jacob the two sons of Joseph) there is something in
the Adopted that moves the Adoptant: cither some outward inducement, as
kindred, beauty, favor etc. or some inward, as the gifts of the mind,
understanding, ingenuity, hopefulnes etc. there was nothing at all in us to
move God to such a mercy. For outward respects, there was neither kindled to
m^^te him (for our father was an Amorite, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. Christ calls his
spouse first his Love, and th^n his fair one. C^^t. 2.10. Homo est invers^s
decalogus. Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
our mother a Hittite: we were the sons of the perverse rebellious woman, as
Saul reproached Jonathan) nor yet beauty to entice him, for we were in our
blood, in our blood, in our blood, when he spread the skirt of his garment over
us, and said unto us, Live. Blood is so many several times there named, to
note our extreme filthiness: so little amiable were we when he set his love
upon us.

And for any inward motive, grace (which is the only thing that God looks after
Psalm. 14.2.) is not at all to be found in the natural man. Nay he stands
acrosse, and is quite contrary to it; as being acted and agitated by the
devil, and held captive, as a slave by him, at his pleasure. Lo this was our
estate, thus the Lord found us when he came to adopt us. And indeed Adoption
(to speak properly, as it is a borrowed term from the civil law) imports as
much. For it is the raking of one for a son, who is, for present, in some
servitude to another. And so Lawyers distinguish it from Arrogation, which is,
say they, the choosing of one for a son that is free, his own man, and not under
the command of another. But such (alas) was not our case: (...). Gal. 3.23.
for both Jews and Gentiles were shut up under sin, fist shut up close
prisoners in the devils dungeon, whose works we did, as slaves, and could not
but do them, whose image we bear, as sons, and could not but resemble him:
being as like the devil, as if we had been sp^tout of his mouth, and had
perished together with him in our own filth and blood like that forlorn
infant, Ezekiel. 16. had not he of his mere grace and goodness, when it was
thetime of loves, said unto us, Live, yea when we were weltring in our blood,
he said Live. Oh let the deep and due consideration of this matchless mercy
and free favor ravish and affecti^^^ hearts, to greatest cheerfulness and
thankfulness: let it swallow up an ^^^^o^tents, and make us send up many an
humble, joyful, and praisefull heart to him.

SECT. X. Let them honor their father: and how.
A Third duty we are to perform to God as a father is Reverence, according to
that in the Prophet, Mal. 1.6
A son honors his father. If then I be a father, where is mine honor? and
that in the Decalogue, Honor thy father and thy mother, which, says St. Paul,
it the first commandment with promise. Promise, I say, of long life to him
that (by honoring them) lengtheneth his parents life. (...). Hi^rocl.
Reverence and loving respect to parents never went unrecompenced, as in
Iapheth, Isaac, Ruth, others: much less shall that to God: for, them that
honor him he will honor.

Here then we are 1. 1 Samuel 2.
to have an high and honorable esteem of God in our hearts: lifting up, and
laying open those everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in, Psalm.
24.
and come in state, in his own likeness. Ignorant people cast him into a
dishonorable mould as it were: they have bald and base conceits of God: they
think him altogether such a one as themselves, or worse: they change the glory
of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man etc. Psalm.
50.21. Romans 1.13.26. (...). 2 Cor. 6.16
they dishonor him, and therefore he gives them up to passions of dishonor,
or vile affections. For as a king will take it ill to be entertained no
otherwise by his subjects, when he comes amongst them, then if he were some
Knight or meaner man: so will God, when we have low conceptions of him, when we
glorify him not as God, when we enlarge not his room, and let him in-dwell
richly in us, when we conceive not of him as the only potentate; represent him
not to our thoughts in the apprehension of one that is in and of himself
All-sufficient, Omnipotent, only wise, and in Christ our most merciful father,
yet still our father in heaven; who without respect of persons judges
according to every man's works: 1 Pet. 1.17.
whom therefore if we call father we must pass the whole time of our
sojourning here (till he send for us home) infear. Lo this is to honor God in
our hearts. And this is that. that is required so often in scripture, under the
term of magnifying God, or making him great, and of glorifying God, or making
him glorious: so he is pleased to account of it, when we get so far, as to
conceive of him above all creatures: and that is when he comes into our hearts
as a king of glory, far above all the glory that can be found in earthly
princes.

2. We must honor him in our speeches, both to him, and of him.

1. In our prayers to God, we must take unto us words, neither too curious,
Verba nec lec^a sint nec neglec^a.
nor too careless, we must speak supplications, with the poor publican, we
must address our selves unto him in lowliest manner, as the Prodigal did,
Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am no more worthy to be
called thy child. A servants place in thine house is too good for me. Briefly,
our words to God in prayer must be, as the words use to be of a child to his
father, humble, earnest, and direct to the point, avoiding vam babblings This
is to be sober in prayer 1 Pet. 4.3. Eccles 5.2. (...) interparlance 1 Timothy
2.1. Omnino oportet nos ora^iotionis tempore curiam intrare coelestem, in qua
Rex regum stella^^ sedet sol^^ etc. Quant ^ ergo cum reveremia quanto timore,
quanto illuc humilitate accedere debet epalude su^ procedens and repens vilts
ranuncula? Bern. Lev. 19.12.
when considering that God is in heaven, and we on earth, considering the
infinite distance, and disproportion between him and us, therefore our words
are few. We are allowed to parle with God by prayer, to use an holy and humble
familiarity, and to come boldly unto the throne of grace; but yet we must so
couch our petitions, that all needless heartlesse repetitions, superfluous
endless digressions, tedious and unnecessary prolixities be carefully avoided.
Humble and pithy prayer finds freer access to God, and returns with better
success to us.

2. As we must thus honor our heavenly father in our speeches to him, so in
our speeches also of him to others. Take heed, that we take not up that great
and terrible name of his, unreverently, lightly, loosely, disrespectfully: for
he has vowed that he will hold none guiltless, he has sworn that no vain
swearers, or other dishallowers of his name shall ever enter into his kingdom.
Reviling of parents was banishment by Plato's laws, death by Gods laws Exodus
21.17. How shall they escape that bore thorough the glorious and dreadful name
of God, tossing it in their common talk as filthy dogs do stinking carrion;
that swear in ^^st and not in judgment; that play with oaths as apes do with
nuts, not considering that there is a large roll of ten yard; long and five
yards broad full of curses against the swearer, and that shall rest upon his
house, which he calls his castle, and where he thinks himself most secure.
Zach. 5.2. Oh what will become of those hellish mouths that belch out
blasphemies against him. (whom yet they daily call Our father which art in
heaven) so ordinarily and so openly, that some of them are become very inter
ections of specch to the vulgar, S. Edw. Sands.
and other-somemere phrases of gallantrey to the braver, as one complains.
How should we grieve at this, as those good men did when David was reviled by
Shimei, how should our hearts rise to hear our heavenly father thus
dishonored? surely good blood will not belie it self.

3. God is to be honored as a father in our whole conversation, remembering
that we are ever in his eye: and should therefore walk before him in an holy
bashfulnesse, as ashamed and afraid to do any thing unworthy of his presence,
or that may give him discontent. It was ordered in Moses law, that when any
went forth of the camp to ease nature, they should dig a hole with a paddle,
and cover their excrements: And why? For the Lord thy God walks in the midst
of thy camp, therefore shall it be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee,
and turn away from thee Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14. Now there was more in this law, then
every man looks unto. Sin is the souls excrements: St. James therefore calls it
the superfluity of naughtiness, Jam. 21. H^b. 1.13. Amos 3.3. 2. Sain. 12.9.
(...). 10.33. (...) Heb. 4.13. Genesis 27.12, 41 Prove. 17.2. as Samuels and (...)
sons as ^onathan the four G^rshom, the son of Menesseh, or as some copies have
it, the son of Moses. In accuratissimis libris Number suspensum est supra ^l^as
literas in signum, came siteram adesse vel abesse pesse^ut sit and silius Mosis
and Manassis 2 Reg. 21. istius, prosapia, hujus imitatione. Buxtorf Tiber. Amam
Coronis.
in reference to the dung of the beasts that were slain in sacrifice. Now God
is of purer eyes then to behold sin with patience, in his own especially: for
can two wal^ together and they not be agreed? David is grievously threatened
for despising God his father, that is, for daring to do that before him, that
he would not have done before a child of a dozen yeers-old. Cornelius and his
company set themselves as in Gods view, looked him full in the face, and carried
themselves accordingly: so must we, remembering that al things are naked and
open before the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. Jacob feared to displease
his father; lest he should get himself a curse, and not a blessing: yea that
profane Esau would not offer to attempt any thing against Jacob his brother
during his fathers days, for fear of displeasing him. Epaminondas rejoiced in
nothing more, then that he had done noble exploits, and atteined great
victories: whiles his parents were yet alive, that they might share with him in
the comfort and credit thereof. Oh let it be our constant care so to carry our
selves, that we may not shame our fathers house, as Solomon's fool, but to get
him honor from others Mat. 5.16. that they may see and say that we are the
seed that the Lord has blessed Esaias 61.9. It is not for noble men's sons to be
lingering and lodging in the stable or gate house, (that is a place for grooms
and hindes) much less to be found filling muck-cart. the No more does it suit
with the sons of God to be loading themselves with thick clay, to have their
hands elbow-deep in the world, to busy themselves about many things with
neglect of the one thing necessary, to run sqeaking up and down the world, as
rats and mice good for nothing but to devour victuals. This is not to walk
worthy of God their father, and of Christ their elder brother.

SECT. XI. Let them resemble their father, and wherein.
GOds children must resemble him, M. Rob. Harris Math 23. (...). Eusebius.
as well as reverence him. The child is but the father multiplied; the father
of the second Edition, as One speaks, like him ordinarily, both in
countenance and condition. The Pharisees were so like their fathers they were
the worse again. Isaac trod in his fathers footsteps, and heyred him, even in
his infirmities, Genesis 26.7. Constantines sons exactly resembled their father
in his good parts and practices. We must also be followers of God as dear
children. 1. In light, 1 John 1.5. being transparent as a crystal glass with
a light in the midst of it. 2. In love, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. for have we not all one
father, Mal. 2.10. Ephesians. 4.5, 6. love therefore as brethren, 1 Pet. 3.8. fall
not out by the way, Genesis 45.24. let there be no difference, for we are
brethren, and the Canaanite is in the land Genesis 13.7, 8. How can we look our
father in the face, or expect his blessing, when we know that he knows there
is dissension amongst us? Oh how happy and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to
be at unity; there surely it is that God commands the blessing Psalm. 133.1, 3.
He never came at Abraham that we read of till the breach betwixt him and Lot
was made up again; live therefore at peace, and the God of love and peace shall
be with you. 3. In mercy Luke 6.36. loving them that hate us, blessing them
that curse us, doing good to them that persecute us: for so shall we be the
children of our heavenly father, who does good both to the just, and to the
unjust, causes his sun to shine, and his rain to fall, not only upon
flowers, and fruit trees, but also upon briers and thorns of the wilderness,
such incarnat devils, as march up and down the earth with hearts and hands as
full as hell, with all manner of malice and mischief. Such a child of God was
Elisha that feasted his enemies, and Steven that prayed for his persecutours,
and that Martyr, that when he could not obtain a fair hearing before Steven
Gardner, cried out. Send me to my prison again among my frogs and toads which
will not interrupt me, whiles I pray for your Lordships conversion. 4. In
sanctifying the sabbath, Exodus 20.11. Esaias 56.5.6. by resting not only from
corporal labor, but spiritual idleness: Acts and Mon.
as God rested on that day from creating, and yet works hitherunto in
preserving and upholding all things by the word of his power. The baser sort of
people in Sweth-land do always break the sabbath, David's desire by Rob. Abbot.
p 16
saying that its only for gentlemen to keep that day. And in many places
amongst us Gods sabbaths are made the voyder and dunghill for all refuse
businesses. But the Pharisees (taking it for granted that Christ had done that
he could not justify on that day, (where in they were mistaken) rightly
conclude: If this man were of God he would not have broke the sabbath day: this
not the guise of Gods children. 5. Lastly, 2 Cor. 7.1 1 Pet. 1.14, 15
in all holy life and pure conversation, according to that, Be ye holy as I am
holy, pure as I am pure, perfect as I am perfect. Our lives should be as so
many visible commentaries upon Christ's life: we should preach forth his
virtues, Coloss. 2.6 1 John 2.6
and express him to the world in all his imitable praises, and practices. Then
we are said to walk in Christ, yea, to walk as Christ walked, when we resemble
him; not as an image does a man in out-ward lineaments only, but as a son does
his father in nature and disposition, in affection and action. Our utmost good
consists in communion with God, and conformity to him: in keeping inward peace
with him that he abhor us not, because of the provoking of his sons and of his
daughters Deuteronomy. 33.13. and in seeking and keeping (if it be possible, and as
much as in us lies) peace with all men, and holiness; for such shall both see
God (which is not every man's privilege,) Heb. 12.14
and be counted and called the sons of God Math. 5.10. they shall have both the
comfort and credit of divine Adoption.

SECT. XII. Let them love their Father: and how to express their love.
IF God be our Father, it is but fit we should love him; 5. (...). Avi magis
amant nepotes, quam suosliberos. Heidfeld. Cos amoris amor. Joh 3.16
God having tied parents and children together with cords of love, says
Nazianzen. Love, I grant, though of a fiery nature, yet (contrary to the nature
of fire herein) descends rather then ascends. Hence, grandfathers often love
their grandchildren better then their own. But love should (and in good
children does) ascend also. It is but reason they should reciprocate, and
return their parents love for love: do not publicans the same, Mat. 5.46? Do
not our clothes warmed by us, warm us again? That God loves all his with a
love more then Fatherly, has been abundantly proved above. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son. This is a sic without a sicut:
there is no sufficient similitude in nature to express it by. Herein, if ever,
he made naked unto us the bowels of his Fatherly affection, as in an anatomy.
God so loved his Son, as he gave him all the world for his possession, Psalm. 2.
but he so loved the world, that he gave Son and all for its redemption. Thus (o
ye sinful sons of men) Gods bowels are open unto you, his heart is enlarged.
Ye are not straightened in him, but ye are straightened in your own bowels. Now for
a recompense in the same, 2 Cor. 6.11, 12, 13 Conjungendo lumen suae
aeternitatis limo tuae mortalitatis. Bern. (...). Psalm. 18.1 Psalm. 119.97 Psalm.
84.1 Pinkes Sermon. of love.
(he speaks unto you as unto his children) be ye also enlarged. Amate amorem
illius, says St. Bernard. Oh love, that love of his, who for love of thee
coupled his love to thy love, by abasing himself, by advancing thee, by uniting
the light of his eternity to the mire of thy mortality. Whom therefore having
not seen, ye love, says Peter, 1 Epist. 1.8. and My love was crucified, said
Ignatius. And, I love thee dearly, O Lord my God, says David. And again, O how
I love thy law! O how amiable are thy Tabernacles! he even wondereth at his own
love, and vents himself by an exclamation. For, Amor Dei est extaticus, nec se
sirit esse sui juris, says One. There is a twofold love, (and both due to him
in whom there is a concurrence of all attractives, and retentives of our love)
1. Of Desire; this is an earnest longing after that which we believe would do
us much good, if we could attain to it. 2. Of Delight, or complacency, when
having attained that which we desired, we hug and embrace it, and solace our
selves in the fruition of it. Now Christ, (the Everlasting Father, Esaias 9.6.)
must have both these, and that in the highest degree: For he is white and
ruddy, white in his life, and ruddy in his death, the chief of ten thousand, or
the standard bearer of ten thousand. Cant. 5.10 (...).
For as the tallest and goodliest men use to carry the Ensign, to display the
Banner, or Standard: such is Christ: All excellency is invested in him, all
good is conveyed unto us by him, all love is therefore due from us to him. Non
been conve^unt nec in una sede morantur Majestas et Amor. Juvenal. (...). 1 Pet
2.21
We say that Majesty and love cannot dwell together, because love is the
abasing of the soul to all services. But its otherwise in Christ. Majesty and
love could cohabite in his heart, and hereof he gave us the best assurance,
when the Lord of life was crucified to death. Love is most seen in suffering:
as it self is a passion, so it is tried rather by passions then actions. He
sealed up his love both by doing and dying for us: leaving us a Copy to write
after, (as St. Peter has it) to do whatsoever he bids us to forbear whatsoever
heforbids us, and to lay down our dearest lives for his sake, if called
thereunto, according to that: For thy sake are we slain all the day long, Acts
and Mon. fol. 14 ^8. Ib. 1430.
we are in deaths often. Ye were every hair of my head a man, (said Ardely the
Martyr, to bloody Bonner) I would suffer death in the opinion and faith I am
now in. The heavens shall sooner fall, then I will forsake my Christ, said
William Flower. Ib. 805.
My wife and my children are so dearly beloved unto me (said George Carpenter
burnt at Munken) that they cannot be bought from me for all the riches and
possessions of the Duke of Bavaria: but for the love of my Lord Christ I will
willingly forsake them. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not
worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of
me Math. 10.37. If a man hold not the Lord Christ worthy of more love then his
dearest friends, he has no part in him. All our love must be bestowed upon him
as most worthy, there is not one particle of it to be bestowed on any other
thing. But then he gives us our love again, and then we may disperse it here
and there, and love other things: but no otherwise then as they convey love to
us from Christ, and may be means of drawing up our affections to Christ.
Pinkes Sermon of love. p. 21
My love unto my Savior (says one) although it came occasionally and
impulsively from my love of my self, yet it is terminated principally in his
glory, though accessorily likewise, as he is contented it should, in mine own
happiness. D. Sibbes Ser on 1 Cor 2.9
But it is a kind of miracle (says another) in evil, when we love other
things besides God; or better then God, baser then our selves: It is as much as
if a river should turn backward. What a base thing is it for a man to suffer
such a sweet stream as love, to run into such a sink? And a little after, It
was a miracle, says he, that the three young men should be in the midst of the
furnace, and be there as if they were in another place, no hotter. And it is as
much a miracle, that men should be in the midst of all encouragements to love
God, and yet love any thing more then God. He is absolutely good, and so is to
be loved absolutely and for himself, Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum. Aug.
but all other things in him, and for him, as our friends are to be loved in
the Lord, and our foes for the Lord. This is child-like indeed.

SECT. XIII. Let them depend upon their Father, both for prevention of evil,
and provision of good.
LAstly, learn we to depend upon God as a father, for both prevention of evil
and provision of good. Phil. 4.6.
In nothing be careful, but in all things make your request known to God with
thanksgiving, says Paul. And mark, that he bids us bring our thanks together
with our request, 2 Samuel 13.4
to have the one as ready as the other, for we are sure to speed. Why art thou
then pale and lean from day to day with carking cares, 1 Pet. 5.5. Psalm. 55.22.
and disquieting fears of this or that danger? Art not thou the Kings son? and
will he deny thee any thing thou ask? Cast all thy care upon God, for he
cares for thee. Roll both thy self upon him, and thy Gift upon him, says
David: that is, whatsoever thou would that God should bestow upon thee, cast
it first upon him by faith and it shall be effected: Romans 8. Qui misit
unigenitum immimisit spiritum, promisit vultum quid tandem tibi negaturus est.
B^r. de tem.
he shall bring it to pass. Away with the spirits of bondage to fear again:
we have now received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba father: yea,
for an unquestionable pledge of his infinite love, he has given us his son:
how shall he not then together with him, give us all things also? That Is St.
Paul's argument. If ye which are evil can give good things to your children,
how much more will your heavenly father give to them that ask of him? that is our
Saviors argument. Whereunto let me add this.

God made himself known to be our gracious and provident Father, Mat. 6 A
Christian is crowned not only in his cradle with K. James, but before he is
born, as Sapores K. of Persia was. For his father dying, left his mother with
child, and the Persian Nobility set the crown on his mothers belly,
acknowledging thereby her issue for their Prince. Heyl. Geog. p. 64 Mat. 6
(...). Psalm. 23.3
before we could know our selves to be his children. He formed us in the womb,
crudled us there like cheese, curiously wrought us in those lowermost parts of
the earth, (as an Artificer, when he has some special piece of work to do,
retires into some private room out of the sight of others) whilst we were
there, he filled two bottles of milk for our entertainment into the world:
whereinto we no sooner came, but he entered into covenant with us, to be our God
and Father: he signed and sealed this covenant by the Sacrament of Baptism,
the solemn seal of our adoption: And all this before ere we knew what was done
unto us. And will he now forget to do us good, when we know and acknowledge
him, when we pray unto him, and by faith depend upon him? It is not possible.
He feeds the fowls, and clothes the lillies, to whom he is no father: And will
he not much more do so for you, Oh ye, mall faiths. A child whiles he has his
fathers favor cares for nothing; never troubles himself to think where he
shall have his next meal, or a new suit of clothes: let him but please his
father, and those things shall be provided to his hand. Again, let a child walk
in dark and dangerous places, so long as he has hold of his father he fears
not. Did we but stir up our selves to take hold of God, we should be secure,
yea though we walked in the vale of the shadow of death, with David: we should
never be heard to say, (as Heathens that have no interest in God) What shall we
eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed? so long as our
heavenly Father knows that we need all these things, and will not fail to
provide them in a competent measure. The men of Gods hand, it may be, shall
have more then we, because they have their portion here with the prodigal.
But we need not envy them that: for it is but an estate for life, granted them
in the utmost and most remote part of our inheritance. Psalm. 17
Will a child think much a father should give a pension for life, out of this,
or that, whiles he has far greater things left him; yea the inheritance also
of that, out of which an annuity is granted for a time to some other? Children
ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children, says
the Apostle. And, Oh how great things, says the Prophet, have thou laid up in
store for them that fear thee! Now, 2 Cor. 12.14
will he give us a crown, and deny us a crust? provide heaven for us, and
withold earth from us? Ask only and it shall be given you: the earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof. In your Fathers house is bread enough. Shall
the prodigal call so confidently for his child's part? shall Esau go so roundly
to his father for the blessing? Luke 15.12 Genesis 27.34
And do we stand doubting whether we were best speak, or hold our tongues? and
not fall down with Esther before Ahashuerosh, or with Achsah before her father
Caleb, and beg the upper-springs of spiritual blessings, and the
nether-springs of temporal comforts? which he withholds, happily, for a time,
with an unwilling willingness, that he may hear of us, and have our prayers:
which, though never so poor and imperfect, yet he is much taken with, as a
natural parent is with the prattling, and stammering of his own, above all the
plain speech of all the children in the Town besides.

SECT. XIV. Comfort of Adoption: where are showed the Privileges of sons,
privative, and positive.
COmfort to all Gods faithful servants: David? What pains did Jacob take night
and day to be but sonne-in-law to Laban, who changed his wages ten times, and
ever for the worse: Joseph and Daniel were for their good service highly
advanced, but not adopted. But every servant of God is a son, and every son
an heir. Great was the glory of our first Parents in Paradise, had they held
it: and yet if they had, what had they gotten, more then a confirmation of
their present estate, or at most, the reward of their service, wages for their
work? they could never have attained to this honor, Joh. 1.12. (...).
to be the sons of God. This St. John in his gospel calls a dignity, an
eminency, a royalty. And in his first epistle, he stands and wonders, as
transported with an ecstasy of admiration at it 1 Ioh. 3.1. And well he might:
For this (says the psalmist) is to be set above the Kings of the earth, it
interesteth and inrighteth a man to the inheritance of heaven and earth. The
possession of the earth is as yet deteyned from God; children by the wicked for
a time, as the promised land was from Israel by the Amorites: but they have
great things meanwhile in reversion, even heaven with all its happiness, whither
they may comfortably look up and boast, on better ground then Nebuchadnezzar
did of his Babel, 1 Pet 1.4
Is not this mine inheritance? Am I not kept by the power of God to that
salvation reserved for me in the heavens? Yea they may comfortably lift up
their eye (as God b^d Abraham, toward heaven, and tell the stars if he were
able) so they their glorious privileges. This, Moses well understood, and
therefore chose rather to suffer as a son, Heb. 11.
then to escape as a bastard, he preferred the reproach of Christ before the
honor of being the son of Pharaohs daughter, and the possibility of being heir
to two kings, as Josephus relates it. He was faithful in all Gods house as a
servant: Joh. 8.35
but that was not all. For the servant abides not in the house for ever, as
the son does. Moreover, the kings of the earth take tribute of their servants
and subjects, but their children go free Mat. 17.26. Behold, Gods children are
all manumitted by Christ, and possessed of a twofold freedom.

1. Multo plures sunt gratiae privativae quam positivae. Gerson
Privative from the dominion, and damnation of sin, from the rigor and
irritation of the law, from the captivity and cruelty of the devil, from the
danger of death, and horror of hell etc. This is a privilege far beyond that
of a citizen of Rome, which yet might neither be suffered to beg, nor be bound
with thongs Act. 22.29. Romans 8.
And this is that the Apostle calls the glorious liberty of the sons of God, as
elsewhere he couples Adoption with glory Romans 9.4. includes it in glory Romans
8.30. and puts it for glory Romans 8.23. Freed Gods children are not (I
confess,) of crosses and corrections, for then were they bastards and not
sons. He scourges every son whom he receives, Joh. 14.18
but he never leaves them orphans, helpelesse, comfortless. In the midst of
desertion (the sorest kind of affliction) they may, nay they must call him
Father, and ask him blessing. Esaias 64.7, 8, 9. and he knows not how to say
them nay, coming unto him in that name, and under that notion. Should a parent
see his sick child pant and look pitifully, cry out (as once the Shunamites
son to his father) O my head, my head! my heart is sick, my head is heavy. I am
weary with pains: what shall I do? where shall I rest? etc. He could not turn
his back upon him and neglect his moans: much less could he continue to strike
him, lifting up his feeble hands for mercy, and looking upon him with watery
eyes; but would rather set himself to seek out, and to do him all possible ease
and comfort. Hic cum triste aliquid staruit fit tristis and ipsa. Cuique fere
poenam sumere poena fua est: Ovid. 2 de Pont eleg 2. To say, God has cast you
off, because he has hid his face is a fallacy fetched out of the Devils Topics.
And shall not the God of all mercy, and the Father of all consolation pity his
poor children that are distressed, or diseased, and send deliverance? Will he
not melt over his child, and burn his rod (Will he not hold him up with one
hand as he did Jacob, when he beats him down with the other? will he not look
through the chinkers to see how we do, when he has shut us up close prisoners?
will he not deal by us as the mother deals by her littleone, makes him believe
she will cast him away to the puttock, or pitch him headlong into the pool,
when yet she keeps fast hold on him?

2. Positive, and so he is made a free-denison of Jerusalem that is above, and
possessed of all the privileges of that supernall city. See a brief extract
of them in that 1 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours? A very large charter;
All illuminations, inspirations, gifts and graces of the spirit, gifts of Gods
ministers and the abler sort of Christians, all these are not more their own
then yours to use; you have title to them, and interest in them, and may claim
them for your own: Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, you are
heirs of it together with faithful Abraham: Or life, grace to spend it well,
or death, to the wicked a trap-dore to hell, Janua vita porta coeli Bern.
but to the saints an inlet into eternal happiness, or things present, all
occurrences are sanctified to you, or things to come, heaven waits for you,
hell has nothing to do with you. Thus all is yours, as the Apostle there
reiterates it, though not in possession (unless it be in our Head) yet in use,
in right or by way of reduction, as we say, the worst things are Gods
childrens: they are heirs of the kingdom says James, heads destinated to the
diadem, Jam. 2.5 Serms non valet exprimere, experimento opus est. Chrysostom. Lati
simus non securi, gaudentes in spiritu sancto, scd tamen caventes a recidivo.
Bern.
says Tertullian. Their privileges as sons, are fitter to be believed, then
possible to be discoursed. And this should make them hold up their heads, but
not too high, and be cheerful, but not, withal, scornful.

CHAP. V. God will pity and pardon his people their wants and weaknesses. And I
will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.
HOw graciously God will deal with his dear children in respect of their pious
performances, is here sweetly set forth by an exquisite simile, Shindler:
Pentag. miserebor, misericordia commovebor. Figuier. Clementiautar. Trem.
polan. In quo duplex est aemoris ratio etc. Figuier De Cartulone filio a patre
Machaeo ob contemptum cruci affixo lege Just. lib. 18. Heb. 13.18.
from the dealing of an indulgent father with his obsequious child, I will
spare them, says he, nay that is not full enough; I will pardon and pity them,
I will commiserate and compassionate them, as Pharaohs daughter once did the
forlorn infant she found among the flags. I will use clemency and show
kindness unto them, And how? As a man does to his own son that serves him.

In which comfortable expression there is a double declaration (says an
Interpreter) of Gods fatherly affection: as thus. We cannot but show love even
to a stranger that observes us: As of the other side, we dislike and detest even a
son that slights us. But a son, and a serviceable son, what father can choose
but love and like well of? And shall God, the father of all the father-hoods in
heaven and earth show less love to his obedient children that are (...)
willing at least to keep a good conscience, and are faithful in weakness,
though weak in faith? No: but he will kindly accept of what they are able, and
remit the rest: He will spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves
him.

Than the which I know not what the good Lord could have spoken more
effectually for the setting forth of his own fatherly compassion, or for the
setting of our hearts in sound consolation. Take it thus,

God will surely show like mercy and mildness to his obedient children in

SECT. 1.2.3.4. Reasons from God, out of Micah. 7.18, 19.
THis is no new doctrine for (besides that the Text is for us in so many words
almost) the man whose eyes are open has said it, He has said, Number. 23.21
who heard the words of God, who saw the visions of the Almighty; God sees no
iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel. See he does ('it is true) for he
is all eye, (...). 1 King. 1.6
and all things are naked and open before him. Yea he sees enough in the best
to provoke the eyes of his glory. For though the crow think her own bird
whitest, and some parents can see nothing amiss in their children, as David in
his Adonijah: Jeb 4.18.21 25.5, 6.
yet he charged his Angels with felly, and the stars are not pure in his
sight. How much less man that is a worm etc. He is neither so blind as not to
behold, nor so fond as not to mislike the least fault in his best child. For
he is of more pure eyes then to behold evil in whomsoever, Habuc. 1.13.
with approbation: he cannot look on iniquity, and not show his displeasure.
All which notwithstanding, the truth of this point is irrefragable, and the
text alleged is no less firm then plain for us: God sees no sin in his
children. For, besides that, he will never throw them to hell, (which is the
just hire of the least sin) it is often seen, Romans 6.23.
that he never so much as corrects them, no not with the rods of men, for
innumerable faylings and infirmities.

But winking at small faults, as we say, nay passing by the transgressions of
the remnant of his heritage, like as a father pittieth his children, (and
pardons them their childishness) so the does lord pity them that fear him.
Lo, he pittieth them, not punishes them. Psalm. 103.13 14.
Or if he do proceed to correction (as he must other whiles, such is our
frowardness) yet amidst all, he knows our frame, he remembers we are but
dust, Esaias 2.22.
a peace of earth neately made up, that we carry our souls as a light in a
paper-lanthorne, that our breath in our nostrils, is every moment ready to
puff out, and that therefore if he should always chide, the spirit would fail
before him, we should soon faint, and swoon under his hands; wherefore he deals
not with us after our sins, nor rewards us according to our iniquities. But as
a man chasteneth his son (says Moses, and he would have us wisely to consider
of it too) so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. Deuteronomy. 8.5. Break their
stomachs he will, but not their bones: their hearts but not their heads. And
albeit they, (such is their peevishness under the rod) give up all for lost,
and make desperate conclusions upon their corrections, Judge 6.13. 2 Timothy 2.
as Gideon did, yet the foundation of God remains sure, The Lord knows who
are his, he knows their souls in adversity. I said in my haste, I am cast out
of thy sight. Here was a poor prayer. And yet thou heardest the voice of my
prayer (poor though it were) when I cried unto thee Psalm. 31.22. So Zion (when
under the lash) sud, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me.
Esaias 49.15.16
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? yea, she may forget, and some Tigresses have done it, yet
I will not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands
etc. Look how a natural mother turns her child out of doors for dabbling
himself, or some other shrewd turn, and with a thump on the back bids it be
gone a begging, yet when the child begins once to make a lip, whimper and set
up his lure, Jer. 31.20.
she takes him in again, and puts him in her bosom: the very like dealing we
may read of in God with Ephraim, his dear son, his pleasant child Hos. 13.1,
2, 3. etc. Ephraim of trembling and tender conscienced became a flagicious
offendour, a desperate idolater. Ver. 1.2, And was not it high time then to
take him in hand? therefore, they shall be as the morning cloud, as the early
dew, as the chafe before the whirl-winde, as the smoke out of the chimney. No
less then utter desolation is threatened against them. But the Lord soon
repents him concerning his servants, witness the words following. Yet I am the
Lord thy God, from the land of Egypt: I am thy sole savior. Here Is now mercy
in the midst of judgment. Oh but they abuse mercy, forget their God and sin
again: Ver. 6. Why therefore God threateneth them again with a more terrible
judgment, Verse. 7, 8. Behold I will be unto them as a Lion, and a leopard, as
a bear bereft: I will rent the kell of their hearts, and devour them. Oh
fearful condition! who would ever think of such, but as of deplored and
desperate, yet see the sequel. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help. Ver. 9. Thou have done thy utmost utterly to undo thy self,
but yet I have thought of a way for thy help, I will be thy king: where is any
other that would save thee (as I do) in all thy cities? And albeit thou art an
unwise son, yet I will bind up thine iniquity (as a cancelled bond) and hide
thy sin Ver. 12. And although the travels of a sorrowful woman be upon thee,
such is thy dullness in not coming off roundly with God work (with those lively
Israelitish women, Exodus 1.19.) but staying too long in the birth, which might
justly be thy death, as it was Rac^els, yet I will ransom thee from the power
of the grave, I will redeem thee from death. Ver. 14. Ey but for how long?
might they say: I shall be (likely) breaking out again, and then thou will
undo me, after thou have done me good. No, says God, repentance shall be hid
from mine eyes. He will not cast away a perfect man, says Bildad Job 8.20. The
Lord will not cast off for ever, says Jeremy, but though he cause grief, Lam.
3.31, 32.
yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude (or, the magnitude) of
his mercies. And this was that miracle that amused, so and amassed the Prophet
Micah, chap. 7.18. who is a God, says he, like unto thee that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever. And will ye know a reason? That text supplies us with two,
(for failing) and both from God. 1. He delights in mercy. 2. He provides for
his own glory; as occasioning hereby his pardoned people to praise him, for
present, saying as here who is a God like unto thee etc. and to trust him for
future. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us etc. Thou will
perform thy truth to Jacob. etc. ver. 19.20.

SECT. II. The reasons are of two sorts. First respecting God.
Psalm 19.4. Eccles. 7.25. Numb. 14.8. 2 Samuel 15.26. (...). Jam. 2.13.
because he delights in mercy. Now delight will do any thing as we say. If the
sun delight to run his race, who shall stop him? If Solomon delight to search
out the secrets of wisdom, what shall be hid from him? If Somson delight in
Daliance, what will h not dare to do for it? if Ahashueroh delight in Esther,
what may not she have of him? If the Lord delight in us says Caleb, then be
will bring us into this land of giants, and give it us. As, if he has no
delight in me, said David, behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good
to him. But now the Lord does delight in every David, and will show him, yea,
seal up unto him the sure mercies of day. He delights in mercy says the
Prophet: yea, such a mercy, says the Apostle, he rejoices against judgment,
and glories over it, as over his adversary whom he has subdued. Hence it was
that he erected himself of old, not a judgment seat, but a mercy-seat in the
midst of his people, as one that settled himself to show them mercy. When the
Judge sat him down in the gates of Israel, it was to do justice. Psalm. 1.1.
(...) Sept.
When the scorner sits him down in the chair of pestilence, he will scoff to
some purpose: so now that God sits in his mercy-seat, he will surely show mercy
with ease, yea a multitude of mercies. When a man has settled himself in his
seat, it is supposed he is at ease, and a small matter shall not raise him. God
is never more at ease, (as I may say) and better pleased, then when he is in
his mercy-seat, in his throne of grace. Hence he is said to rise out of his
place, Heb. 4.16.
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. Esaias 26.21. and to
do his work his strange work, when he is to do justice. Esaias. 28.21. It is an
act neither so proper to him, for it is his strange work, nor so pleasant to
him, for he rises out of his place to do it, which is a kind of diseasement,
and a pain, to him especially, from whom mercy flows as freely and as
naturally as light from the sun, honey from the comb, water from the
wellspring. He quits himself in it, as well apaid thereof, he rests in his
love, and will seek no farther Zeph. 3.17. This mercy-seat was the cover of the
Ark, where the two tables of the Law lay: to note the blessedness of those
that receive mercy, their iniquity is forgiven, their sin is covered. Again
from this mercy-seate, Psalm. 32.1.
situate not between the Seraphim, (those flaming executioners of justice Isa.
6.) but between the Cherubims, as ministers of mercy, the Lord showed himself,
Act. 7.
and gave forth the lively oracles, as St. Steven styles them. Once he spoke
from the burning bush, or smoking mountain, so terrible that Moses himself
said, I exceedingly fear and quake; This was mount Sina in Arabia. But we are
come to mount Sion etc. Heb. 12.21.22
and upon all the glory now there is a covering, or mercy-seat Isa. 4.5. The
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, Rev. 21.3.
Jerusalem (which is from above) is now called the throne of the Lord, and all
nations flock unto it, Jer. 3. God puts them among the children of his love,
and says to each of his, Thou shall call me, my father, and shall not turn
away from me. Jer. 17.19.
Therefore are they before the throne of God (answerable to the ancient
mercy-seat) serving him day and night in his temple. Rev. 7.15. Where the Angel
of his presence Jesus Christ offers their services, pouring in of his incense
with the prayer of all Saints, upon the golden altar which is before the throne
Rev. 8.3. And hence it is, that the good Lord pardons every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, 2 Chr. 30.18, 19.
though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary: that
he winks at small-faults, shall I say? and spares them as a man spares his own
son that serves him? nay that he pardons iniquity, and passes by
transgression or treason: he retains not his anger for ever (seem he never so
much displeased) and all because mercy pleases him: which puts the prophet to
his patheticall exclamation by way of wonderment. Who is a God like unto thee
etc.

SECT. III.
ANd that is the rise of our second Reason from God, Cretae Jovis est imago
auribus carens, ait Plutarchus. Non enim convenit audiri ab eo quenquam, qui
omnium dominus sit, and princeps. Plut. Mor. Lucianus fingit cancellos in
coelo, per quos Jupiter certo tempore homines respiciat: quo solummodo tempore
petentes exaudiantur. Psalm. 48.10 Tollens iniquitatem, peccatu^ and scelus: sic
enim exprimitur magnitudo clementiae, quod non levibus tantum delictis det
veniam, sed graviss. quibusque sceleribus. Calvin. (...) 1 Timothy 1.14
that he may fill their mouths with laughter and their tongues with triumph:
that they may say among the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them:
that they may say among the saints, Their Rock is not as our Rock, our enemies
themselves being judges. Oh who is God like unto thee ^ The Gods of the Nations
are idols. And we know that an idol is nothing, and that of nothing, nothing
comes: of such dunghill deities no mercy is to be expected, they cannot work
beyond the sphere of their activity. But our God is in the heavens, and as the
heavens are high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear
him. He is a great God, and a great King above all Gods. And as himself is
great, so is his mercy, and so also is his glory. For, according to thy name O
Lord, so also is thy praise unto the ends of the earth. Now what is Gods name?
Hear it from his own mouth. Jehovah, Jehovah, God, merciful and gracious etc.
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, that is, all sorts of sins though
never so heavy, never so heinous: Natural pollution, actual transgression,
stifneckt presumption; all sins, and blasphemies shall be forgiven to the sons
of men, says our Savior: how much more the involuntary slips of the saints,
their unavoidable infirmities, their sins of daily incu^sion, for which also
there is provided a pardon of course, it needs no more but suing out. It is the
glory of a man to pass by a transgression, says Solomon Prove. 19.11. And it
makes no less for the glory of God, that he pardons the iniquity of his
people, that he multiplyeth pardons, as they multiply sins Esaias 55.7. that
where grace abounds, then does grace superabound, or abounds to flowing over,
as the word there signifies: that they cannot commit more, then he will remit.
Surely hereby the power of our Lord appears to be exceeding great, and, as true
as he lives, all the earth is thereby filled with the glory of the Lord, as it
is Number. 14.17, 19, 21. He makes his wonderful works to be remembered, says
the Psalmist, and that, in nothing more then this, that the Lord is gracious
and full of compassion Psalm. 111.4. This makes his people sing and shout
Hallelujah, O praise the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

SECT. IIII.
NExt, Ionathans parable could tell Judge. 9.15.) since every former mercy is a
pledge of a future, and every old mercy draws on a new (as the links do one
another in a chain) if we break not off their course by our unbelief and
diffidence. Psalm. 36.10
O continue thy loving kindness, says David. It is in the Hebrew, O draw out
thy loving kindness to the full length. Gods mercies to his are a continued
series, there is a concatenation, a connection between them. Eccles. 1.8
As a spring runs after it has run, so does God spare his, after he has
spared them. The eye is not weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, no more
is God of showing mercy. Hence Gods servants have usually argued from what they
have had, to what they should have: as David, Paul, and the church here in
Micah. She had praised God for his clemency in pardoning her sins, and there
hence confidently concludes for power against sin: If God will cover it,
certainly he will cure it. The same mercy that moved him to pass by the
transgression of his heritage, will make him turn again, and have further
compassion upon us (say they) in subduing our sins, and casting them all, as a
stone into the mighty waters, so that we shall see them no more, any otherwise
then the Israelites saw the Egyptians, dead on the shore. And all this he will
do for his truth and mercies sake to Jacob and Abraham, for his promise and
covenants sake to our fathers of old. Our fathers trusted in thee, they hoped
in thee and were not confounded. Oh who is a God like unto thee etc? All
nations will walk every one in the name of his God, Mic. 4.5
we also will trust in the name of the Lord our God for ever, and ever. And
these are the reasons respecting God.

SECT. V. 6. Reasons respecting the Saints themselves, weo are 1. pure in
heart. 2. perfect in Christ.
A second rank of Reasons respect the Saints, who are 1. Pure in heart 2.
Perfect in Christ, and therefore spared, as a man spares his own son that
serves him.

pure in heart: they are washed, they are justified, 1 Cor. 6.11 Austin
answered roundly when one upbraided him with the sins of his youth, Quae tu
reprehendis ego damnavi. And when One twitted Beza with his youthly wanton
poems, he replied. Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi. Iedidiah. 2 Samuel 12.25
they are sanctified by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of
our God. Now: Yet God is good to Israel, to the pure in heart, Psalm. 73.1. Yet
for all the sorrow: Yet for all their faults and frailties: which, forasmuch as
they disallow, and disclaim, bewail and out-grow, therefore they are not laid
to their charge. Job was a patient man, yea he is set forth as a pattern of
patience, notwithstanding all his frowardness, notwithstanding he made so many
knots, and brake his thread so often as he did, God accounts of him as if he had
spun an even thread of patience all the time of his temptation. David had his
faults as great as another; and yet because he was upright in the main, God
testifies of him, that he had followed him with all his heart, and done only
that that was right in his sight. 1 King. 14.8. Solomon at Gibeon climbes those
disallowed hills, the high places, and yet loves the Lord, and is loved of him.
God will not see weaknesses, where he sees truth: so pleasing a thing to him
is sincerity in his service. With one breath does God report both these: The
high places were not removed (that was a great fault no doubt) nevertheless
Asa's heart was perfect all his days. Such is the mercy of our Gd to the pure
in heart, to those that study purity, that he will not suffer our well-meant
weaknesses to bereave us of his favor: he rather pittieth then plagueth his
children for the infirmities of upright hearts. 2 Chro. 15.17
A slender service, a small chare, though but bungled at by child, is much set
by of the father. And a bridegroom thinks nothing the worse of his bride, for a
little dirt she has got, being about some foul chare, it being such especially
as she may wash off at pleasure. Zach. 13.1. 1 Ioh. 2.1
We have a fountain always open where we may wash and be clean, and a daily
propitiation for daily transgression, even Jesus Christ the Righteous: in whom

SECT. VII. The Saints are perfect in Christ.
SEcondly, our wants are covered, and our works perfected and refined from all
the filth and flesh that cleaves unto them. According to that, He has made him
to be sin, or sinne-offering, for us who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Not that essential
righteousness of God (as Osiander vainly dreamt) but that perfect obedience
both active and passive, of the Son of God, performed unto his Father: by whom
he is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30 Jer. 23.6
righteousness, etc. yea, Jehovah our righteousness: Which one Name of his
would answer all our doubts and objections, had we but skill to spell all the
letters in it. This righteousness of Christ (made ours by imputation and
acceptance) is that white raiment, Rev. 3.17. wherewith being clothed, the
shame of our nakedness does not appear: for it is full broad, large, and wide
enough to cover all our imperfections. This is that broydered work, and those
bracelets wherewith the Church in Ezekiel being bedight and bedeckt became
perfectly beautiful, even to admiration. These are those jewels of gold, with
studs of silver, made us by the whole Trinity, Cant. 6.9. that best robe of the
prodigal, that cloth of gold and needle-work-vesture of the royal daughter,
Psalm. 45.9. that fair mitre, Zach. 3.4, 5
and change of raiment of Jehoshuah the high priest; when the Lord took away
his filthy garments, and clothed him with better, although Satan, at the same
time, stood at his right hand, had the upper hand of him, because (as some will
have it) his accusation was as true as vehement.

In short, (...).
these are the righteousnesses of the Saints, Revel. 19.8. the pure Lamb of God
having covered us with his own fleece, and, as it were exchanged suits with us:
clothing himself with our nature, that he might again clothe us with the divine
nature: Daniels Hist. of England.
so that Christ puts on us, and we put on him, (as once Edmund Ironfide and
Knute the Dane did by exchange of garments, sealing up thereby a sure peace)
Christ becomes ours, and we become Christ's, and both together make up but one
mystical Christ. For as the body is one, and has many members: and all the
members being many, are but one body: so also is Christ, that is, mystical
Christ, the Church. 1 Cor. 12.12
Now to bring what has been said home to the point in hand; Look how that King
could remember no hostility in Themistocles, whiles he saw in his arms the
smiling countenance of his own son and heir, whom he had taken up: And as
David could discern no defect or deformity in lame Mephibosheth: whiles he
beholds in him the feature of his friend Jonathan: so neither does our heavenly
Father regard our infirmities, whiles he looks upon us in the face of Christ,
and finds us framed anew, according to the image of Christ, in whom he is
abundantly well-pleased.

SECT. VIII. Let none suck poison out of this sweet Point.
FOr Application: Esaias 28.9. To whom shall we teach this Doctrine? who is fit
to hear and receive it? This is meat for children, not off all for dogs, not
draff for swine. Let it therefore be limited to Gods children that fail of
infirmity, not laid hold on by his enemies, that go on in iniquity. And that
they may not, let us bound the point, and mound it too, that no beast break
through to this mountain of mercy, lest he be thrust through with a dart: that no
ox nor ass fall into this pit, by turning Gods grace into wantonness, lest at
length he fall into the bottomless pit: that no spider suck poison out of this
flower, lest he burst, and his bowels gush out with Judas, Acts 1.18
and so he go to his place. In a word, that none stumble at this good word of
God, being disobedient thereunto, 1 Pet. 2.8. lest he stumble and fall, and
never rise again, Hos. 14.9. Which to prevent, two things would be considered.
First, that though all men have their spots, and therefore deserve not to be
spared, yet as wicked men's spots are not the spots of Gods children, so neither
is their speed. For their spots first, Hear what God says of the one; They
have corrupted themselves, their spots are not the spots of my children, they
are a perverse generation: Deuteronomy. 32.5 Phil. 2.15
As of the other; They are, says he, blameless and harmless, the sons of
God, unspotted in the midst of a wicked and wayward generation. Where it is
easy to observe, a flat opposition, a palable difference. The natural man is
all overspread with the bright spot of sins-leprosie. Spots they are and
blemishes (says St. Peter) in the abstract, 2 Pet. 2.19
sporting themselves with their own deceivings, having eyes full of adultery,
and that cannot cease to sin. Such an habit and even necessity of sin they
have, by long trading, contracted, that if the Ethiopian can change his skin,
or the leopard his spots, then may they also do good that are inured to evil.
Jer. 13 23
Sin is in such no otherwise then spots are in a leopard, not by accident but
by nature: such as no Art can cure, no water wash off: For why? they are not in
the leopards skin, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews, and inwards. And
this (to say truth) is the case and condition of us all by nature. Whence also
it is, that the just man slips seven times a day, and, Non datur malum punicum
in quo nen inest granum putre, dixit Crates. 1 John 3.9 (...).
in many things we offend all, says St. James, Apostles and all: and that none
can say, his heart is clean. Howbeit, though a godly man sin, yet he does not
commit sin, he does not sin sinningly, for his seed remains in him. The oil
of Gods Spirit wherewith such a one is anointed, sets the colors (which are
of his own tempering) so sure on, and makes them cleave so fast together, that
it is impossible he should return to his own hue. Christ also, that offers
himself without spot to God his Father, has so purged their consciences from
dead works, that they thenceforth serve the living God acceptably, lifting up
their faces before him without spot; yea they are steadfast, and need not fear,
Job 11.5. Lo, this is the comfortable condition of the children of God. This is
their spot on earth, and this is their speed in heaven. But now the ungodly are
not so. Neither their spot nor their speed is as that of the Saints. For,
first, the lepers lips should be covered according to the law: their breath is
infectious and offensive. To the wicked God says, What have thou to do to
declare my statutes, etc. Psalm. 50.16. Quia non indigebat imn undorum laud.
Neque enim speciosa laus in ere peceatares. Theophyl. in Luc. 4. Psalm.4.3 Psalm.
^6.^6 In Graecorum sacris sacerdos exclamabat. (...); quis hic? Respondebaut
qui aderant, (...) Erason. (...). Act. 13.8 In fermento totajacet uxor. Plaut.
Mic. 1.5. Tubulus quidam paulo supra Ciceronem praetor fuit: homor^m projecte
improbus, ut eju^ ^omen non horrinis sed vit^^ esse videretur. Lips. antiq.
lect.
Our Savior suffered not the devils to speak, because he needed not the
service of such: high words befit not a fool, says Solomon. Even David himself
(till thoroughly purged from his two more grievous sins) was suspended from
the comfort of the covenant, and disabled for holy duties, Psalm. 51.15. For,
know ye not, says He, that the Lord has set apart the godly man for himself.
And thence inferres, the Lord will hear when (as such a One) I call unto him.
But if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. If I cast but
a leering look toward some lust, or have but a months mind to it. If there be
in me but an irresolution against any evil, much more a deliberate purpose to
run into it; God, that cannot see evil, will not hear the prayers, nor bear the
manners of such a David. How much less of graceless and profane persons,
whose whole lump is leavened, whose whole hide is spotted, whose whole frame is
corrupted, being evil, only evil, and evil continually. Who, lastly, are so
transformed into sin, that it is even predicated of them: according to that
of the Prophet; What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? And what
are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? God as he sees no sin
in his children, so he sees nothing else but sin in others: Their moral
virtues are with him but splendida peccata, glistering sins: their civil
praises nothing set by, Jer. 8.8. Sin in such is said to be the old man, as
if sin were alive, and the men dead: as if they were totally turned and
transformed into sins image. What marvel then though the Lord be far from
the wicked, when he hears the prayer of the righteous, Prove. 15.29. They
sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine offerings and eat it, but the Lord
accepts it not. Now (even amidst their sacrifices) will he remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins, Hos. 8.13. Where it is remarkable that in
scorn He calls their sacrifices flesh, ordinary flesh, such as they sell in
the shambles. See the like, Jer. 7.21. And in a like sense, Hos. 9.4. Their
bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord, that is, the
bread for their natural sustenance. The Prophet speaks there of that
meat offering, Levit. 2.5. appointed for a spiritual use; yet called the bread
for their life or livelihood, because God esteemed it no other then
common-meat. Semblably, such (now-adayes) as come in their sins to the Lords
Supper, they receive the bare elements, and because no more, a curse with them.
Obed-Edom was blessed for the Ark, the Philistines cursed: Panem Domini, non
panem Dominum.
wheresoever the Ark came amongst them, there came destruction. The ordinances,
if they be not proper to men, are deadly. God says of those that frequent
them, as Solomon said of Adonijah, 1 Kin. 1.52.
if he will show himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to
the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall dye.

SECT. VIII. Reproof of such as censure hardly of God
NExt here is ground of just and sharp reproof of sundry such, Luke 19.21.22
worse of themselves, and worst of all others

For God first, they repute and report him an austere man, a strict and severe
Lord, a hard and rigorous task-master, such as reaps where he sowed not,
gathers where he scattered not, exacts more then he affords requires more then
they are able to perform. Now if they were ungodly an irreligious men that thus
quarrelled their Lord, as once those murmurers in the wilderness were, that
esteemed Gods house a prisonhouse, Number. 14.3.
of greater bondage and baseness then Egypt it self, it were the less to be
wondered at, and the better to be born withal. For such being out of Christ are
yet under the rigor and coaction of the law, as it requires perfect obedience,
and that by their own strength: which because it is imposible, as now, Gal.
5.3: Rom.6
they die without mercy. But for a child of God that is no longer under the
law but under grace, that has Christ formed already in his heart, of whose
fullness he has received grace for grace, that has the spirit of God for his
guide, Neh. 8.10. Psalm. 119.24. 2 Cor. 12.9.
the joy of God for his strength, the word of God for his learned counsel, and
the grace if God to be sufficient for him; sufficient, I say, to supply that
which is wanting, to forgive that which is committed, to impute Christ's
righteousness, to uphold him in his weaknesses, to raise and restore him in
his lapses, and in all to spare him as a man spares his own son that serves
him, what reason is there that such a man should complain of a hard master, or
cry out of an unreasonable task? indeed if God would accept of no service, but
that which is perfect, bear with no failings, though never so involuntary, cast
out every such thing as were not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary, there were no dealing with him, no standing before him, no
encouragement to come a near him, in his works and worships. If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, says the Psalmist, O Lord, who should stand? But
there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared, that is served
(whic else thou would not.) And upon this ground let Israel hope in the
Lord, (not run away from him and repine against him as Cain did, for that were
to add iniquity to their sin, as Samuel told the terrified people 1 Samuel 12.20,
21, for with the Lord there is mercy, (the most powerful attractive Romans 12.1.
to those that have not put off humanity: whence the cords of kindness are
called the cords of a man Hos. 11.6. not to be drawn to God by them, is
bestial) and with him is plenteous redemption, a cornu copia of comfort, a horn
of salvation, enough and enough for us all, were we never so many of us. He
shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130.3, 4, 7, 8. Be not ye
therefore murmurers against God, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer: since those thins were written for our admonition
upon whom the ends of the world are come.

SECT. IX. Reproof of such saints as censure hardly of themselves, and their
performances.
SEcondly, such of Gods servants as are here censurable as censure overhardly
of themselves, 2 Cor. 10.10.11.
as if no children, because not obedient in all things, as it were meet. These
are those over much wicked Eccles. 7.17. (according to some) that will needs
condemn themselves to die before their time; think too vilely of their own
persons and performances, deny, if not, belie the work of Gods grace in their
hearts, not wisely distinguishing betwixt nullity of grace and imperfection,
weakness and utter want of it, to their I know nor how great spiritual hurt
and hinderance.

These consider not that the law admits of a dispensation in the gospel, that
the tenor of the new covenant requires no set measures of grace, and that if
there be a willing mind. God accepts according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not; takes any thing in good worth where there is a
desire of doing better, and for the rest spares us as a man spares his own son
that serves him. Away then with that male-contented sowernesse seen in some
saints also, Gods whinnels you may call them, for they are ever crying and
puling, when they should rather sing at their work, and rejoice in their
privileges: this would please their father best, as if a man have ever a
little cricket among his children that will be merry and make him merry, this
is the fathers darling. Oh blessed are those that dwell in thine house, says
David, they shall be always praising thee. Psalm. 84.4. And for nothing more,
surely, then for this fatherly and gracious disposition toward thy poor
servants that desire to fear thy name, Neh. 1. Heb, 12.18.
are willing in all things to keep a good conscience pleasing God. Lo the very
will to do well pleases God, if sincere, and seconded with strifes, and
attended with grief for coming short of what we should do. Hearty humiliation
under weakness in well-doing, is as true a sign of sanctification, and fruit
of conversion as ability to do better.

^ow I demand, which of Gods children does not thus much? and whether in doing
hereof they cannot, or at least may not find sweetest acceptance, and surest
recompense? Consider, is not Abraham said to have sacrificed his son, Heb.
11.11.
because he would have done it? And for David, had not he for his bare purpose
of building God an house, this promise made him, that God would build his house
for ever? And albeit that very purpose of his was ignorantly and fondly taken
up, as wanting warrant from God, 2 Samuel 7.7. yet the Lord both graciously
approves it, for thou did well, says he, in that thou wast so minded 2 Chronicles. 6.8. 1 Chronicles. 6.13
and bountifully rewards it, by fulfilling that with his hand, that he had
promised with his mouth, as Solomon thankfuly acknowledges. God takes not
advantages against his servants, as he might, but makes the best of every thing
where the heart is upright.

The good women that came with their spices to embalm our Saviors dead body,
should have known that God would not suffer his holy one to see corruption,
Psalm. 16.
tha^ his body could not have putrified: it was their ignorance, and yet they
are commended for their good intentions. So afterward, Luke 24.1.
when they came to look for the living among the dead, they deserved a chiding
for not remembering what he had foretold them of his resurrection, but receive a
comforting from the Angels. Math. 28.5.

The preparations of the heart are of great price with God Esaias. 55.1. Jer.
30.2. Has he not promised to bless our buds, Es. 44.2, 3, 4.
so that we shall grow up as the willows by the watercourse, to be as the dew
to his people, so that they shall grow as the lilly, and cast forth their roots
as Lebanon. Hos. 14 4, 5. to open a door to such as have but a little strength,
and such a door as none can shut? Rev. 3.8, 9 Phil. 4.19
to supply all our necessities out of the riches of his glory? Has he said all
this for our encouragement, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness,
and shall we not by faith subscribe and seal to it? Do we yet doubt and demur
with Zachary? do we yet stagger at the promises with Sarah? do we question Gods
either power or patience with Moses at Meribab? Oh take heed lest a promise,
Luke 1
nay a covenant (which is a whole bundle of promises, lie a cluster of the
grapes of Canaan) a league of love being left us; any of us should seem to fall
short through unbelief Heb. 4.1. Certain it is that God, that will bear much
with his children in other cases, can least of all brook their unbelief. For
this is as for a child to question his fathers love, though he protest it
never so deeply, which is an extreme provocation. Hence his severity to his
best servants, for offending in this kind. Zachary shall speak no more words
for nine months, because he believed not the Angels words that spoke good unto
him. Sarah is checked for her laughing at the unlikely hood, though ^he overcame
the doubt, judged him faithful that had promised, and by her faith received
power to conceive seed. Those two disciples going to Emaus heard, Heb. 11.11
O fools and slow of heart etc. and the other eleven were reproved for their
unbeleef. Mar. 16.14. Moses also and Aaron were denied the comfort of an
earthly Canaan, because they believed not God to sanctify him at the rock
Rimmon. Deuteronomy. 32.52 1 Cor. 10.11
Now all these things happened unto them for types to us, and are written for our
admonition etc.

Be not ye therefore unbeleevers, but believe: turn not the back of the hand
to the promise, that as a staff should support you: spoil not your souls by
a cruel modesty, by a false humility of the comfort God affords you: but
having found honey, Colos. 2 Prove. 25.16
eat it: believe the prophets and ye shall prosper: see your names written in
this and other precious promises: and if ye cannot out-reason the devil who
seeks to unsettle you, yet out-will him, and say; I will not be blasted out of
my belief, I will not cast away my confidence, or be drawn from the horns of
the Altar Christ Jesus. If I must dye, I will dye at his feet who has promised
to spare me, as a man spares his own son that serves him.

SECT. X. Reproof of such as uncharitably censure others.
LAstly, such are here met with as superciliously censure others, for those
things that God is content to pass by and pardon in them: that will needs be
many masters, Jam. 3.1
as St. James has it, and judge another man's servant: that step into Gods seat
of judicature, and presume to pass hard sentence upon their fellow servants,
because not so forwardly and forth-putting as themselves forsooth. Yea, there
want not such unbridled spirits as stick not to forestall the angels office of
severing the elect from the reprobats, to condemn the race of the righteous,
to excommunicate them for some srailties and infirmities out of their
consciences and companies, yea to unchurch them and to unbrother them in a
passion: despising Christ's little ones, casting dirt on his Jewels, and
estranging themselves from such in affection, in countenance, in society, for
every small infirmity: as if they were akin to those hypocrites in Esaias that
cry, stand apart; Esaias 65.5 Jude 19.
or those wandering stars in St. Jude, that separate themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit, which yet they make great boasts of; or at least, to
those inconsiderat sons of Zebedee, who would needs have fet fire from heaven
straight, and were therefore told, Luke 9.54
ye know not of what spirit ye be. Not of his spirit surely that came not to be
served, but to serve, not to judge, but to save.

For cure of this corrupt humor, Consider.

1. Is this to be followers of God as dear children, and to walk as we have
him for an example? Or would you be content God should deal thus rigidly with
you? I trow not. He sees noe sin in his children, such is his love, and and
shall we be juster then God? Christ will not quench but cherish the least spark
of grace that is in any; and shall we be wiser then Christ? The holy ghost
disdaines not to dwell in the dark and smoaky chambers of their hearts; And
shall we be holier then he? Zach. 4.10
who is this that has despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice
etc. says God to those Jews that wept and slighted the second temple. Hag.
2.3.

2. The Author to the Hebrews bids us study one another, and take notice of
such things only in our brethren, Heb. 10.24
as may whet on love, not that engender dislike, Pitch upon such things as are
amiable, and pass by the rest. This is love, and this is to be like unto God
who is love. There was nothing good in all Sarahs speech Genesis 18.12. but only
this, that she calls her husband lord: and yet for this, God praises her,
setting it as a pearl in a gold-ring to her eternal commendation 1 Pet. 3.6.
There was nothing almost but sin in Rahabs entertainment of the spies, and in
the midwives excuse to the King, and yet Rahab is registered among the ancient
believers, and God builded the midwives houses, that is, Rivet in Exodus
gave them children (as some interpret it) in lieu of their care for preserving
the Hebrew children. Nay for a pattern of ingenuity and candor to us, he gives
the very devils also their due, praising in them what is praiseworthy, when
he styles them principalities, powers, Rulers etc. who yet sin against him of
malicious wickedness. And shall we unchristianly conceal, or but dissemble the
better parts and practices of our weaker brethren, and fasten only upon that
they may draw on dislike or disaffection? This is with the crow to light upon
carrion, and prefer it before sweeter food. This is with the fly to fasten on
the sore, Vultures ad male olentia feruntur.
passing by the sounder places of the body. This is with the vultures, to hunt
after dead carcasses, and with swine turned into a garden, to root in the
muck-kill, if any such be there, not once taking notice of the fruits and
sweets. Sure it is, that if a man should do nothing else but pore upon his own
infirmities, he would, in short space, loath and abhor himself with Job: how
much more if God should break up that sink of sin that is in us, as in Judas,
should we never be able to abide the stench thereof.

3. Is it not sufficient that the wicked censure us for hypocrites,
factionists, humourists etc. watch for our haltings, making a man an offendour
for a word, and turning aside the just for a thing of naught Esaias 29.21?
barking and blaspheming for every small matter, but that we must thus fall out
amongst our selves, and thus fall foul upon one another? Is it not enough that
the Pharisees quarrel Christ's disciples for not fasting, but John's disciples
must join with them, Res commiseranda cum pij fratres etc. Cartw: in loc.
and be first in the quarrel? Mar. 2.18. Mat. 9.14. should thou sit and
speak against thine own mothers son? Psalm. 50.20.

4. Consider lastly, the evil that redounds here-hence to our selves. For a
censorious christian subjects himself to the judgment both of God Mat. 18.34.
Scalig: de re poet: cap. 16. gives this proud and unmannerly censure. Gothi
belluae: Scoti non minus: Angli perfidi, inflati, feri, contemptores, stolidi,
amentes, inertes, inhospitales, immanes. One comes after and censures him thus:
His bolt you see, is soon shot, and so you may happily guess at the quality of
the Archer.
Iam. 3.4. and men, Mat. 7.1, 2. Luke 6.38. Good men will suspect such, bad men
scorn them, and all shun them, and desire to be rid of them. Besides, it may be
just in God to leave such to themselves, and to give them over to the power of
the like temptation, or worse, Gal. 6.1. that they may learn to lend that
mercy too there is that now they are compelled to borrow of others.

SECT. XI. Exhortation to put our selves into Gods service.
THirdly, this Doctrine may serve for justification: and first to those
without, that are yet to choose their master; let them learn to pitch upon God
alone, Exodus 36.6. Esaias. 2.1
When men called upon themselves and one another, with Come, let us go up to
the house of the Lord etc. In which voyage they passed from strength to
strength, Psalm. 84.
went many a dearne mile, and many a weary step, till they came to see the face
of God in Sion. And yet how did they see it otherwise then in the dark glass of
the ceremonies, and not with that evidence of vision and nearness of
acquaintance that we now see and serve him? Time was when the people in
Joshua's days were set to serve God. And notwith standing he told them, Ye
cannot serve the Lord: Josh. 24.18.
for he is a holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your
transgression nor your sin: which was enough in likelihood to have quailed and
cooled them, yet they resolutely replied, Nay, but we will serve the Lord, as
not knowing how better to prefer themselves, or provide for their posterity.
How is it then that we seek not after his service, that we hire not our selves
into his house, since his work is so fair, his wages so great? that we put not
our necks under his yoke, since it is so easy? that we bear not his burden, since
it is so light (no more burden to a man then wings are to a bird?) Esaias 56.6
that we love not to be his servants, since he rules with so much love and
lenity? that we come off no more roundly with his business, as a free-hearted
people, Psalm. 110.2, 3
since he is content to take up with so little? But we are ready rather to shift
off that little as Jonas did his journey to Niniveh. Virtus nolentium nulla
est. He that does good with an ill will, does ill. God strains upon no man,
Exodus 25.2
Exodus 25.2. neither likes he that service that is wrested from us, as
Pharaoh's, or wrung out of us as verjuyce is out of a crab. He loves a
cheerful giver: and therefore when he calls for an offering, he wills that
every man give it willingly with his heart. And that none may pretend cause to
hang off, see how low he stoops. Content he is to accept of a lamb or two for a
sacrifice. And if that be too much, and a man want means for a lamb, let him
bring a pair of turtles, or two small pigeons, and it shall be taken. Or if he
cannot reach to that, a hand-full or two of flower, with a corn or two of salt
shall suffice. Levit. 14.10, 21, 31, 32. An it is often repeated for the
encouragement of weak ones. Look, what a man is able, according to his
ability, even what his hand is able to reach unto, and it shall be accepted.
Now is not this motive sufficient to set in, and go on to lay the last stone of
Gods spiritual building with joy? He rules not over his servants with rigor,
as the Egyptians did over the Israelites: he puts them to no drudgery, as the
Israelites did the Gibeonites: but measuring the deed by the desire, and the
desire by the sincerity, he takes all in good part that they do willingly,
though never so weakly: And for what is wanting in their work, he spares them as
a man spares his own son that serves him. To conclude this first Exhortation,
He requires no more of us then he gives, and gives so much as shall suffice to
his acceptance. How is it then that we stand here idle all day long, and do
not lay our bones to work in his Vineyard?

SECT. XII. Give God the glory of his fatherly goodness.
NExt, we address this Exhortation to Gods faithful children. And so this
doctrine of his fatherly dealing with such as serve him in sincerity should
in-force upon them a threefold duty. 1. of thankfulness to God. 2. of mercy to
men, 3. comfortable enjoyment of themselves. Let God be praised, our brethren
pittyed, and our selves acheared.

For God first, how should we not only justify him from hard suspicions and
aspersions of rigor; but also glorify him for his singular love to us herein,
that he is content to take any thing well at our hands, that is but done with
honest hearts. To quicken you hereunto consider 1. that he requires no more of
us then he gives. 2. gives us to do what he requires. 3. makes the best of that
little we do, and remits the rest.

First, he requires no more then he gives, expects not the gain of ten talents,
where he has given but five, nor of five, where he has bestowed but one: but
that every man be doing something according to his model, and measure of grace
received. Cursed be that cozener, says the Prophet, that has in his flock a
male, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Mal. 1.14.
But he is not accursed that brings no better, because he has no better to
bring. Of a little God is content to take a little; as in Jeroboams son, in
whom there was found a little good, and God took him for it, and as in the
Church of Philadelphia, who had but a little strength, and yet for that little
is highly commended. and not blamed for any thing as the rest were. Where no
gold was to be had, goats-hair was as well accepted. Revel. 3.7 O (...) Naz.
Quicquid vis and non potes, factum Deus reputat. Aug.
The poor widow went as far with her two mites, as some other with two
millions. And those beggars that never were able to deal an alms, shall yet
hear, Come ye blessed etc. for ye fed me hungry, clothed me naked etc. that is,
ye would have done it if it had lain in your power; and to what ye were able,
ye were not backward.

Secondly, he gives us to do that which he requires to be done: which made
Austin pray; Give Lord what thou command, and then command what thou will. I
will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27
says God in the new covenant. Christ will not break the bruised reed, Gal 2.9
Joh. 5. Mat. 12.20, 21
nor quench the smoking flax. Every man cannot be a strong pillar, as James
and Cephas, or a flaming torch, a burning and a shining light in Gods house, as
John Baptist. What though he be but a bruised reed? Christ will not break him.
What though he be but a smoking week of a candle? Christ will not quench him.
A smoking week is offensive to the smell, and is soon quenched, according to
that, Esaias 43.17. they are quenched as tow, which is a thing soon done. But
Christ will not do it tho: but he will attemper himself to their infirmity,
till he has supplied them with light more full, and strength more solid: till
he has brought forth judgment to victory, that is, a smaller measure of grace
to full perfection of conquest over whatsoever corruption. He will not reject
the corn for the chafe, the wine for the dregs, the gold for the dross, but
purging out all our dross, and taking away all our tin, Esaias 1.25. he will
correct and cure us of all wants and weaknesses, till we come to a perfection
of purity, Ephesians. 5.26. to the full measure of a man in Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

Thirdly, he makes the best of that little we do, when he perceives it to
proceed from great love: as in Mary that loved much, and out of her love
anointed Christ's head with that precious ointment. It is likely that she had no
further intent then to show her love in doing our Savior that honor, usual
at feasts, and to refresh his spirits by the sweet scent of that ointment. But
the Spirit of God directed that fact for a funerall-service: and Christ defends
her against Judas and the rest, that she had done it against the day of his
burial, Joh. 12.7. Joh. 12.7
In the same Chapter, at his triumphant riding into Jerusalem, the children
sang, the disciples shout, Hosanna in the highest: the Pharisees fret at both,
the Lord Christ defends both. The children he defends from Psalm. 8.2. Out of
the mouth of babes, etc. the disciples he defends from the necessity of their
duty, wherein had they failed, the very stones would cry out, Luke 19.36, 40.
And yet the Disciples themselves (how much less the children?) understood not
what they did at that time. Indeed, when Jesus was glorified, then that they
had done these things unto him, Joh. 12.16. But that whether ignorance, or
incogitancy was never laid to their charge, through Gods fatherly love, and
indulgence to his, whom he spares as a man spares his own son that serves
him: and is therefore to be praised of them thoroughout all eternity.

SECT. XIII. Bear with others weaknesses, and forbear harsh censures.
SEcondly, Let Gods Saints be exhorted to look (as God does) upon the
infirmities of their brethren with a more favorable, and forbearing eye: not
thinking it strength of grace to endure nothing in the weaker sort, but bearing
with them, and believing all things, straining to a good opinion of them, where
there is but the least probability to endure it, 1 Cor. 13.7. Take not up every
evil report you hear of another from a talebearer, as you do wares from a
peddler: but frown upon such, and be ready to make apology. In particular. 1.
Judge no man by the outward appearance, or common-hearsay: for so you may
beseem to condemn a dear child of God, and approve a detestable heretic, and
incarnate devil. St. Paul's companions, that were the very glory of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. were counted the sweepings of the world, and offscouring
of all things. The precious sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, were
esteemed as earthen pitchers, Lam. 4.2. Cors^etur Lutherus so esse Apostatam
sed ^eatam and sancium, qui fidem dia^ol^ datam non servavit.
Athanasius was impeached by the Arrians of adultery. Basil by his brethren of
heresy. Luther by the Papists of Apostasy. Austere John is said to have a
devil. Sociable Christ to be a wine-bibber. And it was the worse because from
Scribes and Pharisees, whose word must carry such credit with it, as alone to
condemn Christ. We would not have brought him to thee, were he not worthy of
death. And whose life must be a rule to others, Do any of the Pharisees believe
in him? Take heed therefore what you hear, and to whom you give credit.

But may I not believe mine own eyes? O^j.
judge the tree by the fruits? Matthew. 7.

Not always in matter of fact. Sol.
Our Savior speaks there of heretics and seducers; and bids judge of them by
their fruits, that is, by their doctrines and opinions that are corrupt and
carnal. But for point of practice, the best tree does not always bear, or not
always alike: An apple tree may have a fit of barrenness as well as a crab
tree: or the fruit may be nipt sometimes by a frost. God only knows what sap
is in the root, what truth is in the heart: and let him that knows it, judge of
it.

2. Be favorable in sins strengthened by natural inclination, or by long
continued custom (which is not so easily broke off,) or by multitude of
temptations and enticements. The best minds when troubled yield inconsiderate
motions: as water that is violently stirred sends up bubbles: and how often
have carnal respects drawn weak goodness to disguise it self with sin?

3. Judge no man by that he is in a passion, whether of grief, fear, or anger:
for these are violent, and have made the holiest in their behavior little
^esse then bestiall: witness David in his sear of Saul's fury, in his roaring
over Absalom, and rage at Nabal. Passions like kine in a narrow passage ride
one upon another; and like heavy bodies down steep hills, once in motion they
know no ground but the bottom. Oh how subject are Gods best Saints to weak
passions! and if they have the grace to ward an expected blow, how easily are
they surprised with a sudden foil! Sometimes both grace and wit are asleep in
the holiest and wariest breasts: and the wisest are miscarried by their passions
to their cost. What shiprack of his faith and patience had meek Moses well-nigh
made against the Rock Rimmon. As, at another time how did he in a sudden
indignation cast away the two-Tables, and abandon that which he would, in cold
blood, have held faster then his life? But passion does so bemist the cleerest
judgment otherwhiles, that a man shall be apt to think there is sense in
sinning, and that he has some reason to be mad.

4. Censure not any to be either better or worse for some particular action,
but consider what his main bent is, and accordingly conceive of him. David that
says his sins were more then the hairs of his head, says also, (in respect
of his general resolution, and full purpose of heart) I have not declined from
thy statutes, neither is there any way of wickedness in me. Saint John looked
upon the Lady, 2 John, 1.4
and her children, as elect, because they walked in the truth, though not
without some particular stumblings, and aberrations. And Saint Paul was
confident of the Thessalonians election, 1 These. 1.4
though so compassed with infirmities, that he doubted he had labored in vain,
and feared their Apostasy, 1 These. 3.5. Persuaded also he was better things of
the Hebrews, Heb. 6.9
and such as accompany salvation, though he found them slow of foot, and dull
of hearing, and frights them with the terror of the Lord upon Apostates. Who
can promise himself freedom from gross infirmities, when Aaron that went up
into the mount comes down, and does that in the valley which he heard forbidden
in the hill? Gods best children may not only be drenched in the waves of
sin, but lie in them for a time, and perhaps sink twice to the bottom, before
they recover. Sudden indeliberate out-bursts, contrary to the general bent and
purpose, break not the league betwixt God and his people, as the robberies done
by Pirates of either Nation do not betwixt King and King. A good man is
habitually good when actually evil, and an evil man is habitually evil, when
actually good. He that goes up a hill, may have many slips and falls, yet is
still said to be going up the hill, because his face is toward the top. A sheep
may slip into a dich, as he is leaping over it, yea lie there some time till
the shepherd find it and help it out. Behold, I, even I will both search my
lost sheep, and seek them out says the Lord. I will seck that which was lost,
and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was
broken, Ezekiel. 34.11, 12.16. Rev 24. Psalm. 119.176
and will strengthen that which was sick. I will deliver them out of all places
where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. Christ the good
shepherd tiddleth his lambs, dyed for their ignorance Heb. 7.7. bare their
infirmities Esaias 53. breeds a first love in his little ones, and gives charge
that none despise them, much less discard them, no, though they go astray as
David did like a lost sheep. And mark his reasons, God despises them not Math
18.10. but senthis son to seek them, and sets his Angels to tend and look to
them; therefore let none set light by them.

SECT. XIV. Take comfort and courage notwithstanding infirmities and failings
in the manner.
LAstly, this doctrine methinks might make the servants of God everlastingly
merry: it should wonderfully clear up the countenances and cheer up the hearts
of all Gods chosen: it should banish and bar out of their blessed souls all
their unnecessary scruples, distrusts, dejections and discouragements arising
from the sense of their manifold defects, distractions in duty, indisposition,
ignorance, forgetfulness, omissions, or failings in the manner.

All which, so long as they are groned under, grieved at, and striven against,
Peccata nobis non nocent si non placent. Augustine.
God will never impute unto them: nay, he will spare them as a man spares his
own son that serves him. Now how that is they can well tell that are parents of
towardly and tractable children, that are good-natured, and well-conditioned.
And yet they cannot neither, be they never so tender, and their children never
so tractable: since there is no more comparison betwixt their mercy and his,
then is betwixt a molehill and a mountain, nay the least drop of a bucket, and
the main Ocean. Yea, I dare be bold to say, that all the mercies of all the
fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, friends, allies in the world, compared to
his mercy, are mere cruelty.

This makes the Prophet as having no other way to utter it, vent himself by an
exclamation, Oh how excellent is thy loving kindness O God! The clouds may
commend thy faithfulness, the mountains thy righteousness, the great deep
thy judgments, but who or what can set forth thy goodness? Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7.
It is beyond all that heart of man can conceive, or tongue of Angels express.
Having therefore such a mercy to make use of, such a father to do service unto,
how is it that we are so dull and disconsolate? how is that we serve not the
Lord, with gladness, and come before him with singing? Psalm 100.2.

A son feeling the love of his father, creeps nearer under his wing, or elbow,
and is welcome. So here.

Yea, but I am so weak, and worthless,

How weak? say thou be no stronger then a child newly quickened in the womb,
Sol.
the very first-springings in the womb of grace are precious before God. Co.
2.13. And you has he quickened, to assure the weak (says One) that though they
be but as the child that lies in the womb, and have not so much as the
strength of a babe newborn, they are accepted with God.

Quickened I trust I am, says another, and born anew to God: yet it is as a
father spares his son that serves him.

A child, Heb. 5.11, 12 Fractu ^st or est (...) liber orum, sed injantra
dulcior. Sense. (...) 9. (...). Lun. 365. Pater libros non reijeit quod
aeg^o^i, claudi, debiles deformes sint: sed chariores ^ibet and mollius tractat
etc. Spin. de justi. christi. Ob.
during his nonage is very infirm, ignorant, wayward: does few chars in the
house, makes many.

So is it also in Gods house, for he has sons of all sizes. Such children in
grace were the Disciples during the bridegrooms abode with them: such also were
the contentious Corinthians 1 Epist. 3.1, 2, 3. the dull and droanish Hebrews,
milk-sops and babies at first, who yet afterward came to be his proper men,
tall Christians. The greatest giant has been in swadling-clouts: the learned
Doctor has been in his horn-book: and he that now does God best service, time
was when he did him little enough.

But parents delight as much in their younger children that play about the
house, as in those bigger that can earn their livings. If we can but call Abba
father, or but name the name of the Lord in prayer, and so depart from evil 2 Timothy 2.19. he is much taken with it. His ears are open to their prayers, says
David, to their breathing, says Jeremy, as a kind mother watches and
listeneth to the least whimping of her child. Yea because the soul is sick,
the service is twice welcome: as if a sick child reach us any thing, we count
it more then to send another on a laborious errand.

Oh but I do not only not serve my heavenly father, but disobey and displease
him, and that often.

Is any child turned out of doors because dabbled? Sol.
No, but if he be for a while, yet afterward he is whipped, and taken in again.

I am so vile and froward, Ob.
I cannot take a whipping, but am ready to fret at it, or to faint under it.

What father will abandon his child because being weak, Sol.
and wearyish, he is therefore thwart and waspish, and cries himself out of
breath (it may be) when corrected: especially if he have been otherwise a
good-natured child, and well-deeded.

Ey, Ob.
but I am none of those, I am such a child, as no father would away with.

Thy father is God and not man, and will do more then any earthly father or
friend else will or can do. Sol.
Jer. 3.1. And when my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up.

Ey, but if the Lord should take me up, yet it would not be long ere he turned
me out again for my naughtiness. Ob.


Not so, for he hates putting away. Besides, the servant abides not in the
house, but the son abides. Joh. Sol.
8.35.

The servant if he cannot do his masters work to his mind, is dismissed and
packt away, as that young man of Egypt that was servant to an Amalekite, was
cast off by his master, because three days before he fell sick, and became
unfit for service. But a son, 1 Samuel 30.13.
albeit he be not able to do any thing (to speak of) is retained and cherished,
because a son.

If I were so good a child as some I know, and could do such service, as they,
I should be very cheerful. Ob.


1. They that have more grace, have more to account for: that which thou have
is thy fathers allowance, Sol.
be contented, Employ and improve thy stock and thou shall have more.

2. Omnis Christianus Cruci anus Luther.
Thou know not their pressures and grievances whom thou so admirest: thou
see but the best of them: they have also enough to do with themselves, if you
knew all: little do others know where their shoe wringeth them. Every
Christian is a Crucian.

3. I told you before, that God requires no more then he gives, and yet gives
also as much as shall suffice to his acceptance, In Eucharisticis licebat
offerre panes fermentatos ut osienderetur deum far nestram infir. mitatem.
Alsted. Matthew. 6.28.
one may be a good servant, though he be not the best in the country. All the
good grounds brought not forth a like quantity of fruit, some not the third
part as others did, and yet that little they did was good and ripe fruit and
themselves were grounds respected of God, and blessed by him. He calls our good
works the fruit of the vine, and loves to taste of them though they relish still
of the old stock. The vine is the weakest plant, vet very fruitful The lilies
spin not, and yet are gorgeously attired.

God will greatly glorify himself in the branch of his planting, in the work of
his hands, so that a little one shall be come a thousand, and a small one a
strong nation. I the Lord will hasten it in his time Esaias 60.21.

4. You have more cause of comfort in that little you have, then of
discouragement in that more that you want: since it is a far greater work to
beget grace where it is not, then to increase it where it is.

Look therefore on others bitterness for imitation and incitation, but not for
slavish dejection and self-blinding. Disgrace not thine own graces because of
other men's perfections and precedencies: but be thankful if Christ be formed
in thee to any degree, and that thou have any thing to do about God. Only
whatsoever thy hand sindeth to do, do it with all thy might. And then, he that
follows after righteousness as a servant follows his trade whereto he is
bound apprentice (though he be far from being his trades-master) he shall have
honor and life, honor in earth, and life in heaven. Prove. 21.21.

Yea but displeasing service is double dishonor,

I grant that a powerless performance of holy duties, Sol.
proceeding from a spirit of sloth joined with presumption, so highly provokes
God against his own dear children, that he has much a do to forbear killing
them, as he had to forbear Moses when he met him in the Inn. Ready he is to
have a blow at them, as he had at David when he brake his bones, and felt his
fall to his dying-day. Psalm. 51
But they that see and sigh under their wants and weaknesses with shame and
sorrow need not be discomforted. Christ appeats for them in heaven with their
names upon his bosom, and their services in his hand, which he not only
presents but perfumeth; not only puts them up, but adds weight to them:
nonsuting and casting out of the court all accusations, and allegations made
against them either by sin or Satan: and drowning their noise by that blood of
sprinkling, Heb. 12.
that speaks better things then the blood of Abel.

This he does for them in heaven: as on earth, he is touched with the feeling
of their infirmities, and has taken order with their enemies for their
security Joh. 18.8. and with their friends for their kind acceptance,
commanding the stronger to receive them into their affections Romans 14.1. and to
restore them in their outstraies Gal. 6.1. promising also to give strength to
him that faints, and to increase power to him that has no strength. Even the
youths (that trust to their own strength, or to any measure of grace acquired,
which is but a creature, and to trust in it, is to trust in the arm of flesh;
lo those youths) shall faint and be weary: and the young men shall utterly
fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall
walk, and not faint. Esaias 40.29, 30, 31.

In regard of the Authors absence, and the misplacing of his Copy, the Reader
is desired to refer this Exposition of the 18. ver. of the 3. Chapter to its
proper place.

Verse 18. Then shall ye returne] you wicked blasphemers that have flandred
Gods hous-peeping, and brought up an evil report of his providence and
justice; as if in managing the matters of the world, he were less equal, or
less careful: You, I say, shall return, not to your right minds by a through
conversion, by an entire change of the whole man, from evil to good (alas
for your misery, it is past time of day with you for any such good work:) But you
shall alter your opinions, when your eyes are once uncealed by the extremity of
your suffering, Plin. Prove. ^^ 25 E^^. 4.30 Dan. 11.21 Vasallos Christi. Socrat.
(as the Mole, eyes are said to be, when pangs of death are upon her) to see
and acknowledge a sensible difference between the righteous (ever more
excellent then his neighbor, let him dwell where he will: because sealed up to
the day of redemption) and the wicked who is but a vile person, an (...) (let
him be as great as Antiochus Epiphancs the great King of Syria) between him
that serves God, accounting it the highest honor to be his vassal, as
Constantine, Theodosius and Valentinian their Emperors) called themselves: And
him that serves him not, but casts off the yoke of his obedience, being a
son of Belial; and counts it the only liberty to live as he lists, and not to
be ruled by God.

Then shall ye returne] Then when it it is too late, when the day of grace is
past, the gales of grace gone over, the gate shut, the drawbridge taken up.
Then shall ye wretched lingerers and loytorers Epimetheusses, postmasters,
after-wits, that come in at length with your fools Had-I-wist, return, not as
the Prodigal did, who seasonably and savingly came to himself Luke 15.17.
having bin before utterly bestraught, 1 King. 8.47
and quite beside himself, by the deceitfulness of sin, called foolishness of
madness Eccles. 7.25. nor as those true converts mentioned in Solomon's prayer,
that bethink themselves and repent, and make supplication to their judge: Par.
in Rev. 18.19. (...). Mat. 27.3 Fox Martyrol
But as Judas; who, whilst he played alone, wan all, but haunted with the
furies of a guilty conscience, which would needs make one with him, he repented
after a sort, with a poenitentia sera Iscariotica. as Pareus calls it, had
some after-thoughts, but not to a transmentation; some inward wamblings, but
they boiled not up to the full height of a godly sorrow, and therefore came to
nothing. Or, as James Abbes, with his hideous All too late, All too late: So
these wicked ones in the text, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the kingdom of heaven, and themselves thrust out; Lazarus in Abraham's bosom,
and their selves in the burning lake; Mat. 13.43
Christ's poor despised fellow sufferers shining forth as the Sun in the
kingdom of their father, and themselves cast out into outer darkness; then
shall they change both their mind and their note: then shall their odious
blasphemies be driven back again down their throats, and then made to say with
Phara^. Exodus 9.27
The Lord is righteous, and so are all his people, Esaias 60.21. but I and mine
associates are wicked, and therefore deservedly wretched. We once counted the
proud happy, but now we see that of David verified which erst we believed not:
Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed: for that they erred from thy
commandments. Psalm. 119.21
We looked upon the righteous as calamitous, as worms and no men: as the
nullisicamen populi ( Tertullians expression) fit to be set with the dogs of
the flock, De resurrect. Job 30.1.
and as the offscouring of all things. But now we can vote with that man of
God and say, Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people, Deuteronomy.
33 29
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thine exe^^ncy!
and thine enemies are now found liars unto thee: for thou treadest upon their
high places, when they are trodden under foot as unsavory salt. Woe unto (...)
spoilers; for now we are spoiled etc. Isa. 33.1 Ier. 4.13 Isa. 33.14
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who can abide with ever
lasting burnings? Behold the day is come that burns as an oven Mal. 4.1. and
we are now as stubble fully dried that it may burn the better Nah. 1.10. We are
put away (even all the wicked of the earth) like dross Psalm. 119.119, thrust
away as thorns 2. Sam. 23.6. placed as vile things under Christ's feet Psalm.
John Careless.
110.1. When the righteous shine as bright as silver upon the celestial shelf
(as that martyr said) and surpass us as far as the lily does the thorns Cant.
2.2. or as the gold does the coals in the goldsmiths shop: yea they are the
throne of Christ Exodus 17.16. his Jewels Mal. 3.17. his ornament Ezekiel. 7.20.
the beauty of his ornament, and that set in majesty ib. a royal diadem on the
head of Jehovah. Esaias 62.3. and so they shall one day appear to be, though now
they do not, 1 Ioh. 3.2. it shall be no hard matter to discern them.

Between the righteous and the wicked] Here they are together in the church
militant, and ever have been. Sinners in Sion Isa. 33.14. sacrificing Sodomites
Isa. 1.10. a devil in Christ's family Ioh. 13.10. All men have not faith 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. all the Lords people are not holy Number. 16.3. that any are, it is
just wonder. What is man that he should be clean, and he which is born of a
woman that he should be righteous? Job 15.14. None are so but such as are
arraied with that fine white linen and shining, the righteousnesses of the
saints Rev. 19.8. that twofold righteousness Imputed and Imparted, of
Justification and of Sanctification. See both 1 Cor. 6.11. and seek after both
by Christ's Merit and Spirit, by his Value and Virtue. He is Jehovah our
righteousness Ier. 23.5. and of his fullness we all receive Ioh. 1.16. He it
is that makes us to differ from the wicked of the world, that have hearts full
of hell, and are ever either hatching cockatrices eggs, or at best, weaving
spiders webbs; vanity or villainy is their whole practice. The best among them
would serve god, and yet retain their lusts too; as Solomon thought he could
follow sinful pleasures, and yet keep his wisdom. And with such we must
converse whiles in this world. Tares will be with the wheat, goats among the
sheep, righteous and wicked together. God permits it so to be for the glory of
his free grace, and for the trial and exercise of his people. Our care must be
the greater: for evil men endanger good men, as weeds do the corn, as bad
humors the blood, or an infected house the neighborhood, We must resolve (as
Ioshuah) to serve the Lord, howsoever: because a difference shall be one day,
set between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Where we see,
that not serving of God, not sacrificing is a sin, Eccles. 9 2. Not robbing
only, but the not relieving of the poor was the rich man's ruin. Not gluttony
only, but overmuch abstinence may overthrow the body. Omission of diet breeds
diseases; so does omission of duties: and makes work for hell, or for the
Physician of our souls. Let us therefore have grace whereby we may serve God
with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.27. Serve him as old Zachary in his
Canticle says we should do, Luke 1.74, 75. First out of sense of his dear love
in our deliverance by Christ: whereinto the deeper we dive the sweeter. Servati
sumus ut serviamus.
This will make us love to be his servants, Esaias 56.7. fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12.12. Secondly, serve him without fear, slavish fear,
serve him with an holy security, in full assurance of his gracious assistance
and acceptance; yea though thorough infirmity we miss, or mar his work, yet
he will spare us, Mal. 3.17. Thirdly, serve him in holiness and
righteousness, in all parts and points of duty: show your integrity both for
subject and object: not picking or chusing' your work, nor sticking at any
thing, but willing in all things to please God. He does not Gods but his own
will, that does no more then himself will. Fourthly, serve him sincerely, in
holiness and righteousness ( before him, or, as in his presence.) Set the
Lord ever at your right hand; look him full in the face, approve your hearts
and lives unto him, do him but eye-service, and it suffices. Fifthly, serve
him constantly, all the days of your lives, hire your selves to him for term
of life: why should you desire to shift or fleet? where can you mend your
selves, either for fairness of work, or fullness of wages? Can the son of
Iesse give you vineyards etc. said Saul to his servants, so may God say, Can
the world do for you, as I both can and will if you cleave to me with full
purpose of heart? Sure it cannot etc.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of all the Principal things contained in this whole
WORK.
A
ABstinence Page 265 Admonition rejected p. 60, 61. the best need it p. 480.
R^ch. 1. admonished by an Hermit p. 321 Adoption: the whole Doctrine of it p.
912, 913, 914, 915, 916, etc. Adultery goes along with idolatry p. 69, 70, 71.
punished p. 57, 664 Affliction is Gods thorn-hedge p. 27. it is useful p. 26.
humbl^th us p. 89. teaches us 90. makes us pray, ib. is Gods vocal
instruction to us 377. Comforts under it 385. Difference of afflictions that
befall saints and sinners 414, 421. Saints are thereby purged 591, 592, 661,
662. tried 593. gratified 593. How to live by faith in affliction 888, 889.
Despondency under affliction reproved 890. Suffer it patiently 891, 892. though
not presently delivered 893. Helps thereunto, ib. and 894. God a Father to his
afflicted. 928 Alchymy a pick-purse p. 420 Alexander M. meeting the high priest
p. 520 Ambition unsatisfiable p. 422 Amos, who p. 221 Amurath 3 stabbed to
death p. 579 Angels readily serve the Saints p. 504, 537. and why 504. they are
our Gardians 512. heavenly spirits, etc. 537 Anger rash, the evil of it p. 326
Antiquity falsified by Papists p. 561 Apostasy p. 67. Apostates 74^ it is very
dangerous 178 Apparel: pride in it condemned p. 448 Assurance: labor after
it p. 153, 208. be not unsettled 618 Astrology judiciary condemned p. 446
Atheists practical p. 450
B
BAal, who p. 30. Baalim what 37 B. Babingtons three-leaved book p. 686
Baptism promised p. 583 Bastards reproached p. 652 Bath of Christ's Blood p.
660 Beauty lovely p. 281. stained with evil manners 408 Be Best in worst times,
and why 695, 696 697, 698, etc. Blasphemy punished p. 676, Blood-guiltinesse
woeful p. 406 Borbonius anagrammatized p. 23 Bribery condemned p. 73, 354, 382
C
CAlling of the Gentiles p. 623 Get a lawful Calling p. 309 Calvin's
Institutions, when, and why written p. 273. Calvin belied by A Lapide p. 601
Cardinals pompous creation p. 25 Censure not others harshly p. 936, 937, 940
Chemarims who p. 446 Children soon corrupted p. 83. unnatural children 384.
degenerate children 642. a fathers huge love to his children 585. Sennacherib
why slain by his own sons 399 Church described by her afflictions p. 594.
restless here 504. is invincible 527, 576. is under persecution 594. she shall
be delivered 887. only she must pray for it 888. she is married to Christ 897
has him for her Head 13 Christ his yoke is easy p. 152. he is a
thorough-Saviour 169. a dew to his 179. King of his Church 360. Abyssines
emblem of his works 457. his Deity asserted 485. he pacifieth the heart 488. be
shall reign 492. his intercession answered 506. how he is sent of his Father
513. how anointed 522. his dolorous passion 523. his subjects have peace ib.
why He is called the Branch 539. All prophecies are fulfilled in him 557. his
poverty stumbled at ib. the Bath of his blood 583, 660. benefits thereby 682.
he is Gods shepherd 589. the Sun of righteousness 683. the souls physician
683. his Intercession 943. A false Christ p. 689 Clouds p. 560 Comfort: God
comfort the abject 503. comforts of the scripture, and of the creature 423.
Company: evil is contagious p. 490 513 Conference: benefit of it p. 680, 700,
824. Satan hinders it 680. it is an indispensable duty 812. and why 813.
barrenness in, and backwardness unto it reproved 818. be forward and free
that way 820. means and helps thereunto 821, 822, 823, 824. Conscience:
natural stoopeth to the image of God p. 700 Consideration: its necessity, and
utility p. 473. See thought, meditation Constantinople: covetousness was its
ruin 403. 591. Conversion: turn to God, and how p. 197, 498, 600. because God
is gracious 499. Cyprian converted by rea^ing J^nah 351. Covenant breach a
great sin p. 643. dangerous 647. New covenant sweet p. 44. see 594
Covetousness restless p. 340, 341. unsatisfiable 405. accursed 428 Council
of Trent p. 16 Courage for Christ, get it p. 482. and how ib. Cruelty inhumane
p. 223, 225, 226, 227. gloried in 429. Parisian Massacre 227 Curse of God
lights heavy p. 626
D
DEad dug up p. 228 Deliverance the times of it p. 885, 866, 527, 903.
Church shall be delivered 887, 888, 903. pray for it 888 Dependence upon God
for all p. 925 Depopulation accursed p. 455 Desertion p. 89. what to do in it
836 Desolation fruit of sin p. 36 Desires: seconded with endeavors p. 483
Digressions when they are lawful p. 441 Diligence in well-doing p. 891
Disgrace a great judgment p. 633. more feared then sin is ib. Devils first
sin, what p. 899 Divorce for light matters not lawful p. 654. 655 Doctrine
like rain, and how p. 246 Drowsinesse spiritual p. 476 Drunkenness: mischief
of it p. 104. it is the mother of mary sins 426. it is a damning sin 432.
gloried in by some 265. drunken-healthing 431. drunken so^s 187 Duty: be much
in it p. 834, 835, 891 shall be accepted 825. and why 827; 828, 829
E
Earthquakes, terrible ones p. 597, 222, 394 Eclipses portentous p. 210, 211
Egypt fruitful p. 604 converted, ib. Q. Elisabeths clemency p. 309. her prayer
436 Enemies of Gods people open and secret p. 214. their cruelty 215 Gods heavy
hand upon them 601. set (...) against another 602. Woe unto them 870, 871, 916.
who they be 871. see persecutours, Church. England: our ancient mearenesse p.
165. our Reformation wonderful 205. our destruction may be sudden 278. God
warned us by John Friths Book in a fishesbelly 321 Englands Genge 395. it is a
blessed Country 674, 675. Pererius his prophecy of our ruin 505 Enthusi^sts
slight the scriptures p. 129, 130. see 209 Exact walking required of saints p.
910, 911 Self-Examination p. 452. do it, or God will punish 453, 475
F
FAith an hard work p. 43. wherein it consists 45. a^^^opriate God by it 384.
it quicke^^th other graces 425. founded upon the power of God 546. live by
faith 426, 808, 889. it makes men courageous 602. do all in faith 662. believe
the goodness of God 936 Famine: a sore plague p. 632, 245 Fasting: the
exercise of it p. 197, 201, 202. fruit of it 204 Father: God is a Father to all
his faithful ones p. 911. whence, and how 91, 914 he is not a Father to the
wicked 915. yet they claim kindred 916. his mercy is more then fatherly 927,
928. Fear: it causes have p. 157. Panick, fears 412, 577, 602, 805 Fear of God
p. 614. every true Christian fears the Lord 708, 709. how, and why 707, 800,
801, etc causes, effects, companions, and opposites of this holy fear 800, 801,
802, 803. kinds of it 804, 627, 708. who they are that fear not God 804. or
other things more then God 805. The best are defective in it 807. signs of
Gods holy fear 807, 809. mo^ives to it 810. means 810, 811 Few exalt God p.
154. few wise 182. few good 212, 377, 591 Scottish fire-crosse p. 217
Forgetting of God p. 121 Fortune how represented p. 237 Free Grace p. 179. all
is of mercy 509. magnify free grace in our adoption 920 Friends are often
perfidious p. 383 Fruitfulness p. 180
G
GAin of godliness p. 676, 849. many look only at wages ^77 Garments
wherefore given p. 33 Geneva upheld by the hand of heaven p. 509, 5^0 Gentiles:
your calling p. 623. disgusted by Jews ib. Gifts once abused, blasted p. 632
Glory: give all to God p. 422. in case of victory 612 Glory of saints here and
hereafter p. 898 God: he is a great King p. 628. 629. his name is dreadful
629. his patience abused turns to fury 655, 656. his hatred of sin 22. his
omniscience 78. his liberality in rewarding 145. seek him ib. his patience 233,
238. his superabundant pardoning mercy 388, 389, 390. his subduing grace 390.
he frowaeth the wicked to destruction 286. how he is a Rock 421. He sees,
therefore take heed 421, 652. how he hates sin 4^1. his faithfulness 425.
We see but little of Him 438. He is with his, and for them 479. his anger
against sinners 497. his jealousy for his people 506, 507. he comfort the
abject 503. his tender mercies 508, 513. he effects great matters by small
means 529 he is immutable 666, 667. how he is said to repent ib. wicked men
have base and bald thoughts of him 855. He is Lord of Hosts 867, 869. what his
hosts are, and why so called 867, 868. his truth 883. his goodness ib. his
justice ib. he is not an hard Master 934. he takes small things in good part
935. let us believe his goodness 936. Gospels threefold operation p. 486
Grace of God is the greatest blessing p. 621. get it rather then gold ib. seek
it first 472. it is free p. 14, 179, 518. See free grace. Grace has
unspeakable comfort p. 909 Great men's sins do much hurt p. 322. they must be
told of them 348 Grief causing death p. 133 Grow in grace p. 684, 685
Gunpowder-treason p. 58
H
Hardness of heart p. 544 Hear attentively p. 136. enhearing ear 501 Heavens
rest and happiness p. 889 Heavenly-mindednesse p. 605 Hellfire terrible p.
591, 592, 681. torments thereof 601. not believed 681. History useful p. 166
Holiness is honorable p. 907. and therefore to be sought 907, 908 Honor God
in 1 thought. 2 words. 3 works p. 921. see glory and praise Hope p. 40 The
horrible Sophister p. 419 Hosea, when and how long he prophesied p. 1. how he
took to wise an harlot 4 Humiliation must be hearty p. 678 Humility in holy
duties threefold p. 376 Hypocrisy is an hateful lie p 157. an odious vice
244, 626, 627, 628 Hypocrites are accursed p. 627, 114. their specious
pretenses 568. why they partake of Ordinances 569. they wrangle with God 677
I
IDolatry and adultery together p. 4, 69, 70, 71. It is an abominable sin 99,
115, 116, 584. a senseless sin 433, 434. a land-desolating sin 561
Idolaters are over at uncertainties p. 368. they kiss their idols 168 Jehovah
Gods memorial 161. the import of it 666 Jews: their calling 121. their land
fertile tile 193. a disjected and despised people 288. their sublime dotage
302. Satan stirred up Herod to beautify their Temple 487. of their conversion,
and future flourish 515, 578, 592, 599, 602. their cruelty 548. how they are
hated ib. they are a very numerous nation 564, cozened by a mock-Moses 565.
their last doleful desolation 571. they are discovenanted ib. sold 30 a penny
572, disjected 573. they are still vainglorious 592. harsh husbands 650.
earthly-minded 685. their great respect to the Law 686, 687 they reject the
Gospel ib. and Christians ib. they falsify the text 688. their sects and
dissentions 689 Ignorance, brutish 617, 57- affected 63, 64, 71. a blushful
sin 436 Ignominy the reward of iniquity p. 634 Images in Churches p. 80
Impudence in sin p. 534 Incorrigible 26, 27, 53, 77, 78, 94, 100 Ingo King of
Danes his respect to poor saints p. 908 Infi^^^^ties: what are p. 933. they
deprive n^^ of Gods favor 941. objections about them answered 942 Ingratitude
how displeasing to God p. 29 a remedy against it ib. hatefulness of it 30,
109. it forfeiteth all 31,33,50 Joel who, and when he lived p. 185 Joy in
wickeds downfall, limited p. 612 Joy of the wicked is short p. 34, 35. they joy
in other men's misery 298 The just man's joy p. 207. in affliction 442 Judges,
evil, a public mischief 459. judgment perverted 418 Judgment general: it
shall certainly be 431. terrible 658, 682. the sire of that last day 406. where
Christ shall sit to judge p. 596, 213 Judgments of God in this life: Observe
them 612. rejoice in them ib. He smites not till needs must 632. and then is
resolute ib. He loves to retaliate 643. He punishes slowly, but surely 663.
K
KNow God as a Father p. 918, and how 919. grow in knowledge 92. sin not
against knowledge p. 635.
L
Landmark removed and how p. 85 Laws excellency and use 686. the Law
judicial, ceremonial, and moral 688 Licentionsnesse under Nero p. 470 Lie
not p. 264. it is a great sin 55, 378, 159. brings des^lation ib. Life a
precious mercy p. 636. it is in Gods hand ibid. how and why men's lives are
shortened 481. live apace 598 Lip-labor lost-labour p. 110 Lord, whence p. 525
Losses of saints made up p. 563 Love God, and how p. 923, 924. suffer for him
out of love ib. Luk^ warmness condemned p. 701 Lut^er over-magnified p. 689
M
MAccabees whence so called p. 558 Magistrates must countenance Ministers p.
470. Exactours are a public pest 573. they must fear God 666. See Judges:
Malachy, who p. 607, 608 Manner: do all aright p. 662. in faith ibid. Marriages
with Idolaters dangerous p. 648 Meditation on God p. 850, 852, 857. motives to
it 859. matter of meditation 861. manner 862. measure 863. hindrances 864.
helps ib. See Consideration. Meck persons preyed on p. 230 Memory corrupt p.
373 Mercy and judgment to be kept p. 162. mercy abused p. 8. limited to the
saints only 10. let it melt us 151. God delights in it 929 Merchandise
useful p. 448. but abused, and how 449 Merits p. 36 Ministers must be
unblameable p. 613. well maintained 622, 669. may not preach till called to it
625. must speak truth howsoever they speed 638, 639. shall convert souls 640.
must be able and apt to teach ib. and plainly 641. alleging Scripture ib. they
must be made welcome ib. scandalous Ministers 642. flatterers 645. they must
repeat the same points 47. use all means to win men 95. be faithful 239.
Ministers are Saviors, and how 303. must be content with mean things 329.
parasiticall preachers a plague 347, 351. The best have small success 300.
they must both say and do well 441, 442. take their best opportunities 469.
must be knowing men ib. cry aloud 51. Satan's spite at them 516. may lose their
abused gifts 574. their hard labor 587. burden 606. Ministers must be exact
613, 639. they are slighted, if poor 617. they are the worst men if wicked 621.
thsoe that scant them are cursed 670. how they are begrutcht, and beguiled 672.
they must preach home to the conscience 690. Mocking: goodness derided p. 521
Money monarch of this world p. 229 Moses praised p. 166 Mul^itude not to be
followed p. 704 go to heaven alone rather 707 Murder a foul sin p. 56, 58
Mutual help p. 492, 552
N
A Good Name gotten by holiness p. 644 ignominy fruit of iniquity ib. and 634.
be not over-tender of thy good name 328 National sins bring national
plagues p. 590 Nineveh a great city 305, 320. desolated 305, 306 Nullifidians
p. 435
O
OBedience, Jehu's partial p. 6, 7. obey God rather then man 85, 86 Obstinate
in sin p. 77, 78, 94, 100. be not so 654. some love to thwart God 609
Occasions of sin: shun them p. 72 Offers of grace slighted p. 604 Old age kept
unspotted p. 106 Omissions are dangerous sins p. 109 945 Oppressors are
Cannibals p. 349. their evil-got goods prosper not 295. but are cursed 474.
Shun their sin 646
P
PApists are idolaters p. 18. Pagans they are 599 Patience of God no quittance
p 5 Patient, be in misery p. 892. and how 893, 894 Paul censured p. 706. and
Marg: Peace and truth together p. 552 Perjury a great sin, and heavily punished
p. 533, 664, 665 Persecutours plagued p. 209. they help to increase the Church
p. 220. woe to such 900. God is against them, and why 902. See Enemies.
Pleasure-mongers p. 224. a notorious one, p. 266 Plenty is from God p. 46
Polygamy unlawful, and why p. 651, 652 Policy: reason of State p. 407 Pope not
infallible p. 640. his insolency and usurpation 269. his soul-murther 401, his
be witching superstition 408. he is over-magnified by his parasites 870 Poverty
preyed on p. 277. despised 464. no prejudice before God 909,910 Power of God p.
867, 869. fear him therefore 872. trust in him 873. submit unto him 874, 875.
comforts flowing from it 878. See God. Practice: be doing p. 483, 684. saints
practice 884 Praise God for his mercy p. 930 Prayer: pray and faint not p. 620.
person must first be accepted 6^2. The power of prayer 37, 211, 217, 270, 4^0,
876, 877. ask and have 559. pray carnestly 541. it is a necessary duty 177. Gods
liberal answers 205. He hear^th prayers 218, 388, 424. bold access to him
417. wicked cannot pray 620. nor be heard ib. how to know our prayers are heard
837 Preaching: what it is p. 84. twice a day, 493 Pride 79, 80. its picture
420. it precedes a fall 456 Prins stigmata Laudis p. 589 Processions, popish p.
165 Procrastination is greatest folly p. 471. punished 944 Prodigies in heaven
p. 210 Privileges of saints p. 896. price of a saint 902. honor such ib. 108.
their glory at the Resurrection 904, 905. their privileges privative and
positive 925, 926. Promises of God: they shall be performed p. 636, 637. they
are a strong-hold 558. pray them over 848. mixed with menaces and why 566.
Prophecy obscure p. 537 Prosperity: no sure sign of piety p. 163 it causes
pride 170, 420. slays the wicked 134, 71, 73, 74 Providence of God: Doubt not
of it p. 424. see 882. He will preserve his and provide for them 878 Psalms:
book of Psalms praised p. 442, 443 Public, most to be minded p. 476 Punishment
waits upon sin p. 59, 217, 531, 535, 545, 670, 843 punishment in kind 63.
in all sorts of sinners 76. punishment insensible 87. one mischief after
another 260
R
RAin, how taken in Scripture p. 603. it is from God 560, 673, 245. Doctrine
resembled to it 246. rain of blood 210 Reformation was ever opposed p. 630.
what Magistrates and Ministers are to do in it 631 Relapse not p. 587. let the
relapsed return to God, and how 28 Religion reproached as rebellion p. 272,
273. otherwise reproached 455. mixtures in it 446. It is the beauty and bulwark
of a land 512 Remission of sin a great comfort p. 519, Christ's righteousness
imputed ib. Repentance the parts of it p. 27. the virtue of it 39. mercy leads
to it 40. necessity of it 192. there is a natural and moral repentance 321.
Reformation is the best repentance 324. See Conversion. Resemble God, and
wherein p. 922. Restitution is necessary p. 324 Resurrection: it is sure p.
319. and will be glorious 562, 904, 905. Retract errors and evil practices p.
586 Revenge p. 226 Reward of righteousness is liberal p. 673. God remembers
and requiteth all his 839. and why ib. and 840, 841. his service is very
gainful 842, 843, 849. See gain of godliness. Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us p. 932 Romish Edomites p. 610, Romish cruelty 347. Romes filth
611. its pride and downfall 65. avarice 66. it is degenerate 206. must be burnt
ib. Romes ruin 609.
S
SAbbath profaned p. 128. must be our delight 276. benefit of it ib. Sacrifices
spiritual to be offered to God p. 625. our selves especially ib. Sacril^dge a
great sin p. 215. punished 668, 670 Saints are earthly Angels p. 608. their
sins are most grievous 625. God will own them, and honor them 895, 896.
despise them not for their outward meandness 906. their honor 907 Scandal to
be shunned p. 239. scandalous Ministers 642. Professors 231 Scriptures
commendation p. 120, 121. See Word. Seek God p. 146 Selah what it imports p.
432 Seducers dangerous p. 584. they must be stigmatized 585. not tolerated 584.
see 588. they are hardly ever recovered 587. Self-denial to be studied p. 705,
801 Self-seekers p. 137. self-ascribers 423, 542 Sensuality p. 68, 224, 266
Septuagint translate amiss p. 629, 620, 628 Security fore-runneth ruin p.
263, 427 Serve God with the best p. 615. not with slubbering service ib. 676.
serve him with soul and body too 625. love Gods service 276. ^^me devotion 618.
honor of Gods service 687. he highly accepts our performances 825, 826, 827,
etc. He rejects the services of the wicked, and why 829, 830. and that is
their misery 831: let them therefore repent ib. Bless God for acceptance of
our services 834. get into Gods service 846. and serve him earnestly 846. God
how to be served 917. serve God, and why 937. He accepts small services 938,
939. how he is to be served 945. Setlednesse to be labored after p. 618
Sickness fruit of sin p. 378, 379 Sight of sin is before sorrow p. 580
Silence in due season p. 257 Similies how to be used p. 164 Singing a
Gospel-Ordinance p. 40 Sincerity accepted p. 98 Sin a great burden p. 606,
607. It makes God to disown people 634. to destroy them 23. remember it not
with delight 42. the filth of sin 78, 518. hateful to God 143. especially if
iterated 223. it is deceitful 293. the greatest folly 317. hardly parted with
649. saints sins are most heinous 236. difference of their sins from other
933. add not sin to sin 549 Sir, whence p. 525 Slandering p. 85, 86.
make-bates 417 Sorrow, godly p. 198. it follows upon sight of sin 580. it is
deep 581. greatest of all sorrows 581, 582. it is secret ib. forts of sorrows
ib. Souls have no sexes p. 373. the worth of a soul 429. it comes from God, and
is like him 579. not propagated 653. precious ib. Spanish greatness p. 418
Spirits first work in the heart p. 852 Strength of a saint wherein p. 579
Stumbling at the word dangerous p. 642 Submission has mercy p. 249 Suffer for
God p. 144 Superstition pompous p. 70. prodigal 375 Supper: Come prepared to
the Lords Supper p. 616 Swearing a common sin p. 532. dangerous 55
Sweating-sicknesse p. 247, 310
T
TEars powerful with God p. 161, 197, 650 Temporals are to be slighted p. 24,
25 saints often have them 546 Temptation: resist Satan p. 517. withstand first
motions 544 Tempt not God p. 672 Thankfulness how it must be qualified p. 177.
Think upon God, and why p. 850, 852. See Meditation. Wicked think not on God
854 or not well 855, 857, 858 Thi^st corporal and spiritual p. 20, 21 Thought
not free p. 342, 481, 551. evil thoughts argue an evil man 856. earthly
thoughts when they are naught 863 Threats shall be accomplished p. 643. we
should tremble at them 236, 237. they are slighted 413. till felt 491
Time-servers p. 701 Tithings, whence p. 345 Tithes to be paid p. 669 Tithe and
be rich p. 673, 674 Tongue: order it well p. 383. an ill tongue destructive 407
Treachery to be avoided p 646 Trinity of persons known of old p. 484 Truth:
little is to be found p. 53 it is ill taken 255. hated 256, 274 Trust in God
has security p. 396 413. the triumph of Trust 420. Trust in Gods mercy 930
Tumults outrageous p. 147 Turks Empire great p. 418. how they use their Asapi
420 Turn to God. See Conversion, and Repentance.
V
Victory is of God, and a great blessing p. 686. especially that over
corruption ib. Unity seek it p. 646. study it 462. Christian union 690
Unsettledness in judgment p. 618 Unthankfulness a grave p. 608, 609. a great
sin 231. It exasperateth the Lord 572 Unworthy Receivers p. 933 Vows must be
paid p. 318
W
VVAit upon God p. 49, 50, 162, 425 Walk exactly p. 520. worthy of God 706
Wantonness: shun it p. 17 War: the woe of it p. 566, 595, 148, 153.
desolation is by it 445. it is from God, and how 549 Watch in prayer and
meditation p. 524. the heart is to be watched 654 Wealth often betrayeth the
owner p. 403. it sinketh the soul 427 Whale, a huge creature p. 313 Whoredom:
mischief of it p. 35. whores 75. impudent 230 Wicked: grow worse and worse 675.
above measure 131. wittily wicked 398. they shall be surely and severely
punished 843. let them therefore repent and meet the Lord 844, 845. They are
Satan's slaves, and perish with him ib. disavowed by God 899. specially at the
Resurrection 900. they are vile persons 944 Widows and Orphans are Gods
Clients p. 665 Wilfulness is destructive p. 358 Will Worship rejected p. 81,
261 Wisdom wherein it consists p. 183 Witches: seek not to them p. 664 Wives:
why to be kindly dealt with p. 650, 652 Women wicked, boisterous p. 242 Word of
God stumbled at p. 183, 642. why things are repeated in scripture 189. famine
of the Word 279, caused by contempt 280, 477. Word wrested 291. word read
converted Cyprian 351. A short bible 375. the word is is plain in necessaries
424. word and sword go together 470. It is of God 473. It is made operative by
the spirit 478. Laymen must read it 481. It will lay hold upon the wicked 502
Words: look well to thy words p. 41, 383. idle and evil words condemned 813
Works of God must be regarded p. 186 they instruct us 253. Sea is commanded by
God alone 394 World: its vanity p. 169. mutability 411 Worship of God:
external only is little worth 374 Wrongs done to the righteous reach to God.
Y
Youth must be consecrated to God p. 381
Z
ZEal of Gods people p. 699, 703, 706.
FINIS.
The Contents of the Righteous Man's Recompense, Or, A True Christian
characterized and encouraged: Out of Malachy, 3.16, 17, 18.
CHAP. I.
THe Text opened, and Analyzed. Page 693
CHAP. II. Doct. 1. Saints must be Best in worst Times. p. 695
Sect. 1. The point Confirmed, by 1 Precept. 2 Practice. p. 695
Sect. 2. The point confirmed by Reasons from 1 God p. 697 2 Men. 1 Themselves
p. 698 2 Others Good. p. 699 Bad. p. 700



Sect. 3. Use 1 A sharp Reproof of Lukewarm Laodiceans p. 701 Timorous
Temporizers p. 702

Sect. 4. Use 2 A forcible Exhortation to courage for Christ, with 4 Helps
thereunto. p. 703

CHAP. III. Doct. 2. Of the several sorts of fear; and that every saithfull
Christian fears the Lord. p. 708
Sect. 1. The Doctrine cleared, and confirmed by Scripture. p. 708
Sect. 2. The Doctrine further confirmed by Arguments drawn from 1 The Causes.
2 Consequents. 3 Companions. 4 Contraries to the true fear of God. p. 709, etc.
Sect. 3. Objections and Quaere's touching the Fear of God cleared; and
answered. p. 804
Sect. 4. Use 1. Information: They that fear not God, are not His: and who
these are, by their Character out of Psalm 36.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. p. 804, 805, etc.
Sect. 5. Use. 2. Examination: where; Marks of the true Fear of God in respect
of 1 Evil, both in Judgment, Practice.
2 Good, toward God, Men, Others Rich, Poor.
Our selves in Prosperity, Adversity.




p. 807, 808, 809 Sect. 6. Use 3. Exhortation to get, and grow in this holy
Fear, with 6 Motives, and 2 Means tending thereto: p. 809, 810, 811

CHAP. IV. Doct. 3. The Text expounded, and the Duty of Christian conference
propounded, p. 812
Sect. 1. Christian Conference, and mutual confirmation confirmed by
Scripture, p. 812. 813.
Sect. 2. Reasons of the point, 1 From God commanding, rewarding. 2 From Men:
and 1 our selves shall be hereby sealed, secured. 2 Others: 1 Good men shall be
1 curbed from sin. 2 quickened to duty.
2 Bad men shall be 1 confuted. 2. defeated,




p. 813, 814, 815, 816 Sect. 3. Use 1. Reproof of idle and evil speakers
together. p. 817
Sect. 4. Use 2. Complaint against the better sort, too too barren and backward
to holy Conference, p. 818
Sect. 5. Use 3. Exhortation to be forward and free to godly Discours^, p. 820
Sect. 6. Helps to a holy dexterity this way; How to 1 get it. 2. Use it, p.
821, 822, 823, 824

CHAP. V. Doct. 4. The Text further expounded: and withal the Doctrine of Gods
gracious acceptance of our upright performances propounded, p. 825
Sect. 1. The Doctrine confirmed by Scripture, p. 825
Sect. 2. The Doctrine confirmed by reasons from God the Father, ^onne, holy
Ghost. p. 827
Sect. 3. The Doctrine further confirmed by reasons from the Saints, p. 828
Sect. 4. Use 1. It Is otherwise with the wicked. Their persons are hated: their
performances rejected; and why, p. 829
Sect. 5. Use 2. Admonition: Let the wicked break off their sins, that they
lose not their services, p. 831
Sect. 6. Use 3. Exhortation, to the best, to be humbled for their 1 not
prizing their privilege. 2 Not praising God for it. 3 Not improving it to the
utmost, p. 833
Sect. 7. Use 4. Exhortation to the saints, 1 To admire this mercy. Helps
thereunto, respecting God, and themselves, p. 834
Sect. 8. 2 To retain it, and if lost, to recover it, and how: with answer to
some Quaeres and objections, made by a mi^giving heart, p 835

CHAP. VI. Doct. 5. God perfectly remembers, and plentifully requiteth all our
labors of love to him and His, p. 838
Sect. 1. This truth confirmed by Scripture, p. 839
Sect. 2. This truth confirmed by 6. Reasons p. 839
Sect. 3. Use 1. Confutation of the contrary-minded, that say, or conceive at
least, that it is in vain to serve the Lord, p. 84^
Sect. 4. Use 2. The wicked shall be surely and severely punished, p. 84^
Sect. 5. Use. 3. Let them therefore hasten out of the Devils danger, and get
into Gods service. How that may be done, p. 844
Sect. 6. Use 4. Exhortation to Saints to abide in Gods love, and to abound in
his work: since their labor of love is not in vain in the Lord, p. 847
Sect. 7. page 847 Sect. 8. page 848
CHAP. VII. Doct. 6. Such as fear the Lord will be thinking upon his Name. What
it is to do so, p. 850
Sect. 1. The point proved by Scripture, p. 851
Sect. 2. The point proved and enforced by 5. Reasons, p. 851
Sect. 3. Use 1. Those that habitually think not upon God, fear not God, p. 953
Sect. 4. Of those that think base and bald thoughts of God, p. 855
Sect. 5. Against thoughts of Atheism, blasphemy, infidelity, and rebellion,
p. 855
Sect. 6. Use 2. Examination: where, Trialls of the goodness of our best
thoughts by their 1 Causes. 2 Effects, p. 856
Sect. 7. Use 3. Exhortation: Settle the soundness of your sanctification, by
the goodness of your thoughts. Motives thereto, p. 859
Sect. 8. Directions, for 1 the matter of good Meditations. p. 861
Sect. 9. Directions for 2 the manner of doing this duty well, both for
substance, and circumstance, p. 862
Sect. 10. Directions about the measure of divine Meditation: where is showed
how men offend 5 ways, in thinking on earthly things, p. 863
Sect. 11. Directions to the Means of fruitful thinking on Gods holy Name.
Where, 4 Hindrances to be avoided, and 7 helps to be used, p. 864
Sect. 12. The Conclusion. p. 866

The Contents of the second Part of the Righteous Man's Recompense.
CHAP. I. The Text divided, p. 866
Sect. 1. That God is Lord of Hosts. What these Hosts are: why called Hosts:
what it is to be Lord of Hosts, 867
Sect. 2. The Pope will needs be Lord of Hosts, p. 869
Sect. 3. Woe to rebels against the Lord of Hosts, p. 870
Sect. 4. Tremble before this mighty Lord of Hosts, p. 872
Sect. 5. Trust in his power, for fulfilling his promises, p. 873
Sect. 6. Stoop to his power, and submit to his Sovereignty, p. 874
Sect. 7. Set his power awork by prayer: The power of prayer, p. 875
Sect. 8. Be comforted in the consideration of his Power, where diverse
objections of weaker Christians are answered, p. 877, 878, 879, 880

CHAP. II. The Lord will find a fit time to make up his jewels from the worlds
misusages p. 881
Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 882, 883 Reasons from Gods Providence, Power, Truth,
Goodness, and Justice, ibid.
Sect. 6. Reasons from the Saints themselves, p. 884
Sect. 7. When God will make up his jewels, p. 885
Sect. 8. Comfort under public calamities, p. 887
Sect. 9. Comfort under personal crosses and grievances, p. 888
Sect. 10. Reproof of frowardness and faintheartednesse in affliction, p. 890
Sect. 11. Exhortation to diligence in duty, p. 891
Sect. 12. Exhortation to patience in misery, p. 892
Sect. 13. Helps to patient waiting upon God for deliverance, p. 893

CHAP. III. God will own and honor his Saints, p. 895
Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Reasons and grounds of this gracious dealing of his, p.
896, 897
Sect. 6. It shall be far otherwise with the wicked, p. 899
Sect. 7. Terror to those that set themselves against the saints, p. 900
Sect. 8, 9, 10. Exhortation to honor them that fear the Lord: and what great
cause men have, and shall have so to do, p. 902, 903, 904, etc.
Sect. 11, 12. Exhortation to practice holiness, that has so great honor put
upon it: and why, p. 907, 908
Sect. 13. Let the saints fee their dignity, and be thankful, p. 909
Sect. 14. Let the saints see their duty, and be careful, p. 910

CHAP. IV. God is a Father to all his faithful servants, p. 911
Sect. 1. Reasons hereof drawn from the causes, p. 912
Sect. 2, 3. Reasons taken from the effects of his Fatherhood, p. 913
Sect. 4. God no Father to the wicked, whatever they pretend to him, p. 914, 915
Sect. 5. Terror to those that malign, or misuse Gods children, p. 916
Sect. 6. Try your Title to God as a Father. Marks. p. 917
Sect. 7. Settle this, that ye are Gods children: and how, p. 918
Sect. 8. Let all Gods children know their Father: and how, p. 918
Sect. 9. Let them thankfully acknowledge his free grace in their adoption: and
why, p. 919
Sect. 10. Let them honor their Father: and how, p. 920
Sect. 11. Let them resemble their Father: and wherein, p. 922
Sect. 12. Let them love their Father: and how to express their love, p. 923
Sect. 13. Let them depend upon their Father, both for prevention of evil, and
provision of good, p. 924
Sect. 14. Comfort of Adoption: where are showed the privileges of sons,
privative, and positive, p. 925, 926

CHAP. V. God will pity and pardon his people their wants and weaknesses, p. 927
Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. Reasons from God, out of Micah, 7.18, 19. p. 927
Sect. 5, 6. Reasons respecting the saints themselves, who are 1 pure in heart.
2 perfect in Christ, p. 931
Sect. 7. Let none suck poyon out of this sweet point, p. 932
Sect. 8. Reproof of such as censure hardly of God, p. 934
Sect. 9. Reproof of such saints as censure hardly of themselves, and their
performatices, p. 934
Sect. 10. Reproof of such as uncharitably censure others, p. 936
Sect. 11. Exhortation: to put your selves into Gods service, p. 937
Sect. 12. Give God the glory of his Fatherly goodness, p. 938
Sect. 13. Bear with others weaknesses, and forbear harsh censures, p. 939
Sect. 14. Take comfort, and courage, notwithstanding infirmities, and failings
in the manner, p. 941.

Errata.
Faults escaped in the Commentary.
PAge 2. line 30. read in the gall p. 7 l. 5. wall r valley. ib l. 7. Tent r.
^eal. p. 12 l. 32. spiritual r. spiteful. p. 15. l. 53. required r. reserved.
p 18. l. 53. r. directly. p. 24. l 49. Collier r. Caloier. p. 35. l. 28. r. Non
mea sunt. p. 38. l. 18. lack r. like. p. 41. l. 43. duties r. deities. p. 44.
l. 15. suitable r. suable. p 55. l. 5. hearts r. houses. p. 56. l. 55 Edomites r.
Sodomites. p 60. l. 46. r. derided. p. 62. l. 9. r. blind) shall be darkened. p.
73. l. 11. And r. a pull. p. 77. l. 27. scribes r. stripes. p. 78. l. 13 r.
world. p. 92. l. 43. r acquired. p. 95. l. 42. taking r. talking. p. 107. l. 1
r (...). p. 128. l 2. r. observing. ib. l. 4. priests. day r. devils-day. p.
137. l. 29. r. marred. p. 141. l. 35 r. Deaster. p 166. l. 38. r. Cyrils. p.
189. l. 56. r. quieted. p. 193. l. 39. r. mansit. p. 194. l. 29. r. relieve. p
242. l. 23 r. Zegedline. p 261. l. 38. r. heatlesse. p. 270. l. 29 r. others.
p. 290. l. 18. r. Cabbalists. p. 291. l. 6. r. fat and. p. 295. l. 35. r.
alive. p. 296. l. 51. r. Zopyrus and 55. Cyneas and l. 56. r. Pyrrhus p. 299. l
38. r. Pyrgopolynices. p. 310. l. 40. r. due. p. 314. l. 30. r. thin. p. 315.
l. 48. r. promises. p 316. l. 2. r. right hand. p. 317. l. 3. r affatu. p. 321,
l 32. r. excused. and l. 34. r. sum. and 35. r. conceived. p. 326 l. 23 r.
becagna;. ib. l. 6. r. zeal. p. 331. l. 6. r. quartaa. p 334. l. 8. r. pour
out. p. 365 l. 33. r. eat. p. 372. l. 7. r. theirs. ib. 32. dele sin. p 374 l.
53. r. dejected. p. 384. l 45. r. well. p. 400. l. 31. r. Poliorcetes. ib. l.
35. r. Dissipatores. p. 405. l. 6. r. Leb p. 420. l. 53. r. devoting. p. 429.
l. 47. r. angle. p. 435. l. 6. r imposture p. 437. l. 34. r. that when. p 438.
l. 18. r. special. p. 441. l. 29 r. grievous. p. 455. l. 53. r. mawmets. p,
449. l. 54. r. nihil. p. 452. l 14. r. Gaius: p. 458. l. 26. r bare. p 459. l
35. r. premises. p. 465. l. 41. r. listlesnesse. p. 471 l. 9. r. mad. p 472 l.
19. r. certe non. p. 486. l. 6 r acclamation. p. 490. l. 40. r. e. rat. p. 513
l. 51. r. crattle. p. 527. l 33. r. unpassable ib. 58. r. somewhere. p. 548. r.
mors est p. 550. l. 49 r. few, true, and ponderous. p 580. l. 43. r. can the
waters flow p. 587 l 46. r. ministry therefore. p. 589. l. 58. r. scattered
and shattered. p 610. l. 12. r. whilome, p. 614. l. 5. r. Of one not at all.
ib. l. 16 r. glove p. 616 l. 48. r. they. p. 634. l. 47. r. pestilen^e. p. 635.
l. 37. r. contrary to prevent. p. 637. l. 8. r. falsify. p. 642. l. 19. after
father Asa, add, Manasseh degenerateth into Ahaz. p. 648. l. 1 r. by Gods good
laws. p 650. l. 35. r. fletu. p. 664 l 24. r. adulterium. ib. l. 52. r. light.
p. 677. l. 24. r. a slurre. p. 684. l. 16. r. inferior bodies.

Faults escaped in the Righteous man's Recompense.
Page 695 l. 57 r. caring. p. 708. l. 46. r. character. p. 810 l. 54. r. set
and serious p 823. l. 3. r. vice. p. 824 l. 31. r. trading. p 825. l. 33. r. he
heard and took. p 843. l. 44. r. we cannot better convince p. 849 l. 36. r.
mock, p. 851. l. 18. r. light. p. 852 l. 0 r. fat abrood. p. 854 l. 10. r. jog:
ib. 50. r. conservation. p. 860 l. 10. r. teachers. p. 801. l. 16. r.
creatures. p. 965. l. 12. r. extracting. p. 871. l. 21. r. with them. p. 876.
l. 7. r. from the p. 879 l. 6. r. invisible. p. 883: l. 14 r. dicere. p. 890.
l. 3. r. frowardness. p. 897. l. 38 dele and such. p. 899. l. 28. r. waxed. p.
900. l. 40. r. Doegs. p. 907. l. 39. r. coveting. p. 911. l. 33. r. good. p.
927. l 38. r. settling. ib. l. 41. r. frailties. p. 929. l. 24. r. David. ib. 25
r. as rejoices. ib. l. 41. r. quiets. p. 936. l. 15. r. baffled p. 938. l 43.
r. exhortation. p. 939. l. 38. r. then remembered they that. ib. l. 52. r
induce. p. 940. l. 47 r. flow of heart. p. 943. l. 6. r betternesse. ib. l. 53.
r. slandered Gods housekeeping.


