THE ALMIGHTY His Gracious Token of Love TO HIS Friend Abraham.

OR A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of BRISTOL, January 3. 1674.

By RICH. TOWGOOD, B.D. now Dean of Bristol, and when time was, Chaplain in
Ordinary to His late Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the First, of most blessed and
most renowned memory.

In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature,

Gal. 6.15. LONDON: Printed by H.C. for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West End of
St. Panls, and are to be sold by Humfrey Dixon, Bookseller in Winestreet,
Bristol. 1676.

To the Right Reverend Father in God GUIDO, by Divine Providence Lord Bishop of
Bristol.
Right Reverend Father in God, and my much honored Lord,
YOur Desire I dare not deny, it is unto me instead of a Command; but I fear
whatsoever it was that your Lordship approved of at the hearing, will not seem
so approvable at the reading. Horace his Verse I may crave leave a little to
change, and say,

Soepius instibant animum dimissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
That which may pass current out of a popular Pulpit, may not perhaps relish so
well out of a public Press. However, that which may serve to edify a hundred,
may serve also to edify a thousand. And the world, I hope, may hereby see,
that our ordinary labors in Bristol (which intend to sound no further than the
walls of the Church, in which they are delivered) are not so extremely
contemptible, that our Hearers had need to keep up to themselves a company of
Schismatical Teachers, fetched from far, to supply our defects. For I dare
assure your Lordship, there are many Sermons frequently preached by my Brethren
in Bristol which may challenge the light rather than this now presented to your
Lordship; and yet I reckon this may pass without offense, having received the
approbation of your Lordships judicious ear; and that it has made bold to
prefix before it your Reverend Name. I humbly beg, and hope, you will be
pleased, as being the occasion of it your self, favorably to vouchsafe a
pardon to

Your Lordships most obliged and most humble Servant. Rich. Towgood.

A SERMON PREACHED In the Cathedral Church of BRISTOL, Januar. 3. 1674/5.
ACT. vij. 8. former part. And he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision.


THESE words are part of a Sermon preached by St. Stephen the Protomartyr,
before the Sanhedrim or Council at Jerusalem, not long after our Saviors
Ascension. What St. Stephens scope is in this Sermon, contained in this
Chapter, or what he aims at in this particular passage, I shall not now stand
to inquire. I shall at present look upon the Words as bearing full and perfect
sense in themselves without any reference to the occasion or coherence, further
then does concern the two Relatives or Persons here spoken of, He and Him. Only
that ye may not stumble at the choice of this Text concerning an antiquated
Ceremony, ye may be pleased to consider that according to the order appointed
by the Church, the anniversary Commemoration of our Saviors Circumcision is
not quite over; as does appear by the Epistle, Gospel, and Collect for this
present Day, and therefore a Text concerning Circumcision is not unseasonable.
Besides, from this time we reckon the beginning of the New year, and
Circumcision was a sign of a New-heart, and of newness of Life. And lastly, the
beginning of this month is the time wherein friends of the chief account do
usually gratify one another with gifts of kindness, and tokens of love; And
here the Text tells us of a special Gift that the Almighty God vouchsafed unto
Abraham his friend, for these two are the He and the Him here spoken of, as is
plain by the Verses foregoing: He gave Him, that is, God gave Abraham the
Covenant of Circumcumcision; so that though I cannot say, here is a New Years
Gift, yet here is no small token of Gods love to Abraham. And concerning this
Token of Love (to come now to the Words themselves) we have four things
observable in the Text.

1. What it was. 2. Of what worth it was. 3. Who gave it. 4. To whom it was
given.
Of these by Gods gracious assistance and your Christian patience in their
order; and first of the first, what it was. It was the Ordinance of
Circumcision. God commanded Abraham this service; and what kind of service this
was, and by whom to be observed, and at what time to be performed is fully
declared by the Holy Ghost himself, and cannot better be expressed than in his
own Words, as we find them, Genesis 17. from the tenth to the twelfth: This is my
Covenant (says the Lord to Abraham) which ye shall keep between me and you,
and thy seed after thee; every manchild among you shall be circumcised; And ye
shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the
Covenant between me and you; And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised
among you, every manchild in your generations, he that is born in the house, or
bought with money of any stranger which is not of thy seed. This was the service
that God commanded him and all his posterity. And a hard service it was, as
appeared in that when the Sechemites were by deceit persuaded by the sons of
Jacob to be circumcised, their whole City by reason of their soreness after
they were circumcised, was not able to defend themselves against two men; For
it came to pass on the third day when they were sore, that two of the sons of
Jacob, Symeon and Levi, Dinahs brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon
the City boldly, and slew all the Males, Genesis 34.25. So likewise it is said of
the Children of Israel, when they were all circumcised at their entrance into
the Land of Canaan, because they had not been circumcised by the way, That they
abode in their places in the Camp till they were whole, Josh. 5.7, 8. But yet
more fully does the hardship of this service appear by that of Zipporah, who
when she was enforced to circumcise her Son, said thus unto Moses her Husband
not without bitterness, A bloody husband art thou to me; and doubled it, A
bloody husband, because of the circumcision, Exodus 4.25, 26. A hard service it
was, and yet to be laid upon their Infants when they were but eight days old:
Surely, we may justly take up the words of the Apostle, which were uttered by
him in another case, Heb. 11.40. God has provided some better thing for us.
Instead of that hard service (for abrogated now it is, Gal. 5.2.) God has
appointed unto us the Sacrament of Baptism, which as for the use is more
perspicuous, so for the quality is far less painful; and yet see the fond
tenderness of Parents, and the foolish niceness of people nowadays is such,
that they can scarce suffer a little cold water to be sprinkled on their
Children; nay a few drops more than ordinary, shall procure as bitter words
against their Minister, as Zipporah's were against her Husband.

But (to pass by this) here we may take notice, that St. Stephen does call this
Ordinance the Covenant of Circumcision, and so it is also called in that place
forementioned, Genesis 17.10. The Lord there thus speaking, This is my Covenant
which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every manchild
among you shall be circumcised. Circumcision both there and here is called the
Covenant, when indeed and in truth it was but the Sign of the Covenant. The
Covenant was this, as it is plainly set down, Genesis 17.7. The Lord there saying
unto Abraham, I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee and thy seed after thee. This was the Covenant on the Lords part, that he
would be a God unto Abraham and his Seed; and in the same words was included
the Covenant on Abraham's part, that Abraham and his Seed should take the Lord
to be their God, and should worship him, serve and obey him as their God. This
was the Covenant, and of this Covenant, Circumcision was instituted to be the
Sign, and so it is plainly declared, Genesis 17.11. Ye shall circumcise the flesh
of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you:
and so the Apostle speaks of it, Romans 4.11. Saying of Abraham, He received the
Sign of Circumcision, (i.e.) He received Circumcision, which was a Sign. It is
the usual language of the Holy Ghost in Sacramental speeches to give to the
sign the name of the thing signified. The Jews had two principal Sacraments,
but more they had less Principals; and the truth of this, holds in both sorts.
Their two principal and ordinary Sacraments, were Circumcision and the Paschal
Lamb. Concerning the former it has been already showed; yea may see it also
concerning the latter. If ye look into Exodus 12.11, ye shall find these words
concerning the Paschal Lamb, Thus ye shall eat it, with your loins girded, your
shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste,
it is the Lords Passover. The Passover was the Act of the Angel passing over
the Houses of the Israelites, when he smote all the firstborn in the Land of
Egypt; and yet the Lamb, ye see, is called by the name of the Passover. The
like we may say of other of their Sacraments: I will instance but in one, and
that is the Rock out of which, when Moses had smitten it with his Rod, water
came forth for the relief and refreshing of the Israelites in the Wilderness,
Number. 20.11. And this Rock, Saint Paul says, was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. No man
will say that Saint Paul meant the Rock was Christ in regard of the substance,
but only by signification; and so Saint Augustine interprets it, Petra erat
Christus, quia significabat Christum, Epist. 102. ad Euod. Neither is this kind
of Metonymy and Figure used only in Sacramental Speeches, but in those Speeches
also wherein there is no Mystery of Religion contained; as in the
interpretation of Pharaohs Dream, Genesis 41. Pharaoh in his Dream saw seven
fat-fleshed Kine come out of the River, and after them seven other lean-fleshed
Kine, Verse 2. Joseph in his interpretation thereof does thus speak unto
Pharaoh, Verse 26, 27. The seven good Kine are seven years, and the seven thin
Kine are seven years. The meaning is, the seven Kine of the one sort and the
other do signify seven years; the name of the thing signified being attributed
to the Sign, which ye see is a usual kind of speaking both in the Old and New
Testament. And this may stop the mouths of the Papists about their
Transubstantiation; who because our Savior at the Institution of the Lords
Supper, taking Bread in his Hand, said, This is my Body, do therefore think
that the substance of Bread at the Sacrament must needs be turned into the
Substance of our Saviors Body: But seeing other Sacramental Speeches are
Figuratively understood, Why should we conceive that our Saviors Words are not
so to be understood also? A real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament we
acknowledge, for the Body and Blood of Christ, according to our
Church-Catechism, are verily and indeed, taken and received of the Faithful in
the Lords Supper, verily and indeed, that is, really, yet not carnally, but
Sacramentally, not Corporally, but Spiritually. For otherwise, how could
Believers eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood before his Flesh had any
existence or being in the World? The Apostle does tell us that the believing
Israelites in the Wilderness did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the
same spiritual drink that we do, and that is none other but the Body and Blood
of Christ, and yet Christ was not then incarnate, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Their Manna
was the Body of Christ, and their water out of the Rock was the Blood of
Christ; not in substance but in signification, they did signify the Body and
Blood of Christ. And surely, in all reason those Propositions and Sentences of
Scripture that are incongruous to reason when they are taken in a proper sense,
but suitable to reason in a figurative sense; in all reason I say, they ought
to be taken Figuratively. And this the Holy Ghost himself does teach us. For
when Saint John had seen seven Golden Candlesticks, And in the midst of the
seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man, Rev. 1 12, 13. who had also
in his right hand seven Stars, verse. 16. the Lord himself does expound the
meaning thereof, ver. 20. in these words: The mystery of the seven stars which
thou saw in my right hand, and the seven golden Candlesticks. The seven
stars, are the Angels (that is, the Bishops) of the seven Churches, and the
seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven Churches. So in these two
Propositions, The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the
seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, the Lord says there is a mystery,
that is, they are not literally, but mistically, or figuratively to be
understood. Multitude of such speeches we find in Scripture, which cannot
possibly be otherwise understood; as when Joseph interpreted Pharaohs Butler,
and his Bakers Dreams: The three branches, says he, are three days, Genesis
40.12. And again, verse. 18. The three Baskets, are three days, that is, they
signify three days. So, Isa. 5.7. The vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the
House of a Isrel, that is, does signify the House of Israel: So likewise,
These bones are the whole House of Israel, that is, they signify the house of
Israel, Ezekiel. 37.11. Look upon our Saviors parable, Mat. 13.37. I will mention
but a branch or two of it. The field is the world, the tears are the Children
of the wicked ones, the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are
the Angels, that is, they signify these things. I Will add but one instance
more, and that is in Gal. 4.24. These (i. e. Abraham's two wives) are the two
Covenants; the meaning is, they signify the two Covenants. Now when these
passages of Scripture, and many others more, cannot be understood but by a
Metonymy figuratively, why should our Saviors words, This is my body, only be
excepted from this general way of interpretation, and have another
interpretation assixed unto them, which is contrary both to Scripture; and to
Sense, to Reason and to the Interpretation of the Ancient Fathers. To
Scripture, because the Scripture tells us that Christ's Body is ascended up into
Heaven, and that the Heavens must receive him until the times of restitution of
all things (i. e.) the day of Judgment, Act. 1.9. and 3.21.

And if it must be in Heaven (as the words, (...), Acts 3.21. do plainly
signify) then he cannot be here on Earth too; and this argument our Savior
himself does elsewhere make good, Joh. 6.62. For whereas, when our Savior
preached at Capernaum and told them, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, ibid. verse. 53. the hearers were
offended at it; and said, not only, how can this man give us his flesh to eat?
but also, this is an hard saying, who can hear it? Our Savior to take away
this offense, and to give them the true meaning of his words, says thus unto
them, ibid. verse. 62. what and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where
he was before? As if he should have said, when ye shall see my Body to be
ascended up into Heaven, then I hope, you will understand that I speak not of
this carnal eating of my flesh that ye dream of; for my Body will be then in
Heaven, and there must continue. And this Argument holds good against the
carnal eating of Christ's Body in the Sacrament also, though our Savior does
not speak thereof in that place; so contrary to Scripture is this
interpretation of our Saviors words. And contrary it is to Sense; For that
which we receive with our hands at the Lords Table, it is not flesh but bread,
bread to our sight, bread to our feeling, and bread to our taste; contrary to
reason it is also, and that in two respects; 1. In that, if the words were
literally meant, our Savior then at the Institution, when he took the bread
and uttered the words, had his own body in his hand, and so he had there two
bodies, one sitting at the table, and the other in his hand upon the table; and
this is not very reasonable. Secondly, In that, if at the administration, the
flesh of Christ in the very substance were there, it would stand us in no
stead; for it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Our
Savior says, Joh. 6.63. My flesh is meat indeed, ibid. ver. 55. And why then
does our Savior say here, the flesh profits nothing. Our Savior does not
contradict himself; and thereby it is plain, his meaning is, that the carnal
Capernaitical eating of his flesh, such as the Capernacies there thought he
spoke of, was of no use at all. And lastly, Contrary it is to the
interpretation of the Ancient Fathers I Will mention but two or three very
briefly; Turt. lib. 4. against Marcion, thus speaks, Christus acceptum panem
and distributum discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est corpus meum
dicendo, i.e. figura corporis mei. Bread taken and distributed to his Disciples
he made his body, by saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body
Saint Ambrose to the same purpose does use the same word, figura. Figura est
corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi. l. 4. de sacramentis, cap.
5. and Saint Aug. on the third Psalm. says, Dominus Judam ad hibuit ad
convivium, in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendavit and
tradidit. That is, The Lord entertained Judas at the feast wherein he commended
and gave to his Disciples the figure of his body and blood. These three, to add
no more, do agree in this particular, and they all use the same word figura,
whereby they signified that the bread is nor turned into to the Body of Christ,
but was a sign or figure of his Body, though called by the name thereof. It is
the language of the Holy Ghost to give to the sign the name of the thing
signified; so it is here in the Text, the Ordinance of the Circumcision is
called the Covenant, which was but a sign of the Covenant. He gave him the
Covenant of Circumcision. One thing more there is to be observed from this
title, the Covenant of Circumcision, which I will touch but briefly; and it is
this, That the Almighty God in his Sacraments does make a Covenant with his
people. Circumcision was a Sacrament, for there was a sign and a thing
signified, as before was showed; and therein God entered into Covenant with
Abraham, and his Seed, The Passover was a Sacrament, and thereby there was a
Covenant made between God and his people. The Israelites, when Hezekiah sent
abroad a Proclamation, exhorting the people to come to Jerusalem to keep the
Passover, which had some years formerly been neglected, he thus bespeaks them,
Now be not stiff-necked as your Fathers were, but yield your selves unto the
Lord; in the Original it is thus expressed (...), that is, give the hand unto
the Lord, and so it is rendered in the Margent of our Bibles 2 Chr. 30.8. Now to
give the hand, ye know, is a circumstance and sign of entering into Covenant;
and by this expression is intimated, that by keeping the Passover, they made a
Covenant with the Lord. The like is to be said of our Sacrament of Baptism; for
the Apostle Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. in respect of the inward part of it, does
calliit (...), and that word though it be by diverse diverfly rendered, as by our
translation, an answer, by the vulgar Latin, Interrogatio; yet it is generally
conceived that the Apostle does therein allude unto the questions and answers
that were made at the baptizing of people converted to Christianity; Such as,
Do thou believe? I do believe, etc, which had their beginning and use even in
the Apostles time, as may be collected from Acts 8.37. And therefore by some,
the word is rendered stipulatio, that is, a Covenant, a Bargain, or an Agreement
between two, one asking the question, and the other answering. Such a thing is
Baptism, a Covenant between God and us; and though those questions and answers
were omitted, yet this Covenant is included and contained in the very words
which by our Savior are appointed to be used at the Sacrament of Baptism, that
is, To Baptize in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
(...), Matthew. 28.19. Into the Name, or in the Name of the Three Persons of the
Trinity, that is, into the Protection of the Father, into the Redemption of the
Son, and into the Sanctification of the Holy Ghost. This is the Covenant on
Gods part; and these are the Promises that are made of God unto us in that
Sacrament, whereof our Church-Catechism makes mention: And on our part the
Covenant is, that we will be his Servants, and yield all obedience to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And this Covenant we renew when we come to the
Lords Supper; for the Lord does offer us his Son to be our Savior, and thither
we come to acknowledge, that we wholly rely upon him and his Merits, and to
yield up our selves wholly to him and his service. Take we heed therefore, all
of us, that have been baptized, and have received the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, (as for others, they are not in Covenant with God, nor can expect
Protection or Salvation from him); take we heed, I say, that we carefully
perform the Covenant. Our Covenant is, wholly to yield obedience unto God, and
that we cannot do, without renouncing the works of the Devil, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh: And if we fail on our part, God is not bound on his part.
Besides, he will not take it well at our hands, if we break Covenants with him;
he will have a quarrel against us for the breach of Covenants; nay, he tells us
plainly, he will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, Levit. 26.25. Well, ye see
Circumcision was called the Covenant; ye see that there was a Covenant in the
Circumcision, as there is also in all Sacraments; even, in the Sacraments of
the New Testament. There is one thing more yet to be observed, before we
proceed to the next Part. In all the Ceremonies of the Law, Divines say, there
are three things to be observed, that is, 1. That they were Memorials of some
Mercy received. 2. That they were Types of Christ. 3. That they did signify
some Moral Duty.


Whether all these things are to be sound in the Circumcision, and how it was a
Memorial of Mercy past, or how it was a Type of Christ, I will not now inquire,
but pitch upon that which the Scripture shows to be undeniable, and that is
this, That there was a Moral Duty signified by the Circumcision; that there is
a Spiritual Circumcision yet remaining, still to be observed and practiced by
all the people of God, even now in the time of the Gospel: And this is nothing
else but the cutting off of carnal affections, the making of a new heart, and
the putting off of the oldman. This is that the Apostle calls, Circumcision
made without hands, Col. 2.11. This is that the Apostle means, when he tells
us, He is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart,
Romans 2.29. Nay, and even in the time of the Law, this was the Circumcision that
the Lord chiefly required, and therefore does Moses thus call upon the people,
Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. And so does the Prophet
Jeremy in the same words, Jer. 4.4. It does not then a little concern us to
consider, whether we are thus spiritually circumcised, yea or no. It was a
fearful threatening that was denounced against all those of Abraham's posterity,
if they were not carnally circumcised, That Soul shall be cut off from his
people, Genesis 17.14. And if the Spiritual Circumcision, as has been showed, be
more regarded by the Lord, shall not the neglect thereof be as severely
punished as the neglect of the other? Surely the Prophet Jeremies words do make
it good in that, Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away
the foreskin of your hearts, ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of
the evil of your doings. Consider then with thy self, O Christian, Have thou
cast off the works of Darkness? Do thou mortify thy Corruptions? Do thou
deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts? If not, surely thou art not spiritually
circumcised; but to use the Apostles phrase, art dead in sin, and the
uncircumcision of the flesh, Col. 2.13. But to descend a little lower, the
Scripture does intimate to us, That there is a Circumcision of the Ear, and a
Circumcision of the Lips, Acts 7. Jer. 6.10. and Exodus 6.30. Examine thy self
then, O Christian, Does thine Ear refuse to hear the Voice of the Charmer? Or
have thou an Itch in thine Ear to harken after novel Doctrines? Does it delight
to hear evil Reports, and to receive false Tales? And is it not then
uncircumcised? Does thy tongue delight in scoffing, give it self to swearing,
whispering, or backbiting? And is it not then uncircumcised? Briefly, three
things there were observed in the Circumcision of the Flesh, all which may
serve to give us some further help and direction in this self-examination.

1. Circumcision could not be without dolor, without grief and pain. And
certainly, forasmuch as there is no man living that sins not; nay, for as
much as in many things we offend all, he who never felt any remorse of
Conscience, that was never pricked at the heart whose heart, never smote him,
can never reckon himself spiritually circumcised; and if it be but the
corruption of our nature (and when Infants were circumcised, they were guilty
of no more), yet had we need with sorrow of heart to humble our selves, and to
cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? To borrow the Apostles expressions, Romans 7.24.

2. The ancient Circumcision did distinguish the Jews from other people. As the
Grecians called all others Barbarians; so the Jews called all others besides
themselves, as it were by a reproachful and contumelious word, the
Uncircumcised, 1 Samuel 17.26. Yea, and they themselves were by others reproached
for their very Circumcision. By the name of Judeus Apella, the Poet speaks of
him; So likewise, if we would be sure that we are spiritually circumcised, we
must see there be a difference between us and worldly minded and voluptuous men
that are in the world; not in opinion, as the Pharisees thought well of
themselves and despised others, but in practice; for if there be as much vanity
on thy back, as much venom in thy tongue, as much pride and malice in thy
heart, as in the worst of men, never think thy self to be spiritually
circumcised. Judah and Israel, because in their practice they differed not from
Egypt and Edom, from Moab and Ammon, are therefore ranked with them, and
threatened with them, as being uncircumcised in heart, Jer. 9.26.

The third thing observable in the Circumcision, was this; It was a Sacrament
of Initiation, whereby they were as it were consecrated unto God. They did
thereby enter into Covenant with God, it was a sign whereby they declared
themselves to be Gods peculiar people. And so surely, they that are not
dedicated unto God, and so live as persons that are dedicated and consecrated,
can never reckon themselves spiritually circumcised; for the Apostle says, We
are the circumcision, that serve God in the spirit; that is; in purity of life,
Phil. 3.3. He that is spiritually circumcised, and so devoted unto God, must
yield no part of himself either of Body and Soul to any other service then to
the service of God, site vovoris Deo, imitandus est tibi vitulus quem non licet
humanis operibus deseruire, Origin. Hom. 14. in Number. A Bullock that is
consecrated unto God, it is not lawful to put it to any humane service; and
therein, says he, must we be like him, if we have consecrated our selves to
God. But ah alas! how many be there, that so live as if they had bound
themselves by Indenture unto Satan, as if they had made themselves by vow his
Slaves, counting it there honor to be profane, and their greatest glory to
stand at desiance with holiness. Is it not a great abuse for a consecrated
Temple to be turned into a Stable, or into a Sty to hold Swine in? But how much
greater is the abuse for the Body and Soul of a Christian, consecrated unto
God, to become Satan's workhouse, for in such Children of disobedience he
works, Ephesians. 2.2. The sum of all is, then Mortify your members that are
upon the Earth; if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off; cleanse your selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, for in this consists the spiritual
circumcision (which neither is, nor ever will be abrogated) namely, in putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, Col. 2.11. Ye see what this token of
Gods love to Abraham was, both for the letter and the mystery. In the letter it
was in the cutting off the foreskin of the flesh. In the mystery it was a sign
of the Covenant between God and Abraham, and withal did warn and admonish him
to cut off all vile and carnal affections. This is the first thing observable
in the Text. I shall first be briefer in the other parts that are behind. Come
we then to the second thing observed of what worth this token of love was, and
that is employed in the word (...), he gave, Saint Steven does not say, he
inflicted it as a punishment, or imposed it as a burden, he gave it as a token
of love, out of his special faviour. Gods Ordinances are special blessings, of
singular worth. The Almighty God promised to this man Abraham the whole Land of
Canaan, Genesis 13, 14, 15. a bountiful gift; and yet this gift here spoken of,
the Covenant of Circumcision was of more worth then the whole Land of Canaan or
all the Kingdoms of the world. It was a painful service, but of inestimable
worth, it was a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4.11. and so
consequently it was a seal to assure him of the Kingdom of Heaven. All Gods
ordinances are precious gifts, and that may appear first by the time which the
Doner chose for the bestowing of them. When a man is parting from his friends,
he will leave behind him some special token of love and so the Apostle (says
when Christ Jesus ascended up on high he led Cativity Captive, and gave gifts
to men, Ephesians. 4.8. and yet I confess the Apostle does not allude so much to the
parting of one friend from another) as to the custom of conquerors, who after
their victories go up into their Cities in triumph carrying their captives
bound, and then withal giving rich gifts to their friends; so Christ having
conquered hell, and death, and sin, and the Devil, led them captive and gave
gifts unto men; but as to our purpose, the question is, what those gifts were,
and the Apostle tell us, ibid. ver. 11. he gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
etc. these are the chief gifts that Christ Jesus thought good to give to his
people (though the world does not esteem them so) even at the time of his
triumph when he was ascending into his greatest glory, as if he had no greater
gifts to bestow upon them, and what is it for which they are reckoned by the
Lord such singular gifts, but only because they are his messengers and the
dispencers of his holy word and sacred ordinance? These are gifts of high
esteem, and that does thus appear, by the time when they were given, and that
was at his ascension; For as the coming of the Holy Ghost was a fruit of
Christ's ascension; so also is the fitting of his messengers and the committing
unto them the dispensation of his sacred ordinances, the fruit of the same
ascension. Secondly, the singular worth and excellency of Gods sacred
ordinances does appear in that, they to whom they are vouchsafed, are dignified
by them. What nation is there so great, says Moses, to the Israclites, that
has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law which I set before
you, Deuteronomy. 4.8. and it is worth your noteing, that whereas the land of Canaan
was so highly dignified and commended; Dan 8.9. the pleasant land; the glory of
all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. the land of desire, Zech. 7.14. It was not for that
there was such plenty of silver and gold there for there was none at all, Deuteronomy.
8.7, 8, 9. Solomon sent to Ophir for Gold, 1 King. 9.28. and so did Jehosaphat,
1 King. 22.48. but it was chiefly because the ordinances of God were there
settled. In respect hereof it is said, that there the glory of God is seen in
the sanctuary, Psalm. 63.2. that is, at the Temple in Jerusalem, and his
statutes and ordinances he gave unto that people which was a mercy that he
showed not to any other nation, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Thirdly, the worth and
excellency of Gods ordinances do appear in the end and effect of them, for to
this end they are given, and this is the effect of them, to beget grace in us
and to bring us to Christ, such is the excellency of the word of grace, that is
of the Gospel, that it is able to build us up and to give us an inheritance
among them that are sanctified, Act. 20.32. It is able to make us wise unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. and this wisdom cannot be valued with the gold of
Ophir, gold and crystal cannot equal it, Job 28.16, 17. It was the mystery of
the Heathens, that they were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. and it is the most
blessed and admirable use of the Sacraments to make us partakers of Christ. For
as many of us as have been baptized into Christ, have put, on Christ, Gal.
3.27. And the bread which we break (that is the other Sacrament) is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. such is the worth thereof, it
makes us partakers of Christ. All Gods ordinances are of estimable worth and
excellency, and how comes it then to pass that these shored ordinances are by
so many slighted and neglected? The word by some, the sacraments by others,
both by most, and all the holy things of God, as if they were of no value. The
things themselves surely are heavenly blessings, but it is the wretchedness of
thy heart, O man, and it is thy misery thou do not know the worth of them;
What is the reason the sick man does abhor all manner of meat; yea, the
choicest dainties that can be provided? Is it not because his body is possessed
with dangerous unwholsom malignant humors, which if not removed will
inevitably bring death? So when thou can not relish the food of thy Soul,
what is the reason? Is it not because thou art desperately Soul-sick? The
natural man, says the Apostle, (and certainly the natural man is desperately
Soul-sick) he receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: Neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And what will follow hereupon but inevitable
destruction? The Baptism of John, was the Ordinance of God; The Pharisees
refused to be baptized of him; What was the issue? They rejected the Council of
God against themselves, against themselves, that is, to their own ruin, Luke
7.30. Shall the Manna be loathed, or any of Gods sacred Ordinances slighted?
And shall not he be offended? Mark how he complains, I have written to him the
great things of my Law, but they were counted as a stringe thing, Hos. 8.12.
Neither will it be sufficient to pretend the meanness either of the things of
the Institution, or of the Messengers that are employed about them; It is a
vain thing to say, can a little water on my Body wash away the sin of my Soul?
Or can a bit of Bread, and sip of Wine make me Partaker of Jesus Christ? No. It
is not these things that do the Work; But the Almighty God upon our right use
of these things according to his appointment. He does the Work, he cleanses us
from our Sins, he makes us Partakers of his Son; It was not the sounding the of
Rams Horns that threw down the Walls of Jericho, neither was it the Waters of
Jordan that cured Naaman of his Leprosy, but the Almighty did both these Works
upon the right using and observing what he had appointed. The like may be said
of the Messengers by whom the Almighty does send these Gifts, Are they mean in
your sight? Be it so, Yet will a man refuse rich precious Treasure, because it
is brought him in an Earthen Vessel? We are Earthen Vessels, but Treasure we
bring you. 2 Cor. 4.7. The Prophet Elijah in the time of Famine, Had Bread and
Flesh brought to him in the Morning, and Bread and Flesh in the Evening, the
Ravens brought it to him by the Commandment of the Lord, 1 King. 17.4, 6. The
Prophet knew very well that the Ravens were unclean Creatures, by the Lords own
Verdict. Levit. 11.15. And yet he had more Wit and Grace then to refuse that
which they brought him from the Lord, otherwise, besides the Lords displeasure,
he might have perished for want of Food. I have but one thing more to add
touching this point. These Sacred Ordinances which are of such inestimable
worth, the Lord has vouchsafed to us in great measure, and all the days of our
Lives we have enjoyed them. Let us now bethink our selves of returning something
unto him. The circumstances of New years day are not yet quite over, Let us
present the Lord with a New years Gift. Perhaps you will say, (and well ye may)
What shall I return to the Lord for all his benefits? Ps. 116.12. But is there
nothing indeed? I remember a saying of Aeschines a poor Disciple of Socrates.
Many brought to Socrates, many rich Gifts, poor Aeschines had nothing, but he
comes to Socrates, and says unto him, Nihil dignum te quod dare tibi possim,
invenio. Itaque dono tibi quod unum, habeo me ipsum; that is, I have nothing in
the World worthy to be presented to you, and therefore I bestow upon you all
that I have, my very Self; In like manner let us give our Selves to God; So did
they of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.5. And so does the Apostle wish us all to do. I
beseech you brethren, says he, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1. and in the
next verse he shows how it is to be done, Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind; So then, make you a new heart, let us begin to lead new lives, and
this will be an acceptable Present unto God. For that is it, that God requires,
Ezekiel. 18.31. But the time bids me hasten to the third and fourth things,
observable in the Text, that is, by whom, and to whom this Gift was given. I
shall be brief in both. He gave Him. He, that is the God of Glory mentioned in
verse 2, He gave, and indeed Saint James tells us, that Every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights,
Jam. 1.17. There is no mercy, no blessing that any man does enjoy, but it comes
from him; What have thou, that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. Are they
natural mercies? Why he gives to all life and breath, Act. 17.25. Are they
temporal blessings? Why, Both riches and honor come of thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
Are they spiritual blessings? If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
that gives to all men liberally, Jam. 1.5. Is it eternal happiness it self?
Why, The gist of God is eternal life, Romans 6.23. Is it not strange then, and
may we not marvel at it, that God has no more Friends? Every man, says
Solomon, is a friend to him that gives gifts, Pro. 19.6. And yet the Almighty
God who gives us all that we enjoy, may ask the question that Jehu once did,
Who is on my side, who? 2 King. 9.32. All seek their own, not the things which
are Jesus Christ's, as the Apostle complains, Phil. 2.21. Every man is for
himself, for his own profit, for his own pleasure, for his own will. But you
perhaps may say, who is not Gods Friend? For the answer of this, I shall but
produce a Scripture or two unto you, as that in Ps. 139.20. Thine enemies take
thy name in vain. Why then common Swearers, and all others that any way abuse
the Name of God, are not his Friends; Again, Luke 19.27, Those mine enemies
which would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them
before me, Why then, they that will not suffer the Lord to rule them and reign
over them, are not his Friends. I will add but one more, and that in Ps. 68.21.
God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as
goes on still in his trespasses. Why then, such as go on still in their
trespasses are not his Friends. Those and many others may be declared to be
such as God does not take for his Friends. And would we be his Friends indeed?
Our Savior shows us the way, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. But this we shall touch again in the next point to
which therefore I come and shall but briefly touch it.

The fourth and last thing observable in the Text, is, to whom this token of
Gods love was given. He gave Him, that is Abraham, as appears in the foregoing
verses of the Chapter, Abraham, as Saint James tells us, was called the friend
of God, Jam. 2.23. two places there be in the Old Testiment, where Abraham is
called Gods Friend, that is, 2 Chro. 20.7. and Jsa. 41.8. To him was this
Covenant of Circumcision given, so Gods special gifts are for his special
friends. The Preacher Eccles. 2.26. divides the world into two sorts of people,
and then he shows what gifts the Lord does give to them both. God gives to a
man that is good in his sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy, but to the Sinner
he gives travel togather and to heap up, etc. Wisdom and knowledge in this
world, and joy with the righteous in the world to come (as some expound the
words) are Gods special gifts, and these he gives not to all, but to the men
that are good in his sight, that is, such as he accounts his friends. The
favorites of an earthly Prince, as they do always enjoy more of the princes
favor so do they always partake more of his bounty, and the special tokens of
his inward affections are vouchsafed unto them, which are denied to others,
especially to those that rebel against him: just so it is with the Almighty,
and his friends or favorites. He give you but an instance or two. One is that
of our Savior to his disciples whom he esteemed his friends, Mat. 13.11. It is
given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them
(that is to those that are not his friends) it is not given. The other is that
Prayer of the Psalmist, Psa. 106.4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that
thou bear unto thy people, he does acknowledge there that God has a special
savor for some more then for others, and out of that favor he does bestow
upon them special gifts, health, and wealth, and riches, and honor, and the
like he does bestow many times upon those that are not his friends; but those
things that tend to the happiness of the Soul, as wisdom, and knowledge, and the
Mysteries of the kingdom, and newness of heart, here signified by the Covenant
of Circumcision, these are Gods special blessings, and these, ye see, are only
for his special friends. And if we would have them (and surely of all things in
the world, they are most desirable, as appears by that prayer of the Psalmist
forementioned, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
people) If I say; we would desire to have them we must become his friends; be
we therefore such as Abraham was, and then we shall not miss of them. Such as
Abraham was? why, what a one was he? why, sure in Abraham, if we would be like
him, there are many things that we must take notice of.

1. In his carriage toward God. 2. In his carriage toward his neighbors. 3.
In his carriage toward his own family.
1. In his carriage toward God, we may observe that wheresoever he came he
built an Altar, such care he had of the Worship and Service of God, as Genesis
12.7, 8. and 13.18. etc. Whatsoever God commanded, he was ready to obey, though
it were never so against flesh and blood: when he was called out of his Country
from his kindred, and from his Fathers house, he obeyed and went forth, not
knowing whether he went, Heb. 11.8. when he was commanded to take his Son, his
only Son, Isaac whom he loved, and to offer him up for a burnt-offering, he
went about it without gainsaying, showing thereby both his readiness to obey,
and also to part with any thing, though never so dear unto him, for Gods sake;
he had faith and confidence in God, and doubted not of his promises even then,
when unto human reason there seemed little hope of them, as that he should have
a Son, when he was an hundred years old, and his Wife not only ninety, but
naturally barren, Romans 4.18, 19, 20. And that in Isaac his seed should be
called; and that all Nations should be blessed in him, though he had a command
to offer him up for a Burnt Offering, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.

2. In his carriage toward his Neighbor, for there ye may see his Justice,
his Mercy, and his Love of Peace, His Justice, in paying Tithes where they were
due; Melchisedeck was the Priest of the most High God, and Abraham returning
from the slaughter of the Kings, gave him the Tenth part of all, Heb. 7.1, 2.
His Mercy, in that he prayed to the Almighty God that he would be pleased to
spare the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, with the three other Cities of the
Plain, Genesis 18.23, etc. And in that when they were oppressed and carried
Captive, he armed his Trained Servants, and rescued them, Genesis 14. And for his
Love to Peace, when there was like to be a difference between him and Lot, he
was contented to part with his own right, rather than that there should be any
strife between them; For though he were the elder man, and Lots Uncle, and
though the Land of Canaan was given to him, and not to Lot, yet he gives Lot
his choice, and wishes him to go into which part of the Land he pleased, that
so there might be no danger of contention between them, Genesis 13.9.

3. In his carriage toward his own Family; for though Abraham were a great
man, so great, that the Children of Heth said unto him, Thou art a mighty
Prince amongst us, Genesis 23.5, 6. Yet he did not count it a work beneath
himself, to have care of his Family, both Children and Servants, and to teach
and instruct them in the ways of Piety and Godliness, I know him, says the
Lord, that he will command his Children and household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. These are the things that are eminent in
Abraham, and in these things if we imitate him, as we shall be sure by doing
the works of Abraham, that we are the Children of Abraham, Joh. 8.39. So we may
hope, God will reckon us his friends and take us into Covenant with him, and be
our God, as he was and is the God of Abraham, and that he will bestow upon us
the choicest of his blessings, and bring us to sit down at length with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which God of his mercy grant us,
through the merits of his Son. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Sermons, etc. printed for Henry Brom, since the dreadful
Fire of London, to 1676.
A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, useful for Families, and fit to be given at
Funerals. Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the King, about Miracles, 6 d. -- His
Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester. 6 d. -- His Sermon before
the King in Lent, 1673. 6 d. The Seasonable Discourse against Popery, in
quarto. 6 d. -- The Defense of it, quarto. 6 d. -- The Difference betwixt the
Church and Court of Rome, in quarto. 6 d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament
answered. 6 d. Mr. Naylor's Commemoration Sermon for the Honorable Col.
Cavendish. 6 d. Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes at Reading. 6 d. Mr. Tho.
Tanner's Sermon to the scattered Members of the Church. 6 d. Mr. Stanhop's four
Sermons on several Occasions, octavo, bound. 1 s. 6 d. Papal Tyranny, as it was
exercised over England for some Ages, with two Sermons on the fifth of
November, by Dr. Du Moulin, in quarto. 1 s. 6 d. -- His Sermon at the Funeral
of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury. 6 d, Bishop Lany's last Sermon, preached
before the King, against Comprehension. Principals and Duties of Natural
Religion. By John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of Chester. Mr, Farindon's 130
Sermons, in Folio, in three Vol. Mr. Standish's Sermon preached before the
King, an White Hall, September 26. 1675.

