A Tragi-COMEDY, called NEW-Market-FAYRE, OR A PARLIAMENT Outcry: OF
State-Commodities, SET TO SALE.

The Prologue sung by the Crier.

Come, come away, to the Fair I say,
for now it is the Saints Market Day:
Here be pretty things, toys for your new Kings,
Scepters: Crowns Diamonds and Rings:
Manors for pleasure, good land for your treasure*
good People, here is measure for measure.
Come Tom and ^oll, Jane, C^sse, Sue, and Doll,
and wise Aldermen of the City,
See but this Play, and before you go away
you will say it is wondrous pri^ty.
Welcome, Welcome with al^ my heart,
For now the Crier must mind his Part.
The Second Edition, Corrected and amended by the Author.

Printed at you may go look. 1649.

To his Noble Friend the Man in the Moon, in Comendations of his Tragi-Coemedy
called NEW-Market-FAYRE.
PRoceed, Dear friend; and bid them do their worst;
Tell them their Acts are like themselves accursed:
Thine are more blessed, and happy, that give sight
To blinde-men; thy Moon in the clipse puts out their light.
But when our So^ but daines to appear
In the bright Orb of his Right Hemisphere:
Then shall State-Glow-worms vanish to their graves,
So ends thy Play, and so will end such Knaves.
Mean while thou have the wishes of my heart,
This Gold to boot, to write thy Second Part.
Thine W. M. B. In. Tem* The Actors Names.
Fairfax. Crumwell. Their Wives. Ireton. Mildmay. Skippon. Pride. Martyn. Half
a score Aldermen. Rains broughs widow. Two Cryers. Three Messengers.
The Scene WESTMINSTER.

A Tragi-COMEDY, called NEW-Market-FAYRE, OR A PARLIAMENT Outcry: OF
State-Commodities, SET TO SALE.
Enter CRIER with a Crown and Scepter, a Cabinet of Jewels, Suites and Roabes
belonging to the late King. Crier. O Yes, O yes, O yes; here is a golden
Crown, worth many a hundred Pound; 'twill fit the head of a Fool, Knave, or
Clown; 'twas lately taken from the Royal Head, of a King Martyred; Who bids
most? Here is a Scepter for to sway a kingdom a new reformed way; 'twas usu^p'd
from one we did lately betray; pray Customers come away: Here be Jewels of
wondrous price, they will dazzle both your eyes; come, come, who buys: here be
suits of the Kings, Bands, Shirts and Shoo-strings; Here be S ockings; here be
shoes and cuffes, and double double Ruffes; here be cloaks, hats and gloves,
Rings and Bracelets of His Dear Loves; Here be boots and spurs, and bloody
handkerchers; with his Roabs that be royal, his Watch and Sun-diall; Here be
Cabinets with Letters, to instruct all your betters; his Meditations and
Prayer Book, in which all Nations may look; here is his Hair and royal Blood,
shed for his Subjects good; here be Liberaries and Books, and Pictures that
contain his Looks; Here you may all things buy, that belong to Monarchy;
Here Is a Bowl his blood to Carrowse with the Goods belonging to his House; here
be rich Hangings, Chairs and Stools, belonging to the House of Lordly Fools;
here be seats of Wool-packs, and many pretty Knacks. Come customers buy, for
the STATE wants money, my Candle is light, and I shut up before night.


Enter Fairfax, Cromwell, Ireton, Pride, Martyn, Mildmay, and Skippon. Fair.
GEntlemen, welcome to New-Market-Fayre; Here are Commodities worth your
Purchasing; the spoils of Tyrant Kings, and of incestious Queens* which We have
crushed by power of Arms; and made them taste Our high Displeasure at large,
when Victory was proud to honor Us at Nasbys happy Field. I hope you will give me
leave to choose what I like best.


Crum. My Lord, the Fair is proclaimed, and Free: you have no greater
privilege then the meanest here; our Interest's all alike in every parcel.


Cry. What want ye Gentlemen? here is Stately Ware; The Goods oth' King, and his
Exiled Heir.


Crum. Where is the Crown that Col. Martyn took from the Abbey at Westminster,
some four years since? I think it fitts my Temples, and i^ the richest save
one, an^ that the Rebel Earl of Darby has in the I Will of Man.


Crier. Here it is Sir; try it on: So, now it is sure,
And makes you look more like a King then Brewer.

Fair. It Is most my ^ight, and best becomes my head.


Crum. Not yet my Lord, till OLIVER be dead.
Better to Straight, then to have none at all,
aside. Were it but on, -- yours should quickly fall?
Here Is a hundred pound in gold for it;
And here is the Purse was given me by a Citt.

Cry. A hundred pound bid for the royal Crown of England; who bids any more?


Fair. Here it is trebble.


Cry. Three hundred pound bid for the royal Crown of England; who bids more?


Cr^m. I Will hav't in spite of Fairfax or Fate,
Although I buy't at never so dear a rate:
Here Is five hundred pounds; and now it is mine.

Fair. But not so hasty sir; Here Is a thousand for it:
And more; because I Will make it sure,
I Will give thee in my Basin and my Ure.

Crom. I caused the Owner of it loose his head,
And shall I loose his Crown now he is dead?
No: Did it encompasse the powrful brows of JOVE,
I Would storm the Heavens, and fetch it from above.

Fair. Are you content to share it then?


Crom. No: A Crown admits no Rival; I Will all or none,
He sits unsafe that does divide his Throne.

Enter my Lady Fairfax, and Mrs. Crumwell. Fair. I Will try that presently.

draws his sword.
Mrs C^um. Do if thou dare;
(she stands stradling betwixt.) Run thy Blade in a Woman, do,
Thou white. liver'd Knave thou; thou art marked for a Rogue;
Wooed I were a man for thy sake. Uds. fut I Would --

Lady Fair. What wooed ye Mistress Yest and Graynes; marry foh -- Come up
Small-beer: You Would make your nose as red-hot as your husbands, and thrust it
into his Fizzling-place, wooed ye not, Mistress Brazen-face.


Mrs. Crom. Call me Mistress brazen-face; --; thou Rotter-dam slut thou; -- call
me brazzen-face. Thou look more liker a Mistress fools-face, or like thy
Husbands-face, then I do a brazzen-face, or a copper-face either; Come, come; I
never had a Bastard by another man, when my Husband was at the Leaguer before
Breda; nor I keep not c^mpany with Cavaliers at Tavernes; nay at Bawdy Taverns
too, when thy Tom Innocent has been in fight. Gorge me that, Gorge me that
Madam Turn-tayle.

maks horn^.
Fair. You Will peace you Shee-Otter, I Will make ye take your Copper else; and for
Dives-face thy husband, I Will deal well enough with him -- come fire-snowt, draw.


Mild. Nay, good my Lord, put up your sword; we shall ere long I fear have
occasion enough to use your Valor: Fie, fie, in your own Country? wrong your own
Country? it is the way to make us loose all we have got and fetch the Prince in
amongst us: I Will to the Counsel of State, and take up the business to all your
contents I Will warrant ye; in the mean time you may equally divide the Houses and
goods of the late King Queen and Prince amongst us; you two shall cast lots,
which shall be King of England, and which of Ireland C^m. Genesis Ireton Prince of
Wales, my self Master of the horse, and clerk of your Majesty's Jewels; Col.
Pride will be content with Oate-lands, Wood-stock, or Greenwich to brew in: Mr.
Martyn Lord Chamberlain; Keeper of your Concubines, or Gentleman Usher to one
of your Queens; your Wives may enjoy all the Queens rights; and Major Skippon
be made Lord High Constable of England; Mr. Goodwin Archbishop o^ Canterbury,
Mr. Owen Archbishop of York, and Hugh Peter's of London, John Bradshaw Lord
Chief Justice, Steel, R^lls, etc. of the privy Counsel, ^embroke Controuler;
Denb^igh Yeoman of the Wine-seller. ^lemming Master-Cook, Seldom Secretary of
State, my Lady Kent Laundresse, Miles Corbet Scullion; and then we shall have a
Kingdom well governed, and all the People contented to the full: Is not this
better then fighting and weakening your selves to strenthen the Enemy?

Come come, let us be all Peace, and cease base jarres,
We look for foreign, not domestique Wars.

Omnes, Content, content; all is Peace, all is Peace.


Mrs. Crum. But think ye that WE can brook any thing that was the late Queens;
No she was a Strumpet, and a Baggage, and all her Goods smell of Popety, and
savor as strong as the Whore of babylon; If the Kingdom will not be at the
Charge to find me all things New, by my troath, I will not be their Queen. Do
ye think that I Will be Odious to my People? No; they shall be proud of the
Ornaments I wear.

The Gods themselves shall for my Love implore,
My People (ike some Goddess) me adore.

Crom. Be but content, my Dear, the glory of the world is thine.
Thou have both Indies at thy beck; Thy train
Shall be held up by Queens of France and Spain

Ex Om. The Scene changing. Enter a Surveigher, and presents a Landscape,
wherein is discovered all the Kings Manors, Parks, Chases, Forests, with
Horses and Deer feeding. Enter a malignant CRIER. Crier. O Yes, O yes, O yes,
Who buys any of the late Kings Revenues belonging to His Crown, worth many a
hundred Thousand pounds; Here be Manors, Parks, Forests and Chases, and good
Timber trees that grow on their places; Here be good stoor of Deer, for the
Saints to make good cheer, and grown Woods for their feer; Here Is Cammels,
Asses, and H^rses, that will mount you more Forces; Here be broken Seals Maces,
and Members with hollow hearts, and double faces; Here Is Dean^ and Chapters
Lands, and Parliament men with bloody hands; Here are perjured Knaves and
Fools, that have ^ndone Churches and Free-Schools; here is Grafton and
Bel-cause, that intend to steal half; Tony Mildmay and Lampier are intrust^d to
sell Deer; here is Taxes of Gold-smiths-hall, Couzening, Cheating, Lying and
the Devil and all; here is a new Art of doubling come in fashion, but hereafter
'twill prove double Damnation; Ireton Reports the amendments of the Act, but
you may one day see him hanged for the Fact; these holy thieves live only by
murder and stealth, rob God, King and People for the good of the Commonwealth;
here is Richmond and Hampton Court, and Windsor-Castle, and Havering for their
sport; here is Wansted for Judas Mildmay that with a kiss did his Master betray;
here is Holmby a prison to relieves, and White Hall full of thieves; here is the
Wardrobe intended for the poor, and St. Ianses that shrowds many a
Parliament-mans whore; here is Titbury, Roysto^^ and Newmarket, to be sold
outright, or to be let; here is Claringdon, Oatlands, Theobalds, Woodstock, and
400 l. per an. for my Lord fool- Pembrook there is Bushy; Greenwich and
Sumerset-house, which will serve the Saints to inherit, and multiply their
spirit; besides here be Offices and G^atuetyes, given for their brethrens lies;
each Parliament Man has 4 l. per week allowed him: besides the Revenue, which
they think is their due. Delinquents Estates and Church Lands, are all in
State-hucksters hands, yet still they be poor, and tax the people more and
more; the Self-denying-Ordinance, lies in a trance; the war is unjust, grounded
on covetousness and lust. Come Customers and buy -- your own slave^


Enter Woolasion, Adkins, Penning^on, and 4 Aldermen more with the Widow
Rainsbrough. Wool. I have laid out large Sums in purchasing of Bishops Lands;
heaven send me comfort of them, and grant I may enjoy them quietly. This news
from Sea, and the Scots does not please me I promi^e ye.


Atkins. I have purchased some too, and have money in readiness for more.
Sister Rain^brough you will have double share for the loss of your deer
husband; enough to marry you to a Lord.


Mrs. Rains. Indeed the State is liberal.


Cry. I, so they are of that that is none of their own.

aside.
Enter Fairfax, Cromwell, Ireton, etc. Crum. WE must be sudden in our
resolutions, all is lost else; Money is a moveable Comm dity, let us demand a
million of the City: hang 'um, they are rich enough.


Atkins. Do ye hear that brethren?

(lets stand a side)
Crum. Tell them of Manors, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands; it is the way
to make the Jou ^ heads untru^s --


Atkins. I Will do it in my Breeches first.

aside.
Fair. But what if they deny us the money?


Ire. My Lord, I am confident they dare not: if they should, we can compel
them: Here Is an ill scent my Lord, pray let us void the room.


Enter three Messengers running. Crum. Some hasty news -- pray heaven it is good.


Messengers. Here Is Letters for the General.

C^u^. read.
Crom. We Are all undone; our Navy's lost at Sea; Dublin's taken; the Prince is
landed with 30000 in the West; the Scots are advanced with five and twenty
Thousand to Carissle; the Levellers and Pre^byters fly to them; and which is
worse, the People generally do our late Actions curse. We all are lost.


Crier. Ha, ha, ha; then you had best all hang your selves.


Omnes. All People here behold our miseries,
Who lives by Treason, thus by Treason dies.

they fall upon their swords. FINIS.
Next Week expect the Second Part.


