A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON All the EPISTLES AND THE REVELATION of John
the Divine.

Wherein the Text is explained, some Controversies are discussed, diverse
Common-places are handled, and many remarkable matters hinted, that had by
former interpreters been pretermitted.

Besides, diverse other Texts of Scripture, which occasionally occur, are fully
opened, and the whole so intermixed with pertinent Histories, as will yield
both pleasure and profit to the judici^us Reader.

With a Decad of Common-places upon these ten Heads, Abstinence. Admonition.
Alms. Ambition. Angels. Anger. Apostasy. Arrogancy. Arts. Atheism.


By John Trapp M. A. Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Glocestershire.

Paulum quoties^unque lego, non verba audire videar, sed Tonitrua.

Hierom. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three
golden Lions in Cornhill, M.DC.XLVII.

TO THE REVEREND And his much honored Father, Mr JOHN LEY, Pastor and
Preacher of Gods Word at great Budworth in Cheshire, and one of the venerable
ASSEMBLY.
Reverend Sir,
NOw, by a sweet providence, is that happiness put into my hands, that I have
long wished and waited for, viz a fit opportunity of telling the world, how
highly I honor You, and how deeply I stand engaged unto You. A most able and
absolute Divine (in another sense then Erasmus termed some in his time) I ever
took You for, Abselutae eruditionis and pietatis viris. Sic scripsit Theolog^^
Parisiens^b. Voluit autem, alienis ab omni eruditione and pietate, interpret
Melancthone.
since I first came acquainted with You. And how little mistaken I am therein,
let Your many elaborate lucubrations say for me; those accurate Annotations
upon the Pentateuch especially: of which precious piece, and the thriceworthy
Author, I am eftsoons ready to say, Buchol.
as one did once of Erasmus and his Adagies -- quis nosset Erasmum, Chilias
aeternum si latuisset opus?

Or as another did of Calvin's Institutions, Praeter Apostolicas, (...). Dugardi
mei ingeniosissimum inventum. M. Ley was at that time the first President of
Sion-Colledge. Joseph. Scali. epist. ad Eliam Vinet.
post Christi tempora, chartas Huic peperere libro secula nulla parem. Sure I
am, and not a little sensible, that he that here come's after You, shall but
actum agere, he shall but facem Soli (Soli, inquam, in Sion) accendere, he
shall but in nobilissimo theatro seipsum traducere. Well he may pick up
Praeterita with Drusius, or spicilegium post messem with Capellus, he shall
hardly ever get so near You, Val. Max.
as the Latin Orator did the Greek, Demosthenes Ciceroni praeripuit, ne primus
esset Orator, Cicero Demostheni, ne solus. Cant. 6.12.
But whither (or ere I wist) has the just admiration of Your singular worth
transported me? My design was not to praise You (for that were, as an Ancient
said of Athanasius, to praise virtue it self) but to profess my deep
indebtednesse unto You, for Your many fatherly favors and real courtesies
done me since mine adoption Quibus effecisti, ut vivere^ and morerer ingratus,
as he said to Augustus, Sen. de benef. l. 2. c. 12.
this being the only wrong that ever You did me, that I must live and die
unthankful. These brief Notes passeable (I say not praisable) only for their
brevity, do humbly beg Your perusal, and (sitanti sint) Your Patronage: and
surely may they but obtain Your much-desired countenance and comprobation, I
shall soon say with the Orator, (...), I fear not any man's censure. Whatever
else is wanting in them, a will, I am sure, is not wanting, of laying forth my
small talent to the honor of my Master, and the good of my fellow servants;
those of mine own particular charge especially, to whom most of these things
have been delivered, and of whom I can truly say, as Reverend M. Stock did of
his people in Breadstreet London, Mr Gatak, Abraham's decease.
That he had rather win one of them, then twenty others. Now that I may be fit
and able to fulfill the Ministry that I have received in the Lord, Col. 3.17.
^ Tim. 4.16.
so as to save my self and them that hear me, let Your fatherly benediction,
and instant intercession to the Father of all the fatherhood in heaven and
earth, Ephesians. 3.15. (...) Parentela.
be never wanting to

Your most affectionately obsequious son and servant, John Trapp.
Welford this 16. of Nov. 1647.
Ad Libellum chartaceum, venerando Autori, ante manum huic Annotationum parti
admotam, dono missum, Affatio, Quae vice Praefationis, de Autore Opereque, esse
possit.
DOminum, Libelle, gratulor tibi novum.
Mihi negatam tu sortem folix habes;
Viro futurus eximio jugis comes,
Qui floribus, quos fundit, seu Britannia,
Seu Latium, seu Palestina, simul Graecia,
Te fragrantissimis or nabit, instrue^:
Vt olim Acheloi cornu implerunt Najades.
Qui proprii venustos foetus ingeni,
Quibus venustiores nullum parturit,
Magisve densos, credet servandos tibi.
Qui quicquid audit est-divino pectore,
Lingua facunda, moribus suavissimis.
Contra quam Sacra jam profitentes plurimi,
Docere recta callidi, non vivere.
Quam vellem scitus esse nuno Libellulus!
Forem ut tuae foelicitatis particeps,
Ejus beandus, gestandus, manu, sinu.
Tene fidelis quicquid mandarit tibi.
Furacibus cave sedulus ab unguibus.
Tibi ne maculas aut foedas labes contrahe:
Subire vultus ut queas libens meos.
Abijam, and Dominum a me saluta millies.
THOMAS DUGARD, Art. Mag. Rector Barfordiae.

A Table of such Texts of the old Testament, as are here occasionally
explicated.
Genesis 5.24. p. 388. Genesis 13.9. p. 330. Genesis 23.2. p. 83. Genesis 25.34. p. 401.
Genesis 27.33. p. 401. Genesis 33.9, 11. p. 256. Exodus 23.28. p. 517. Exodus 33.2, 3.
p. 402. Exodus 33.16.17. p. 688. Levit. 2.5. p. 103. Levit. 14.19. p. 459.
Levit. 19.16. p. 314. Levit. 19.17. p. 618. Numb. 13.16. p. 362. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
p. 191. 1 Samuel 25.6. p. 653. Job 38.2. p. 671. Psalm. 7.12. p. 671. Psalm. 10.3.
p. 320. Psalm. 22.1. p. 356. Psalm. 26.12. p. 254. Psalm. 36.10. p. 640. Psalm.
72.17. p. 581. Psalm. 39.1. p. 420. Psalm. 41.1. p. 639. Psalm. 119.9. p. 329.
Psalm. 139.16. p. 107. Prove. 3.17. p. 635. Prove. 10.2, 3. and 15.24. p. 635, 65.
Prove. 20.29. p. 469. Prove. 28.20. p. 161. Eccles. 5.6. p. 498. Cant. 1.5. p.
185. Isa. 6.1, 2, 3. p. 433. Isa. 14.23. p. 116. Isa. 23.18. p. 632. Isa. 28 9.
p. 64. Isa. 45.7. p. 572. Isa. 51.18. p. 159. Isa. 58.10. p. 636. Lam. 3.36. p.
443. Ezekiel. 38.3. p. 581. Dan. 4.19. p. 689. Dan 9.21. p. 660. Hos. 9.4. p. 103.
Zach. 3.9. p. 494.
Errata.
Page 5 l 25. r. praeripuit p 21 l. 14 r ad. p 25, l 12 r langold p. 80. l. 17,
r. married couples. p 85. l. 10. r. that is. p. 94 l. 5. r bitter. p 114 l. 11 r
sis. p. 1^4 l 28. dele that. p 128. l 7. r. at. p 136. l 21. r Secretaries. p.
143 l. 12. r encaged. p. 173 l. 30 r: conqueror. p. 200 l 23 r beedlesse p 206
l 20 r. amaxuensis p. 814 l. ^0. r wills. p. 221. l 24. r blown p. 228. l. 2^
add we. p. 160. l 6. r. relate. p. 263. l. 21. r. matter p. 305 l. 35. r
involuntary p. 191 l. ^. r there. p 395. l 9 r forwardnes. p. 404 l. 14. r 5. r
pauc^. p 418. l. 9. r. they p. 406. l warmed p. 424. l. p. 426. r 4 r
savourily. (...). p. 459. l. 39 r. in bu eyes ib. mar. r. puptllam. p. 463 l:
30. r Sertorius p. 473 l. 18. r. Theologica p. 532. l. 3. r one writes. p. 534.
l. 8 r Amos. p. 537. l. 38. dele for. p. 546. l. 7. r. Antichrist. p. 549. l.
25. r earth p. 557. l. 28. dele are. p. 572. l. 25. r imitate. p. 593. l. 12. r
by the Sun beams p. 608 l. 23. r. that the devil. p. 628. l. 9. r. cast. p.
641. l. 23. r. Sareptan. p. 646. l. 14. r. (...).

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the ROMANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. A servant of Jesus Christ.
THis is an higher title th^n Monarch of the world, as Numa, second King of
Rome could say. (...). Pult.


Verse 2. Promised] Fore-shewed and foreshadowed.

Verse 3. Concerning his Son] Here Is a lofty and lively description of Christ's
sacred person. The whole Epistle being the Confession of our Churches, as
Melancthon calls it, Scultet. Annal.
who therefore went over it ten several times in his ordinary Lectures: The
Epistle being such, as never can any man possibly think, speak or write
sufficiently of it is worth and excellency.

Verse 4. Declared to be, etc.] Gr. Defined; (...).
for definitions explain obscurities.

With power] For, Superas evadere ad auras; Hic labor, hoc opus est -- a work
befitting a God, See Ephesians. 1.20. with the Note there.

The Spirit of holinesse] The divine essence of Christ, 2 Cor. 13 4. which
sanctifies the humane nature assumed by him.

Verse 5. For obedience to the faith] That is, to the Gospel (that doctrine of
faith) or to Christ, who is often put for faith (whereof he is the proper object)
in this Epistle. Kiss the Son, etc. Psalm. 2 12. Math. 17.5.
Hear him.

Verse 6. Ye are the called] With an high and heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. See
the Note there.

Verse 7. Called to be Saints] Those then that are called, are Saints, whilst
alive, and not only those that are canonized by the Pope after they are dead,
Bemb in List. Venet.
In numerum Deorum ab Ecclesia Romana relati, as Bembus profanely speaks of
their Saint Francis, a sorry man, Dan hist of Engl. fol. 99.
of whom (as once of Becket 48 years after his death) it may well be disputed,
Whether he were damned or saved. Pope Callistus 3. sainted some such in his
time, as of whom Cardinal Bess^rion, Iac. Revius. bist. Pontis.
knowing them for naught, said, These new Saints make me doubt much of the old.

Grace he to you, and peace] See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.2.

Verse 8. Your faith is spoken of] See chap. 16. and Juvenal, Tacitus, and
other profane writers, who bitterly exagitate the doctrines and practices of
those Roman Christians.

Verse 9. Whom I serve in my spirit] That is, with all the faculties of my soul
concentred and co-united.

Verse 10 I might have a prosperous journey] This he prayed, and this he had by
such a way as he little dreamt of. Little thought Paul, that when he was bound
at Jerusalem, and posted from one prison to another, that God was now sending
him to Rome: yet he sent him, and very safe, with a great Convoy. God goes often
another way to work, for our good, then we could imagine.

Verse 11. That I may impart] There is no envy in spiritual things, because
they may be divided in solidum; one may have as much as another, Theat Naturae.
and all alike. Scientiarum (sic and gratiarum) ca vis est and natura, ut quo
plus doceas, and alteride tuo largiare, co ditior ac doctior fias, says
Bodine. Such is the nature and property of sciences and graces, that the more
you communicate them, the more you increase them.

Verse 12. That I may be comforted] Or exhorted, Ad communem exhortationem
percipiendam, says Beza out of Bucer, and others. The meanest of Christ's
members may contribute somewhat to the edifying even of an Apostle.

Verse 13. But was let hitherto] Either by Satan, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. or by the holy
Spirit, otherwise disposing of him, as Act. 19.6, 7. or by some intervenient,
but important occasion: as Chap. 15.20, 21.

Verse 14. I am debter] Because entrusted with talents for that purpose, 1 Cor.
9.16. See the Note there.

Verse 15. So as much] Quicquid in me situm est, promptum est. A notable
expression.

Verse 16. For I am not ashamed] As men are apt to be; whence that fatherly
charge, 2 Timothy 1.8. Do ye think (said John Frith, Martyr, to the Archbishops
men that would have let him go) that I am afraid to declare mine opinion unto
the Bishops of England in a manifest truth? Act. and Mon. 1917.
If you should both leave me here, and go tell the Bishops that you had lost
Frith, I would surely follow as fast after, as I might, and bring them news
that I had found and brought Frith again.

For it is the power, etc.] Eternal life is potentially in the Word preached,
as the harvest is potentially in the seed.

Verse 17. The just shall live by faith] Hab. 2.4. that is, they shall enjoy
themselves by their faith, in greatest disasters, or dangers, when others are
at their wits ends, that is the Prophets sense; and the Apostle not unfitly
applies it to prove justification by faith alone: for if a man live by faith,
he is just by faith.

Verse 18. Who hold the truth] Hold the light of their consciences (which is as
a Prophet from God) prisoner. The natural man, that he may sin the more
securely, imprisons the truth, which he acknowledges, and lays hold on all
the principles in his head, that might any way disturb his course in sin,
locking them up in restraint. Hence it appears that no man is righteous in
himself, or by his own righteousness, which was the (...)

Verse 19. Because that which may] Heathens might know God the Creator, per
species creaturarum (as they speak) either in way of negation, or causality, or
eminence; not so God the Redeemer.

Verse 20. Are clearly seen] As in a mirror, Pervidentur.
or as on a theater. Vt solemn in aquis, sic Deum in operibus contemplamur.

Verse 21. Neither were thankefull] How then shall we answer to God our
hateful unthankfulness, which is (says one) a monster in nature, a solecisme
in manners, a paradox in divinity, a parching wind to damme up the fountain of
divine favors.

But became vain in their imaginations] Gr. (...).
In their reasonings, disputations, discourses upon serious deliberation. They
stood not to their own principles (as, That there is one God only, That this
God is to be worshipped, etc.) but were Atheists by night that worshipped the
Sun, and Atheists by day that worshipped the Moon, as Cyril says wittily.

Verse 22. Professing themselves to be wise] Aristotle, Natures chief
Secretary, writes many things most absurdly concerning God: As, Metaphys. l.
12.
that he is a living creature, That he works not freely, Ib. lib 1. Bodin.
Theat. Not p 29.
but by a kind of servile necessity; and that therefore he deserves no praise
or thanks from men for his many benefits, since he does but what he must needs
do. These are Aristotle's absurd assertions. And yet at Stuckard in Germany, was
found a Doctor of Divinity that preached to the people, That the Church might
be sufficiently well taught and governed by Aristotle's Ethics, though we had
no Bible: And the Collen Divines set forth a book, concerning Aristotle's
salvation.

Verse 23. Made like to corruptible man] God made man in his own image: And (to
be even with him, as it were) will needs make God, after his image.

And fourfooted beasts] God therefore justly gave them up to Sodomy, whith did
abase them below the beasts: that there might be an analogy between the sin and
the punishment. This is called a meet recompense, ver. 27. They dishonored
God, they dishonored therefore themselves. They would not know nor honor him,
they shall not therefore know, nor spare one another, etc. so severely will God
punish the contempt of rebellion against the light.

And creeping things] In Lapland the people worship that all day for a god,
Abbots his Geog.
whatsoever they see first in the morning, be it a bird or worm.

Verse 24. Arist. Etb.l 7. c. 3, 4.
Gave them up to uncleannesse] Aristotle confesses the disability of moral
knowledge to rectify the intemperance of nature; and made it good in his
practice: for he used a common strumpet to satisfy his lust. Socrates is said
to have had his Catamite, Iavenal.
Inter Socratices, etc.

Verse 25. Who changed] They tare out their natural principles and turned
Atheists.

Verse 26. Into that which is against nature] So against nature, that children
(natures end) and posterity is utterly lost by it.

Verse 27. Leaving the naturall] As at this day in the Levant, Sodomy is held
no sin. B^unts voyage.
The Turkish Basha's have many wives, but more Catamites, which are their
serious loves.

Burned in their lust] Gr. Were scalded. (...).
Some men put off all manhood, become dogs, worse then dogs. Hence Deuteronomy. 23.18.
The price of a dog, that is of a buggerer, as Iunius and Deodatus expound it.

Verse 28. To a reprobate minde] Or, an injudicious mind: Or, a mind
rejected, disallowed, abhorred of God: Or a mind that none has cause to glory
in, but rather to be much ashamed of.

Verse 29. With all unrighteousnesse] The mother of all the ensuing misrule.

Wickednesse] The Syrian says, Bitterness. See Ier. 2.19.

Envy, murther] Three such Agnominations are found in this black bedroll. The
Apostle seems delighted with them, (...).
as was likewise the Prophet Isaiah. Of which noble two, I may well say, as one
does of Demosthenes and Cicero, Demosthenes Ciceroni praecipust ne esset primus
Orator, Cicero Demostheni, ne solus.

Malignity] Or, Morosity, crossenesse.

Verse 30. Haters of God] And so God-murtherers, 1 John 3.15. See the Note
there.

Verse 31. Implacable] That will not hear of a truce, much less of a peace.

Verse 32. Have pleasure] Or, they patronize, (...). Theoph.
applaud and approve: This is set last, as worst of all: it comprehends all
kinds of consent. To hold the bag is as bad as to fill it.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable.
THough thou have no pleasure in them that do evil, as Chap. 1. 32. but do
superciliously censure them, being thy self otherwise as bad. Cato is said to
have exercised usury, to have prostituted his wife, to have slain himself. God
often sets a Noverint universi upon the worlds wizards, for the foulest fools.

Verse 2. Which commit such] As Cato, ver. 1. whom yet Velleius affirms to
have been, hominem virtuti simillimum. But God judges not as man.

Verse 3. Think thou] This is preaching to the conscience, to the quick.

Verse 4. (...).
The goodness of God] Gr. His native goodness, ready to be employed to the
behoof and benefit of the creature, Tit. 3.4. Now as the beam of the Sun
shining on fire, does discourage the burning of that; so the shining of Gods
mercies on us should dishearten and extinguish lust in us. This is so equal,
and needful a duty, that Peter picks this flower out of Paul's garden, as one
of the choicest, and urges it upon those to whom he writes, 2 Pet, 3.15.

Verse 5. Treasurest up unto thy self] Sicut mittentes pecuniam in
gazophyla^ium, quod, ubi jam impletur, confringitu^, says Stella upon Luke. In
treasuring, there is, 1. Laying in. 2. Lying hid. 3. Bringing out again, as
there is occasion. Wicked persons, whiles by following their lusts, they think
they do somewhat to their happiness, shall in the end find, Pro the sauro
carhones, those burning coals, Psalm. 140.10.

Verse 6. Who] See the Note on Mat. 16.27.

Verse 7. Who by patient continuance] Or, By suffering persecution for
righteousness sake. Gordius the Martyr said, It is to my loss, Tertal. Ep. ad
Polycarp.
if you bate me any thing in my sufferings. Majora certamina, majora sequuntur
pramia, (...), says Ignatius. Much pains has much gains.

Verse 8. (...).
But unto them that are contentious] That wrangle and thwartle against clearest
truths, searching the devils skull for carnal arguments, as those Athenians,
Act. 17. being refractary as Pharaoh, who would not sit down under the miracle,
but sent for the Magicians. And though the word does eat up all they can say,
as Moses his rod did, yet harden they their hearts as Pharaoh, and resolve to
curse, as Balaam, what ever come of it. These are those contentious ones.

Verse 9. Of the Jew first] Qui ideo deteriores sunt, quia meliores esse
deberent. Who are therefore worse, Salvian.
because they should be better.

Verse 10. Peace] Safety here, and salvation hereafter.

Verse 11. For] See the Note on Act. 10.34.

Verse 12. Perish without law] Or, Though they hall no written law, as that of
Moses.

Verse 13. But the doers of the law] The Scriptures are verba vivenda non
l^genda, Aug.
as Egidius Abbot of Norimberg said of the 119. Psalm. Boni Catholici sunt qui
and sidem integram sequuntur, and bonos mores. Lessons of music must be
practiced, and a copy not read only, but acted. Divinity must be done as well
as known.

Verse 14. Do by nature, etc.] Velleius says that Cato was, Vell, lib, 2.
Homo virtuti simillimus, cui id solum visum est rationem habere, quod Haberet
justitiam, omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, etc.

Are a law to themselves] The Thracians glorie^ that they were (...), living
laws, walking statutes.

Verse 15. Their thoughts mean while] Or, (...).
Betwixt whiles: Or in every interim of this life. Other faculties may rest; an
obscene dream by night shall not escape consciences record, it is index, judex,
vindex. Gods say, and man's over-seer; and it is better to have it sore, then
seared.

Verse 16. According to my Gospel] Which promises heaven to believers. This is
comfort to those that are faithful in weakness, though but weak in faith. The
sentence of the last day shall be but a more manifest declaration of that
judgment that the Lord in this life, most an end, has passed upon men.
Heathens shall be judged by the law of Nature: Prostigate Professors by the
law written, and the Word preached: Believers by the Gospel, which says, If
there be a willing mind, God accepts, etc.

Verse 17. Restest in the law] So spending thy time in a still dream, but thou
shall have sick waking, then when God shall send out summons for such sleepers.
Judge. 7.
Men dream their Midianitish dreams, and then tell them for law or Gospel to
their neighbors.

Verse 18. (...).
Being instructed out of the law] Gr. Being well catechized and principled,
thou art able to discern of doctrines, and choose the best.

Verse 19. Of the blinde] The Chinois say, That all other Nations see but with
one eye, they with two.

Verse. 20. Which have the form of knowledge] A platform of wholesome words,
(...).
a systeme, a method artificially molded, such as Tutours and Professors of
Arts and Sciences have, and do read over again and again to their Auditors.

Verse 21. Teach thou not thy self!] He that knows well, and does worse, is
but as a whiffler which carries a torch in his hand to show others his own
deformities. I have read of a woman, who living in professed doubt of the
Godhead, after better illumination and repentance, M Wards, Hap of p^act.
did often protest, That the vicious life of a great scholar in that town did
conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul, Neronis illud (quantus artifex
pereo?) quadrabit in te peritum and periturum. That Is the best Sermon that is
dig'd out of a man's own breast. Origens teaching and living were said to be both
one.

Verse 22. Speeds Chron.
Do thou commit sacriledge] The Chronicler notes of Q. Mary, that she
restored again all Ecclesiastical livings assumed to the Crown, saying, that
she set more by the salvation of her own soul, then she did by ten Kingdoms.
Shall not she that abhorred not idols, rise up and condemn those that do, and
yet commit sacrilege?

Verse 23. Through breaking] By shooting short, or beyond, or wide of the mark,
by omission, commission, or failing in the manner.

Verse 24. For the Name of God, etc.] Heretics and hypocrites do still with
Judas deliver up the Lord Christ to the scoffs and buffetings of his enemies.
Augustine complains of the ancient heretics. Aug. deciv. Dei, l. 1 c. 51.
that in them many evil-minded men found matter of blaspheming the Name of
Christ, because they also pretended to the Christian religion. Epiphanius
adds, That for the looseness of such men's lives, and the baseness of their
tenets, many of the Heathens shunned the company of Christians, and would not
be drawn to hear their Sermons. The opific. Dei, proaem.
Origin before them both cries out, Nunc male audiunt castiganturque vulgo
Christiani, quod aliter quam sapientibus convenit, vivant, and vitia sub
obtentu nominis celent, etc. There is an ill report goes of Christians for
their unchristian conversation, etc. Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen Historian
deeply taxes the pride, luxury, contentions, covetousness of the Bishops in
his time, and the deadly hatreds of common Christians. Am. Marc l. 2^ cap. 2,
Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae, ut sunt sibi serales plerique Christiani,
says he. A sad thing that a Heathen should see and detest such hellish
miscarriages among Christians.

Verse 25. If thou keep the law] Which thou art thereby bound to do, either by
thy self, or by thy Surety Christ Jesus.

Verse 26. If the uncircumcision] Which it can never do. But admit it could,
etc.

Verse 27. Judge thee] Men's guilt is increased by their obligations, as was
Solomon's in departing from God, who had appeared unto him twice, 1 King. 11 9.

Verse 28. Neither is that circumcision] See Colos. 2.11. with the Note there.
Inward circumcision is (as Origin describes it) Purgatio animae and abjc ctio
vitiorum, or (as St Paul in the place above named) the putting ost old Adam
with his actions, by the circumcision of Christ, by his merit and Spirit.

Verse 29. Which is one inwardly] An Israelite indeed, Ioh. 1. that has put
away the foreskin of his heart, Ier. 4.4.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. What advantage]
GR. What odds, singular thing, prerogative? See my True Treasure, Chap. 7.
Sect. 2. (...).


Verse 2. Chiefly, because that, etc.] This was their prime privilege, that
they were Gods library-keepers, that this heavenly treasure was concredited
unto them. Other Nations are said to have been without God, because without
those lively oracles, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Ephesians. 2.12. Prize we this privilege, and
improve it. You must never expect another edition of the faith once received,
Jude 3, once for all.

Verse 3. The faith of God] That is, his faithful promises, opposed to man's
perfidy.

Verse 4. Every man a lier] viz. By nature. But Isa. 63.8. Gods people are
children that will not lie, they will die rather. Non ideo negare volo, ne
peream: sed ideo mentiri nolo ne peccem, says she upon the rack, of whom St
Hieron^ writes. The officers of Merindol answered the Bishop that moved them
to abjure, That they marvelled much that he would persuade them to lie to God
and the world. Act and Mon. ^ol. 860.
And albeit that all men by nature are liers, yet they had learned by the Word
of God, that they ought diligently to take heed of lying in any matter, be it
never so small, etc.

That thou may be justified in thy sayings] David speaks of the truth of
Nathans reprehension; Paul applies it to the truth of God in his promises also.
Let us give him a testimonial, Ioh. 3.33. Such as is that Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of
truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.

And might overcome] May be pure, Psalm. 51.
says David. Zacah in the Syriack is used for overcoming. Vincit veritas, and
dare non dignis res mage digna Deo est.

Verse 5. Is God unrighteous] Such heart-boilings there were in the rejected
Jews. And Job said little lesle, till God over-hearing him, steps, as it were,
from behind the hangings, and takes him up for it, Job 38.2. Who is this,
says he, that talks thus? How now?

Verse 6. I speak as a man] q. d. Is there not such language heard in some men's
hearts?

Verse 7. For if the truth of God] Here the former objection is repeated,
explicated, and more fully answered, that every month might be stopped.
Lomelius.
Ferunt ranas lampade supra lacum, in quo tumultuantur, appensa, illius sulgore
repercussas conticescere. So gainsayers are silenced, when the truth is
thoroughly cleared.

Verse 8. As we be slanderously reported] So are the reformed Churches by the
black mouthed Papists. See the abatement of Popish brags by Alex. Cook, the
Preface: Eudaemon Ioannes against Casaubon, and Calvino-Turcismum, etc.

Whose damnation is just] In the year of grace 1525. a Monk of Berline in
Germany, who in the Pulpit charged St Paul with a lie, was suddenly smitten
with an apoplex, whiles the word was yet in his mouth, ^cultel. Annal.
and fell down dead in the place on S. Stevens day, as they call it.

Verse 9. That they are all under sin] Whole evil is in man, and whole man in
evil. Homo est inversus decalogus. Man by nature is no better then a filthy
dunghill of all abominable vices. His heart the devils storehouse, throne,
nest. His eyes great thorowfares of lust, pride, vanity, etc. His life a long
chain of sinful actions, a web of wickedness spunne out and made up by the
hands of the devil and the flesh, an evil spinner, M. Whate'y his new birth.
and a worse Weaver.

Verse 10. As it is written] What the Prophets had said of some particular
people or person, is here applied to the whole race of mankind, because by
nature there is never a better of us, (...) Eras. Adag.


Verse 11. None that seeketh] That seeks and fetches him out of his
retiring-room, as she did, Mark 7.24, 25.

Verse 12. Become unprosimble] Or rotten, nasty, stinking, as the Hebrew has
it, Psalm 14.3. The old world was grown so foul, that God was forced to wash it
with a deluge.

Verse 13. The poison of Aspes] Of that sort of Aspes that spit their venom
far from them upon the by standers. P^ya^es.
There is a great deal of such vermin and venom in that new found world of
wickedness, the tongue, Iam. 3. It is easy to observe, that S. Paul here
making the anatomy of a natural man, stands more on the organs of speaking
then all other members, and shows how his tongue is tipped with fraud, his
lips tainted with venom, his mouth full of gall, his throat a gaping grave,
his tongue as a rapier to run men through with, and his throat as a sepulcher to
bury them in. As for the Asp, they write of her, That whereas her poison is so
deadly, that the part infected cannot be cured, Io Wover. ^^nd 8. c. 23.
but by cutting off, succurrit periclit^^tibus benignior natura, and
noxiosissimo animali caliginosos obtutus dedit. Aspidi (says Psiny) hebetes
oculi dati, co^que non in front, sed in temporibus habet.

Verse 14. Full] As a ship that has it is full fraught and lading. (...).


Verse 15. Swift to shed bloud] As Paul, till God stopped him in his cursed
career.

Verse 16. They mind nothing but mischief.]

Verse 17. They are restless and troublesome.]

Verse 18. There is no fear of God] This is set last, as the source of all the
former evils.

Verse 19. Guilty] Culpable, and such as cannot plead their own cause without
an advocate. Chrysostom.


Verse 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law] This is directly against Popish
justification by works, merits, etc. Those misled and muzled souls did worse
then lose their labor that built religious houses, Act. and Mon. fol. 1077.
Pro remissione and redemptione peccatorum, pro remedio and liberatione animae,
in eleemosynam animae, pro salute and requie animarum patrum and matrum,
fratrum and sororum, etc. These were the ends that they aimed at, as appears in
stories.

Verse 21. But now] Since Christ came.

Verse 22. Upon all] So that none shall hinder their happiness.

Verse 23. All have sinned] The first man defiled the nature, and ever since
the nature defiles the man. Adam was a parent, a public person, a Parliament
man, as it were; the whole country of mankind was in him, and fell with him.

Short of the glory of God] i. e. Of his image now obliterated, or of his
kingdom, upon the golden pavement whereof no dirty dog must ever trample. It
is an inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4.

Verse 24. Being justified freely] Because the Apostles word (...), is
expounded by Varinus to be (...), therefore Thammerus will needs conclude from
this text, that God by justifying us, does but pay us for our pains, give us
what we have earned. Coelum gratis non accipiam, says Vega. Opera bona sunt
Coeli mercatura, says another. Heaven is the purchase of good works.

By the redemption] That is, By faith applying this redemption, wrapping her
self in the golden Fleece of that Lamb of God.

Verse 25. To be a propitiation] Or a covering, in allusion to the Law; where
the Ark covering the two Tables within it, the Mercy-seat covering the Ark, and
the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat and one another, showed Christ covering
the curses of the Law, in whom is the ground of all mercy; which things the
Angels desire to pry into, as into the pattern of Gods deep wisdom.

For the remission of sins] Gr. For the relaxation or releasment of sins, (...).
as of bonds or fetters.

Verse 26. (...).
To declare] Gr. For a clear demonstration or pointing out with the finger.

Verse 27. Where is boasting then, etc.] A certain sophister would hence prove
the authority of the Church: He read the words thus, by a mistake of their
short-hand-writing, Vbi est gloriatio^? Ecclesia est, for exclusa est.

Verse 28. A man is justified by faith] Here St Paul shows himself a pure
Lutheran, and is therefore sharply and blasphemously censured by some Jesuits
for a hotheaded person, who was so transported with the pangs of zeal and
eagerness beyond all compass in most of his disputes, that there was no great
reckoning to be made of his Assertions. Yea, he was dangerous to read, Speculum
Europae.
as savouring of heresy in some places, and better perhaps he had never
written. Four years before the Council of Trent, Cardinal Conturenus, asserted
the doctrine of justification by faith alone, in a just tractate, and was
therefore soon after poisoned. Cardinal Pool is thought to have been sound in
this point. Bellarmine reproves Pighius for consenting to Luther herein, whom
he undertook to confute: and yet Bellarmine himself with his tutissimumest,
does as much upon the matter. Magna est veritas and valebit, Great is the
truth, and shall prevail.

Verse 29. Is he the God of the Jews only] That is, Does he justify the Jews
only? For he is their God only, whom he justifies. (...)
Now men are said to be justified effectively by God, apprehensively by faith,
declaratively by good works. The Schoolmen are very unsound in this capital
Article of Justification, and are therefore the less to be regarded. Nam quae
de gratia Dei justificante scolastici scribunt, commentitia universa existimo,
says Cardinal Pighius, who is therefore much condemned by Bellarmine, but
without cause.

Verse 30. And uncircumcision] All by one way, lest he should seem not to be
one, but alius and alius.

Verse 31. We establish the law] Which yet the Antinomians cry down, calling
repentance a legal grace, humiliation a backdore to heaven; grieving that they
have grieved so much for their sins, etc.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. As pertaining to the flesh.]
THat is, As touching his works, v. 2. called also the letter, cha. 2.27. and
the Law a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16.

Verse 2. But not before God] Who when he begins to search our lacks, as the
steward did Benjamins, can find out those out theeveries that we thought not
of; bring to mind and light those sins that we had forgot, or not observed.
When he comes to turn the bottom of the bag upwards, it will be bitter with
us. Abimelech's excuse was accepted, and yet his sin was chastised, Genesis 20.6.

Verse 3. Abraham believed God] Latomus of Lovan was not ashamed to write, That
there was no other faith in Abraham, then what was in Cicero. Joh. Manlij loc.
conc. p. 490.
And yet our Savior says, Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced, so did Cicero
never. Another wrote an apology for Cicero, and would needs prove him to have
been a pious and penitent person, because in one place he has these words,
Ibid. 481.
Reprehendo peccata mea, quod Pompeio confisus, ejusque par^es secutus suerim.
A poor proof: Hoc argumentum tam facile diluitur, quam vulpes come pyrum.

Verse 4. Now to him that worketh] Yet it is an act of mercy in God to render
to a man according to his works, Ps. 62.12. Exo. 206. Gods kingdom is not
partum, but paratum, Mat. 25.34. not acquired, but prepared.

But of debt] Not so indeed, Romans 11.31. but according to the opinion of the
merit-monger, who says as Vega, Coelum gratis non accipiam.

Verse 5. His faith] Yet not as a work, nor in a proper sense, (...).
as Arminius and Bertius held, but as an act of receiving Christ.

Verse 6. Unto whom God imputeth] Ten times the Apostle mentions this grace
of imputed righteousness in this Chapter: Yet the Papists jear it, calling it
putative righteousness, so speaking evil of the things they know not. Manlij
lo. com. p. 494.
Stories tell us of a Popish Bishop that lighting by chance upon this Chapter,
threw away the book in great displeasure, and said O Paul, an tu quoque
Lutheanus sactus es? Art thou also a Lutheran, Paul? But if the faith of
another may be profitable to infants at their baptism, as Bellarmine holds,
why should it seem so absurd a thing, that Christ's righteousness imputed,
should profit those that believe on him? The Jews indeed at this day being
asked, Whether they believe to be saved by Christ's righteousness? They answer,
That every Fox must pay his own skin to the flaier. Thus they reject the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. As their Fathers did, so do they, Act. 7.51.
The Lord open their eyes, that they may convert and be saved.

Verse 7. Are covered] Sic velantur ut in judicio non revelentur: So covered as
that he never see them again, but as the Israclites saw the Egyptians dead on
the shore.

Verse 8. Imputes not] Charge it not, sets it not upon his score, 2 Cor.
5.19.

Verse 9. Comes this blessednesse] This is the third time that the Apostle
avoucheth the universality of the subject of justification. For this he had
done once before, Chap. 3.23. and again, cha. 3.29 30, 31.

Verse 10. In circumcisi^n] As the Jew would have it: No such matter.

Verse 11. A seal of the righteousnesse] Circumcision is called a sign, and a
^eal by a Dectour of the Jews, more ancient then their Talmud. Zohar, Genesis 17.

That righteousness might be imputed] How foolish is that inference of
Thammerus, (...).
that because the word here used to signify imputed, comes of a word that
signifies reason, therefore the righteousness of faith must be such as a man may
understand and comprehend by reason?

Verse 12. Walk in the steps] That herein personate and express him to the
life, as Constantines children (says Eusebius) did their father.

Verse 13. Heir of the world] That is, Of heaven, say some; (...)
of Canaan, say others, the pleasant Land, more esteemed of God, then all the
world besides, because it was the seat of the Church. As man is called every
creature, Mark 16.15. the Church is called all things, Col. 1. So Canaan is
called the world, and Tabor and Hermon, put for the East and West of the whole
world, Psalm. 89.12.

Verse 14. Faith is made void] See the Note on Gal. 3.12. and 5.2.

Verse 15. No transgression] sc. Is imputed by men where there is no law
written, See Chap. 5.13.

Verse 16. It is of faith] Fides mendica manu.

Verse 17. Who quickneth the dead] As he does, when he makes a man a believer,
Ephesians. 1.19. he fetches heart of Oak out of a hollow tree, and a spiritual
man out of a wilde-asse-colt. See both these metaphors, Job 11, 12.

Verse 18. Who against hope, etc.] Elegans antunaclasis propter speciem
contradictionis, says Piscator. Spes in terrenis, incerti nomen boni: spes in
divinis, nomen est certissimi, says another.

Verse 19. (...).
He considered not] Gr. He cared not for his own body, etc. he never thought of
that.

Verse 20. Giving glory to God] Confessing and exalting God, as Luke 17.18
giving him a testimonial, as it were, Ioh. 3.33. with Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Verse 21. (...).
Being fully perswaded] Gr. Being carried on with full sail, and going
gallantly toward heaven.

Verse 22. See the Note on Verse. 5, 6.

Verse 23. For his sake alone] But for our instruction and encouragement, Rom
15.4. See the Note there.

Verse 24. That raised up Iesus] And with him all believers Col. 3.1. Romans 6.4.

Verse 25. Who was delivered, etc.] Not that his death had no hand in our
justifying: but because our justification begun in his death, (...)
was perfected by his resurrection. Redemption we have by Christ's abasement,
application of it by his advancement. This one verse is an abridgement of the
whole Gospel, the sum of all the good news in the world. The grand inquest of
all the ancient Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.11. Adore we the fullness of the holy
Scriptures.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Being justified by faith.]
AS he had said, Chap. 4.24.

We have peace with God] A blessed calm lodged in our consciences: Like as when
Jonas was cast overboard, there followed a tranquillity.

Verse 2. (...).
We have accesse] Christ leading us by the hand, and presenting us to the
Father, with, Behold, here am I, and the children whom thou have given me,
Ephesians. 2.18.

Verse 3. We glory in tribulations] As an old soldier does in his scars of
honor. See Gal. 6, 17. 2 Cor. 7.4.

Verse 4. And experience, hope] Without hope patience is cold almost in the
fourth degree, and that is but a little from poison.

Verse 5. Hope makes not ashamed] As among men, many lie languishing at Hopes
hospital, as he did at the Pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5. and return as they did
from the brooks of Tema, Job 6.17. Or, as men go to a Lottery with heads full
of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks. The Dutch have a Proverb to
this purpose, Sperare and expectare, multos reddit stultos. And we say, He that
hopes for dead men's shoes may hap go barefoot. Bad men's hopes may hop
headlesle, they may perish in the height of their expectancies. Not so those
that hope in God: they shall yet praise him who is the help of their
countenance, and their God, Ps. 43 ult. Nunquam confusi, Deo confisi.

Verse 6. Christ died for] A sufficient evidence of Gods dearest and deepest
love shed abroad in our hearts, as a most sweet ointment.

Verse 7. Yet per adventure for a good man] For a public person. Lilloe stepped
between the murderer and King Edwin his master to intercept the deadly thrust.
Speeds Chron, lib 7. cap. 20. Life of K Ed. 6 page 37. Turk hist fol. 730.
A common soldier lost his life at Musselborough field to save the Earl of
Huntlies life: so did Nicolas Ribische to rescue Prince Maurice at the siege of
Pista.

Verse 8. God commends, etc.] Herein God lays naked to us, the tenderest
bowels of his fatherly compassions, as in an anatomy.

Verse 9. Much more then] It is a greater work of God to bring men to grace,
then being in the state of grace, (...)
to bring them to glory; because sin is far more distant from grace, then grace
is from glory.

Verse 10. We shall be saved] Here the Apostle reasons from regeneration to
eternal life, as the lesser.

Verse 11. Not only so] Not in tribulation only do we glory (as v. 3.) but in
the whole course of our lives.

Verse 12. As by one man] Yet Anabaptists deny original sin, as did also the
Pelag^ans of old, consuted by Augustine. Egranus a German Preacher said (as
Melancthon reports) that original sin is a mere fiction of Augustine, and
other Divines; and that, Joh. Manl loc. com. page 486.
because there was no such word found in the Scriptures. Papists say that
original sin is the smallest of all sins, not deserving any more of Gods
wrath, then only a want of his beatificall-presence: and that too, without any
pain or sorrow of mind from the apprehension of so great a loss. There have
been amongst us, that have said, that original sin is not forbidden by the
Law. Directly indeed, Moulins Anaton. Armin c 8. Wotton on Joh. p 146.
and immediately it is not: but forbidden it is, because cursed and condemned
by the Law. In original sin is a tacit consent (eminently) to all actual
sin. And some understand this text of all sin, both original and actual.

And so death passed upon all men] As a sentence of death on a condemned
malefactor 1 or, (...).
as those diseases that are called by Physicians, Corruption totius substantiae;
or as the rot overrunneth the whole flock.

Verse 13. Sin is not imputed] In men's esteem, as Chap. 4 15.

Verse 14. Death raigned] From the reign of death, he concludes the reign of
sin. Infants are no innocents: the first sheet or blanket wherein they are
covered is woven of sin, shame, blood and filth, Ezekiel. 16.4.6.

Verse 15. Many be dead] Many is here put for all, as all for many, 1 Timothy 2.3.

Verse 16. Of many ^ffences] i.e. Of all, whether imputed to us, inherent in
us, or issuing from us.

Verse 17. Abundance] That is, abundant grace.

Verse 18. By the offense of one] We were all in Adam, as the whole country in
a Parliament Man. And although we chose not, God chose for us.

Verse 19. (...)
Many] That is, All, except Christ, sinners, tainted with sins, guilt and filth.

Verse 20. But where sin abounded] But then it is where sin that abounded in
the life, abounds in the conscience in grief and detestation of it, Act. and
Mon. fol 1^30.
as the greatest evil. Bonner objected to Mr Philpot, Marytyr, that he found
written in his book, In me Joanne Philpotto ubi abundavit peccatum,
superabundavit and gratia. This he said was an arrogant speech, Novum crimen,
C. Caesar.

Verse 21. That as sin has raigned] That is, the wrath of God by sin.

Through righteousnes] Imputed and imparted.

By Jesus Christ] See how sweetly the end answers the beginning of the Chapter,
and how Christ is both author and finisher, etc.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. Shall we continue]
QVasi dicat, That were most unreasonable, and to an ingenious nature,
impossible. To argue from mercy to liberty is the devils Logic. Should we not
after deliverance yield obedience, said holy Ezra? Chap. 9.13, 14. A man may as
truly say, the sea burns, or fire cools, as that certainty of salvation breeds
security and loosnesse.

Verse 2. Live any longer therein] Fall into it we may and shall: but it is not
the falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it: so it is not falling
into sin that damns, but living in it.

Verse 3. Baptized into his death] Hoc est baptizaripro mortuis, says Beza, to
be buried with Christ in baptism, Col 2.12. in putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh verse 11.

Verse 4. We are buried] Burial is a continuing under death; so is
mortification a continuate dying to sin, Mors quaedam perpetuata; Sin is by
degrees abated, and at length abolished, when once our earthly tabernacles are
dissolved.

Walk in newness of life] Resurrectione Domini configuratur vita, quae hic
geritur. Walk as Christ walked after his resurrection.

Verse 5. For if we have been planted] Burying is a kind of planting.

Verse 6. The body of sin] For whole evil is in man, and whole man in evil.

Verse 7. Is freed from sin] Anacreon says the like, (...); Death is the
accomplishment of mortification. It does at once, what death does by degrees.
Herbs and flowers breed worms, which yet at last kill the herbs and flowers: So
sin bred death: but at last death will kill sin. A mud-wall whiles it
stands, harbors much vermin; which when it falls, flee away: So does
corruption, when once these cottages of clay fall to ruin.

Verse 8. We shall also live] Then we are said properly to live, when our
regeneration is perfected in heaven. To live here, is but to lie a dying.

Verse 9. Death has no more, etc.] Christ, being life essential, swallowed up
death in victory, as the fire swalloweth up the fuel, and as Moses his serpent
swallowed up the Sorcerers serpents.

Verse 10. He died unto sinne] That is, To abolish sin, as Chap. 8.2.

Verse 11. Reckon ye also] By faith, reason and reckon your selves wholly dead
in and through Christ, who once died perfectly to sin, as a common person.

Verse 12. Let not sin therefore] As if the Apostle should say, we preach
purity and not liberty, as the adversary suggesteth, v. 1. of this Chapter with
Chap. 3.8.

Verse 13. Unto sinne] As Satan's General, who has his trenches, 2 Cor. 10.4.
His Commanders, as here, and his fighting soldiers, 1 Pet. 2.11. His weapons,
as here.

Verse 14. Sin shall not have dominion] Rebel it may, but reign it shall not
in any Saint. It fares with sin in the regenerate, as with those beasts, Dan.
7.12. they had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a
season and a time.

Ye are not under the Law] i.e. Under the rigor, irritation, curse of the Law,
Quatenus est virtus peccati.

Verse 15. Shall we sin, because, etc.] Some Antinomian Libertines would
persuade men, That God is never displeased with his people, See M. Calamies
Sermon. to the house of Cummons, October. 22 an, Dam. 1644.
though they fall into adultery, or the like sin, no not with a fatherly
displeasure: That God never chastises his people for any sin, no not with a
fatherly chastisement.

Verse 16. His sevants ye are] Sinners, though not drunk, yet are not their own
men, but at Satan's beck and check, whom they seem to defy, but indeed deifie.

Verse 17. That form of doctrine] Gr. That type or mould; The Doctrine is the
mould, hearers the metal, which takes impression from it in one part, as well
as another. And as the metal has been sufficiently in the furnace, when it is
not only purged from the dross, but willingly receives the form and figure of
that which it is cast and poured into: so here.

Verse 18. Versus est planus, says Pareus.

Verse 19. After the manner of men] That is vulgarly, Crassius and rudius
loquor, by a similitude drawn from humane affairs of easy and ordinary
observation.

To uncleanness, and to iniquity] Mark the opposition: there are three To's in
the expression of the service to sin: but in the service of God only two.
Wicked men take great pains for hell: would they but take the same for heaven,
they could not, likely, miss of it.

Verse 20. Free from righteousnesse] That is, Utterly void of grace, and did
therefore sin lustily and horribly, earnestly opposing with crest and breast,
whatsoever stood in the way of their sins and lusts.

Verse 21. Whereof ye are ashamed] Where sin is in the saddle, shame is on the
crupper. Men would have the sweet, but not the shame of sin, and the credit
of religion, but not go to the cost of it.

Verse 22. Become servants to God] Phrasis vulgatissima est, Deum colere. Non
secus atque agri fertiles inprimis and optimi, sic Deicultus, fructus fert at
vitam aeternam uberrimos.

Ye have your fruit unto holines] Every good work increases our holiness, and
so hability for obedience.

Verse 23. For the wages of sin] The best largess or congiary that sin gives
to his soldiers, is death of all sorts. (...).
This is the just hire of the least sin. The Jesuits would persuade us, that
some sins against which the Law thundereth and lightneth, Chemnit. de thoel.
Iesuitar.
are so light in their own nature, Vt factores nec sordidos, nec malos, nec
impios, nec Deo exosos reddere possint. But as there is the same roundnesse in
a little ball, as in a great one: so the same disobedience in a small sin, as
in a greater. Indeed there is no sin little, because no little God to sin
against.

CHAP. VII. Verse 1. Know ye not Brethren]
BEllarmine says of his Romans (more true perhaps of these) Romani sicut non
acumina, ita nec imposturas habent. As they are not very knowing, so not
cunning to deceive.

Verse 2. She is loosed, etc.] And so at liberty to marry again, though Hierom
compare such to the unclean beasts in the Arc, and to vessels of dishonor in
an house, yea to dogs that return to their vomit, which was his error. Patres
legendi cum venia, says one.

Verse 3. M. Edwards his Gange. par. 2. p. 141.
So then if] The Sectaries then are out, that say now-a-daies, that if they
have husbands and wives that will not turn Saints, that is Sectaries, they may
leave them, and marry others.

Verse 4. That we should bring forth fruit] The Ministry of the Word, says
one, is the bridall-bed; wherein God by his Spirit does communicate with our
souls his sweetest favors, and makes them be conceived with fruits of
righteousness to everlasting life.

Verse 5. (...).
In the flesh] In our pure naturals.

The motions of sin] Those maladies of the soul.

By the law] By the irritation of the law.

Did work] Gr. D^d inwardly work. (...).


Verse 6. Not in the oldnesse of the letter] That is, Not in that old kind of
life that we lived under subjection to the law, to the irritation, coaction,
and curse of it.

Verse 7. I had not known lust] Involuntary evil motions. The Apostle calls
concupiscence sin, says Possevine the Jesuit: but we may not say so.
Possevin. Apparal sa^ verbo. Pat. Antiq.
Most of the most dangerous opinions of Popery spring from hence, that they
have slight conceits of concupiscence, as a condition of nature. But inward
bleeding will kill a man, so will concupiscence, if not bewailed. The Council
of Trent says, That it is not truly and properly a sin, albeit it be so
called, because it proceeds from sin, and enclines a man to sin. Neither want
there amongst us that say, That original sin is not forbidden by the law:
Directly indeed, and immediately it is not: but forbidden it is, because cursed
and condemned by the law.

Verse 8. By the commandment] Not Commandments. Papists abolishing, or at least
destroying the sense of the second Commandment by making it a member of the
first, that they may retain the number of ten words (so loath are heretics to
have their Asses ears seen) they divide this last; which yet Paul here calls the
Commandment; and sure he knew better then they, the Analysis of the law.

Verse 9. For I was alive] As being without sense of sin, and conscience of
duty.

Sin revived] sc. In sense and appearance.

And I died] sc. In pride and self justice.

Verse 10. Ordained to life] By life and death, understand peace and
perturbation.

Verse 11. Deceived me] Irritated my corrupt nature, and made me sin the more,
per accidens, as Pharaoh was the worse for a message of dismission.

Verse 12. The Commandement] Vis legis in mandando and praecipiendo. (...).
The word properly signifies an affirmative precept.

Verse 13. Exceeding sinsull] Sin is so evil that it cannot have a worse
Epithet given it. Paul can call it no worse then by it is own name, sinful sin.

Verse 14. Sold under sin] But yet ill-apaid of my slavery, and lusting after
liberty.

Verse 15. I allow not] Gr. I know not, as being preoccupated, (...).
Gal. 6.1. wherried and whirled away by sin before I am aware, or have time to
consider.

Verse 16. I consent unto the law] I vote with it, and for it, as the rule of
right, I wish also well to the observance of it, as David did, Psalm. 119 4.5.

Verse 17. It is no more I] Mr Bradford Martyr, in a certain Letter thus
comfort his friend; At this present, my dear heart in the Lord, you are in a
blessed estate; Act. and Mon. fol. 1497.
although it seem otherwise to you, or rather to your old Adam; the which I
dare now be bold to discern from you, because you would have it not only
discerned, but also utterly destroyed. M. Harris. Sam. Fun.
God (says another reverend man) puts a difference between us, and sin in us,
as betwixt poison, and the box that holds it.

Sin that dwells in me] An ill inmate that will not out, till the house
falls on the head of it. As the fretting leprosy in the walls of an house
would not out, till the house it self were demolished. Sin, as Hagar will dwell
with grace, as Sarah, till death beat it out of doors.

Verse 18. Dwells no good thing] Horreo quicquid de meo est, ut sim meus,
says Bernard. It was no ill wish of him that desired God to free him from an
ill man, himself. For, Domine, libera me a malo bomine meipse.
though engraffed into Christ, yet we carry about us a relish of the old stock
still. Corruption is though dejected from it is regency, yet not ejected from
it is inherency: It intermingleth with our best works.

How to perform] Gr. To do it thoroughly; (...).
though I am doing at it, as I can.

Verse 19. For the good, etc.] Nature, like Eve and Jobs wife is always
drawing us from God. As the ferry-man plies the oar, and eyes the shore
homeward, where he would be, yet there comes a gust of wind that carries him
back again: so it is with a Christian. Corruption edged with a temptation, gets
as it were the hill, and the wind, and, upon such advantages, too often
prevails.

Verse 20. It is no more I] Every new man is two men. See the Note above on
Verse. 17.

Verse 21. Tota vita bani Christiani sanctum desiderti^ est. Aug.
When I would do good] Something lay at the fountain head, as it were, and
stopped him when he would do his duty. But God valueth a man by his desires.

Evil is present] We can stay no more from sinning, then the heart can from
panting, and the pulse from beating. Our lives are fuller of sins then the
firmament of stars, or the furnace of sparks. Erasmus was utterly out, that
said with Origin, Paulum hoc sermon balbutire, quum ipse potius ineptiat,
says learned Beza. So Joannes Sylvius Aegranus, a learned, but a profane
person, reprehended Paul for want of learning, and said, Quod usus sit
declamatorijs verbis, non congr^^ntibus ad rem^, etc. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 165,
486.
Nominabat sophisma, quod diceremus homines non posse implere legem, etc.

Verse 22. I delight] Germanicus reigned in the Romans hearts, Tiberius but in
the Provinces. So here.

Verse 23. A law in my members] Called the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13. (...).
Pla^o (...) appellat. Phoedro.
because corruption acts and utters it self by the m^mbers of the body. The
(...) (vox Empedoclea) is within, but easily and often budgeth and breaks out.

Warring against the law] The regenerate part. Plato in Cratylo pulchre ait: Vt
mentem appellamus (...), ita legem dicimus (...), quasi (...), alioqui men's
hominum vagatur.

And bringing me into captivity] The sins of the Saints (those of daily
incursion) are either of precipitancy, D. Preston.
as Gal. 6.1. or of infirmity, when a man wrestles, and has some time to fight
it out, but for want of breath and strength, falls, and is in some captivity to
the law of sin. This is the worse.

Verse 24. O wretched man] We must discontentedly be contented to be exercised
with sin, while we are here. It is so bred in the bone, that till our bones, as
Joseph's, be carried out of the Egypt of this world, it will not out. The Romans
so conquered Chosroes the Persian, (...).
that he made a law, that never any King of Persia should move war against
the Romans. But let us do what we can to subdue sin, it will be a Jebu^te, a
false borderer, yea, a rank traitor rebelling against the Spirit. Only this we
may take for a comfortable sign of future victory, when we are discontent with
our present ill estate. Grace will get the upper hand, as nature does, when the
humors are disturbed, and after many fits. And as till then there is no rest
to the body: so neither is there to the soul.

Who shall deliver me] Nothing cleaves more pertinaciously, or is more
inexpugnable then a strong lust.

From this body of death] Or, this dead body, by an H^braisme, this carcass of
sin to which I am tied and lungold: as noi^ome every whit to my soul, as a dead
body to my senses; and as burdensome, as a withered arm, or mortified lim,
which hangs on a man, as a lump of lead.

Verse 25. I think God, etc.] The Grecians being delivered but from bodily
servitude by Flaminias the Roman ^enerall, called him their Savior: and so
rang out, Savior, Savior, Plutarch.
that the Fowls in the a^r fell down dead with the cry. How much greater cause
have we to magnify the grace of Christ, etc.

So then, with the mind, etc.] The stars by their proper motion are carried
from the West to the East: And yet by the motion of obedience to the first
mover, they pass along from the East unto the West. The waters by their
natural course follow the center of the earth, yet yielding to the Moon, they
are subject to her motions: So are Saints to Gods holy will, though corrupt
nature repine and resist.

CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. There is therefore now]
NOw, after such bloody wounds and gashes, chronicled Chap. 7. Though carried
captive, and sold under sin, yet not condemned, as might well have been
expected. This the Apostle does here worthily admire.

Verse 2. For the Law of the Spirit] That is, Christ revived and risen has
justified me. See the Note on Chap. 4.25.

Verse 3. It was weak through the flesh] Which was irritated by the law, and
took occasion thereby.

Verse 4. Might be fulfilled] In us applicative, in Christ inhaesive.

Verse 5. Do mind the things] For want of a better principle. The stream
rises not above the spring.

Verse 6. (...).
To be carnally] The quintessence of the fleshes witinesse, or rather
wickedness.

Verse 7. (...).
Because the carnal minde] The best of a bad man, is not only averse, but
utterly adverse to all goodness. Homo est inversus decalogus, Job 11.12. an
asses soal for rudenes, a wild asses for unrulines.

Verse 8. Cannot please God] Their best works are but dead works, says the
Author to the Hebrews; but silken sins, says Augustine. Lombard cites that
Father, De ver inrocent. cap. 56.
saying thus, Omnis vitae infid lium peccatum est: and nihil bonum sine summo
bono. The whole life of unbelievers is sin; neither is there any thing good
without the chiefest good. Ambrose Spiera a Popish Postiller, censureth this
for a bloody sentence, Crudelis est illa sententia, says he.

Verse 9. He is none of his] As the Merchant sets his seal upon his goods: So
does God his Spirit upon all his people, Ephesians. 1.13.

Verse 10. The body is dead] Death to the Saints is neither total, but of the
body only, nor perpetual, but for a season only, verse. 11.

Verse 11. Your mortal bodies] As he has already quickened your souls.

Verse 12. Not to the flesh] We owe the flesh nothing but stripes, nothing but
the blew eye that St Paul gave it. It must be mastered and mortified. Drive
this Hagar out of doors, when once it grows haunty.

Verse 13. If ye live after the flesh] We must not think to pass e coeno ad
Coelum, to dance with the devil all day, and sup with Christ at night, to fly
to heaven with pleasant wings. Beetles love dunghils better then ointments: and
swine love mud better then a garden, so do swinish people their lusts, better
then the lives of their souls. Horat ep. 2.
At Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus, Cogi posse negat. That carnal Cardinal
said, That he would not part with his part in Paris for Paradise.

But if ye mortify the deeds, etc.] Either a man must kill here, or be killed,
Camdens Elis.
Aut for, aut feri, as Q. Elizabeth often sighed and said to her self
concerning the Queen of Scots. Valentinian the Emperor dying, gloried of one
victory above the rest, and that was his victory over the flesh. Inimicorum
nequissimum devici, carnem meam, said he. Be always an enemy to the devil, In
vita Valentin.
and the world, but specially to your own flesh, said Rob. Smith, Martyr, in a
letter to his wife. Act. and Mon. fol. 1545.


Verse 14. For as many as are led] As great men suffer their sons to go along
with them, but set tutours to overlook and order them: So deals God by his;
the Spirit leads them into all goodness, righteousness and truth, Ephesians.
5.9, and fetches them again in their cu^straies.

Verse 15. The spirit of bondage] (...), as 2 Timothy 1.7. (...) The law will
convince the judgment: but it is the Gospel that convinces the lust and the
affection, and so sends us to treat with God as a Father, by fervent prayer.

Verse 16. Bears witnesse] What an honor is this to the Saints, that the
holy Ghost should bear witness at the bar of their consciences.

Verse 17. And if sons, then heirs] All Gods sons are heirs; not so the sons
of earthly Princes. Jehoshaphat gave his younger sons great gifts of silver, of
gold, and of precious things, with fenced Cities in Jud^h; but the Kingdom gave
he to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. Gods children are
all higher then the Kings of the earth, Ps. 89 27.

Verse 18. Are not worthy to be, etc.] Heaven will pay for all: hold out
therefore faith and patience. When Saul had the Kingdom, some despised him, but
he held his peace, though a man afterward froward enough. What is a drop of
vinegar put into an ocean of wine? What is it for one to have a rainy day, who
is going to take possession of a kingdom. Pericula non resp^cit. Martyr,
coronas respicit, says Basil. A Dutch martyr seeing the flame to come to his
beard, Ah, said he, what a small pain is this to be compared to the glory to
come? Act. and Mon. 813.


Verse 19. For the earnest expectation] Gr. The intent expectation of the
creature expects; an hebrew pleonasme, and withal, a metaphor either from
birds that thrust a long neck out of a Cage, as laboring for liberty; or else
from those that earnestly look and long for some special friends coming, as
Sisera's mother, who looked out at a window, and cried through the lattesse, Why
is his charet so long in coming? Judge. 5.28.

Verse 20. Subject to vanity] The creature is defiled by man's sin, and must
therefore be purged by the fire of the last day; as the vessels that held the
sin-offering were purged by the fire of the Sanctuary.

Verse 21. Because the creature it self] See Mr Wilcox his Discourse upon these
words, printed together with his Exposition of the Psalms, Proverbs, etc. in
Folio.

Verse 22. The whole creature groneth] Even the very heavens are not without
their feebleness, and the manifest effects of fainting old age. It is observed
that since the days of Ptolomy the Sun runs nearer the earth by 9976. Germane
miles; and therefore the heavens have not kept their first perfection.

Verse 23. The first fruits] Which the creatures have not, and yet they groan,
how much more we?

The redemption] Our full and final deliverance.

Verse 24 For we are saved by hope] Hope is the daughter of faith, but such as
is a staff to her aged mother.

Verse 25. Then do we with patience] Religious men find it more easy to bear
evil, then to wait till the promised good be enjoyed, Heb. 10 36. The spoiling
of their goods required patience; but this, more then ordinary.

Verse 26. (...). Beza. Pareus.
Helps our infirmities] Lifts with us, and be fore us in our prayers: Or
helps us, as the Nurse helps her little child, upholding it by the sleeve.

For we know not what, etc.] The flesh with her murmurings makes such a din,
Da. Dike.
that we can hardly hear the voice of the spirit, mixing with the fl^shes
roarings and repinings, his praying, sighs and sobbings.

But the Spirit it self] Prayer is the breath of the Spirit, who does
superexpostulate for us, (...).
enditing our prayers. We cannot so much as suspirare, unless he do first
inspirare, breathe out a sigh for sin, if he breathe it not into us.

With groanings that cannot be uttered] He that would have unspeakable joy, 1
Pet. 1.8. must by the Spirit stir up unutterable groanings.

Verse 27. Aug.
Knows the mind, etc.] Quomodo enim non exauditur spiritus a patre, qui
exaudit cum patre?

Verse 28. All things work together] Not affliction only (as some would here
restrain it) but sin, De benef. lib. 2. c. 18.
Satan, all. Venenum aliquando pro remedio suit, says Seneca. Medici pedes and
alas Cantharidis, cum sit ipsa mortifera, prodesse dicunt. Plut.
The drinking of that wine wherein a viper has been drowned, cures the
leprosy. The Scorpion heals his own wounds: and the viper (the head and tail
being cut off) beaten and applied, cures her own biting. God changes our
grisly wounds into spangles of beauty: and makes the horrible sting of Satan
to be like a pearl-pin, to pin upon us the long white robe of Christ, and to
dress us with the garment of gladness.

Verse 29. Conformed to the image] In holiness, say some; in glory, say others,
in affliction is the Apostles meaning. Plus. in Apophtheg.
Art not thou glad to fare as Phocion? said he to one that was to die with him.
May not Christ better say so to his co-sufferers?

Verse 30. Them also he called, etc.] If ye feel not faith (said that holy
Martyr) then know that predestination is too high a matter for you to be
disputers of, until you have been better scholars in the School-house of
repentance and justification, Bradsord. Ac^ and Mon. fol. 1505.
which is the Grammer-school wherein we must be conversant and learned, before
we go to the university of Gods most holy predestination and providence.

Them he also justified] Vocation precedeth Justification. Deus justificat fide
jam donatos, sicut damnat prius induratos. Cameron,


Them he also glorified] That is, He keeps them glorious by his glorious
Spirit, even in this life, from impenitent sin, and makes them stable and
constant in godliness.

Verse 31. What shall we say then?] q. d. Predestination, Vocation,
Justification, Glorification? What things be these? We cannot tell what to say
to these things, so much we are amazed at the greatness of Gods love in them. A
brave conclusion of the whole disputation concerning justification by faith
alone.

If God be for us etc.] Maximilian the Emperor so admired this sentence,
Chytr^us in ^^^uer.
that he caused it to be set in Checker-work upon a Table, at which he used to
dine and sup: that having it so often in his eye, he might always have it in
mind also.

Verse 32. He that spared not] Qui misit unigenitum, immisit spiritum, promisit
vultum, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? says Bernard. Nihil unquam ei negasse
credendum est, quem ad vituli hortatur esum, says Hierom. Bern de temp.


Verse 33. Who shall lay any thing] This is that confident interrogatory of a
good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. (...).


It is God that justifieth] Some read it questionwise thus, Shall God that
justifies? No such matter. And if the Judge acquit a prisoner, he cares not
though the Jailer or fellow prisoners condemn him: So here.

Verse 34. Who is he that condemns?] To the sentence of death he opposes
Christ his death.

Who is even at the right hand] And as Christ is at the right hand of his
Father: so is the Church at the right hand of Christ, Ps. 45.10 a place of
dignity and safety.

Verse 35. Who shall separate us] Who shall separate me? says the Syriack.

Verse 36. We are killed all the day] In Dioclesians days 17000 Christians are
said to have been slain in the space of a month: In the Parisian Massacre
30000 in as little space, and within the year 300000.

As sheep to the slaughter] That lamentable story of the Christians of Calabria
that suffered persecution, anno 1560. comes home to this text. For being all
thrust up in one house together, as in a sheepfold, Act. and Mon. fol 859.
the executioner comes in, and among them takes one and blinde-folds him with a
muffler about his eyes, and so leads him forth to a larger place, where he
commands him to kneel down. Which being done, he cutteth his throat, and so
leaves him half dead: and taking his butchers knife, and muffler all of gore
blood, he comes again to the rest; and so leading them one after another, he
dispatcheth them to the number of eighty eight, no otherwise then does a
butcher kill his calves and sheep.

Verse 37. (...).
We are more then Conquerours] What is that? Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. We do
over-overcome: because through faith in Christ we overcome before we fight, and
are secure of victory.

Verse 38. (...), scil. Ex verbi praedicatione essicaci ut ind^at tacit hoc
verbo. Beza.
For I am perswaded] Or, I am sure by what I have heard out of Gods Word. He
that has this full assurance of faith goes gallantly to heaven. What (says
the world) should a rich man ail? The Irish ask such, What they mean to die?
But I wonder more at such as have the riches of full assurance, yea, that have
but the assurance of adherence, though not of evidence, what they mean to walk
heavily. Mr Latimer says, That the assurance of heaven is the sweetmeats of
the feast of a good conscience: There are other dainty dishes in this feast,
but this is the banquet.

Verse 39. From the love of God] viz. Wherewith he loved us. For he loves his
own to the end, and in the end, Joh. 13.1. See the Note there. Joh. Manlij,
loc. com.
The wife of Camerarius heard Sarcerius interpreting this text, and verse. 35.
thus, and was much comforted after a sore conflict.

CHAP. IX. Verse 1. I say the truth, etc.]
AS any one is more assured of his own salvation, the more he desires the
salvation of others. Charity is no churl; as we see herein Paul.

Verse 2. Continual sorrow] Such as a woman in travail has. (...).
So Gal. 4 19.

Verse 3. Were accursed,] Devoted to destruction, as those malefactors among
the Heathens were, that in time of common calamity were sacrificed to their
infernal gods, (...).
for pacifying their displeasure, that the plague might cease. Out of greatest
zeal to God, and love to his contrymen, the Apostle wishes himself
Anathema, that is, not to be separated from the Spirit and grace of Christ (for
so he should have sinned) but from the comforts of Christ, the happiness that
comes in by Christ, as one well interprets it.

Verse 4. The adoption] For Israel was Gods firstborn, and so higher then the
Kings of the earth, Ps. 89 27.

And the glory] The Ark of the Covenant, 1 Samuel 4.21. whence Judea is called
the glorious land, Dan. 11.41.

The Covenants] The moral law in two tables.

The giving of the law] The judicial law.

The service] The ceremonial law. (...)


The promises] Of the Gospel made to Abraham, and his seed for ever. These
promises are a precious book, every lear whereof drops mirth and mercy.

Verse 5. Of whom is Christ] This is as great an honor to all mankind (how
much more to the Jews?) as if the King should marry into some poor family of
his Subjects.

Verse 6. Not as though the word] That word of promise, v. 4. which is
sure-hold, Ye^ and Amen.

For they are not all Israel] Multi sacerdotes and panci sacer dotes, says
Chrysostom, multi in nominc, and panci in opere. So here.

Verse 7. Neither because they are] This profits them no more then it did
Dives, that Abraham called him Son.

Verse 8. The children of the promise] Abraham by believing Gods promise,
begat, after a sort, all believers, yea Christ himself, the head of his seed,
his Son according to the flesh, but more according to the faith.

Verse 9. At this time] See the Note on Genesis 18.10.

Verse 10. But when Rebecca] She, and not Isaac is named, because she received
the Oracle; whether from the mouth of Melchisedech, or some other way, I have
not to determine.

Verse 11. For the children, etc.] Here the Apostle wadeth into that profundum
sine fundo, Predestination.

Being not yet born] Sapores son of Misdates, King of Persia, began his reign
before his life. For his father dying left his mother with child, and the
Persian Nobility set the Crown on his mothers belly, acknowledging thereby her
issue for their Prince, before she as yet had felt her self quick. God elects
not of foreseen faith or works, but of free grace.

Verse 12. Shall serve] Servitude came in with a curse, and figureth
reprobation, Genesis 9 25. Joh. 8 34 35. Gal. 4.30.

Verse 13. Esau have I hated] i. e. I have not loved him, but passed him by:
and this praecerition is properly opposed to election.

Verse 14. Is there] Carnal reason dares reprehend what it does not comprehend.

Verse 15. Bonavent. in lib. 1. sent. did. 41. ^ q. ^.
I will have mercy, etc.] Dei voluntas est ratio rationum, nec tantum recta,
sed regula.

Verse 16. So then it is not, etc.] Nec volentis, nec volantis (as a Nobleman
gave it for his Motto) though a man could run as fast as a bird can fire.

Verse 17. Raised thee up] For a vessel of wrath, and an instance of my justice.

Verse 18. Therefore] God being a free agent, cannot be unjust: he is bound to
none.

Verse 19. Why does he yet find fault?] Queritur, says the Vulgar: which
interpretation cozened Aquinas, as if it had been written Quaeritur. So Luke
15.8. Gregory the great and others, for Everrit, read Evertit: which mistake
produced many groundless glos^es.

Verse 20. That reply against God] Gr. That chattest and wordest it with
him? (...).


Verse 21. Of the same lump] The Apostle alludeth to man's creation, and
therehence ascends to Gods eternal decree of predestination.

Verse 22. Fitted to destruction] Non dicit Deum eos aptasse ad interitum, ne
videretur dicere Deum eis indidisse peccatum, quo ad exitium praeparentur.
Molinaeus in Anat. Armin.


Verse 23. And that he might] He rejected some, that his mercy might the more
appear in the election of others.

Verse 24. Even us] Not me Paul only has he assured of vocation, and so
consequently of election to eternal life.

Verse 25. And her beloved] Jer. 12.7. God calls the Church, the beloved of his
soul, or (as the Septuagint and Vulgar read it) his beloved soul. (...).


Verse 26. The children, etc.] This is such a royalty, John 1.12. as the
Apostle worthily wondereth at, and sets an Ecce upon it.

Verse 27. Aremnant] Reserved for royal use. Diaconos, paucitas honorabiles
fecit, says Hierom: Sic and sanctos, say I.

Verse 28. A short work] When once he sets to work to cut off hypocrites.

Verse 29. Except the Lord of Sabaoth] That is, Of Hosts. God is Commander in
chief of all creatures. The Rabbis well observe that he has Magnleh Cheloth,
and Matteh Cheloth, Kim^b^,
two general troops, as his horse and foot, the upper and lower troops ready
pressed.

Verse 30. Which is of faith] Faith wraps it self in the righteousness of
Christ, and so justifies us.

Verse 31. The law of righteousnes] That is, The righteousness of the law.

Verse 32. For they stumbled] So they do to this day. Jo. Fox Christ.
Triumphans ^pist.
So do Papists and carnal Protestants. Non frustra Lutherus in libris toties
vaticinatus videtur, sese vereri dictitans, ne se extincto verailla
justificationis disciplina prorsus apud Christianos exolescat.

Verse 33. See the Note on 1 Pet. 2.6.

CHAP. X. Verse 1. My hearts desire]
SO it should be ours. See my True Treasure, Chapter 7. Sect. 2.

Verse 2. They have a zeal of God] So had those two Rabbis, David Rubenita,
Alsted. Chron. 426.
and Shelomoh Molchu that set upon the Emperor Charles the fifth, to persuade
him to Judaisme, and were therefore put to a cruel death, anno 1530. So had
Latimer before his conversion: I was as obstinate a Papist, says he, as any
was in England: Insomuch that when I should be made Bachelour in Divinity, my
whole Oration went against Philip Melancthon, and his opinions, etc. Being a
Priest, and using to say Mass, he thought he had never sufficiently mingled
his massing wine with water: and moreover that he should never be damned, if he
were once a professed Friar; Act. and Mon. fol 1571.
with diverse such superstitious fantasies. Zeal without knowledge is as
wilde-fire in a fools hand; it is like the devil in the demoniack, that casts
him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the water.

Verse 3. For they being ignorant] The soul that is without knowledge is not
good, and he that (without knowledge) hastes with his feet, sins, Prove.
19.2. the faster he goes, the farther he is out.

Verse 4. For Christ is the end, etc.] q. d. By, and for Christ's sake, is the
righteousness of God. But the Jews submit not to Christ, therefore not to the
righteousness of God.

Verse 5. Shall live by them] This do and live; that is, says Luther, morere,
die out of hand: for there is no man lives and sins not. We can as little cease
to sin, as the pulse to beat, heart to pant, etc.

Verse 6. Say not in thine heart] The law preaches faith in Christ, as well as
the Gospel.

Verse 7. Into the deep] Those deeps of the earth, Ps. 71.20.

Verse 8. The word is nigh thee] Moses meant it of the law, but it more fitly
agrees to the Gospel. The Babe of Bethlehem is swathed up in the bands of both
Testaments: he is author, object, matter and mark of both. Therefore if we
will profit in hearing, teaching, reading, we must have the eye of our minds
turned toward Christ, as the faces of the Cherubims were toward the Mercy-seat.

Verse 9. That if thou shall confesse] That is, If thou shall call upon the
name of the Lord, as it is expounded, v. 13.

Verse 10. For with the heart, etc.] Pluturch tells us, that of all plants in
Egypt, Plut. de ^side and Osiride.
that they call Persica is consecrated to their goddess Isis, and that for
this reason, because the fruit of it is like an heart, the leaf like a tongue.

Verse 11. Shall not be ashamed] Makes not haste, says the Prophet. Shame and
confusion follow haste and procipitancy: Sed Deo confisi nunquam confusi.

Verse 12. Is rich unto all, etc.] He cannot therefore be poor that can pray:
for he shall have out his prayer, either in money or moneys-worth.

Verse 13. Shall be saved] Though he miss of that particular mercy he asks,
he is certainly sealed up to salvation.

Verse 14. How shall they hear, etc.] The word read, is of divine use and
efficacy: but of preaching we may say as David did of Goliah's sword, There Is
none to that.

Verse 15. How beautiful are the jeet] How much more their faces? Surely I
have seen thy face as the face of God, said Jacob to Esau, Genesis 33.10. that is,
honorable and comfortable. We know how Cornelius received Peter; and the
Galatians, Paul, till they were bewitched from him, Gal. 4.14. But it must be
remembered that we glorify the Word, not the Preacher, Act. 13.48.

Verse 16. Who has believed our report!] Gr. Our hearing. (...)
Passively taken. So Caesar and Cicero use auditio, for report and rumor. Some
sit before a preacher as senseless as the seats they sit on, pillars they lean
to, dead bodies they tread on. Others rage, Tange montes and fumig abunt, etc.

Verse 17. By the word of God] That is, By the Word of Gods command sending out
preachers gifted for the purpose, and saying to them, Go. preach, etc.

Verse 18. Yes verily; their sound, etc.] Sonus, tonus. David says only, Their
line, Psalm. 19.2. (...).
That accurate and artificial frame of the heaven preaches, as it were, the
infinite wisdom and power of the Creator. All Gods works are his Regij
professores, his Catholic Preachers, or real Postilles (as one calls them)
of his Divinity. The world (says Clem. Alex.) is Dei Scriptura, Gods great
Bible with three great leaves, heaven, earth and hell.

Verse 19. Did not Israel know] sc. That the Gentiles were to be called? They
were often told it.

Verse 20. Is very bold] So that for his boldness he was sawn asunder, says
Hierom.

Verse 21. Stretched] A metaphor from a mother.

CHAP. XI. Verse 1. I say then, Has God, etc.]
AS I may seem to have said, Chap. 10. Ministers must do their utmost to
prevent mistakes. Zuinglius, when in his Sermons he had terrified the wicked,
was wont to shut up with Bone vi^, hoc nihil ad te, Thou good man, I mean not
thee.

Verse 2. Says of Elias] A man of such transcendent zeal, that to heighten the
expression thereof, some have legended of him, that when he drew his mothers
breasts, he was seen to suck in fire.

Verse 3. And I am left alone] To withstand and reform the common corruptions.
Some have commended it to our consideration, that from the first service in the
Temple, when it was built, and the time of Eliah's Reformation, was about an
hundred years: And from the Reformation in K. Edward the sixth's days until
now, is about the same proportion of time.

Verse 4. The image of Baal] (...), to that Lady, as our modern Idolaters also
call the virgin Mary, whom they despite with seeming honors. Sal^zar. Iesuita
in Prove. 8.19. Ibid ad ver. 23. Ibid. ad ver. 29.
They would persuade the world, that Christ by dying obeyed not his Father
only, but his mother too, that she is the complement of the Trinity, that she
entreats not, but commands her Son, is the most imperious Mother of our
Judge, with many like horrid blasphemies, which I tremble to relate.

Verse 5. According to the election of grace] St Paul was Constantissimus
gratiae praedicator, as Austin calls him, a most constant preacher of Gods
free grace.

Verse 6. Then is it no more of works] Whatsoever conferrumination of grace and
works Papists dream of. They think, that as he that stands on two firm
branches of a tree, is surer then he that stands upon one only: So he that
trusts to Christ and works too, is in the safest condition. But, 1. They are
fallen from Christ that trust to works, Gal. 5.4. 2. He that has one foot on a
firm branch, and another on a rotten one, stands not so sure as if he stood
wholly on that which is sound. But let them be Moses's Disciples, let us be
Christ's: Set not up a candle to this Sun of righteousness: mix not thy puddle
with his purple blood, thy rags with his raiment, thy Pigeons plumes with his
Eagles-feathers. He can and will save his to the utmost, Heb. 7.25. Detest all
mock-staies.

Verse 7. Israel] i. e. The carnal Israelite.

He seeks for] viz. Righteousness and salvation by works.

Hardened] By a judiciary hardness.

Verse 8. The Spirit of slumber] So that with those Bears in Pliny they cannot
be awakened with the sharpest prickles: and with those Asses in Hetruria, that
feeding upon hen-bane, Mathiol in Dioscorid.
they he for dead, and awake not till half-hileded. Such a dead Lethargy is now
befallen Papists.

Verse 9. Be made a snare] As the bait is to the birds.

Verse 10. Bow down] i. e. Bring them into bondage and misery. Compare Lev.
26.13.

Verse 11. Have they stumbled] He that stumbleth and comes not down, gets
ground.

Verse 12. How much more their fulnesse] O dieculam illam! dexter mihi prae
laetitia salit oculus. How long, Lord, holy and true?

Verse 13. I magnify mine office] I make the utmost of it by gaining souls to
Christ.

Verse 14. And might save some] Ministers must turn themselves as it were into
all shapes and fashions both of spirit and speech to win people to God.

Verse 15. Be the reconciling] Not as a cause, but as an occasion.

Life from the dead] That is, Res sum bona, says Phocius, a special good
thing.

Verse 16. If the first fruit be holy] Not with a natural, but federall
holiness, as 1 Cor. 7.14.

Verse 17. Were graffed in] Gr. (...).
Pricked into the middle, the center of the Olive.

Verse 18. Boast not] Gr. Throw not up thy neck, in a scornful insulting way,
but rather pity and pray for them.

Verse 19. Isidor. so^il. Greg Moral.
Thou will say] Carnal reason will have ever somewhat to say, and is not
easily set down.

Verse 20. Be not high-minded, but fear] Alterius perditio tua sit cautio,
says one. Ruina majorum sit cantela minorum, says another, See thou thy
brother shipwrackt? look well to thy tackling.

Verse 21. Take heed lest] Cavebis autem si pavehis.

Verse 22. (...).
Severity] Gr. Resection or cutting off, as a Chyrurgian cutteth off proud and
dead flesh.

Verse 23. God is able] He can fetch heart of oak out of an hollow tree, and of
carnal make a people created again, Psalm. 102.18. Ephesians. 2.10.

Verse 24. Contrary] Therefore nature contributes nothing toward the work of
conversion.

Verse 25. That blindness in part] It is neither total nor perpetual. Lyra
was a famous English Jew. Tremellius was also a Jew born; they are but Methe
mispar, a very few that are yet converted. Spec. Europ.
They pretend (but maliciously) that those few that turn Christians in ^taly,
are none other then poor Christians hired from other cities to personate their
part. But when God shall have united those two sticks, Ezekiel. 37.19. and made
way for those Kings of the East, Rev. 16.12. then it shall be said of Jacob and
Israel, What has God wrought! Numb. 23.23.

Verse 26. Shall turn away ungodlinesse] That is, He shall pardon their sin.
The Prophet Isaiah has it, Unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob,
etc. They whose persons are justified, have their lusts mortified.

Verse 27. When I shall take] By the spirit of judgment and of burning, Isa.
4.4. with 27.9.

Verse 28. They are enemies] i. e. Hated of God, as appears by the opposition;
and banished, as it were, by a common consent of Nations, out of humane
society. See 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.

Verse 29. Are without repentance] When God is said to repent, it is Mutatiorei
non Dei, effectus non affectus, facti non consilij, a change not of his will,
but of his work. Repentance with man, is the change of his will: Repentance
with God, is the willing of a change.

Verse 30. Through their] By occasion of their unbelief. Pungit Judaeos and
humiliat Gentes, says one.

Verse 31. That they also] It notes not the cause, but the event, as 1 Cor.
11.19.

Verse 32. (...).
For God has concluded] Or locked them all up in the laws dark dungeon, Gal.
3.22. Unbelief breaks all the law at an instant by rejecting Christ, as the
first act of faith obeys all the law at an instant in Christ.

That he might have mercy upon all] Luther in a very great conflict was
relieved and comforted by the often repeating of this sweet sentence.

Verse 33. O the depth of the riches] The Romans dedicated a certain lake, the
depth whereof they knew not, to victory, so should we the unsearchable counsels
of God, being subdued to that, which we cannot subdue to our understandings.

Verse 34. Who has been his Counsellour] Alphonso the wise (the fool rather)
was heard blasphemously to say, Roderic, Santij Hist. Hispan. p. 4, ^. 5.
That if he had been of Gods counsel at the Creation, he could have advised
and ordered many things much better then they now are.

Verse 35 Who has first given to him] Do we not owe him all that we have and
are? And can a man merit by paying his debts?

Verse 36. For of him] As the efficient cause, and (through him) as the
administering cause, and (to him) as the final cause are all things. A wise
Philosopher could say, That man is the end of all in a semicircle; that is, All
things in the world are made for him, and he is made for God.

To whom be glory for ever] God (says one) counts the works and fruits that
come from us to be ours: because the judgment and resolution of will, whereby
we do them is ours: This he does to encourage us. But because the grace whereby
we judge and will aright, comes from God, ascribe we all to him: So shall he
loose no praise, we no encouragement.

CHAP. XII. Verse 1. That ye present]
AS they of old did their sacrifices at the altar. With the burnt offering, which
signified the sacrificing of the flesh, was joined the sin-offering, that is,
Christ, Faith applies Christ to the believer, and the believer to Christ.

Your bodies] That is, your whole person. Cainistae sunt, says Luther,
offerentes non personam, sed opus personae. They are Cainists that offer to God
the work done, but do not offer themselves to God.

A living sacrifice] In the old law they had many kinds of Sacrifices killed
and offered. Now (says Origin) in stead of a Ram we kill our irefull
passions: in stead of a Goat our unclean affections: in stead of slying fowls
our idle thoughts, etc.

Verse 2. To this world] To the corrupt customs and courses of wicked
wordlings. See them set forth, Rom 13.13. Ephesians. 4.18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.3. and
shun them.

But be ye transformed] Gr. Metamorphosed, the old frame being diflolved, and a
new form acquitted.

That ye may prove] sc. By your practice.

Verse 3. (...). Xenoph. de dictu and factis Socrat. lib 3.
But to think soberly] Gr. To be wise to sobriety. Socrates made no distinction
between wisdom and sobriety, (...) non distinguebat.

Verse 4. For as we have, etc.] See 1 Cor. 12.12, which is a Commentary on this
text.

Verse 5. One body in Christ] See the Note on 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.

Verse 6. According to the proportion] That form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
those principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1. with which all
interpretations of Scripture must bear due proportion.

Verse 7. Or Ministery] Take it either largely for the whole ministry, as 1
Cor. 12.5, Act. 1.17. Or more strictly for the office of a Deacon, as Act. 6.

Verse 8. Or he that exhorteth] The Pastor properly so called. See the Note on
Ephesians. 4.11.

Verse 9. (...).
Abhor that which is evil] Hate it as hell it self: so the word signifies,
Mihi certe Auxentius nunquam aliud quam ^abolus erit, quia Arrianus, says
Hilary, I shall look upon Auxemius no otherwise then as upon a devil, so long
as he is an Arrian.

Verse 10. Be kindly affectioned] As natural brethren and more. Arctior est
copula cordis quam corporis. We are brethren in Adam according to the flesh, in
and by Christ according to the Spirit.

Verse 11. (...). Cunctator.
Not slothfull] Or, Not driving off till it be too late. Charles the son of
Charles Duke of Aniou, who was King of Sicily and Jerusalem, was called,
Carolus cunctator, not in the sense as Fabius, because he staid till
opportunity came, but because he staid till opportunity was lost.

Fervent in spirit] Gr. Seething hot. God, (...).
who is himself a pure act, loves activenes in men: the very rest of heavenly
bodies is in motion in their proper places.

Verse 12. Rejoicing in hope] Hope makes absent joys present, wants
plenitudes, and beguiles calamity as good company does the time.

Patient in tribulation] Bearing up under pressures, as among many other
Martyrs Nicolas Burton, who by the way to the stake, and in the s^ame was so
patient and cheerful, Act. and Mon. 1866.
that the tormentours said, the devil had his soul before he came to the fire,
and therefore his senses of feeling were past.

Continuing instant in praier] Constant and instant. (...). N^z. in Epita.
A metaphor from hunting dogs, that give not over the game till they have got
it. Nazianzen says of his sister Gorgonia, that she was so given to prayer,
that her knees seemed to grow to the very ground. Of Trasilla it is reported,
Greg. Dialog.
that being dead she was found to have her elbows as hard as horn, by leaning
to a desk at which she used to pray. St James is said to have had knees as hard
as Camels knees, Eusebius.
by his continual kneeling in prayer. And Paul the eremite was sound dead
kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, lifting up his eye: so that the
very dead corpse seemed yet to live, and to pray to God. Hieron in vita


Verse 13. To the necessity] Gr. To the uses of the Saints, (...).
not staying till they be in necessity.

Verse 14. Bless them] See the Note on Mat. 5 44.

Verse 15. Weep with them that weep] St Cyprians compassion is remarkable, Cum
singulis pectus meum copulo, maeroris and funeris pondera luctuosa participo:
cum plangentibus plango, cum d slentibus defleo, etc. I partake in every man's
grief, and am as much affected and afflicted, as if it were mine own case.

Verse 16. Be of the same] This verse had been easy, had not Interpreters
obscured it, as Origin observes.

Verse 17. Recompense to no man] In reason, revenge is but justice: Aristotle
commends it: the world calls it Manhood, Arist Rhetor. lib. 9 cap. 1.
it is doghood rather. The manlier any man is, the milder and more merciful, as
David, 2 Samuel 1.12. and Julius Caesar, who wept over Pompeys head presented to
him, and said, Non mihi placet vindicta, dicta, sed victoria, I seek not
revenge, but victory.

Verse 18. As much as lies in you] Let it not stick on your part. ^ive not
offense carelessly, take not offense causlesly. See the Note on Mat. 5.9

Verse 19. Avenge not your selves] Some take the Sword into their own hands:
and, lest they should seem Anabaptists in taking two blows for one, will give
two blows for one.

Give place to wrath] sc. To the wrath and vengeance of God, which he seems
to prevent that seeks revenge.

Verse 20. Thou shall heap] Thou shall melt him, and make him thy friend for
ever.

Verse 21. Be not overcome] In rixa is inferior est, qui victor est, says
Basil. In revenge of injuries, he is the loser that gets the better. (...)
(...). ^ Cor. 6.7.
Hence the Apostle disgraceth it, by a word that signifies disgrace or loss
of victory.

But overcome evil] This is the most noble victory. Thus David overcame Saul,
Func. Chronol.
and Henry the 7th, Emperor of Germany, overcame the Priest that poisoned him
at the Sacrament: for he pardoned him, and bad him be packing. So did not Iacup
the Persian King, Turk Hist.
who perceiving himself poisoned by his adulterous wife, enforced her to drink
of the same cup: and because he would be sure she should not escape, with his
own hand he struck off her head. But this (to say truth) was not revenge, but
justice.

CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. Let every soul be subject]
IN things lawful only: for else we must answer as those Apostles did, Act.
3.29. and as Polycarp, who being commanded to blaspheme Christ, and to swear by
the fortune of Caesar, peremptorily refused, and said, We are taught to give
honor to Princes and Potentates, but such honor as is not contrary to Gods
religion.

Ordained of God] In regard of it is institution, Tha. 2.2. q. 10. ar. 10.
though for the manner of it is constitution it is of man.

Verse 2. Resists the power] His authorative commands, not his personal.

Receive to themselves damnation] Poenam sibi auferent, says Piscator, (...).
Conser. 1 Cor. 11.31, 32
they shall receive punishment, to wit from the Magistrate: as Aretine deserved
to do, who by longer custom of libellous and contumelious speaking against
Princes, had got such a habit, that at last he came to diminish and disesteem
God himself.

Verse 3. For Rulers are not, etc.] They should not be. But Jeroboam set a net
on Mizpeh, and spread a share upon Tabor to watch who would go from him to
Judah to worship, Hos 5.1.

A terror to good works, but to the evil] The Sword of justice (says one)
must be furbished with the oil of mercy: yet there are cases wherein severity
ought to cast the scale. Petr. Nicol. Gelstrou^. Dan. bist.
Duresce, Duresce, o infoelix Lantgravie, said the poor Smith to the Lantgrave
of Thuring, more mild then was for his peoples good. Bonis nocet, qui malis
parcit. Edward the Confessor was held a bad Prince, not by doing, but enduring
ill.

Verse 4. For he is the minister] It was written upon the sword of Charles the
great, December praeceptorum custos Carolus, Charles is Lord Keeper of the
Decalogue.

For he bears not the Sword in vain] Like St Paul in a glass window, or St
George (as they call him) in a sign-post.

A revenger to execute wrath] But now we see how every man almost will be a
Pope in his own cause, depose the Magistrate, at least appeal from him to
himself.

Verse 5. But also for conscience sake] Good Rulers we must obey as God, bad,
for God. (...). Basil.


Verse 6. Attending continually] As born for the benefit of many. The
Parliament in the 25. of Edward 3. is known to posterity by the name of
Benedictum Parliamentum: So shall this present ^arliament for their continual
attendance upon the Lords work; bending themselves to the business (as the
word signifies) and holding cut therein with unparalled patience. This was
written, anno 1646. (...).


Verse 7. Render therefore to all their dues] He says not their unjust
exactions. Melancthon makes mention of a cruel Prince, that to get money of
his Subjects, would knock out their teeth; Primo unum dentem evellebat
minitans, etc.
first one tooth, and then another, unless they would bring him in such sums
of money as he required.

Fear to whom, etc.] i. e. Reverentiall observance, far beyond that which Q.
Fabius Maximus yielded to his son, when he became Consul. Li. Decal. 3. lib 4.


Verse 8. Owe no man, etc.] The Persians reckoned these two for very great
sins; 1. To be in debt. 2. To tell a lie; the later being often the fruit of the
former. By the twelve Tables of Rome, Xenophon.
he that owed much, and could not pay, was to be cut in pieces, and every
creditour was to have a piece of him according to the debt. Gell lib. 12. c. 1.


Verse 9. (...).
Briefly comprehended] Capitulated, fulfilled, says the Syriack, summed up. St
Bartholomew was quoted by Dionysius to have said of Divinity, Et magnam esse
and minimam, that it was large and yet little, (...).
as containing much matter in few words.

Verse 10. The (...) of the law] The filling up of the law in this, that it
clotheth the duties of the law with the glory of a due manner, and seateth them
upon their due subjects, with the unwearied labors of a constant well-doing.

Verse 11. To awake out of sleep] Whiles the Crocodile sleeps with open
mouth, the Indian rat gets into his stomach, and eats through his entrails.
Whiles Ishhosheth slept upon his bed at noon, Baanah and Rechab took a way his
head. Security ushereth in destruction. Go forth and shake your selves as
Sampson did, when the Philistims were upon him: lest Satan serve you, at least
for your souls, as Captain Drake did the Spaniard at Taurapasa in the
West Indies for his treasure; he found him sleeping securely on the shore, and
by him thirteen bars of silver to the value of 400000 ducats, Co^^dens Elisa.
fol. 422.
which he commanded to be carried away, not so much as once waking the man. Or
lest Christ himself deal by us, as Epaminondas did by the watchman, whom he
found asleep: He thrust him through with his sword, and being blamed for so
severe a fact, he replied, Talem eum reliqui, qualem inveni, I left him, as I
found him.

For now is our salvation nearer] Stir up your selves therefore, and strain
toward the mark. (...). Hesych. Poliux l 3 ^ 30
There is a Greek word signifying the end of a race, which is derived of a word
that signifies to spur or prick forward. Surely, as they that run their horses
for a wager, spur hardest at the races end: so, since our salvation is nearer
now then ever it was, therefore we should run faster now then ever we did.

Verse 12. The night] Here it is taken for all unregeneracy, which (as the
night) is full of error, terror. etc. Nox pudore vacat. This night with the
Saints is far spent, or already past, as Cyprian and Hierom here render it.
Transivit. Praeterijt. (...)


Verse 13. Let us walk honestly] Handsomely, fashionably, mannerly, with an
holy shamefacednes.

Not in chambering] Properly, lying a bed, or long-lying. (...).


Verse 14. But put ye on] Augustine confesses that he was converted by reading
and pondering this text.

And make not provision] Make not projects, cater not for the flesh.

CHAP XIV. Verse 1. Him that is weak, etc.]
THat is not thoroughly persuaded of all things pertaining to Christian liberty
about things indifferent.

Receive] Assectu charitatis, put him into your bosoms, Haymo.
bear with his weaknesses, etc, Bucer rejected none, though different in some
opinions, in whom he found, Aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ, whose
weaklings are to be handled with all tenderness.

But not to doubtfull] Make him not Question-sick, 1 Timothy 6.4. Wring not men's
consciences, you may hap to break the wards, if you do.

Verse 2. Eats herbs] Rather then meats forbidden by the Law. The ancient
Latins were as well apaid of herbs to eat, Dan. 1, 11.
as if they had had all manner of dainties. Holus (...).
Green herbs were both food and physic to them.

Verse 3. For God has received him] viz. For his household servant, which David
counted a greater dignity then to be King of Israel. And Justinian the Emperor
styled himself, Vltimum servorum Dei, the meanest of Gods servants.

Verse 4. Who art thou, etc.] The wisdom from above is without censuring,
without hypocrisy, says S. James, Chap. 3.17. Intimating, that the greatest
censurers are mostly the greatest hypocrites: And as any one is more wise, he
is more sparing of his censures.

Verse 5. Let every man be fully perswaded] It is a safe rule, Plin. Epist:
Quod dubites, ne feceris: In doubtful cases be sure to take the suter side.

Verse 6. For he gives God thanks] A custom used by the very Heathens to
their gods, Sir Ed Sands, Spec. Europae.
as is to be read in Homer and Virgil: but grown clean out of use among the
Catholics in France and Italy. But if they that give thanks at meat do eat to
God, to whom do they eat that give none?

Verse 7. For none of us lives to himself] S. Paul stood, as it were on
tiptoes, (...).
Phil. 1.20 to see which way he might best glorify God, by life or by death.

Verse 8. We are the Lords] Death divides us not from Christ, but brings us
home to him, 2 Cor. 5.6. It is but winking (as that Martyr said) and thou shall
be in heaven presently.

Verse 9. That he might be Lord] He won his crown before he wore it: he
fought for it, and having vanquished all enemies, he accomplished and
proclaimed the victory in his glorious resurrection, triumphed in his
wonderful ascension leading captivity captive, etc. Ephesians. 4.7.

Verse 10. But why do thou, etc.] Three things are not subject to our
judgment. 1. The counsels of God. 2. The holy Scriptures. 3. The persons of
men. Be not therefore rash in rejecting, or sour in censuring your
fellow servants; but let your moderation herein be known to all men; and the
rather, because the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5.

Verse 11. As I live, says the Lord] As true as I live is an oath, as appears
here, and Numb. 14 21. with Ps. 95.11. Forbear it therefore.

Verse 12. So then every one, etc.] It was excellent counsel that the Orator
gave his hearers, Cic. 4. in Verr.
I ^a vivamus ut ration^m nobis reddendans arbitremur. Let us so live as those
that must give an account of all at last.

Verse 13. A stumbling block, or an, etc.] A lighter or greater offense, to
make him go halting to heaven.

Verse 14. By the Lord Iesus] Who has pulled down the partition wall, and
purchased our Christian liberty.

Verse 15. But if thy brother be grieved] It is his weakness to be grieved
thereat, but gratify him howsoever. What one speaks of a plain place of
Scripture, this verse (says he) had been easy, had not Commentatours made it
knotty: the like, says another of a Christians condition, it is gracious,
happy, clear, sure, sweet, did not erroneous judgments vex and unsettle them.

Verse 16. Let not then your good] That is, Your Christian liberty purchased by
Christ.

Be evil spoken of] Gr. Be blasphemed. Contumely cast upon the people of God is
blasphemy in the second Table. God, for the honor that he bears to his
people, counts and calls it so.

Verse 17. For the kingdom of God, etc.] That was a swinish saying of
Epicurus, That eternal life should be nothing else but a continual eating of
the fat, and drinking of the sweet, (...).
even unto an uncessant surfeiting and drunkenness. The Turks at this day
promise Paradise to such as die in war for the Mohammedan faith, Blou^ts
voyage, p 37 ^.
where they shall have delicious fare, pleasant gardens, all sensual delights,
eternally to be enjoyed not withstanding any former sins. Fit lettice for such
lips.

Verse 18. Is acceptable to God] And he is an happy man that can be acquitted
by himself in private, in public by others, in both by God.

Verse 19. Wherewith one may edify another] Discords among good people, do
edificare in gehennam, as Tertullian phraseth it, build backwards. One of the
main scandals the Jews take from Protestants, is their dissension.

Verse 20. The work of God] That work of faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. wrought by the
mighty power of God, Ephesians. 1.19. who puts not forth great power, but for great
purposes.

Verse 21. It is good neither to eat, etc.] It will be no grief of heart (as
she once told David in another case) to have forborne in case of scandal. A
great grief it would be if by some rash word we should betray a brother, or
smite out the eye of our dearest child. 1 Samuel 25.
Should we then destroy the life of grace in another by our unadvised walking?

Verse 22. Have thou faith?] Posse, and nolle, nobile est. Forbear for fear of
effence, unless it be in point of necessary duty: For then we may not do evil
that good may come, Romans 3 8.

Verse 23. Is damned] Both of his doubting conscience, which sounds heavily,
as a shau^m, and of God, who is greater then his conscience.

CHAP. XV. Verse 1. Ought to bear]
AS Porters do their burdens, as pillars do the poise of the house, (...).
or rather as parents bear their babes in their arms.

And not to please our selves] Bis desipit, qui sibi sapit. Prove. 3.7.

Verse 2. Please his neighbour] Though he cross himself: this is true
Christian love, and driven almost out of the world by sinful self-love, which
can eth men to dislike those things in others, that they slatter in themselves.

Verse 3. For even Christ] And we should express him to the world, preach
abroad his virtues by our practice, 1 Pet. 2.9. Our lives should be as so many
Sermons upon the life of Christ. This is walk in Christ, Col. 2 6. as Christ, 1 John 3.6.

Verse 4. For whatsoever things, etc.] Here the Apostle meets with an
Objection. For some man might say, that that saying of the Psalm pertains to
David, how therefore is it applied to Christ? He answers, Whatsoever things,
etc. q. d. We must learn to see Christ in David: David in the history, Christ
in the mystery; David as the type, Christ the truth.

That we through patience] Hence the Scriptures are called. R^vel. 2.
The word of Christ's patience, because they patient the heart under Gods holy
hand: and are better called Physic for the soul, then ever was the library of
Alexandria. (...).


And comfort of the Scriptures] As the blood and spirits are conveied by the
veins and arteries: so is the Spirit by the promises, helping the soul to lay
it self upon Christ by faith, which is a grace of union, and so of
establishment.

Verse 5. Now the God of patience] The soul is then only in good plight, when
the heaven answers the earth, Hos. 2.21. When. Christ the Sun of righteousness
shines into it.

Verse 6. With one mind, and one mouth] It is recorded to the high
commendation of the Church of Scotland, that for this 90 years and upwards,
they have kept unity with purity, without schism, much less heresy. Syntag.
Confession praesat.


Verse 7. To the glory of God] That is, Of heaven, the joys whereof it is as
impossible to comprehend, as it is to compass the heaven with a span, or
contain the Ocean in a nut-shell. Such comfort there is in the presence of
Christ (though but in the womb) as it made John to spring: What then shall it
be in heaven?

Verse 8. Now I say that Jesus] Paul proves particularly in this and the
following verses, that Christ has taken both Jews and Gentiles to his glory.

Verse 9. And that the Gentiles] Though they had no such promises, might
glorify Gods free grace in the day of their visitation.

Verse 10. Rejoyce] That your names also are written in heaven, and that ye are
enrolled in the records of the new Jerusalem.

Verse 11. All ye Gentiles] As being received into the glory of God, verse. 7.

Verse 12. In him shall the Gentiles trust] I says has it, To him shall the
Gentiles seek; To seek to God then argues trust in God. He that hopes not,
prays not, or but faintly.

Verse 13. Fill you with all joy, etc.] Note here that joy and peace are the
means, whereby faith works hope.

Verse 14. Full of goodnesse] The excellency of a godly man is to follow God
fully, as Caleb, Numb. 14.24. to have a heart full of goodness, as these
Romans, a life full of good works, as Tabitha, Act. 9.36. These shall receive a
full reward, 2 John 8.

Verse 15. Chrysostom truly says of St Paul that he was insatiabilis Dei
cultor, one that thought he could never do God or his Church service enough.

Verse 16. Ministering the Gospel] Serving about holy things, (...).
or doing sacred offices, as the Priests under the Law, to whom the Apostle all
along this verse alludes in an elegant allegory: the Ministry is a divine and
heavenly function. All other callings are for the world, and draw to the world:
but this, both in the preparation and execution, draws to God, keeps us
with God, and to be ever mindful of the things of God.

Verse 17. I have therefore, etc.] So have all Gods faithful Ministers at this
day against the contempts and contumelies cast upon them by the mad world, ever
besides it self in point of salvation. There is a pamphlet lately published
that sticks not to make that sacred and tremend function of the Ministry to be
as mere an imposture, as very a mystery of iniquity, The Compass. Samarit^n.
as arrant a juggle as the Pa^acy it self.

Verse 18. To make the Gentiles, etc.] Christ by his Gospel subdued the
Britans, whom the Romans with all their force could never subdue, as Tertullian
observed. Britannorum ^nac^^ssa Raman^ ^^ C^risto (...) sub^ta 1 ere,


Verse 19. So that from Jerusalem] Chrysostom observes, that Plato came three
times to Sicily to convert Dionysius the tyrant to moral philosophy, and could
not. But Paul fet a great compass, converted many souls, planted many
Churches: And why? Christ sat upon him as upon one of his white horses, and
went forth conquering and to conquer, Revel 6.2.

Verse 20. Lest I should build[Lest I should seem to do any thing unbeseeming
the office of an Apostle. There is a decorum to be kept in every calling.

Verse 21. But as it is written] In obedience to this divine oracle, the
Apostle preached to those that had not heard, yet neglected not those that had.

Verse 22. For which cause] By planting Churches, and preaching where was more
need.

Verse 23. These many years] The Romans were converted to the faith betimes.

Verse 24. For I trust to see you] Ipse aspectus viri beni delectat, says
Seneca. There is a great deal of sweetness in the society of Saints, and much
good to be gotten thereby. Sometimes, (says a grave Divine) though we know
that which we ask of others, as well as they do, yet good speeches will draw
us to know it better, by giving occasion to speak more of it; wherewith the
spirit works more effectually, and imprints it deeper, so that it shall be a
more rooted knowledge then before. For that does good that is graciously known,
and that is graciously known, that the Spirit seals upon our souls.

Verse 25. To minister unto the Saints] The highest Angel in heaven may not
hold himself too good to serve the Saints.

Verse 26. (...).
It has pleased them] It has not been squeezed out of them, as verjuice is
out of a crab, but freely and cheerfully they have contributed.

Verse 27. Their debtors they are] And so are we to pity and pray for them. See
my True Treasure, Sect. 2. chap.7.

Verse 28. When I have sealed] That is, Safely delivered, as if it were under
seal.

This fruit] This sweet ripe fruit of their faith and love, their alms

Verse 29. In the fullness of the blessing] Christ may use one of less grace
to do more good then one of more (for there are diversities of operations, as
well as of gifts, 2 Cor. 12.6.) but usually he delights to honor those of most
sinicerity, with most success, 1 Cor. 15.10.

Verse 30. For the Lord Jesus Christ's sake] This is one of those passages in S.
Paul, then the which there can nothing possibly be imagined more grave, divine,
excellent, says Beza.

That ye strive together] Even to an agony, as the word imports. (...)
Spiritual beggary is the hardest and richest of all trades, as one laid.
Learn of this great Apostle to beg prayers with all earnestness. Act. and Mon.
fol 1565. Ibid. 1499.
Pray for me, I say, pray for me, I say, quoth father Latymer, Pray for me,
pray for me, for Gods sake pray for me, said blessed Bradford.

Verse 31. That my service which, etc.] One would have thought that the Apostle
coming with alms to them, should easily have been well accepted: but he saw
cause to seek God for such a mercy, since it is he alone that fashions men's
opinions, and gives favor and kind acceptance. Besides wisdom, he gave
Solomon honor.

Verse 32. Be refreshed] See the Note on Romans 1.12. and on 2 Ioh. 12.

Verse 33. Now the God of peace] A sit attribute for the present purpose. It is
a commendable policy in Christians, when they pray to propound God to their
mind in such notions, and under such titles, as whereby they may see in God
the things they desire of God.

CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. Servant of the Church]
A Diaconisse to minister to the sick, as 1 Timothy 5.9. not a praedicantisse, to
preach or have Peter's keys at her girdle. D. Bastwick against Independ.


Verse 2. As becomes Saints] Who are great Princes, States, in all lands, Psalm
4; and to be observed accordingly, even worthy of God, 3 Ioh. 6.

Verse 3. Salute Priscilla] She is first mentioned, happily as more forward then
her husband in the best things. So was Manoahs wife, and Nazianzens mother.

Verse 4. Who have for my life] A rare example. Dan. hist. 231.
Fast friends are in this age for the most part gone on pilgrimage (said one
once) and their return is uncertain.

Verse 5. The Church that is in their house] The house of George Prince of
Anhalt, for the good orders therein observed, is said to have been, Ecclesia,
Academia, Curia.

The first fruits of Achaia] The first that received the Gospel there. A
singular commendation, a sweet happiness. Gods soul has desired such first
ripe fruits, Mic, 7.1. such primroses.

Verse 6. Greet Mary, etc.] It is profitable that men of great parts and place
should preserve their memory with others, though it be but in a salutation: for
it may be a means to fire up affection to godliness in such whom they so
remember.

Verse 7. Who are of note] Noble, notable Christians, old experienced
gray headed Disciples. (...).
Christianity finds or makes us honorable.

Verse 8. Greet Amplias] Piety is no enemy to courtesy: It does not remove,
but rectify it.

Verse 9. Our helper in Christ] A sweet sign to him, that his name was written
in the book of life, Phil. 4.3.

Verse 10. Approved in Christ] An high style, far beyond that of the great
Turk, with all his big-swoln-titles.

Verse 11. My kinsman] In the flesh, but more in the faith, that surest tie.

Verse 12. Who labor in the Lord] Though not so much as Persis did, Cic.
deorator.
yet does he not defraud them of their due commendation, Prima sequentem
honestum est in secundis tertiisque consislere. Every man must not look to
excel: let him be doing, as he is able.

Verse 13. His mother and mine] His by nature, mine by affection. The Apostles
parted with parents and friends at home, found them abroad.

Verse 14. Salute Asyncritus, etc.] Nothing is said of these; for haste
perhaps, or else because they were (as one says of Iesse the father of David)
Viri, probi and honesti, minus ^amen clari, Good honest men, but not much
noted. Or lastly, for that the Apostle had no very good opinion of them, as he
seems not to have had of Demas, Colos. 4.14. who yet would needs be one in the
Apostles register there: a place he will have, though it be the last place.
Hermas here mentioned, was reputed by some of the Ancients to be the Author of
that Apocryphal book called Pastor; wherein he dealt not so fairly and
faithfully in relating what he had received from the Apostles, being sublestae
fidci author.

Verse 15. And Olympas] Viri nomen non mulicris. The name not of a woman, but
of a man, says Beza.

Verse 16. With an holy kisse] The Independents at Arnheim in Holland, M.
Edwards his Antapol. p 36, 60.
propounded this kiss of love to be practiced amongst them. So for anointing
the sick with oil, singing of hymns by one man, all the rest being silent, etc.

Verse 17. (...).
Mark them which] Set a watchful and a jealous eye upon them, as upon pests
and enemies. And here, let not our Episcopi (whose office it is chiefly) be
Aposcopi, Bernard.
overseers be by-seers, but look well to the slock, lest these wolves worry
them. Act. 20, 29.


And avoid them] Gr. Decline them studiously, (...).
as ye would do a serpent in your way, or poison in your meats.

Verse 18 But their own bellies] They pretend the service of Christ to their
worldly and wicked respects, by a dissembled sanctity, which is double
iniquity. The Duke of Bavaria is even eaten up with those Popish flesh-shes,
Friars and Jesuits.

And by good words, etc.] Those locusts in the Revelation have faces like
women, insinuative and flattering. Tertullian.
The Valentinian heretics had an art to persuade before they taught, whereas
the truth persuades by teaching, it does not teach by persuading.

They deceive] As cheaters do, by the cogging of a dye, Ephesians. 4.14. Fallax
artisicium, vel potius artisex fallacia, (...)
says Erasmus on that text, a cunning kind of cez^nage.

Verse 19 For your obedience, etc.] Whereas the Romans might object, Are we
also of those simple ones? Your obedience, says he, is famous all the world
over. Howbeit I would have you wise to that which is good, but simple
concerning evil. This simplicity is no disparagement, to be unskilled in the
devils depths, Revel. 2.24.

Verse 20. Shall bruise Satan] Sincerity of a little grace shall be rewarded
with abundance of greater graces. Christ our Champion has already won the
field, and will shortly set our feet upon the necks of our spiritual enemies.
The broken horns of Satan shall be the Trumpets of our triumph, and the Cornets
of our joy.

Verse 21. Timotheus my work fellow] Of Timothy, read Act, 16.1, 2. Of Lucius,
Act. 13.1. Of Jason, Act. 17.5. Of Sopater, Act. 20 4.

Verse 22. I Tertius who wrote, etc.] Either from the Apostles mouths, or
rather out of his foul papers.

Verse 23. Gaius mine host] Baptized by Paul, for whom therefore, 1 Cor. 1.14.
Muli^ bo^piti^ praebuit. Steph.
and for other good men he thought he could never do enough. Such another was
Phebe, verse 2. who had been a succourer, or an hostess to many, and to my
self, says Paul.

Verse 24. The grace of our Lord] This is the seal of all S. Paul's Epistles. 2 Thessalonians. 3.17.

Verse 25. Which was kept secret] Even from the very Angels, 1 Pet. 1.12. who
do daily profit in the knowledge of this secret, Ephesians. 3.10.

Verse 26. According to the Commandment] The writings of the Prophets
concerning the mystery of Christ were not made known to the world by
hap-hazard, but by a special command of God.

Verse 27. To God only wise, etc.] So say I for these few Notes thus finished.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Sosthenes our brother]
ANd companion in the kingdom and patience of Christ, Act. 18.17. There he was
despitefully entreated, here highly honored. Revel. 1.9^
Christ is a liberal play master: Never any did or suffered ought for his sake
that complained of an hard bargain. It is to my loss (said that Martyr) if you
bate me any thing in my sufferings. Majora certamina, majora sequuntur praemia,
says Tertullian.

Verse 2. Called to be Saints] i. e. Either such as are sanctified by habitual
infusion, or such as are sanctified by baptismall profession only, that are in
Covenant with God by sacrifice, Psalm. 506. and are in Christ, though they bear
no fruit, Ioh. 15.2. These two sorts of Saints make up a true visible Church.

With all that in every place] The Apostles then wrote not their Epistles for
the particular uses of those times only, as the Jesuits will have it.

Verse 3. Grace be to you and peace] All peace that flows not from the sense of
Gods love and favor, is as that of the Romans with the Samnites, Pax infila,
pax incerta Livius.
unfound and uncertain.

Verse 4. For the grace of God] Intending to chide them, he first commends them
that he may preserve in their hearts an opinion of his love, whilst he rebuked
them sharply, that they might be sound in the faith.

Verse 5. Ye are enriched] See here what is the Christians riches. And so David
reckons of his wealth, Psalm. 119.32. He cannot be poor in whom the word of God
dwells richly, Colos. 3.16. especially if he befrce of discourse, able and
willing to communicate. A dumb Christian is to be blamed, as well as a dumb
Minister.

Verse 6. The testimony of Christ] The Gospel, called also the Testimony, Isa.
8.10. To the Law, and to the Testimony.

Verse 7. So that ye come behind, etc.] Yet were babes and carnal, Chap. 3.2,
3. and fell short in many graces. We must distinguish between gifts and graces
and covet these rather then those, 1 Co. 13.1.

Verse 8. In the day of our Lord J^sus] Eleven times in these ten first verses
(as Chrysostom well observes) the Apostle mentions the Lord Jesus Christ,
who was to him, and should be to us, Bern.
Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord, Honey in the mouth, music in the
ear, joy in the heart.

Verse 9. Unto the fellowship] Union being the ground of communion: so that all
that is in him is for us. I give my goods to the Saints, says David, in the
person of Christ.

Verse 10. That there be no divisions] To break unity in the Church, is to cut
asunder the very veins and sinews of the mystical body of Christ.

By the Name of our Lord] Which is like to suffer by your dissensions, and
whereof you ought to be as tender, as of treading upon your parents that begat
you.

Perfectly joyned] Schisms dis-joynt men.

Verse 11. Of the house of Chloe] A godly Matron she was no doubt, and a good
office herein she did her neighbors: though, likely, she had little thank for
her labor; as likewise Joseph had for bringing his brethrens evil report to
their father, Genesis 37.2.

That there are contentions] These often breed Schisms; as did the contention
between Luther and Carolostadius: And many of the ancient heresies, sprang from
private grudges and discontents, in sui solatium, for a sorry comfort to those
that broached them.

Verse 12. And I of Christ] q. d. I care neither for Paul nor Apollo, etc. As
some say now-a-daies, they are neither Papists nor Protestants, but Christians,
that is just nothing, slat Atheists. Heraclius the Emperor being imprudently
carried away by some Bishops into the opinion of the Monothelites, when that
heresy was afterward condemned by the Council of Jerusalem, the Emperor
being ashamed to recant, became a mere Noutralist, and held neither one way nor
other.

Verse 13. Baptized in the Name] Gr. Into the Name, so as to be called by my
name. Those then that will needs be called Franciscans, Lutherans etc. do after
a sort disclaim their baptism, and become run awaies from Christ.

Verse 14. I thank God] He notes and noticeth herein a sweet providence,
beyond all that he then imagined, when he was at Corinth. God is to be seen in
every special occurrence.

Verse 15. Lest any should say] q. d. God has so disposed of it, that none can
with any color of cause, or show of sense say such a thing.

Verse 16. Whether I baptized any] His Colleagues, belike, did it (whiles he
was other wise busied) with a particular examination and instruction in those
principles, Heb. 6.2.

Verse 17. Not to baptize] As my chief work, So Jer. 7.22. Meli^h. Adam. i^ vi^
115.
but to preach and plant Churches, wherein he had a very happy hand: as had
likewise Farellus among our late Reformers, Qui Mompelgardenses, Aquileienses,
Lausannensis, Genevenses, Novocomenses Christo luorisecit, he gained five
Cities with their territories to Christ.

Not with wisdom of words] Which yet S. Paul could have done as well as
another; witness his artificial unstarching of the Orators speech, Act. 26.
But he liked not to put the Sword of the Spirit into a velvet scabberd, that it
could not pierce, to speak Floride potius quam solid, as those self-seekers at
Corinth did, that sought more to tickle the ear then to affect the heart. It
repented Augustine, (and well it might) that when he was young he had preached
more, Vt placeret, quam ut doceres, to please, then to profit. And Luther was
wont to say, He is the best preacher that preaches, vulgariter, trivialiter,
maximeque, ad populi captum. Not but that there is a lawful use of Rhetorike
in Sermons, so it be free from ostentation. See the Preface to my Gods love
tokens.

Verse 18. To them that perish, foolishnesse] As it is to the Jews at this day,
who rail against Christ's person, calling him the hanged God, the wool and the
warp, Levit. 13.52. because these two make the figure of the Cross. And being
asked whether they believe to be saved by Christ's righteousness? They answer,
That every Fox must pay his own skin to the flaer. The Pagans also jeared at
Christ, and his people, as did Julian, Lucian, Porphyry, etc.

Verse 19. For it is written] Thus the old Testament is fulfilled in the New,
(...).
whiles the worlds wizards are dazelled, dulled and disannulled.

Verse 20. Where is the wise?] The teacher of traditions: the Jews had a
Proverb (...).

Where is the Scribe?] Or the Text-men, those that proceed according to the
literal interpretation.

Where is the Disputer?] The teachers of allegories and mysteries, 1 Timothy 1.4.

Verse 21. Act. 17.27. (...).
The world by wisdome] Not the Jews by their deep Doctors, nor the Gentiles by
their wits and wizards (Qui tanquam noctuae ad solemn caligabant) could grope
out God.

By the foolishness of preaching] An ironicall concession, so the mad world
esteems it, who shall the for ever the contempt of it, crying out Nos
insensati, etc.

Verse 22. For the Jews require, etc.] The reason of their rejecting the Gospel
is, they are prepossessed against it, they look for that, that it affords
not. A prejudicate opinion bars up the understanding. Intus existens prohibet
alienum: like muddy water in a vessel, that causes the most precious liquour
to run over.

Verse 23. But we preach Christ] We not only preach of him, but we preach him,
we give what we preach. It is the special office of the ministry to lay
Christ open, to hold up the tapestry, to unfold the hidden mysteries of Christ.
The holy Ghost in them, takes of that which is Christ's, and shows to men.
Joh. 16.15.

Unto the Jews a stumbling block] These Philistims cannot conceive how out of
the eater should come meat, and out of the strong, sweet. Unto the Greeks]
These jeared at Jesus, and the resurrection, as at a couple of strange gods,
Act. 17.18. Cato profanely says, Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem.
It is a folly to expect safety by the death of another.

Verse 24. Christ the power of God] Opposite to the power of miracles required
by the Jews.

And the wisdom of God] Opposite to the Grecians worldly wisdom.

Verse 25. Because the foolishnesse] The wisest man compared to God, Simia
videbitur, non sapiens, said Hera^litus, as Plato relates it, He will appear
to be an Ape rather then a wiseman.

Verse 26. Not many mighty] The Eagle and Lion were not offered in sacrifice,
as the Lamb and the Dove were. It is hard for great ones to deny themselves.
Hence it grew to a Proverb in times of Popery, That hell was paved with Priests
shaven crowns, Rafit sacrificulorum verticibus and magnatumgolgia. Hieron.
and great men's head-pieces. Indeed if men might pass de deliciis ad delicias,
e eaeno ad coelum, as Hierom has it: If they could dance with the devil all
day, and sup with Christ at night: If they might live all their lives long in
Dalilah's lap, and then go to Abraham's bosom when they die, they would have a
sine time of it. But that cannot be: and hence so many mighties miscarry.

Not many noble] Blessed be God that any: as Galeacius Caracciolus an Italian
Marquess, and Nephew to Pope Paul 5. was converted by Peter Martyr reading
upon this first Epistle to the Corinthians. George Prince of Anhalt, a pious
preaching Prince, converted by Melancthon: Ulysses Martinengus Earl of Baccha
another Italian convert, and some few more that might be instanced. But good
Nobles are black-swans (says one) and thinly scattered in the fit mament of a
state, even like stars of the first magnitude. We may say of such, as Luther
does of Elizabeth Queen of Denmark, a pious Princess, Luther in epist. ad Joh.
Agricol.
Scilicet Christrus etiam aliquando voluit reginam in coelum vehere.

Verse 27. But God has chosen] In our Church assemblies the meaner usually,
like little fishes, bite more then the greater. The poor are Gospellized, Mat.
11.5.

Verse 28. Things which are not] i. e. That are naught set by 1 Samuel 25.6. Thus
shall ye say to him that lives, that is, to him that is rich: for poor men are
reputed as dead men. They have but prisoners pittances, which will keep them
alive, and that is all.

Verse 29. That no flesh] Proud flesh will soon swell, if it have but any thing
to fasten on. The devil will also easily blow up such a blab.

Verse 30. But of him are ye] q. d. Albeit ye have nothing of your own, yet in
Christ you have all: for in him is all fulness both repletive and diffusive,
both of abundance, and of redundance too, both of plenty and of bounty.

Is made unto us wisdome] This notes out Christ's Prophetical office.

Righteousness and sanctification] By his Priestly office.

Redemption] By his K^^gly office, having fully delivered his from sin, death
and hell; all which is not fully done, till after death. And that is the reason
why Redemption is here set last. See Romans 8.23. Luke 21.28.

Verse 31. Glory in the Lord] Acquiesce and exult in him, which is the end why
God has done all this for us in Christ.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Not with excellency]
SAint Paul's speech was neque lict^, neque negl. cta. neither curious nor
careless. Politian could say, that it is an ornament to an Epistle to be
without ornaments. And yet he had so little grace as to prefer Pindars Odes
before David's Psalms. Hosius also the C^dinal, thought David's Psalms unlearned,
applying that, Scribrmus indoct^ doctique pocm^ta passim. Os durum! The holy
Scriptures have a grave eloquence, but want those pompous and painted words,
that carnal rhetoricians hunt after.

Verse 2. To know any thing] To profess or teach any other skill. All the
wisdom of a man is in this one thing, says Lactartius, Vt Christum cognoscat
and colat, That he know and worship Christ. Hoc nostrum dogma, haec sententia
est, etc. Lactan. li^ 3. cap. 30.


Verse 3. In weaknesse] In misery, and in a mean condition, laboring with his
hands, etc. Act. 18.3.

And in fear] Of adversaries, or through care of discharging my duty amongst
you.

Verse 4. With entising words] Religion is not a matter of parts, words or wit.
The devil cares not for the sons of Sceva's adjurations. Abanah and Pharphar
may scour, but Jord^n only can cure. Gods holy things must be handled, Sancte
magis quam site, with fear and reverence, rather then with wit and dalliance.

In demonstration of the spirit] With demonstrations fetched out of the very
marrow of the Scriptures. It must be an elaborate speech that shall work upon
the conscience.

Verse 5. That your faith, etc.] A humane testimony can breed but a humane
faith. Aarons bells were of pure gold; our whole preaching must be
Scripture Proof, or it will burn, and none be the better for it.

In the power of God] In the Gospel that lodges a certainty in the soul.

Verse 6. Wisdom among the perfect] Or those that are grown to maturity. Some
think the Apostle borrows this term from the Pagans superstition, who
admitted none to their most secret Ceremonies, but only persons well prepared
and purified for many years.

Yet not the wisdom, etc.] Which is like the labor of Moles, that dig
dexterously under ground, but are blind above ground.

That come to nought] That are tumbled into hell with all their learning, which
does but light them into utter darkness. Nos cum doctrinis nostris, etc. Aug.


Verse 7. Wisdom of God in a mystery] Whiles God did not divide himself into a
merciful Father, and a just Judge (as Valerius speaks of Zaleucus) but
declared himself to be both a perfectly merciful Father, and withal a
perfectly just Judge; which was such an act of wisdom as the world never heard
of. This is that great mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

Verse 8. Which none of the Princes] He calls the Pharisees and Philosophers
Princes, for their learning; as being himself a scholar. Only he might well
have said of them, as Tuliy of others in another case, Mihi quidem nulli satis
eruditi videntur, quibus nostra sunt ignota. I cannot take them for scholars,
Cic de Poet^ Latinu.
that partake not of our learning.

None of the Princes of this world knew] Because their learning hung in their
light. So it fared with Vspian the chief Lawyer, Galen the chief Physician,
Porphyry the chiefest Aristotelian; and Plotinus the chief Plaionist, who were
professed enemies to Christ and his truth. So was Libanius and Lucian the chief
scholars of their time. None miscarry oftener then men of greatest parts. None
are so deep in hell as those that are most knowing. They see no more into the
mystery of Christ, then illiterate men do into the profound points of
Astronomy. As a man may look on a trade and never see the mystery of it: or he
may look on the letter, and never understand the sense: so here.

Verse 9. Eye has not seen, etc.] It is reported of one Adrianus, that seeing
the Martyrs suffer such grievous things, he asked the cause, one of them
answered, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things that God has prepared for them that love him. The naming of
which Text so wrought upon him, that afterward he became a Martyr.

The things which God has prepared] As he prepared Paradise for Adam; so
heaven for all his. Yet he reserves not all for the life to come, but gives a
few grapes of Canaan in this wilderness.

Verse 10. But God has revealed] The Chinese use to say of themselves,
D^scrip. of the world, Chap. of China and Cathaia.
That all other Nations of the world see but with one eye, they only with two.
This is most true of the natural man compared to the spiritual.

Verse 11. Save the Spirit, etc.] Man knows his inward thoughts, purposes and
desires; but the frame and disposition of his own heart he knows not, Jer. 17.9.

Knows no man] How can he that cannot tell the form and quintessence, that
cannot enter into the depth of the flowers or the grass he treads on, have the
wit to enter into the deep things of God, hid from Angels till the discovery,
and since that, they are students in it?

But the Spirit of God] With this heifer of his therefore we must plow, if we
will ever understand his riddles.

Verse 12. Not the spirit of the world] The world lies down in that unclean
one, and is under the power and vassallage of that spirit that works in the
children of disobedience, as a Smith in his forge, 1 John 5.19. Ephesians. 2.2. It
is wholly set upon wickedness, as Aaron says of the people, Exodus 32.22.

That we might know] A sweet mercy; The Cormorants of the world will not let
their heirs know what they will do for them, till they die. But God assures his
of heaven aforehand. Thus we have not received the spirit of this world: we
cannot shift and plot as they can; but we have received a better thing, and
have no reason to repine.

Verse 13. But which the holy Ghost teacheth] So that not the matter only, but
words also of holy Scripture are dictated by the Spirit, and are therefore to
be had in higher estimation, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Comparing] Or coapting, (...).
fitting spiritual words to spiritual matters, that all may savor of the
Spirit.

Verse 14. But the natural man] The mere Animal, (...).
that has no more then a reasonalbe soul, and natural abilities, Jude 19.
Such was that saplesse fellow, Psalm. 14.1. that may have a disciplinary
knowledge, that is, by hearsay, as a blind man has of colors, but not an
intuitive per speciem propriam. The water rises no higher, then the spring
whence it came: So natural men can ascend no higher then nature. If the
unreasonable creatures could draw a picture of God, said Xenophanes, they would
certainly paint him like themselves, Quia scilicet nihil animal animali
superius cogitare potest, because they can think of nothing above themselves.

Neither can he know them] They that are blear-eyed and weak-sighted, if at any
time they set themselves to see better into a thing, they see the worse: So
here. Nay more, Vives in Aug. de civ Dei. l. 22. cap. 6.
in our nature there is an antipathy to divine truth. We love the law better
then the Gospel, and any truth better then the law.

Because they are spiritually] Ambrose reads, Because he is spiritually judged,
being delivered up to a reprobate sense. But the other reading is bent ^.

Verse 15. Judges all things] By his spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. 14. his
spiritual senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14. his undoubted
persuasion of that truth he professes, Colos. 2.3. and whereof he has fel^
the sweetness, Colos. 1.9.

Is judged of no man] Of no natural man, who can judge no more of divine
truths then a blind man can do of colors, or a sick man of meats. And herein
the poorest Idiot (says one) being a sound Christian goes beyond the
profoundest Clarks that are not sanctified, that he has his own heart in stead
of a Commentary, to help to understand even the most needful points of the
Scripture.

Verse 16. But we have the mind of Christ] This is a privilege confined to
the communion of Saints, to have communication of Christ's secrets, to be as it
were of his Court and Council. One says of Dr Sibbs. That he was a man
spiritually rational, and rationally spiritual, one that seemed to see the
insides of nature and grace, and the world and heaven, by those perfect
anatomies he had made of them all.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Could not speak unto you]
Unless I would beat the air, and lose my sweet words, q. d. You quarrel me
for a shallow trivial teacher, when your selves are in fault, as not yet
capable of more mysterious matter. Our Savior preached (not as he could have
preached, but) as the people were able to hear, Mark 4.33. So the Author to
the Hebrews, chap. 5.11. Some impute their not profiting to the Minister, as he
in Seneca, that having a thorn in his foot, complained of the roughness of the
way, as the cause of his limping. Or as she in the same Author, that being
struck with a sudden blindenes bad open the windows, when as it was not want of
light, but want of sight that troubled her.

As unto carnal, even as unto babes] Or, At least as unto babes, not yet past
the spoon, and that must have their meat masticated for them by their nurses.

Verse 2. I have fed you with milk] Ministers must condescend to their hearers
capacities, though they be slighted for so doing, as Paul was; or jeared, as
Isaiah, chap. 28.9, 10. for his line upon line, Moses his choice, 375.
precept upon precept, Kau lekau, and Zau lezau; The sound of the words carries
a taunt, as scornful people by the tone of their voice and riming words, scorn
at such as they despise.

Verse 3. For ye are yet carnall] It is a shame for Christians to be like other
men, as Sampson was after he had lost his ha^r.

Envying and strife, etc.] These overflowings of the gall and spleen, came from
a fulness of bad humors.

And walk as men] Christians should be as Saul was, higher then the people by
head and shoulders. Something singular is expected from them, Matthew. 5.47. they
should have their feet where other men's heads are, Prove. 15.24. When we do
evil, we work do nostro and secundum hominem, we do our kind, as the devil
when he speaks lies, speaks, De suo, of his own, Joh. 8.44.

Verse 4. For when one says, etc.] So those that will needs be called
Lutherans, Jurantque in verba magistri. Did not Luther play the man, when he
and other Dutch Divines advised Philip Lantgrave of Hesse, a pious Prince to
marry a second wife that is an adultresse, whiles his lawful wife was yet
alive? Zanch. Mi^^^l. Epist. de^licat.
And might he not deceive, and be deceived in other things as well as in that?

Are ye not carnal?] Nay, Will not the world think ye are mad? As the Apostle
speaks in a like case, 1 Cor. 14.23.

Verse 5. But Ministers] Not Masters, as Magistri nostri Parisienses, so the
Sorbonists will needs be called, Presat, in 1, Sentent.
contrary to Jam. 3.1. Bacon the Carmelite was called Doctor resolutissimus,
because he would endure no May Bees.

Verse 6. But God gave the encrease] The Harp yields no sound, till it be
touched by the hand of the Musician. The heart is never made good, till the
heavens answer the earth, Hos. 2.21. till God strike the stroke. Holy
Melancthon being newly converted, thought it impossible for his hearers to
withstand the evidence of the Gospel. But soon after he complained that old
Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

Verse 7. So then neither is he, etc.] This made Cyril to conclude his Preface
to his Catechism, with M^um est docere, vesirum auscultare, Dei perficere. I
may teach, and yen hear, but God must do the deed, when all is done. Else, we
may preach and pray to the wearing of our tongues to the slumps (as Bradford
said) and to no more purpose then Bid did, when he preached to a heap of
stones.

Verse 8. And he that waters are one] Why then are not you at one? Should ye
not follow your leaders, press their footsteps?

Shall receive his own reward] Those ambitious Doctors that draw disciples
after them, hunting after popular applause (that empty blast of stinking
breath) shall have that for their reward; let them make them merry with it.
When faithful Ministers shall shine as stars, Dan. 12.3.

Verse 9. For we are laborers, etc.] Let Ministers hence learn their, 1.
Dignity. 2. Duty. Fructus honos oneris, fructus honoris onus. Who would not
work hard with such sweet company?

Verse 10. As a wise master-builder] Artificers also have their wisdom, Arist.
Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 7.
as Aristotle yields. For his God does instruct him to discretion, and does
teach him, Isa. 28.26. As he did Bezaleel, and Aholiah.

Verse 11. Which is Jesus Christ] The Doctrine of his person and offices is the
foundation of Christian religion: and must therefore be kept pure and entire by
all means possible. Arrius his (...), would not be yielded: nor Nestorius his
(...), for (...) So religious were the old Bishops that they would not alter or
exchange a letter or a syllable in these fundamentals. Every particle of truth
is precious, and not to be parted with.

Verse 12. Wood, hay, stubble] Rhetorical strains, philosophical fancies,
that tend not to edification. There are that together with the gold, silver and
ivory of sound and savoury truths, have, as Solomon's ships had, store of apes
and peacocks, conceits and crotchets. Now if he that imba^eth the Kings coin
deserve punishment, what do they that in stead of the tried silver of divine
truths, stamp the name and character of God upon Nehushtan, their own base
brazen stuff?

Verse 13. For the day shall declare it] That is, The light of the truth, or
time the father of truth, or the day of death, when many recognize and recant
their errors, shall show them their sin.

Verse 14. If any man's work abide] Error as glass is bright, but brittle and
cannot endure the hammer or sire, as gold can; which, though rubbed or melted,
remains firm and orient.

Verse 15. He shall suffer losse] Of his work (his laborious loss of time) and
of some part of h^s wages.

Yet so as by fire] Not of Purgatory (a Popish fiction) but of the holy Ghost.
Or (as one interprets it) like unto them who save themselves naked out of the
fire, without carrying away any of their goods: so his person shall be saved,
but he shall not have the reward of a well qualified Minister.

Verse 16. Ye are the temple of God] Not Gods building only, as verse. 9. but
his Temple. A mud wall may be made up of any thing, not so the walls of a Temple
or Palace: that must have other materials.

And that the Spirit of God, etc.] Next to the love of Christ in dwelling in
our nature, D. Sibbs ^ Ephesians. 9.30.
we may wonder at the love of the holy Ghost, that will dwell in our defiled
souls. Let our care be to wash the pavement of this temple with our tears, to
sweep it by repentance, to beautify it with holiness, to perfume it with
prayers, to deck it with humility, to hang it with sincerity. Delicata res est
spiritus Dei. The holy Ghost will dwell in a poor, so it be a pure house.
Religion loves to lie clean, as was a grave speech of an ancient Saint.

Verse 17. Which temple ye are] Man is Gods temple: God, man's altar.
Demosthenes could say, That man's heart was Gods best and most stately temple,
Iustitia, verecundia, and observantia legum communitum. Contra Aristog.


Verse 18. Let no man deceive himself] Bis desipit, qui sibi sapit. Consily
satis est in me mihi,said she in the Poet. Arachne ap. Ovid. Metam.
Nothing so easy as to over-ween.

Let him become a fool] Let him come to the well with an empty pitcher. Intus
existens prohibet alienum. Agur (if a man may believe him) is more brutish then
any man, Pro. 30.2, 3. See there how he vilifies, yea nullifies himself before
God. So did blessed Bradford, as appears by the subscriptions of many of his
letters. Act and Mon. fol. 1507.


Verse 19. He takes the wise] Those natural bruit beasts made to be taken and
destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. God takes them, (...).
and makes fools of them.

Verse 20. Of the wise] Such as excel in natural gifts, that are the choicest
and most picked men. The Psalmist says only of men, Ps. 94.12.

Verse 21. Let no man glory in men] That is, that they are such an ones
scholars or followers; seeing the Church is not made for them, but they for
the Church.

Verse 22. All are yours] Though not in possession, yet in use, or by way of
reduction, as we say, the worst things are Gods childrens, and in reversions
those best things above.

Verse 23. And ye are Christs] We hold all we have in Capite tenure in Christ.
From Christ therefore let us take our denomination. The name of Jesuits
savoureth of blasphemous arrogance.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. Let a man so account]
QVasi dicat, Though we are yours, as Chap. 3.22. devoted to the service of
your faith, yet are we not to be slighted, but respected as Christ's high
stewards. Ministers of Christ] Gr. (...)
Vnder-rowers to Christ the Masterpilot, helping forward the Ship of the Church
toward the haven of heaven.

Stewards of the mysteries] Dispensing all out of Gods goods, and not of our
own; setting bread and salt upon the table (that is preaching Christ crucified)
what ever else there is.

Verse 2. That a man be sound faithfull] Giving every man his due proportion of
fit food, Mat. 24.45. not as he in the emblem, that gave straw to the dog, and
a bone to the ass.

Verse 3. But with me it is, etc.] A good Minister reviled, may reply, as once
a Steward did to his pa^^onate Lord, when he called him knave, etc. Your honor
may speak as you please, but I believe not a word that you say; for I know my
self an honest man, (...) F^sl. lib 22 cap. 34. Dio (...). Dio Act. and Mon.
fol. 1356.
Non curo illos censores, qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel
reprehendende non intelligunt, says Augustine. Augustus did but laughed at the
Satyrs and buttoniers, which they had published against him. Severus the
Emperor was careful of what was to be done by him, But careless what was
said of him. Doc well and hear ill is written upon heaven gates, said Mr
Bradford the Martyr. Thou art an heretic, said Woodroofe the Sherifte to Mr
Rogers the protomartyr in Queen Mary's days. That shall be known, quoth he, at
the day of judgment. Some men slatter me, Polic epist. l. 3. ep. 24.
says Politian, some others slander me, I think neither the better nor the
worse of my self for that: no more then I think my self taller or lower for
that my shadow is longer in the morning and shorter at noon.

Verse 4. Yet am I not, etc.] Paul a chosen vessel, but yet an earthen vessel,
knew well that he had his cracks and his flaws, which God could easily find
out.

Verse 5. Until the Lord come] Tot argumenta quot verba, says Paraeus. Every
word here has it is weight. There shall be a resurrection one day of names, as
well as of bodies: let that stay us, when belied or misreported.

Verse 6. I have in a figure, etc.] i. e. I have represented and reprehended
your partialities under our own names, when I brought you in saying, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. 1 Cor. 1.12. For the heads of your factions were
your own ambitious Doctors, whose names yet I spared, and took the business upon
my self and Apollos, for your sakes.

Verse 7. For who makes thee] He directs his speech to those Theologi
gloriae, as Luther usually called such, those vainglorious, self-ascribing
Pastors at Corinth, that sought to bear away the bell from Paul; and would not
stick to answer this demand of his, Greenincbonius.
Quis te discernit? As that insolent Arminian did, Ego meipsum discerno, I make
my self to differ.

And what have thou, etc.] There are that would hammer out their own
happiness, like the Spider, climbing by the thread of her own weaving, with
Motto accordingly, Mihi soli debeo

Why do thou glory] As great a folly, as for the groom to be proud of his
masters horse, the stage-pla^er of his borrowed robes, or the mud wall of the
Sunshine. Of all the good that is in us, we may well say as the young man did
of his hatchet, Alas, master, it was but borrowed.

Verse 8. Now ye are rich] Crescit oration, says Piscator here. The Apostle
rises in his expressions; and that all along by an ironicall reprehension.
These Corinthians had riches, and gifts and learning: and carried aloft by
these waxen wings, they domineered and despised others.

Verse 9. As it were men appointed to death] As when he fought with beasts at
Ephesus. The Heathens in their public calamities would commonly call out,
Christianos ad leones, Tertul. Apol. cap. 40.
to the lions with these Christians, as if they had been the cause. Ignatius
suffered in this sort.

A spectacle to the world] As those that were first led in triumph, and then
had back again to the prison, Piscat.
there to be strangled.

Verse 10. We are fools, etc.] Not to the world, but in your account too, For
these Corinthians undervalued and depressed Paul under their silly
shallow-headed Verbalists, not worthy to carry his books after him, for found
and substantial learning.

Verse 11. Even to this present] Thus he complains, not out of impatience
(for he was active in his sufferings) but to stain their pride, that permitted
it so to be, when it in their power to have relieved him.

Verse 12. And labor, working, etc.] Whereas they might object, Are you
hungry, thirsty, naked? It Is because you are idle. No, says he, We labor,
working with our hands ((...) shame for you to suffer it) and yet can hardly
sweat out a poor living.

Verse 13. Being defamed, we entreat] Though Luther call me devil, said Calvin,
yet I will honor him, as a servant of God.

We are made as the filth of the world] q. d. The filth of filth; for the whole
world lies in wickedness, as a foul sloven in a slow, or as a carrion in the
slime of it. The word signifies, The sweepings of the world, (...).
or the dirt scraped off the pavement thereof.

And the of-scouring of all things] Detersorium, sordes, purgamenta,
reject^menta. Piaculares and obominales, says Paraeus. The word signifies, M
Burrows.
the dung-cart (says one) that goes through the City, into which every one
brings and casts his filth. Every one had some filth to cast upon Paul and the
Apostles. Constantine a Citizen of Rhoane with three others, being for defense
of the Gospel condemned to be burned, were put into a dung cart: who thereat
rejoicing, Act. and Mon. fol ^ 20.
said that they were reputed here the excrements of the world, but yet that
death was a sweet odor unto God. Budaeus is of opinion that the Apostle here
alludeth to those expiations in use among the heathen, performed in this
manner. Certain condemned persons were brought forth with Garlands upon their
heads in manner of sacrifices: these they would tumble from some steep places
into the sea, Bud Pandec.
oftering them up to Neptune with this form of word, (...), Be thou a
propitiation for us. So for the removal of the pestilence they sacrificed
certain men to their goods: these they called (...), Suidas in (...).
filth, loading them with revilings and cursings.

Verse 14. To shame you] An innocent person sometimes, upon the fullness of an
aspersion, may conceive shame, as David dip, Psalm. 44.15. yet usually shame is
the effect of an evil conscience, and may prove, by Gods blessing, a means of
repentance, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

Verse 15. Ten thousand instructers] Gr. Pedagogues, who often prove Orbiliusses,
sharp and severe above measure, Verberibus pluunt, colaphis grandinant. So did
these Corinthian schoolmasters, 2 Cor. 11.20. They were also too well skilled
in the Dorick dialect, crying, Give, Give: and taught little more then elegant
elocution.

Verse 16. Be ye followers of me] As dear children. Ovid.
A bove majori discit ar are minor. Constantines children resembled their
father exactly, they put him wholly on, says Eusebius, and were, as it were,
very he. (...)


Verse 17. For this cause] That ye may be followers of me, and know what I do.

Of my ways which be in Christ] It is of excellent use to know what good men,
especially Ministers, do, as well as what they say. Ministers lives should be a
transcript of their Sermons, or as so many Sermons on the life of Christ.

Verse 18. Now some are puffed up] Swelling in the body is an ill symptom: So
it is in the soul. A swelling wall will shortly fall.

Verse 19. The Kingdom of God] i.e. The administration of his Ordinances and
Government of the Church.

Verse 20. With a rod, or in love?] Both: but (as children) we think not so.
Sed sinite virgam corripientem, ne sentiatis malleum conterentem, says one
Father. Bern. Hieron.
Non erudit pater nisi quem amat, nec corripit nisi quem diligit, says another.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. As is not so much as named]
TO wit, Without detestation. The Apostle seems to allude to Antiochus Soter,
who married his stepmother Stratonice, being first like to die for love of
her, as Erasistratus the Physician told his Father. Aelian.
Of this incestuous marriage came Antiochus Theos, or Antiochus the god, so
called of the Milesians, because he did put down their tyrant Timark. This god
was poisoned by his wife Laodice.

Among the Gentiles] In Mexico and those parts, whoredom, Sodomy, Sir Fra
Drake his World encompas. 58.
and incest (those Spanish virtues, as one calls them) are common without
reproof: the Popes pardons being more ri^e in those parts, then in any part of
Europe for these abominable filthinesses, whereout he sucketh no small
advantage. Notwithstanding the Indians abhor this most loathsome living: showing
themselves in respect of the Spaniards, as the Scythians did in respect of the
Grecians, whom they so far excelled in life and behavior, as they were short
of them in learning and knowledge. Who has not heard of the abhorred incest of
the house of Austria? Spec. Europ.
King Philip 2. could call Archduke Albert, both brother, cousin, nephew and
son. For all this was he to him either by blood or affinity: being uncle to
himself, cousin germane to his father, husband to his sister, and father to his
wife; and all this by papal dispensation. The Papists themselves write with
detestation, that in Rome a Jewish maid might not be admitted into the Stews of
whoredom, Espenc de continen. l. 3. cap. 4.
unless she would be first baptized.

That one should have his father wise] Ethelbald King of West Saxons, with
great infamy marrying his fathers widow Judith, enjoyed his kingdom but two
years and a half. Daniel hist of Ergl 1 2.


Verse 2. And ye are puffed up] And yet ye are puffed up (so Piscator reads it)
viz. with your spiritual gifts, and your brave teachers: whereas you have more
cause to be cast down for your other men's sins now made yours, because
unlamented by you.

And have not rather mourned] That any of you should incur the censure of
excommunication: at which time they did anciently fast and lament.

Verse 3. Have judged already, etc.] q. d. I by mine Apostolical authority do
excommunicate him. And yet how fiercely does learned Erassus contend with
Calvin and Beza about Excommunication, denying the Church any such power?

Verse 4. With the power of our Lord] Promised, Matthew. 18.18 19, 20. This makes
it to be a heavy case to be rightly excommunicated. Indeed it may fall out that
Jonas shall be cast out of the ship, when Cham shall be reserved in the Ark.
Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said (for a
pretense) let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.5. When the sentence of Excommunication began with,
In ^omine Domini, to be read against a certain Martyr, he cried out, as well he
might, You begin in a wrong name. And another of them, Act. and Mon. sol 1862.
together with his five fellow sufferers, did formally excommunicate their
persecutours.

Verse 5. To deliver such an one to Satan] That he may learn not to blaspheme,
that is, not to cause others to blaspheme or speak evil of the good way of God,
for his stagitious courses.

Verse 6. Your glorying is not good] It is the height of wickedness to glory
in wickedness, as Lamech Gen 4. and Alexander Pheraeus, who consecrated the
Javelin, Plato.
wherewith he had slain Polyphron. Protagoras boasted that he had spent forty
years in corrupting of youth. Mark Antony vomited out a book concerning his own
ability to eat and drink much. Joannes a Casa, Act. and Mon. 1517.
Dean of the Popes chamber, wrote a Poem in commendation of his own beastly sin
of Sodomy. And Stokesly Bishop of London in King Henry 8. time, lying at point
of death, rejoiced, Ibid. ^025.
boasting that in his life time he had burned fifty heretics, that is, good
Christians.

A little leaven leaveneth, etc.] One spoonful of vinegar will soon tart a
great deal of sweet milk: but a great deal of milk will not so soon sweeten one
spoonful of vinegar.

Verse 7. As ye are unleavened] viz In part sanctified. Every new man is two
men. Many a one that is merry in company, has a shrew at home; so have the
best their inward troubles. The comfort is, that God overlooks our involuntary
infirmities, and accounts us unleavened, when yet there is much still to be
purged out. The leper, when his leprosy began but to heal, was pronounced
clean; because then he went on still to heal, and his leprosy to shale off.

Verse 8. Let us keep the feast] The benefits we receive by Christ should crown
the Calendar or our lives with continual feastivals: Yea, make us
everlastingly merry at our convivium juge of a good conscience. Diogenes could
say, Plut.
That a good man keeps every day holy day. And the Jews were bound to rejoice
at all their feasts, Eat therefore thy meat with joy, and drink thy wine with
gladness, since God now accepts thy works, Eccles. 9.7.

Verse 9. Not to company with fornicatours] Dion Chrysostom says, (...).
That Corinthus was the most luxurious and lascivious City in the world. Lib. 8.
Strabo says, that Venus had a most stately Temple there, that was kept by
above a thousand beautiful curtisans. Another says, that it was the
brothel-house of Greece, and a most filthy Mart-town of abominable lusts.
Molin. Anat. Ar^^inianis.


Verse 10. Yet not altogether, etc.] Here he lets them know that in that former
Epistle (not extant now) he meant not that they should wholly sever themselves
from those wicked that are yet without the Church (for that they cannot do) but
from profligate professors, discinct Christians, that they may be ashamed.

Verse 11. Not to keep company] Gr. Not to be mingled with them. (...)
The rivers of Peru, after they have run into the main sea, yea some write 20.
or 30. miles, they keep themselves unmixed the salt water: so that a very great
way within the sea, men may take up as fresh water, Abbots Geog. 331. Blunts
voy. p. 10.
as if they were near the land. So, at Belgrade in Hungary where the Danuby and
Sava (two great rivers) meet, their waters mingle no more then water and oil,
etc. We must so converse with the wicked, as that we commingle not, by holding
any needless society with such, no not with him that is called a brother, but
belies his profession. Yet still must we perform to such, though
excommunicated, offices of charity, natural and civil duties, as those of
parents toward their children, of children toward their parents, and the like.

Verse 12. Them also that are without] These come not under the verge of
Church Censures, Revel. 22.15.

Verse 13. (...).
Therefore put away] Gr. Ye will put away, q. d. I hope you will, though
hitherto ye have not. Soft words and hard arguments do soonest prevail:
Especially when we reprove or admonish not in our own, but in Gods words, as
here the Apostle does out of Deuteronomy. 13. Some warmth must be in a reproof, but it
must not be scalding hot. Aegros, quos potus fortis non curavit, ad salutem
pristinam aqua tepens revocavit, says Gregory. They that could not be cured
with strong potions, have been recovered with warm water.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. Go to law before the unjust]
ALl unbelievers are, 1. Void of Christ's righteousness imputed. 2. Of true
civil righteousness, as being self-seekers in all. 3. They oppress the
Saints, and draw them before the judgement^^ats. Jam. 2.6.

And not before the Saints] Christians first brought their causes before the
Bishops to be judged. And hence grew their power (as Paraeus notes) which the
Christian Emperors first would not, and afterward could not take away from
them. This raised Papacy and Prelacy to such an height; they would be Princes
as well as Bishops.

Verse 2. Shall judge the world] That is, The wicked, called the inhabitants of
the earth, and of the sea, Revel. 12.12. in opposition to the Burgesses of the
new Jerusalem, Phil. 3 20. And let this comfort us under the perverse censures
of worldly men, mad and besides themselves in point of salvation. The Lord
sees that their day is coming, Psalm. 37.13.

Verse 3. Things that pertain to this, etc.] That serve to, and satisfy the
body only, being nec vera, nec vestra, Luke 16.11, 12.

Verse 4. If then ye have judgements] As the Corinthians being many of them
merchants, had many law-sutes. But if men's hearts were not bigger then their
suits, there would not be half so many.

Who are least esteemed] Rather then go to law before Heathen Judges. The
lowest, if of any judgment, are high enough for such a purpose. Why should
those sordida poscinummia qui latrocinia intra mania exercent, as Columella
has it, those Crumenimulgae, the unconscionable Lawyers make a spoil of us;
and then when they die build Hospitals for fools, as one of them did, saying,
Of fools I got my estate, and to fools I will leave it? Purchase his Microcosm.
Of those that go to Law, we may well say, as Charoudas once did of those that
go to sea, Se non mirari qui semel mare ingressus sit, sed qui iterum, that he
marvelled not at those that went once, S^apl. mor^do, 2. post pent.
but at those that would go again.

Verse 5. No, not one that shall be able] Our late Judge Dicr, if there came
any controversies of poor men to be tried before him, would usually say, The
pr^ct. of Queenesse, p. 270.
that either the parties are wilful, or their neighbors uncharitable, because
their lutes were not quietly ended at home.

Verse 6. But brother goes to law] Once it was counted ominous to commence
actions, Caes com.
and follow suits. Of common barretters, we may say as the Historian does of
Mathematicians, Genus hominum quod in nostra repub. and vetabitur semper, and
retin^^itur. Ta^^t. l. 1. c. 1.


Verse 7. (...).
There is utterly a fault] Gr. Adisgrace, a loss of victory. q. d. By your
litigious lawing one another, you betray a great deal of weakness and
impotency of affection. These be ignoble quarrels, Vbi and vinc^re, inglorium
est, and atteri sordidum. See the Note on Romans 12.21.

Because ye go to law] Lightly, for every small offense (which if Mahometans
do, they are publicly punished) and with spiteful vindictive spirits: whereas
in going to law men should not be transported with hate or heat; but as Tilters
break their spears on each others breasts, yet without wrath or intention of
hurt, so, etc. The French are said to be very litigious, and full of Lawsutes.

Verse 8. Nay you do wrong] In person and name.

And defraud] Of goods and estate.

And that your brethren] Which very name should charm and allay all discords,
In ^thie.
as betwixt Abraham and Lot, Genesis 13 8. Aristotle could say, It is better to
suffer wrong then to do it. And I know how to bear injuries, (...).
said Chilo to his brother, who took it ill that he was not chosen to be one of
the Judges.

Verse 9. Shall not inherit] It is an undefiled inheritance, 1 Pet. 1 4. no
dirty dog ever trampled on that golden pavement, Revel. 22.15. Heaven spewed
out the Angels, shall it lick up the unrighteous? The Serpent could s^^ue
himself into paradise, but no wicked could ever get into heaven.

Verse 10. Nor thieves, nor covetous] These two be fitly set together, as near
akin, so are drunkards and railers.

Nor extortioners] Whose sin is properly immoderate getting, as that of the
covetous consists in pinching and saving. So 1 Timothy 3.3.

Verse 11. Such were some of you] Oh the infinite goodness of God that would
once look upon such walking dunghils, such monstrous miscreants ^

But ye are washed] In general: As in particular, 1. Ye are sanctified] And
that by the Spirit of our God. 2. Ye are justified] And that in the Name, or by
the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ. His blood cleanses us from sins
both guiltiness and filthiness. It is like to those sovereign mundifying
waters, which so wash off the corruption of the ulcer, that they cool the heat
and stay the spread of the infection, and by degrees heal the same.

Verse 12. All things are lawfull] viz. All indifferent things amongst which
the Corinthians reckoned not only meats and drinks, but also fornication (their
National sin.) The devil perhaps had persuaded them, as he has done the Turks
at this day, Llunts voyage.
that God did not give men such appetites to have them frustrate, but enjoyed,
as made for the gust of man, not for his torment, wherein his Greatour delights
nor. Now the Apostle grants that for ^dats all things are lawful (yet in case
of offense or intemperance, they may become inexpedient, and so, unlawful.)
But for fornication, it was utterly unlawful, as he proves by many powerful
arguments.

But I would not be brought] As those swinish surfetters, that wearing their
brains in their bellies (with the Aster fish) their guts in their heads, do dig
their graves with their own teeth: being like the Mule which cannot travel,
they say, without a bottle of hay hanging at his nose.

Verse 13. God shall destroy,] The belly shall be destroyed in the other world,
not for the substance of it, but for the use of it. And the same may be said
for the difference of sexes: the parts shall remain, the use cease: Ca^o said
well, that he was an ill commonwealths man, Qui inter guttur and inguen, cuncta
sub ventris ditiane positisset, that was a slave to his sensual appetite.

Verse 14. And will also raise us up] He will make our vile bodies to be like
unto his glorious body the standard? Shall we then defise them with the
kitchin-stu^^e of uncleanness?

Verse 15. Shall I then take] Scipio, when a harlot was offered him, said,
Vellem, si non ess^m Imperator, I would, if I were not a General, Say thou, If
I were not a Christian.

Verse 16. Is one body] By a most strict, but vicious and infamous bond (says
an Interpreter) which is sufficient to unty or break any other bond though
lawful and holy, either corporal or spiritual.

Verse 17. Is one spirit] That is, One spiritual body: whiles Christ lays
hold on us by his Spirit, we lay hold on him by faith. Hence the Church is
called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. and the fulness of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. We have the
honor of making Christ perfect, as the members do the body.

Verse 18. (...)
Flee fornication] With post-haste flee it. Laera venire Venus, tristis abire
solet. Be not of those men that are called Borboritae of their mity
filthiness, whom Epiphanius and Oecumenius speak of.

Verse 19. That your body is the Temple] Shall we make the Temple of God, the
stews of Satan? See Chap. 3.16. Antiochus and Pompey never prospered after that
they defiled the Temple.

Verse 20. Ye are bought] Shall I drink the blood of these men, said David? So,
shall I abuse my body the price of Christ's blood, abandon it to Venery, etc?

Glorify God in your body] The very Manichees that denied God to be the
author of the body, fasted on Sabbath days, and in fasting exercised an
humiliation of the body.

CHAP. VII. Verse 1. Whereof ye wrote unto me]
CErtain cases of conscience they had propounded, which here he answers. Act.
and Mon. fol. 789.
This he could do excellently, and so could Luther, as having had experience,
and been much beaten and exercised with spiritual conflicts. Conscience is a
diamond, and will be wrought on by nothing but dust of diamond, such as
contrition has ground it to.

It is good for a man] Now since the fall, it is good, i. e. convenient for the
many troubles of the married estate. It is not evil to marry, but good to be
wary, else conjugium may prove conjurgium, marriage a mar-age.

Verse 2. (...).
To avoid fornication] Gr. Fornications, comprehending all lustifull burnings,
self-pollutions, and all other impurities of a single life. How many are there
that enter into Gods ordinance (marriage) through the devils portall
(fornication) that take such liberty before, that after marriage they rue it
all the days of their lives.

Let every man have his one wife] Not many wives. Turks may have as many as
they can keep. And some sensualists plead now for Polygamy. See Mal. 2.15.
Scotorum Natio uxores proprias non habet, says Hierom of the old Scots.

Verse 3. Let the husband, etc.] Let them be chaste between themselves, and
beware both of excess and defect. Chastity is a man's honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. And
modesty is the best preserver of nuptial chastity. Marriage as well as meats
must be sanctified by the Word and prayer. God must be sent for, to bless thy
physic to the soul. Raging lust is a great enemy to conjugall love.

Verse 4. The wife has no power, etc.] The husbands body is servant to the
wife, and the wives to the husband: they have passed themselves one to another
by mutual covenant, and God keeps the bonds, prove. 2.17. Mal. 2 14.

Verse 5. To fasting and praier] Preces nobis je^uniis a lendum and quasi
saginandum. Fasting-daies are soul-fatting days: prayer is edged and winged
thereby.

That Satan tempt you not] The temptation is strong to fornication, stronger to
adultery. Watch therefore. Our nature is catching this way: and once in, it is
not so easy to come off. This is a searing sin, Hos. 4.11. Ephesians. 4 19.

Verse 6. And not of commandment] Among the Jews marriage was not held a thing
indifferent, or at their own liberty to choose or refuse, but a binding command.
Hereto Paul seems in this verse to allude. Tar. on Genesis 1.28.


Verse 7. For I would that all, etc.] He had a peculiar gift, that he was so
eminently chaste: such as might be in reprobates. So Moses his meekness was
partly from his natural temper: And Luthers not being tempted to covetousness
was much helped by the freenes and generousnes of his spirit.

Verse 8. I say therefore to the unmarried] Yet does not the Apostle simply
prefer virginity or viduity before marriage as better. The Saturnilian
heretics said, that marriage was of the devil. And the blemish will never be
wiped off some of the ancient Fathers, who to establish their own I dol of I
know not what virginity, which they themselves had not, have written most
wickedly and basely of marriage. If the same God had not been the author of
virginity and marriage, he had never countenanced virginity by marriage, as he
did in the blessed Virgin.

Verse 9. Let them marry] There is no lust so hot and violent, but Gods
medicines rightly applied, will cool and heal. Only remember that it is not the
having, but the loving of a wife that keep (...) man chaste and clean: And that
God does use to correct excess and dalliance betwixt married couples, with
strong temptations after strange flesh.

Better to marry then to burn] As an Oven heated by the Baker, Hos. 7.4. As
those Pagans were scalded, Romans 1.27. and these Pa^agans still are, that are
forbidden to marry, and yet cannot contain.

Verse 10 Yet not I] By prudentiall advice only.

But the Lord] Not in so many words, but by just consequence drawn from Mat. 19
6.

Verse 11. Ovid.
Or let her be reconciled] Vt qua modo puguarant jungant suarostra columbae.
Why should marriage couples be as glass, that being once broke can never be
pieced again? The Lord hates putting away, Mal. 2.1^.

Verse 12. Let him not put her away] For to the pure all things are pure.
Vxoris vitium aut tollendum, aut tolerandum est, says Varro in Ge^ius. Mend a
bad wife, if thou can: bear with her, if thou can not.

Verse 13. If he be pleased, etc.] If he blaspheme not Christ, force her not to
deny the faith, etc. as that King of Denmark that would have compelled his wise
to go to Mass, who was therefore forced to fly for her life to her brother
the Electour of Brandenburg (as Luther relates) where she died Christianly.

Verse 14. But now they are holy] With a federall holiness, and are therefore
to be baptized, as being partakers of the Covenant of Grace. The Hab^ssines (a
kind of mongrell Christians in Africa) have an odd conceit, That the souls of
Infants departing before baptisine, are saved by ve^tue of the Eucharist
received by the mother after conception, which sanctifies the child in the
womb. Breerwoods Enquit. 257.


Verse 15. But God has called us to peace] To domestical peace, Aristot. in
Khetor.
which they that want, Plus quam dimidia beatitudinis suae part privat^ sunt,
says Aristotle. They have lost the greater half of the happiness of their
lives. This was verified in Phoroneus the Lawgiver, and Sylla the Roman
General. Bruson. l. 7. c. 32.


Verse 16. Whether thou shall save] And to have any hand in saving a soul, is
the highest honor.

Verse 17. But God has distributed] In case you should not save your
yoke fellow, yet keep your station, be content with your condition, and adorn
it 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. It is the duty of a Christian (said Luther) to believe things
invisible, to hope for things deferred, and to love God when he shows himself
contrary to us.

Verse 18. Let him not become uncircumcised] Some Jews for fear of Autiochus,
made themselves uncircum^ised, 1 Maccab. 1.16. Others for shame after they were
gained to the knowledge of Christ, as here. This was done by drawing up the
foreskin with a Chirurgions instrument: And of this wicked invention Esau is
said to be the first author and practiser. Godw. Antiq. Hebr.


Verse 19. But the keeping of the Commandment] This is that Bonum hominis, Mic.
6.8. that totum hominis, Eccles. 12.23. that one thing necessary, that is
better then sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. Mallem obedire, quam miracula facere,
says Luther, I had rather obey, then be able to do miracles.

Verse 20. Abide in the same calling] And therein learn to maintain good works,
or to be their crafts-masters, Tit 3 8, 14. (...).
to excel in their profession, Honestis functionibus praeesse, as some render
the Apostle there. These things are good and profitable unto men.

Verse 21. Use it rather] Liberty is that we lost by sin, and affect by nature.
Servus est nomen officy. A servant is not (...), one that moves absolutely of
himself, he is the masters instrument, and (...), wholly his, says Aristotle.
O that we could be Gods servants in that sort!

Verse 22. For he that is called] See a parallel place to this Jam. 1.9, 10.
Our preferment in Christ should make us hold up our heads, but not too high,
and be cheerful, Laeti simus in Domino. sed caveamus a recidivo. Bern.
but not withal scornful.

Verse 23. Ye are bought with a price] The redeemed among the Romans were to
addict themselves to the service of their Redeemers, and to observe them as
their parents all days of their lives.

Be not ye the servants of men] When they command you things forbidden by
Christ, or when they would tyrannize over your consciences, as the Jesuits
that require blind obedience. Cardinal Tolet says, Cas. Co^s^. l. 4. cap. 13.
The people may merit at Gods hand in believing an heresy, if their teacher
propound it: for their obedience is meritorious. If a priest teach it (says
Stapleton) be it true, be it false, take it as Gods oracle. If the Church
should approve and authorize Arrianisme or Pelagianisme, says Erasmus, I would
do so too. Epist. ad ^irketmer.
But so would no wise man.

Verse 24. Let every man wherein, etc.] This is the same with verse. 20. The
Apostle inculcateth it, as we not only anoint our benumbed limbs with
ointments, but also rub and chafe them in.

Verse 25. (...).
I give my judgement] The Rhemists (after Erasmus) render it counsel, and
thereupon ground a distinction between divine commands and counsels. But the
word betokens, Viriboni rectum and verum judicium, In Arist, Ethic, l. 6. c. 10.
says Magirus, the right and sound judgment of some good man, And furely if
the Apostle had no express command from Christ, neither had he any counsel
from him concerning this business.

Verse 26. I suppose therefore] This is his judgment, his vote or verdict, the
first part thereof we have here: the second v. 28. the third, v. 35.

Verse 27. Art thou bound to a wise?] A manifest metaphor from Oxen. Ovid Eipst.
Hence we call them yoke-fellows, Quam male inaequales veniunt ad aratra
juvenci, tam premitur magno etc. Dare not to yoke thy self with any untamed
heifer that bears not Christ's yoke.

Verse 28. Thou have not sinned] If any man call lawful marriage a sinful
defilement, he has the apostate Dragon dwelling in him, Epist. ad Philadelph.
Act. and Mon. fol 790.
says Ignatius. And yet the Papists teach that it is a far greater sin,
for a Priest to have a wife, then to keep many harlots.

Such shall have trouble in the flesh] Mark that he says, In the flesh, the
delights of wedlock will be allaied with troubles, to avoid surfeit. Before
marriage people promise themselves much happiness in that estate, and think
they could live together with all delight: but after, they see they are
deceived, and therefore need to go to school to learn how to behave themselves
one toward another.

But I spare you] q. d. No more of that: and yet I Will show you a way how you
may escape, or at least mitigate those troubles in the flesh.

Verse 29. This then I say brethren] The best counsel I can give you, is that
you hang loose to all these outward comforts, as having your selves but a while
to be here: You have a long task, and but a little time. God has hanged the
heaviest weights upon the weakest wiers; for upon this moment depends eternity.
Castigemus igitur mores and moras nostras: Up therefore and be doing.

The time is short] Gr. Contracted and roled up, (...).
as sails use to be by the mariners, when the ship draws night to the harbor.
Others say, it is a metaphor from a piece of cloth rolled up, only a little
left at the end: So has God rolled up all his works: only he has left a
little at the end, and then all his glory shall appear. The time is short,
says the Apostle, and you have business enough another way, therefore let
other things (as wiving and buying, etc.) pass, and mind the main. There is
water little enough to run in the right channel, therefore let none run beside.
Some that have lain a dying would have given a world for time: As I have heard
(says a reverend man) one crying day and night, Call time again. And I also
have known the like of a great Lady of this Land.

They that have wives, etc.] Not be uxorious, since they know not how soon God
may take from them, as he did from Ezekiel, the delight of their eyes, their
dearest Spouses. The Jews at this day have a custom, when a couple are married
to break the glass, wherein the bridegroom and bride drank: thereby to
admonish them of their dying condition, and that there must be a parting again
ere long. Sphinx. Philos. p 4 22.


Verse 30. And they that weep] viz. In the loss of wife or children: Let them
moderate their grief, as Abraham did in the loss of Sarah, Genesis 23.2. He came
to weep for her: where the Hebrew has one little letter extraordinary: To note
that Abraham wept but a little for her; and this, not because she was old and
over-worne (as the Rabbis give the reason) but because he had hope of a happy
resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. and because she was his still, though dead:
therefore he so often in that Chapter calls her my dead, v. 4, 11, 13, 15.

And they that rejoyce] In the marrying of wives, or birth of children. The
marriage-day is called the day of the rejoicing of a man's heart: And when
should men be merry rather then at the recovering of the lost rib? Cant. 3.11.
But he was too blame that said, He had married a wife, and therefore he could
not come. And he was a wiser man that said, Martial.
Vxori nubere nolo meae.

As if they possessed not] mind earthly things we must, as if we minded them
not: As a man may hear a tale, and have his mind elsewhere: or as a man that
baits at an Inn, his mind is somewhere else. A right believer (says one)
goes through the world, Mr Ward.
as a man whose mind is in a deep study: or as one that has special haste of
some weighty business. Rebus non me trado, sed commodo, says Seneca. Be not
wholly dulled or drowned in the world: look at it out of the eyes end only,
lest as the Serpent Scytale, it be witch us with it is beautiful colors, and
sting us to death.

Verse 31. As not abusing it] Not shooting our affections over-far into it.
David was as a weaned child, Paul as a crucified man. If Jobs heart had not
been weaned from the world, when as yet he wallowed in worldly wealth, he could
not have borne so bravely the ruin of so rich a state without repining. The
devil has no way to entangle us, but to say, as he did to Christ, Mitte te
deorsum, Cast thy self down, pitch upon the bait, eat and devour hook and all.

For the fashion this world] The word signifies a mathematical figure, (...).
which is a mere notion, and nothing in substance. So Psalm. 39.6. Surely every
man walks in a vain shadow, he leads an imaginary life, rather then a life
it self. The pomp of this world is but a fantasy, Act. 25.23. (See the Note
there.) The glory of it, an opinion. The word here used intimates, that there
is nothing of any firmness of solid consistency in the creature. It is but a
surface, outside, empty promise: all the beauty of it is but skin-deep.

Passes away] Temporals are as transitory, as a hasty headlong torrent. The
posting Sun of all worldly pleasure, after a short gleam of vain glistering,
sets in the ocean of endless sorrow. In the Popes inthromzation, before he is
set in his chair, and puts on his triple-crown, a piece of tow, or wad of straw
is set on fire before him, and one appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi,
The glory of this world is but a blaze. (...). Falla, transversum agit Bud.
It is indeed an Ignis fatuus, a walking fire that leads men into brakes and
ditches. And so some render this text. The Fashion or hue of this world
deceives, misleadeth, carries men another way, out of their way. For of the
world we may say as Plutarch says of Herodotus. (...).
Both the words and shows of it are full of fraud. Nec tantum fallacia sunt
quia dubia (says Lactantius) sed and insidiosa, quia dulciae.

Verse 32. Without carefulnesse] That unavoidably attends the
marriage-estate, Genesis 30.30.1 Tim. 5.8.

Verse 33. (...).
Cares how he may please] He takes extraordinary care to please, and so does
she, v. 34. The word implies a dividing of the mind into diverse thoughts,
casting this way and that way, and every way how to give best content. Thus an
happy study.

Verse 34. Cares for the things] Expeditius vacat.

Holy both in body and spirit] For contemplative wickedness, and mental
uncleanness also greatly displeases God. In declam.
Incesta est, and sine stupro, quae stuprum cupit, says Seneca, And, Quae quia
non licuit non facit, illa facit, says Ovid. The very desire to do evil, is to
do evil. The Romans punished one of their vestall virgins for uttering this
verse only,

Foelices nuptae! moriar ni nubere dulce est.

Oh! it is a brave thing to be married.

How she may please her busband] As Sarah did Abraham, calling him Lord, as
Rebecca did Isaac, by providing him the meat that he loved, as Livia did
Augustus, by observing his disposition, and drawing evenly with him, being a
piece so just cut for him, as answered him rightly in every joint.

Verse 35. That you may attend, etc.] Gr. (...).
That you may sit close to him, as Mary did, Luke 10.40. whilst Martha was
distracted about much service. Let every man bend himself to banish and beat
away distractions,

Nam neque chorda sonum reddit, quem vult manus and men's Poscentique gravem
persaepe remittit acutum. Hor. de art. poet.


Verse 36. If she pass the flower] Childehood is counted the flower of age: so
long the Apostle would have marriage forborne. While the flower of the plant
sprouteth, the seed is green, unfit to be sown.

Verse 37. And has so decreed] Reserving still a liberty of doing otherwise,
if need require: which Popish votaries do not.

Verse 38. Does better] 1. For the better waiting upon Gods work without
distraction. 2. For the better bearing of persecution.

Verse 39. Secundas nupti^s pro fornicationibus babent. Aug.
She is at liberty] The Montunists therefore (and with them Tertullian in his
old age) were in an error, that condemned second marriage, and said it was no
better then fornication. Howbeit that of Hierome is not to be disliked. Think
daily of death; and that will be enough to forbid the banes of second marriage.

Verse 40. But she is happier] i. e. She shall live more at ease, and have
less to care for. And we should contract our cares into as narrow a compass
as we can, in hard times, especially.

CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. Now as touching things]
ANother case that they had propounded to him in their Letter, Chap. 7.1.

We know] So all pretend. Sed nummos habuerunt Athenienses ad numerandum, and
scientiam ad sciendum.

That we all have knowledge] But that is not sufficient, unless we have love
too. There be many things concur to the making up of a good work, a lawful
action.

Knowledge puffs up] Swelling us above measure, unless humility laid on as a
weight, keep us down, and charity regulate our knowledge for the good of
others. Knowledge without love is as rain in the middle region. But how foolish
were they of whom ^ustin makes mention that neglected the means of knowledge,
because knowledge puffs up, and so would be ignorant, that they might be
humble, and want knowledge that they might want pride? This was to be like
Democritus who plucked out his eyes, to avoid the danger of uncleannes.

Verse 2. If any man think] This one thing I know, that I know nothing, said
Socrates. Neither know I this yet, that I know nothing, says another. Though I
know my self ignorant of many things (says a third) Yet I dare boldly profess
with Origin, Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, I am not ignorant that I am ignorant.
The greatest part of our knowledge is but the least part of our ignorance. And
yet how apt are we to think we know all that is knowable: as in Alcibiades his
Army all would be leaders, none learners. Epicurus said, that he was the first
man that ever discovered truth, and yet in many things he was more blind then
a Beetle. Aratus the Astrologer vaunted, Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 16.
that he had counted the stars, and written of them all. Hoc ego primus vidi,
said Zabarell. And Laurentius Valla boasted, that there was no. Logic worthy
to be read but his, which therefore he called, Joh. Manl ^ae. com.
Logicans Laurentinam.

Verse 3. But if any man love God] And his neighbor for Gods sake; his friends
in God, his foes for God.

The same is known of him] That is, Knows him savingly, Gal. 4 9. is taught of
God, 1 Thessalonians. 4 9. who only gives true wisdom, Jam. 1.5.

Verse 4. Is nothing in the world] A mere fiction it is, that the Idol
represents, a brat of man's brain.

None other God but one] This the wiser Heathen also acknowledged, and for
opposing the multitude of gods Socrates suffered. Cicero in his books of the
Nature of the gods, takes pains to show the vanity of Heathen Deities. And
after all wishes that he were as well able to find out the true God, as to
discover the false.

Verse 5. That are called gods] Hesiod reckons up thirty thousand of them that
were in his time. (...).
What an army may we think there were of them in after-ages?

As there be gods many] The Serpents Grammar first taught, Deum pluraliter
declinare, Ye shall be as gods, Genesis 3. says Damianus.

And Lords many] Demy-gods, Heroes whose images were worshipped. Ninus was the
first that made an Image for his Father Belus, and all that came to see it were
pardoned for all their offenses: whence in time that Image came to be
worshipped. But they did a very ill office that first brought in Images, says
Varro (as Calvin cites his words) for they increased error, and took away
fear. And Plutarch says, It is sacrilege to worship by images.

Verse 6. But to us there is but one God] Be the gods of the Heathen
good-fellows (says one) the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his
glory with another.

Of whom are all things, and we for him] So that God is the first cause, and
the last end of all: which two are the properties of the chief good.

Verse 7. Unto this hour] Though they have been better taught and clearly
convinced, yet they stiffly retain, at least some tincture of their old odd
superstitious conceits. Me ex ca opinione, etc. De not. deor l. 3.
No man's speech, whether he be learned or unlearned (says Cicero) shall ever
persuade me from that opinion which I have taken up from mine ancestors
concerning the worship of the immortal gods.

Their conscience being weak] That is, not rightly informed of the true nature
of things indifferent.

Is defiled] By doing what they doubt of.

Verse 8. But meat commends us not] This is another objection: Meat is
indifferent. The Apostle answers,

Verse 9. True, it is indifferent, so it prove not a stumbling block to the
unresolved. For in such a case thou must suspend thy liberty, and forbear to
exercise it.

Verse 10. Be emboldened] This is, Proficere in pejus, aedificare in gehennam,
as Tertullian has it. Wh^^es men look upon party-colored objects, they bring
forth spotted fruits, as Labans sheep did.

Verse 11. Thy weak brother perish] Revolt to Paganism, or at least pollute
his conscience with mortal sin, which shall be set upon thy score. And have
thou not sins enough of thine own to answer for?

Verse 12. (...).
And wound their weak consciences] Gr. Beat upon it to make it sound heavily as
a shaulm. Sin is as a stroke upon the heart, 2 Samuel 24.10.

Ye sin against Christ] Who holds himself highly concerned in the misusages
of his servants. It is an idle misprision, to sever the sense of an injury done
to any of the members, from the head. Joah had slain Abner and Amasa. David
appropriates it: Thou know (says he to Solomon) what Joab did to me. Tho
arraignment of mean malefactors ^uns in the style of wrong to the Kings Crown
and dignity. So here.

Verse 13. While the world standeth] We must stand unchangeably resolved,
neither to give offense carelessly, nor to take offense causlesly.

CHAP. IX. Verse 1. Am I not an Apostle. etc.]
THat is to say, Do I require you to do any thing more, then I my self do
daily, in parting with my proper rights? All things in a Minister should be
exemplary, and for imitation, Tit. 2.7. In all things show thy self a pattern of
good works. (...).
The word there used signifies a thing that makes the stamp on the coin, or
the mould whereinto the vessel is cast and shaped.

Have I not seen the Lord?] viz. In visions and ecstasies. The false Apostles
reported him no Apostle, because he had not conversed with Christ in the flesh.
It is ordinary with seducers to detract from the truths Champions, that they
may be the better esteemed of. Thus Bellarmine rejects the Fathers and others
that make not for him, as heretics. To Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius and
Luther (says he) I answer, Omnes manifesti haeretici sunt, De Christo lib. 1.
cap. 9.
they are all manifest heretics. So Arminius his course was to detract from
the authority and fame of Calvin, Zanchi, Beza, Martyr, Synol. Dordeo. (...).
etc. that he might build himself upon better men's ruins. The Jesuits speak
most basely of St Paul, as making much against many of their tenets: and stick
not to teach in their Pulpits, That he was not secure of his preaching, but by
conference with St Peter: Nor that he durst publish his Epistles, till St Peter
had allowed them. Spec Europ.


Verse 2. The seal of mine Apostleship] See the like, Jer. 23, 22. and Mat.
21.28. where our Savior proves John Baptists Ministry to be from heaven, by
the success.

Verse 3. Mine answer to them, etc.] Or, this is mine Apology to those that
cavil and quarrel my calling, viz. That I have converted you and others: a
real proof, an odular demonstration. So 2 Cor. 13.3-5.

Verse 4. To eat and to drink] At the Churches charge: so that we do it
moderately without excess, as Josiah did, and it went well with him, Jer.
22.15.

Verse 5. To lead about a sister] At the Churches charge likewise. The Papists
that deny the lawfulness of Ministers marriage, are condemned and cursed by
their own Canon Law. Distinct. 29. and 31. See Acts and Monuments, folio 1008.
Paphnutius opposed this proposition in the Nicene Council, and prevailed. Hist
trip. l. 2. c. 14.


Verse 6. To forbear working] At our trade? Yes, or else I should easily be of
Melancthons mind, who when one had said of the Ministry, that it was the Art
of Arts, and the science of sciences; if he had added (said Melancth^n) that it
is the misery of miseries, Joh. Manl. loc. com 471.
he had hit the nail on the head.

Verse 7. Who goes a warfare, etc.] Ministers as they should be valiant as
soldiers, diligent as husbandmen, vigilant as shepherds ( Pastor, arator,
aeques, etc.) so should they live of their labor, as every tinker and tapster
does. It Is a sign of gasping devotion, when men are so close-handed to their
Ministers, whose very cold water goes not unrewarded.

Verse 8. Or says not the law] Not of Nations only, as verse. 7. but of God
expressly, Verbis non solum disertis, sod and exertis?

Verse 9. Does God take care for Oxen?] He does doubtless, Jon. 4.11. he
preserves man and beast; He hears the young ravens that cry to him only by
implication. Does he not then much more take care for men, for Ministers?

Verse 10. Should plow in hope] Of Maintaining his life by his labor, which is
therefore called she life of our hands, because it is upheld by the labor of
our hands, Ludit, qui sterili semina mandat humo. Propert.


Verse 11. Is it a great thing, etc.] Do not we give you gold for brass? Cast
we not pearls before you? Alexander the great gave Aristotle for his book de
Natura Animali^m 800. talents, which is 800000 Crowns at least. Theodorus Gaza
translated that book into Latin, and dedicated it to Pope Sixtus. The Pope
asked him, Interrogavit asinus pa^a quanti ornatus constaret? etc Joh. Man^
loc. com. 572.
how much the rich outside of the book stood him in: Gaza answered, forty
crowns. Those forty crowns he commanded to be repaid him, and so sent him away
without any reward for so precious a piece of work. How well might the poor old
Grecian sit and sing.

Heu male nunc arts miseras haec saecula tractant, Spes nulla ulterior, etc.
Juven Satyr. 7.


Verse 12. If others be partakers] If your ordinary Pastors etc. For the false
Apostles preached gratis (as some gather out of 2 Cor. 11.12.) partly to draw
more Disciples, and partly to bring an odium upon the Apostle, if he should not
do the like.

Verse 13. Live of the things of, etc.] Yea they lived plentifully and richly,
as appears by the liberal gift of those Levites for Passeover-offerings, 2 Chronicles. 35.9.

Verse 14. Even so has the Lord] Note that [so] says one: that is, As they of
old lived at the Altar by tithes: so Ministers now. How else will men satisfy
their consciences in the particular quantity they must bestow upon the
Ministers? The Scripture speaks only of the tenth part.

Verse 15. Better for me to die] To be hunger-starved then to do any thing to
the prejudice of the Gospel. Affliction is to be chosen rather then sin, Job
36.21. Quas non oportet mortes praeeligere, Epist. 3.
says Zuinglius. What death should not a man choose, nay what hell rather then
to sin against his conscience? Daniel those rather to be cast into the Lions
den, then to bear about that lion in his own bosom. The Primitive Christians
thought it far better to be thrown to lions without, then to be left to lusts
within. Ad leonem m^^^^ ^uam lenone^. 1 citul.
Potius in ardentem rogum insiluero, quam ullum peccatum in Deum commisero,
said a good man once. I will rather leap into a bonefire, then wilfully commit
any wickedness. The Mouse of Armenia will rather die then be defiled with any
filth. Pintus in Dan. ^.
If her hole be besmeared with dirt, she will rather choose to perish with
hunger then be polluted. Such was Paul here, and such we ought all to be.

Verse 16. I have nothing to glory of] My glorying is, that I preach it gratis,
and thereby stop an open mouth, a Cor. 12.16, 17, 18. give them the lie that
falsely accuse me, that I make a prize of you.

Yea woe is unto me] It was death for the High Priest to enter the Tabernacle
without his bells. Preach man, preach; thou will be damned else, said one to his
friend. Be instant, or stand over the work, in season, out of season. See
Jacobs diligence, genesis 31.40. (...).
And Paul's, Act. 20.20.

Verse 17. I have a reward] Yet not earned, but of free grace, God crowning his
own works in us. He was a proud Papist that said, Coelum gratis non accipiam,
V^ga.
I will not have heaven for naught. And he another, that said, Opera bona
m^r^atura regni coelest is, Good works are the price of heaven. Bellarm.
God will cast all such merit-merchants out of his Temple.

But if against my will] Virtus nolentium, nulla est. God will strain upon no
man. All his servants are a free people, Psalm. 110.3. All his soldiers
volunteers. They flee to their colors, as the Doves to their windows, Isa.
60.8.

Verse 18. What is my reward then?] My merces mundi, all that I have here.

That I abuse not] i. e. M^lch Adam. page 359.
That I make no indiscreet use of it. Non opes, non gloriam, non voluptates
quaesivi (said holy Melancthon) Hanc conscientiam aufero, quocunque, discedo. I
never sought wealth, honor, nor pleasure. This my conscience tells me, whatever
becomes of me.

Verse 19. (...) quia (...).
That I may gain the more] The Greek word for gain, signifies withal the joy
and delight of the heart in gaining. It signifies also craft or guile, such as
is that of the fox: which when he is very hungry after prey, and can find
none; he lies down and feigneth himself to be a dead carcass, and so the
fowls fall upon him, and then he catches them. So must a Minister deny himself
to gain his hearers.

Verse 20. And unto the Jews, etc.] Not in conforming to their impieties: but
1. In the use of things indifferent. 2. In merciful compassion toward them.

To them that are under the law] Though not Jews borne, yet proselytes, as the
Ethiopian Eunuch, Cornelius, etc.

Verse 21. Naz.
That I might gain them] A metaphor from merchants, Qui (...), Who are never
weary of taking money. St Paul harps much upon this string, out of a strong
desire of winning souls to God. Ministers must turn themselves into all shapes
and fashions both of spirit and speech to gain souls to God.

Verse 22. To the weak] Not pressing upon them the austerities of religion, but
condescending and complying with them, as far as I could with a good conscience.

That I might save some] This is the highest honor in the world, to have any
hand in the saving of souls. Let all of any ability put forth themselves
hereunto: and if they have not fine manchet, yet give the poor people barley
bread, Act. and Mon, 1453.
or whatsoever else the Lord has committed unto them, as Bucer bad Bradford.

Verse 23. That I might be partaker] i. e. That I might be saved together with
you. For the bell may call men to the Church, though it self never enter. The
field may be well sowed with a dirty hand; the Well yield excellent water,
though it have much mud. Noah's builders were drowned: and the sign that
tells the passenger there is wholesome diet, or warm lodging within, may it
self remain in the storms without. See 1 Timothy 4.16. Nihil turpius est
Peripatetico claudo.

Verse 24. Know ye not] The Apostle argues from their profane sports, yet
approves them not: As neither does the Lord patronize U^ury, Mat. 25, 27.
Injustice, Luk 16.1. Theft, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. Dancing, Mat. 11.17.

So run that ye may obtain] Here is the race, (...).
but above the Crown, said Ignatius to Polycarp. Run to get the race, said Mr
Bradford to his fellow sufferers: you are almost at your journeys end. I doubt
not but our Father will with us send to you also, Act and Mon. fol. 1495.
as he did to Elias, a fiery charet to convey us into his Kingdom. Let us
therefore not be dismayed to leave our cloak behindeus, that is, our bodies to
ashes.

Verse 25. Is temperate in all things] These luxurious Corinthians were much
addicted to their belly: he calls them therefore to temperance. ^ll does it
become a servant of the highest, to be a slave to his palate, to have animum in
patinis and calicibus, as the Sybarites. A man may eat that on earth, that he
must digest in hell. Aug.


Verse 26. Not as uncertainly] For, 1. I forget those things that are behind,
all worldly things, I set those by. 2. I have Oculum ad me^^m (which was
Ludovicus Vives his Motto) an eye upon the mark. 3. I strain and stretch toward
it. See all these Phil. 3.13, 14.

That beats the air] As young Fencers use to do, but I beat mine adversary.

Verse 27. My body] My body of sin in the whole man, not mine outward man
only. If we find the devil practicing upon the flesh, the way is, not to
revile the devil, but to beat the flesh.

A castaway] Cast out of heaven, as they were out of the fencing-schools, that
were either cross or cowardly.

CHAP. X. Verse 1. I would not that ye should]
HIstoriae sidae monitrices, Buchole.
says one. There is very good use to be made of other men's examples. Historia
has it is name, says Plato, of stopping the flux of errors and evil manners.
For muta to nomine de to Fabula narratur. (...) in Crat.
What better effects sin has produced in some man, it may in any man. Lege
igitur historiam, ne sias historia.

Verse 2. And were all baptized] And yet were rooted out and rejected. Baptism
saves; not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but, etc. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Verse 3. And did all eat] They fed upon Sacraments, and yet died in Gods
displeasure. The carcass of the Sacrament cannot give life, but the soul of it,
which is the thing represented.

Verse 4. The same spiritual drink] Here was no dry communion.

That spiritual rock that followed them] The waters of the rock, See Psa, 195
41 Deuteronomy 9 21.
the virtue and benefit went along with them: so should the efficacy of the
Lords Supper with us. We should walk in the strength of it, as Eliah did of his
cake.

Verse 5. They were overthrown] They died with the Sacramental meat in their
mouths: our privileges excuse us not, but aggravate our enormities.

Verse 6. Were our examples] Worthily are they made examples that will not take
them. Alterius perditio tua sit cauti^. The destruction of others should be a
terror to us, that we may wash our feet in the blood of the wicked, Psalm.
52.6. It is a just presage and desert of ruin, not to be warned.

As they also lusted] As at Kibroth hattaavah, where by a hasty testament they
bequeathed a new name to the place of their burial.

Verse 7. And rose up to play] Now if they were so cheared and strengthened by
these murdering morsels, should not we be made active and abundant in Gods
Word by the dainties of Gods Table? Knew stub. on Com.7.


Verse 8. And fell in one day] The Apostle instead of the cloak of heat of
youth, puts upon fornication a bloody cloak, bathed in the blood of twenty
three thousand.

Three and twenty thousand] Moses mentions 24000. whereof one thousand were the
chief Princes, the others inferiors, provoked to sin by their example. But why
does the Apostle insist in the special punishment of the people? Jun paral
lib. 2. p. 37.
To show (says learned Junius) how frigid and insufficient their excuse is,
that pretend for their sins, the examples of their superiors.

Verse 9. Neither let us tempt] By provoking him to jealousy, as verse. 22.
especially by Idolatry, that Land-desolating sin.

Verse 10. As some of them also] viz. Numb. 14. And God said Amen to it, verse.
28. May he not justly say the same to our detestable God-damn-me's? As truly as
I live, says the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you.

Verse 11. For our admonition] God hangs up some, as it were in gibbets, for
public ex^mple. See ver. 6.

Upon whom the ends, etc.] These then are the last and worst days, the very
lees and dregs of time. Now the worse the times are, the better we should be:
and the rather, because an end of all things is at hand.

Verse 12. That thinks he stands] If he do but think so, if he be no more then
a seemer, he will fall at length into hell mouth. A man may live by a form, but
he cannot die by a form. Therefore rather seek to be good, then seem to be so.

Verse 13. But such as is common] Such as is humane, i. e. (...)
Either such as is incident to men, as men. Job 5 6. Or such as men may well
bear without buckling under it: Or such as comes from men, not from devils: Ye
wrestle against flesh and blood, etc. Or you are yet only allured to idolatry,
not forced by persecution. You gratify your idolatrous acquaintance with your
presence at their Idol feasts; you are tempted and soon taken.

But God is faithfull] When Mr Latimer stood at the stake, Act. and Mon. fol.
1579.
and the tormentours about to set fire to him and Ridley, he lifted up his eyes
toward heaven with an amiable and comfortable countenance, saying these words,
Fidelis est Deus, etc. Ridley also at the stake, with a wondrous cheatfull
look ran to Latimer, embraced and kisted, and as they that stood near reported,
Ibid. 1605.
comforted him, saying, Be of good heart, brother. God will either assuage the
fury of the flame, or else will strengthen us to abide it.

But will with the temptation] He proportioneth the burden to the back, and the
stroke to the strength of him that bears it. I thank God, said Mr Bradford,
my common disease (which was a rheum with a feebleness of stomach) does less
trouble me then when I was out of prison, which does teach me the merciful
providence of God toward me. Ibid. 1459.


Verse 14. Flee from Idolatry] He calls their sitting at the Idols-feasts,
though without intent of honoring the Idol, by the name of Idolatry: because.
1. Hereby they yielded a tacit consent to that sin. 2. Petty matters pave a
causey for the greater.

Verse 13. I speak as to wise men] i. e. Well skilled in the doctrine of the
Sacraments: from one of which I am about to argue. Piscator after he had read
some of the Fathers, gave over for this reason, because scarce any of them did
rightly understand the use and efficacy of baptism.

Verse 16. The cup of blessing] Not the Chalice, but the common cup. Die de
ratione stud^ Theol. page 116.
Colvin chose rather to leave Geneva, then to use unleavened bread or
water-cakes at the Lords Supper. We may not symbolize with Idolaters.

Is it not the communion] Does it not signify and set forth, yea, as an
instrument, effect and exhibit this communion?

Verse 17. And one body] By the force of faith and love, Can. 6.9. My dove is
but one: the daughters saw her, and blessed her. No such oneness, entirenesse
any where as among the Saints. Other societies are but as the clay in the toes
of Nebuchadnezzars image, they may cleave together, but not incorporate one
into another.

Verse 18. Are not they which eat, etc.] See Levit. 7.15. Hence he infers that
these Corinthians also eating of the Idols-sacrifices, were defiled with
idolatry: a pari.

Verse 19. What say I then?] He prevents a mistake. See cha. 8.4. Ministers
must in their discourses meet with all objections as much as may be.

Verse 20. They sacrifice to devils] A good intention then excuses not. The
Gentiles thought they had sacrificed to God. So do the Papists, who yet worship
devils, whiles they worship idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone,
Revel. 9.20. The devil is (...), says Synesius an Idol-lover. In epist.


Verse 21. partakers of the Lords table] Name and thing. The Popish opinion of
Mass was, that it might not be celebrated, but upon an altar, or at least upon
a superaltare, Act. and Mon. fol. 1111. Ibid. 1326.
which must have it is prints and carects, or else the thing was not thought to
be lawfully done. Our Communion Table they called an oyster-board.

And the table of devils] Redwald King of East Saxons had in the same Church
one alter for Christian Religion, Camden.
and another for sacrifice to devils.

Verse 22. Do we provoke the Lord] As Caligula that dared his Jove to a duel:
As the raging Turk at the last assault of Scodra, most horribly blaspheming
God. Tork. bist. fol. 423. Psalm. 90.11.
But who knows the power of his anger? It is such as none can avert or avoid,
avoid or abide.

Verse 23. Bern.
All things are not expedient] An liceat, an deceat, an expediat, are three
most needful questions. Things lawful in themselves may be unseemly for our
state and calling; unbehovefull also to the benefit of others. Think unlawful
for thee whatsoever implies either inexpediency or indecency.

Verse 24. Let no man seek his own] Self miscarries us all, and makes us
eccentrick in our motions, nothing more.

Verse 25. Whatsoever is sold etc.] A portion of the consecrated flesh was
usually sold by (...) Pr^ests, who made their markets of it, as Aug^stine upon
the Romans testifies.

Verse 26. For the earth is the Lords] God, of his bounty, spreads a Table for
all: Make no scruple therefore, eat freely.

Verse 27. And ye be disposed to go] Our Savior when he saw that John's
austerity was censured, took his liberty in the use of creatures, and
convenient company-keeping, Luke 7.33, 34. I do not find where ever he was
bidden to any table and refused. Not for the pleasure of the dishes, but for
the benefit of so winning a conversation.

Verse 28. The earth is the Lords] Therefore in case of scandal abstain. Why
should thou use this creature, as if there were no more but this? Suspend thy
liberty: Have not thou all the world before thee?

Verse 29. Why is my liberty judged] As a profane license. We should be shie of
the very sh^ws and shadows of sin, Quiequid fuerit male color atum, as Bernard
has it: if a thing look but ill favored, abstain from it.

Verse 30. (...).
For if I by grace] Or, By thanksgiving. The same Greek word signifies both: to
teach us, that a grateful man is a gracious man. The unthankful and the evil
are set together as the same, Luke 6.33. God is kind to the unthankful and to
the evil.

Verse 31. Whether therefore ye eat, etc.] Of a reverend Scotch Divine it is
said, That He did even eat and drink and sleep eternal life. These common
actions also are steps in our Christian walking, despise them not therefore,
but refer them to that supreme scope. (...). Xenoph. Drus. Apophil.
Socrates even in his recreations, profited his companions no less then if he
had been reading Lectures to them. Plato and Xenophon thought it fit and
profitable that men's speeches at meals should be written. Quicquid agas propter
Deum agas, says one. Propter te Domine, propter te, said another.

Verse 32. Give none offence] This is another end we should aim at, the
edification of others. Finibus, non officys a vitys, discernuntur virtutes.
Augustine.
Two things make a good Christian, good actions, and good aims.

Verse 33. Not seeking mine own profit] This, says Chrysostom, is the most
perfect Canon of Christianity, the top-gallant of true religion.

CHAP. XI. Verse 1. Be ye followers of me]
THis verse properly belongs to the former Chapter. The distinguishing of the
books of Scripture into Chapters is not very ancient. But that of verses was
devised and done by Robert Stephens, Pio quidem at tumultuario studio (as one
says well) with a good intent, Soult^t.
but with no great skill, as appears here and in diverse other places. The
Apostle chap. 10.33. had showed his own practice: here he calls upon them to do
accordingly. As the Ox follows the herd, Sicut bos armenta, sic ego bonos
viros, etc. Cic, ad Attic.
so will I follow good men, Etiamsi ruant, says Cicero, although they do
amiss. This was more then St Paul desires: Be ye followers of me, says he:
but only so far as I am of Christ, not an inch further.

Verse 2. And keep the ordinances] Gr. the traditions or doctrines by word of
mouth. These are 1. Dogmaticall, concerning faith and practice, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
2. Rituall, Selater, in lo.
and these again are 1. Perpetual, as that of the manner of administering the
two Sacraments. 2. Temporary, as that of abstaining from certain meats, Act.
15.28, 29. And those other pertaining to the observing of external order and
decency in Church Assemblies. And of these the Apostle here speaks.

Verse 3. The head of the woman is man] Were it not an ill sight to see the
shoulders above the head, the woman usurp authority over the man? A prudent
wife commands her husband by obeying, (...). 1 Timothy 1.1^.
as did Livia.

Verse 4. Dishonors his head] As they accounted it then and there. In other
places it is otherwise. The French preach covered. B^unts voyage, p. 88.
The Turks neither kneel nor uncover the head at public prayers, as holding
those postures unmanly. Several countries have their several customs.
Basiliades Duke of Muscovia showed himself a tyrant in nailing an Ambassadors
hat to his head, for not uncovering it before him.

Verse 5. Praying or prophecying] That is, joining with the man that prays or
prophecieth, and going along with, him in her heart. Thus the King and all
Israel with him offered Sacrifice before the Lord, 1 Kin. 8, 62. And thus the
unlearned sey, Amen, 1 Cor. 14.16. See the Note on Romans 16.1.

Verse 6. For a woman to be shore] Our Hic-muliers hold it now no shame. If
Henry the sixth had seen such creatures, he would have cried out, as once he
did at the sight of naked breasts, Daniels hist. p. 198.
Fie, fie, Ladies, insooth you are too blame, etc.

Verse 7. He is the image and glory of God,] Even as an image in the glass
does look toward us, from whom it is reflected: So (says one) does Gods image
in us make the eyes of our minds view him the author of it in us. Bayns
letters.
And as the eye becomes one with that which it sees, and is after a sort in
that light it beholds: so are we by the vision of God, which is begun in us,
one with him and in him.

The woman is the glory of the man] Either because he may glory in her, if she
be good: or because she is to honor him, and give glory to him.

Verse 8. But the woman of the man] Of a bone she was made, and but one bone,
N^ esset ossea, says a Divine: A bone of the side it was, Vitia Palatina.
not of the head (she is not to be his mistress) nor of the foot (she is not
to be his handmaid) but of the side, to show that she is a companion to her
husband. A bone from under the arm, to mind the man of protection and defense
to the woman. A bone not far from his heart, to mind him of dilection and
love to the woman. A bone from the left side, to put the woman in mind, that
by reason of her frailty and infirmity, she stands in need of both the one and
the other from her husband.

Verse 9. For the woman] sc. To serve her: unless it be some women, As
Artemisia, Zenobla, blandena. Anna Atestina Guisiorum and Memorous. parens.
Thuan. bi^t l. 124. Numb. 5.18.
specially called to, and qualified for government. Amongst whom Queen
Elizabeth that female-glory is famous: Of whom a great French Duchess said,
That she was, Gloriosissima, and omnium quae unquam sceptrum gesserunt
foelicissima faemina, Besides her Sex, there was nothing in her woman-like or
weak.

Verse 10. To have power] That is, a veil, called in Hebrew Radid, of Radad to
beat rule. And indeed what was this subjection to the husband, but a kind of
power and protection derived to the wife, in respect of her fromer estate?

Because of the Angels] Present in the Assemblies of the Saints. This was set
forth of old by the hangings of the Tabernacle wrought with Cherubims within
and without. Others understand this Text of Ministers, frequently called
Angels, Hag. 1.12, 13. Revel. 2. and 3. Judge. 2.1. (that Angel is thought to be
Phintas) Eccles. 5.6. Neither say thou before the Angel (i. e. before the Lords
Priest) it was an error.

Verse 11. Nevertheless neither is] This is added for the woman's comfort.
There must be all mutual respects and melting-heartednesse betwixt married
couples, which being preserved fresh and fruitful, will ^fi^tely sweeten and
beautify the marriage-estate. Love is a quom that must be exchanged betwixt
them, and returned in kind. Husbands love your wives, Colos. 3.16. He says
not, Rule over your wives, as he had said, Wives submit your selves to your
husbands, but Love your wives; yea, let all your things be done in love: for
neither is the man without the woman; he is not complete without her, he wants
a piece of himself: neither is the woman without the man, she cannot subsist
without him, as the Vine cannot without a supporter. The rib can challenge no
more of her, then the earth can of him, etc.

Verse 12. But all things of God] God consulted not with man to make him happy
(says one.) As he was ignorant while himself was made, so did he not know
while a second self was made out of him: Both, that the comfort might be the
greater then was expected; as also, that he might not upbraid his wife with any
great dependence or obligation, he neither willing the work, nor suffering any
pain to have it done.

Verse 13. Judge in your selves] All Christ's sheep are rational, able to
discern of things that differ, having their senses thereunto exercised, Heb.
5.14. But some sins are condemned by common sense, as here: and religion is
founded upon so good reason, that though God had not commanded it, yet it had
been our wisest way to have chosen it. But lust does often so bleer the
understanding, that a man shall think he has reason to be mad, and that there
is great sense in sinning.

Verse 14. That if a man have long hair] Bushes of vanity, which they will
never part with (said Marbury) until the devil put a caudle into the bush. But
our Gallants object, That the Apostle here intends such hair as is as long as
women's hair. Whereunto we answer. That Homer calls the Greeks hair-nourishing
men, who yet did not wear their hair long as women. (...) Home^
How Cromwell handled the shag-haired ruffian; See Acts and Monuments of the
Church, folio 1083. How God has punished this unnatural sin by that loathsome
and horrible disease in the hair, called Plica Polonica; See Hercules de
Saxonia: And out of him Mr Bolion in his four last things, page 40. It begun
first (says he) not many years ago in Poland: It is now entered into many
parts of Germany. And methinks our monstrous fashionists both male and female,
the one for nourishing their horrid bushes of vanity: the other for their most
unnatural and cursed cutting their hair, should every hour fear and tremble,
lest they should bring it upon their own heads, and amongst us in this kingdom.
Daniels Hist: 67.
Our henry 1. repressed the wearing of long hair: which though it were a gaiety
of no charge, yet for the undecency thereof, he reformed it, and all other
dissoluteness. See Mr Prins Vnlovelinesse of love-locks.

Verse 15. Her hair is given her] Now it is a vile thing to go against nature.
Cyprian and Austin say, That garish apparel is worse then whoredom: because
whoredom only corrupts chastity, but this corrupts nature.

Verse 16. Seem to be contentious] Adectore glori^s^, and Pastore contentioso,
and inutilibus quaestionibus, liberet Ecclesiam suam Dominus, said Luther. From
a vainglorious Doctor, from a contentious Pastor, and from endless and
needless controversies, the good Lord deliver his Church.

We have no such custome] viz. To strive about trifles, but to submit to our
teachers, Bifield on 1 Pet. 3.
Heb. 13.17. It is a vile thing, says one, to vex our Ministers by our
obstinacy; yea, though they were not able to make so full demonstration, yet
when they reprove such things, out of a spiritual j^alousie and fear that they
corrupt the peoples hearts, they are to be heard and obeyed.

Verse 17. I praise you not] q. d. I discommend and dispraise you. The
Corinthians were in many things faulty and blameworthy. St Paul deals plainly
and freely with them, and would not therefore take their offered kindness, 2
Cor. 12. lest he should be engaged to them, and by receiving a courtesy, fell
his liberty.

Verse 18. (...)
There be divisions] Gr. Schisms, rents, yea, and that about the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper (that bond of love) through Satan's malice. Now there can be no
greater sin committed, says Chrysostom, Hom. 11. ad Ephesians. Lib. de unitate
Ecclesie Oecol. ad frat. in Suevia
then to break the peace of the Church. Cyprian says, It is an inexpiable
blemish, such as cannot be washed ost with the blood of martyrdom. The error
of it may be pardoned (says Oecolampadius in his Epistle to the Lutherans of
Suevia) so there be faith in Christ Jesus: but the discord we cannot expiate,
though we should lay down our lives to do it.

Verse 19. There must be heresi^s] Therefore much more schisms, which also,
for most part, do degenerate into heresies; as an old Serpent into a Dragon. In
the time of Pope Clement the fifth, Frederick King of Sicily was so offended at
the evil government of the Church, that he began to question the truth of the
Christian religion. But Arnoldus de villa nova confirmed and settled him by this
and such like places of Scripture, Offenses must come, there must be heresies,
etc. God having so decreed and foretold it.

May be made manifest] As they are now, if ever, in these shedding and
discriminating times. So in the Palatinase they fell to Popery, as fast as
leaves in Autumn.

Verse 20. This is not to cat, etc.] When the Lords Supper therefore is not
rightly administered, it is no longer his; especially if the substantials
thereof be omitted. As in those Sacrifices, Hos. 9 4. Their bread for their
soul shall not come into the house of the Lord; that is, the bread for their
natural sustenance. He speaks of that meat offering, Levit. 2.5. appointed for
a spiritual use, yet called the bread for their life or livelihood; because
God esteemed it no other then common meat. So Jer. 7.21. in scorn he calls their
sacrifice, flesh, etc.

Verse 21. Every one taketh] Eats and communicates with those o^ his own
sect and faction only, not staying for others. Such among the Philippians were
those of the concision, Chap. 3.2. that made divisions, and cut the Church into
little pieces and sucking Congregations, making separation.

Verse 22. What? Have ye not houses] Here he abolisheth their love feasts, for
the disorder that fell out therein. The Greek Church nevertheless retained
them: but the Roman Church laid them down, as Justin Martyr witnesses.

Verse 23. For I have received] Rectumest regula sui and obliqui. The Apostle
seems to rectify them, by reducing them to the first institution.

The same night, etc.] It was his last bequeath to his Church, for a (...), as
Ignatius has it, a sovereign both purgative and preservative.

This is my body] En praeclaram illam consecrationem, Behold that goodly
consecration (says Beza) for the which the Shavelings say, that they are more
holy, then the very virgin Mary. For that Mary only conceived Christ, but they
create him. Beza in confess: 241.
Whereunto the Virgin might well reply, That she carefully nourished Christ
whom they cruelly devour. Do thou believe (said the Doctor to the Martyr)
that Christ's body and blood is in the Eucharist really and substantially? I
believe, says he, Act. and Mon.
that that is a real lie, and a substantial lie. When Cranmer was brought
forth to dispute in Oxford, Dr Weston Prolocutour thus began the disputation,
Act. and Mon. fol. 1300.
Convenistis body fratres, profligaturi detestandam illam haeresin de veritate
corporis Christi in Sacramento, etc. At which mistake, diverse learned men burst
out into a great laughter.

Verse 25. He took the Cup] See the Note on Matthew 26.27.

Verse 26. Ye do shew] We need no other crucifix to mind us of Christ's passion.

Till he come] There shall be a Church then, and the pure worship of God, till
the worlds end, maugre the malice of tyrants and heretics.

Verse 27. Shall be guilty] Because they profane the holy symbols and pledges
of Christ's blessed body and blood. These are in some sense, as guilty as those
that spit upon Christ's face, or that spilt his blood: As the Donatists that
cast the holy elements to dogs; or as that wretched Booth a Bachelour of Arts
in S. John's College in Cambridge, who being Popishly affected, at the time of
the Communion took the consecrated bread, and forbearing to eat it, B. Morton
Instit of the Sacr: l. 5. c. 3.
conveyed and kept it closely for a time, and afterward threw it over the
Colledge-wall. Not long after this, he threw himself headlong over the
battlements of the Chapel, and so ended his life.

Verse 28. Let a man examine] A Metaphor from Metallaries or Lapidists, as they
try their metals or precious stones, and do it exactly, that they be not
cozened, so here, men must make an exact scrutiny.

And so let him eat] After preparation, participation. The Heathens had their
caena pura, the night before their Sacrifices. The Russians receive children
after seven years old to the Communion, saying, Breerwoods Enquit. 135.
that at that age they begin to sin against God. But can they say, that at that
age they can examine themselves, and receive preparedly? Chrysostom calls
the Lords Table, that dreadful table, (...)
and the Ancients call the Sacraments dreadful mysteries.

Verse 29. Eats and drinks damnation] He that came in without a
wedding garment on his back, went not away without fetters on his feet: He was
taken from the table to the tormentours. Gods table becomes a snare to unworthy
receivers; they eat their bane, they drink their poison. Henry the seventh
Emperor of Germany, was poisoned in the Sacramental bread by a Monk. Pope
Victor 2. by his sub. Deacon in the Chalice; and one of our Bishops of York by
poison put into the wine at Sacrament. God will deal with ill communicants, as
Job 20.23. They will speed no better then Amnon did at Absoloms feast.

Verse 30. Many are weak] The mortality at Corinth began at Gods house, and
that for unworthy communicating. God will be sanctified of all that draw-near
to him. He loves to be acquainted with men in the walks of their obedience, and
yet he takes state upon him in his ordinances, and will be served like himself,
or we shall hear from him.

Verse 31. We should not be judged] God should be prevented, and the devil put
out of office, as having nothing to say against us, but what we have said
before.

Verse 32. That we should not, etc.] Far minora volo, ne graviora feram.

Verse 33. Wherefore my brethren] He that reproves and advises not, does as
it were snuff the lamp, and not pour in oil.

CHAP. XII. Verse 1. I would not have you ignorant]
TO wit, of the only author, and true end of them, Col. 2.18.
Lest ye be vainly puffed up by your fl^shly mind. Ignorance breeds pride,
Rev. 3.17.

Verse 2. Even as ye were led] It is the misery of a natural man that has not
his heart stablished with grace, to be carried away as he is led, to be
wherried about with every wind of doctrine, to have no mould, but what the
next seducer casts him into: being blown like a glass into this or that
shape, at the pleasure of his breath.

Verse 3. Calls Jesus accursed] As the wicked Jews do at this day in their
daily prayers and abbreviatures: And as the Gentiles did of old, and these
Corinthians among the rest. Quorum nihil cogi posse dicun. tu^ qui sunt revera
obristiani. Plin. epist.
But now they would rather die then do so: as Pliny writes to Trajan the
Emperor, that he could never force any that were Christians indeed, either to
invocate the gods, or to do sacrifice before the Emperors image, or to curse
Christ.

And that no man can say, etc.] That is, No man can with the fiduciall assent
of his heart, acknowledge Christ to be the only Lord, whom he is to worship by
the lame impulsions, by which another curses and blasphemes him, but by such
peculiar motives as are suggested and revealed unto him by the holy Ghost.

Verse 4. But the same spirit] As the diverse smells of flowers come from the
same influence, and the diverse sounds in the organ from the same breath.

Verse 5. Differences of administrations] i. e. Ecclesiastical functions, all
of them the dona honoraria of the Lord Christ, Ephesians. 4.8-11.

Verse 6. Diversities of operations] The holy Ghost may use one of less grace,
to do more good then one of more: though he delights to honor those of most
sincerity with most success, as 1 Cor. 15.10.

Verse 7. To profit withall] We are neither born nor born again for our selves.
If we be not fit to serve the body, neither are we fit to be of the body: He is
not a Saint that seeks not communion of Saints. Paulum set ul^e distat
incrtie ^elata virtu^. Hor.
Pudeat illos, qui ita in studijs se abdiderunt, ut ad vitam communem nullum
fructum far possint, says Cicero, They may well be ashamed that employ not
their talents for a public good.

Verse 8. The word of wisdom] The tongue of the learned, to time a word, Isa.
50.4. to set it upon it is circumferences, Prove. 25.11. to declare unto man his
righteousness, when not one of a thousand can do it like him, Job 33.23.

The word of knowledge] This, say some, is the Doctors office, as the former
word of wisdom is the Pastors. But the essential difference betwixt Pastors
and Doctors in each Congregation is much denied by many learned and good
Divines. M. Edwards his Antapolog.


Verse 9. To another faith] The faith of miracles, which a man may have, and
yet miscarry, 1 Cor. 13.2. So does not any one that has the faith of Gods
elect; that fails not, Luke 22. Some say the Apostle here means historical
faith: And this seems the more probable, Rolloc de vocatione.
because he speaks of the working of miracles, verse. 10.

Verse 10. Discerning of spirits] They discerned not men's hearts of themselves
(for so God only) but by a special work of Gods Spirit discovering them to
their eyes, as Peter discerned A^anias, and afterward Simon Magus, whom Philip
mistook and baptized.

Verse 11. One and the self same spirit] Who yet is called, the seven spirits
of God, Revel. 1.4. for his manifold and sundry operations.

Verse 12. So also is Christ] Mystical Christ, the Church. Christ the Savior
of his body (Ephesians. 5.23.) accounts not himself complete without his Church,
Ephesians. 1. ult. So God is called Jacob, Psalm. 24.6.

Verse 13. For by one spirit, etc.] By the testimony of the two Sacraments,
whereof we all partake, the Apostle proves that we are all but one body, and
should therefore as Bees bring all our honey to the common hive.

Are we all baptized] The Apostles received all into the Church that believed
and were baptized, without particular probation for some days, weeks, months
or years, and entering into a private solemn Covenant.

And have been all made to drink] Potionati sumus, says Piscator, and so prove
our selves to be of the corporation and company of believers. But what was the
meaning of that passage in the old Church-Catechisme, There are but two
Sacraments only, as generally necessary, etc. Are there any more then two,
though not absolutely and generally necessary to all men in all times, states
and conditions whatsoever? The Papists themselves say, that five of their
Sacraments at least, are not generally necessary.

Verse 14. Not one member, but many] As man's body curiously wrought, and as it
were, by the book, Psalm. 139.16. Had God left out an eye or hand in his
common-place-book (says one) thou had wanted it.

Verse 15. If the foot should say etc.] Inferiors must not envy those above
them, but be content, ^^th it is, God that cutteth us out our several
conditions; and a Scavenger may honor God in his place, as well as a Minister
in his.

Verse 16. If the ear] A man had better be blind, lame, dumb, then deaf;
because by the ear life enters into the soul, Isa. 55.3.

Verse 17. If the whole body, etc.] It is proper to God to be (...), all-eye:
Sic spectat universos quafi singulos, sie singulos quasi solos.

Verse 18. God has set, etc.] And he, as only wise, does all in number, weight
and measure. Shall we not rest in what he has done as best? What can the man
do that comes after the King? Eccles. 2.12.

Verse 19. Arist. Ethic.
Where were the body?] So the body politic consists not of a Physician and a
Physician (says Aristotle) but of a Physician and an husbandman, etc.

Verse 21. The eye cannot say, etc.] Superiors may not slight their
inferiors, since they cannot be without them; as one ^^ne or other they will be
forced to acknowledge. It was a saying of General Vere to the King of Denmark,
That Kings cared not for soldiers, until such time as their Crowns hung on
the one side of their heads.

Verse 22. Which seem to be, etc.] As the organs of nourishment, not so noble,
but more necessary then those of the senses.

Verse 23. And those members] As the organs of excretion and generation.

Our uncomely parts, etc.] It was at the abomination of Baal-peor or Priapus,
that his worshippers said, Nos, pudore pulso, stamus sub Jove, celeis apertis,
Isa. 3.
etc. God taught our first parents to make coverings to hide their nakedness;
and the contrary is often threatened as a curse.

Verse 24. For our comely parts] A fair face needs no dress, is it is own
testimonial, a bait without an hook, said Socrates. (...).


Verse 25. Should have the same care] As if the heel do but ache, the whole
condoleth and cures.

Verse 27. Now ye are, etc.] S. Cyprians sympathy is remarkable, Cum singulis
pectus meum copulo, meroris and funeris pondera luctuosa participo: Cum
plangentibus plango, cum deflentibus defleo. Hereby he showed himself a living
member.

Verse 28. Diversities of tongues] This comes in last; either to bid check to
their pride, who gloried so much in their many languages: or because he meant
to say more to it in the words following.

Verse 29. Are all teachers?] Yes, some would have it so; as in Alcibiades his
army all were leaders, no learners.

Verse 31. (...). Ambite.
Covet earnestly, etc.] This is the best ambition. Christians should strive to
excel, and be the best at what they undertake. Melancthon says, that
Frederick the Electour of Saxony, had cropped off the tops of all virtues.

A more excellent way] What was that? Charity to God and men, Chap. 13.1.
Graces are better then gifts.

CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. Though I speak with the tongues]
THe Corinthians gloried much in this gift of tongues: But this a man may have,
and yet perish, as Mithridates, (...), etc. Plut.
who is said to have spoken two and twenty languages. And Cleopatra was a great
linguist, she could give answers to Ethiopian, Hebrew, Arabic, Syrian, Median
and Parthian Ambassadors, says Plutarch: yea she could turn and tune her
tongues as an instrument of many strings, to what dialect she pleased.

And of Angels] Not that angels have tongues; as neither have they wings,
though they are said to fly, and even unto weariness of flight, Dan 9 21. A
certain Friar undertook to show to the people a feather of the Angel Gabriels
wing, and so verified the old proverb, A Friar a lier. Carltons thank. Remem.
p. 174.
But the Apostle here uses an high kind of expression, such as is used, Act.
6.15. Psalm 78.25. Unless perhaps, says Chrysostom here, the angels have. suo
modo, sua co^oquia. The Schoolmen have great disputes about it, and tell us,
that when an angel has a conceit in his mind of any thing, with a desire that
another should understand it, it is enough, it is done immediately. But are not
these they that intrude into those things that they have not seen, Colos. 2.18.
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. Like
unto these are our new Millenaries, that upon a mistake of some high
expressions in Scripture, which describe the judgments poured out upon Gods
enemies in making a way to the Jews conversion by the pattern of the last
judgment, think that Jesus Christ shall come from heaven again, and reign here
upon earth a thousand years. See M. Co^tons sixth viol, p. 26


Verse 2. And have no charity] If I knew and did all for ostentation, not for
edification: As Stephen Gardener, Act. and Mon. fol. 1020.
who blew up his gifts to the view of others, as Butchers blow up their flesh.

Verse 4. Though I bestow all my goods] Unless I draw out my soul as well as
my sheaf to the hungry, Isa. 58.10. Many shrink up charity to an handbreth to
giving of alms.

And though I give my body, etc.] As Servetus the heretic did at Geneva, anno
1555. Calv. opusc.
So Manzius the Anabaptist gave his body to be drowned at Tigure, anno 1527.
Scultet. Annal.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester to be beheaded, for holding the Popes supremacy.
Friar Forest to be hanged, Act. and Mon. fol. 1005.
for the same cause. And how many of our Popish Martyrs (malefactors or
traitors, I should say) have worn the Tiburn-tippet, as Father Latimer
phraseth it? And more of them must; for they be some of them knaves all, as the
L. Audley Chancellor of England once said to the 13. Callice prisoners for
religion, Act. and Mon. fol. 1117.
whom he discharged: and like bells they will never be well tuned, till well
hanged.

Verse 4. (...).
And is kinde] Or, is easy to be made use of, ready to any good office.
Charity is no churl.

Vaunteth not it self] With the scorn of others. Arrianus says, In Epictet.
lib. 3.
that he is (...), that blames others, and is restless in himself. Such an
one was Timon of old, and Laurentius Valla alate.

Is not puffed up] Hence charity is pourtraied as a naked child with a merry
countenance, covered in a cloud, with a bloody heart in the right hand, giving
honey to a Be without wings.

Verse 5. (...)
Behave it self unseemly] Or, does not disgrace any one.

Is not easily provoked] Falls not into any sharp fit (as they did, (...).
Act. 15.39.) so as that her teeth are set on edge, or that she should show her
anger by the trembling of the body.

Thinks no evil] Is not suspicious, or does not meditate revenge.

Verse 6. D. Sclatter.
Rejoices with the truth] Nulla est igitur inter malos charitas, sed
conjuratio potius, says a grave Expositour. It is not charity, but conspiracy
that is found in wicked men.

Verse 7. Bears all things] Covers faults with her large mantle, (...).
dissembleth injuries, swalloweth down whole many pills, that would prove very
bitter in the chewing.

Believes all things] Is candid and ingenuous, yet not blind and blockish. No
man may ravish me out of my wits, says one; to conclude as Walter Mapes did of
his Church of Rome, after he had related the gross simony of the Pope; Sit
tamen Domina materque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus, and absit credere
quae vidimus. If a Papist see one of their Priests kissing a woman, he is by
their Canon Law bid to believe, that the Priest is giving her counsel only.
Their rule to their novices is, Tu and Asinus unum estote.

Endures all things] Love, as it is a passion, so it is tried rather by
passions then actions.

Verse 8. Prophecies, they shall fail] The Arch-prophet shall teach us
immediately, as he had done Moses and Elias, who appearing to Christ in the
transfiguration, knew, and could say far more to our Savior for his comfort
and confirmation against the bitterness of his death, then ever they could,
whiles here living upon earth, Luke 9.31.

Whether there be knowledge] Got by study and communicated to others. For
Lilmod lelammed, say the Rabbis, we therefore learn that we may teach.

Verse 9. We prophecy in part] We therefore know but imperfectly, because we
are taught but imperfectly. My greatest knowledge, Melch. Adam.
said Chytraeus, is to know that I know nothing. And not only in most other
things am I ignorant, said Austin, Aug epist. 119. cap. 21.
but even in the Scriptures (my chief study and trade of life) Multo plura
nescio quam scio. The Rabbis in their Comments upon Scripture, when they meet
with hard knots that they cannot explicate, they solve all with this, Elius cum
venerit, solvet omnia.

Verse 10. Then that which is in part] As the old slough falls off, when the new
skin comes on. As a man returns no more to the free school, that has
proceeded in the University.

Verse 11. When I was a childe] Adrian 6. before he became Pope, taxed the
Church of Rome for many errors: but afterward, being desired to reform them,
he wickedly abused these words for an answer, When I was a child, I spoke as a
child, etc. but now being a man, etc.

Verse 12. In a glass, etc.] See Numb. 12.8.

Even as I am known] We shall know the creatures by knowing God: as God now
knows all his works, by knowing himself.

Verse 13. The greatest of these] Because longest lasting. Gifts that suppose
imperfection in us, as faith and hope, or misery in others, as pity, etc. shall
be put away.

CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. Follow after charity]
FOllow it hot-foot, as they say: pursue and practice it. It is more then to
desire or to be zealous of a thing, as it follows in the next words, (...).
be zealous of spiritual gifts. Follow charity close, as the Hunter does his
prey, (...).
or as the persecutour does the Martyr, that will hide or escape if he can.
Charity may be fitly compared to the precious stone Pantarbe spoken of by
Philostratus. A stone of great beauty and of strange property. Philostr. in
vit. Apollony lib 3. cap. ^4
So bright it is and radiant, that it gives light in the darkest midnight. And
that light is of that admirable virtue, that it brings together the stones that
it reaches into heaps, as if they were so many hives of Bees. But nature, lest
so precious a gift should be undervalued, has not only hid this stone in the
secret bowels of the earth, but has also put into it a property of slipping
out of the hands of those that hold it, Nisi provida ratione teneatur, unless
they hold it fast indeed.

Verse 2. In an unknown tongue] So they that preach in a kind of Roman
English, and not in a low language to the peoples capacity.

But unto God] Canit sibi and Musis, as the proverb is: And as good he may hold
his tongue, for God needs him not.

Verse 3. To edification, to exhortation] These three ends every preacher ought
to propound to himself; 1. Edification in knowledge and holiness. 2.
Exhortation, that is, Reprehension and Admonition. 3. Consolation, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.13.

Verse 4. Edifieth the Church] Therefore prophecy is the more worthy, because
profitable. Prodesse melius quam praeesse.

Verse 6. If I come unto you, etc.] This you would not like in me. And is that
Venus in Caio, that is, Naevus in Titio? a blemish in one, that is a beauty in
another.

By revelation or by knowledge, or etc.] Piscator reads it by revelation, or by
knowledge, that is, either by prophesying or by doctrine. The Apostle
expounding himself.

Verse 7. Except they give a distinction] Vnisono nihil auribus molestius.
Discords in music make the best harmony. Blunts voyage, page 106.
Through all Turkey there runs one tune, nor can every man play that: yet scarce
any but has a fiddle with two strings.

Verse 8. For if the Trumpet] Similies are excellent for illustration, and must
be fetched from things familiar.

Verse 9. Ye shall speak into the air] You shall lose your labor, and may as
well keep your breath to cool your broth.

Verse 10. So many kinds of voices] Seventy two maternall languages, they say.

Verse 11. A Barbarian] So the Grecians called all Nations that spoke not their
language. It is reported that no where at this day is spoken more barbarous
language then at Athens, once the Greece of Greece. Neand. Chron.


Verse 12. To the edifying of the Church] Clouds when full, pour down, and the
presses overflow, and the Aromaticall trees sweat out their precious and
sovereign oils, and every learned Scribe must bring out his treasure for the
Churches behoof and benefit.

Verse 13. Pray that he may interpret] Pope Innocent the third never prayed
thus: for he said that the Church decreed the service in an unknown tongue, Ne
sacrosancta verba vilescerent, lest the holy words should be under-prized. But
public prayers in an unknown tongue, says one, must be attributed to the
change of time it self in Italy, France and Spain, for there a long time the
Latin was understood of all. Erasm.
But when afterward their speeches degenerated into those vulgar tongues now
there used, then the language not of the service, but of the people was altered.

Verse 14. Is unfruitfull] In regard of others edification. It were a great
grace, said Lambert the Martyr, Act. and Mon. fol. 1015.
if we might have the Word of God diligently and often spoken and sung unto us
in such wise, that the people might understand it: then should it come to pass
that craftsmen should sing spiritual Psalms sitting at their work, and the
husbandman at his plow, as wishes S. Hierome, Pavier Town-clark of London in
Henry the eighths time, was a man that in no case could abide to hear that the
Gospel should be in English: Insomuch that he once swear a great oath, that if
he thought that the Kings highness would set forth the Scripture in English,
and let it be read of the people by his authority, Ibid 962.
rather then he would so long live, he would cut his own throat. But he broke
promise; for shortly after he hanged himself.

Verse 15. I will pray with understanding] To an effectual prayer there must
concur intentio and affectus, the intention of the mind, and the affection of
the heart. Else it is not praying but parotting. Sphinx. Philos.
I have read of a Parot in Rome, that could distinctly say over the whole Creed.

Verse 16. Say Amen] This the Apostle reckons for a great loss. The poor
misled and muzled Papists are enjoined not to join so far with a Protestant in
any holy action, as to say Amen. But in that, Specul. Europ.
there is no so great loss.

Verse 17. But the other is not edified] This we should all labor, viz. to
edify others. Synesius speaks of some, who having a treasure of tongues, and
other abilities in them, would as soon part with their hearts as their
meditations: the canker of whose great skill shall be a witness against them.

Verse 18. I thank my God, etc.] Skill in tongues is, as now, a great blessing.
Indeed at first when men began (...), to fight against God, they were compelled
(...), to brabble in diverse languages, seventy two, as Epiphanius affirms.
But God has turned this curse into a blessing unto his people, Act. 2. and as
in the first plantation of the Gospel, so in the late Reformation, God sent it
before, as his munition to batter the forts of Antichrist, who had banished
arts and languages, overspreading all with barbarism and Atheism. Graece
nosse suspectum erat, Hebraice fere haereticum.

Verse 19. In an unknown tongue] A Parisian Doctor tells us that though the
Apostle would have Gods service to be celebrated in a known tongue, Benedict.
Mo^tan. in 1 Cor. 14.
yet the Church for diverse weighty reasons has otherwise ordered and appointed
it. The Mahometans read their Alchoran (which they supposed were profaned, if
it were translated into vulgar tongues) and perform their public devotions in
the Arabique tongue, Breerw Enquit. 185.
which is their learned language.

Verse 20. Be not children] Mentibus scilicet, sed moribus, Mat. 18.3. See the
Note there.

In malice be ye children] In innocence and ignoscency.

In understanding be men] Is it not a shame to have no more understanding at
eighty, then at eight years of age?

Verse 21. With men of other tongues] God threatened the Jews, that since they
would not hearken to their own Prophets, they should (...) foreign enemies,
Isa. 28.11. Jer. 5.15. So those that will not obey the sweet command of Christ,
Come unto me, shall have one day no command to obey but that dreadful
discedite, Depart from me, etc.

Verse 22. But for them which believe] To confirm and comfort believers: This
is the chief end of preaching. Let this comfort those that cannot say they have
converted any by their Ministry.

Verse 23. Will they not say, ye are mad!] And may they not say as much if we
jangle and dissent in opinion, one holding this, Lib. 2. cap. 2.
and another that. Ammianus Marcellinus taxed the ancient Bishops of his time
for their hateful miscarriages in this kind.

Verse 24. He is convinced of all] God smites the earth with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips does he slay the wicked, Isa. 11.4. By
his Word he tells a man (as he did the Samaritesse, Joh. 4.) all that ever he
did.

Verse 25. The secrets of his heart] Gods Word is a curious Critic, Heb. 4.12.
a discerner of the thoughts, etc. It finds and ferrets out secret sins.

Verse 26. Let all things, etc.] There is edifying even in appointing of fit
Psalms.

Verse 27. Or at the most by three] Lest the hearers be tired out. Our
infirmity will not suffer any long intention, either of body or mind. Long
services can hardly maintain their vigor, as in tall bodies the spirits are
diffused. Erasmus has observed that Origin never preached above an hour, often
but half an hour: Consultius judicabat crebro docere, quam diu, says he. He
held it better to preach often, then long. Eras praefat. ad Orig. opera.


Verse 28. Let him keep silence] Such as stuff their Sermons with Greek and
Latin are here silenced, further then they interpret the same. If thou can
help my hearers to Greek and Latin ears (says a reverend Preacher) they shall
have Greek and Latin enough.

Verse 29. Let the other judge] But is not this a disparagement to the
Prophets? may some say: No, but an honor, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20, 21. After Despise not
prophesying, he subjoyneth, Try all things.

Verse 30. That sits by] And is extraordinarily inspired and qualified: a
little otherwise then our Enthusiasts, that brag of their lumen propheticum.

Verse 31. That all may learn] The most learned may learn something by the
discourses of others less learned then themselves. Apollos a learned teacher,
may yet be taught by a Tent maker. The Jewish Rabbis acknowledge that they
came to understand, Isa. 14.23. (...)
by hearing an Arabian woman mention a beesome in her language to her maid.

Verse 32. R. David. in Radic.
Are subject to the Prophets] To be scanned and examined; which they should not
be, unless they took their turns in course to prophecy. Eloquere, said one, ut
quid sit videam, Speak that I may see what is in thee.

Verse 33. Not the author of confusion] Nec author, nec fautor. Unquiet
spirits are of the devil, who keeps ado, and fills the Church with confusion by
his turbulent agents and emissaries, sowing sedition and spreading schisms.

Verse 34. Let your women, etc.] See the Note on Romans 16.1.

Verse 35. Ask their husbands] Who therefore must dwell with them according to
knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7. and be manly guides unto them in the way to heaven. The
masters breast must be the households treasury.

For it is a shame for women, etc] She was a singular example, that taught the
Greek and Latin tongues at Heidelberg, anno 1554. Her name was Olympia Fulvia
Morata an Italian, of the City of Ferrara.

Verse 36. What? came the word, etc.] As if he should say (and he says it with
some displeasure) Are ye the first, or the only Christians? Are ye too good to
be admonished? Take heed lest God for your arrogance and high spiritednes lay
you low enough, even in that slimy valley, Job 21.31, 32.

Verse 37. The Commandments] And therefore to be obeyed by the best of you. Aut
faciendum, aut patiendum: Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum. Either do it or die
for it.

Verse 38. But if any man be ignorant, etc.] If stubbornly ignorant and
uncounsellable, let him take his own course. I have cleared the truth in things
now controverted, and there I rest me. Who so blind, as he that will not see?

Verse 39. Wherefore, brethren] This he adds as a corollary, to prevent
mistakes, as if that he were an enemy either to prophecy, or tongues, so
soberly and orderly used. Arbitror nounullos in quibusdam locis librorum
meorum, opinaturos me sensisse quod non sensi, aut non sensisse quod sensi,
says Augustine. Aug. lib. 3. de Trin. c 3.
I foresee that some will construe many passages of my writings far otherwise
then I intended them: and it fell out accordingly, Annal tom 6. ad annum, 450.
n. 17.
as Baronius testifies.

Verse 40. Let all things, etc.] A general rule of great moment. In things
both real and rituall decency and order must be observed in Church-meetings.
For this the Colossians are much commended, Chap. 2.5. Our Savior caused the
people whom he fed to keep order in their sitting on the grass: they sat down
rank by rank, as rows, or borders of beds in a garden; so the Greek imports.
(...). Hebrais. ut Exodus 8.14. Cartwright.
Whereupon an Expositour notes, Ordinatim res in Ecclesia faciendae. Order
must be observed in the Church.

CHAP. XV. Verse 1. And wherein ye stand]
A Military term, as Martyr notes. (...).
Satan overthrows the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.18 and by this very engine
wherewith he assaulted these Corinthians, ib. So that the Apostle was fain to
make Apology, v. 19. to make a barricado.

Verse 2. By which also ye are saved] Eternal life is potentially in the word,
as the harvest is potentially in the seed, or as the tree is in the kernel or
sience, Jam. 1.21.

If ye keep in memory] Helimiteth the promise of salvation to the condition of
keeping in memory what they had heard. Tantum didicimus, quantum meminimus,
said Socrates. Many have memories like nets that let go the fair water, retain
the filth only: or like sives that keep the chaff, let go the corn. If God come
to search them with a candle, what shall he find but old songs, old wrongs?
etc. not a promise or any sword of God hid there: for things of that nature,
they are like Sabinus in Seneca, that never in all his life could remember
those three names of Homer, Ulysses, and Achilles. But the soul should be as an
holy Arc, the memory like the pot of Mannah, preserving holy truths.

Verse 3. First of all] Christ is to be preached with the first, as being the
prora and puppis of man's happiness, Joh. 16.14. It is the office of the holy
Ghost to take of Christ's excellencies, and hold them out to the world. What
then should Ministers, the mouth of the holy Ghost do rather?

Verse 4. According to the Scriptures] Which both fore-shewed and fore-shadowed
it in Adams waking, Isaac's reviving, as it were from the dead, Joseph's
abasement and advancement, Samsons breaking the bars, and bearing away the
gates of Gaza, David's being drawn out of the deep, Daniels out of the den,
Ieremies out of the dungeon, Jonas out of the belly of hell, Mat. 12.39. etc.

Verse 5. Seen of Cephas] Adam died, and we hear no more of him. But Christ
showed himself after death in six several apparitions for our confirmation.

Verse 6. Above five hundred] The number of believers then were greater then
some would gather out of Act. 1.15. Those 120 may seem to have been Chieftains,
such as that any one of them might have been thought meet to succeed Judas in
his Apostleship.

Verse 7. Seen of Iames] This is not mentioned in the Gospel, as neither that
of Peter, v.5.

Verse 8. One born out of due time] Quasi malo astro abortus, and adversante
natura coactus: One that deserved to be rejected, as that forlorn Infant, Ezekiel.
16.4, 5.

Verse 9. I am the least of the Apostles] Not come to my just bigness, as one
born out of due time, and not without violence.

Not meet to be called] True humility, as true balm, ever sinkes to the bottom
of the water, when pride, like oil, ever swims on the top.

Verse 10. I labored more abundantly] See 2 Cor. 12.23. Romans 15.19. George
Eagles, Martyr in Q. Mary's days, for his great pains in traveling from place
to place to confirm the brethren, was surnamed, Act. and Mon. fol. 1823.
Trudge over the world. Might not St Paul have been fitly so surnamed?

Not I, but the grace of God] So those good servants, Luke 19.16. Not we, but
thy talents have gained other five, and other two, etc. Let God have the entire
praise of all our good.

Verse 11. So we preach, and so ye beleeved] A happy compliance, when the
hearers affections and endeavors do answer the affections and endeavors of
the preacher, as here, and at Ephesus, Act. 20.31-37. When people deliver
themselves up to the form of doctrine, Romans 6.17.
and are cast into the mould of the Word?

Verse 12. No resurrection] More then that of regeneration, Math. 19.28. that
estate of the Gospel, called a new heaven, and a new earth, 2 Pet. 3.13. the
world to come, Heb. 2.5. that resurrection already past, ^ Tim. 2.18. that
first resurrection, Revel. 20.5.

Verse 13. Then is not Christ risen] But of Christ's resurrection, there were
many both living and dead Witnesses, as the earthquake, empty grave, stone
rolled away, clothes wrapped up, etc.

Verse 14. Then is our preaching vain] Never was there any such imposture put
upon the world, as Christianity, if Christ be yet in the grave.

Verse 15. False witnesses of God] For they might safely say with Jeremy, Lord,
if we be deceived, thou have deceived us.

Verse 16. Then is not Christ raised] And so Gods decree is cassated, Act.
13.33. with Psalm. 2.7.

Verse 17. Ye are yet in your sins] Romans 4.25. If he had not been let out of
prison, our debt had remained upon us. But God sent his Angel to roll away the
stone, as the Judge sends an officer to fetch one out of prison, and to release
him. And this is the strength of our Saviors reason, Ioh. 16.10. The Spirit
shall convince the world of righteousness (that I am Jehovah their
righteousness) because I go to the Father, which I could not have done,
unless you were acquitted of all your sins.

Verse 18. A sleep in Christ] The Germans call the Churchyard Godsaker,
because the bodies are sowed therein, to be raised again. The Greeks call them
(...), sleeping-houses. The Hebrews call the grave Bothchaijm, the house of the
living. Job calls it the Congregation-house of all living, Job 30.23. As the
Apostle calls heaven the Congregation-house of the firstborn, Heb. 12.23.

Verse 19. Most miserable] Because none out of hell ever suffered more then the
Saints have done.

Verse 20. The first fruits, etc.] As in the first fruits offered to God, the
Jews were assured of Gods blessing on the whole harvest: so by the resurrection
of Christ, our resurrection is ensured.

Verse 21. By man came also etc.] Gods justice would be satisfied in the same
nature that had sinned.

Verse 22. Shall all be made alive] The Saints shall be raised, by virtue of
the union with Christ to glory: the wicked shall be dragged to his tribunal,
by his Almighty power, as a Judge, to be tumbled thence into hell-torment.

Verse 13. At his coming] As in the mean time, their very dust is precious: the
dead bodies consumed are not so destroyed, but that there is a substance
preserved by a secret influence proceeding from Christ as a head. Hence they
are said to be dead in Christ, who by rotting refineth them.

Verse 24. Delivered up the Kingdome] Not his essential kingdom, as God, but
his oeconomicall, as Mediator.

Verse 25. Till he has put] And after too, but 1. Without adversaries: 2.
Without any outward means and ordinances.

Verse 26. That shall be destroied] It is already to the Saints swallowed up in
victory, so that they may say to it, as Jacob did to Esau; Surely I have seen
thy face as the face of God. This Esau, death, meets a member of Christ with
kisses instead of frowns, and guards him home, as he did Jacob to his fathers
house.

Verse 27. All things under his feet] This Psalm. 8, 7, 8. spoken of man in
general, is properly applied to the man Christ Jesus: in whom also it
extends to the Saints, who are therefore more glorious then heaven, earth, or
any creature, and shall have power over all, Rev. 2.26.

Verse 28. That God may be all in all] Till sin and death be abolished, we have
no access to God, but by Christ. But after that all enemies be trod under
foot, then shall we have an immediate union with God: yet so, as that this
shall be the proper and everlasting praise of Christ, that he is the procurer
of that union. Cameron. de Eccles.


Verse 29. Which are baptized, etc.] The several senses that are set upon this
Text. See in Beza, Piscator, but especially our new Annotations upon the Bible.

Verse 30. (...). Athenae.
In jeopardy every hour] Carrying our lives in our hands, as both the Hebrews
and Greeks phrase it.

Verse 31. By our rejoycing] i. e. By our infirmities, afflictions, wherein he
so much glories, 2 Cor. 11. and 12. as an old soldier does of his scars. As
if the Apostle should say, I appeal to all those miseries that I have suffered
amongst you for a testimony.

Verse 32. If after the manner, etc.] Paul sought with beasts at Ephesus after
the manner of men, that is, say some, the men of Ephesus fought with him after
the manner of beasts. Others more probably understand it literally: If after
the manner of men, Beza. Sclatter.
that is, as men use to do to show their valor (he means those B^stia^ij
among the Romans) I have been cast to the beasts, Chrisostom. Ambros.
and have either overcome them, as Lysimachus did the lion, or have been spared
by them, as corpora sanctorum Martyrum tangere multoties refugiebant bestiae,
says the Historian, what advantageth it me, etc. And this later sense is a
stronger argument of the resurrection.

Let us eat and drink] An ill inference of men of corrupt minds, and destitute
of the truth. Chrysostom says, There were a sort of such in his time, as said
(...). (...) An^^^^on.
Give me to day, and take thou tomorrow. And have not we those that say, Let us
be merry while we may: we shall never be younger, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem
nulla v^luptas. It was wisely done of the Romans to banish Alaecus and
Philiscus, a couple of swinish Epicures, lest they should by their evil
communication and conversation corrupt others. Aelian. l. 9.


Verse 33. Evil communication] Evil words are not wind, as most imagine, but
the devils drivell, that leaves a foul stain upon the speaker, and often sets the
like upon the hearer. Shun obscene borborology (says one) and unsavory
speeches: thou losest so much of thine honesty and piety, as thou admittest
evil into thy tongue.

Verse 34. Awake to righteousnesse] Go forth and shake your selves (as Samson
did) out of that dead lethargy whereinto sin has cast you: your enemies are
upon you, and you fast asleep the while.

I speak this to your shame] Ignorance is a blushfull sin. Are ye also
ignorant? said Christ to his Apostles: q. d. that is an arrant shame indeed. The
Scripture sets such below the Ox and the Ass.

Verse 35. But some man will say] Some Epicure will object, and say, How can
these things be? A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus. See the Note on
Act. 17.18.

Verse 36. Thou fool] A hard knot must have a hard wedge, a dead heart, a
rousing reproof. He confutes Atheists from the course of nature which they
ascribe so much unto.

Verse 37. And that which thou sowest] This is an answer to the Epicures second
demand, verse. 35. with what body do they come? with a dead, diseased, rotten
body, etc? No, no, says the Apostle. Sin only is rotted with it is
concomitancies, infirmities: but the rotting of the body is but as the rotting
of corn under the clod, that it may arise incorruptible. Or as the melting of
an old piece of plate in the fire, to bring it out, of a better fashion.

Verse 38. But God gives it a body] Deus naturae vires and vices ita
moderatur, etc. says one. God so orders all, that nothing is done without him.
(...)
The same Hebrew word that signifies an ear of corn, does also signify a
word; because every field of corn, is a book of Gods praise, every land a leaf,
every leaf a verse, every ear a word, every corn of wheat a letter to express
the power and goodness of God.

Verse 39. All flesh is not the same] This is another answer to the Epicure,
who might happily reply, and say, If man's flesh, when rotted, shall revive, why
not likewise the flesh of other creatures? The Apostle answers, All flesh is
not the same, etc. Man's flesh only is informed by a reasonable and immortal
soul, not so the flesh of other creatures: And hence the difference.

Verse 40. There are also coelestiall] Stars and spirits (the inhabitants of
that other heaven) I find (says a Divine) like one another. Meteors and fowls
in as many varieties as there are several creatures. Why? Is it because man,
for whose sake they were made, delights in variety, God in constancy? Or is it
because that in these God may show his own skill, and their imperfection?

The glory of the terrestriall] The glory of our terrestrial bodies, shall at
the resurrection be celestial; they shall be more like spirits then bodies: so
clear and transparent, says Aquinas, that all the veins, humors, nerves and
bowels shall be seen, as in a glass: they shall be conformed to the glorified
body of Christ, as to the standard.

Verse 41. One star differs, etc.] The morning star is said to cast a shadow
with it is shine. Can thou bind the sweet influences of the seven stars?
Job 38.31.
Whose work is to bring the Spring, and which like seven sisters or lovers (as
the word signifies) are joined together in one fair constellation. Or lose the
bands of Orion? The star that brings winter, and binds the earth with frost
and cold. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth, the Southern constellations? Or
can thou guide Arcturus with his sons, that is, the Northern stars, those
storehouses of Gods good treasure, which he opens to our profit? Deuteronomy. 28.12.

Verse 42. So also is the resurrection] Whether there are degrees of glory, as
it seems probable, so we shall certainly know, when we come to heaven. Three
glimpses of the bodies glory were seen, in Moses his face, in Christ's
transfiguration, and in Stephens countenance.

Verse 43. It is raised in power] The resurrection will cure all infirmities.
At Stratford-bow were burned in Queen Mary's days, at one stake, a lame man
and a blind man. The lame man after he was chained, casting away his crutch,
bad the blind man be of good comfort; for death would heal them both. Act. and
Mon. fol. 1733.
And so they patiently suffered.

Verse 44. A spiritual body] Luther says the body shall move up and down like
a thought. Augustine says, they shall move to any place they will, as soon as
they will. As birds (says Zanchius) being hatched, do fly lightly up into the
skies, De operib. Dei.
which being eggs, were a heavy and slimy matter: So man being hatched by the
resurrection, is made pure and nimble, and able to mount up into the heavens.

Verse 45. A quickening spirit] Christ is called a spirit from his Deity, as
Heb. 9.14. and a quickening spirit, because he is the principle of life to all
believers.

Verse 46. And afterward, that is spirituall] Nature, Art, Grace, proceed from
less perfect to more perfect. Let us advance forward, and ripen apace, that we
may be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, Luke 20.35.

Verse 47. Of the earth, earthy] Gr. Dusty, slimy, ex terra friabili. Let this
pull down proud flesh.

The Lord from heaven] Not for the matter of his body; for he was made of a
woman; but for the original and dignity of his person; whereof see a lively
and lofty description, Heb. 1.2, 3.

Verse 48. They that are earthy] (...), Vulgus fictilis. Man is but an earthen
pot., Isa. 64.8.

Verse 49. The image of the heavenly] See Phil. 3.21. Our bodies shall be
fashioned like to Christ's glorious body in beauty, brightness, incorruption,
immortality, grace, favor agility, strength, and other unspeakable qualities
and excellencies. Whether they shall have that power as to toss the greatest
mountains like a ball, yea to shake the whole earth at the^r pleasure, as
Anselme and Luther think, I have not to say.

Verse 50. Flesh and bloud] The body as it is corruptible, cannot enter heaven,
but must be changed: we shall appear with him in glory. The vile body of Moses,
that was hid in the valley of Moab, was brought forth glorious in the hill of
Tabor, Math. 17.

Verse 51. I show you a mystery] Not known till now to any man living. (...).
This, likely, was one of those wordlesse words that Paul heard in his rapture,
2 Cor. 12.4

Verse 52. The trumpet shall sound] As at the giving of the law it did, Exodus 19
16. If the law were thus given (says a Divine) how shall it be required? If
such were the proclamation of Gods statutes, what shall the sessions be? I see
and tremble at the resemblance: The trumpet of the Angel called to the one; the
trumpet of the Archangel shall summon us to the other. In the one, the Mount
only was on a flame, all the world shall be so in the other. To the one Moses
says, God came with ten thousands of his Saints: In the other thousand
thousands shall minister to him, and ten thousand thousands shall stand before
him.

Verse 53. For this corruptible] Pointing to his body, he that speaks, as
Psalm. 34 6. This poor man cried, the Lord heard him. So the old believers, when
they rehearsed the Creed, and came to that Article, I believe the Resurrection
of the flesh, they were wont to add, Etiam hu^^s carnts, even of this
self-same flesh. So Job 19.27.

Verse 55. Death is swallowed up] As the fuel is swallowed up by the fire: as
the Sorcerers serpents were swallowed up by Moses his serpent.

Verse 56. Death, where is thy sting?] This is the sharpest and the shrillest
note, the boldest and the bravest challenge that ever man rang in the ears of
death. Sarcasmo constat and hostili derisione, qua mors ridenda propinatur,
says one. Death is here out-braved, called craven to his face, and bidden, Do
his worst. So Simeon sings out his soul; Tollitur mors, non ne sit, sed ne
obsit. Aug.
Hilarion chides it out. Ambrose is bold to say, I am neither ashamed to live,
nor afraid to die. Anne Askew the Martyr, Act. and Mon. fol. 1131.
thus subscribeth her own confession: Written by me Anne Askew that neither
wishes for death, nor fears his might; and as merry as one that is bound
toward heaven. Ibid.
Mr Bradford being told he should be burned the next day, put off his cap, and
lifting up his eyes, praised God for it.

Verse 56. The sting of death is sinne] Christ having unstinged death, and as
it were disarmed it, we may safely now put it into our bosoms, as we may a
snake, whose sting is pulled out. If it shoot forth now a sting at us, it is
but an enchanted sting, as was that of the Sorcerers serpents. Buzze it may
about our ears, as a drone Be; but sting us it cannot. Christ as he has taken
away not sin it self, but the guilt of sin, so not death it self but the
sting of death.

Verse 57. But thanks be to God, etc.] Here S. Paul, Christ's chief Herald,
proclaims his victory with a world of solemnity and triumph.

Verse 58. Always abounding, etc.] This will strengthen faith: as the often
knocking upon a stake fastens it. When faith bears fruit upward, it will take
root downward.

CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. Collection for the Saints]
THe poor believers at Jerusalem, Romans 15.26. who had suffered hard things of
their own Contrymen, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. and taken joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, Heb. 10.34. Gal. 2.10. Non (...), sed (...) and (...).
and were therefore relieved by the Churches of the Gentiles at Paul's motion.
The word here used for Saints, signifies such as are taken off from the earth.
The Saints, though their commoration be upon earth, their conversation's in
heaven.

Verse 2. Upon the first day] The Christian Sabbath, the Lord's Day, as the
Greek Scholiast well renders it: which to sanctify was in the Primitive times
a badge of Christianity. When the question was propounded, Servasti dominicum?
Have thou kept the Lord's Day? The answer was returned, Christianus sum;
intermittere non possum, I am a Christian, I can do no less then keep the
Lord's Day. D King on Jonas, Lect. 7.
But the world is now grown perfectly profane (says one) and can play on the
Lord's Day without book. The Sabbath of the Lord, the sanctified day of his rest
is shamelesly troubled and disquieted.

Lay by him in store] Gr. As a treasure, 1 Timothy 6.18. Manus pauperum
gazophylacium Christi. The poor man's box is Christ's treasury.

As God has prospered him] Gr. (...).
Given him a good arrival at the end of his voyage, and enabled him: for we
may not stretch beyond the staple, and so spoil all.

Verse 3. Your liberality] Gr. Your grace: That which having received of Gods
free grace, you do as freely part with to his poor people.

Verse 4. That I go also] And go he did, Romans 15.25. Act. 24 17. The very
Angels hold not themselves too good to serve the Saints.

Verse 5. When I shall come, etc.] He was not then yet come into Macedonia,
neither was this Epistle written at Philippi (as the subscription says) a
chief City of Macedonia.

Verse 6. 2 Cor. 1^.15.
Yea, and winter with you] They had ill deserved such a favor of him: for the
more he loved them, the less he was beloved of them: But he sought not theirs,
but them. Discourtesies must not discourage us from Gods work. Calvin, though
but c^u^lly, used at his first coming to Geneva, brake through all.

Verse 7. If the Lord permit] The Lord orders a good man's goings, Psalm. 37.
See Act. 16. with Jam. 4.13. It was rather rashness then valor in our Richard
1. who being told (as he sat at Supper) that the French King had besieged his
town of Vernoil in Normandy, protested that he would not turn his back, until
he had confronted the French. And thereupon he caused the wall of his palace
that was before him to be broken down toward the South, and posted to the
Seacoast immediately into Normandy.

Verse 8. But I will tarry at Ephesus] From thence then he wrote this Epistle,
and not at Philippi, as the subscription has it. See verse. 5.

Verse 9. (...).
And effectuall] Or, Busy, that requires great pains-taking. The Ministry is
not an idle man's occupation, as some fools think it.

And many adversaries] Truth never wants an opposite. In the beginning of the
late Reformation, Eckius, Roffensis, Cajetun, More, Faber, Cochlaus,
Cutharinus, Pighius, all these wrote against Luther, Summo conatu, acerrimo
desiderio, non vulgari doctrina, as one says, with utmost desire and endeavor.

Verse 10. For he works, etc.] So does every faithful Minister, though of
meaner parts. The Vine is the weakest of trees, but full of fruit. A little
hand may thread a needle. A little boat may do best in a low river. Philadelphia
had but a little strength, Revel. 3.8. and yet it served turn, and did the deed.

Verse 11. (...). Niceph.
Let no man despise him] For his youth: for he has lived much in a little time
(as it is said of our Edw. 6.) and is an old young man, as was Macarius the
Egyptian.

Verse 12. I greatly desired him] Paul did not compel or command him, as the
Pope takes upon him to do, even to Princes and Potentates. Oh that all Kings
would answer him in this case, as Philip the Fair of France did Pope Boniface,
claiming a power there to bestow Prebends and Benefices. Sciat tua maxima
fatuitas. etc. Alsted. Chronol.


Verse 13. Watch ye, etc.] Solomon's wisdom, Lots integrity, and Noah's sobriety
felt the smart of the serpents sting. The first was seduced, the second
stumbled, the third fell, whiles the eye of watchfulnes was fallen asleep.

Verse 14. Let all your things, etc.] Love is the Saints livery, Joh. 13.35,
Heathens acknowledged that no people in the world did love one another, so as
Christians did. In the Primitive times, Animo animaque; inter se miscebantur,
as Tertullian speaks. But now, alas, it is far otherwise; Love began to grow
cold among these Corinthians. Hence this sweet and savoury counsel.

Verse 15. To the ministry of the Saints] To serve them in collecting and
distributing alms to the necessitous.

Verse 16. That ye submit] Giving them due honor, doing them all good offices.

Verse 17. They have supplied] viz. Your absence: for in them I take a short
view of you all.

Verse 18. They have refreshed] Ipse aspectus viri boni delectat. It Is some
comfort to see a good man's face. Sen.


Verse 19. Aquila and Priscilla] Paul's fast friends and constant companions;
worth their weight in gold.

Verse 20. With an holy kisse] Not hollow, as Joab and Judas; nor carnal as
that harlot, Prove. 7.13. See Romans 16.16.

Verse 21. With mine own hand] Well known to the Corinthians, to prevent
imposture.

Verse 22. If any man love not] That is, desperately hate. A sin so execrable,
that the Apostle would not once name it. So the Jews would not name leven of
the Passover, nor a sow at any time, but called it dabar achar, E^^as Th^bit.
another thing.

Anathema Maranatha] Accursed upon accursed, put over to God to punish.

Verse 23. My love, etc.] Though I have sharply rebuked you, etc. Tit. 1.13.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the
CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Our brother]
IN the faith, not in the flesh, Sanctior est copula cordis, quam corporis,
Prove. 18.24.

Verse 2. From God the Father] The Father is the Fountain, the Son the conduit,
whereby all good things are derived to us.

Verse 3. The Father of mercies] Only it must be remembered, that as he is Pater
miserationum, so he is Deus ultionum, Psalm 94.1. As he has ubera, so he has
verbera. Christ is girt about the paps with a golden girdle, to show his love;
but yet he has eyes like flaming fire, and feet like burning brass, Rev. 1.
to look through and keep under his enemies.

The God of all comfort] It is he that shines through the creature, which else
is but as the air without light. It is he that comfort by the means. It is
not the Word alone; for that is but as the veins and arteries that convey the
blood and spirits: So the Spirit being conveyed by the promises, helps the
soul to lay it self upon Christ by faith, and so it is comforted. Sometimes
comfort comes not by the use of the means till afterward, that he may have the
whole glory, Cant. 3. The Church found not him, whom her soul loved, till she
was a little past the watchmen. The soul is apt to hang her comforts on every
hedge, to shift and shark in every by-corner for comfort. But as air lights not
without the Sun, and as fuel heats not without fire, so neither can any thing
soundly comfort us without God.

Vna est in trepida mihi re medicina Jehovae Nath. Chytraus.

Cor patrium, os verax, omnipotensque manus.
Verse 4. By the comfort wherewith] How forcible are right words? especially
when uttered more from the bowels then the brain, and from our own experience:
which made even Christ himself a more compassionate high priest, and Luther
such an heart-affecting preacher, because from his tender years he was much
beaten and exercised with spiritual conflicts, as Melancthon testifies. In
vita.
He was also wont to say that three things make a Preacher, Reading, Prayer,
and Temptation. Reading makes a full man, Prayer an holy man, Temptation an
experienced man.

Wherewith we our selves are comforted] Goodness is communicative. Mr Knox, a
little before his death, role out of his bed; and being asked wherefore, being
so sick, he would offer to rise? He answered, that he had had sweet meditations
of the resurrection of Jesus Christ that night, and now he would go into the
Pulpit, Mel^b Adam.
and impart to others the comforts that he felt in his soul.

Verse 5. As the sufferings of Christ] So called either because the Saints
suffer for Christ, or because they have him suffering with them, Act. 9.4. God
is more provoked then Nehemiah, Nehem. 4.3, 5.

So our consolation] As the lower the ebb, the higher the tide. (...), says
Ignatius. The more pain, the more gain. It is to my loss, if you bate me any
thing in my sufferings.

Verse 6. And whether we be afflicted] Let the wind sit in what corner soever
it will, it blows good to the Saints, Cant. ^.16. Though North and South be of
contrary qualities, yet they make the Churches spices to flow and give forth
their sent.

Verse 7. So shall ye be also, etc.] Our troubles therefore are compared to the
throws of a traveling woman that tend to a birth, and end in comfort Joh.
16.21.

Verse 8. For we would not, etc.] It is of great use to know the sufferings
that others have sustained before us. The Primitive Christians kept Catalogues
of their Martyrs. Dr Tailor the Martyr at his death gave his son Thomas a
latin book, containing the sayings and sufferings of the old Martyrs,
collected by himself. In the English Seminaries beyond seas, they have at
dinner time their Martyrology read, that is, the legend of our English
Traitors.

We despaired even of life] God is often better to us then our hopes: he reserves
usually his holy hand for a dead lift. He comes in the nick of time: and our
extremity is his opportunity. See the Note on Luke 18.8.

Verse 9. But we had the sentence] Gr. (...).
The answer or denunciation of death. Here we must distinguish between answers
of trial, and direct answers. This was of the former sort: for Paul died not
at that time. When Leyden was so long, and so strictly besieged by the Duke of
Alva, that they were forced for their sustenance to search and scrape
dung-hils, etc. and the Duke, in the language of blasphemy, threatened the
defendants with cruel death, that very night the winds turned, the tide
swelled, and the waters came in, and forced him to raise the siege.

That we should not trust] Hope is never higher-elevated then when our state in
all men's eyes is at lowest.

Verse 10. In whom we trust] Experience breeds confidence. Thou have, thou
shall, is an ordinary medium made use of by the Psalmist.

Verse 11. You also helping together] The best may have benefit by the prayers
of the meanest. Melancthon was much cheared and confirmed by the prayers of
certain women and children, whom he found tugging with God in a corner for the
settling of the Reformation in Germany. S^lneccer. paedagog. Christian. page 196.


Verse 12. For this is our rejoicing, etc.] He was merry under his load,
because his heart was upright. The sincere will well stand under great
pressures, because they are sound. Whereas if a bone be broke, or but the skin
rubbed up and raw, the lightest load will be grievous.

And godly sincerity] A fine word he here uses: (...).
and it is a Metaphor either from the Eagle that tries her young by holding
them forth against the full sight of the Sun; Aristot. Plin.
(so should we the motions of our minds to the Word of God) or else from a
wise and wary chapman, that holds up the cloth he buys, betwixt his eye and
the Sun.

Verse 13. Then what ye read, etc.] Or, then what you can both recognize and
approve of: for you have known me through and through.

Verse 14. You have acknowledged in part] q. d. You ought to have done it more
fully: but you have been carried away, as ye were led by the false Apostles.

Verse 15. A second benefit] Gr. Grace not converting only, but confirming
also. All is but enough.

Verse 16. And to pass by you] So indefatigable and unsatisfiable was he in
doing God service. Calvin said, Ne december quidem maria, etc. That it would not
grieve him to sail over ten seas, about a uniform draught for religion.

Verse 17. Did I use lightnesse] So the false Apostles suggested against him.
Ministers must carefully clear themselves of suspicions and aspersions cast
upon them, either by a verbal or real Apology.

Verse 18. Our word toward you, etc.] Gods children are all such as will not
lie, say and unsay, blow hot and cold with a blast, Isa. 63.8.

Verse 19. For the Son of God] What is that to the purpose? Thus: if the
Gospel that Paul preached be not yea and nay, then neither are Paul's promises
yea and nay. This is his intendment: else his inference is nothing. And by that
which follows, it reaches all Christians, M. Cotton on the seven vi^als 25.
q. d. Look what a Christian does promise, he is bound by the earnest-peny of
Gods Spirit to perform. He dares no more alter his words to the discredit of
his profession, then the Spirit of God can lie.

Verse 20. In him are yea and amen] That is, truth and assurance. They will eat
their way over all alps of opposition, as one speaks.

Verse 21. Has anointed us] i. e. Consecrated and qualified us.

Verse 22. Sealed us] As the Merchant sets his seal upon his goods.

The earnest of the Spirit] Whereof God should undergo the loss, if he should
not give the inheritance, as Chrysostom notes.

Verse 23. I call God to record] He purges himself by oath. So those Josh.
22.22.

Verse 24. Dominion over your faith] As Masters of your consciences: such as
the Bridge-maker of Rome will needs be. Pontisex Romanus.


CHAP. II. Verse 1. That I would not come again]
ILle dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox. It goes as much against the heart of a
good Minister, as against the hair with his people, if he say or do any thing
to their grief. It is no pleasure to him to fling daggers, to speak milstones,
to preach damnation, etc. But there is a cruel lenity, as was that of Eli to
his sons, and evil men must be sharply rebuked, that they may be sound in the
faith, Tit. 1.13.

Verse 2. But the same which is made, etc.] Nothing can cure a faithful
Minister of his cordolium, of his hearts grief, but his peoples amendment. Now
we live if ye stand fast in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8. else we are all amort, and
you kill the very hearts of us.

Verse 3. Of whom I ought to rejoyce] Nothing sticks a man more then the
unkindness of a friend, then expectation of love dashed and disappointed: All
evils, as elements are most troublesome, when out of their proper place, as
impiety in professors, injustice in Judges, unkindenes or untowardnes in a
people toward their Pastor, etc.

Verse 4. With many tears] Non tam atramento quam lachrymis chartas illevit,
says Lorinus. In Act. 22.19.
S. Paul's epistles were written rather with tears then with ink.

Verse 5. Have caused grief] Wicked livers are Hazaels to the godly, and draw
many sighs and tears from them. Lots righteous soul was set upon the rack by
the filthy Sodomites. Jeremy weeps in secret for Judah's sins. Paul cannot
speak of those belly-gods with dry eyes, Phil. 3.18.

Verse 16. Sufficient to such a man] The Novatians therefore were out, that
refused to receive in those that repented of their former faults and follies.
The Papists burnt some that recanted at the stake, saying that they would send
them out of the world, while they were in a good mind. Act. and Mon. fol. 1392.


Verse 7. Should be swallowed up] It was a saying of Mr Philpot, Martyr: Satan
goes about to mix the detestable darnell of desperation with the godly sorrow
of a pure penitent heart. Ibid. 1665.


With overmuch grief] Some holy men (as Mr Leaver) have desired to see their
sin in the most ugly colors, and God has heard them. D. Sibbs on Ps. 42.5.
But yet his hand was so heavy upon them therein, that they went always
mourning to their graves; and thought it fitter to leave it to Gods wisdom to
mingle the potion of sorrow, then to be their own choosers. It is a saying of
Austin, Let a man grieve for his sin, and then joy for his grief. Sorrow for
sin, if it so far exceed as that thereby we are disabled for the discharge of
our duties, it is a sinful sorrow, yea though it be for sin.

Verse 8. (...).
Confirm your love, etc.] Gr. Ratify it, and declare it authentike, as it were
in open court, and by public sentence (as Gal. 3.15.) and that at mine
instance, (...).
as an advocate.

Verse 9. Whether ye be obedient] First to the Lord, and then to us by the will
of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. Confer Heb. 13.17. Isa. 50.10.

Verse 10. To whom ye forgive] Or, Gratify. Mercy is that we must mutually
lend and borrow one of another. Let the rigid read Gal 6.1. See the Note there.

Verse 11. (...)
Lest Satan] That wily merchant, that greedy bloud-sucker, that devoureth not
widows houses, but most men's souls. See ver. 7.

For we are not ignorant] He is but a titular Christian that has not personal
experience of Satan's stratagems, his set and composed machinations, (...).
his artificially-moulded methods, his plots, darts, depths, whereby he
outwitted our first parents, and fits us a peny-worth still, as he sees reason.

Verse 12. A door was opened] An opportunity offered. Where the Master sets up
a light, there is some work to be done; where he sends forth his laborers,
there is some harvest to be gotten in.

Verse 13. (...).
I had no rest, etc.] Gr. No relaxation, viz. from my former cares and
anxieties about you, because he was not yet returned to tell me how it was with
you, 2 Cor. 7.6. Gods comforts are either rational, fetched from grounds which
faith ministers, or real from the presence of comfortable persons or things.

Verse 14. Now thanks be to God] Deo gratias was ever in Paul's mouth, ever in
Austins. And a thankful man is ever ready with his present, as Joseph's
brethren were, Genesis 43.26.

Causes us to triumph] Makes us more then conquerours, even triumphers;
whiles he rides upon us as upon his white horses all the world over, Conquering
and to conquer, Rev. 6.2.

Verse 15. A sweet savour] The Church is the mortar, preaching the pestell, the
promises are the sweet spices, which being beaten, Bis. on 1 Pet. 2.
yield an heavenly and supernatural smell in the souls of the godly hearers.

Verse 16. The savor of death] Aristotle writes, De mirabil. aus^ultat.
that vultures are killed with oil of roses. Swine (says Pliny) cannot live in
some parts of Arabia, by reason of the sweet sent of aromaticall trees there
growing in every wood. Tigers are enraged with perfumes. Vipera interficitur
palmis, says Pa^sanias, Moses killed the Egyptian, saved the Israelite.
Obed-Edom was blessed for the Ark, the Philistims were cursed. The Sun of the
Gospel shining upon one that is ordained to eternal life, reviveth and
quickneth him: but lighting upon a child of death, it causes him to stink
more abominably.

And who is sufficient] And yet now who is it almost that thinks not himself
sufficient for that sacred and tremend function of the Ministry? Who am I?
says Moses: Who am I not? says our upstart. Bradford was hardly persuaded to
become a Preacher. Act. and Mon. fol. 1578.
Latimer leapt when he laid down his Bishopric, being discharged, as he said,
of such an heavy burden. Luther was wont to say, That if he were again to
choose his calling, he would dig, or do any thing rather then take upon him the
office of a Minister. So said reverend Mr Whately of Banbury once in my hearing.

Verse 17. Which corrupt the word] Gr. Which huckster it, (...).
by handling it craftily and covetously, not serving the Lord Jesus Christ but
their own bellies, as those Popish trencher-flies, and our Court parasites.

In the sight of God] It is impossible to speak as in Gods presence, and not
sincerely.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Do we begin again, etc.]
AS we had done before, cap. 1.12. Plin. l. 1. epist. 8


To commend our selves] Quod magnificum referente alio fuisset, ipso qui
gesserat recensente vanescit. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own
mouth, Prove. 27.2. Laus proprio sordescit in ore. But the Apostle was
necessitated to it.

As some others, letters of commendation] As the false Apostles, who carried it
by testimonials: in giving whereof many good people are much too blame. Beauty
needs no letters of commendation, says Aristotle: much less does virtue,
where it is known. If moral virtue could be seen with mortal eyes, says
Plato, it would soon draw all hearts to it self.

Verse 2. You are our Epistle] The fruitfulness of the people is the Preachers
testimonial: as the profiting of the scholar is the teachers commendation.

Written in our hearts] Or rather in your hearts, as tables; the Spirit writing
thereon, by his Ministers as pens, that form of doctrine, Romans 6.17. that law
of their minds, Romans 7.23. Heb. 8.10. to be known and read of all men.

Verse 3. Ministered by us] Who are devoted to the service of your faith, and
are the Lord Christ's Sectaries.

But in fleshly tables] In the softened heart God writes his law, puts an
inward aptness answering the Law of God without, as lead answers the mould, as
tally answers tally, as indenture answers indenture.

Verse 4 Such trust have we] i. e. Such boldness of holy boasting, If Tully
could say, Two things I have to bear me bold upon, Cic. ep sam ^ 7.
the knowledge of good arts, and the glory of great acts; how much more might
Paul?

Verse 5. Not that we are sufficient] Lest they should think him arrogant.
Cyrus had this written upon his Tomb, I could do all things, (...).
as Arrianus reports. So could Paul too; but it was through Christ which
strengthened him. Phil. 4.1^.

All our sufficiency is of God] Had not Ministers then need to pray? Been
orasse est been studnisse, says Luther. And whether a Minister shall do more
good to others by his prayers or preaching, I will not determine (says a
reverend Writer) but he shall certainly by his prayers reap more comfort to
himself. Whereto I add, D. Tailour on 1 Thessalonians 5.23.
that unless he pray for his hearers as well as preach to them, he may preach
to as little purpose as Bede did, when he preached to an heap of stones.

Verse 6. Not of the letter] To wit, of the law, which requires perfect
obedience, presupposing holiness in us, Lex jubet grat^a juvat. Aug.
and cursing the disobedient: But the Gospel (called here the Spirit)
pre-supposeth unholinesse, and, as an instrument, makes us holy, Ioh. 17.17.
Act. ^0.32. For we preach Christ, 1 Cor. 1.23. We give what we preach. The
Spirit is received by the preaching of faith, Gal 3.2. This Mannah is rained
down in the sweet dews of the Ministry of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.22.

For the letter killeth] Many Popish Priests, that hardly ever had seen, much
less read St Paul's writings, having gotten this sentence by the end, The
letter kills; took care of being killed, by not meddling with good literature.
Hence that of Sr Thomas Moore to one of them, Tu been cavisti, ne te ulla
occidere possit
Littera: nam nulla est littera nota tibi.


Verse 7. The ministration of death] That is, the Law. David was the voice of
the Law awarding death to sin, He shall surely die. Nathan was the voice of the
Gospel, awarding life to repentance for sin, Thou shall not die.

For the glory of his countenance] Which yet reflected not upon his own eyes.
He shone bright and knew not of it: He saw Gods face glorious, he did not think
others had so seen his. How many have excellent graces, and perceive them not?

Verse 8. Be rather glorious] Let this comfort the Ministers of the Gospel
under the contempts cast upon them by the mad world ever besides it self in
point of salvation. See Isa. 49.5.

Verse 9. Exceedin glory] A throne was set in heaven, Rev. 4.2. Not in the
Mount, as Exodus 25 9. The pattern of our Church is showed in the heavens
themselves, because of that more abundant glory of the Gospel above the Law.
And therefore also John describes the City far greater and larger then
Ezekiel, Revel. 21. Because Ezekiel was a Minister of the Law, Brightman in loc.
John of the Gospel.

Verse 10. Had no glory] To speak of, and in comparison. The light of the Law
was obscured and overcast by the light of the Gospel. The sea about the altar
was brazen, 1 King, 7.23. and what eyes could pierce through it? Now our sea
about the throne is glassie, Rev. 4.6. like to crystal clearly conveying the
light and sight of God in Christ to our eyes.

Verse 11. Much more that, etc.] As the Sun outshineth Lucifer his herald.

Verse 12. Plainness of speech] Or, much evidence, as Ioh. 10.24. and 11.14.
and 16.29. with much perspicuity and authority we deliver our selves: we speak
with open face, not fearing colors.

Verse 13. Could not steadfastly, etc.] Could not clearly see Christ the end of
the Law, Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.24.

Verse 14. But their mindes] Unless God give sight as well as light, and
enlighten both organ and object, we can see nothing.

Which vail is done away] See Isa. 25.7. Faith freeth from blindness: we no
sooner taste of that stately feast by faith, but the vail of ignorance, which
naturally covers all flesh, is torn and rent.

Verse 15. The vail is upon their hearts] By a malicious and voluntary
hardening; they curse Christ and his worshippers in their daily devotions, and
call Evangelium Avengillaion, the Gospel, a volume of vanity or iniquity. Eliab
in Th^b.


Verse 16. When it shall turn] Of the Jews conversion, and what hinders it. See
the Note on Romans 11.7, 8, 25.

Verse 17. The Lord is that spirit] Christ only can give the Jews that noble
spirit, as David calls him, Psalm. 50.12. that freeth a man from the invisible
chains of the kingdom of darkness.

Verse 18. Are changed] As the pearl, by the often beating of the Sunbeams
upon it, becomes radiant.

From glory to glory] That is, From grace to grace. Fullness of grace is the
best thing in glory. Other things, as peace and joy, are but the shinings forth
of this fullness of grace in glory.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. As we have received mercy]
Since we have so freely been called to the Ministry of mere mercy, we show
forth therein all sedulity and sincerity. When I was born, said that French
King, thousand others were born besides my self. Now what have I done to God
more then they, that I should be a King, and not they? Tamerlane having
overcome Bajazet, asked him whether ever he had given God thanks for making him
so great an Emperor: who confessed ingenuously he never thought of it. To whom
Tamerlane replied, that it was no wonder so ungrateful a man should be made a
spectacle of misery. For you, says he, being blind of one eye, and I lame of
a leg, Leunelau. Annal, Tu^^.
was there any worth in us, why God should set us over two such great Empires
of Turks and Tartars? So may Ministers say, What are we that God should call us
to so high an office, etc.?

We faint not] We droope not, we flag not, (...).
we hang not the wing, though hardly handled. For, Pradicare nihil alind est,
quam derivare in se furorem totius mundi, as Luther said.

Verse 2. The hidden things of dishonesty] All legerdemain, and underhand
dealing. They that do evil hate the light, love to lurk. But sin has woaded an
impudency in some men's faces, that they dare do any thing.

To every man's conscience] A pure conscience has a witness in every man's
bosom. See 1 Cor. 14.24.

Verse 3. To them that are lost] It is a sign of a reprobate-goat, Joh. 8 43,
47. Sensual, baving not the spirit, Jude 19. The devil hides his black hand
before their eyes.

Verse 4. The god of this world] The devil usurps such a power, and wicked men
will have it so. They set him up for God: If he do but hold up his finger, give
the least hint, they are at his obedience, as God at first did but speak the
word, and it was done. All their buildings, plowings, plantings, sailings are
for the devil. And if we could rip up their hearts, we should find written
therein, The god of this present world.

Verse 5. We preach not our selves] We are Christ's paranymphes, or spokesmen,
and must woo for him. Now if we should speak one word for him, and two for our
selves, as all self-seekers do, how can we answer it?

Verse 6. Has shined] The first work of the spirit in man's heart is, to beat
out new windows there, and to let in light, Act. 26, 18. And then, Semper in
sole sita est Rhodos, qui and calorem and colorem nobis impertit. Aeneas Sylv.


Verse 7. (...).
In earthen vessels] Gr. In oyster-shels: as the ill-favored oyster has In it
a bright pearl. Vilis saepe cadus nobile nectar habet. In a leathern purse may
be a precious pearl.

Verse 8. We are troubled on every side] This is the worlds wages to Gods
Ministers. Veritas odium parit. Opposition is Evangely genius, said Calvin.
Truth goes ever with a scratcht face.

We are perplexed] Pray for me, I say, Pray for me, said Latimer. Act. and Mon.
fol 1565.
For I am sometimes so fearful, that I could creep into a Mouse-hole,
sometimes God does visit me again with comfort, etc.

Verse 9. Persecuted but not for saken] The Church may be shaken, Concuti, non
excuti, Duris ut ilex ^onsa bipennibus.
not shivered, persecuted, not conquered. Roma cladibus animosior, said one.
It Is more true of the Church: She gets by her losses, and as the Oak she takes
heart to grace from the maims and wounds given her, Niteris incassum Christi
submergere navem,
Tluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illaratis.


As the Pope wrote once to the great Turk,

Cast down, but not destroied] Impellere possunt (said Luther of his enemies)
sed totum prosternere non possunt: crudeliter me tractare possunt, sed non
extirpare: dentes nudare, sed non devorare: occidere me possunt, sed in totum
me perdere non possunt. They may thrust me, but not throw me, show their teeth,
but not devout me, kill me, but not hunt me, etc.

Verse 10. The dying of the Lord] A condition obnoxious to daily deaths and
dangers.

Might be made manifest] As it was in Paul, when being stoned, he started up
with a sic, sic oportet intrare. Thus, thus must heaven be had, and no
otherwise.

Verse 11. For we which live, etc.] Good men only are heirs of the grace of
life, 1 Pet. 3.7. Others are living ghosts, and walking sepulchers of
themselves.

Verse 12. Death works in us] It has already ceized upon us, but yet we are
not killed with death, as those were, Revel. 2. 23. As a godly man said, That
he did agrotare vitaluer, so the Saints do Mori vitaliter, die to live for ever.

But life in you] q. d. You have the happiness to be exempted, whiles we are
tantum non interempti, little less then done to death.

Verse 13. The same spirit] That you have and shall be heirs together of heaven
with you, though here we meet with more miseries.

I believed and therefore, etc.] The Spirit of faith is no indweller, where the
door of the lips open not in holy confestion and communication.

Verse 14. Shall present us with you] Shall bring us from the jaws of death, to
the joys of eternal life.

Verse 15. That the abundant grace] This is one end wherefore God suffers his
Ministers to be subject to so many miseries, that the people might be put upon
prayer and praise for their deliverance.

Verse 16. Yet the inward man] Peter Martyr dying said, My body is weak, my
mind is well. Well for the present, and it will be better hereafter, This is
the godly man's Motto.

Verse 17. For our light affliction] Here we have an elegant Antithesis, and a
double hyperbole beyond englishing. For affliction, here is glory; for light
affliction, a weight of glory; for mome^ary affliction, eternal glory.

Which is but for a moment] For a short braid only, as that Martyr said.
Mourning lasts but till morning. It is but winking, and thou shall be in
heaven presently, quoth another Martyr.

Works unto us] As a causa sine qua non, as the law works wrath, Romans 4.15.

Afar more exceeding] An exceeding excessive eternal weight. Or, a far most
excellent, eternal weight. Nec Christus, nec coelum patitur hyper^olen, says
one. Here it is hard to hyperbolize.

Weight of glory] The Apostle a^^^seth to the Hebrew and Chaldee words, which
signify both weight and glory. (...)
Glory is such a weight, as if the body were not upheld by the power of God, it
were impossible it should bear it. Joy so great, as that we must enter into it:
it is too big to enter into us. Enter into thy Masters joy, Mat. 25. Here we
find that when there is great joy, the body is not able to bear it; our
spirits are ready to expire; What shall it then be in heaven?

Verse 18. (...).
Whiles we look not] Gr. Whiles we make them not our scope our mark to aim at.
Heaven we may make our mark, our aim, though not our highest aim.

At the things that are seen] Whiles we eye things present only, it will be
with us as with an house without pillars, tottering with every blast, or as a
ship without anchor, tossed with every wave.

But at the things which are not seen] Pericula non respicit Martyr, coronas
respicit: Plagas non horret, praemium numerat: non videt lictores inserne
flagellantes, sed Angelos superne acclamantes, says Basil: Who also tells us
how the Martyrs that were cast out naked in a winters night, being to be burned
the next day, (...).
comforted themselves and one another with these words; Sharp is the cold, but
sweet is Paradise: Troublesome is the way, but pleasant shall be the end of our
journey: let us endure cold a little, and the Patriarchs bosom shall soon
warmus: let our foot burn a while, that we may dance for ever with Angels: Let
our hand full into the fire, that it may lay hold upon eternal life, etc.

But the things which, etc.] The Latins call prosperous things Res secundas,
because they are to be had hereafter, they are not the first things; these are
past, Rev. 21.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. For we know]
NOt we think, or hope only: This is the top gallant of faith, the triumph of
trust, this is as Latimer ca^s it, the sweetmeats of the feast of a good
conscience. There are other dainty dishes in this feast, but this is the
banquet. The cock on the dunghill knows not the worth of his jewel.

Our earthly house of this Tabernacle] Our clayie cottage. Man is but terra
friabilis, 1 Cor. 15.47.
a piece of earth neatly made up. The first man is of the earth earthy: and his
earthly house is ever mouldering over him, ready to fall upon his head. Hence
it is called, The life of his hands, Isa. 47.
because hardly held up with the labor of his hands. Paul a Tent-maker,
elegantly compares man's body to a Tent. Plato also in his dialogue of death,
calls the body a Tabernacle. (...).


We have a buiding of God] The Ark transportative till then, was settled in
Solomon's temple: So shall the soul be in heaven. As when one skin falls off,
another comes on, so when our earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved or taken
down, we shall have a heavenly house. The soul wears the body as a garment,
which when it is worn out, we shall be clothed with a better snit; we shall
change our rags for robes, etc. Itaque non plangimus, sed plandimus quando
vitam claudimus: quia dies iste non t^m fatalis quam natalis est.

Verse 2. For in this] That is, in this tabernacle of the body.

We groan earnestly] As that Avis Paradisi, Macrob l. 1. c. 11.
which being once caught and enraged, never leaves sighing, they say, till set
at liberty. The Greeks call the body (...) the souls bond, and (...), quasi
(...) the souls sepulcher.

To be clothed upon] By a sudden change, and not to die at all, as 1 Thessalonians.
4.17 1 Cor. 15.51 52. Quis enim vult mori? prorsus nemo. Death when it comes
will have a bout with the best, as it had with Hezekiah, David, Jonas, others.
For nature abhors it, and every new man is two men. But when a Christian
considers, that non nisi per angusta ad augusta perveniatur, that there is no
passing into Paradise, but under the flaming sword of this Angel death, that
stands at the Porch; that there is no coming to the City of God, but through
this straight and heavy lane no wiping all tears from his eyes, but with his
winding sheet, he yields, and is not only content, but full glad of his
departure. As in the mean while he accepts of life rather then affects it, he
endures it rather then desires, Phil. 1.23.

Verse 3. If so be that, etc.] q. d. Howbeit, I know not whether we shall be so
clothed upon, that is, whether we that are now (...), shall be sound alive at
Christ's coming to judgment, whether we shall then be found clothed with our
bodies, or naked, that is, stripped of our bodies.

Verse 4. Do groan, being burdened] viz. With sin and misery, whereof we have
here our back-burdens. M Bradford. Act. and Mon. fol. 1492.
And surely great shame it were (as that Martyr said) that all the whole
creatures of God should desire, yea groan in their kind for our liberty, and
we our selves to loath it: as doubtless we do, if for the cross, yea for
death it self we with joy swallow not up all sorrow that might let us from
following the Lords call, and obeying the Lords providence, etc.

Might be sw^llowed up of life] Not as a gulf or fire swallows up that is cast
into it, but as perfection swallows up imperfection; As the perfecting of a
picture swallows up the rude draught, as perfect skill swallows up bungling, or
manhood, childehood; not extinguishing, D. Preston.
but drowning it that it is not seen.

Verse 5. He that has wrought us] Curiously wrought us in the lowermost parts
of the earth, that is in the womb, as curious workmen perfect their choice
pieces in private, and then set them forth to public view. Psalm 139.15. with
Ephesians. ^19.
Others expound it by Rom 9.23.

The earnest of the spirit] He says not the Pawn, but the earnest. A pawn is
to be returned again, but an earnest is part of the whole bargain.

Verse 6. Therefore we are confident] Not haesitant, or halting, as Hadrian the
Emperor was, and as he that cried out on his deathbed, Anxius vixi, dubious
morior, nescio quo vado, I have lived carefully, Plato.
I die doubtfully, I go I know not whither. Socrates also that wisest of
Philosophers could not with all his skill resolve his friends, whether it were
better for a man to die or to live longer. Cicero comforting himself as well as
he could by the help of philosophy against the fear of death, cries out and
complains at length, Nescio quomo do, imbe^^^ior est med cina qudm morbus.
that the medicine was too weak for the disease. It is the true Christian only
that can be confident that his end shall be happy, though his beginning and
middle happily may be troublesome, Psalm. 37.37.

Whilst we are at home] Or stay for a night, as in an Inn. A man that comes
into an Inn, (...).
if he can get a better room, he will: if not, he can be content with it; for,
says he, it is but for a night. So it should be with us.

Verse 7. For we walk by faith] Which puts our heads into heaven, sets us on
the top of Pisgah with Moses, and therehence descries and describes unto us the
promised Land, gives us to set one foot aforehand in the porch of Paradise, to
see as Stephen did Christ holding out a Crown, with this inscription, Vincenti
dabo.

Not by sight] Sense corrects imagination, reason sense, but faith corrects
both, thrusting Hagar out of doors, when haughty and haunty grown.

Verse 8. And willing rather] Death is not to be desired as a punishment of
sin, but as a period of sin: not as a postern gate to let out our temporal,
but as a street door to let in eternal life.

To be present with the Lord] This Bernard calls Repatriasse. Plotinus the
Philosopher could say when he died, Bern, de morte.
That which is divine in me I carry back, (...), Synes. ep 139.
to the Original divine, that is, to God. But whether this man believed
himself or not, I greatly doubt.

Verse 9. Wherefore we labour] Our hope of heaven makes us active and abundant
in Gods service. The doctrine of assurance is not a doctrine of liberty, but
the contrary, 1 John 3.3. (...).
We make it our ambition, faith the Apostle here, to get acceptance in heaven,
waiting till our father shall call us home, and passing the time of our
sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. (...).
The Saints have their commotation upon earth, their conversation in heaven.

Verse 10. For we must all, etc.] This great assize will not be such an
Assembly as that of Ahashuerosh, of his Nobles, Princes and Captains only: nor
such as the biddings of rich men to their feasts, of their rich neighbors
only, Luke 14.12.
but like the invitation of that householder that sent his servants to compel
all to come in. On that day Adam shall see all his nephews together.

Appear before, etc.] Be^aid open, and have all ripped up. Our sins that are now
written as it were, with the juice of lemmons, (...).
shall then by the fire of the last day be made legible. And as in April both
wholesome roots and poisonable, discover themselves, Macar. Hom 12.
which in the winter were not seen, so at the day of judgment good and evil
actions.

The things done in his body] That is, Bernard.
the just reward of those things. In die judicy plus valebit conscientia pura,
quam marsupia plena. Then shall a good conference be more worth then all the
worlds good. And this was that that made Paul so sincere a Preacher, and so
insatiable a server of God, as Chrysostom calls him.

Whether it be good or bad] Wicked men shall give an account, 1. Debonis
commissis: Of goods committed to them: 2. De bodis dimissis, of good neglected
by them. 3. De malis commissis, of evils committed. 4. De malis permissis, of
evils done by others, suffered by them. Itaque vivamus, says the Orator. Cic.
4 in Ver.
Let us so live as those that must render an account of all.

Verse 11. Knowing therefore the terror, etc.] What a terrible time it will be
with the wicked, who shall in vain tire the deaf mountains with their hideous
outcries to fall upon them, etc.

We persuade men] To slay from the wrath to come, to repent and be converted,
that their sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come,
Act. 3.19. We speak persuasively to this purpose, but it is God only that
persuades.

Verse 12. (...).
Which glory in appearance] Gr. In the face. Hypocrites as they repent in the
face, Mat. 6.16. so they rejoice in the face, not in the heart. Their joy is
but skin-deep, it is but the hypocrisy of mirth, they do not laugh but grin,
their hearts ache many times, when their faces counterfeit a smile: Their mirth
is frothy and flashy, such as smooths the brow, but fills not the breast, such as
wets the mouth, but warms not the heart.

Verse 13. It is to God] i. e. When to the world we seem mad of pride and
vainglory, yet then we respect only Gods glory.

It is for your sakes] i. e. For your learning, that we are more modest and
sparing in commending our Apostleship. It is a good rule, Quicquid agas,
propter Deum agas. Do all for Gods sake.

Verse 14. The love of Christ, etc.] As reward has an attractive, and
punishment an impulsive, so love has a compulsive faculty. This love of Christ
had so closed in S. Paul, so hemmed him in, (...).
and begirt him round, that his adversaries reported him a mad man, as verse.
13. he erred in love toward his sweet Savior, and even exhaled his blessed
soul in continual sallies, as it were, and expressions of his dear affection
to the Lord Jesus.

Then were all dead] All the body suffered in and with Christ the head, and so
are freed by his death, Heb. 2.9. as if themselves in person had died.

Verse 15. Should not hence forth] Servati sumus ut serviamus. The redeemed
among the Romans were to observe and honor those that ransomed them as
parents, all their days.

Verse 16. No man after the flesh] i. e. We esteem no man simply the better or
worse for his wealth, poverty, honor, ignominy, or any thing outward. See jam.
1.9, 10, 11. Thomas Wats Martyr, spoke thus at his death to his wife and
children, Wife, and my good children, I must now depart from you, Act. and Mon.
fol 1450.
therefore henceforth know I you no more: but as the Lord has given you to me,
so I give you again to him, whom I charge you see that ye obey, etc.

Though we have known Christ] As possibly Paul might have known Christ in the
flesh: for Jesus of Nazareth was a Prophet mighty in deed and word before God
and all the people, Luke 24. 19. Austin wished that he might have seen three
things, Rome flourishing, Paul preaching, Christ conversing with men upon
earth. Bid comes after, and correcting this last wish, faith, yea but let me
see the King in his beauty, Christ in his heavenly kingdom. Paul was so
spiritualized that he took knowledge of nothing here below: he passed through
the world as a man in a deep muse, or that so looks for a lost jewel, that he
overlooks all besides it.

Verse 17. Is a new creature] Either a new man, or no man in Christ.

All things are become new] The substance of the soul is the same, the
qualities and operations altered. In regeneration our natures are translated,
not destroyed, no not our constitution and complexion. As the melancholy man
does not cease to be so after conversion, only the humor is sanctified to a
fitness for godly sorrow, holy meditation, etc. so, of other humors. (...)


Verse 18. And all things are of God] He is both author and finisher of our
faith, the God of all grace, the Father of all lights, etc.

And has given to us the Ministery] He has taken this office from the Angels,
those first preachers of peace, Luke 2.10, 14. The Angel told Cornelius, his
prayers were heard in heaven: but for the doctrine of reconciliation he refers
him to Peter, Act. 10.

Verse 19. That God was in Christ, etc.] As the salt-waters of the sea, when
they are strained through the earth, they are sweet in the rivers: so (says
one) the waters of Majesty and Justice in God, though terrible, yet being
strained and derived through Christ, they are sweet and delightful.

Verse 20. Emb^ssadours for Christ] And therefore sacred persons, not to be
violated on pain of Gods heavy displeasure. Do my Prophets no harm.

As though God did beseech you] Gods grace even kneels to us. En flexanimam
Suadae medullam: Who can turn his back upon such blessed and bleeding
embracements?

Verse 21. To be sin for us] That is, a sin-offering, or an exceeding sinner,
as Exodus 29.14. So Christ was, 1. By imputation, for our sins were made to meet
upon him, as that Evangelicall Prophet has it, See Aug. Enchirid. c. 41.
Isa. 53 6. And secondly, By reputation, for he was reckoned among
malefactors, ibid. And yet one Augustinus de Roma Archbishop of Nazareth was
censured in the Council of Basil, for affirming that Christ was peccatorum
maximus, the greatest of sinners. Christ so loved us, says one, that he
endured that which he most hated, to become sin for us (he was made sin passive
in himself to satisfy for sin active in us) and the want of that which was
more worth then a world to him, the sense of Gods favor for a time, Ama amorem
illius, etc. says Bernard.

Who knew no sinne] That is, With a practical knowledge, with an intellectual
he did, else he could not have reproved it. We know no more then we practice.
Christ is said to know no sin, because he did none.

That we might be made, etc.] As Christ became sin, not by sin inherent in him,
but by our sin imputed to him; so are we made the righteousness of God, by
Christ's righteousness imputed and given unto us. This the Papists jearingly
call putative righteousness.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. As workers together]
NOt as coadjutours, but as instruments, such as God is pleased to make use of.
See the Note on 1 Cor. 3.9.

The grace of God in vain] That Embassage of grace, Chap. 5. 20. Life of K. Ed.
6. by St ^^. Hay p. 74.
Or that unspeakable gift of Christ, v. 21. which many use as homely as Rachel
did her fathers gods; she hid them in the litter and sat on them: or as that
lewd boy in Kets conspiracy, who when the Kings pardon was offered the Rebels
by an herald, he turned toward him his naked posteriours, and used words
suitable to that gesture. One standing by discharged an harquebuz upon the body,
etc.

Verse 2. Now is the accepted time] He purposely beats upon the (...), because
opportunity is headlong, and, if once past, irrecoverable. Some are Semper
victuri, as Seneca says, they stand trifling out their time, and so fool away
their salvation. God will not always serve men for a sinning-stock. Patientia
lasa fit furor. Do we therefore as Millers and Mariners, who take the gale
when it comes, and make use of it, because they have not the wind in a bottle.

Now is the day of salvation] And God will not suffer men twice to neglect it.
If once past, it will never dawn again. Catch therefore at opportunities, as
the Echo catches the voice, Psalm. 27. take the nick of time. God is more
peremptory now then ever, Heb. 2.2, 3.

Verse 3. Giving no offence] A Minister should be as Absalom was, without
blemish from head to foot. His fruit should be, as that of Paradise, fair to
the eye, and sweet to the taste. A small fault is soon seen in him, and easily
either imitated or upbraided. God appointed both the weights and measures of
the Sanctuary to be twice as large as those of the Commonwealth.

Verse 4. In much patience] Or tolerance, suffering hardship, as good soldiers
of Jesus Christ.

In afflictions] Out of which there is little or no use of patience: at least
she cannot have her perfect work, Jam. 1.4.

In necessities] Want of necessaries.

In distresses] Such straits, as that we are at a stand, (...).
and have not whether to turn us: we are in a little ease, as it were.

Verse 5. In imprisonments] Chrysostom says, he had rather be Paul cast into
prison, then Paul wrapped up into Paradise.

Verse 6. By purenesse] By lamb-like simplicity or sincerity. (...).
Religion loves to lie clean, said one. Godliness must run through our whole
lives as the woof does through the web. See Isa. 33.14. No gold or precious
stone is so pure as the prudent mind of a pious man, said divine Plato.

Verse 7. On the right hand, etc.] Against the worlds both irritamenta and
terriculamenta, both allurements and affrightments. Contempt us est a me
Romanus and favor and furor, said Luther, when the Pope one while entised him,
and another while threatened him. When he was offered to be Cardinal, if he
would be quiet, he replied, No, not if I might be Pope. When he was told that
he should find no favor. Quid vero facere poterunt? Epist ad Spal.
(said he) occident? Nunquid resuscitabunt, ut iterum occidant^ What will they
do? will they kill me? But can they raise me to life again, that they may kill
me again? Can they kill me the second time?

Verse 8. Act. and Mon. fol. 1491.
By honor and dishonor, etc.] It is written on heaven-doors (said that
Martyr) Do well and hear ill. A bad report port is the ordinary reward of
very-well-doing: which made Luther wax proud even of his reproach. Tom. 1.
oper. Lat. p 31. ^
Superbus fio, said he quod video nomen pessimum mihi crescere. Hierome also
writes to Augustine, Quod signum major is gloriae est, omnes haeretici me
detestantur. This is my glory, that none of the heretics can give me a good
word or look. Qui boni viri famam perdidit ne conscientiam perderet, Sen.
It was a divine saying of Seneca, No man sets a better rate upon virtue, then
he that loses a good name to keep a good conscience.

As deceivers] Aspersed for such, as Christ was, Mat. 27.63. And Lucian
blasphemously terms him (...), the crucified cezener.

Verse 9. As unknown] To the world, 1 John 3, 1, 2. A Prince in a strange Land
is little set by, as not known. Vnkent unkist, as the Northern Proverb has it.

Well known] To them that have spiritual judgment, and can prize a person to
his worth: which the worlds wizards cannot do, Isa. 53.2, 3.

And not killed] God will have a care of that: he corrects in measure, he
smites his, not at the root, but in the branches, Isa. 27.8. As it is a rule in
physic still to maintain nature, etc. so does God still keep up the spirits of
his people by cordials, Isa. 57.16.

Verse 10. As sorrowful, yet, etc] Gods works are usually done in oppositis
contrarys, as Luther said. Out of the eater he brings meat, etc. This riddle
the world understands not.

Yet possessing all things] Godliness has an autarkie, a self-sufficiency, 1 Timothy 6.6. Cuicum paupertate been convenit, pauper non est, faith Seneca. A
contented man cannot be a poor man.

Verse 11. Our mouth is open unto you] We speak thus freely unto you, out of
our deep affection toward you: we even carve you a piece of our heart, we pour
forth our selves in this flood of speech, that thereby ye may take a scantling
of our over-abundant love to your fouls. (...), open-mouthed men are put for
fools oftentimes in Lucian and Aristophanes. But in another sense then the
Apostle here uses it. A large heart makes a man full in the mouth, as if it
sought that way to get out to the thing affected.

Verse 12. ye are not straightened in us] Non habitatis anguste in nobis: so
Piscator renders it.

But ye are straitned] Ye are bankrupts in love, ye comply not, ye do not
reciprocate. Plain things will join in every point, one with another: not so,
round and rugged things.

Verse 13. I speak as unto my children] Here are soft words, hard arguments.
This is the way to win: and that was a sad complaint, 2 Cor. 12.15. Love lost
is a bitter affliction. M. Ward.


Verse 14. Be not unequally yoked] Dare not (says a Divine) to yoke thy self
with any untamed heifer, that bears not Christ's yoke. Quam mase inaequales
veniuni juvenci? Ovid. epist.
An Ox and an Ass might not be coupled together in the Law. And hereunto the
Apostle seems to allude. The Doctors of Doway upon Levit. 19.19. Here all
participation, say they, with heretics and schismatiques is forbidden. Philip
King of Spain said, He had rather have no Subjects, then Subjects of diverse
religions. And, out of a bloody zeal, suffered his eldest son Charles to be
murdered by the bloody Inquisition, because he seemed to favor our profession.
Hieron. Catina.


Verse 15. What concord has Christ] Those Moderatours that plead for a
correspondency with Popery, would make a pretty show, if there were no Bible.
But if these reconcilers (as Franciscus de sancta clara, and his fautors) were
the wisest men under heaven, and should live to the worlds end, they would be
brought to their wits end, before they could accomplish this works end, to make
a reconciliation betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt Rome and us.

Verse 16. I will dwell in them] Gr. (...).
I will indwell in them: This notes Gods nearest communion with them. He
sets them before his face continually, Psalm. 41.12. as loving to look upon
them. The Philosopher told his friends, when they came into his little low
cottage, The gods are here with me. God and Angels are with his Saints. (...).


And walk in them] As they did in Solomon's porch, and other walks and galleries
about the Temple. And hereunto the Prophet alludes, Zach. 3.7. The Turks wonder
to see a man walk to and fro, and usually ask such whether they be out of their
way, or out of their wits. Bi^lulph.


Verse 17. And be ye separate] For gross Idolatry, and for fundamental
errors only must we separate. Corruptions grew so great in the Church of Rome,
that it justly occasioned first the separation of the Greek Churches from the
Latin, and then of the Reformed Churches from the Roman. Di^p derep. l. 2.
cap. 12.
Machiavel observed, that after the thousand year of Christ, there was no where
less piety then in those that dwelt nearest to Rome. And Bellar mine bewails
it, Lib. 3. de Papa Rom, cap. 21.
That ever since we cried up the Pope for Antichrist, his kingdom has not only
not increased, but has greatly decreased.

And I will receive you] So you shall be no losers, ^e put you into my bosom.
God imparteth his sweetest comforts to his in the wilderness, Hos. 2.14.

Verse 18. I will be a Father] The fundamental, meritorious, impulsive and
final causes of this precious privilege, see set forth, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

Says the Lord Almighty] This is added by our Apostle to Jer. 31.9.

CHAP. VII. Verse 1. Having therefore, etc.]
FAith in the promises purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. and argues notably from
mercy to duty.

From all filthinesse] Sin defiles a man worse then any jakes or leprosy. It
is the devils excrement, it is the corruption of a dead soul. Seldom or never
is there a birth of saving grace, but there follows it a flux of mortification.

Of flesh and spirit] i. e. Both of the outward and inward man. Or of flesh,
that is, worldly lusts, and grosle evils, as uncleanness, earthly-mindednesse,
etc. And of spirit, that is, more spiritual lusts, as pride, presumption,
self-flattery, etc. These lie more up in the heart of the Country, as it were:
those other in the fron^iers and skirts of it.

Perfecting holines] Propounding to our selves, the highest pitch, and the best
paterns.

In the fear of God] Which is the fountain, whence holiness flows, See Pro.
8.13.

Verse 2. Receive us] Gr. Make room for us in your hearts and houses. Set wide
open the everlasting doors, (...). Locum date.
that the King of glory may come in, triumphantly riding upon us his white
horses, Revel. 6 2.

We have wronged no man] Ministers must so live, that they may, if need be,
glory of their innocence and integrity, as did Moses, Samuel, Paul, Melancthon.

We have corrupted no man] viz. As the false Apostles had done with their
leaven of false Doctrine, which eats as a canker, 2 Timothy 2.17. or a gangrene,
which presently over-runs the parts, and takes the brain. Protagoras in Plato
boasted that of those sixty years that he had lived, he had spent forty in
corrupting of youth.

We have defrauded no man] We have cunningly made sale of no man, as those old
impostours, that made prize of their prisoners, 2 Pet. 2.3. And as those Popish
Muscipulatores or Mice-catchers, as the story calls them, that raked together
their Peter Pence, and other moneys here in England by most detestable arts.
Polydore Virgil was one of these ill officers, that left not so much money in
the whole Kingdom sometimes, as they either carried with them, or sent to Rome
before them.

Verse 3. I speak not this, etc.] Though cause enough he had to condemn them
for their shameful tenacity toward him, whom they basely suffered to labor
for his living, and to preach gratis; against all right and reason.

To die and to live with you] Such faithful friends are in this age all for
the most part gone in pilgrimage, and their return is uncertain, as once the
Duke of Buckingham said to Bishop Morton in Rich. the thirds time. Jonathan and
David, Pylades and Orestes, Polistratus and Hippoclides are famous for their
love one to another. These two last being Philosophers of Epicurus his sect,
V^l^r, M^x, l. ^. c. 16.
are said to have been born the same day, to have lived together all their
days, and to have died in the same moment of time, being well stricken in
years. But the love of Irish foster-brothers, is said far to surpass all the
loves of all men. C^md. Elizab. fol. 483. (...).


Verse 4. I am exceeding joyfull] Gr. I do over-abound exceedingly with joy.
Others may revell, the godly only rejoice: they have an exuberancy of joy, such
as no good can match, no evil over-match: Witness the Martyrs ancient and
modern. Oh how my heart leapeth for joy (said one of them) that I am so near
the apprehension of eternal bliss I God forgive me mine unthankfulness and
unworthiness of so great glory. In all the days of my life I was never so
merry, Act. and Mon. fol 1668, 1669 1670.
as now I am in this dark dungeon. Believe me there is no such joy in the
world, as the people of Christ have under the cross. Thus and much more Mr
Philpot Martyr.

Verse 5. Our flesh had no rest] Our spirit had no unrest. The outward man
suffers much sometimes, when the inward remains unmolested. Philip Lantgrave of
Hesse, being asked how he could so well bear his seven years imprisonment,
answered, Se divines Martyrum consolationes sensisse, that he felt the divine
consolations of the Martyrs, which as bladders bore him aloft all waters.

Verse 6. God that comforteth] This is a most sweet attribute of God, such as
we may profitably plead and produce in prayer. He loves to comfort those that
are forsaken of their hopes.

By the coming of Titus] Who came very opportunely, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13.
even whiles Paul was writing this Epistle. Gods comforts are therefore sweet,
because seasonable. He never comes too soon, nor stays too long. He waits to
be gracious, as being a God of judgment. Were we but ripe, he is ready, and
will lift us up in due time, Isa. 30 18.
1 Pet. 5.6.

Verse 7. Your earnest desire] Of seeing me, or rather of satisfying me.

Your fervent minde] Gr. Your zeal, both against the incestuous person, and the
false Apostles, Saint Paul's adversaries.

Verse 8. Though it were but for a season] Gr. For an hour. In sin, the
pleasure passes, the sorrow remains: but in repentance, the sorrow passes,
the pleasure abides for ever. God soon pours the oil of gladness into
broken hearts.

Verse 9. (...).
That ye sorrowed to repentance] Gr. To a transmentation, to a through change
both of the mind and manners. Optima and aptissima poenitentia est nova vita.
says Luther. Which saying (though condemned by Pope Leo 10.) is certainly an
excellent saying. Repentance for sin is nothing worth without repentance from
sin. If thou repent with a contradiction (says Tertullian) God will pardon
thee with a contradiction. Thou repentest, and yet continuest in thy sin. God
will pardon thee, and yet send thee to hell. There Is a pardon with a
contradiction.

Sorry after a godly manner] Gr. According to God. This is a sorrowing for sin,
as it is Offensivum Dei, averfivum a Deo. (...).
This both comes from God, and drives a man to God, as it did the Church in the
Canticles, and the Prodigal.

Verse 10. Godly sorrow worketh] Sin bred sorrow, and sorrow, being right,
destroieth sin: as the worm that breeds in the wood, eats into it, and devours
it. Chrysostom.
So that of this sorrow according to God we may say as the Romans did of Pompey
the great, (...) Plutarch.
That it is the fair and happy daughter of an ugly and odious mother.

Repentance never to be repented of] That is, says one, (...). M^rb^^y of
Repent.
Never to fall back again: for a man in falling back, seems to repent him of
his repentance. Others interpret it, such a repentance, as a man shall never
have cause to repent of. Job cursed the day of his birth; but no man was ever
heard to curse the day of his new birth. For it is repentance to salvation, it
has heaven: it is that rainbow, which if God see shining in our hearts, he
will never drown our souls.

But the sorrow of the world] That which carnal men conceive either for the
want or loss of good, or for the sense or fear of evil.

Works death] As it did in Queen Mary, Act. and Mon. fol. 1901.
who died (as some supposed by her much sighing before her death) of thought
and sorrow either for the departure of K. Philip, or the loss of Callice, Duke
of the he^rt.
or both. There are that interpret death in this place, of spiritual death,
because it is opposed here to life and salvation.

Verse 11. What carefulnesse] Gr. What study, (...). Ve^emens ad aliquam rem
magna cum vola^^^e applicatio.
which (says Tully) is an earnest and serious bending and applying of the
mind to some thing with a great deal of delight. It is rendered here
carfulness, not that of diffidence, but that of diligence putting a man upon
those wholesome thoughts, What have I done? What shall I do, etc.?

Yea what clearing] Gr. Apology or defense. M Bradford. S^r. of Repent. p. 14.
The old interpreter renders it satisfaction. It may be (says Mr Bradford) he
meant a new life, to make amends thereby to the Congregation offended. As the
devil is called the Accuser, so the Spirit is called, The Comforter or pleader
for us: because as he makes intercession in our hearts to God: so upon true
repentance he helps us to make apologies for our selves; not by denying our
sins or defending them, but by confessing and disclaiming them, as a child to
his father.

Yea, what indignation] Or stomach, as Ephraim, Jer. 31.19. The publican who
smote himself upon the breast; he would have knocked his corruptions, if he could
have come at them: as those Isa. 30.22. that polluted the Idols that they had
perfumed, and said unto them, Get you hence, be packing, What have I to do any
more with Idolds? Hos. 14.8. Out of doors with this Tamar, here is no room for
her. So foolish was I, and so very a beast, says David, Psalm. 73. How angry
and hot was he against himself, 2 Samuel 24.10.

Yea, what fear] Of Gods heavy displeasure, and of doing any more so; the burnt
child dreads the fire. He that has been stung, hates a snake.

Yea, what vehement desire] As that of Rachel after children, as that of David
after the water of the well of Bethlehem, as that of the hunted Hind after the
waterbrooks. David panted and fainted after God. Psalm. 119.
That Martyr cried out, None but Christ, none but Christ.

Yea, what zeal] Which is an extreme heat of all the affections for and toward
God. David's zeal ate him up. Paul was judged as mad for Christ, as ever he had
been against him, 2 Cor. 5.13. with Act. 26.11.

Yea, what revenge] Out of deepest self-abhorrency, buffeting the flesh, and
giving it the blew eye, as S. Paul (that crucifix of mortification) once did.
Thus the women parted with their looking-glasses, Exodus 35. Mary Magdalen wiped
Christ's feet with her hair, wherewith she had formerly made nets to catch fools
in. Cranmer burnt his right hand first, wherewith he had subscribed, Act. and
Mon. fol. 1714.
and oftentimes repeated in the flames. This unworthy right hand, so long as
his voice would suffer him. The true penitentiary amerceth himself, and
abridgeth his flesh of some lawful comforts, as having forfeited all. These
seven signs of godly sorrow are to be seen in the repenting Church, Cant. 5. as
in a worthy example or emblem. I sleep, there is indignation, but my heart
waketh, there is Apology. I arose to open etc. there is study or care and
diligence. My soul failed, there is her zeal. I sought him, I called on him,
there is her vehement desire. The watchmen found me, they smote me, etc. There Is
her revenge, whiles she shrank not for any danger, but followed Christ through
thick and thin in the night among the watch. And all this shows her fear of
being again overtaken with drowsiness.

To be clear in this matter] Because they had heartily repented of it. Quem
poenitet peccasse, poene est innocens. Senec. in Agam.
Repentance is almost equivalent to innocence. Imo plus est propemodum a vitijs
se revocasse, quam vitia ipsa nescivisse, Amb. in Psalm.
says Ambrose.

Verse 12. Not for his cause] That is, Not so much for his cause.

That suffered the wrong] viz. The father of the incestuous person. Compare
Genesis 49.4.

But that our care for you] That the Church might not suffer, as allowing such
foul facts. How the Primitive Christians were slandered by the Heathens in this
kind, who knows not? Act. and Mon^ 838.
Cenalis Bishop of Auranches wrote against the Church at Paris, defending
impudently that their assemblies were to maintain whoredom. Such reports also
they cast abroad a little before the massacre, They tell the people in Italy,
that Geneva is a professed Sanctuary of all roguery, that in England the people
is grown barbarous, and eat young children, etc.

Verse 13. His spirit was refreshed] After his long and tedious toil and
travel to come to you, he never thought much of his labor. Calvin said, That
it would not grieve him to sail over ten seas about an uniform draught for
religion. Ne december quidem maria, etc.


Verse 14. I am not ashamed] As I should have been, had it proved otherwise.
Lying is a blushfull sin: and therefore the lier denies his own lie, because he
is a shamed to be taken with it: and our ruffians revenge it with a stab.

Verse 15. Whiles he remembreth] Deep affections make deep impressions.

CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. Of the grace of God]
IT is a favor, yea an honor to us, that we may relieve poor Christ in his
necessitous members, Psalm. 16.2. When therefore he sets us up an Altar, be we
ready with this Sacrifice, Heb. 13.16.

Verse 2. In a great trial of affliction] For affliction tries what ^ettle we
are made of. Alchymy gold will not endure the seventh ^re, as true gold will.
Affliction (the trial of our faith) is more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7.
What then is faith it self so tried? Revel. 3.18.

The abundance of their joy] Whilst the spirit of glory, and of God rested
upon them, 1 Pet. 4.14. Well my grace be called the divine nature: for, as God
brings light cut of darkness, riches out of poverty, etc. so does grace: it
turns dirt into gold, etc. The world wonders (said that Martyr) how we can be
so merry, in such extreme misery. Act. and Mon. fol. 1^88.
But our God is omnipotent, which turns misery into felicity, etc. See the
Note on 2 Cor. 7.4.

Their deep poverty] Gr. (...)
Their poverty being now at the very bottom, and having little left beside
hope: they were even exhausted, and yet gave liberally. Giles of Brussels,
Martyr, gave to the poor whatsoever he had, that necessity could spare, and
only lived by his science, which was of a Cutler. Some he refresht with his
meat, Act. and Mon. fol. 811.
some with his clothes, some with his household stuff. One poor woman there was
brought to bed, and had no bed to lie in; to whom he brought his own bed,
himself content to lie in the straw.

Unto the riches of their liberality] Gr. (...).
Of their simplicity: in opposition to that crafty and witty wiliness of the
covetous to defend themselves from the danger of liberality. Wherein also they
are utterly mistaken; for not getting, but giving is the way to thrive. See the
Note on Mat. 6.4.

Verse 3. Yea and beyond their power] One such poor Macedonian might well shame
a hundred rich Corinthian cur-mudgins.

They were willing] Gr. (...)
They were volunteers, full of cheerful charity.

Verse 4. (...).
Receive the gift] Gr. The grace, i. e. the alms: it being of Gods free grace
that we have, 1. What to give. 2. Hearts to give it. For naturally we are all
like children which though they have their bosoms, mouths, and both hands full,
yet are loath to part with any.

Verse 5. Not as we hoped] God is usually better to us then our hopes.

First gave their own selves to the Lord] Ay, this is the right way of giving
alms; and this is done by faith, the work whereof is to be an empty hand,
Mendica manus (as Luther calls it) a beggars hand to receive it: but when it
has received, it gives back again it self and all, and thinks all too little,
as Mary Magdalen did her precious ointment.

And unto us by the will] The good soul delivers up it self to Christ's
faithful Ministers, and says in effect to them, as Luther, before he was
better informed, wrote to Pope Leo X, anno 1518. Scul. Annal. ^8
Prostratum pedibus me tibi offero, cum omnibus quae sum and habeo: -- Vocem
tuam vocem Christi in to praesidentis and loquentis agnoscam. I humbly
prostrate my self with all that I have, and am, at thy feet, etc.

Verse 6. So he would finish] Finis opus coronat, the end is better then the
beginning, says Solomon. Charles the 5. his emblem was Vlterius. Titus was
here desired to take up the whole alms, and not to faint till he had finish^d,
Gal 6 9.

Verse 7. As ye abound in faith] He purposely commends them, that he may the
better insinuate into them. Ministers may profitably praise their people in
some cases, that they may the sooner win them to duty: For there is no so sweet
hearing (says Xenophon) as a man's own commendation. (...).


Verse 8. To prove the sincerity] Gr. The germanity, (...).
the naturalnesse, legitimatenesse, opposed to bastardlinesse. This age
abounds with mouth-mercy, which is good cheap, and therefore, like refuse
fruit, is found growing in every hedge. But a little handful were worth a
great many such mouth-fuls, Isa. 51.18. Complaint is made, that there is not
any one that takes Sion by the hand. S. James tells of some in his time that
would feed their poor brethren with good words, and good wishes, Jam. 2.15, 16.
as if they had been of the Cameleon-kinde, to live with Ephraim upon wind,
Hos. 12.1. But what said the poor man to the Cardinal, who denied him a penny
which he begged, and offered him his blessing, which he begged not? If thy
blessing had been worth a penny, I should not have had it; keep it therefore to
thy self, Carle.

Verse 9. He became poor] Not having where to lay his head, nor wherewith to
pay tribute, till he had sent to sea for it, etc. Lo he that was heir of all
things, Heb. 1.2. was scarce owner of any thing, but disinriched and disrobed
himself of all, that through his poverty, he might crown us with the
inestimable riches of heavenly glory: This is such a motive to mercifulness as
may melt the most flinty heart that is.

Verse 10. But also to be forward] Gr. To be willing. This the Apostle makes to
be more then to do, that is, then to do with an ill will. Psalm. 110.3.
or for by-respects. Virtus nolentium nulla est. Christ will enjoy his Spouses
love by a willing contract, not by a ravishment: the title of all converts is,
a willing people.

Verse 11. Now therefore perform] Unless our willing of good be seconded with
endeavor, it is nothing worth: Balaam wished well to heaven, so did he that
came kneeling to our Savior with good master, etc. but they stuck at the
hardship of holiness, without which there is no heaven to be had: they would
not come off here, and therefore gat nothing by their short-winded wishes.
Solomon compares such sluggards to the door, that turns on the hinges, Virtutem
exoptant contabescu^tque relicta. Pers.
but yet hangs still upon them, it comes not off for all the turnings.

Verse 12. It is accepted] Sic minimo capitur thuris honor Deus. Noah's
Sacrifice could not be great, yet was greatly accepted. Jacob bad his sons take
a little of every good thing, and carry for a present to the Lord of Egypt.
Saul and his servant present Samuel with the fourth part of a shekel, to the
value of about our five-pence. Thankfulness (they had learned) was not
measured by God and good men by the weight, but by the will of the retributour.
God calls for that which a man's heart inclines him to do, be it more, be it
less: so low does his highness stoop to our meannesse; preferring the
willingness of the mind, before the worthiness of the work.

Verse 13. (...).
And you burdened] Gr. Pinched or pressed, viz. with poverty.

Verse 14. Your abundance] That your cup may overflow into their lesser dishes,
that your superfluities both in respect of the necessity of nature and exigency
of estate (as the Schoolmen speak) may supply the wants of Gods poor afflicted.

A supply for your want] Those that lend mercy may have need to borrow. The
Shunamite that refused once to be spoken for to the King by the Prophet, little
thought she should afterward have craved that courtesy of his man Gehezi.
Those that stand fastest upon earth, have but slippery footing: No man can say,
that he shall not need friends. Pythias was so wealthy a man, that he was able
to entertain Xerxes his whole Army consisting of a million of men: yet
afterward he became so poor that he wanted bread.

Verse 15. He that had gathered much] He that was so nimble as to gather more
then his neighbor, was to supply his neighbor, that every man might have his
Omer. Now the equity of this law being common and perpetual, the Apostle
draws his argument from it. Riches, says one, are but as Manna: those that
gathered more of it, had but enough to serve their turn (or if they gathered
more, 'twas but a trouble and annoyance to them) and they that gathered less
had no want. Let the rich account themselves the poor man's stewards. Withold
not good from the owners thereof (the poor) when it is in the power of thy hand
to do it.

Verse 16. But thanks be to God] Deo gratias was ever in Paul's mouth, and in
Austins, and should be in ours.

Verse 17. But being more forward] A good heart is ready to every good work,
waiting the occasions thereof, Tit. 3.1. as the Be, so soon as ever the Sun
breaks forth, flies abroad to gather honey and wax.

Verse 18. Whose praise is in the Gospel] S. Luke, likely, who wrote first
Gospel, as some gather out of Luke 1.1. and whom Ambrose highly commends for
the most clear and distinct Gospel-writer.

Verse 19. Chosen of the Churches] This compared with Act. 13.1, 2. it may seem
the Apostle means not Luke, but Barnabas: though others think Timothy. Danae
in 1 Timothy 612. (...).


Verse 20. Avoiding this] As shipmen avoid a rock or shelf: for it is a
seafaring term, and shows how shie we should be doing ought, that may render
our honesty suspected. Ego si bonam famam servasso, sat dives ero, said he in
the Comedy.

Verse 21. Providing] Projecting, procuring. (...)
A good name is a great blessing, and therefore the same word in Hebrew
signifies both, Prove. 28.20. (...)


Verse 22. Whom we have oft] Some are of opinion that Luke is here deciphered
rather then verse. 19. Whoever it was, it is much for his honor, that
Apelles-like he was approved in Christ, Romans 16.
and active for the Church.

Verse 23. Messengers] Gr. Apostles, Emandati, Ambassadors of special and
high emploiment.

The glory of Christ] So the Church is called the glory, Isa. 4.5. Gods glory,
Isa. 46.13. a crown of glory, and a royal diadem in the hand of Jehovah, Isa.
62.3. The throne of God, Exodus 17.16. The throne of glory, Jer. 4.21. The
ornament of God, yea the beauty of his ornament, set in Majesty, Ezekiel. 7.20.
There is not so much of the glory of God (says one) in all his works of
creation and providence, as in one gracious action that a Christian performs.
(...).


Verse 24. Wherefore show ye] As by an ocular demonstration, or as by pointing
the finger.

Before the Churches] In the face of the Churches, whose eyes are now full set
upon you, (...).
to see what entertainment ye will give to their messengers. A Christian is
like a crystal glass, with a lamp in the midst.

CHAP IX. Verse 1. The ministering to the Saints]
OR the service that ye owe the Saints in ministering to their necessities.
Amadeus Duke of Savoy, Stephanus King of Hungary. Hooper Bishop of Gloucester,
(...).
and Dr Tailour Martyr, are famous for their labor of love in ministering to
the Saints.

Verse 2. Was ready] To wit, in their resolutions: for the collection was not
yet made.

And your zeal] i.e. Your liberal contribution out of deep affection, and an
holy emulation to exceed others in bounty.

Verse 4. Capel. in Spic.
In this same confident boasting] Gr. In this confidence of glorying: A
Metaphor from hunters, who confidently expect the beast, and valiantly set upon
him. Sic latini dicunt, subsistere apram.

Verse 5. Not of covetousnesse] Non ut extortum aliquid, says Piscator, velut
illiberale aliquid. Not as wrung out of you, squeezed out, as verjuice is out
of a crab. Covetous persons part with their penny, as with blood out of their
hearts, Citius aquam ex pumice, clavam ex manu Herculis extorqueas. God will
set off all hearts from such misers in their misery, that are so unreasonably
merciless.

Verse 6. (...)
Which sows bountifully] Gr. That sows in blessings; alluding to Ezekiel.
34.26. Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the water, that is, upon fat and
fertile places, loca irrigua. A Metaphor from seedsmen, who eat not all, sell
not all, but sow some: so should we sow that we have upon the backs and bellies
of the poor, sow more of this seed in Gods blessed bosom, the fruit whereof we
are sure to reap in our greatest need.

Verse 7. According as he purposeth] God straineth upon none: See Levit. 5.6,
12, and 14.10, 21, 30. Liberality implies liberty.

God loves a cheerful giver] Dat been, dat mulium, qui dat cum munere vultum,
One may give with his hand, and pull it back with his looks.

Verse 8. And God is able] Fear not therefore lest your selves should want
hereafter, if you should give liberally now. Is not mercy as sure a grain as
vanity? Is God like to break?

Having all sufficiency] He says not, superfluity. Enough we shall be sure of,
and an honest affluence, if fit for it, De civit Dei l. 5 c. 25.
and can make us friends with it. Bonus Deus Constantinum magnum tantis
terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta optare nullus auderet, says Austin. God
gave Constantine more wealth then heart could wish, and he was no niggard of it
to poor Christians.

In all things] The Apostle uses many Ali's on purpose to cross and confute
our covetousness, who are apt to think we have never enough.

Verse 9. He has dispersed abroad] General Norice was like that Bishop of
Lincoln, that never thought he had that thing that he did not give. Of Mr
Wiseheart the Scottish Martyr it is reported, that his charity had never end,
night, day, nor noon. Act. and Mon. fol. 1155.
He forbear one meal in three, one day in four for the most part to bestow it
on the poor. He never changed his sheets, but he gave them away, etc.

His righteousness endures for ever] Never did a charitable act go away
without the retribution of a blessing. See the Note on Mat. 10.42.

Verse 10. And multiply your seed sown] He that sows seems to cast away his
seed, but he knows he shall receive his own with usury. Isaac had a
hundredfold increase. In Egypt so far as the river Nilus waters, the ground
is so fruitful, Blunts voyage, 77.
that they do but throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests in less then
four months. Temporalia Dei servis impensa non pereunt, sed parturiunt.
Sidedisses tres aureos, accepisses trecentos, said that Bishop of Millain to
his servant, that had not given so much to the poor as he had appointed him. If
we never sow, Job Manlij. loc. com page 359.
we shall never reap, said that ^ood poor Minister that bad his wife give
threepence (his whole stock) to a poor brother.

Verse 11. Rogers of love.
Which causes through us] Whiles we not only relieve them, but instruct them,
as Bishop Hooper did his board of beggars, as Dr Tailour the Martyr did the
Alms-people of Hadley, and other poor of his Parish. Act. and Mon. fol. 1370.
Ibid 1387.
As Giles of Brussels did, ministering wholesome exhortation of sound doctrine to
them he relieved, and so eliciting from them many thanksgivings unto God.

Verse 13. For your professed subjection] Whilst you testify your faith by
your works, as they produced the coats that Dorcas made, to prove her a devout
woman; and as Numb. 13.13. it appeared by the fruits it was a good land.
Heathens acknowledged, That no people in the world did love one another so as
Christians did.

Verse 14. And by their prayer for you] A poor Christians prayers cannot be
bought too dear. I will restore comfort to him, and to his mourners, Isa.
57.18. Such can do much with God. Et cum talis fueris memento mei, says
Bernard to his poor, but pure friend. How heartily prays Paul for One
siphorus, 2 Timothy 1.18? Meditat. devetiss cap. 5.


Verse 15. For his unspeakable gift] That is, for Christ (says Theophylact,
whom Piscator follows) who is called the gift, by an excellency, Joh. 4.10.
and the benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2.

CHAP. X. Verse 1. By the meekness and gentlenesse]
Whom in those sweet virtues I desire to imitate. The praise of Christ's
meekness recorded by the Prophet, and explained by Philip, converted the
Eunuch, Act. 8.

Who in presence am base] i. e. Despicable, because I take not upon me, and
bear a port, as the false Apostles do. Meekness of spirit commonly draws on
injuries. A Crow will stand upon a sheeps back pulling off wool from her sides.

Am bold toward you] So mine adversaries report me, as if I were over-bold and
busy by my letters.

Verse 2. That I may not be bold] That you necessitate me not. Non nisi coactus
hoc facio, said that Emperor that subscribed a warrant to put one to death.

With that confidence] It was but confidence: but they made the worst of it,
and called it boldness, Quam vitio verterunt. Evil will never speaks well.

Verse 3. We do not war, etc.] The Ministry is a kind of Militia, 1 Timothy
1.18. Christ rides on Ministers, as his white horses, conquering and to
conquer, Rev 6.2.

Verse 4. Are not carnall] i.e. Weak, opposed here to mighty. The flesh is weak
as water, therefore called the old man, old leaven, etc. These weak weapons of
the false Apostles (here intimated and taxed) are humane eloquence, artificial
composures, etc. of those Verbalists, Qui exceptis verbis tinnulis and
emendicatis, nihil loquuntur, as Hierom has it.

But mighty through God] Note here the Apostles modesty, Not we, says he, but
our weapons are mighty, and not through us that wield them, but through God that
works by and with them. See the Note on 1 Cor. 15.10.

To the pulling down of strong-holds] Forts, Munitions, Trenches, Cages of foul
spirits inhabiting men's hearts.

Verse 5. Casting down imaginations] As the spettle that comes out of man's
mouth slaieth serpents: so does that which proceeds out of the mouths of Gods
faithful Ministers quell and kill evil imaginations, carnal reasonings, which
are that legion of domestical devils, that hold near intelligence with the old
Serpent. Nemo sibi de suo palpet: quisque sibi Satan est. Corrupt reason, like
Eve and Jobs wife, is always drawing us from God. Out of doors with this Hagar.

And bringing into captivity] See here the process of St Paul's Ministry. He
overthrows, captivates, subdues to the obedience of the Lord Christ. See the
like Jer. 1.10. Chosroes King of Parthia, was so subdued by the Romans, that he
made a law that none of his successors should ever wage war with them again,
So here.

Verse 6. And having in a readinesse] Vengeance is every whit as ready in Gods
hand, as in the Ministers mouth. See Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. Elisha has his
sword as well as Jehu and Hazael, 1 King. 19.17. God hews men by his Prophets,
and slaies them by the words of his mouth, Hos. 6.5. By preaching, Christ many
times smites the earth, Isa. 11.4. his word lays hold on them, Zach. 1.6. and
that which they have counted wind, has become fire to devour them, Jeremy
5.13, 14.

Verse 7. Do ye look on things] q. d. Are ye so weak as to be cozened by an
outside, to be carried away with shows and shadows of true worth? Do not many
things glister besides gold? Every bird that has a seemly feather, has not
the sweetest flesh: nor does every tree that bears a goodly leaf, bring good
fruit. Glass gives a clearer sound, then silver, etc.

Even so are we Christs] The Rogation heretics would have made the world
believe, that they were the only Catholics. The Arrians called the true
Christians, Ambrosians, Athanasians, Homousians, etc. The Donatists made
themselves the only true Church, etc.

Verse 8. And not for destruction] If it prove so, it is by accident, and not
as we intend it. See the Note on 2 Cor. 2.16.

Verse 9. Terrify you by letters] As the false Apostles object against me.
Aspersions must be carefully cleared, when the fruit of a man's Ministry is
thereby impeached and impeded.

Verse 10. Weighty and powerfull] As often as I read Paul's Epistles, Non verba
sed tonitrua audire mihi videor, says Hierome, Me thinks I hear not words but
thunderclaps. But that his bodily presence was not weak, nor his speech
contemptible. See Act. 13.10. together with the Note thereon.

Verse 11. Such will we be, etc.] That we have not hitherto been so, was
because we spared you. Posse and nolle nobile, says Chrysostom, (...)
Kindness is goodlinesse, Isa. 40.6.

Verse 12. For we dare not] This he speaks by an irony, whereof he is full in
this Epistle: and may therefore be called, as Socrates was (...).

But they measuring themselves, etc.] Turning the other end of the perspective,
they see themselves bigger, and others lesser then they are. So bladder-like is
the soul, that filled with earthly vanities, though but wind, it grows great
and swells in pride. O pray to be preserved from this perilous pinnacle of
self-exaltation. Look into the perfect law of liberty, and draw nigh to God.
The nearer we come to God, the more rottenness we find in our bones. The more
any man looks into the body of the Sun, the less he sees, when he looks down
again.

Verse 13. But we will not boast, etc.] As any man is more worthfull, he is
more modest: full vessels yield no such sound as empty casks do. A vessel cast
into the sea, the more it fills, the deeper it sinks: the laden scale goes
downward: the most precious balm sinks to the bottom. The good ear of corn, the
fuller it is, the lower it hangs the head.

Verse 14. For we stretch not, etc.] We tenter not our selves beyond our
scantling. (...)


Verse 15. Not boasting of things] Ammianus Marcellinus tells of one Lampadius a
great person in Rome, who through all parts of the City, where other men had
bestowed cost in building, he would set up his own name, not as a repairer of
the work, but as the chief builder. Of the same fault Trajan the Emperor is
said to have been guilty: Whence he was commonly called, Herba parietina, or
Wall-wort.

Verse 16. In the regions beyond you] This was a piece of the Bragadochio
false-Apostles vain boasting: as it is now of the Jesuits those Circulatores
and Agyrtae, that compass sea and land, Am. Marcel.
crack of what conversions they have wrought in India and Afrike, and
Lampadius-like take it ill at any man's hand that commend them not every time
they spet upon the ground. Caius the Emperor was ready to destroy the whole
Senate, because they did not deifie him for marching with his whole Army to the
Ocean, Dio in vit^ Caligulae.
and fetching thence a few oyster-shels, Quibus spolys acceptis magnifice
gloriabatur, quasi Oceano subacto.

Verse 17. Glory in the Lord] See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.31.

Verse 18. Whom the Lord commendeth] As he did his servant Job. chap. 1.8. And
as he did his handmaid Sarah, for calling her husband Lord, though there was
never a good word besides in the whole sentence, 1 Pet. 36. with Genesis 18.22.
Neither was Job so patient, but that he had his out-bursts. All which not
withstanding, ye have heard of the patience of Job, etc. Iam. 5.11. He is not
challenged at all for his impatience, but crowned and chronicled for his
patience. See here the wonderful goodness of God toward his: and take comfort
in his white stone, against the black coals of ill-affected persons.

CHAP. XI. Verse 1. In my folly]
HOw foolish were the Pharisees, Ioh. 7.49. and after them the Gnostics, the
Illuminates, and now the Jesuits that boast themselves to be the only knowing
men? Palemon the Grammarian that bragged that all learning was born with him,
Sueton.
and would die when he died? Epicurus, that he first found out the truth, etc.
Richardus de S. Victore, Parei. bist. occl.
that gave out that he knew more in Divinity, then any Prophet or Apostle of
them all? These were fools to purpose. The Apostle was put upon a necessity of
commending himself, so to vindicate his Ministry from the contempt cast upon
him by the Corinthians.

Verse 2. For I am jealous] q.d. My dear love to you puts me upon this praising
my self.

With a godly jealousie] Gr. With a zeal of God, called the flame of God, Cant.
8.6. such as was that of Job over his children, for fear they should sin
against God: not such as was that of the Pharisees over the Galatians, the
hypocrisy of jealousy, Gal. 4.17. (...) Velut ca quae glutino aut ferrumine
com mittuntur. Erasm. 2 King. 14.9.


For I have espoused you] Gr. I have fitted you, as things that are pieced
together, are glewed or soddered.

To one husband] Here the Cedar takes the thistle to wife ( tantus taentillos)
and does all the offices of an husband to her. He first loves his Church, and
then purisieth her, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. ( Abashuerosh had the virgins first
purified and perfumed, before he took them to his bed) He puts upon her his own
comeliness, Ezekiel. 16.
as Eleazar put the jewels upon Rebecca (hence she is called Callah of the
perfection of her attire, ornaments and beauty, Ier. 2.32.) 3. He makes love
to her by his Paranymphes. his Ministers, who woo for him, and present her to
Christ as a chaste virgin. 4. He cohabits with her, Cant. 7. 5. The King is
tied in the ra^ters. 5. He rejoices over her, Isa. 62.4, 5. 6. He does the
marriage duty to her, and makes her the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. Romans 7.
1^ 4. 7. He nourishes and cherishes her, Ephesians. 5.29. 8. He hates putting
away, Mal. 2.16. and provideth for her eternal welfare, Ephesians. 1.27. Col. 1.21,
22.

Verse 3. But I fear] Jealousy is made up of love, fear and anger.

By his subtilty] He mustered all his forces, or rather all his frauds together
to cheat her. That old Serpent when he was young, outwitted our first parents.
Now that he is old, and we young, Ephesians. 4.14. What will he not do, if we watch
not? Bellar mine says of his Romanists, Romani sicut non acumina, ita nec
imposturas habent, that they are neither sharp nor subtle. The devil is both,
and so are they: witness their crafty cruel both positions and dispositions.
This old Serpent having lent them both his seven heads to plot, and his ten
horns to push.

So your minds should be corrupted] Satan has his (...), his set and composed
machinations, 2 Cor. 2.11. whereby he adulterateth out (...), our judgments.

From the simplicity, etc.] Of all graces Satan would beguile us of this
simplicity: the world calls it silliness, sheepishnesse

Verse 4. But if he that cometh] Giddy hearers, wherried about with every
novelty, have no mould, but what the next teacher casts them into: being blown
like glasses into this or that shape at the pleasure of his breath. See Ioh.
5.43.

Verse 5. The very chiefest Apostles] Either he means those pillars, Peter,
James, John, etc. Gal. 2.6. Or the false Apostles, whom he styles chiefist by
an irony, because they sought to bear away the bell, and be counted prime
preachers.

Verse 6. But though I be rude in speech] Gr. An idiot, a plain downright,
homespun, homely-spoken person. The Ancients busied themselves (says Cyril)
(...), not about coynt and new coined language, but (...), Cyril. Hicrosolom.
about solid demonstrations drawn out of the holy Scriptures. Hierome reports
of Didymus that he was an Apostolic writer, as you might easily gather by his
style, T^m sensuum nomine, quam simplicitate verborum. His matter was as lofty,
as his language low and ordinary. Hierom himself is much commended by learned
men, Quod ubique non si^ aeque Latinus, Viver l 2. and 3. de trad dis^ip.
that he is not always so curious and choice of his words. But what reason he
had I see not, to censure St Paul so sharply as he does, Ob sensus involutos,
cloquium implicatum, and artis Grammaticae imperitiam, for his intricate sense,
dark clocution, and unskilfulnesse in Grammar-learning. Hieron epist. ad
Agesiant.
True it is he was a plain preacher, as he here acknowledges: and why he
affected plainness, he tells us, 1 Cor. 1.17. as stooping to vulgar
capacities. But that he could play the Orator if he pleased, appears, Act
17.2^. etc. and Act. 26.2 Insomuch as the Lycaonians called him Mercury,
because he was a Master of speech, Act. 14.12. And as for his Epistles, there
is as good thetorike found in them, as in any Heathen Orator whatsoever;
Demosthones is but dull to him: and Austins wish was to have seen, Paulum in
ore, Paul preaching, which he would have esteemed an high happiness.

Verse 7. I have preached to you freely] Because he gat his living with his
hands, that he might preach gratis, they despised him as a mean mechanic, This
is merces mundi, the worlds wages, Nil habot inf^elix paupertas, etc. Ministers
must have an honorable maintenance (and not be forced to weave for a living,
as Musoulus was, or to serve the Mason, as another great scholar) or else they
will be shamefully slighted.

Verse 8. I robbed other Churches] Grandis Metaphora, says Piscator. I took
maintenance from them (as the Apostle presently expounds himself.) I made a
prey and prize of them.

Verse 9. (...).
And wanted] Gr. And was behind hand.

I was chargeable to no man] I was none of those droans that chill the charity
of well-disposed people, as the cramp-fish benummeth those that touch or come
near it. (...). Torpe lo.


Verse 10. As the truth of Christ is in me] He confirms it with an oath, that
he will not take a penny of them, whiles he preaches in those parts. A Minister
should be careful of whom he receives a kindness.

Verse 11. Because I love you not?] It should be a Ministers care to preserve
in the hearts of his people an opinion of his love to them. For if they once
concerve an incurable prejudice against him that he hates them, or the like,
there is no good will be done.

Verse 12. That I may cut off occasion] There were those that waited for it, as
earnestly as a dog does for a bone, as we ^y. Habuerunt suos cuculos omnes
docti and hearoici quolibet tempore, says Melancthon. Every Zopyrus has his
Zoilus.

That wherein they glory] They, likely, had feathered their nests, and so might
well afford to preach gratis. Paul, though not so well under-laid, would not
come behind them in that neither. He would not be less busy (though he
labored hard for it) in building stair-cases to heaven, then they were in
digging descents down to hell.

Verse 13. Deceitful workers] They seemed to labor, but indeed they loitered,
or worse; seeking to set up themselves in the hearts of Gods people.

Transforming themselves, etc.] The Mannichees derived their name of Manna,
because they held, That whatsoever they taught was to be received as food from
heaven. Montanus said, He was the Comforter, etc. Novatus called himself Moses,
and a brother that he had Aaron. The Family of Love set out their Evangelium
regni. The Swenckfeldians (Stinckseldians Luther called them, from the ill
savor of their opinions) entitled themselves with that glorious name, The
Confessors of the glory of Christ. Schlussenburg. ^


Verse 14. Satan himself is, etc.] Satan (says one) does not always appear in
one and the same fashion, but has as many several changes as Proteus among
the Poets. At Lystra he appears like a Comaedian, as if a scene of Plautus were
to be presented on the stage. At Antioch like a Jesuit with traditions in his
month. At Athens he sallies out like a Philosopher. At Ephesus like an
Artisicer, and here at Corinth he is transformed into an Angel of light. Fiery
Serpents full of deadly poison are called Seraphims, Numb. 21.6. Isa. 30.6.

Verse 15. As the Ministers of righteousnes] Cavete a Melampygo. Try before you
trust: Sectaries and seducers are very subtle and insinuative; the locusts have
faces like women; know them and avoid them. When one commended the Popes Legate
at the Council of Basil, Sigismund the Emperor answered, Tamen Romanus est,
yet he is a Roman. So, let Satan or his Agents come never so much commended to
us in his sugared allurements, let us answer, Yet he is a devil.

Verse 16. Let no man think me] There was never man, nor action, but was
subject to variety of censures and misconstructions, foolish men daring to
reprehend that which they do not comprehend. I like S. Augustines resolution in
this case. Non curo illos censores, qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel
reprehend ndo non intelligunt. Aug. cont Fan. l. 22. c. 34.


Verse 17. I speak it not after the Lord] Neither by his command nor example,
but permission only.

Verse 18. Glory after the flesh] Or in the slesh, Gal. 6.13. or have
confidence in the flesh, Phil. ^.^.

Verse 19. For ye suffer scols] Inter indoctos etiam Corydus sonat, Wise men
hold them for fools, whom fools admire for wise men. Quintilian.
As one says of Atturneys, Quod inter opiliones se jactitent Jurisperitos,
inter Jurisperitos ne opilionum quidem aestimatione habeantur. Rex Platonicus.


Verse 20. For ye suffer, if etc.] As the Popish penitentiaries, those
miserably misled and muzzled creatures. They write of out King Henry the
second, that going to Canterbury to visit the sepulcher of his own Martyr
Thomas Becket, coming within the sight of the Church, he alighted, and went
three miles on his bare feet, Daniels hist. fol ^02.
which with the hard stones were forced to yield bloody tokens of his devotion
on the way. Clemens the fifth, Pope, caused Dandalus the Venetian Ambassador
to come before him tied in chams, Incl p. 379. Gab. Powell of Tolerat.
and to wallow under his table with dogs, whilst his Holiness sat at supper.
The Pope lashed Henry 4. of France (in the person of his Ambassador at Rome)
after the singing of every verse of Miserere, until the whole Psalm was sung
out. Sed exor to jam Evangely yubare, sagaciores (ut spero) principes ad nutum
Romani Orbily non solvent subligacula, says a great Divine.

If a man take of you] By way of gratuity, but not of wages: or by their
followers, and not by themselves. No Cappucine among the Papists may take or
touch silver. This metal is as very Anathema to these, D. Halls; epist. 5.
Decade. 1.
as the wedge of gold to Achan: At the offer whereof he starts back, as Moses
from the Serpent. Yet he carries a boy with him that takes and carries it, and
never complains of either metal or measure.

Verse 21. As though we had been weak] i. e. Worthless and spiritlesse. But
mistake not your selves; I am another manner of man then you imagine me. It is
said of Athanasius, that he was Magnes and Adamas; a loadstone in his sweet,
gentle, drawing nature, and yet an adamant in his resolute, stout carriage
against heretics and evil doers. Nazianz.


Verse 22. Are they Israelites] Gods select, peculiar. Happy art thou, o
Israel: who is like unto thee, o people^ Deuteronomy. 33.29. The Jews say that those
seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much as all the seventy
Nations of the world. Tabor and Hermon, the East and West of Judea, are put for
the East and West of the world, Ps. 89.12.

Verse 23. In labors more abundant] Chry softome calls Paul, Insatiabilem
Dei cultorem, an unweariable servant of God.

Verse 24. Forty stripes save one] That they might be sure not to exceed the
set number of stripes, limited by the Law, Deuteronomy. 25.3.

Verse 25. Thrice was I beaten, etc.] By the Roman Magistrates, as also the
Martyrs were by the Romish Bishops. Act. and Mon. fol. 1854.
Thomas Hinshaw was beaten with rods by Bonner, and abode his fury so long as
the fat-paunched Bishop could endure with breath, and till for weariness he
was fain to cease. So also he dealt by John Willis, and by M. Bartlet Green,
who greatly rejoiced in the same. Ibid 1684.


I have been in the deep] Sine nave in mari fu^ So the Syriack renders it. For
24. hours together I have been floting in the sea.

Verse 26. By mine own countreymen] A Gentilibus meis, and a Gentibus.

Verse 27. In weariness and painfulnesse] Here Is dainty rhetoric. Tully
calls Aristotle's Politikes, Aureum flumen orationis, a golden flood of
eloquence in respect of the purity of the style, and the excellency of the
matter, May it not be more truly said of this great Apostles writings?

Verse 28. That which comes, etc.] Quasi agmine facto, and repetitis vicibus.
His care came upon him, as an armed man, (...).
and gave him no rest or respite.

The care of all the Churches] Calvin was no otherwise affected toward the
Churches though far remote, then if he had born them upon his shoulders, says
Beza. He often sighed out, Vsquequo Domine; over the poor afflicted Churches of
Christ; with the miseries whereof he was much more affected then with any of
his own private miseries. I could not but love the man (said Theodosius of
Ambrose) for that, whilst he lived, Magis de eccl^siaru statu, qua^ de suis
periculis angebatur.
and when he died, he took more care for the Church then for himself.

Verse 29. Who is weak] By passion.

And I am not weak] By compassion.

And I burnt not] i. e. Am exceedingly grieved. Compare Ps. 10.2. and 7.14. He
hotly pursues the poor.

Verse 30. I will glory of the things] As a conquering of his spoils, or as an
old soldier of his sears. The Apostle glories in those things that his
adversaries condemned, as infirm in him.

Verse 31. Which is blessed for ever] And therefore to be blessed, as he that
is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is a praise that he much stands
upon, Romans 15.6. And surely if all generations shall call the virgin blessed,
for that she was the mother of Christ, Luke 1.48. how much more, etc.

Verse 32. In Damasius] The chief City of Syria, built (say some) in the place
where the blood of Abel was spilt, and thence called. Damesek, i. e. a bag of
blood. Thither Paul marched with a bloody mind, but was miraculously
converted, and so powerfully confounded his countrymen there, that they
incensed the governor against him, to his great peril. That is the guise of
godless persecutours, to attempt that against the truth by arms, that they
cannot effect by arguments. See Act. 9.23, 24.

Verse 33. And through a window, etc.] An honest shift, though against the Roman
Law of leaping over the walls, Quia leges semper ad aequitatem flectendae sunt,
says Ciero. The sense of the law is the law, Apices juries non just j^s.
and not always the letter.

And escaped his hands] Of the lawfulnes of flight in some cases, See the Note
on Mat. 10.23. and Act. 9.24.

CHAP. XII. Verse 1. It is not expedient for me]
BEcause it carries a show at least of pride and folly: and Christians must be
shy of the very shows and shadows of sin; Ministers especially, whole practice
easily passes into an example. Howbeit for the Corinthians it was expedient,
because they thought more meanly of Paul then was meet.

To visions and revelations] The false Apostles, happily, boasted of such; as
some seducers do now-adaies, who dream Midianitish dreams, and then tell the
same to their neighbors for Gospel. But take heed, the old Prophet may bring
men into the lions mouth by telling them of an Angel that spoke to him.

Verse 2. I knew a man in Christ] i. e. A Christian and approved, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Above fourteen years ago] See the Note on Act. 9.9, All this while till now,
(...).
he had held his tongue. Taciturnity (in some cases) is a Christian virtue.
Either be silent, or say somewhat that is better then silence, was an old
moral precept.

Verse 3. Whether in the body, etc.] So far did he forget and neglect his own
body, which is so dear and near a thing in comparison of that incomparable
delight he then took in the Lord, Oh that joy! o my God when shall I be with
thee! These were the dying words of the last Lord Harrington, that was in
heaven aforehand, O the joys, the joys, the unspeakable joys that ^ fe^l in
my soul! said another that was even entting into heaven, and had a foretaste of
eternal life. Peter in the transfiguration was so transported that he never
thought of a tabernacle for himself, Mat. 17. he cared not to lie without
doors, so he might longer enjoy that glimpse of heavens glory.

Verse 4. How that he was caught up] Not locally (likely) but in spirit, as Act
7.56. Ezekiel. 8.3.

Into Paradise] heaven, whereof that earthly Paradise was but a dark shadow.
Hierome comforting a young Hermit, bad him look up to heaven, Et paradisum
mente deambulare, to take a few turns in Paradise by his meditations, assuring
him that so long as he had Paradise in his mind, and heaven in his thought,
Tamdiu in eremo non eris, He should not be sensible of his solitariness.

Unspeakable words] Wordlesse words, (...).
such as words are too weak to utter. Nec Christies, nec Coelum patitur
hyperbolen. A man cannot hyperbolize in speaking of Christ and heaven; but must
entreat his hearers, as Tully does his Readers concerning the worth of L.
Crassus, Vt majus quiddam de ijs, quam quae scripta sunt suspicarentur, ^. De
Oratore.
that they would conceive much more then he was able to express. It is as
easy to compass the heaven with a span, or contain the sea in a nut-shell, as
to relate heavens happiness.

Verse 5. Yet of my self I will not glory] Non nisi coactus, ut supra. Paul was
a model of modesty, a very crucifix of mortification, as one calls him.

But in mine infirmities] i. e. My troubles; so called, either because under
them we seem infirm and contemptible: or else, for that afflictions often show
our infirmities, our impatience, etc. they make us sick of the fret, etc.

Verse 6. Lest any man should think of me] Let no man, says Gregery, desire to
seem more then he is, that so he may be more then he seems. It pleases me not,
says Augustine, that by many I am thought to be that which I am not. For truly
they love not me, but another for me, Si non quod sum, sed quod non sum
diligunt, if they love not that I am, but that I am not.

Verse 7. And lest I should be exalted] So lest Ezekiel should be lifted up
with his many rare visions, he is frequently called Son of man, to put him in
mind of his mortal, miserable condition.

A thorn in the flesh] A corruption edged with a temptation. Satan sent some
Dalilah to lull Paul asleep in her lap, and bind him with withes of green
delights: but his watchful soul displeased deeply with that flesh-pleasing
force, complained thereof, shaked himself, and so found ease.

To buffet me] Perhaps in a proper sense Paul might feel the devils fingers:
Take it metaphorically for temptations, and then they are fitly called
buffetings, because they come so thick upon a man's spirit, that he can hardly
take breath. He dogs good hearts with foulest lusts sometimes, as of Atheism,
Idolatry, blasphemy, murder, etc. In all or any of which, if the soul be
merely passive (as the word buffeting here implies) they are Satan's sins, and
our crosses only.

Lest I should be exalted] If Paul had not been buffetted, who knows whether he
would have swelled. He might have been carried higher in conceit, then before
he was in his ecstasie.

Verse 8. I besought the Lord thrice] i. e. Frequently and fervently. God
respects not the Arithmetike of our prayers, how many they are, nor the
thetorike of our prayers, how neat they are, or the Geometry of our prayers,
how long they are: nor the music of our prayers, how melodious they are: nor
the Logic of our prayers, how methodicall they are: but the Divinity of our
prayers, how heart-sprung they are. Not gifts, but graces prevail in prayer.

Verse 9. My grace is sufficient for thee] God sometimes gives pardoning grace,
where yet he denies prevailing grace. He roots not out all our Canaanites at
once, but leaves some to try and exercise us.

For my strength is made perfect] It is an act of as great power in God, to
keep our spark of grace alive amidst so many corruptions, as to keep a sire
alive upon the face of the sea. The angels are kept with much less care,
charge and power then we; because they have no biasse, no weight of sin hung
upon them.

Verse 10. (...).
Therefore I take pleasure] I am well apaid of them, I reckon them among Gods
love tokens, pledges of his, loves and badges of my sonship.

For I am weak, then, etc.] This is a seeming contradiction. God, said Luther,
does most of his works in medijs contrarijs, (...).
by contraries. He has a way by himself, says Nazianzen, that he may be the
more admired.

Verse 11. For in nothing am I behinde] And yet there were a sort of silly
souls (that thought themselves jolly fellows) in the days of Zuinglius, anno
1519. that talked thus at Zurich, Quis tandem Paulus? nonne homo est? Apostolus
est, sed suburbanus tantum, non ex 12. viris, non cum Christo est conversatus,
articulum fidei non composuit. Zuing l. Tom. 1. 1. operum.
What was Paul? but a man: an Apostle he was, but of an inferior rank. He was
not of the twelve; he conversed not with Christ, he composed not any of the
twelve Articles of the Creed. We would as soon believe Thomas or Scorus, as
Paul, etc.

Verse 12. In all patience] A grace to be gloried in: Job is crowned and
chronicled for it.

Verse 13. Forgive me this wrong] A pleasant irony, such as whereof this
Epistle is full. It is said of a wise man, Quod objecta probra ut visus
nocturnos, and vanas somniorum imagines digno supplicio puniat, festivo
scilicet contemptu and oblivione, vel si tanti est, misericordia elevet. Joh
Wover in Polymath.


Verse 14. For I seek not yours] Not the fleece but the flock. He had not those
instruments of a foolish shepherd, forcipes and mulctram, the shears and
milke-pale, etc. The whole Senate can witness, says Beza, that whereas Calvin
had a very small stipend, yet was he so far from being discontent therewith,
that a more ample allowance being freely offered him, he obstinately refused
it. All the goods that he left behind him when he died, his library also being
sold very dear, came scarce to three hundred French-crowns. Melch Adam. 359.
Non opes, non gloriam, non voluptates quaesivi, said Melancthon, I never
sought riches, pleasures or preferments: This conscience I carry with me,
whethersoever I go. Melch. Adam. in vita. 187.
I do ingenuously profess, says Mr Rolloc, that of all my stipends I have
not laid up two pence, for I never cared for the things of this world. Luther
never found himself once tempted to covetousness. And herein I could wish we
were all Lutherans.

Verse 15. Act. and Mon. fol 789.
Spend and be spent] If like clouds we do sweat our selves to death, so souls
may be brought home to God, it is a blessed way of dying.

The less I be loved] This is many a good man's grief, but his reward is
nevertheless with God. The nurse looks not for her wages from the child, but
from the parent.

Verse 16. Being crafty I caught] A blessed craft, a high point of heavenly
wisdom, Dan. 12, 3. It is written of the fox, that when he is very hungry
after prey, and can find none, he lies down and faineth himself to be a dead
carcass, and so the fowls fall upon him, and then he catches them. Saint Paul
hungering after the souls-health of his Corinthians, denies himself to gain
them.

Verse 17. Whom I sent unto you] It is said of the Pope, that he can never lack
money so long as he can hold a pen in his hand: he can command it and have it.
But Saint Paul could not skill of those arts.

Verse 18. In the same spirit] Who works with his own tools only, and is ever
like himself in all the Saints: through whose whole course godliness runs, as
the woof does through the web, as the spirit does through the body.

In the same steps] With an upright foot, Gal. 2.14. in Christ, Col. 2.6. as
Christ, 1 John 2.6.

Verse 19. That we excuse our selves] And so, yield a fault.

I speak before God] The witness of mine innocence, Job. 16, 19. Genesis 20.6.

For your edifying] Whilst ye conceive no ill opinion of us, which, like muddy
water in a vessel, might cause the most precious liquour of our doctrine to run
over.

Verse 20. Mimus.
And that I shall be found] Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit. We
delight not to fling daggers at men's faces: but if men be not told their own,
and that with some sharpness, they will on in sin to their utter ruin.
Sharp waters clear the eyesight: and bitter potions bring on sweet health. A
weak dose does but stir bad humors, and anger them, not purge them out: so
it fares with sins.

Lest there be debates, envyings, etc.] K. Edward the fourth, the night before
his death, said to his kinsmen and friends: I remember it to my grief, that
there has bin discord amongst you a great time, not always for great causes,
but poor mistakings, etc. Some, Daniels hist. of Engl 2.0.
like Salamanders, live always in the fire, like trouts they love to swim
against stream, like Phocion, they think it a goodly thing to dissent from
others.

Verse 21. That have not repented] Impenitence makes sin mortal, says S.
John, 1 epist. 5.16. or rather immortal. as says S. Paul. Romans 2.5. It is not
the falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it. Gods people may sink
once and again to the bottom, but the third time they rise and recover by
repentance.

CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. Of two or three witnesses]
SO he calls his threefold admonition. Gods Word neglected will one day be a
swift witness against the contemners. Moses shall accuse men, Joh. 5.46. Gods
Word lay hold on them, Zech. 1.6. and stick in their hearts and flesh, as fire,
thorowout all eternity, Ier. 5.14.

Verse 2. I told you before] Sed surdo fabulam, no telling would serve turn.
Many are so wedded and wedged to their sins, that nothing will sunder them, but
an extraordinary touch from the hand of heaven.

Verse 3. A proof of Christ speaking in me] The Church is Christi docentis
auditorium, says Bernard, the place wherein he ordinarily teaches, who has
his school on earth, though his chair in heaven. Sebolam babe^ in terris,
cathedram in coelis, Aug.


Verse 4. Crucified through weaknesse] i. e. Ex afflicto ejus statu, as Gal.
4.14. as having voluntarily subjected himself to all sorts of sufferings for
our sakes.

Verse 5. Examine your selves] The final trial of our eternal estate does
immediately and solely appertain to the Court of heaven. Indeed the
disquisitive part belongs to us, the decisive to God.

Prove your own selves] Redouble your diligence in this most needful, but much
neglected duty of self-examination: an error here is easy and dangerous;
hence the precept is doubled: So Zeph. 2.1. Excutite vos, iterumque excutite,
as Tremellius renders it.

Verse 6. But I trust that ye shall know] Whereas they were ready to retort,
that they were no reprobates, he should well know, let him see that himself
were not one: I trust ye shall know, says he, that we are no reprobates,
counterfeits, or unapprovable, opposed to approved, verse 7.

Verse 7. Though we be as reprobates] viz. In your esteem. The good heart is
content to vilify, yea nullify it self, so God may be glorified, and his
people edified: let him be a footstool, or what ye will, ^pist. ad Spalat.
to help Christ into his throne. Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed Christus
vivit, and regnat, Amen, says Luther. Let me be called a devil, or any thing,
so Christ may be exalted.

Verse 8. For we can do nothing] A temporary many so fall away as to persecute
the truth that he once professed, and the Ministry that he once admired. Never
falls a Saint so far in his greatest relapses. Lat. Seru^ before ^ Edward.
Bishop Latimer tells of one, who fell away from the known truth, to mocking and
scorning it; yet was afterward touched in conscience for it. Beware of this
sin, says he, for I have known no more then this that repented. It is a very
dangerous precipice.

Verse 9. Even your perfection] Or, Your restoration, or joynting again. (...).
His meaning is, says Beza. That whereas the members of this Church, were all,
as it were, dislocated and out of joint, they should now again be joined
together in love, and they should endeavor to amend what was amiss amongst
them, either in faith or manners.

Verse 10. (...).
And not to destruction] Unless by accident: or, if to the destruction of the
flesh, it is that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor.
5.5. See the Note there, and on 2 Cor. 10.8.

Verse 11. Finally] Gr. That which yet remains to say more, and then an end.

Be perfect] Or, Piece again.

Be of one minde] For matter of opinion.

Live in peace] For matter of affection.

The God of love] The author and fautour.

Verse 12. With an holy kisse] A custom proper to those times, See the Note on
Romans 16.16. and on 1 Cor. 16.20.

Verse 13. All the Saints salute you] Sanctity is no enemy to courtesy: it does
not remove but rectify it.

Verse 14. The grace of our Lord] A friendly valediction, or fatherly
benediction.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the GALATIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Whoraised him from the dead]
ANd by the same almighty power causes dead souls to hear the voice of the Son
of God in his Ministers and live, Ioh. 5.25. Ephesians. 1.19.

Verse 2. The Churches of Galatia] They are not discliurched, though much
corrupted. Vzziah ceased not to be a king, when he began to be a leper: the
disease of his forehead did not remove his Crown.

Verse 3. Grace be, etc.] See the Note on Romans 1.7. This Epistle to the
Galatians is an epitome of that to the Romans.

Verse 4. From this present evil world] Bewitched wherewith the Galatians were
relapsed from Christ. A subtle and sly enemy it is surely, and has cast down
many wounded: yea, many strong men have been slain by it, as by Solomon's
harlot, Prove. 7.26.

Verse 5. To whom be, glory] The benefit of our redemption should make us lift
up many an humble, joyful and thankful heart to God.

Verse 6. That ye are so soon] Giddy headed hearers have religionem ephemeram,
are wherried about with every wind of doctrine, being constant only in their
inconstancy, as Ecebolus, Balduinus, and our modern Sectaries. The Bishops and
Doctors of England (said that Martyr) in their book against the Popes
supremacy, spoke as much as Luther, or any Lutheran ever did or could. If they
dissembled, who could ever so deeply, speaking so pithily? If not, who could
ever turn head to tail so suddenly and so shortly as these did? Act. and Mon.


Removed from him, etc.] From Christ and me his Apostle. Luther often in his
books testifies, that he was much afraid, lest, when he was dead, that sound
doctrine of justification by faith alone, would die also. It proved so in
sundry places of Germany. Men fell to Popery as fast as leaves fall in Autumn.

Verse 7. There be some] That would fain have blended Pharisaisme and
Christianity, Act. 15 5.

That trouble you] As Camels with their feet trouble the waters they should
drink of. (...).


And would pervert the Gospel] They pretended only to bring in a Jewish rite or
two, and yet are said to pervert the Gospel: Ea quae post tergum sunt, in
faciem convertere, (...).
as Hierome has it, to turn that before that should be behind: to speak
distorted things, such as produce convulsions of conscience, (...).
Act. 20.30. A little thing untowardly mingled, mars all. (...).
The monstrous heresy of Nestorius lay but in one letter, and of Arrius, but
in one syllable.

Verse 8. Or an Angel] Not an evil Angel (as Ambrose understands it) but a good
Angel, per impossible, as John 8.55.

Then that which we, etc.] Or besides that which we have preached. He says
not, contrary to that, but besides that: for indeed that which is directly
besides, is indirectly against the Gospel.

Verse 9. Then that ye have] Of the Camel it is said, that he will never carry
any more weight then what at first is said upon him; nor go one foot beyond his
ordinary journey. Conscience will not budge, nor yield an hair for an Angels
authority. Stand fast in the good old way, and find rest, Jeremy 6.16.

Verse 10. For do I now persuade men] That is, men's doctrines and devises.

Or do I seek to please men] Vt (...), qui ab omnibus gratiam inire cupit, quem
quidam per jocum Placentam vocat. Menpleasers, that curry favor with all, and
covet to be counted No medlers. These loose a friend of God.

For if I yet pleased men] As once I did whiles I was a Pharisee.

I should not be, etc.] That rule holds good in rhetorike, but not in Divinity,
Cic. in Partit.
Non ad veritatem solum, sed etiam ad opinionem little qui audiunt, accommodanda
est oration.

Verse 11. Is not after man] This he often inculcateth, because the false
Apostles had buzzed such a thing into their ears, to disparage his Ministry.

Verse 12. Received it of man] i. e. Of mere man. Jesus Christ is more then a
man.

Verse 13. (...). Ho^er.
And wasted it] As an enemies country with fire and sword. Mars is styled
(...).

Verse 14. Above many of mine equals] Porphyry said it was great pity such a
man as Paul was even cast away upon the Christian religion. The Monarch of
Morocco told the English Em basladour in King John's time, that he had lately
read Paul's Epi stles, Ecp. Geog.
which he liked so well, that were he now to choose his religion, he would,
before any other, embrace Christianity; but every one, said he, ought to die in
his own religion: and the leaving of the faith wherein he was born, was the
only thing that he disliked it that Apostle.

Verse 15. Who s^parated me from. etc.] How knew we this, but by the event?
Whosoever is lawfully called to the Ministry, may conceive that he also was
sanctified thereunto from the womb, and should therefore do his utmost in the
work, Verbi minister es, hoc age, Sa Ward Praef. ad Pe^^t. prob^.
Perk. probl. was Mr Perkins his Motto.

Verse 16. To reveal his Son in me] Not only as in an object (wherein the
power and grace of Christ might shine and appear) but as by an instrument of
revealing and preaching Christ to many.

I conferred not with flesh] i. e. With carnal reason, an evil counselor for
the soul, Romans 8.7. Indeed in humane governments, where reason is shut out,
there tyranny is thrust in: but where God commands, there to ask a reason is
presumption, to oppose reason is flat rebellion.

Verse 17. But I went into Arabia] Of this journey Luke makes no mention in
the Acts. Into these tents of Kedar came S. Paul, and made them, by his
preaching, comely as the curtains of Solomon, Cant. 1.5. Rude they were, but
rich; black, but comely, when they had this precious man amongst them
especially, who became a blessing to all places whithersoever he came: Contrary
to that which is said of the great Turk, that wherever he sets his foot, he
leaves desolation behind him. Arabia was Felix indeed, when S. Paul was there.

Verse 18. To see Peter] Not by way of idle visit, but thoroughly to observe the
History of his Christian practice for godly imitation. Historiae sunt fidae
monitrices. (...), videndo abservare.


Verse 19. But other of the Apostles] They were busily attending upon their
particular charges and offices, according to Romans 12.7.

Verse 20. Behold, before God, I lie not] This he solemnly swears for therir
satisfaction. An oath may be lawfully taken to help the truth in necessity, and
not otherwise. Hence the Hebrew word is a passive, and signisieth to be sworn,
rather then to swear. Nisbbaug.


Verse 21. Afterward I came] He kept, belike, a Diary of his travels, and was
able to give a good account of his daily courses. It is not to be doubted, but
that our Saviors Disciples kept a register of his holy oracles and miracles,
out of which the history of the Gospel was afterward compiled and composed.

Verse 22. And was unknown] So far was Paul from learning ought of them.

Verse 23. Now preaches the faith] A marvelious conversion. I was an obstinate
Papist (says Latimer of himself) as any was in England: Insomuch that when I
should be made Bachelour of Divinity, my whole Oration went against Philip
Melancthon, and his opinions, etc. Act. and Mon.


Verse 24. And they glorified God] Whosoever offers praise, he glorifieth me,
Psalm. 50.23. God accounts himself as it were to received new being, by those
inward conceptions of his glory, and by those outward honors, that we do to
him.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. I went up]
TO that first Christian Council, Act. 15.

With Barnabas] His constant companion, till that bitter bickering, Act. 15.39.
See the Note there.

Verse 2. By revelation] i. e. By Gods special direction: for he orders a
good man's goings, Psalm. 37.23.

I communicated unto them] I laid open the matter freely and familiarly, (...).
as unto bosome-friends.

But privately] For all good men are not fit to be trusted with secrets, but
only such as can both keep counsel, and give counsel.

Or had run in vain] Lest, if it should be thought that I had not held good
correspondency with those other Apostles, I might lose the fruit of my
Ministry.

Verse 3. I was compelled to be circumcised] i. e. I would not yield he should
be: lest I should seem to countenance them that held circumcision necessary to
salvation. In the year of grace 1549 the Ministers of Magdeburg did stoutly
oppose them of Wittenberg and Leipsich, and set forth many books against them,
because they dealt deceitfully, Alsted: ^bron. page 520.
and by their Adiaphora, or things indifferent, as they called them, they paved
a way to Popery. And this was our case till this late blessed Reformation. It
was not without cause that Peter Martyr commended it to the care of Queen
Elizabeth, That Church Governors endeavor not to carry the Ark of the Gospel
into England upon the cart of needless Ceremonies.

Verse 4. (...).
Unawares brought in] Or privily slipped in, pretending piety to their worldly or
wicked respects. With such ill instruments the Church has been ever pestered,
2 Pet. 2.1. These hell-scouts are sculking in every corner.

To spy out our liberty] viz. Of circumcising or not circumcising Titus, that
they might pick a quarrel with us.

That they might bring us into bondage] sc. To the ceremonial law. Bucholcer.
Chronol.
Carolostadius attempted some such thing in Luthers days, and by him was
opposed.

Verse 5. to whom we gave place] We must stick close to the truth, and stickle
hard for it, accounting each parcel thereof precious, and not to be parted
with for any good. How religious were the Apostles and Ancients this way? They
would not yield for an hour, or exchange one letter or syllable of that holy
faith, wherewith Christ had betrusted them.

Verse 6. Whatsoever they were] Augustine being oppressed with the authority of
the Fathers, says, he regards not Quis, sed quid, the worth of the man, but
the weight of his reasons.

Verse 7. As the Gospel of, etc. He equalizeth himself to Peter in office and
dignity: though pseudo-apostles, and pseudo-catho-likes deny him that honor.
Survey of West. relig.
Saint Peter Jesuits commend for a worthy spirit, when they censure Saint Paul
for a hotheaded person, etc.

Verse 8. For he that wrought, etc.] He argues from the success of his and
Peter's Ministry, to the lawfulness of their calling to the work. So he does,
1 Cor. 9.1, 2, 3. and 2 Cor. 13, 4.5. See the Notes there.

Verse 9. Who seemed to be pillars] Of the Church, or of the College of
Apostles. The Apostle seems to intimate, (...). dictum. Camer.
that even then men began to attribute more then was meet to those holy
Apostles. This degenerated afterward into gross superstition.

And they unto the circumcision] Yet were they not so tied up by this
agreement, but that they might preach upon fit occasion, to the Gentiles too,
as might Paul and Barnabas to the Jews; but the Gentiles were their chief
charge, and among them, they had greatest success.

Verse 10. Remember the poor] Those Jews that embraced Christianity in
Pal^stina were therefore turned out of all by their unkind contrymen, Heb.
10.34. Hence this care of the Apostles, and this forwardness in S. Paul. About
the beginning of the Reformation in France, the Duke of Lorrain had proscribed
some thousands of his Lutheran Subjects, who were forced to feed upon haws and
acorns, etc. The Divines of Strasborough in Germany, moved with pity toward
these poor brethren, ceased not till by their discourses they had prevailed
with the Senate there, to take those miserable exiles into their City, Scultet.
Annal.
and to provide for them, till they might be conveniently conveyed to other
places.

Verse 11. But when Peter, etc.] I would gladly learn (said that Martyr) why
the seat of the primacy (to grant that) should be rather at Rome then
elsewhere? They answer, because Peter's chair was at Rome. Act. and Mon. fol.
1496.
This is even like to this, because Moses the greatest Prophet, and Aaron the
first Priest exercised their office until their death in the desert, therefore
the principallest place of the Jews Church shall be in the wilderness. But
grant them their reason that it is good, what should Antioch claim? for Peter's
chair was there also, when Paul gave him a check, which was unseemly and
unmannerly done of Paul, that would not give place to his President and better.
Baron. A^^a'.
Thus far Mr Bradford. Cardinal Baronius withstands Paul as much as ever he
did Peter, and blasphemously assirmeth, that Peter was not to be blamed, but
Paul a great deal more, Bellarmine says, It was not Peter, but Cephas one of
the seventy.

Verse 12. For before that certain] This history pertains to Act. 15.30, 35.
but is not there recorded, that we might search the Scriptures, and compare
place with place. So God has scattered the duties of husbands and wives up and
down the Scriptures, That men learning to be good husbands, they may learn also
to be good men.

Fearing them of the circumcision] It was not danger that he feared, but
offense: wherein he had not done amiss, but that in avoiding a less scandal,
he fell into a far greater.

Verse 13. And the other Jews dissembled] The sins of teachers are the teachers
of sins: and great men's faults go as seldom unaccompanied, as their persons.

Barnabas also] Adhering to Peter rather then to Paul his old companion, not
without a tincture perhaps of the old bitter bickering. Try all things; Good
men may seduce us, as here Peter did Barnabas, and as those would have done
Paul, Act. 21.12.

Verse 14. That they walked not] Ministers must both (...) and (...), Divide
the word rightly, and foot it uprightly.

I said to Peter be fore them all] The fault was public, the reproof must be
according, 1 Timothy 5.20. In the year 1159. lived Ioannes Sarisburiensis, Prae
ens prae, erter pontificem redarguit. Renius in hist. Pont.
who both reproved the Pope to his face, and also wrote his Polycraticon,
wherein he freely scourges the Popish Clergy.

Why compellest thou, etc.] Peter's example was a compulsion. The company we
keep compel us to do, as they do.

Verse 15. We who are Jews] The Apostle proceeds in his speech to the Jews at
Antioch.

And not sinners of the Gentiles] Because under the Covenant of Grace; Their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

Verse 16. Knowing] Here Is more then an implicit faith, or a conjecturall
confidence.

Verse 17. B^^. if whiles we seek] This is the same in sense with Romans 3.31. If
we should argue from mercy to liberty, from free justification to lewd and
loose conversation, would not all the world cry shame on us? I read of a
monster, who that night that his Prince pardoned and released him, got out and
slew him. This was Michael Balbus, who slew the Emperor Leo Armenius. Is it
possible that any should offer to do so to Christ?

Verse 18. For if I build again] As I should, if I should license any man to
sin, because justified by faith. Christ came by water, as well as by blood: he
justifies none, but whom he also sanctifies.

Verse 19. Am dead to the Law] I. e. Am freed from the curse, rigor, and
irritation of the Law. Or, am freed from sin, as Romans 6.7.

Verse 20. Christ lives in me] Luthers Motto was Vivit Christus, Christ
lives: and if he were not alive, Ioh. Manl. loc. com page 419. Ps l. 18.
I would not with to live one hour longer. Let the Lord live, says David: Yea
let him live in me, says Paul. Let him act me, let him think in me, desire,
pray, do all in me. Lord, says Nazianzen, I am an instrument for thee to
touch. Christ dwells in that heart most largely, that has emptied it self of it
self. The Israelites felt not the sweetness of Manna, till they had spent the
fleshpots, and other provisions of Egypt.

And gave himself for me] True faith individuateth Christ, and appropriateth
him to a man's self. This is the pith and power of particular faith: Mistress
Lewis the Martyr, being set upon by Satan, a little before she suffered, was
much comforted and helped by this text. Act. and Mon. fol. 1826.


Verse 21. I do not frustrate] viz. By seeking to be justified by the Law.
Ambrose tenders it, Non sum ingratus gratiae Dei, I am not ungrateful to grace
of God: I do not repudiate, cassate, nullify it.

Dead in vain] Because he attains not his end in dying, which was not only to
leave us a pattern of patience, as Anabaptists hold; but to merit for us
remission of sins, and imputation of his righteousness for our justification.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. O foolish Galatians]
THose that are sick of a Lethargy must have double the quantity of physic
given them, that other men have in other diseases. These Galatians were in a
spiritual lethargy, and are therefore thus sharply rebuked, that they might be
sound in the faith. T^t. 1.13.


Who has bewitched you] Or, Bemisted you, and dazeled your eyes, (...). ve^v.
Pun lib. 7. cap. 2.
The word properly signifies to overlook, as they call it, or to kill with the
eyes, by casting out venomous beams, as the Basilisk, and as witches are said
to do.

Has been evidently set forth] As a remedy, by looking whereon ye might have
been cured or kept from that bewitching by the eye: like as the stung
Israclites were healed by looking on the brazen serpent.

Crucified amongst you] In the evidence of the doctrine of Christ crucified,
and in the administration of the Lords Supper, that lively picture of Christ on
the cross.

Verse 2. Or by the hearing of faith] The Manna of the spirit comes down from
heaven in the dews of the Ministry of the Gospel. If our eyes see not our
teachers, N^nb. 11.9. 1 Pet 1.23.
we cannot expect to hear the voice behind us, Isa. 30.20, 21.

Verse 3. Are ye so foolish?] Those then that have the spirit may play the
fools in some particulars. Those that are recovered of a frenzy, have yet
some mad fits sometimes.

Made perfect by the flesh] As Nebuchadnezzars image, whose golden head ended
in dirty feet.

Verse 4. If it be in vain] q. d. It is not in vain. God keeps the feet of
the Saints, that they cannot altogether loose the things they have wrought,
they cannot fall below his supporting grace: the Lord puts under his hand,
Psalm. 37. Yet it cannot be denied that an hypocrite may suffer, and all in
vain, 1 Cor. 13.3. as did Alexander the Copper-smith, who was near unto
Martyrdom, Act. 19.34. See the Note on 1 Cor. 13.3.

Verse 5. Or by the hearing of faith] Faith (and so life) is let into the soul
by the sense of hearing, Isa. 55.3. to cross the devil, who by the same door
brought death into the world.

Verse 6. It was accounted to him] This the Papists jearingly call a putative
righteousness. The Jews also deride it, and say, That every fox shall yield his
own skin to the flaer. See Romans 4.9, 11, 12.

Verse 7. The same are children, etc.] And heirs together with him of the
world, Romans 4. which is theirs in right, though detained a while from them by
the Amorites, till their sins be full.

Verse 8. And the Scripture fore-seeing] The Scripture therefore is not a bruit
dead things, as the Jesuits blaspheme. Greg in Reg. 3.
Excellently spoke he, who called the Scripture, Cor and animam Dei, the heart
and soul of God.

Preached the Gospel] There is Gospel therefore in the old Testament.

In thee shall all Nations] See my Note on Genesis 12.3. All Nations shall be
blessed, i. e. justified by faith.

Verse 9. Are blessed, etc.] For they only are blessed whose sins are remitted,
Psalm. 32.1. O the blessednesses of that man, says the Psalmist.

Verse 10. Are under the curse] Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. He that will not
have the direction of the law, must have the correction. (...).


That continues not in all] Deuteronomy. 27.26. Heb. Shall stand firm, as a
apiece stone.

Verse 11. Shall live by faith] As being justified by faith. See the Note on
Romans 1.17.

Verse 12. And the law is not of faith] Because it promises not life to those
that will be justified by faith, but requires works.

Verse 13. Christ has redeemed us] As man he bought us, as God he redeemed us,
says Hierome. For to redeem is properly to buy some things back, that were
morgaged. Qui redimit, emit quol suum fuit and suum esse desi^t. Hieron.


Cursed is every one that hangeth] The tree whereon a man was hanged, the stone
wherewith he was stoned, the sword wherewith he was beheaded, and the napkin
wherewith he was strangled, they were all buried, that there might be no evil
memorial of such an one, to say, This was the tree, sword, stone, Casaub. ex
Maimonide.
napkin, wherewith such an one was executed. Constantine abolished this kind
of death out of the Empire. But what an odd custom was that of the Tibarenes
to hang their best friends in courtesy, Sphinx Pbilos. page 752.
Longas(...), ex ijs literas facere quos chares habtbant?

Verse: 14. The promise of the spirit] That is, the spiritual promise made to
Abraham, and his spiritual posterity.

Verse 15. I speak after the manner] I set the matter forth to you by a
familiar comparison.

Though is be but a man's testament] William Tracy of Glocestershire Esquire,
made in his Will, that he would have no funeral pomp at his burying, neither
passed he upon a Mass. And he further said, That he trusted in god only, and
hoped by him to be saved, and not by any Saint. This Gentleman died, and his
son as Executour, bought the Will to the Bishop of Canterbury to be proved,
which he showed to the Convocation: and there most cruelly they judged that he
should be taken out of the ground, and be burnt as an heretic, anne 1532. Dr
Parker Chancellor of Worcester executed the sentence, Act. and Mon. 951.
and was after wards lent for by King Henry 8. who laid high offense to his
charge, etc. It cost him three hundred pounds to have his pardon.

Verse 16. Which is Christ] Mystical Christ, that is, whole Christ: for he
accounts not himself complete without his members, who are therefore called his
fulness, Ephesians 1.23.

Verse 17. Ligbtsoots Har. Prolegom.
Four hundred and thirty, etc.] This space of time betwixt the promise and the
law, the divine providence call into two equal port. ons of 215. before the
peoples going down to Egypt, and 215. of their being there.

Verse 18. Gave it to Abraham] Gr. Freely gave it. What more free then gift?
And what better freehold, then the divine promise? (...)


Verse 19. Because of transgressions] Which are discovered by the Law. Sight of
misery, must go before sense of mercy. Lex. lux, the law is a light (says
Solomon) which lays all open: as I Cor. 14.25. and threatens destruction to
transgressors.

And it was ordained, etc.] Therefore it is not to be disrespected, though we
cannot attain eternal life by it.

In the hand of a Mediatour] That is, of Moses, who was a Mediator of that
communication of the Law to the people, Exodus, 20.19. Christ is the only
Mediator of expiation, and of Christ alone some take this text.

Verse 20. Is not a Mediator of one] q. d. God and men were at odds: else what
use of a Mediator? sin is the makebate, as being a transgression of the Law.

But God is one] One and the same now as of old in taking vengeance on the laws
transgressors. Or, God is one party disagreeing or displeased.

Verse 21. Have given life] That is, have justified a sinner. But herein lay
the laws weakness through the flesh, Romans 8.3.

Verse 22. But the Scripture] The law and Prophets.

Has concluded all] Gr. Has clapped them up close prisoners. (...)


That the promise, etc.] That he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11.32. See the
Note there.

Verse 23. But before faith came, etc.] i.e. Before Christ came: Faith is put
for the object of faith.

We were kept under the law] As in a prison or garrison: being circled with a
compassing strength. The sinner, (...)
having transgressed, is kept by the law, as with a guard or garrison, that he
cannot escape, unless he be delivered by Christ.

Verse 24. The law was our schoolmaster] Such an one as that that Livy and
Florus speak of in Italy, who brought forth his scholars to Hanibal: and if he
had not been more merciful then otherwise, they had all perished.

Verse 25. But after that faith] That is the Gospel, or Christ the author and
matter of the Gospel. See ver. 23.

Verse 26. The children of God] Gr. The sons of God, grown up at man's estate,
Qui manum ferulae subduxiums, who are no longer under a schoolmaster. How we
are the children of God by faith, See the Note on Joh. 1.12.

Verse 27. Baptized into Christ] And so have had your adoption sealed up unto
you: like as in the civil adoption there were certain rites and ceremonies
usually performed.

Have put on Christ] To justification and sanctification. See the Note on Romans
13.14. this is to be clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12.2.

Verse 28. Ye are all one in Christ] Souls have on sexes, and Christ is no
respecter of persons.

Verse 29. Heirs according] Heirs are kept short in their nonage, and sometimes
forced to borrow of servants: but when once at years, they have all. So shall
the Saints in heaven, though here hard put to it.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. Differs nothing from a servant]
IN allusion whereunto there is written upon the Princes arms, Icb dien,
Daniels Chro. fol 109.
that is, I serve. Henry the second, King of England. crowned his eldest son
Henry, whilst he was yet alive: which made his ambition quite turn off his
obedience. Ambition ever rides without reins.

Verse 2. (...)
But is under tutours] Those under the Law were but Alphabetaries in comparison
of those under the gospel. the Sea about the Altar was brazen, I King. 7.23.
and what eyes could pierce through it? Now our sea about the throne is glassie,
Revel. 4.6. like to crystal clearly conveying the light and sight of God to
our eyes.

Verse 3. (...)
When we were children] Gr. Infants, babies, that must be pleased with rattles:
so the old Church with carnal Ceremonies.

Verse 4. But when the fullness of the time] This answers to that time
appointed of the Father, verse. 2. Plato said, that God does always (...), he
does all things in number, weight and measure: He never comes too soon, neither
stays he too long.

Godsent forth his Son] Out of his own bosom. May not we say, as they did,
sob. 11.36. Loc how he loved us. This was an hyperbole of love.

Made of a woman] Of the sanctified substance of the holy virgin. Note this
against Marcionites and Anabaptists.

Made under the Law] Circumcised the eighth day, and so made a debtour to do
the whole law: which he perfectly fulfilled, and yet (for us) suffered the
curse.

Verse 5. To redeem them, etc.] To buy them off, who were in worse case then
the Turks Gally-slaves chained to an oar.

That we might receive the adoption] That is, the possession of our adoption,
the full enjoyment of our inheritance.

Verse 6. Crying Abba, Father] God has no still-born children. Paul was no
sooner converted, but behold he prayed, Act. 9.11. The spirit of grace is a
spirit of supplication, Zech. 12.10. And when God sends this spirit of prayer
into our hearts, it is a sure sign, that he means to answer our desires: like
as when we did our children say, I pray you, father, give me this, we do it
not, but when we mean to give them that which we teach them to ask.

Verse 7. And if a son, etc.] See the Note on Romans 8.17.

Verse 8. Ye did service] Here all religious service done to any, but God, is
manifestly condemned as impious, whether in Pagans or Papagans.

Verse 9. Or rather are known of God] Whose gracious foreknowing and
fore-appointing of us to eternal life, is the ground and foundation of our
illumination and conversion: our love to him a reflex of his love to us.

Verse 10. Ye observe daies] The Christian Church knows no holy days, besides
that honorable Lord's Day, Isa 57.14. Revel. 1.10. and such holy feasts, and
upon special occasions the Church shall see sit to celebrate, as November. 5,
etc.

Verse 11. Lest I have bestowed labour] Gr. (...)
Even to lassitude, as a day-labourer. Other work-folks find their work as
they left it ^ but a Minister has all marred many times, between Sabbath and
Sabbath: or if but a while absent, as Moses was in the Mount.

Verse 12. Be as I am] No longer a legalist, as once, Philip. e.5, 8.

Ye have not injured me at all] He was above their bussoneries and indignities.
Sendeira ^ ^.
When an ineonsiderate fellow had stricken Cate in the bath, and afterward
cried him mercy, he replied, Tacit.
I remember not that thou did strike me; Tu linguae, ego aurium Dominus, said
one to another that railed on him. I cannot be master of thy tongue, but I will
be master of mine own ears. One having made a long and idle discourse before
Aristotle, concluded it thus, Plutar. degarrulit.
I doubt I have been too tedious to you Sir Philosopher, with my many words: In
good sooth, said Aristotle, you have not been tedious to me; for I gave no heed
to any thing you said. (...)
Momus in Lucian tells Jupiter, It is in thy power whether any one shall vex or
wrong thee. St Paul here shakes off the affronts and injuries offered unto him
with as much ease, as once he did the Viper. Some would have swelled, and
almost died at the sight of such a thing: he only shook it off, and there was
no hurt done.

Verse 13. Through infirmity of the flesh] That is, though much broken with
many miseries, yet I spared not to take pains amongst you. Zachary, though he
ceased to speak, yet he ceased not to minister: he took not his dumbness for a
dismission, but staid out the eight days of his course, Luke 1.

Verse 14. And my temptation] That is, mine afflictions, whereby the Lord
tempts his, feels which way their pulses beat, and how they stand affected
toward him.

Which was in my flesh] My spirit being happily untoucht. For ost the body is
weak, the foul well. Afflictions may reach but to the out ward man. sob never
complained till he was wet through, till the waters went over his soul.

Nor rejected Gr. Ye spet not on., as they did, that spet in Christ's face. (...)


Even as Christ Jesus] Who has said, He that receives you, receives me. It
was a common saying at Constantinople, Better the Sun should not shine, then
that Chrysostom should not preach. (...) Beatitu^inia praedicatio B. 30.


Verse 15. Where is then the blessednesse] q. d. time was when ye held your
selves happy in me, and blessed the time that ever ye saw and heard me. Is the
change now in me, or in your selves? Thus the Jews rejoiced in John for a
season, but he soon grew sta^e to them, Joh. 5.35. See the Note there. Neutrum
modo, mas modo vulgus.

Verse 16. Am I there sore become, etc.] Truth breeds hatred, as the fair
Nymphs did the ugly Fawns and Satyrs. the hearing of truth galls, as they
write of some creatures, that they have fell in aure, gail in their ears. It was
not for nothing therefore that the Orator called upon his Countrymen to get
their ears healed before they came any more to hear him. to preach, faith
Luther is nothing else but to derive upon a man's felt the rage of all the
Country. And therefore when one defined the ministerial function to be Artom
artium and scientiam scientiarum, the art of arts, and science of sciences.
Melancthon said, If he had defined it to be miseriam miseriarum, the misery of
miseries, he had hit it.

Because I tell you the truth?] He that prizeth truth (says Sir Walter
Raleigh) shall never prosper by the possession or profession thereof. Hist l.
1.0.1.
An expectas, ut Quintilianus ametur? When we seek to fetch men out of their
sins, they are apt to fret and snarl and as when men are wakened out of sleep,
they are unquiet, ready to brawl with their best friends.

Verse 17. They zealously affect you] Depereunt vos: as Jealous wooers they
would have you whole to themselves without a corrivall, (...), cognata sunt.

They would exclude us] As standing in their way. this is the guise of all
sectaries and seducers, they denigrate the true teachers, that they may be the
only men.

Verse 18. To be zealously affected in a good thing] In a good cause, for a
good end, and in a good manner. There is a counterfeit zeal, as it that of the
Popish Martyrs or traitors rather, of whom Campian in his Epistle to the
honorable Counselors of Queen Elizabeth, Quamdiu vel unus quispiam e nobis
supererit qui Tiburno vestro fruatur, etc. As long as there shall be left any
one of us to wear a Tibu^n tippet, we will not cease our suit.

And not only when I am present] Since even absent I teach and tell you the
truth of God by letters.

Verse 19. Till Christ be formed] That you may seek for salvation by him alone.
Together with the word there goes forth a regenerating power, Jam. 1.18. It is
not a dead letter, an empty sound, as some have blasphemed. Only let us not, as
Hosea's unwise son, stay in the place of breaking forth of children, proceed no
further then to conviction: much less stifle those inward workings for sin, as
harlots destroy their conceptions that they may not bear the pain of
childe-birth.

Verse 20. And to change my voice] To speak to your necessity: for now being
absent I shoot at rovers, (...)
and am at some uncertainty how to frame my discourse to you.

Verse 21. Ye that desire, etc.] that are ambitious of slavery, of beggary, v.
9. How many have we at this day, that rejoice in their bondage, and dance to
hell in their bolts?

Verse 22. For it is written] It was enough of old to say, It is written: there
was no need to quote Chapter and verse, as now. Men were so ready in the
Scriptures, they could tell where to turn to any thing at first hearing.

Verse 23. Was born aster the flesh] In an ordinary way, as all others are: for
Hagar was young, and Abraham not old.

Was by promise] i. e. By a supernatural power, by a divine miracle.

Verse 24. Which things are an allegory] That is, they signify or import an
allegory: or they, being the things that they were, (...)
represented and typed out the things that they were not. So did the brazen
serpent, the deluge, the red sea, etc. As for those allegories gories of Origin
and other wanton wits, luxuriant this way, what are they else but Scripturarum
spuma, as one calls them, Scripture-froth?

Verse 25. For this Agar is mount] The Arabian, call Mount Sina, Agar. Twice
Hagar sled thither, Genesis 16. and 21. it being in her way home to Egypt. From
her the Arabians are called Hagarens, and since (for more honor sake) Saracens
of Sarah Hagars mistress.

Answers to Jerusalem] That is, to the Jewish Synagogue, born to bondage, as
Tiberius said of the Romans, that they were homines ad servitutem parati.

Verse 26. But Jerusalem which is above] that is, the Christian Church, the
heavenly Jerusalem, the Panegyris and congregation of the firstborn, whose
names are enrolled in heaven, Heb, 12.23. The Hebrew word for Jerusalem is of
the Duall number; to show, AmamainCoronide.
say the Cabalists, that there is an heavenly as well as an earthly Jerusalem,
and that the taking away of the earthly was intimated by the taking away of the
letter jod out of Ierushalaim, 2 Samuel 5.13.

Verse 27. Far it is written] When these testimonies of the old Testament are
thus cited in the new, it is not only by way of Accommodation, but because they
are the proper meaning of the places.

Verse 28. Now we, brethren, as Isaac] This the Jews to this day will not hear
of, but call us Ma^zer Goi bastardly Gentiles.

Verse 29. Persecuted him] By cruel mockings and real injuries, challenging
the birth right, and deriding the Covenant, etc. The Papists made way for their
great project of perdition in 88. by dividing the people here under the rearms
of Protestant and Puritan, George Abbots ^of. to D. Hiss 3 real.
and provoking them thereby to real and ^un^uall, both hate and contempt.

Even so it is new] And to also it is now, may we say at this day. For what do
Papists persecute us for else, but because we reject their justification by
works? They poisoned their own Cardinal Contarenus, for that he declared
himself found in this point by a book that he set forth some four years before
the Council of Trent.

Verse 30. Shall not be beirs] No justitiary can be saved. A Papist cannot go
beyond a reprobate. Pur us pu^us Papistanon potest servani, Rev. 19.21.

Verse 31 We are not children, etc.] q. d. We are in a far better condition
then Legalists. I have blessed Ismael, faith God, twelve Princes shall be
beget, but my Covenant will I establish with Isaac, Gen 17.20, 21. And such
honor have all his Saints.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Be not again entangled]
AS oxen tied to the yoke, Those that followed Judas Galileus, (...)
Act. 5.37. chose rather to undergo any death, then to be in subjection to any
mortal. If civil servitude be so grievous, Joseph. 1.18. c. 2
what ought spiritual to be? Those poor misled and muzled souls that are held
captive in the Popes dark dungeon, have an ill time of it. Ever since, being
reconciled to the Roman Church, I subjected my self and my Kingdoms (said King
John of England) to the Popes authority, never any thing went well with me,
Nulla mihiprospera, sed omnia asversa evensrunt.
but all against me.

Verse 2. Behold I Paul] q. d. As true as I am Paul, and do write these things.

Christ shall profit you nothing] For he profits none, but those that are found
in him, not having their own righteousness, which is of the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through
faith, Phil. 3.9. As Pharaoh said of the Israelites, they are entangled in the
Land, the wilderness has shut them in, Exo. 14.3. So may it be said of
Pharisaicall and Popish Justiciaries, they are entangled in the fond conceits
of their own righteousness, they cannot come to Christ. A man will never truly
desire Christ, till soundly shaken, Hag 2.7.

Verse 3. That he is a debtour] viz. If he be circumcised with an opinion of
meriting thereby. Christ will be our sole Savior, or none; he will not mingle
his precious blood with our p^^ddle-stuff.

Verse 4. Christ is become of none effect] Woe then to Popish merit-mongers.
William Wickum, founder of New-colledge, Parc^bist pro. fan medul. D Usher on
Ephesians. 4.13.
though he did many good works, yet he professed he trusted to Jesus Christ
alone for salvation. So did Charles the fife Emperor of Germany. So did many
of our forefathers in times of Popery.

Ye are fallen from grace] It cannot hence be concluded, that the Apostle
speaks conditionally, and it may be understood of the true Doctrine of Gods
free grace.

Verse 5. Erigito scalam, Acesi and sol^^ ^stendito
For we through the spirit] We Apostles hope for righteousness by faith. If
you will go to heaven any other way, you must erect a ladder, and go up alone,
as Constantine said to Acesius the Novatian heretic.

Verse 6. Neither circumcision] Unregenerate Israel is as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7.

But faith that worketh] Iustificamur tribus modis. Effective a Deo,
apprehensive a fide, declarative ab operibus. Faith justifies the man, and
works justify faith.

Verse 7. Ye did run well] Why do ye now stop or step back? Tutius recurrere,
Reusner Symb.
quam male currere, was the Emperor Philips symboll. Better run back, then run
amiss: for in this case, He that hastes with his feet, sins, Prove. 19.2.
But to run well till a man sweats, and then to sit down, and take cold, may
cause a consumption.

Verse 8. This perswasion] Sectaries and seducers have a strange art in
persuading, (...).
Colos. 2.4. And although we think our selves able enough to answer and
withstand their arguments, yet it is dangerous dealing with them. The
Valentinian heretics had a trick to persuade before they taught. Arrius could
cogge a die, Tertullian.
and cozen the simple and needless hearer.

Verse 9. A little leven] viz. Of false doctrine, Mat. 16.6. See the Note there.

Verse 10. But he that troubles you] That heresiarch, or ringleader of the
faction. the Beast and the false-prophet, are taken and cast alive into a lake,
etc. when the common sort seduced by them had an easier judgment, Revel.
19.20, 21.

Verse 11. Why do I yet suffer persecution] From the Jews zealous of the Law.
It is well observed, that the nearer any are unto a conjunction in matters of
religion, and yet some difference retained, D. Day upon 1 Cor. 16.^.
the deeper is the hatred. A Jew hates a Christian, worse then he does a Turk
or Pagan. A Papist hates a Protestant worse then he does a Jew, etc. Non
circumcidantur modo, sed and abscindantur. Chrysostom. (...).


Verse 12. I would they were even cut] Not circumcised only, cut round, but cut
off.

That trouble you] That turn you upside down, or that turn you out of house and
home.

Verse 13. Only use not your liberty] In maxima liberate, minima licentia.
Therefore are men the worse, because they should be better. Christ came to call
sinners, not to licentiousness, but to repentance, Mar. 2.17. to take his yoke
upon them, Mat. 11.29. to hire out their members servants to righteousness,
Romans 6.16. Hence it is, that as S. Paul's Epistles largely prove free election
and justification by Christ: So the Epistles of James, Peter, and John, press
to love and new obedience, lest any should argue from mercy to liberty.

Verse 14. For all the law] i. e. All the second table. Primo praecepto
reliquorum omnium observantia praecipitur. Luther.
The Scripture often appropriateth the Law to the second Table, as Romans 13.8.
Ephesians. 6.2. etc. A man must exercise the first table in the second, the duties
of his general calling in his particular calling. In the first Commandment,
says Luther, the keeping of all the law is enjoined. Neither can any one love
his neighbor as himself, but he that loves God above all.

Verse 15. But if ye bite, etc.] Si collidimur, frangimur. If we clash, we
break. Dissolution is the daughter of dissension, Camer. Medit. hist cent. 2.
said Nazianzen. The Turks pray to God to keep the Christians at variance.
Israelites in Egypt vexed one another: And Christians, as if they wanted
enemies, sly in one another faces. This is a sad fore-token of a deadly
consumption.

Verse 16. This I say then] For an antidote against abuse of Christian liberty.
Set the Spirit, as Pharaoh did Joseph, upon the chief Charet of your hearts,
and let all be at his beck and check.

Verse 17. For the flesh lusteth] Every new man is two men. What can a man see
in the Shulamite, but as the appearance of two Armies, Cant. 6.13? These
maintain civil broils within her, as the two babes did in Rebecca's womb. All
was jolly quiet at Ephesus, till Paul came thither: But then there arose no
small stir about that way, Act. 19.23. So is there in the good soul, etc.

So that ye cannot do the things, etc.] As ye cannot do the good that ye
would, because of the flesh ( Romans 7.21. something lay at the fountainhead,
and stopped it) so neither can ye do the evil that ye would, because of the
Spirit. In which respect, setting the ingratitude aside, the sins of godly men
are less then of others: because the flesh cannot carry it without some
counter-buffs.

Verse 18. Ye are not under the Law] For where the spirit is, there is liberty,
from the rigor, irritation, and malediction of the Law.

Verse 19. Now the works of the flesh] Sinners are sore laborers; wicked men
great workmen, Would they take but half that pains for heaven that they do for
hell, they could not, likely, miss of it. Gnama^. (...).
The Hebrew and Greek words for sin import labor.

Are manifest] They lie above ground, and are condemned by the light of nature.
(...).
Wicked men also hang out their sins to the sight of the Sun, Isa. 3 9.

Verse 20. Idolatry] This is fitly set after those fleshly sins, as commonly
accompanied with them, 1 Cor. 10.7, 8. Sir Walter Rawleigh knew what he said,
that were he to choose a religion for licentious liberty and lasciviousness, he
would choose the Popish religion.

Verse 21. Murders, drunkennesse] This is often the mother of murder. Sueton.
Domitius the father of Nero, slew Liberius an honest man, because he refused
to drink so much as he commanded him. Alexander killed many of his dear friends
in his drunkenness, whom he would have revived again (but could not) with his
own heart-bloud. Once he invited a company to supper, and provided a crown of
180. pounds to be given to those that drank most. One and forty killed
themselves with drinking to get that crown.

Verse 22. The fruits of the spirit] The spirit of grace are those two golden
pipes, Zach. 4. through which the two olive-branches empty out of themselves the
golden oils of all precious graces into the Candlestick, the Church: Hence
grace is here and elsewhere called the fruits of the spirit, pleasant fruits,
Cant. 4.16. and 6.2. Ioh. 15.16.

Long-suffering] It has been questioned by some, whether a man can be
long-suffering, Sine anxilio gratiae, without the help of grace. Aquin 2.2. q.
136 (...).
But that which is right, is a fruit of the spirit.

Gentlenesse] Gr. Usefulness, sweetness.

Faith] That is, Faithfulness, as Mat. 23.23. 1 Timothy 5.12. Tit. 2.10.

Verse 23. Meekness, temperance] Queen Elizabeth was famous for these two
virtues. King Edward 6. Camd Elisab.
called her by no other name, then his sweet sister Temperance. She did seldom
eat but one sort of meat, rose ever with an appetite, and lived about 70.
years. Next to the holy Scripture, she preferred (as the best piece) Seneca's
book of clemency. S. W. Vaughan.
When she said, that book had done her much good, yea, said one, but it has
done your subjects much hurt. M. H^^rick^ 3. Sermons.


Against such there is no law] 1 Timothy 1.9. As, for the works of the flesh,
there is no Gospel.

Verse 24. And they that are Christs] When Christ came in the flesh, we
crucified him: when he comes into our hearts, he crucifies us.

Have crucified the flesh] To crucify is not absolutely and outright to kill;
Crucifixion is a lingering death, no member being free from pain. If then we so
repent of sin (as that which crucified Christ) we so pierce the old man, that
we are sure he will die of it, though he be not presently dead, this is
mortification. Those beasts, Dan. 7.12. had their dominion taken away, and yet
their lives were prolonged for a season.

With the affections] Sinful, sudden passions.

And lusts] More deeply rooted in our natures, and so, not so easily overcome.

Verse 25. If we live in the Spirit] Spiritual men only are heirs of life, 1
Peter 3.7. all other are dead in trespasses.

Let us walk] Walk orderly by line, and by rule, march in rank, (...).
etc. Life consists in action. Life, says the Philosopher, is such a faculty
as whereby creatures move themselves in their own places. The godly esteem of
life by that stirring they find in their souls: as else they lament, as over a
dead soul, Isa. 38.15, 16.

Verse 26. Let us not be desirous of vain-glory] Ingens dulcedo gloriae (says
Aeneas Sylvius:) facilius contemnenda dicitur, quam contemnitur. It was this
vice that rai^ed so much trouble in Germany betwixt Luther and Carolostadius,
and that bred the Sacramentary war, that is not yet ended. It was a saying of
Luther, From a vainglorious Doctor, from a contentious Pastor, and from
unprofitable Questions, the good Lord deliver his Church.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. If a man be overtaken]
GR. (...)
Be taken before he is aware, before he has time to consider, or bethink himself
of better. It is of incogitancy, that the Saints sin: put them in mind, and
they mend all. It is of passion, and passions last not long. Psalm. 139. Psalm.
1.1.
There is no way of wickedness in them: They stand not in the way of sinners,
they sit not down in the seat of scorners.

Restore such an one] (...).
Gr. Set him in joint again. A Metaphor from Chyrurgeons and bone-setters, who
handle their patients tenderly.

Lest thou also be tempted] I have known a good old man, says Bernard, who
when he had heard of any that had committed some notorious offense, was wont to
say with himself, Ille hodie, and ego cras, He fell to day, so may I tomorrow.

Verse 2. Bear ye one another burdens] When after-reprehension, sin is
become a burden, set to your shoulder, and help to lift it off. Support the
weak, be patient toward all. ^ Thessalonians. 5.14.


Verse 3. Think himself to be something] The self-deceiver takes his counter,
and sets it up for a thousand pound, as the Pharisees and Laodiceans. Of such
it may be said, as Quintilian somewhere of some over-weeners of themselves,
that they might have proved excellent scholars, is they had not been so
persuaded already.

Verse 4. But let every man prove] This is an excellent remedy against
self-deceit, and a means to make one fit to reprove others with mercy and
meeknes.

And then shall he have rejoycing] Vt testimonium perhibeat conscientia
propria, non lingua aliena, says Augustine, that thine own conscience, and not
another man's tongue may testify for thee. Omnis Sarmatarum virtus extra ipsos,
Tacit. lib. ^. ^. 10.
says Tacitus. All the self-deceivers goodness is shored up by popularity, or
other base respects.

Verse 5. For every man shall bear] Be through therefore in the work of
self-examination. Sparing a little pains at first, doubles it in the end: As he
who will not cast up his books, his books will cast up him at length. The
misery of most men is, that their minds are as ill set as their eyes, neither
of them look inwards: how few are there that turn short again upon themselves,
so as to say, What have I done? Woe to all such when God shall send out summons
for sleepers, When he comes to search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the
men that are settled on their lee^, etc. Zeph. 1.12.

Verse 6. Communicate unto him] Not contribute as an alms, Occumen.
but communicate as a right: see Philem. 17. as wages for his work, Mark 6. as
pay for his pains, 1 Cor. 9.14. See the Note there.

Verse 7. Be not deceived] Think not all well saved that is withheld from the
Minister. It is a saying in the civill-law. Clericis Laici sunt oppido insensi:
Many think it neither sin, nor pity to beguile the Preacher. But God is not
mocked, neither will he be robbed, by any, but they shall hear, Ye are cursed
with a curse, Mal. 3.8, 9. even with Shallums curse ( Jer. 22.11, 12, 13.) that
used his neighbors service without wages, and would sacrilegiously take in a
piece of Gods windows into his wide house, ver. 14.

Verse 8. For he that sows in the flesh] He that neglecting his poor soul,
cares only to feather his nest, and to heap up riches. Si ventri been, si
lateri, as Epicurus in Horace: If the belly may be filled, the back fitted, let
the soul sink or swim, he takes no thought.

Verse 9. And let us not be weary] Let us not give in, (...).
as tired jades: hot at hand seldom holds out.

For in due season we shall reap] We must not look to sow and reap in a day: as
he says of the Hyperborean people, far North, that they sow shortly after the
Sunrising with them, Heresbach. de re rustica.
and reap before the Sun set: that is, because the whole half year is one
continual day with them.

If we faint not] Quaerendi defatigatio turpis est, cum id quod quaritur, sit
pulcherimum. Cic. de fini^.
It is a shame to faint in the search of that, which being found will more then
pay for the pains of searching. Caleb was not discouraged by the Giants:
therefore he had Hebron the place of the Giants: so those that faint not in the
way to heaven, shall inherit heaven.

Verse 10. As we have therefore opportunity] Catch at it, as the Echo catches
the voice. Joseph took the nick of time to gain Egypt to the King by feeding
the hungry, so may we, to get heaven.

Who are of the houshold] Of the family of faith, Gods houshold-servants. That
was a desperate resolve of Aigoland, King of Arragon, who coming to the French
Court to be baptized, Turpine.
and asking who those Lazars and poor people were that waited for alms from the
Exmperour Charlemains Table? When one answered him that they were the
Messengers and servants of God; I will never serve that God, said he, that can
keep his servants no better.

Verse 11. How large a letter] Gr. With what good great text-letters. I have
written unto you with mine own hand (no fair hand: the greatest Clerks are not
always the best Scribes) and not by any Tertius, Chrysostom. Theophylact.
or other am^nensis, Romans 16.22. to show his love, and prevent imposture, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.

Verse 12. To make a fair shew] Gr. To set a good face on it, (...)
before the Jews especially, and to ingratiate with them.

For the cross of Christ] That is, for the doctrine of the cross, or of
justification by the death of Christ crucified.

Verse 13. Keep the law] Romans 2.23. Hierome doubts not to pronounce that man
accursed, that says it is impossible to keep the Law. Sed quid visum sit
Hieronymo, nihil moramur: nos quid verum sit inquirimus, says Calvin. But let
Hierome hold as he will, we know there is no such thing.

That they may glory in you flesh] That they pride themselves in the multitude
of their followers, and curry favor with the Jews by gaining many proselytes.

Verse 14. But God forbid, etc.] The Saints keep a constant counter-motion, and
are Antipodes to the wicked. They thus and thus, but I otherwise.

Whereby the world is crucified] I look upon the world as a dead thing, as a
great dunghill, etc. That harlot was deceived in S. Paul, in thinking to
allure him by laying out those her two fair breasts of profit and pleasure: He
had no mind to be sucking at those botches; He was a very crucifix of
mortification: And in his face (as one said of Dr Raynolds) a man might have
seen, Verum mortificati hominis idaeam, the true portraiture of a mortified man.

And I to the world] q.d. The world and I are well agreed. The world cares not
a pin for me, and I (to cry quittance with it) care as little for the world.

Verse 15. For in Christ Jesus] That is, in the Kingdom of Christ.

But a new creature] Either a new man, or no man.

Verse 16. According to this rule] viz. Of the new creature.

Peace be on them] Not only in them, or with them; but on them, maugre the
malice of earth and hell.

Verse 17. From henceforth let no man] Here he takes upon him as an Apostle,
and speaks with authority. (...).


I bear in my body the marks] As scars of honor. Paul had been whipped,
stocked, stoned, etc. The marks of these he could better boast of, then those
false Apostles of their circumcision. And hereby it appeared that he refused
not, as they did, to suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. In the year
1166. the Synod held at Oxford in the reign of Henry the second, banished out
of England thirty Dutch Doctors (which taught the right use of Marriage,
Alsted. Chron. p. 357.
and of the Sacraments) after they had first stigmatized or branded them with
hot irons. John Clerk of Melden in France, being for Christ's sake whipped three
several days, and afterward having a mark set in his forehead, as a note of
infamy, his mother beholding it (though his father was an adversary) encouraged
her son, crying with a loud voice, Blessed be Christ, Act. and Mon. fol. 802.
Vivat Christus ejusque insignia.
and welcome be these prints and marks of Christ. The next year after, scil.
anno 1524. He brake the images without the City, which his superstitious
Contrymen were to worship the next day. For the which he was apprehended,
and had his right hand cut off, his nose pulled off with pinsers, both his
arms, and both his breasts torn with the same instrument; and after all, he was
burned at a stake. Sculte^. Annal.
In his greatest torments he pronounced that of the Psalmist, Their idols are
silver and gold, the works of men's hands, etc. I conclude this discourse with
that saying of Pericles. It is not gold, precious stones, statues, etc. that
adorns a soldier, but a torn buckler, a cracked helmet, a blunt sword, a
scarr'd face, etc. Of these Biron the French Marshall boasted at his death. And
Sceva is renowned for this, that at the siege of Dyrrachium he so long alone
resisted Pompeys army, that he had 220. darts sticking in his shield, Densa^que
^^rens in p^^^o^e lylvam. (...).
and lost one of his eyes, and yet gave not over till Caesar came to his rescue.

Verse 18. Be with your spirit] Spirituals are specially to be desired for our
selves and ours. Caetera aut aderunt, aut non oberunt. Other things we shall
either have, or not want, but be as well without them.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION
Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the EPHESIANS.

CHAP. I. Verse 1. To the Saints -- to the faithfull]
FItly: for it is by faith, that we become Saints, Act. 15.9.

Verse 2. Grace be to you, and peace] These go fitly together: because we must
seek our peace in the free grace and favor of God. The Ark and Mercy-seat were
never sundred.

Verse 3. Blessed be God] Grattae cessat decursus, ubi gratiarum recursus. A
thankful man shall abound with blessings.

With all spiritual blessings] Wisdom, prudence, etc. ver. 8. a Benjamins
portion, a goodly heritage.

Verse 4. He has chosen us in him] Christ was Mediator therefore from
eternity, viz. by virtue of that humane nature, which he should assume.

That we should be holy] God elected us as well to the means, as to the end.
Note this against Libertines. For as they Act. 27.31. could not come safe to
land that left the ship: so neither can men come to heaven but by holiness.
Cyrus was moved to restore the captivity, by finding himself fore-appointed to
this glorious service 170. years before he was born, Isa. 44.28. Should not we
likewise be excited to good works by this that we were elected to them.

Without blame] Or blot, Ephesians. 5.27. Absque querela, Luke 1.6.

Before him] i. e. In purity of heart, 2 King. 20.3.

In love] In sanctity of life.

Verse 5. Having predestined us] Interpreters have observed that this word
that signifies to predestinate is but six times found in the new Testament
(never in the old) being referred but twice to things, Act. 4.28. and 1. Cor.
2.7. four times to persons. Romans 8 29, 30. Ephesians. 1.5, 11. and never applied to
reprobates, but to elect persons only. Howbeit Divines under predestination do
usually consider the decree both of election and reprobation. The doctrine
hereof men should not adventure to teach till they have well learned and
digested it. In the year 1586. Iacobus Andreas the Lutheran, and Theodore Beza
conferred and disputed for eight days space at Mompelier: the issue of which
conference was unhappy; Alsted. Chron p. 562.
for form that time forward the Doctrine of Predestination was much misused and
exagitated.

Verse 6. To the praise of the glory] This is the end whereunto it is destined:
and hence it is called Predestination. Note here that all the causes of
predestination are merely without us. The efficient, God: the material,
Christ: the formal, the good pleasure of his will: the final, the praise of
Gods glorious grace.

Wherein he has made us accepted] Gr. (...). Gratificavit. Vulgata.
He has ingratiated us, he has justified us, made us gracious in his beloved
son our Mediator. And although there be an inequality of expressions in
duty, Quoad nos, in us, yet there is a constancy of worth and intercession by
Christ, propter nos, for us.

Verse 7. In whom we have redemption] As captive ransomed at a price. What this
price was see 1 Pet. 1.19. Should not Christ therefore reap the travails of his
soul, Isa. 53?

The forgiveness of our sins] This David counted his crown, and prized it
above his imperial diadem, Psalm. 103.3, 4.

Verse 8. In all wisdom and prudence] That properly respects contemplation,
this action. Socrates made no distinction betwixt them. For, said he, who so
knows good to practice it, and evil to avoid it, he is a man truly wise and
prudent. Xenophon de dict is Socrat. l 3


Verse 9. The mystery of his will] That is, the Gospel, a mystery both to men,
1 Cor. 2.8. and Angels, Ephesians. 3.10.

Verse 10. That in the dispensation] God is the best oeconomick: his house is
exactly ordered for matter of good husbandry. (...).


Gather together in one] Gr. Recapitulate, reduce all to a head, recollect.
(...).


Both which are in heaven] The crowned Saints, and perhaps the glorious Angels,
who (according to some Divines) being in themselves changeable creatures (and
therefore called Shinan, that is, mutable, Psalm. 68.17.) receive confirmation
by Christ, so that they cannot leave their first station, as did the apostate
Angels. Others think that the Angels stand not by means of Christ's mediation,
but of Gods eternal election, and are therefore called the elect Angels.

Verse 11. We have obtained inheritance] Or we are taken into the Church, as
Magistrates were by lot into their office. (...).
On we are made Gods inheritance, as Deuteronomy. 32.9. It imports our free and
unexpected vocation.

After the counsel of his own will] God does all by counsel, and ever has a
reason of his will: which though we see not for present, we shall at last day.
Meanwhile submit.

Verse 12. Who first trusted] It is a singular honor to be first in so good a
matter. Hope is here put for faith, whereof it is both the daughter, and the
nurse.

Verse 13. After that ye beleeved] They 1. Heard. 2. Believed. 3. Were sealed,
i. e. full assured. Assurance is Gods seal, faith is our seal. God honors our
sealing to his truth by his sealing by his spirit. We yield first the consent
and assent of faith, and then God puts his seal to the contract. There must be
the bargain before the earnest.

Verse 14. Which is the earnest] Not the pawn, but the earnest, Quia pignus
redditur, arrha retinetur, says Hierome. A pawn is to be returned again, but
an earnest is part of the whole sum, and assures it. We here have eternal
life, 1. In praetio. 2. In promisso. 3. In primitijs.

Verse 15. Your faith in the Lord Jesus] Love is the fruit of faith: therefore
the Apostles pray for increase of faith, that they might be able seven times a
day to forgive an offending brother, Luke 17.5. See the Note there.

Verse 16. Making mention of you] Whether a Minister shall do more good to
others by his prayers or preaching, I will not determine (says a grave Divine)
but he shall certainly by his prayers reap more comfort to himself.

Verse 17. Saints progr. by D. Tailour.
The Spirit of wisdom and revelation] So called, because he reveals unto us
Gods depths, and reads us his riddles, 1 Cor. 2. He illightens both the organ
and object: he anoints the eyes with eye salve, and gives both sight and light.

Verse 18. The glory of his inheritance] The glory of heaven is unconceivable,
Revel. 21. search is made through all the bowels of the earth for something to
shadow it by. No natural knowledge can be had of the third heaven, nor any
help by humane arts, as Aristotle acknowledges. The glory thereof is fitter to
be believed, then possible to be discoursed.

Verse 19. De ^ulo text. 99
And what is the exceeding] Here is a most emphaticall heap of most divine and
significant words to express that which can never sufficiently be conceived or
uttered. A six fold gradation the Apostle uses to show what a power God puts
forth in working the grace of faith. Indeed this power is secret, and like that
of the heavens upon our bodies, which (says one) is as strong as that of
physic, etc. Yet so sweet, and so secretly insinuating it self with the
principles of nature, that as for the conveyance of it, it is insensible, and
hardly differenced from that of the principles of nature in us. Therefore the
Apostle prays for these Ephesians here, that their eyes may be enlightened to
see the power that wrought in them, etc.

Verse 20. Which he wrought in Christ] God puts forth the same almighty power
in quickening the heart by faith, that he did in raising up his Son Christ from
the dead. It must needs then be more then a moral swasion that he uses.
Christ wrought the Centurions faith, as God: he wondered at it, as man. God
wrought, and man marvelled: he did both, to teach us where to bestow our wonder.

Verse 21. Far above all principality] Quantum inter stellas luna minores. Oh
do but think with thy self (says one) though it far pass the reach of any
mortal thought, what an infinite inexplicable happiness it will be to look
for ever upon the glorious body of Jesus Christ, shining with incomprehensible
beauty: and to consider that even every vein of that blessed body bled to bring
thee to heaven: and that it being with such excess of glory hypostatically
united to the second person in Trinity, has honored and advanced thy nature
above the brightest Cherub.

Verse 22. To be the head over all things] That is, All persons, all the elect,
as Gal. 3.22. Christ is head over Angels too, but in another sense then over
the Church, viz. 1. As God he gives them whatsoever they are or have. 2. As
Mediator also, he makes use of their service for the safety and salvation of
the Church. They holy Angels are great friends to the Church, but not members
of it. For Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Besides, he sanctified his Church, and washed it with his
blood, Ephesians. 5.26. But this he did not for the Angels, etc. See the Note on
verse. 10.

Verse 23. The fullness of him] That is of Christ, who having voluntarily
subjected himself to be our head, accounts not himself complete without his
members. In which respect we have the honor of making Christ perfect, as the
members do the body.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Who were dead]
Natural men are living carcases, walking sepulchers of themselves. In most
families it is, as once it was in Egypt, Exodus 12.30. No house wherein there
is not one, nay many dead corpses.

Verse 2. Wherein ye walked] Hence Act 14.16. Sin is called a way, but it
leads to the chambers of death.

According to the course of this world] The mundaneity or worldliness of the
world (as the Syriack renders it) which is wholly set upon wickedness (as
Aaron says of his worldings, Exodus 32.22.) and takes no care for the world to
come.

According to the Prince, etc.] The devil by whom wicked men are acted and
agitated. Gratian was out in saying, That Satan is called Prince of the world,
as a King of Onesse, or as the Cardinal of Ravenna, only by derision. Evil men
set him up for their Sovereign, and are wholly at his beck and obedience.

The spirit that now worketh] As a Smith works in his forge, an Artificer in
his shop.

Verse 3. Among whom also we all, etc.] Let the best look back often on what they
were before calling, that they may thankfully cry out with Iphi^rates, (...),
from what misery to what dignity are we advanced!

Fulfilling the desires] Gr. The wiles of the flesh. Now therefore we must as
diligently fulfill not the will, but the wills of God, as David did, Act. 13.22.

The children of wrath] Deires. Gregory the great said of the English boys
that were presented to him, Angli quasi Angeli. And demanding further what
Province they were of in this Island, it was returned, that they were called
Deires: which caused him again to repeat the word, Abbots Geog. page 119.
and to say, that it were great pity but that by being taught the Gospel, they
should be saved de ira Dei, from the wrath of God.

Verse 4. But God who is rich in mercy] Such a mercy as rejoices against
judgment, as a man against his adversary which he has subdued, Jam. 2.13.

Verse 5. Has quickened, etc.] The very first stirrings in the womb of grace
are precious to God: he blesses our very buds, Isa. 44.3. according to the
Geneva translation.

Verse 6. And made us sit together] We have taken up our rooms aforehand in
heaven, whereunto we have just right upon earth by virtue of the union, the
ground of communion, 1 John 5.12. He that has the son has life: he has
possession of it, as by turf and twig.

Verse 7. In his kindness toward us] We come not to the knowledge of God, but
by his works: And even his way of knowing him we naturally abuse to idolatry.

Verse 8. For by grace ye are saved] So ver. 5. and every where almost S. Paul
is a most constant preacher of the grace of God, as Chrysostom styles him.
Sub laudibus naturae latent inimici gratiae, says Augustine. The patrons of
man's free will are enemies to Gods free grace.

Verse 9. Least any man should boast] As that fool did, that said, Vega.
Coelum gratis non accipiam, I will not have heaven but at a rate. Non sic Does
coluimus, aut sic vivimus, ut ille nos vinceret, said the Emperor Antonius
Philosophus. Valcat. Gallic. in Avid Cassio.
We have not so lived and deserved of God, that they enemy should vanquish us.

Verse 10. For we are his workmanship] His artificial facture, (...).
or creature, that wherein he has showed singular skill, by erecting the
glorious fabrike of the new man.

Created -- to good works] In the year 1559. there was published a paradox,
that good works are pernicious to salvation of men's souls. David George the
broacher of this heresy was dug up, and burnt at Basile.

God has before ordained] i. e. By his eternal decree. Oar Vivification then
is not a work of yesterday: but such as God has with singular complacency
contemplated from all eternity, rejoicing in that habitable part of his earth,
Prove. 8.31.

Verse 11. Who are called uncircumcision] In great scorn and reproach, as 1 Samuel 17.26. Howbeit unregenerate Israel was to God as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7. And
Iether by nature an Ismaelite, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. was for his faith and religion
called an Israelite, 2 Samuel 17.25.

Verse 12. Strangers from the Covenant] The Saints only are heirs to the
promises: but the devil sweeps all the wicked, as being out of the Covenant.
They stuff themselves with promises, till they have made them a pillow for sin,
Deuteronomy. 29.19. Sed praesumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt.

Having no hope] But such as will one day hop headless: such as will serve
them as Absoloms mule served her Master, when she left him hanging by the head
betwixt heaven and earth, as rejected of both.

Without God in the world] Because without a teaching Priest, and without law,
2 Chronicles. 15.3. As it is said of the poor Brasileans at this day, that they are
sine fide, sine rege, sine lege. This was the case of our Pagan Predecessors.

Verse 13. Are made nigh by the bloud] Christ has paved us a new and living
way to the throne of Gods grace by his own most precious blood. O happy
lapidi-pavium! Joh. 19.13-17
O - Golgotha become our Gabbatha!

Verse 14. For he is our peace] That is, (...).
our peacemaker and peace-matter. When he was born, there was among all
Nations, a general, aut pax, aut pactio, as Florus observes. When he took his
name, he would not have it either entirely Hebrew, as Jesus, or entirely Greek,
as Christ, but both Jesus and Christ, to show (says one) that he is our peace
that has reconciled two into one, etc.

Verse 15. Having abolished in his flesh] That is, by his death in the flesh,
Colos. 1.22. At which time the veil rent, and the Ceremonies died: only they
were to be honorably buried.

For to make in himself] Gr. To create; sc. by regeneration, Gal. 6.15. So by
conjoyning he new created them, and by new creating he conjoined them.

Verse 16. In one body] Vbi igitur separatistae? says one.

Having slain the enmity] Not the Ceremonies only, as ver. 15. but sin that
great makebate, that sets God at odds with his own creature.

Verse 17. To them that were nigh] That is, The children of Israel, a people
^ear unto him, Psalm. 148.14.

Verse 18. We both have an accesse] With good assurance of success. The
Persian Kings held it a piece of their silly glory to hold off their best
friends, who might not come near them, but upon special license, Esth. 1. Not
so our King. Oh come, for the Master calls thee!

Verse 19. Fellow citizens with the Saints] Paul, as a Citizen of Rome, Act. 22.
escaped whipping: we, as Citizens with the Saints, escape hell tortures and
torments.

Verse 20. Upon the foundation] Foundation is taken either for Christ, 1 Cor.
3.11. Mat. 16.16. or the doctrine of the Scriptures, which teach salvation only
by Jesus Christ, as here, and Rev. 21.14.

Verse 21. Fitly framed together] Or, perfectly joined together by the ciment
of the holy Spirit working in the Saints faith in Christ, and love one toward
another, which the Apostle calls the bond of perfection.

Verse 22. For an habitation of God, etc.] The Father makes choice of this
house, the Son purchases it, the holy Ghost takes possession of it. This
happiness he best understands, that most feels. The Cock on the dunghill
knows it not.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. For this cause]
TO wit, That you may be an habitation of God, through the Spirit.

I Paul the prisoner]. I hold not S. Paul so happy for his rapture into
Paradise (says Chrysostom upon this Text) as for his imprisonment for Christ.

Verse 2. Of the dispensation] Gr. Economy. The Church is Gods house, 1 Timothy
3.15. Paul was faithful therein as a steward, Mat. 24.45.

Verse 3. As I wrote before in few] Sc. Chap 1.9. and 2.13, etc. Fullness of
matter in fewness of words. This is the Scriptures pre-cellency above all
humane writings.

Verse 4. My knowledge in the mystery] The highest point of heavenly learning:
and hereby he proves his calling to the Ministry.

Verse 5. Was not made known] sc. So clearly and particularly. Peter himself
could hardly be persuaded to it, Act. 10.14 34, 35.

Verse 6. Gentiles should be fellow-heirs] Coheirs, concorporate, and
consorts: three sweet societies, the former founded upon the two latter.

Verse 7. By the effectual working, etc.] Enabling me to accept and improve
that gift of Gods grace: whereunto I should otherwise turn not the palm, but
the backside of the hand.

Verse 8. Less then the least] Great Paul is least of Saints, O^ulentissima me
a^la, qu^rum in ^ to latent ^e^ae. Sen. ep. ^3.
last of Apostles, greatest of sinners. The best b^lsomes sink to the bottom:
the goodliest buildings have lowest foundations: the heaviest ears of corn hang
downward, so do the ^^ughes or trees that are best laden.

The unsearchable riche^] Gr. Not to be traced out. (...).
Should not Ministers be made welcome that come to men on such golden messages?

Verse 9. And to make all men see] Gr. To illighten them, far more then the
preaching of the Prophets could, 2 Pet. 1.19. To us now is a great light sprung
up. Mat. 4 10.

The fellowship] Or, as some copies have it) the dispensation. (...).


Who created all things] i. e. Restored, repaired: hence Gospel-daies are
called the world to come, Heb. 2.5.

Verse 10. Might be known by the Church] As by a glass or theater.

The manifold wisdom, etc.] Gr. That has abundance of ^^rious variety in it,
(...).
such as is seen in the best pictures or textures. This the very Angels look
intently into (as the Cherubims in the Tabernacle did into the Mercy-seat) and
are much amused and amazed thereat. They see that man's salvation by Christ is a
plot of Gods own devising.

Verse 11. According to the eternal purpose] Of calling and saving the
Gentiles by Christ: a secret that the Angels themselves could not understand,
till the time fore-appointed came.

Verse 12. Boldness and accesse] True peace draws men to God, false drives
them from God. Uprightness has boldness, serenity has security.

Verse 13. (...).
Wherefore I desire] Or, I beg of God, as one would do an alms, Menaico.
Act. 3.2. humbly, heartily. And here the Apostle returns to his former
discourse, after a long digression, ver. 2. to ver. 13.

At my tribulations for you] For for your sakes am I maliced and molested by
the Jews; by whose means also I am now a prisoner.

Verse 14 For this cause] sc. That ye faint not, but gather strength.

I bow my knees] A most seemly and suitable gesture, usual among all Nations,
but Turks, who kneel not, nor uncover the head at prayer, as holding those
postures unam^ly.

Verse 15. (...) Paren^e^a.
Of whom the whole family] Or, Paternity: God is the only Father, to speak
properly, Mat. 23 9. The Father of all the father-hood in heaven and earth.

Verse 16. According to the riches of his glory] That is, of his grace: so 2
Cor 3.18. See the Note there.

Verse 17. That Christ may dwell] As the Sun dwells in the house by his beams.
Faith fetches Christ into the heart, as into his habitation: And if he dwell
there, he is bound to all reparations.

Verse 18. The breadth and length, etc.] Gods mercy has all the dimensions.
Psalm. 36, 5.
Thy mercy, o God, reaches to the heavens: There is the height of it, Great is
thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell:
There is the depth of his mercy. The earth is full of thy goodness: There is
the breadth of it. All the ends of the earth have seen thy salvation: There is
the length of it. Psalm. 86.13.


Verse 19. With all the fullness of God] That is, of Christ's diffusive
fullness, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, and in whom we are complete, Col.
2.9, 10.

Verse 20. Exceeding abundantly] Gr. (...).
More then exceedingly or excessively. God has not only a fullness of
abundance but of redundancy, of plenty, but of bounty. He is often better to, us
then our prayers.

According to the power] The Apostle begins his prayer with mention of Gods
fatherly mercy: he shuts it up with a description of his power. These two, Gods
might and Gods mercy are the Jachin and Boaz, the two main pillars of a
Christians faith, whereon it rests in prayer.

Verse 21. Glory in the Church by Christ] Who is the refulgency of his Fathers
glory, Heb. 1.3.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. Worthy of the vocation]
THere is a (...), a seemlinesse appertaining to each calling: so here. We must
walk nobly and comfortably, as becomes the heirs of God, an coheirs of
Christ. Scipio, when a harlot was offered him, answered, Vellem, si non essem
Imperator; I would, if I were not General of the Army. Antigonus being invited
to a place where a notable harlot was to be present, asked counsel of
Menedemus, what he should do? He bad him only remember that he was a Kings
son: So let men remember their high and heavenly calling, and do nothing
unworthy of it. Luth. in Genesis
Luther counsels men to answer all temptations of Satan with this only,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian.

Verse 2. With all lowliness and meeknesse] These are virtutes collactaneae,
as Bernard calls them, a pair of twin-sisters, never asunder.

Verse 3. The unity of the spirit] That is, Unanimity: this keeps all together,
which else will shatter and fall asunder. The daughter of dissension is
dissolution, says Nazianzen.

Verse 4. In one hope of your calling] That is, unto one inheritance, which we
all hope for. Fall not out therefore by the way, as Joseph charged his brethren.

Verse 5. One baptisme] The Author to the Hebrews speaks of Baptismes, Chap.
6.2. But either he puts the plural for the singular: or else he means it of
the outward and inward washing, which the Schools call baptismum stuminis and
flaminis. See the Note on Mat. 3.11.

Verse 6. Mal. ^ 10.
One God and Father of all] Have we not all one Father, says Malachy? Why then
dissent and jar we? How is it that these many ones here instanced, unite us
not? My dove, mine undefiled is but one, Cant 6 9.

Verse 7. According to the measure] And may not Christ do with his own as he
lists? Those of greater gifts are put upon hotter service. (...)

Verse 8. He led captivity captive, etc.] As in the Roman triumphs, the Victor
ascended up to the Capitol in a Chariot of state, the prisoners following on
foot with their hands bound behind, and they threw certain pieces of coin
abroad, to be picked up by the common people. So Christ in they day of his
solemn inauguration into his heavenly Kingdom, triumphed over sin, death and
hell, Col. 2.15. and gave gifts to men.

And gave gifts unto men] The Hebrew has it, Psalm. 76 19. Thou receivedst
gifts for men. Christ received them, that he might give them, and said, It is a
more blessed thing to give then to receive. The Psalmist adds, Even for the
rebellious. To them also Christ gives common gifts, for the behoof of his
people. Augustus in his solemn feasts gave gifts: to some, gold, to others,
trifles. So God in his ordinances, to some saving grace, to others common
grace, and with this they rest content.

Verse 9 Into the lower parts] That is, into his mothers womb; according to
Psalm. 139.15. I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, i. e.
in the womb, where God formed and featured me; like as curious workmen, when
they have some c^o^c^ piece in hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring
it forth to light for men to gaze at.

Verse 10. Far above all heavens] That is, above all visible heavens, into
the third heaven, not into the Vtopia of the Ubiquitaries.

That he might fill all things] viz. With the gifts of his holy Spirit: for the
further he is from us in his flesh, the nearer by his Spirit; he is more
efficacious absent, then present.

Verse 11. Some Pastors and Teachers] Distinct offices, Romans 12.7, 8. yet one
man may be both, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. The essential difference between Pastors
and Teachers in each Congregation is much denied by many learned and godly
Divines.

Verse 12. For the perfecting of the Saints] For the joynting of them, whom the
devil has dislocated. (...).


Verse 13. Unto the measure of the stature] Or age: that age wherein Christ
fills all in all, as Chap. 3.19. The Saints (say some) shall rise again in
that vigor of age, that a perfect man is at about 33 years old, each in their
proper sex: whereunto they think the Apostle here alludeth.

Verse 14. Be no more children] But young men, 1 John 2.14 strong men.

Tossed to and fro] As a feather or froth upon the waves, wherried about with
every wind of doctrine, unstable souls, as S. Peter calls them, simple, that
believe every thing, as Solomon has it: giddy hearers that have no mould, but
what the next teacher casts them into, being blow like glasses into this or
that shape at the pleasure of his breath.

By the sleight of men] Gr. By men's cogging of a die, (...).
the usual trade of cheaters, and false gamesters.

Whereby they lie in wait to devise] Gr. Unto a method of deceiving. The devil
and his disciples are notable method-mongers, so as to deceive, if it were
possible the very elect: but that they cannot do fundamentally, finally, Mat.
24 24. See the Note there.

Verse 15. But speaking the truth] Or, Doing the truth, (...).
as the Vulgar has it. Truthifying, or following the truth, as one rendereth
it. S. John bids, Love in truth, 1 John 3.18. S. Paul, Speak or do the truth in
love. And again, let all your things be done in love.

Verse 16. Comp^cted by that, etc.] The Saints are knit unto Christ by his
Spirit, as fast as the sinews of his blessed body to the bones, the flesh to
the sinews, the skin to the flesh.

Unto the edifying of it self in love] Our souls thrive and are edified, as
love is continued and increased. Nothing more furthereth growth in grace and
power of godliness in any place or person: observe it where and when you will.

Verse 17. This I say therefore] Matters of great importance must be urged and
pressed with greatest vehemence.

As other Gentiles walk] Singular things are expected from Saints: who are
therefore worse then others, because they should be better.

Verse 18. Having the understanding darkned] By the devils black hand held
before their eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4. See the Note there.

Alienated from the life of God] That is, from a godly life, which none can
live, (...), Caliu^ obductum
but those that partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Because of the blindenesse] Gr. Hardness, brawninesse, a hoof upon their
hearts, corneas fibras, brawny breasts, horny heart strings. The Greek word
imports a Metaphor from the hard hand of hardest laborers.

Verse 19. Who being past feeling] Under a dead and dedolent disposition, being
desperately sinful. Some there are of cauterized consciences, that like
devils, will have nothing to do with God, because loath to be tormented before
their time. They feeling such horrible hard hearts, and privy to such notorious
sins, they cast away souls and all for lust, and so perish woefully, because
they lived wickedly: having through cus^^^^ in evil contracted such an
hardness, as neither ministry, not misery, nor miracle, nor mercy could
possibly mollify. As Ducklings dive at any little thing thrown by a man at
them, yet shrink not at the heavens great thunder: so is it with these.

Verse 20. But ye have not so ^earned Christ] Caracalla never minded any good:
Quia id non didicerat (says Dio) quod ipse fatebatur, because he had never
learned it, as himself confessed.

Verse 21. Ye have heard him, etc.] When Christ speaks once, we must hear him
twice, as David did, Psalm 62.11. to wit, by an after deliberate meditation:
for otherwise we learn nothing.

Verse 22. That ye put off, etc.] As the beggar puts off his rags, as the
master puts off his bad servant, as the Porter puts off his burden, as the
husband puts off his lewd wife, as the Serpent his slough, or as the captive
maid when she was to be married, put off the garments of her captivity, Deuteronomy.
21.13.

The old man which is corrupt] Sin is said to be the old man, because it lives
in man so, as sin seems to be alive, and the man dead: and because God will
take notice of nothing in the sinner, but his sin.

According to the deceitful lusts] Sin, though at first it fawn upon a man,
yet in the end (with Cains dog lying at the door) it will pluck out the very
throat of his soul, if not repented of. Like the Serpent, together with the
embrace, it stings mortally. Hence the Rulers meat is called deceivable, Pro.
23.3.

Verse 23. In the spirit of your minde] That is, in the most inward and subtle
parts of the soul, the bosom and bottom, the vis vivifica and very
quintessence of it. This he calls elsewhere, The wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8.7.
that carnal reason, that like an old beldame is the mother and nurse of those
fleshly lusts that fight against the soul.

Verse 24. Which after God is created] The new man is nothing else but the
happy cluster of heavenly graces.

And true holinesse] Or, Holiness of truth. Opposite to that deceitfulness of
lusts, ver. 22.

Verse 25. Wherefore putting away lying] A base tinkerly sin, as Plutarch
calls it, shameful and hateful: therefore the lier denies his own lie, as
ashamed to be taken with it.

For we are members] Of the same holy society. Shall we not be true one to
another? Shall we not abhor sleights and slipperines in contracts and Covenants?

Verse 26. Be angry and sin not] The easiest charge under the hardest condition
that can be. Anger is a tender virtue, and must be warily managed. He that will
be angry and not sin, let him be angry at nothing but sin.

Let not the Sun go down] If ye have overshot in passion, let it not rest or
roost in you, lest it become malice. Plut lib. (...).
Plutarch writes that it was the custom of Pythagoras his scholars, however
they had been at odds, jarring and jangling in their disputations yet before
the Sunset to kiss and shake hands as they departed out of the school. How
many are there that professing themselves the scholars of Christ, do yet
nevertheless not only let the Sun go down, but go round his whole course, and
can find not time from one end of the year to the other to compose and say
aside their discords? How should this fire be raked up, when the curfew-bell
rings?

Verse 27. Neither give place, etc.] Vindictive spirits let the devil into
their hearts: and though they defy him, and spet at him, yet they spet not low
enough; for he is still at ^nne with them, as Mr Bradford speaks. As the
Master of the pit often sets two cocks to fight together, to the death of both,
and then, after mutual conquest, suppeth with both their bodies: So, faith
Gregory deals the devil with angry and revengefull men.

Verse 28 Let him labor Working, etc.] This is the best remedy against
poverty, which often prompts a man to theft, Prove. 30 9.

That he may have to give] Day-labourers then must do somewhat for the poor.
Act. and Mon. fol. 765. Ibid 811.
And indeed alms should not be given until it sweat in a man's hand, said he,
in the book of Martyrs. Giles of Brussels gave away to the poor whatsoever he
had that necessity could spare, and only lived by his science, which was of a
Cutler.

Verse 29. Let no corrupt communication] Gr. Rotten, putid spe^ch. (...)
A Metaphor from rotten treas, or stinking flesh, or stinking breath. Shun
obscene borborology, and filthy speeches.

Verse 30. And grieve not, etc.] As men in heaviness cannot dispatch their
work, as they were wont: so neither does the Spirit. If we grieve the holy
Ghost, how should we expect that he should comfort us? It is a foul fault to
grieve a father, what then the Spirit?

Verse 31. Let all bitterness, etc.] If the godly man suddenly fall into
bitter words, it makes the holy Ghost stir within him.

And clamor and evil speaking] These are as smoke to the eyes, and make the
Spirit ready to loath and leave his lodging.

Be put away from you] When any lust arises, pray it down presently (says
one:) for otherwise we are endangered by yielding to grieve, by grieving to
resist, by resisting to quench, by quenching, maliciously to oppose the Spirit.
Sin has no bounds, but those which the Spirit pats, whom therefore we should
not grieve.

Verse 32. And be ye kinde] Sweet-natured, (...)
facile and fair-conditioned: as Cranmer, whose gentleness in pardoning wrongs
was such as it grew to a common proverb, Act. and Mon. fol. 1699.
Do my Lord of Canterbury a displeasure, and then you may be sure to have him
your friend, while he lives. He never raged so far with any of his household
servants, as once to call the meanest of them Varlet or Knave in anger, much
less to reprove a stranger with any reproachful world, etc.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Be ye therefore followers]
IN forgiving one another.

As dear children] God has but a few such children. See the Notes on Mat.
5.45, 48.

Verse 2. Has loved us, and has given] When Christ wept for Lazarus, Lo how
he loved him, said the Jews, Joh. 11.35, 36. When he poured forth his soul for
a drink offering for us, was not this a surer seal of his endeared love?

An offering and a sacrifice] By this to expiate our sins, by that to mediate
and make request for us; and so to show himself a perfect High Priest.

Verse 3. But fornication and all uncleannesse] As standing in full opposition
to that sweet smelling savor, verse. 2. being no better then the corruption of
a dead soul, the devils excrement.

Let it not be once named] Much less acted, as in Stage-plaies. Ludi praebent
semina nequitiae. How Alipius was corrupted by them S. Austin tells us. How the
youth of Athens, Ovid. Trist. l. 2.
Plato complains. One of our contrymen professes in print, that he found
theaters to be the very hatchers of all wickedness, the brothels of bawdery,
the black blasphemy of the Gospel, the devils chair, the plague of piety, the
canker of the Commonwealth, etc. He instanceth on his knowledge Citizens wives
confessing on their deathbeds, that they were so impoisoned at Stage-plaies,
Spec belli sacri.
that they brought much dishonor to God, wrong to their marriage-beds,
weakness to their wretched bodies, and woe to their undone souls. It was
therefore great wisdom in the Lacedaemonians to forbid the acting of Comedies or
Tragedies in their Commonwealth, and that for this reason, lest either in jest
or earnest any thing should be said or done amongst them contrary to the laws
in force among them. Plutarch.


Verse 4. Neither filthinesse] Borborology, ribaldry, the language of hell.
Some men as ducks have their noses always gozling in the gutter of obscene
talk. Of Eckius his last book concerning Priests inarriage, Melancthon faith,
Non f^it Cygnea cantio, sed ultimus cr^pi^us: Et sicut filis fugiens pedit, sic
ille morions hunc crepitum cecinit. Legilibrum, subinde accipiens par tem ad
cloacam, alioqui non legiss^m.

Nor jesting] Salt j^sts, scurrility, jocularity, dicacity, to the just grief
or offense of another: This consists not with piety and Christian gravity. (...)
Aristotle uses the word here found in a good sense, for urbanity, facility
and face^iousnesse of speech, in a harmless way. But Jason in Pindarus says,
that he lived twenty years with his Tutour Chiron, and never in all that time
heard him speaking or acting (...), Pindar.
any thing scurrilous or abusive to another. On the contrary our Sir Thomas
Moor^ never thought any thing to be well spoken, except he had ministered some
mock in the communication, E^w. Halls Ch^on^e^.
says the Chronicler, who therefore seems to doubt whether to call him a
foolish wise man, or a wise foolish man, Quid nobis cum fabulis, cum risu? non
solium profusos, sed etiam omnes joeos arbitror declinandos, says Bernard.
Bern. de ordin. vit.
What have we to do with tales and j^sts? Tertullian faith, he was Nulli rei
natus nisi poenitentiae, born for nothing else, but for repentance. Creed mihi
res severa est gaudium vernum, says Seneca, True mirth is a severe business.

Which are not convenient] As not conducing to the main end of our lives. (...)


But rather giving of thanks] A special preservative against the former evils,
the filth and power of those base vices. And the word Rather imports an
extraordinary earnestnes to be used in giving thanks to God.

Verse 5. Who is an Idolater] Dancing about his golden calf, and saying to his
wedge of silver, Job 30.24.
Thou art my confidence: which yet shall prove but as Achans wedge to cleave
his soul in sunder, and as that Babylonish garment to be his winding sheet.

Verse 6. Let no man deceive you] So as to make you think there is no such
danger in fornication, covetousness, etc. There wanted not such Proctours for
hell in the Primitive times, as may be gathered out of 2 Pet. 2. and the
Epistle of Jude. Against these he here cautioneth.

Verse 7 Be not ye therefore partakers] Lest by infection of their sin, ye come
under infliction of their punishment. We are accountable as well for sins of
communion, as of commission: And he knew what he said, that praid, From mine
other-mens-sins, Good Lord deliver me.

Verse 8. For ye were sometimes darknesse] Which has in it (as one well
notes.) 1. Error. 2. Terror. 3. ^^. Dugard in loc.
Inconsistency with light. 4. Impossibility of reducing it self to light.

But now are ye light] Semper in sole sita est Rhodos, says Sylvius. The
Saints are always in the Sunshine.

Walk as children of light] A godly man should be like a crystal glass with a
light in the midst, which appears through every part thereof. He is in the
light, and shall be more.

Verse 9. For the fruit of the spirit] Why grace is called fruit, See the Note
on Gal 5.22.

Verse 10. Proving what is acceptable] By the practice of what you know. Let
your knowledge and obedience run parallel, mutually transfusing life and
vigor one into another.

Verse 11. Works of darknesse] Work done in the dark must be undone again, or
else we are sure to be thrust into outer darkness, where we shall never see
light again, till we see all the world on a light fire.

But rather reprove them] At least by your contrary courses, as Noah condemned
the old world, by being righteous in his generation, Rev. 14. Those that stood
with the lamb, had his fathers name on their foreheads, led convincing lives:
so did Luther, Bucer, Bradford, etc.

Verse 12. For it is a shame] sit honos auribus. Joannes a Casa so far forgot
both honesty and (...), Act. and Mon. fol. 4 17.
that he boasted openly of his beastly Sodomy: y^^ most impudently commended
that odious sin in an Italian Poem, set forth in print. Faber of Vienna,
another filthy Papist, published such a stinking book that Erasmus thus wrote
to him,

Mente cares, sires agitur tibi s^ria: rursus
Front cares, si^ sic ludis, amice Faber.
Which are done of them in secret] Sin secretly committed shall be strangely
discovered, either by the sinner himself, as Judas, or by his companions in
evil. When the sodder is once melted, this glass will fall in pieces, and all
will out.

Verse 13. But all things that are, etc.] Or, But all these things, viz. There
unfruitful works of darkness, whilst they are reproved or discovered by the
light ( viz. of the word, as 1 Cor. 14.24. Heb. 4 12) are made manifest; so
that thereby they grow abashed and abased before God and men.

Verse 14. Isa. 9.2. and 26.19. and 60.1.
Wherefore he saith] Or, The Scripture says. See the like Jam. 4.6. But he
gives (or the Scripture gives) more grace. It convinces not only, but
converteth, it discovers not only, but cures corrupt hearts. These waters of
the Sanctuary are healing. Some there are that interpret this he of our Savior
Christ, and take this saying for a sentence of his: such as was that, Act.
20.35. Others read, Therefore the light says, etc.

Awake thou that sleepest] Lex jubet, gratia juvat: Praecipit Deus, quod ipse
praestat. God gives us to do what he bids us to do.

Verse 15. (...)
See then that ye Walk circumspectly] Precisely, exactly, accurately, by line
and by rule, and as it were in a frame, striving to get up to the top of
godliness, as the word imports; to keep Gods Commandments to the utmost, to
go to the extremity of it. Hereunto if we stand straightly, one may say safely,
Lord, if I be deceived, thou and thy word have deceived me.

Not as fiols] Christians must excel others, standing as standard-bearers.

But as wise] Great need we have to fly to Christ, (...) ab Heb. Tsopheb
speculator.
who dwells with prudence, Prove. 8. to stand upon our watch.

Verse 16, Redeeming the time] As wise Merchants, trading for the most precious
commodity, and taking their best opportunity. The common complaint is, Non
parum habemus temporis, sed multum perdimus. Sen.
We want time: but the truth is, do not so much want it, as waste it. The men
of Issachar were in great account with David, because they had understanding of
the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. So are they in
great account with God, that regard and use the season of well-doing.

Because the days are evil] Corrupted by the devil, who has engrossed our
time, and out of whose hands we must redeem time for holy uses, and pious
purposes.

Verse 17. But understanding what] Drawing your knowledge into practice, as
verse. 10. For the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding, Job 28.28. Where, wisdom (proper to the understanding) is
ascribed to the will, because practice should be joined to knowledge. Hence
also Eccles. 10.2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand, because his heart
teaches his hand to put things in practice.

Verse 18. And be not drunk with wine] Nothing so opposite to an accurate life
as drunkenness! which therefore is not specially prohibited in any one of the
ten Commandments (says a Divine) because it is not the single breach of any
one, but in effect the violation of all and every one: It is no one, but all
sins, the inlet and sluice to all other sins.

Wherein is excesse] Excessive drinking then is drunkenness: when as swine do
their bellies, so men break their heads with filthy quassing.

But be filled with the spirit] Call for flagons of this holy wine, Cant. 2.5.
that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak,
Cant. 7.9. This is called by Luther, Crapula sacra, a spiritual surquedry or
surfeit.

Verse 19. Speaking to your selves, etc.] As drunkards sing and hollow over
their cups in their good-^ellow-meetings: so, in a sober sense, do you
express your spiritual jollity in Psalms, etc.

Melody in your hearts unto the Lord] This is the best tune to any Psalm.
Spiritual songs they are called, both because they are indicted by the spirit,
and because they spiritualize us in the use of them.

Verse 20. Giving thanks alwaies] In our deepest miseries, let us sing
cheerfully, as Paul and Silas in the dungeon, as Philpot and his fellows in the
cole-house, as many Martyrs in the ^lames, as Luther did in a great conflict
with the devil. Venite, Joh M^^^. loc. com. page 43.
said he to his company, in contemptum diaboli Psalmum de profundis quatuor
vocibus cantemus. Let us sing the 130. Psalm in despite of the devil. Happy was
that tongue in the Primitive times that could sound out aliquid Davidicum, any
thing of David's doing.

Verse 21. Submitting your selves] This is a general admonition to all
inferiors, whose duties are afterward described. Thus in the second Table of
the Law, the fifth Commandment for order and obedience is fitly premised to the
following p^^cepts.

In the fear of God] This frames the heart to a ready and regular submission.
Hence that saying of Luther: Primo praecepto reliquorum omnium observantia
praecipitur. The first Commandment includes the other nine.

Verse 22. Wives submit, etc.] This includes reverence, obedience, etc. God
has scattered the duties of husbands and wives up and down the Scritptures,
that they may search, and by learning to be good husbands and wives, they may
learn also to be good men and women.

As unto the Lord] Who takes himself dishonored by wives disobedience. And
though husbands may remit the offense done to them, yet they cannot remit Gods
offense, but there must be special repentance.

Verse 23. For the husband is the head] And would it not be ill-favored to see
the shoulders above the head?

Verse 24. Therefore as the Church] Denying her self to please Christ, making
his will her law.

In every thing] In all her husbands lawful commands and restraints. A wife
should have no will of her own, but submit to her husbands: albeit there are
that merrily say, that when man lost free will, woman took it up.

Verse 25. Husbands, love your wives] He says not, Rule over them (in answer
to submit, verse. 22.) for this they can readily do without bidding: but love
your wives, and so make their yoke as easy as may be. columbae trahunt currum
Veneris.

Verse 26. That he might sanctifie] The maids were first purified and perfumed,
before Ahashnerosh chose one. But here it is otherwise. Sanctification is a
fruit of justification. The Lord will not have a sluttish Church, and therefore
he came not by blood only, but by water also, that clean water of his spirit,
whereby he washes away the swinish nature of his Saints, so that they desire
no more to wallow in the mire.

Verse 27. Council. Arausican. secund. Oanon. 12.
That he might present] As Isaac did his Rebecca, adorned with his jewels. See
Ezekiel. 16.14. Tales nos amat Deus quales futuri sumns ipsius dono, non quales
sumus nostro merito, says an ancient Council.

Verse 28. As their own bodies] No man may hide himself from his own flesh at
large, Isa. 58.7. that is, from his neighbor of the same stock: much less
from a wife, which is such another as himself, Genesis 2.18. nay his very
self, as here.

Verse 29. For no man over hated] No man but a Monk, who whips himself, or a
mad man, Mar. 5.5. who cuts himself. It was the saying of the Emperor
Aurelius, A wife is to be often admonished, sometimes reproved, but never beaten.
and yet of the Russian women it is reported, that they love that husband best
that beats them most, and that they think themselves else not regarded, unless
two or three times a day well-favouredly swadled. M. Jun in orat. Heyl. Geog.
Chrysostom says, It is the greatest reproach in the world for a man to beat
his wise.

But nourishes and cherishes it] As the hen does her chickens, or as the
cock-pigeon does the eggs. (...) Columbarum masculus ipse ovis incubat.
Chytrae. in Levit. 13. M^lanctton.
Contrariwise the Pie hunts away his mate about autumn, lest he should be
forced to keep her all the Winter: and so becomes the hieroglyphick of an
unkind husband.

Even as the Lord, the Church] Lo this is the pattern of all true love, whether
to our selves or others.

Verse 30. Of his flesh, and of his bones] Whilst he that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. This union is neither natural, nor corporal,
nor political, nor personal, but mystical and spiritual: And yet it is no
less true and real, then that of God the Father, and God the Son, Joh. 17.21,
22. For as the holy Ghost did unite in the Virgins womb, the divine and humane
natures of Christ, and made them one person; by reason whereof Christ is of our
flesh and of our bones: So the Spirit unites that person of Christ, his whole
person, God-man, with our persons, by reason whereof we are of his flesh, and
of his bones.

Verse 31. For this cause, etc.] See the Note on Mat. 19.5. and on Genesis 2.24.

Shall be one flesh] By virtue of that Covenant of God betwixt married couples,
Prove. 2.17. for he keeps the bonds of wedlock.

Verse 32. This is a great mystery] To wit, this mystical marriage with
Christ. It passes the capacity of man to understand it in the perfection of
it. Preachers can make it known but in part; and hearers can but in part
conceive it. Let us therefore wait for perfect understanding of it, till all
things be perfected in Christ.

Verse 33. Nevertheless^ [ q. d. But that I may return to my former discourse,
from the which I have somewhat digressed for your satisfaction.

See that she reverence] 1. In heart, as Sarah did Abraham, and she is crowned
and chronicled for it, I Pet. 3.6. 2. In her speeches both to him, and of him,
as the Spouse in the Canticles. 3. In all her gestures and deportments: for she
may scold with her looks, etc. Vultu saepe laeditur pietas. God has a barren
Womb for mocking Michal.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. Children obey your Parents]
AS Isaac did Abraham in submitting to be sacrificed: As Christ became obedient
even to the death of the Cross.

For this is right] Good and acceptable before God and men, 1 Timothy 5.4. See the
Note on Mat. 15.4.

Verse 2. First Commandment with promise] To wit, with special promise of long
life. See more in the Note on Mat. 15.4.

Verse 3. And thou may live long] Good children help to lengthen their
parents days, as Joseph did Jacobs. God therefore lengthens the^s in
redhostimentum, as it were. Or if he take from them this long lease, he gives
them a freehold of better value.

Verse 4. Provoke not, etc.] God forbids bitterness and austerity in husbands,
Colos. 3.19. Masters, Colos. 4.1. parents here, and Col 3.21. Superiors must
so carry themselves, as to be at once loved and feared.

But bring them up in the nurture, etc.] Or nourish them and nurture them. The
later is as needful as the former. They that nourish their children only, what
do they more, then the unreasonable creatures? Selue^^er.
The blessing upon posterity is entailed to piety in the second Commandment. If
I may see grace in my wife and children, said reverend Claviger, Satis habeo,
satisque mihi, mea ux-ar^ filiis and filiabus prospexi, I shall account them
sufficiently cared for.

Verse 5. Servants be obedient] The Centurion was happy in his servants, and no
marvel, for he was a loving Master. See the Note on Mat 8 6.

Verse 6. Not with eye-servi^e] And yet it were well if we would do God, our
great Master, but eye-service. For his eye is ever upon us, and pierces into
the inward parts So that they much deceive themselves, who think all is well,
because no m^n can say to them, Black is thine eye.

Verse 7. As to the Lord] In obedience to his will, and with reference to his
glory.

Verse 8. Whether he be bond or free] The Centurion did but complain of the
sickness of his servant, and Christ unasked, says, I will come and heal him.
He that came in the shape of a servant, would go down to the sick servants
pallet, would not go to the bed of the rich Rulers son.

Verse 9. Do the same things] That is, Do your parts and duties by them; and
use them as men, not as beasts.

Forbearing threatning] Those blusters and terrible thunder-cracks of fierce
and furious language found in the mouths of many mast^rs, i^ never so little
crossed. Severitas nec sit tetra, nec t^trica: Servants should be chidden with
good words, Sidon. epist.
with Gods words, and not reviled.

Verse 10. Be strong in the Lord] For by his own strength shall no man prevail,
1 Samuel 2.9. Get Gods Arm, wherewith to wield his Armor, and then you may do
any thing.

Verse 11. Put on the whole armour] Or else never think to do the
forementioned duties: we have a busy adversary to deal with. The Turks bear
no weapons, but in travel: then some of them seem like a walking armory: so
must a Christian be. Coriolanus ^ad so used his weapons of a childe-little,
that they seemed as if they had been born with him, or grown into his hands.
(...). Plutarch.
Seneca reports of Caesar, that he quickly sheathed his sword, but never laid
it off. No more must we.

The wiles of the devil] Gr. The methods or way-layings of that old subtle
Serpent, who like Dans adder in the path, biteth the heels of passengers, Genesis
48.17.
and thereby transfuseth his venom to the head and heart. Julian by his craft
drew more from the faith, then all his persecuting predecessors could do by
their cruelty. So does Satan more hurt in his sheepskin then by roaring like a
Lion.

Verse 12. Not against flesh and bloud] Hereby the Apostle means not so much
the corruption, as the weakness of our natures. q. d. We have not only to
conflict with weak, frail men, but with puissant devils. Look to it therefore,
and lie open at no place: but get on every piece of this spiritual armor,
whether those of defense (as the girdle of truth, bre^t-pla^e of
righteousness, the shoes of peace and patience, the helmet of hope) or those
of offense, as the sword of the Spirit, and the darts of prayer. Fetch all
these out of the holy Scriptures, which are like Solomon's tower, where hang a
thousand shields, and all the weapons of strong men. The Apostle here sounds
the alarm, crying, Arm, arm, etc.

But against principalities,] So wicked men make the devils, by being at their
beck and obedience. Observe here, ((says an Interpreter) in the holy Ghost a
wonderful pattern of candor: he praises what is praiseworthy in his very
enem^es. How then shall not the Saints be accepted and acknowledged, since they
sin not of malicious wickedness, as devils do.

Against spiritual wickednesse] Gr. (...)
The spirituals of wickedness, those hellish plots and satanicall suggestions,
black and blasphemous temptations, horrid and hideous injections, etc.

In high places] Or, (...)
About our interest in those heavenly privileges, which the devil would wring
from us, and rob us of. He strove with the Angel about the body of Moses: but
with us about our precious souls. And herein he has the advantage* that he is
above us, and does ou^ of the air assault us, being upon the upper ground, as
it were.

Verse 13. That ye may be able to with stand] Not seeking to resist Satan's
craft with craft, fraud with fraud, Sed per apertum Martem, but by open
defiance. He shoots (says Greenham) with Satan in his own bow, who thinks by
disputing and reasoning to put him off.

Verse 14. Stand therefore] (...)
A military expression. A man may well say to the Christian soldier, as Simeon
in the ecclesiastical history did to the pillars, D. H^ll's, Quo vadis.
which he whipped before the earthquake: Stand fast for ye shall be shaken.

Your loins girt about] Here if ever, Ungirt, unblest. He is a loose man that
wants this g^^dle of since^ity.

The breast plate of righteousnes] Inherent righteousness, 1 Ioh. 3.7. that
ensureth election. 2 Pet. 1, 10.

Verse 15. And your feet shod] As one that is well booted or buskind can walk
unhurt amidst briers and brambles: so may he amidst Satan's snares, whereof all
places are full, that is fortified with Gospel-comforts, whereby God creates
peace.

Verse 16. Above all] Or, Over and upon all. (...)
For the word here rendered a shield comes from another word that signifies a
door: to note that as a door or gate does the body, (...)
so the shield of faith covers the whole soul. Let us be therefore (as
Epaminondas) Non d^ vita, sed de sc^to solliciti. S^eva at the siege of
Dyrrachium so long alone resisted Pompeys army, that he had 220 darts sticking
in his shield, and lost one of his eyes, and yet gave not over till Caesar came
to his rescue.

To quench all the fiery darts] Pointed and poisoned with the venom of
serpents, which set the heart on fire from one lust to another. Or fiery for
the dolor and distemper that they work: in allusion to the Scythian darts,
dipped in the gall of asps and vipers; the venomous heat of which, like a fire in
their flesh, killed the wounded with torments the likest hell of any other.

Verse 17. The helmet of salvation] Hope which holds head above water, and
makes the soul with stretcht-out ^eck expect deliverance, Rom 8.19. crying out
not only, Dum spiro, spero, but dum expiro spero.

And the sword of the spirit] Wherewith our Savior beat the devil on his own
dunghill the wilderness, fetching all out of that one book of Deuteronomy,
Matthew. 4. See the Notes there.

Verse 18. Praying alwaies] Prayer is not only a part of the armor, but
enables to use all the rest. It is not only a charm for that crooked serpent
Leviathan, Isa. 26.16. to inchant him, Flagellum Diaboli.
but a whip to torment him, and put him into another hell, says Chrysostom.
It ^etcheth Christ into the battle, and so is sure of victory. It obtains
fresh supplies of the Spirit, Phil. 1.19. and so makes us more then
conquerours, even triumphers. It drives the devil out of the field, and makes
him fly from us, Tanqua;m si leones ignem expuentes essemus, says
Chrysostom. Especially if we go not to the battle,(...), with our break fast,
as Nestor in Homer, but fasting and praying. For some kind of devils are not
cast cut, but by fasting and prayer.

And watching thereunto] That we be not surprised at unawares. The bird
Onocratal^^ is so well practis^d to expect the Hawk to grapple with her, that
even when she shuts her eyes, she sleeps with her beak exalted, as if she
would contend with her adversary: Let us like wise stand continually upon our
guard. The devil watches and wa^keth the round, 1 Pet. 5.8. Watch therefore.

Verse 19 And for me] Ministers must be especially prayed for, that they may
have a door not only of utterance, but of entrance to men's hearts, and so be
able to save themselves, and those that hear them. In praying for such, we pray
for ou^ selves.

Verse 20. (...)
I am an Embassadour] Venerable for mine age and authority, as the word
signifies. The ancient and the honorable are usually employed as
Ambassadors. Cognata sunt (...) and (...), old age and honor are akin in the
Greek tongue.

In bonds] Gr. In a chain; instead of a chain of gold (worn commonly by
Ambassadors) and far more glorious. (...)
I bear about my bonds (says Ignatius in his Epistle like wise to the
Ephesians) as so many spiritual Jewels or Ensigns of honor. Oh, said Alice
Driver, here is a goodly neckerchief, blessed be God for it, when the chain was
put about her neck.

That therein I may speak boldly] He says not, That I may be freed from my
chain, but that I may do my office well in my chain. Let God serve himself upon
us, and then no matter what becomes of us. Martinus decumbens, Domine, dixi^,
si adhuc populo tuo firm necessarius, nonrecuso L^borem. Sever. epist. 3.


Verse 21. But that ye may know] It is of good use to the Church to know the
lives and affairs of men eminent in goodness, and of exemplary holiness; that
others may express them, as Polycarp did John the Evangelist, as Irenaeus did
Polycarp, as Cyprian did Tertullian, Paraeus did Vrsin, etc.

Verse 22. Comfort your hearts] It is God that comforts by the creatures, as by
conduit-pipes. The air yields light as an instrument, the water may heat, but
not of it self. When a potion is given in beer, the beer of it self does not
work, but the potion by the beer. So in this ease.

Verse 23. Peace be to the brethren] These only be the children of peace, Luke
10.10. The wicked are like the troubled sea, Isa. 57.20. which may seem
sometimes still, but is never so: no more are they. The peace of prosperity
they may have, but not of tranquillity. Sinceritas serenitatis matter. Hence it
follows.

Verse 24. In sincerity] Or, Immortality, (...)
opposite to that Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.23.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the PHILIPPIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. With the Bishops and Deacons]
THe word Priest is never used at all for a Minister of the Gospel by the
Apostles, no nor by the most ancient Fathers, De (...)
as Bellarmine himself confesses. And yet how ^ager were our late factours for
Rome to have priested us all, but that God better provided for us.

Verse 2. Grace be to you] See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.2. and on Eph^s. 1.2.

Verse 3. Upon every rem^mbrance] And no wonder: for there w^^e those famous
M^cedonians, that first gave themselves to the Lord, and then to their
faithful Ministers by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. See the Note there, and
compare Isa. 50.10.

Verse 4. Making request with joy] Those that grieve their faithful Ministers,
and quench the spirit in them, do it to their own singular disadvantage.

Verse 5. For your fellowship] A good man cannot tell how to go to heaven
alone. No sooner had the Philippians received the Gospel, but they were in
fellowship to a day. The communion of Saints was with them a point of practice,
as well as an article of belief. The apostles Creed was anciently briefer then
now. The mention of the Fathers being maker of heaven and earth, The Sons death
and descending into hell, and the communion of Saints being wholly omitted:
happily as implied sufficiently in other Articles. But surely if the Creed were
called Symbalum, as a sign or badge to difference Christians from Infidels and
wicked people, there was little reason to leave out the Communion of Saints,
this being a main distinctive character: there being no such fellowship as
among the Saints, Cant. 6.9.

Verse 6. Will perform it] Or perfect it. God doth-not use to do his work by
the halves, but goes thorow-stitch with it, 1 These. 5.24. Psalm. 138.8. Only we
must pray as Luther was wont to do, Confirm, O Lord, in us what thou have
wrought, and perfect the work that thou have begun in us to thy glory. So be
it. And as Queen Elizabeth praid, Look upon the wounds of thy hands, and
despise not the work of thy hands. Thou have written me down in thy book of
preservation with thine own hand: o read thine own handwriting, and save me,
etc. Act. and Mon. fol 777.


Verse 7. Partakers of my grace] That is, ye communicate with me in my
sufferings, which he here calls his grace, and tells them, verse. 29. To you it
is given, as an honourary to suffer for Christ's sake. Crud^litas vestra gloria
nostra, Tertull.
said those Primitive Martyrs. I had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch, said
Ignatius. It is to my loss, if you bate me any thing in my sufferings, said
Gordius to his tormentours. Gaudebat Crispin cum ten^hatur, cum audiebatur, cum
damnabatur, cum ducebatur, In Psalm. 157.
says Angustine. Crispina Rejoiced when she was apprehended, convented,
condemned, executed.

Verse 8. I long after you all] Here the Apostle practiced his own precept of
fatherly affection, Romans 12.10. Pray for me, (...). Act. and Mon. fol 1482.
mine own heart-root in the Lord, Quem in intimis visceribus habeo ad
convivendum and commoriendum, said Bradford in a letter to his fellow Martyr
Laurence Saunders.

Verse 9. And in all judgement] Or, Sense, The soul also has her senses as
well as the body. And these must be exercised to discern good and evil, Heb.
5.14. those two learned senses especially (as Aristotle calls them) the eye
and the ear, Job 34 3. Ier. 2.31.

Verse 10. Approve the things] Or try the things that differ, that ye be not
ch^ated, and so undone, as many a man is by purchasing a counterfeit commodity
at an unreasonable rate. A Bristow* stone looks like a diamond, and many things
glister besides gold.

Verse 11. Being filled with the fruits] The excellency of a Christian is to
follow God fully, as Caleb, Numb. 14.24. To have a heart full of goodness, as
those Romans 15.14. A life full of good works, as Tabitha, Act. 9.33. See the
Note on Galat. 5.22.

Verse 12. Rather unto the furtherance] So were Luthers troubles: Quo magis
illi furunt, says he, eo amplius pr^cedo. The more they rage, the more the
Gospel spreads. It was a pleasant sight (says one) to have beheld Christ and
Antichrist striving for masteries. For whatsoever the Pope, and the Emperor
attempted against the Gospel, Scultet. Annal.
Christ turned it all to the furtherance of the Gospel. The Popes bull, the
Emperors thunderbolt amazed not men, but animated them to embrace the truth,
weakened them not, but wakened them rather.

Verse 13. In all the pallace] So in the diet held at Ausborough in Germany,
anno 1530, Caesar reading the Protestants Confession, and sending it abroad to
other Christian Princes, as desiring their advice about it, dispersed and
spread it more in all parts then all the Lutheran Preachers could have done.
For which cause Luther laughs a good at the foolish wisdom of the Papists in a
certain Epistle of his to the Electour of Saxony. Scalte^, Annal 274.
When Bonner allowed William Hunter, Martyr, no more then an halfpenny a day in
prison, he confessed that he lacked nothing, but had meat and clothing enough,
Act. and Mon. fol. 13^8.
yea even out of the Court both money, meat, clothes, wood and coals, and all
things necessary. What friends John Wicliffe found, both in the Court of
England, and in the Court o^ Bohemia is famously known: And yet the Proverb is,
Exeat aula qui velit esse pius --

Verse 14. Are much more hold] This is the fruit of the Saints sufferings,
Ecclesiatotum mundum sanguine and oratione convertit, says Luther. As the
Lilly is increased by it is own juice that flows from it: so is the Church by
it is sufferings. This caused Julian to spare some Christians, whom he could
have wished out of the world. I thank our Lord God (said B. Ridley in a letter
of his to Bradford) that since I heard of our dear brother Rogers departing,
and stout confessing of Christ and his truth even unto death, my heart, blessed
be God, rejoiced of it, Act. and Mon. fol. 565.
neither ever since that time have I felt any lumpish heaviness, as I grant I
have felt sometimes before. So Bradford in a letter to Cranmer, Latimer and
Ridley, prisoners at Oxford, Our dear brother Rogers has broken the ice
valiantly. As this day I think hearty Hooper, ^usty Tailour, Ibid. 1. 8^.
and sincere Saunders end their course and receive their crown. The next am I
which hourly look for the Porter to open me the gates after them to enter into
the desired rest. God forgive me mine unthankfulness for this exceeding great
mercy, etc.

Verse 15. Some indeed preach Christ] Such self-seekers there are now a-daies
not a few. Two things make a good Christian, good actions and good aims. Though
a good aim does not make a bad action good, as we see in Vzzab. yet a bad aim
makes a good action bad, as in these preachers. They preached Christ; so did
the devil, who yet was silenced by Christ, Mark 1.24, 25.

Verse 16. Preach Christ of contention] Striving to bear away the bell from me,
as the better preachers. And with such ambitionists the Church of Christ has
ever been pestered. This made Luther pray, A doctore glorioso and a Pastore
contentioso, liberet Ecclesiam suam Dominus. From vainglorious and contentious
preachers, The good Lord deliver his Church.

Supposing to add affliction to my bonds] An immane cruelty, such as Job and
David of^ complain of, Job 6.14. Psalm. 69.26. Camdens Eliz. 531.
Queen Elizabeth hated no less then did Mithridates, such as maliciously
persecuted virtue forsaken of fortune, says Camden.

Verse 17. Knowing that I am set] Or, Laid by the heels, (...).
they of love help out at a dead lif^, and do my office abroad: as Marulla a
maid of Lemnos seeing her father slain in the gate, Turk. Hist. 418
took up his weapons, and not only revenged his death, but helped to keep out
the Turks, who hoped to have surprised the City on the sudden.

Verse 18. Christ is preached, etc.] Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed Christus
vivit, and regnat, Amen, says Luther in an Epistle of his to Spalatinus.
Luther is called a devil: but be it so, ^o long as Christ is magnified, I am
well apaid. All private respects should be drowned in the glory of God. But he
is a base ^p^^ted man that is totus in se, like the sna^ still within doors,
and a^ home.

Verse 19. This shall turn to my salvation] God makes all to cooperate and
turns all about to the best: as the skillful Apothecary makes of a
poisonfull viper a wholesome tr^acle. See the Note on Romans 8.28. and on Genesis
50.20.

Verse 20. According to my earnest] St Paul stood as it were on tip-^o^s to see
which ways he might best glorify God by life or death.

Verse 21. (...)
And to die is gain] B. cause death to a good man is the daybreak of eternal
brightness, janua vitae, porta coeli, as Bernard has it, a valley of Achor, a
door of hope to give entrance into Paradise, to bring them malorum omnium
ademprionem, bonorum omnium adeptionem.

Verse 22. What I shall choose, I wot not] As a loving wife sent for by her
husband far from home, and yet loath to leave her children, is in a muse and
doube what to does Su was the Apostle.

Verse 23. (...) etc.
For I am in a s^rai^] Plato in the eighth of his laws has a like speech, The
communion of the soul with the body is not better then the ^^^olution, as I
would ^^y if I were to speak in carnest. But whether Plato believed himself so
saying, I have reason to make question, when I consider that his master
Socrates, when he came to die, doubted whether it were better with the dead or
with the living, as both Plato and Cicero testify.

Having a desire to d^part]. (...)
To loose from the shore of life, and launch out into the t^ain of immortality,
"Or it may be rendered, " to return home, or to change rooms.

And to be with Christ] This was all his song ever since he had been in the
third heaven. So Mr Bolton lying on his deathbed said, I am by the wonderful
mercies of God as full of comfort as my heart can hold; and feel nothing in my
soul but Christ, with whom I heartily disire to be. In his life by M. Bagsh^^^.


Which is far better] Farte far the better. (...)
A transcendent expression, such as is that, 2 Cor. 4.17. See the Note there.

Verse 24. Is more needful for you] Mr Bolton dying, and desiring to be
dissolved, being told that it was indeed better for him to be with Christ, but
the Church of God could not miss him, not the benefit of his Ministry, he
thus replied with David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If I shall find favor in the eyes
of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation.
But if otherwise, lo here I am; let him do what seems good in his eyes.

Verse 25. And joy of faith] That is, for your full assurance; which is that
highest degree or faith, whereby a believer having gotten victory over his
doubtings, triumphs with a large measure of joy.

Verse 26. That your rejoycing] Gr. Your glorying, or exulting in this, that
God has given ^e in, as an answer to your prayers. It is surely a sweet thing
to hear from heaven. David often boasts of it, Ps. 6. and 66.

Verse 27. Only let your conversation] q. d. If you would that God should hear
you, and deliver me, be ready prepared for the receipt of such a mercy. The
fountain of divine grace will not be laden at with foul hands, Ps. 66.17. The
lepers lips should be covered according to the law.

Let your conversation] Your civil conversation, (...)
your common commerce, and interdealings with men also. Hippocrates took an
oath of his followers to keep their profession unstained, and their lives
unblameable.

Striving together for the faith] As the Barons of Polonia professed to do, by
their starting up at the reading of the Gospel, Anno 965.
and drawing out their swords half way, in testimony that they would stick and
stand to the defense of that truth to the very death. Io. Funccius.
Help the truth in necessity, strive with it, and for it.

Verse 28. And in nothing terrified] A Metaphor from horses, (...)
when they tremble and are sore afrighted. he that fears God, need fear none
else, Psalm. 3. But with the horse in Job, Job 39.22.
he mocketh at fear, and is not afrighted: neither turns he back from the
sword.

Verse 29 For unto you it is given] As an high honor, not only to believe
(though that is a great matter: For he that believes has set to his seal that
God is true, has given God a testimonial, such as is that Deuteronomy. 32.4. but
also (as a further favor) to suffer for his sake: This is the lowest
subjection that can be to God, but the highest honor both to him and us. This
made Latimer after the sentence pronounced on him, Act. and Mon.
cry out, I thank God most heartily of this honor. Saunders said, I am the
unmeetest man for this high office, that ever was appointed to is. Such an
honor it is, said Careless Martyr, as the greatest Angel in heaven is not
permitted to have. God forgive me mine unthankefulnesse, etc. Ibi^ ^3 61. Ibid
1744.


Verse 30. Which ye saw in me] Act. 16.19, 23, 24, etc. See the Notes there.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. If there be therefore]
A Most passionate obtestation, importing his most vehement desire of their
good agreement: whereunto he conjures them, as it were, by all the bonds of
love betwixt him and them. Matters of importance must be pressed with utmost
vehemence, Colos. 3.14. Love is charged upon us above all those excellent
things there reckoned up.

If any comfort of love] As there is very much; making the Saints to enjoy one
another society with spiritual delight, Psalm. 16.3. and to communicate with
gladness and singleness of heart, Act. 2 46 The Lord does usually and
graciously water the holy fellowship of his people with the dews of many sweet
and glorious refreshings: so that they have a very heaven upon earth, for
kind, the same with that above, and differing only in degrees.

Verse 2. Being of one accord of one minde] Hereunto those many ones should
move us mentioned by our Apostle, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. See the Notes there.

Verse 3. Let nothing be done through strife.] These are those hell-hags that
set the Church on fire (...) and (...) If these could be cast out of men's
hearts, Isid. Pelusl 4. (...) 55.
great hopes there were, (...) as Isidore has it, that all men would soon
consent in one and the same truth, and be at peace among themselves.

Verse 4. Look not every man. etc.] Self is a great stickler, but must be
excluded where love shall be maintained. He that is wholly shut up within
himself is an odious person: and the place he lives in, longs for a vomit to
spue him out.

Verse 5. Let this mind be in you] We should strive to express Christ to the
world, not as a picture does a man in outward lineaments only, but as a child
does his father in affections and actions. Our lives should be as so many
Sermons upon Christ's li^s, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Verse 6. To be equal with God] Gr. Equals, that is every way ^quall, not a
secondary inferior God, as the Arrians would have him. See the Notes, on Job.
1.1, 2, 3, 4.

Verse 7. But made himself, etc.] Gr. Emptied himself, suspended and laid aside
his glory and majesty, (...)
and became a sinner both by imputation (for God made the iniquity of us all to
meet upon him, Isa. 53.6.) and by reputation, for he was reckoned not only
among men, but among malefactors, verse 9. hence he is said to be sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8 3.

Verse 8. He humbled himself] This Sun of righteousness went ten degrees back
in the dial of his Father, that he might come to us with health in his wings,
that is, in his beams.

Became obedient unto death] That is, to his dying day, says Beza. He went
through many a little death all his life long, and at length underwent that
cursed and painful death of the Cross, his soul also being heavy to the
death, Mat. 26.

Verse 9. Wherefore God also, etc.] Wherefore denotes not the cause, but the
order of Christ's exaltation, as a consequent of his sufferings, as some
conceive.

Verse 10. That at the name] Gr. In the name. The Papists stiffly defend the
ceremony of bowing at the name of Jesus, Sir Edwin Sands in Spec. Eur^p.
to countenance the adoration of their deified Images, altars and their host:
teaching in their Pulpits, That Christ himself on the Cross, bowed his head on
the right side, to reverence his own name, which was written over it.

Verse 11. And that every tongue] The heathens were wont to say, Mutus sit
oportet qui non laudarit Herculem. Let that tongue be tied up for ever, that
cries not out with David, Vivat Dominus, and with Luther, Vivat and regnet
Christus, Amen.

Verse 12. Work out your salvation] (...)
The reason that men still tremble, and are still troubled with this doubt, and
that fear is, because their salvation is not wrought out. Something is left
undone and their conscience tells them so.

With fear and trembling] Opposed to carnal security. Those venturous bold
spirits that dare live in any evil, so it ^are not in their faces, and have not
a heart fearful of the least evil, aspire not to immortality.

Verse 13. For it is God which worketh] Therefore work out, etc. As
actiagentes, moti moventes, as the inferior orbs move, as acted by the
superior. When God has tuned, and does touch us, we must move: and whilst
the spirit imbreaths us, we must turn about like the mill.

To will and to doe] Sub laudibus naturae latent inimici gratiae, faith
Augustine; who stood so much for grace, that the Schoolmen say he yielded too
little to free will. That we live is the gift of the gods (says Seneca) that
we live well, is of our selves. De not. deor.
A base speech! So Cicero, Judicium hoc omnium mortalium est, fortunam a Deo
petendam, a seipso sumendam sapientiam. For which impious sentence Augustine
faith of him, Eumut faceret homines liberos, fecisse sacrilegos. De eiv D^i l 5


Verse 14. Without murmurings] Gr. Wrath and rancour, or discontent, (...)
which makes men's lips like rusty hinges seldom to move without murmuring and
complaining.

And disputings] Or wranglings about trifles, nicities or novelties, things
whereof we can have neither proof nor profit.

Verse 15. Blameless and harmlesse] Gr. Hornlesse, or sincere without mixture
of deceit or guile, (...)
Israelites indeed.

The sons of God] Dignity enforces duty. Remember that thou art a Kings son,
said he to Antigonus, and thou can not do amiss.

Without rebuke] (...)
Such as envy it self cannot justly tax, or fasten her fangs on. Si Luthero
faverem us viro bone, quod fatentur and hosts, etc. Tom. 8. Epist.
says Erasm^^, who yet loved him not. Luther is a good man, as his very
enemies cannot but acknowledge. So B^cer, Bradford, Melancthon, etc. Christians
should excel others, standing as standard-bearers, higher then others, as Saul
was by the head and shoulders, being without blemish from head to foot, ^en.
3.6.
as Absalom, fair to the eye, and good to the taste, as the tree of knowledge.

In the midst of a crooked] As Noah was righteous in his generation: as Joshuah
would serve Jehovah, (...)
though alone ^^ as David therefore loved Gods testimonies, because other man
kept not his law; as Eliah amidst the Ba^lites, cries, Zelando, zelavi; the
worse they were, the better was he. Baruc kindled himself from other men's
coldness, A^^endit seip^un. Trem.
and quickened himself from other men's dulnes, Neh, 3 ^0.

As lights in the world] Luminaries, great lights, (...)
such as are the Sun and Moon, that give light to others. Some wicked have
greater common gifts then the godly; as many metals are brighter and more
orient then the heavens: yet as those metals are not fit to convey the light
of the Sun, nay indeed they would stop it; so neither are the wicked fit to
shine the true light into us; Mat. 5.
but Christ and Christians, those lights of the world.

Verse 16. Holding forth the word] As an ensign, (...)
or rather as the hand does the torch, or the watch-tow^^ the light, and so the
haven, to weather-beaten Mariners.

Verse 17. Yea and if I be offered] Or, Be poured out as a drink offering upon
the S^crifice, etc. to seal up my Doctrine, whereby I have brought you to the
obedience of faith. Bishop Ridley in a letter to Bishop Brooks of Glo^ester,
writes thus: As for the doctrine which I have taught, my conscience assures
me that it was sound and according to Gods Word, to his glory be it spoken: the
which doctrine the Lord being my help, I will maintain, so long as my tongue
shall wag, and breath is within my body, and in confirmation there of seal the
same with my blood. Act. and Mon. fol. 1604.


Verse 18. For the same cause also, etc.] The hearers affections and endeavors
should exactly answer to the affections and endeavors of the preacher, as the
Elders of Ephesus did, Act 20.31, 37. And as those religious Romans did, Chap.
6, 17. and these Philippians, 2 Cor. 8 5.

Verse 19. That I also may be of good comfort] (...)
That I may be inspirited. For when Silas and Timotheus were come from these
Macedonians, Paul was pressed in spirit, Act. 18.9.
and set vigorously upon the Lords work.

Verse 20. Like-minded] An alter ego to me. True friendship transformeth us
into the condition of those we love, (...)
as Eusebius into his friend Pamphilus the Martyr, Whence he was called
Eusebius Pamphili. Hieronym.
Amicitia sit tantum inter bin^s qui sunt very, and bonos qui sunt pauci.

Verse 21. For all seek their own] If it were so then, what wonder if now, as
was so long since foretold, 2 Timothy 3.2. Self must be shouldred out, and Christ's
share studied more then out own: all private interests let fall, and all
self-respects drown^^ in the glory of God, and the public good, or else we
want that pious ingenuity that becomes Saints. It is said of Cato, that he
did. -- toti genitum se credere mundo, Eucan.
That the care of the community lay upon him. Timothy was of a choice and
excellent spirit that naturally cared for the Churches welfare: Few such now
a-daies.

Verse 22. As the son with the Father] Happy son in such a Father, 1 Timothy
1.2. If Jason the Thessalian held himself to happy in his Tutour Chiron,
Alexander in his Aristotle, Paul in his Gamaliel, ^inda^. lib. 4. (...).
how much more was Timothy in Paul the aged, Philem. ver. 9. whose not only
doctrine but manner of life he knew fully and followed faithfully, 2 Timothy 3.10.
as a diligent Disciple?

Verse 23. So soon as I shall see] For his life was now in suspense by reason
of that roaring lion Nero, whom Tertullian wittily calls, Dedicatorem
damnation^s Christianorum, q^ippe qui oriontem fidemprimus Romae cruen^^ v^^.

Verse 24. Shall come shortly] Whether ever he did come or no, we know not.
Fallitur augurio spes bona saepe suo. Good hopes are often frustrated.

Verse 25. Necessary to send to you] It is not meet that a Pastor be long
absent from his people. Moses was a way but forty days, and before he came
again, Israel had made them a golden Calf. A godly Minister when he is abroad,
is like a fish in the air; whereinto if it leap for recreation or necessity,
yet it soon returns to his own element.

Verse 26. (...)
For he longed after you] The word signifies such a vehement desire, as is
impatient of delays. His heart was where his calling was.

And was full of heavinesse] (...)
Gr. He was out of the world, as it were, and could not take comfort in any
company.

Verse 27. For indeed he was sick] Which should not have been, if S. Paul could
have cured him, as he did others. This shows that the Apostles cured the sick,
and did miracles not by their own power, or at their own pleasure, etc.

But God had mercy on him] A great mercy it is to recover health, and highly to
be prized. After sickness, offer to God the ransom of thy life, as they did,
Exodus 31. Bless Jehovah thy Physician, so he is called, Exodus 15.26. Thus did
David, Psalm. 103.3. Thus Hezekiah, Isa. 36.9. Thus the very Heathens, whose
custom was, after a fit of sickness, to consecrate something to their gods.

But on m^ also] For it is a very sore affliction to loose a dear friend, which
is as a man's own soul, Deuteronomy. 13 6. and is there set after brother, son,
daughter, wife of a man's bosom, as dearer then all of them.

Lest I should have sorrow] Gods care is that we suffer in measure, Isa. 27.8.
And according as we can, 1 Cor. 10.13. See the Note there.

Verse 28. That when ye see him] And receive him as risen from the dead. God
knows how to commend his mercies to us, by threatening us with the loss of
them: for Bona a tergo for mosissima. We know best the worth of mercies by the
want of them.

Verse 29. Hold such in reputation] Or set a just price, a due estimate upon
them. Horrible is the contempt that is now call upon the Ministry by our
Novellers, as if they had learned of Campian to say, Ministr^^ eorum n^hil
vilius.

Verse 30. Not regarding his life] Gr. Ill providing for his life, (...)
casting away all inordinate care of it, as if he had put on that Rom^n
resolution, Necesse est ut eam, non vt vivam. Nee^sly I must go, not needsly
live.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Rejoyce]
OR farewell in the Lord. Salutem in Sospita^ore.

To ^rite the same things to you] So 1 Cor. 5.9. Joh 15.1, 5. Some gather out
of Mat. 5.1. with Luke 6.20. that our Savior preached the same Sermon twice
over, Men are dull to conceive, hard to believe, apt to forget, and slow to
practice heavenly truths, and had therefore great need to have them much
pressed, and often inculcated. Neither let any cry out, Occidit mis^ros crambe
repetita magistros. Surfeit not of Gods Manna, say not it is a light meat,
because lightly come by, or the same again. Aug de ^^ct; Christ. and in. (...)
10.
Austin persuades the Preacher so long to pursue and stand upon the beating and
repeating of one and the same point, till by the gesture and countenance of the
hearers he perceives that they understand and relish it.

Verse 2. (...) Hom. 11
Beware of dogs] That is, Seducers and Sectaries, who though dead dogs, yet
will be barking at godly Ministers. And though the dogs of Egypt would not
move their tongues against Gods Israel, Exodus 11.7. yet these greedy dogs, Isa.
56. can both bark and bite better men then themselves, being set on by the
devil, Homines perfrictae frontis, impudent as dogs.

Beware of evil workers] Deceitful workers. 2 Cor. 11.13. that seem to build
stair-cases for heaven, when indeed they dig descents down to hell, taking
great pains to very evil purpose.

Beware of the concision] For Circumcision: as Diogenes called Zeno's (...) and
Euclides (...). La^rt.
The holy Scriptures have many such elegant, and pleasant passages, as Pro.
25.27 Hos. 4.15. Galat. 5.12. Isa. 5.7, etc. There is one that senseth it thus.
D Bastw.
Beware of the concision, that is, of those that make divisions, and cut the
Church into little pieces, and sucking Congregations making separation. So
Piscator, Qui conantur vos ab Ecclesia Deirescindere, who seek to sunder you
from the Church. The Donatists affirmed, That there were no true Churches, but
theirs, and were also divided among themselves, In minutula frustula, as Austin
says.

Verse 3. For we are the circumcision] Such as have our luxuriancies lopped
off, our unruly passions mortified, Col. 2.11. casting them away as a wretched
foreskin.

Verse 4. Confidence in the fl^sh] That is in external privileges, which yet
profit not those that rest in them. An empty title yields but an empty comfort
at last. God cares for no retainers, that only wear his livery, but serve
themselves. A man may go to hell with baptismall water on his face: yea the
sooner for his abused privileges.

Verse 5. An Hebrew of the Hebrews] That is, by both fathers and mothers side.

Verse 6. Concerning zeal] A blind misguided zeal. See the Note on Romans 10.2.
If zeal be not qualified with knowledge, all will be on fire, as the Primum
mobile they say would be with it is swift turning about, but for the
countermotion of the lower spears.

Verse 7. Loss for Christ.] Christ is to be sought and bought at any hand, at
any rate. This is to play the wise merchant, Mat. 13.44.46. See the Notes
there. Esteem we Christ, as the people did David, 2 Samuel 18.3. more worth then
ten thousand, as Naomi did Ruth, better then seven sons, Ruth 4.15. As Pharaoh
did I^seph. There is none so wise and worthy as thou, said he, Genesis 41.39. Let
burning, hanging, all the torments of hell befall me, Tantummodo ^t I^sum
nancis^ar, So that I may get my Jesus, Act. and Mon.
aid Ignatius. None but Christ, none but Christ, said Lambert, listing up such
hands as he had, and his fingers ends flaming. We cannot buy this gold too dear.

Verse 8. And do count them but dung] Dogs-dung (as some interpret the word) or
Dogs-meat, course and contemptible. (...) quasi (...)
Paul's sublime spirit counts all dung, yet is content for Christ to be counted
the offscouring of all things.

Verse 9. And be found in him] Out of whom all are lost in the wilderness of
worldly lusts, and woefully wander; yet not so wide, as to miss of hell.

Verse 10. And may know him] Not notionally only (for so a man may do out of
every Catechism) but practically, not apprehensively only, but affectively,
not with that knowledge that is ^ognoscitiva only standing in speculation, but
that is directiva vitae, as the Apostle here expounds himself. A natural man
may have a disciplinary knowledge of Christ, that is, by hearsay, as a blind
man has of colors, not an intuitive, i.e. per speciem propriam, etc.

Verse 11. I might attain to the resurrection] That is (by a metonymy of the
subject for the adjunct) that perfection of holiness that accompanies the
estate of the resurrection. True grace never aims at a pitch, but aspireth to
perfection. It is a low and unworthy strain in some, to labor after no more
grace then will keep life and soul together, that is, soul and hell asunder (as
one speaks.) But that man for heaven, and heaven for him, that ^ets up for
his mark, the resurrection of the dead.

Verse 12. But I follow after] Gr. I persecute, I follow hotfoot with utmost
eagerness, (...)
By this then he signifies how greedily and uncessantly he pursued after the
perfect knowledge of Christ, having it as it were in chase, D. Airy.
and resolved not to rest till he had attained unto it. Well might Chrysostom
call S. Paul an insatiable greedy devouring worshipper of God.

Verse 13. I count not my self] Si dixisti sati^ est, periisti. Satiety is a
dangerous disease, and the next step to a declension, The Eagles emblem is
sublimius, the Suns celerius, Psalm. 19.3. the wheats perfectius, Mar 4.28.
Ezekiels profundius, Chap 47. 4. Christ's superius Luke 14 10. and Paul's
ulterius.

Reaching forth] (...) Pro^o and quasi prae^i^^ti corpore ^erri ad scopum B^z^.
Straining and stretching out head and hands, and whole body to lay hold on the
mark or price proposed. A manifest metaphor from runners in a race.

Verse 14. I press toward, etc.] The Ark of the Covenant was but a cubit and a
half high ^^ so were likewise the wheels of the caldron. Now we know that a
cubit and a half is but an unperfect measure: which shows (says one) that no
man in this life is perfectly perfect. Lee us strive to perfection, as Paul
did; and then, Columel.
Summum culmen affectantes, satis honesti vel in secundo fastigio conspiciemur.

Verse 15. As many as be perfect] Comparatively or conceitedly so.

God shall reveal] Several measures of knowledge and holiness are given to
the Saints at several times. We are narrow-mouthed vessels, and cannot receive
all at once. Whether I go thou can not follow me now: but thou shall follow
me afterward, Joh. 13.36. See the Notes there.

Verse 16. Let us walk by the same rule] To wit of the Word: and then you may
say, Lord, if I be deceived, thou have deceived me.

Verse 17. (...).
Be followers together of me] Longum iter per pracepta, brevius per exempla.
Every thing in a Minister should be exemplary. We must propound to our selves
the highest pitch, and the best paterns of perfection.

Verse 18. Lor^^ in Act, 22.19.
And now tell you weeping] Non tam atramento quam lachrymis chartas infici^bat
Paulus. Paul was a man of many tears.

Verse 19. Whose God is their belly] A scavenger whose living is to empty, is
to be preferred before him that lives, but to fill privies; as they do that
make their gut their God, that dunghill Deity. Such an one was that Pamphagus,
Nabal, Dives, and others that digested in hell, (...) Vt m^n^cipes (...), Si^
redd^t Piscator.
what they are on earth.

Verse 20. For our conversation] Our civil conversation, or Our Burgesseship,
whiles we live by heavens laws, and go about our earthly busin^sses with
heavenly minds: This a carnal man cannot skill of. A Fly cannot make that of
a flower that a Be can do. There is a generation whose names are written in
the earth: these make earth their throne, heaven their foot^^ool, Jer. 17.13.
and are loath to die, because they have treasur^s in the field. Jer. 41.8.
But the Saints, though their commoration be on earth, yet their conversation
is in heaven; as the pearl grows in the sea, but shines as the sky.

Verse 21. Like unto his glorious body] Which is the Standard. See the Notes on
1 Cor. 15.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. Dearly Beloved, and longed for]
What heart-melting language is here! Ministers must wone had for Christ, and
speak fair, if they will speak to purpose: Though I might be much bold in
Christ to enjoin thee, yet for loves sake, I rather beseech thee, Philem 8.9.
How often are men fain to sue for that which is their own; and how heart-glad if
by fair entreaties they can gather up their debts.

Verse 2. I beseech Euodias] A couple of disagreeing sisters, whom the Apostle
seeks to reconc^le, and it was a wonder if they could resist his rhetorike.
Hei mihi quiv^s al^cubi re^^rirc non pos^^^, etc.
O that I could but once find you together once (said Austin of the
differences between Hi^rome and Ruffinus) I would fall down at your feet with
much love and many tears: I would beseech you for your selves, and one another,
and for weak Christians sake who are offended thereat, you would not suffer
these dissensions to spread etc.

Verse 3. And I entreat thee also] All men should contribute their help to the
composing of differences, and bring their buckets, as it were, to quench this
unnatural fire, when once kindled.

Verse 4. Rejoice in the Lord] That is the true and only joy (said Mr Philpo^
the Martyr) Act. and Mon. fol 1^ 6^.
which is conceived not of the creature, but of the Creator: to this all other
joys being compared are but mournings, all delights sorrows, all beauty filth,
etc. Other joy besides this may wet the mouth, but not warm the heart, smooth
the brow, but not fill the breast.

And again I say rejoyce] No duty almost more pressed in both Testaments then
this of rejoicing in the Lord. It is no less a sin not to rejoice, then not
to repent.

Verse 5. Let your moderation] Or equality, such as was that of David, Psalm
26.12. The scales of his mind hung equal, giving him liberty in all
occurrences to enjoy himself. All immoderations are enemies to he^^th:
Hippocrates.
so they are also to the quietness of the mind. Against these (as against
poisons) there be two kinds of antidotes, prayer and patience, the one hot,
the other cold, the one quenching, the other quickening. The word here used by
the Apostle properly signifies moderation in law-businesses, or in laying
claim to a man's own right, (...) (...) c. lib. 5 cap. 10. Summ^^ (...) summa
i^^uria.
the preferring of equity before extremity, as holding utmost right to be
utmost wrong. Austin tells us, That is was grown to a Proverb among his
Contrymen, Vt habeas quietum tempus, perde aliquid. For a quiet life, part
with some part of thy right, as Abraham did, Genesis 13.9.

The Lord is at hand] To right you, and recompense you, to pay you for all your
pains and patience, Iudex pro foribus, says S. James. chap. 5.9.

Verse 6. In nothing be carefull] Or care for nothing, viz. with a care of
dissidence and distrust. See the Note on Mat. 6.25, 26 etc.

Bat in every thing by praier] This is the best cure of care: Cast thy burden
(or thy request) upon the Lord, says David, P^. 55.22. and he shall sustain
thee. Remove thy trouble from thy self to God by virtue of that Writ or
Warrant, and then all shall be well. They looked unto God, and were lightened,
Psalm. 34 5. Luther in a certain Epistle of his to Melancthon, complains thus:
Ego certe oro pro te, and doleo te pertinacissimam curarum hirudinem, meas
preces sic irritas facere. I pray for thee, but to no purpose so long as thou
give so much way to carking cares.

Supplication with thank^sgiving] We should come to pray with our thanks in our
hands; standing ready with it, as Joseph's brethren stood with their present,
Genesis 43.25. In the old Law, what special request soever they had to make, or
what sacrifice soever to offer, they were commanded still to come with their
peace offerings. Prayer goes up without incense, when without thankfulness.
The Church ascends daily to her beloved Christ in these pillars of smoke, Cant.
3.6. for she knows that unthankfulness hinders much the restfull success of
prayer.

Verse 7. Shall keep your hearts] Keep as with a guard, (...).
or as in a gar^son. Solomon's bed was not so well guarded with his threescore
valiant men, all holding swords, Cant. 3.7.8. as each good Christian is by the
power of God without him, and the peace, of God within him: This peace, like
David's harp, drives away the evil spirit of cares and fears: It soon husheth
all God can soon raise up in his, an army of powerful thoughts and
meditations, so as their very inward tranquillity arising from the testimony of
a good conscience (called here, Their minds) and the sweet Sabbath of spirit
the composedness of their affections (called here, Their hearts) can make and
keep them secure and sound, yea bring aid when they are close besieged by sin
and Satan.

Verse 8. Whatsoever things are true] This is that little Bible, as the
eleventh to the Hebrews is by one fitly called, A little Book of Martyrs. In
this one verse is comprised, That Totum hominis, Eccles. 12.13. That Bonum
hominis, Micah 6 8. For if ye do these things here enjoined, ye shall never
fall, but go gallantly into heaven, as Saint Peter has it, 2 ^et. 1.10, 11.

Verse 9. And ^eard, and seen in me] Est aliquid quod ix mag^o viro vol tacente
proficias. The very sight, nay thought of a good man, often does good. Whereas
the tongue or heart of a wicked man is little worth. Prove. 10.20.
If their thoughts and discourses were distilled, they are so frothy they would
hardly yield one drop of true comfort.

And the God of peace] Not only the peace of God, as verse. 7. Austin somewhere
fisheth a mystery out of the word PAX* which consists of three letters, says
he, to note the Trinity from whom is all true peace.

Verse 10. Has reflourish^d] (...).
It had deflourished then for a season, and withered, as an Oak in winter, Isa.
6.13. and as a Teyl-tree who^e ^ap is in the root. The best tree may have a fit
of barrenness: So may the best men suffer some decaies for a s^ason^ the
spiritual life may ^unne all to the heart, as a people conquered in the field
runs to the Castle. Howbeit, as Eu^ychus his life was in him still; and he
revived, though he seemed to be dead, and as trees in the spring grow green
again: So do the relapsed Saints.

Verse 11. In respect of want] The wicked in the fullness of his sufficiency is
in straits, Job 20.22. Contrariwise, the godly man in the midst of his straits
is in a sufficiency. He has all things, as having the haver of all things.

For I have learned] In Christ's school: for Nature teaches no such lesson.

Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. Horat.
The laborers were not content with their penny Mat. 20.13. They that have
enough to sink them, yet have not enough to satisfy them: as a ship may be
over-laden with gold and silver, even unto sinking, and yet have compass and
sides enough to hold ten times more. It is God only that fills the heart, and
makes a man say truly with Jacob, and not fainedly, Rabb-li. Col li. Gen 13.9.
Gen, 33.11.
as Esau, I have enough my brother. Esau had a deal, but Jacob had All,
because he had the God of all.

Verse 12. I know both how, etc.] Sound bodies can bear sudden alterations of
heat and cold: So cannot distempered bodies.

Both how to be abased] So Chilo (one of the seven Wisemen of Greece) (...).
L^ert.
said to his brother who took it ill that he was not chosen to be one of the
Judges, I know how to be injuriously dealt with: but I hardly believe him.
Socrates also could tell Archelaus, Arrian, apud Stob^um.
that offered him large revenues, My mind and mine estate are matches. But
flesh and blood could never carry him so far, for all his saying so. It is God
alone that fashioneth a man's heart to his estate, Psalm. 33.15. as a suit of
clothes is fitted to the body.

I am instructed] (...).
I am initiated, I am a young scholar, newly entered in this high point of
heavenly learning.

To suffer want] Either patiently to wait for what I desire, or contentedly to
want what God denies.

Verse 13. I can dos all things] A Christian walks about the world like a
conqueror, having power given him over all, Cyrus Major.
Revel. 2.26, 27. It was a vain brag of that Heathen Prince, that caused it to
be engraven upon his Tombstone, (...), Arrian.
I could do all things. None can say so, but the man in Christ.

Verse 14. Ye have well done] For hereby as you have sealed up your love to me,
and engaged me to pray for you (as for Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1.18.) So you have
gotten a good testimony to your selves that ye are members of Christ's mystical
body. The tongue is far enough from the toe, the heel from the head, yet when
the toe or heel is hurt, the rest of the members sympathiz^ and seek help for
it. So here.

Verse 15. But ye only] One poor Philippian shamed a hundred rich close-fisted
Corinthians. Araunah gave like a King, 2 Samuel 24.23. and is therefore crowned
and chronicled, Zechary 9 7. Ekron shall be as the J^busite, that is, T^cm^l.
as this famous J^busite Araunah, that parted with his freehold for pious uses.

Verse 16. Ye sent once and again] Charities fountain runs fresh, More perennis
aquae, and is never dried up. The liberal man devises liberal things, and
holds that only his own, that he has given to others.

Verse 17. Not because I desire a gift] As those Cormorants that with shame do
love, Give ye, Hos. 4.18. as if they could speak no other but the Dorick
Dialect, the horse-leeches language. S. Paul was none of these.

That may abound to your account] For God keeps an exact account of every penny
laid out upon him and his, that he may requite it: and his retributions are
more then bountiful.

Verse 18. I have all] viz. That you sent, and I give you an acquittance, which
the Greeks, from the word here used, (...)
call (...) Compare Prove. 3.27.

I abound, I am full] As a bird with a little eye, and the advantage of a wing
to soar with, may see far wider then an Ox with a greater: So the righteous
with a little estate, joined with faith and devotion, may feel more comfort,
and see more of Gods bounty, then one of vast possessions, whose heart cannot
lift it self above the earth.

Verse 19. Shall supply] Gr. Shall fill up as he did the widows vessels, shut
the doors upon thee, says the Prophet. (...). 2 King. 4 4.
It was time to shut the doors, when one little vessel must overflow and fill
up many greater.

Verse 20. Now unto God] Paul cannot mention Gods bounty without a doxology.

Verse 21. Every Saint] A great encouragement to the meaner, to be so respected.

Verse 22. All the Saints salute you] Christianity is no enemy to courtesy.
Gods scholars are taught better manners then to neglect so much as salutations.

They that are of Caesar's houshold] When Caesar himself lived and died an
unconverted caitiff, and a castaway.

Verse 23. The grace of our Lord] with this wish of grace grace to them, Prove.
4.7.
he both begins and ends. Wisdom is the principal thing.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the COLOSSIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Paulan Apostle, etc.]
THis golden Epistle is an epitome, as it were, of that other to the Ephesians:
like as that he writes to the Galatians is an abstract of that other to the
Romans.

Verse 2. Which are at Colosse] A City in Phrygia, swallowed up by an
earthquake not long after this Epistle was written. Gods judgments are
sometimes secret, but ever just.

Verse 3. We give thanks -- praying, etc.] Prayer and thanks (says one) are
like the double motion of the lungs; the air that is sucked in by prayer is
breathed out again by thanks.

Verse 4. And of the love, etc.] Faith in Christ Jesus makes love to all the
Saints. Therefore they go commonly coupled in Paul's Epistles. And therefore
when the Disciples heard how often they must forgive an offending brother. Lord
increase our faith, say they, Luke 17.5. See the Note there.

Verse 5. For the hope] It is hope (says an Interpreter here) that plucks up
the heart of a man to a constant desire of union by faith with God, and of
communion by love with man. But by hope, is here meant the object of hope.

Verse 6. (...) Eus^^. hist. 1.2. c. 3.
As it is in all the world] Eusebius says, That the Gospel spread at first
through the world like a Sunbeam. The Reformation begun by Luther in Germany,
wont on abroad Christendom, as if it had been carried upon Angels wings. That
of the Church of England is such as former ages despaired of, the present
admireth, Spec Europ.
and the Future shall stand amazed at. It is that miracle (says one) which we
are in these times to look for.

Verse 7. Who is for you a faithful Minister] Epaphras was their
City-preacher: whom therefore the Apostle here so highly commends. Luther is
much blamed by his best friends for opposing and disparaging Carolostadius
among his own charge at Orlamund, anno 1524. Scultet. Annal. page 130.
A faithful Minister should have all good respect before his own people
especially.

Verse 8. Who also declared unto us] His heart was over-joyed with his peoples
forwardness, and he could not but impart it to the Apostle. It was a pride in
Montanus to over-ween his Pepuza and Tymium two pelting Parishes not far from
Colosse, and to call them Jerusalem, Euseb^^ 5.^ 17
as if they had been the only Churches in the world. But this was a commendable
practice of Ep^phras to late to S. Paul the good he found in his people, that
he by an epistle might further encourage and quicken them.

Verse 9. In all wisdom and spirituall] See the Note on Ephesians. 1.8.

Verse 10. That ye might walk worthy] By walking before God, with God, after
God, according to God, as it is phrased in several Scriptures, all to one
purpose. See the Note on Ephesians. 4.1.

Verse 11. And long-suffering with joyfulnesse] The joy of the Lord is the
strength of the soul, Nehem. 8.10. as true gold comforts and strengthens the
heart that Alchymy does not. At the death of Francis Gamba a Lombard, that
suffered Marty^dome, the Friars brought in their hands a cross for him to
behold, to keep him from de poration at the feeling of the fire. But his mind
he said was so replenished with joy and comfort in Christ, Act. and Mon. fol.
856.
that he needed neither their cross nor them.

Verse 12. Of the Saints in light] So that though cast into a dark dungeon the
Saints may clap their hands upon their bosoms, as Oecolampadius upon his
deathbed did, and say, Hic sat luc is, here within is plenty of divine light.

Verse 13. From the power of darknesse] Every natural m^n is under the power
of darkness, nay of the devil, Act. 26.18. as the malefactor that goes bound
and pinniond up the ladder, is under the power of the executioner. Imagine
(says one) a man driven out of the light by devils, where he should see
nothing but his tormentours, and that he were made to stand upon snar^s and
g^ns with iron teeth ready to strike up and grind him to pieces, and that he
had gall poured down to his belly, and an instrument raking in his bowels, and
the pains of a traveling woman upon him, and a hideous noise of horror in his
ears, and a great Giant with a spear running upon his neck, and a slame burning
upon him round about. Alas, alas, this is the estate of every one that is ou^
of Christ, as these Places show, whence these comparisons are taken, Job 18.7,
8. and 20.24 15 and 15.20, 21, 26, 30.

Verse 14. Even the forgiveness, etc.] See the Note on Mat. 1.21.

Verse 15. Who is the image] The express image of his person, Heb. 1.2. Milk
is not so like milk, as this Son is like the Father.

The firstborn of every creature] As being begotten of the substance of the
Father after a wonderful manner before all beginnings.

Verse 16. For by him were all things] This is an high praise to Christ, Rev.
4.11. See the Note on Joh. 1.3.

Verse 17. By him all things consist] They would soon fall asunder had nor
Christ undertaken to uphold the shattered condition thereof, by the word of his
power.

Verse 18. And he is the head] See the Note on Ephesians 1.22.

Verse 19. In him should all ful^esse] In a vessel or treasury an emptiness
may follow a fullness: not so here. See the Note on Joh. 1.14.

Verse 20. To reconcile all things] That is, all the Saints, who are worth all,
better then all, more worth then a world of wicked men, Heb. 11.38. The Jews
have a saying, That those seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were
as much as all the seventy Nations in the world. What account God makes of
them in comparison of of others. See Isa. 43.3, 4.

Verse 21. Enemies in your minde] Haters of God Romans 1.30. and so, God slaiers,
1 Ioh. 3.15. Omne peccatum est Deicidium.

Verse 22. To present you holy and unblameable] By his righteousness imputed
and imparted: though most interpreters expound this text of sanctification, and
not of justification or future perfection.

Verse 23. Grounded and setled] When faith bears fruit upward, it will take
root downward, and make a man as a tree by the rivers side, and not as the
chafe in the fan, Psalm. 1.3, 4. or as the boat without ballast.

Preached to every creature] That is, to every reasonable creature, mar. 16.15.
Though to many we preach to no more purpose then B^de did, when he preached to
an heap of stones: these are unreasonable creatures, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

Verse 24. (...) non (...) Vicissim ^ur, um impleo.
And fill up that which is behinde] Christ suffered much for Paul: it is but
meet therefore that Paul should suffer somewhat for Christ. All our troubles
are but the slivers and chips as it were, of his cross. When the Jews offered
our Savior gall and vinegar, he tasted it, but would not drink. He left the
rest for his Church, and they must pledge him, not to expiate sin, but for
their trial and exercise.

For his bodies sake] For the confirmation of men's minds in the truth of the
Gospel.

Verse 25. According to the dispensation] What a horrid blasphemy therefore is
that of the Jesu tes, who stick not to tell the people in their pulpits, That
S. Paul was not secure of his preaching, but by conference with S. Peter, nor
that he durst publish his Epistles, Spec, ^urop.
till S. Peter had allowed them.

Verse 26. But now is made manifest] God has now opened his whole heart to his
Saints. See the Note on Romans 16.25. and on Mat. 4.16.

Verse 27. The hope of glory] All the Saints are said to worship in the altar,
Revel 11.3.
because they place all their hope of life in Christ's death alone.

Verse 28. Whom we preach] Ministers do not only preach of Christ, but preach
Christ, that is, they give what they speak of. As the Manna came down in the
dew; se does the spirit in the Ministry of the Gospel.

Verse 29. I also labor, striving] Labor to lassitude, strive even to an
agony. Good Ministers are great pains-takers: and God that helped the Levites
to bear the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 15.26. will help his servants by his spirit, working
in them with power.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. For I would that ye knew]
LIttle do most men know, what uncessant care and pains their faithful
Ministers take for their souls health. But we would they should know it, and
know those that labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and to esteem
them very highly in love, for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.

Verse 2. That their hearts may be comforted] Ministers are sons of
consolation, whiles by them God makes the heart to hear of joy and gladness,
Ps. 51.8. and creates the fruit of their lips peace, ^eace, etc. Isa. 57.19.

Being knit together] No such comfort upon the earth, as in the communion of
Saints: it differs from the happiness of heaven, but in degrees only.

Of the full assurance of understanding] Such as was that of S. Luke, chap.
1.3. See the Note there.

Verse 3. In whom are hid] What so great a maker is it then if we be obscured,
and our good parts not so noticed? Pers.
Vsque adeone scire tuum nihil est, etc? Christ was content his treasures
should be hid. In maxima sui mole se minimum ostendunt stellae.

All the treasures of wisdome] Out of Christ then there is no true wisdom or
solid comfort to be found. The depth faith, It is not in me, and the sea says,
It is not ith me, Job 28.14. The worlds wizards cannot help us to it, Ier. 8.9.
Nescio quomodo imbecillior est medicina quam morbus, says Cicero concerning
all Philosophical comforts: The medicine is too weak for the disease.

Verse 4. With entising words] (...).
With probable and persuasible speeches. It is not safe for simple men to hear
heretics: for though they may think themselves able enough to answer them, yet
they have a notable faculty of persuading the credulous and less cautelous.
The Valentinian-hererikes had an art to persuade before they taught. Tertull.
The locusts have faces like women. In the year 497. Pope Anastasius second,
seeking to reduce the heretic Acacius, was seduced by him.

Verse 5. Your ord^r, and the st^df^stn^sse] Faith and order, that is doctrine
and discipline, faith one. These two make the Church fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and terrible as an army with banners, Cant 6 10.

The steadfastness of your faith] (...).
Gr. The firmament of your faith. As in the first creation, so in the new
creature there is first the light of knowledge: Secondly, The firmament of
faith: Thirdly, Repentant tears and worthy fruits, as sea's and trees, etc.

Verse 6. So Walk ye in him] Continue well affected, as ye were at your first
conversion: fall not from your own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. Happy is he that
can say in a spiritual sense (as it was said of Moses) that after long
profession of religion his sight is not waxed dim, nor his natural strength
abated.

Verse 7. Abounding therein with thanksgiving] Thankfulfulnesse for smaller
measures of grace, gets more. Essicacissimum genus est rogandi, gratias agere.
Plin. Panegyr.


Verse 8. (...).
Lest any man spoil you] A Metaphor either from sheep stealers or plunderers.
Seducers plunder men of their precious souls. They take them prisoners, 2 Timothy
3.6. They make merchandise of them, 2 Pet. 2.3. or bring them into bondage,
smiting them on the face, 2 Cor. 11.20.

I brough Philosophy] In the year of Christ 230. the Artemonites, a certain
kind of heretics, corrupted Scripture out of Aristotle and Theophrastus,
turning all into Questions, as afterward the Schoolmen also did, that evil
generation of dunghill Divines, as one calls them. Tertullian not unfi^ly
faith, That the Philosophers were the Patriarchs of the heretics. Not but that
there is an excellent and necessary use of Philosophy truly so called: but the
Apostle means it of their idle speculations and vain deceits, those aerie
nothings, as the Apostle expounds himself. See the Note on Romans 1.21, 22.

And not after Christ] The Gentiles then could not be saved by their philosophy
without Christ. And yet not only the Divines of Cullen, A^rippa. B^laeus.
set forth a book concerning the salvation of Aristotle, whom they called
Christ's forerunner in naturals, as John Baptist was in supernaturals: but also
some of the School-Doctours, grave men (says Acosta) do promise men salvation
without the knowledge of Christ.

Verse 9. All the fullness of the Godhead bodily] That is, Essentially, not in
clouds and Ceremonies, as once between the Che^nb^^s, which the J^ws called
Shechinah; whereunto the Apostle here alludeth.

Verse 10. And ye are compleat] Ye have that true happiness of a man, which
Philosophers hunted after in the thicker of car^hly vani^i^s, and lost
themselves in the chase. Varr^ makes report of 288. several opinions that they
had about this subject, and were out in all, whil^st they caught at the shadow
of ^uits in a ^edge of thorns, but could not come at the tree of life, Christ
Jesus in whom we are complete.

Verse 11. Made without hands] Oh how honorable (says an Interpreter) is the
work of mor^ification, even as to make those huge heavens, etc.

By the ci^cumcision of Christ] Which circumciseth our hearts, pulling off chat
wretched foreskin.

Verse 12. Buried with him in baptisme] Which succeeds in the place of
circumcision, and is also to us a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.

Of the operation of God] In the work of faith God puts forth the same
almighty power that he did in raising Christ from the dead, Ephesians, 1.19, 20.
See the Note on that Text.

Verse 13. And you being dead] See the Note on Ephesians. 2.1.

Has he quickned] The first springing in the womb of grace is precious before
God.

Verse 14. Blotting out the hand-writing] Crossing out the black lines of our
sins, with the red lines of ^^s Sons bl^nd.

Verse 15. He made a show of them] A plain allusion to the Roman triumphs. See
the Note on Eph^s. 4.8. Christ made the devils a public spectacle of scorn and
derision, Tank hlstz^o.
as Tamerl^ne did Ba^azet the great Turk, whom he shut no in an^ iron c^ge made
like a grate, in fuch sort, as that he might on every side be seen: and so
carried him up and down, as he passed through Asia, to be of his own people
^corned and derided, etc.

Verse 16. Let no man there fore judge you] That is, Set not up any such for a
Judge over your consciences: Or, if any usurp such an authority, slight him,
according to that Gal. 5.1. Periculosum est in divinisrebus ut quis cedat j^re
suo, Cypr de hor. baptiz.
says Cyprian, In things of God we should be tender of our liberty.

Verse 17. Which are a shadow] And so a sign of Christ, obscurely and
imperfectly representing him to the old Church, and now abolished by his coming
in the flesh. In the twelfth year of our Saviors age (the same year wherein he
taught in the Temple, Luke 2.) the Sanctuary was polluted by the casting about
the bones of dead men through every part and porch thereof, at the very feast of
the Passover in the night time. This Josephus says was done by the Samaritans
out of hatred to the Jewish services. But God had surely a special hand in it,
to show that people, that those shadows were to vanish, now that Christ the
body was come and showed himself.

Verse 18. Let no man beguile you] Gr. Brave it over you. Confer Exodus (...).
Tremel.
8.9 Glory over me, Gloriam assume supra me, as thou have done over thy
sorcerers; I gave thee this liberty. See also Judge. 7.2. Isa: 10.15.

In a voluntary humility] A proud humility. They would not dare to worship God,
but Angels, etc. yet were vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds. And
something like this was that of the Baptist in refusing to wash Christ, and of
Peter in refusing to be washed by him Ioh. 13.8.

And worshipping of Angels] Setting them up as Papists do for Mediat^u^s of
intercession. Let not us acknowledge any other Master of requests in heaven,
but Christ alone, 1 Ioh. 2.1. But what a piece of knavery is that in Surius and
Caranza, who rendering that passage of the Laodicean Council, Chap. 35. (...),
Christians may not pray to Angels, they make the words to be, Non oportet
Christianos ad angulos Congregatione ^^facere. Christians may not be corner
creepers: And the title they make, Deys qui angulos colunt, Of those that
worship (not Angels, but) corners; against all sense. What? will they put out
the eyes of Goods people? As he said, Numb. 16.14. Or do they not rather,
Festucam quarere unde oculos sibi cruant, as Bernard has it, Seek straws to
put out their own eyes withal.

Intruding into those things] (...).
Or invading those things, etc. blind and bold, busy about such matters, as
whereof there is neither proof nor profit. Of this sort of seducers was that
daring Dionysius, that writes so confidently of the heavenly hierarchy: The
Schoolmen also with their curious speculations and new niceties, as Scotellus,
and others.

Vainly puffed up by his fleshly minde] Corruption is the mother of pride, as
the devil the father. He is the King of all the children of pride. Job 41.34.

Verse 19. And not holding the hoad] This is worse then all the former, that
they despoiled Christ of his dignity: as if he alone were not sufficient to
cherish and increase his Church.

With the increase of God] That proceeds from God, that is, from the Spirit of
Christ the head: To which growth is opposed that vain puffing up, verse. 18.
whereby men do not increase, but swell.

Verse 20. Are ye subject to ordinances] why do ye dogmatize: or be burdened
with ^ites or traditions, as they now are in the Papacy? John Aunt a Roman
Catholic, in his humble appeal to King James, in the sixth Chapter of that
Pamphlet thus blasphemeth God, D. S^eldens Make of the beas^ ep^de^ic.
The God of the Protestants (whom he knows to be the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost) is the most uncivil and evil manner'd God of all those who have borne
the names of God upon earth: Yea, worse then Pan, God of the Clowns, which can
endure no Ceremonies nor good manners at all.

Verse 21. Touch not, taste not, etc.] The words of those impostours, which are
here mimetically, or by way of imitation related. See the like Eccl. 10.14.
where the Wiseman graphically describes the fools tautologies, A man cannot
tall what shall be, and what shall be, who can tell?

Verse 22. Which all are to perish] The very daily perishing of food and
raiment, are types of thy perishing also, faith a Divine.

Verse 23. And neglecting of the body] Gr. (...).
Not sparing of it, as the old and new Baalites, Those Flagellantes: And those
also amongst us (good otherwise) that pinch their bodies too much with penury
or excessive fasting, are blameworthy. The body is the souls servant, and that
it may be, Par negotio, neither supra not infranegorium, it must have due
honor and nourishment.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. If ye then be risen with Christ]
ASyeprefe le to be, Chip. 2.12.

Se^^ those things, etc.] As Christ risen spoke, and did only the things
p^^aining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.3. and waited always for his exaltation
into heaven. There should be continual ascensions in our hearts: Trem^l.
the Church is compared to pillars of smoke, Elationibus sumi, Cant. 3.6. as
having her affections, thoughts, desires upward, heavenward.

Verse 2. Set your affection on things] Things above out-last the days of
heaven, and run parallel with the life of God, and line of eternity. Things on
earth are mutable and momentary, subject to vanity and violence: when we grasp
them most greedily, we embrace nothing but smoke, which wrings tears from our
eyes, and vanish^th into nothing.

And not on things on earth] Set not thine heart upon the asses, said Samuel to
Saul, ^ith the desire of all Israel is thee: So, set not your affections on out
ward things, ^ith better things abide you. It is not for you to be fishing for
gudgeons, but for towns, forts and castles, said Cl^^pa^ra to M. Antony. So
neither is it for such as hope for heaven to be taken up about trifles: as
Domitian spent his time in catching shes, and Artaxerxes in making hafts for
knives. There is a generation of Torrigen^ fratres, whose names are written in
the ^arth, Ier. 17 13. called the inhabitants of the earth, Rev^l. 12.12. in
opposition to the Saints and heirs of heav^n. These may with the Ath^ians give
for their badge the Grasshopper, which is bred, lives and dies in the same
ground: and though the has wings, yet slieth not: sometimes she hoppeth
upwards a little, but salleth to the ground again. So here.

Verse 3. For ye are d^ad] Crucified to the world as Paul, Gal. 6.14. weaned as
a child from the bre^^s, or rather botches of the world, as David, Pt. 131.1.
Dead also in regard of dady miseries, Isa. 26.19. 1 Cor. 15.31.

And your list is hid] As the pearl is hid, till the shell be broken.

Verse 4. Then shall we appear.] What then do we loading our selves with thick
clay? or moiling our selves here, as much worms?

Verse 5. Mortify therefore] Sin has a strong heart, and will not be done to
death, but with much ado. Peccata sape raduntur, sed non eradicantur. Something
is done about sins, little against them: as artificial juglers seem to wound
themselves, but do not; or as plaiers seem to thrust themselves through their
bodies, but the sword passes only through their clothes.

Covetousness Which is idolatry] For it robs God of (his slower) his trust,
and draws a man away from all the Commandments. Ps. 119.36 See the Note on Ephesians.
5 5.

Verse 6. On the children of disobedience] Unperswadable, uncounsellable
persons, that regard not good courses or discourses.

Verse 7. When ye lived in them] Man's life is a walk, and each action a step
either to heaven or hell.

Verse 8. Filthy communication] The devils drivell. See the Note on Ephesians. 5.4.

Verse 9. Lie not one to another] No not in jest, lest ye go to hell in
earnest. See the Note on Ephesians. 4.25.

Verse 10. After the image] If moral virtue could be beheld with mortal eyes,
faith the Philosopher, it would stir up wonderful loves of it self. How much
more would the image of God in the hearts of his people? See the Note on Ephesians,
4.24.

Verse 11. Christ is all, and in all] Not only in the hearts of men, but in all
things else (...) in the neuter gender. This second Adam has filled all things
again: neither is there any thing else required to justification and salvation.

Verse 12. As the elect of God, holy and beloved] Therefore holy, because
elect, and therefore beloved, because holy; as Gods name is holy, and therefore
reverend, Ps. 111.9. God chose his for his love, and now loves them for his
choice.

Bowels of mercies] Draw out thy soul as well as thy sheaf to the hungry, Isa.
58.10. Steep thy thoughts in the mercies of God (says one) and they will die
thine, as the die-fat does the cloth.

Verse 13. If a man have a quarrell] Occasions will be given, Prove. 19.11
and offenses will fall out. Now it is the glory of a man to pass over a
transgression. See 1 Samuel 10.27. And to forgive where there is just cause of
complaint: If no quarrel, no quarrel, no thank.

Verse 14. The bond of perfectnesse] Or the couple, the juncture, (...).
the tie: as the curtains of the Tabernacle were joined by loops: so are all
true Christians by love.

Verse 15. And let the peace of God rule] Sit certaminis Moderator, let it rule
after the manner of a Moderatour, (...).
or an umpire: Let it over-see and overruled in all your personal discords. Or
(as others sense it) let it carry away the prize, or distribute the garlands.

And be ye thankefull] Arhor ^onoreiur cujvs nos umbra ruetur.
sc. To those that are courteous and beneficial to you. Ingratum dixeris omnia
dixeris. Lycurgus would make no law against unthankfulness, because he could
not think there could be any such evil committed. If there be any sin in the
world against the holy Ghost (said Queen Elizabeth in a letter to Henry 4 of
France) Camder^
it is ingratitude. This (says one) is a monster in nature, a solecisme in
good manners, a paradox in divinity, Ventus u^^rs and exi^ans.
a parching wind to damme up the fountain of divine and humane favors.

Verse 16. Dwell in you richly] Indwell in you, as an ingraffed word, (...).
incorporated into your souls: so concocted and digested by you, (...).
as that you turn it in succum and sanguinem, into a part of your selves. This
is your riches: and thus David reckons of his wealth, Ps. 119.31.

Teaching and admonishing one another] It is rightly observed by a late
reverend Writer, D. Sibbs on Cant. 5.
That although we know that which we ask of others, as well as they do: yet
good speeches will draw us to know it better, by giving occasion to speak more
of it; wherewith the Spirit works more effectually, and imprints it deeper, so
that it shall be a more rooted knowledge then before. For that does good, that
is graciously known; and that is graciously known, that the Spirit seals upon
our fouls.

In Psalms and hymns] Dinnius.
Papists forbid people to sing Psalms, and permit only Quiristers to sing, lest
the music should be marred. But the Apostle bids every Saint to sing. And
Nicephori^s writes, Hist Eccles.l. 3. sap. 37.
that the Christians of his time, even as they traveled and journeyed, were
wont to sing Psalms. Tatianus also faith, That every age and order among the
Christians were Christan Philosophers: yea that the very virgins and maids, as
they sat at their work in wool, were wont to speak of Gods Word.

With grace in your heart] This is the best tune to any Psalm.

Verse 17. Do all in the Name] By the warrant of his word, and with an aim to
his glory.

Verse 18. Wives submit your selves] Inferiors are ordered before superiors,
to teach them to do duty before they expect it. Love descends, duty ascends.

In the Lord] Though the husbands will be crooked (so it be not wicked) the
wives will is not straight in Gods sight, if not pliable to his. Sed liberum
arbitrium, pro quo tantopcre contenditur, viri amiserunt, uxores arripuerunt,
faith an Author.

Verse 19. Husbands love your wives] He faith not, Rule ever them, Subdue them
if they will not submit, but love them, and so win them to your will: make
their yoke as easy as may be, for they stand on even ground with you, as
yoke-fellows, though they draw on the left side. Yet is she thy companion, and
the Wise of thy covenant, Mal. 2.14. He therefore that is free may frame his
choice to his mind: but he that has chosen, must frame his heart to his
choice.

Vxorem vir amato, marito pareat uxor:
Conjugis illa sui cor, caput ille suae.
And be not bitter against them] Nothing akin to Nabal, to those Caldeans, a
bitter and furious Nation, or to that star, Rev. 8.11. called worm wood, that
imbittered the third part of the waters. The Heathen when they sacrificed at
their marriage-feasts, Plut. praec. cojug.
used to cast the gall of the beast sacrificed out of doors.

Verse 20. In all things] Vultu saepe laeditur pietas. See the Note on Ephesians. 6.1.

Verse 21. Provoke not your children] See the Note on Ephesians. 6.4.

Lest they be discouraged] Dispirited, (...).
and through despondency grow desperate in their resolutions.

Verse 22. Not with eye-service] See the Note on Ephesians. 6.5, 6.

Fearing God] That has power to cast body and soul to hell: Fear him more then
you do your masters, that have power over the flesh only.

Verse 23. Do it heartily, as to the Lord] This is to make a virtue of
necessity, whiles in serving men, we serve the Lord Christ, going about our
earthly businesses with heavenly minds, with not only an habitual, but an
actual intention, as much as may be, of glorifying God in all.

Verse 24. Thereward of inheritance] And so be made of servants sons, whose it
is to inherit.

For ye serve the Lord Christ] Whiles godliness runs through your whole lives,
as the woof does through the web, and you seek to approve your selves to Christ
in all your actions and emploiments.

Verse 25. But he that does Wrong] Be it but by not doing right to poor
servants, which in those days were bond sl^ves. Note here (says an
Interpreter) the Apostles candor: he was not of the ^umour of Lawyers that
seldom speak much, but for great men, or when they may have great gifts, etc.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. That which is just and equall]
SEe they must, both to the well choosing, and the well using of their servants.

Ye also have a master] Eccl. 5 8. There be higher then they: and wherein they
deal proudly, God is above them, Exodus 18.11.

Verse 2. Continue in praier] Constant and instant in it, wait upon it, (...).
lay all aside for it (as the word signifies, Act. 6.2.) while prayer stands
still, the trade of godliness stands still.

And watch in the same] Against dullness of spirit, drowsinesse of body,
satanicall suggestions, secular distractions, etc.

With thanksgiving] Have your thanks ready, for you are sure to speed.

Verse 3. Withal, praying also for us] See the Note on Ephesians. 6.19 By the word a
door is opened into heaven.

Verse 4. As I ought to speak] As every sound is not music: so neither is
every pulpit-discourse a Sermon.

Verse 5. Walk in wisdom] Neither giving offense carelessly, nor taking offense
caus^esly.

Redeeming the time] Opportunities are headlong, and must be timously laid hold
on, or all is lost. See the Note on Ephesians. 5.16. It is said of Hooper the Martyr,
that he was spare of diet, sparer of words, and sparest of time. Act. and Mon.
fol. 1366. Ibid 1^74. Ibid 1457.
Latime^ rose usually at two of the clock in a morning to his study. Bradford
slept not commonly above four hours in the night: and in his bed, till sleep
came, his book went not out of his hand. He counted that hour not well spent,
wherein he did not some good, either with his pen, tongue or study. These
Worthies well weighed what a modern Writer has well observed, That they that
lose time are the greatest losers and wastfullest Prodigals. For of all other
possessions two may be had together, but two moments of time (much less two
opportunities of time) cannot be possessed together.

Verse 6. Seasoned with sale] Of mortification and discretion, even our common
communication must be so seasoned: as we powder most those meats that be most
apt to putrify, and as upon our uncomely parts, we put the more comeliness.

Verse 7. All my state shall Tychicus] See the Note on Ephesians. 6.21.

Verse 8. And comfort your hearts] See the Note on Ephesians. 6.22.

Verse 9. With Onesimus, a faith full] Once unprofitable, but now profitable,
faithful and beloved. Philosophia non (...) ^ed abscond^t. DE Elta and jejun
cap. 12.
Plato went thrice to Sicily to convert Dionysius, and lost his labor. Polemo
of a drunkard, by hearing Xenocrates, became a Philosopher. But Ambrose faith
well of him, Siresipuit a vino, f^it semper tamen temulentus sacrilegio, If he
repented of his drunkenness, yet he continued drunk with superstition. Paul's
convert proved better, a faithful preacher, and a beloved brother.

Verse 10 Marcus, sisters son to Barnabas] Hence Barnabas stood so stiff for
him against Paul his faithful fellow traveller, Act. 15.37. See the Note
there. Natural affection swaies over much with some good men, as it did with
Eli, and perhaps with Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.1, 3.

Verse 11. These only are my fellow-workers] S. Paul complains of fickle and
false friends, that forsook him in his distress, as Demas, 2 Timothy 4 16.
2 Timothy 4.0 that like Jobs friends proved miserable comforters, and as the
brooks of Tema, which in a moisture swell, in a drought fail: Or as the river
Novanus in Lombardy, that at every Mid-summer Solstice sw^lle^h and runs
over the banks, but in mid-winter is clean dry. Howbeit Marcus, Aristarchus,
Onesimus, Onesiphorus, and some few others stuck to him. A great mercy: Optimum
solatium, sodalitium.

Verse 12. Epaphras, who is one of you] See Chap. 1.7. and the Note there.

That ye may stand perfect] In his absence especially: for then the devil is
most busy, as he was with the people, when Moses was but a while in the Mount,
Exodus 32.

Verse 13. And them that are in Laodicea] A Minister must be like the Sun, that
shines not only within it is own o^b, but i^lightneth all round about it, and
within the reach of it.

Verse 14. And Demas] he will needs be one, and is, but without any title of
honor, as the rest. He began to be suspected: and he afterward proved an
utter apostate, and (as Dorotheus says) an Idol-Priest at Thessalonica.

Verse 15. Salute the brethren] Christianity is no enemy to courtesy. It
removes not, but rectifies it.

The brethren which are in Laodicea] There God had his remnant, there Christ
was Amen, the faithful and true witness, and there there were such, as by a
new creation of God, were begotten again, even among to car^^ss^ a multitude,
Revol. 3.14. There remain in Constantinople at this day above 20. Churches of
Christians: and in Thessalonica above 30. besides very many Churches abroad in
the province, etc. Breerw. Enquir Chytrae de statu Ecclesiar.
The whole country of Asia the less, wherein stood Colosse, Laodicea and
H^erapolis, is now under the power and superstition of the Turk: yet no doubt
God has his remnant there.

Verse 16. Read the Epistle from Laodicea] Other good books then must be read,
as well as the Scriptures; yet not idle pamphlets and love-toies. These should
be burnt, as those curious books were, Act. 19.

Verse 17. And say to Archippus] Archippus was a Pastor of the Laodicean
Church; So that before S. John's time in Pathmos they began to cool.

That thou fulfill it] By preaching the Word in season, out of season, etc. and
so doing the work of an Evangelist, fulfilling his Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.2, 5.
This to do, the people were to excite their Pastor: yet with all due respect
and reverence to his office, 1 Timothy 5.1. (...).
An Elder must not be lashed or jerked with the scourge of the tongue, as a
puny, but entreated as a father.

Verse 18. Remember my bonds] To pray for me, and minister to me, etc. This he
here inserteth as his last charge, that they may the better remember and
practice it. Something we should leave with those we love that may stick by
them, and stand them in stead when we are gone, or have done with them.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Paul and Silvanus]
OTherwise called Silas, Act. 15.40. as Iehoshuah the High Priest is called
Ieshua, Ezra 3.2. and 5.2. it is not therefore unlawful to abbreviate names.

Unto the Church of the Thessalonians] Thessalonica, the chief City of
Macedonia, is now known by the name of Saloniks, and is under the Turk. For the
plantation of a Church here, see Act. 17.1, 2, 3, etc. Breer. Enquir. P 68.
together with the Notes there. There are 30 Churches of Christians in it at
this day, and but three of Mahometans.

Verse 2. We give thanks to God] Thus he begins most of his Epistles with
thanksgiving: This being held to be the first that ever he wrote to any of the
Churches, The beginning of his strength (as Reuben Jacobs firstborn) and the
excellency of dignity, Genesis 49.3.

Verse 3. Remembering without ceasing] A good memory is required to assiduity in
prayer. All the faculties are exercised, and the whole man hard wrought.

Your work of faith] We believe not without much conflict, When faith goes
about to lay hold on Christ, the devil raps her on the singers, and would beat
her often. Hence the believer has such ado to believe.

And labor of love] Every man's love is as his labor is, Heb. 6.10. Therefore
also love and labor are of one root in latin, because love is diligent and
laborious,

And patience of hope] To wait the accomplishment of Gods promises. Thus every
Christian virtue has it is proper distinctive character, to difference it from
that which is counterfeit.

In the sight of God] True grace will stand to Gods trial, which false grace
cannot abide: as Alchy my gold cannot pass the seventh sire: nor does it
comfort the heart, as true gold does.

Verse 4. Knowing, brethren, beloved of God] Knowing it by the judgment of
charity, not of infallibility. He that believes has the witness in himself,
1 Job. 5.10. But the white stone, the new name, and the hid man of the heart
are not certainly known to any, but to such as have them. Howbeit, holy men in
some degree are known one to another, to make the communion of Saints the
sweeter. Strong confidence one may have of another salvation: but no certainty
either of sense or of science, much less of faith, or immediate revelation.

Verse 5. For our Gospel came not] Hence he collects their election according
to Act. 13.48. The Ministry sent to a place is an argument of some elect
there. A husbandman would not send his servant with his sickle to reap thistles
and nettles only.

As ye know what manner] The Church is endued with the spirit of discerning:
and Ministers should approve themselves spiritual in word and conversation. 1
Cor. 2^, 10.


Verse 6. Followers of us, and of the Lord] The Apostles walked in Christ, Col.
2.6. as Christ, 1 Job. 2.6. their lives were a Commentary upon his life, 1 Pet.
2.9.

Received the word in much affliction] Opposition is (as Calvin wrote to the
French King) Evangely genius, the black Angel that dogs the Gospel at the
heels. To preach (says Luther) is nothing else, but to get the ill will of the
world.

With joy of the boly Ghost] Which bore them up above all persecutions, as
blown bladders bear a man up aloft all waters.

Verse 7. So that ye were ensamples] Gr. Types, moulds, paterns of piety to
those that were in Christ long before them. (...).
A brave commendation, and not every man's happiness. Affliction to some is
like a growing ague, or as a warm rain to garden-herbs, that makes them shoot
up sensibly in one night.

Verse 8. For from you sounded out] A vobis diss^matus est sermo. Remigius
commenting upon this place, tells us that the Apostle here speaks some what
improperly, by saying Diffamatus for Divulgatus. This man knew not (belike)
that S. Paul wrote in Greek, and not in Latin: So great was the ignorance of
that ninth age, The Greek word imports that from the Thessalonians the word
of the Lord sounded out as a trumpet, (...).
and resounded as an Echo. A vobis ebuccinatus est ser^^ Domini: So Vatablus
rendereth it.

So that we need not to speak] A good people may ease their Pastor of a great
deal of pains.

Verse 9. What manner of entering in, etc.] The Pastor has his part and share
in the peoples commendation. If they grow famous, he cannot lie obscured.

Ye turned to God from idols] They gave not the half turn only from East to
South, but the whole turn from the East to West, from idols to God. Ephraim
shall say, Hos. 6.4.
What have I to do any more with idols, Hos. 148? Those Balaam blocks, those
mawmets and monuments of idolatry, those images of jealousy? Ephraim is now no
longer as a cake half baked, as a speckled bird, Jet. 12.9.
etc. Better be a Papist then an Atheist, a gross idolater then a profligate
professor, a carnal Gospeller.

Verse 10. And to wait for his Son] This is pinned as a badge to the sleeve of
every true believer, that he looks and longs for Christ his coming to
judgment. The old character of Gods people was, they waited for the
consolation of Israel, Christ's first coming: So is it now, the earnest
expectation of his second coming.

Which delivered us from the wrath to come] This is the ^^^mon, the notation of
his name Jesus, a Savior. Salvation properly betokens the privative part of
man's happiness, but includes the positive too. King Alphonsus, when he saw a
poor man pulling of his beast out of a ditch, he put to his hand to help him.
Is it not more that Christ should stoop so low as to help us (who were in worse
condition then the beasts that perish) out of the ditch of destruction? The
devil is said to be (...), a roaring Lion: but our comfort is, That the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah is (...), h^ that delivers us from the wrath to come.

The wrath to come] There is a present wrath that men suffer; and who knows
the power of this wrath? Even according to a man's sear, so is Gods wrath, Psalm
90.11. Let a man fear never so much, he shall be sure to feel more, when Gods
wrath falls upon him. A timorous man can fancy vast and terrible fears; fire,
sword, racks, scalding lead, boiling pitch, running b^ll-mettle. Yet all this
is but as a painted fire to the wrath to come, that eternity of extremity,
which graceless persons shall never be able to avoid, or to abide.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Our entrance in unto you]
THe word preached in any place does usually work best at first. After a while
men become like unto birds in a bell-free, that can well enough bear the noise
of the bells, and not be frighted.

Verse 2. But even after that, etc.] From this to the 13. ^orse. Ministers may
as in a mirror see how they ought to behave themselves in the house of God.

We were bold in our God] The Church as the palm tree, spreads and springs
up the more it is oppressed; as the bottle or bladder that may be dipped, D^ris
u^ ilex ^onsa b^peuni^^^.
not drowned: as the Oak that sprou^s out the thicker from the maims and wounds
it receives. This daunted Diocletian and made him lay down the Empire in
discontent. This caused Julian the Apostate to leave off force, and use fraud
to draw men from the truth.

Verse 3. Was not of deceit, nor, etc.] Neither for profit, pleasure, not
preferment (the worldlings Trinity.) A Minister, as he should have nothing to
lose, so he should have nothing to get: but should be above all price or sale.
He has too impotent a spirit, whose services, like the dial, must be set only
by the Sun of selfreipects. True grace is of a most masculine, disingaged,
noble nature, and remits nothing of its diligence either for fear of a frown,
or hope of a reward.

Verse 4. But as we were allowed] Enabled and counted faithful, 1 Timothy 1.12.

Not as pleasing men] See the Note on Gal. 1.10. Men, be they pleased or
displeased, God must not be displeased.

But God] Who looks upon displeasing service, as a double dishonor.

Which tries our hearts] And so knows our aims, Drus. Apophth.
Quicquid igitur agas, propter Deum agas. Propter te Domine, propter te, as he
cried. It stands me upon, says one, to see that though my work be but mean,
yet it may be clean; though not fine, yet not foul, soiled and slubbered with
the slur of a rotten heart: since it is God I have to deal with.

Verse 5. For neither at any time] Sinisterity of ends is here opposed to
sincerity in Gods work: And flattery, covetousness, ambition, declared to be
the fountains of insincerity.

Nor a cloak of covetousnesse] This sin goes usually cloked with the name and
pretense of good husbandry. The ordinary language of the world is, He is a man
somewhat with the hardest, a little with the nearest, a little too much for the
world, but yet a mavelous honest, a wondrous good man. Covetousness is
seldom without fained words, 2 Pet. 2.3. to hide it from others without, or
subtle thoughts and evasions to blinde-fold the conscience within.

God is witnesse] That he flattered not, he reports himself to them, that he
coveted not, he appeals to God, who is not mocked with masks or specious
pretenses.

Verse 6. Nor of men sought we glory] Theologus gloriae dicit malum bonum and
bonum malum (says Luther) Theologus crucis dicit id quod res est. A
vainglorious preacher calls good evil, and evil good, etc.

Verse 7. But we were gentle] This is the way to win, for man is a cursed,
crabbed creature, and may be led, but not easily dragged to duty. Soft words and
hard arguments soonest prevail with him.

Verse 8. (...). Cup^dine rap^i.
So being affectionately desirous] Homing and hankering after you.

But also our own souls] Greater love then this has no man: And such a love
ought there to be in every Pastor toward his people. Love is liberal, charity
no churl.

Verse 9. Our labour] Even to lassitude.

And travell] So to spare them, he spared not himself.

Verse 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also] Happy is that man that can be
acquitted by himself in private, in public by others, in both by God: standers
by may see more.

How holily, and justly, and unblameably] Here he practiced his own precept,
Tit. 2.12. And herein lies the difference between Divinity and other sciences,
that it is not enough to prescribe it, but you must practice it, as lessons of
music, and as a copy must not be read only, but acted also.

Verse 11. As a father] Before, as a mother, verse. 7. a nurse not mercenary,
but natural, with greatest tenderness and indulgence. Here he tempers his
mother-like meekness with the gravity and authority of a father. Ministers
must turn themselves, as it were, into all shapes and fashions, both of speech
and spirit, to win people to God.

Ver. 12. Walk worthy of God] Whose livery we wear, whose image we bear, whose
kingdom we are called unto, etc. Those that stood with the Lamb, Rev. 14. had
his fathers name on their foreheads. Our outstraies reflect upon God, who will
require and requite.

Verse 13. Not as the word of men] Whom yet he makes use of to cast down
Satan's strongholds, as he made use of little David against Goliath, and of the
frogs and flies against Pharaoh.

As the word of God] With reverence and diligence, with all good affection and
attention. When Samuel knew it was God that called him (and not Eli) he had no
more mind to sleep. We are all here present before God, says Cornelius, Act.
10.33. And God is in you of a truth, says the Corinthian convert, 1 Cor. 4.25.

Verse 14. Of your own countrey-men] Malice against the truth breaks all bonds
of nature or amity. Moah was irked, because of Israel, or vexed at them, Numb.
22.3, 4. though they were allied to Israel, who passed by them peaceably, and,
by the slaughter of the Amorites, freed them from evil neighbors, which had
taken away part of their Country, etc. The English Papists in four years
sacrificed 800 of their innocent Countrymen in Q. Ma^^es days.

Verse 15. Who both killed the Lord] And are therefore banished out of the
world, as it were, by a common consent of Nations, for their unexpiable guilt.
Even in Jerusalem there be hardly to be found a hundred households of them. In
Cyprus it is present death for any Jew to ^et his foot upon that Island.
Bre^^^ood. Enqu^^.
In Thessalonica and Constantinople there are diverse thousands of them, but at
every Easter they are in danger of death, Dio. Cass. Biddulph.
if they but stir out of doors, because at that time they crucified our
Savior. The Turks themselves so hate the Jews for crucifying Christ, that they
use to say in detestation of a thing, I would I might die a Jew. Neither will
they permit a Jew to turn Turk, unless he be first baptized.

And their own Prophets] Whose slaughter (though long since done) is in recent
remembrance with God, and is reckoned and registered together with the death of
Christ himself.

And have persecuted us] They still curse the Christians in their daily
prayers, which they close up with a Maledic Domine Nazaraeis. Lopez at Tiburn
affirmed, Camde^s Eliz.
That he had loved Q. Elizabeth as he loved Jesus Christ. Which from a Jew was
heard not without laughter.

And they please not God] Yet they challenged the title of Gods Church: as the
Papists will needs be the only Catholics.

And are contrary to all men] Being herein rather Ismaelites, then Israelites,
Genesis 16.12. The Tro^t delights to swim against stream. The herb Alexander will
agree with no other herb, but it self. Such Antipodes are our Jesuits, so
unsufferably ambitious and impudent, that neither then doctrine, not their
conversation pleases those of their own religion.

Verse 16. To fill up their sin alway] Bounds are set to sin by the divine
decree, Zech. 5.7. Wickedness is compared to a woman pressed in an Ephah: when
the measure is full, the business is finished. See the Note on Mat. 23.32.

Verse 17. For a short time] Or, In a short time, suddenly. See Act. 17 9, 10.

Being taken away] Or separated, (...).
as orphans are from their dear parents, or parents from their deceased
children. The separation of friends is so grievous, that death it self is
styled no other then a departure.

Verse 18. But Satan hindered us] He still does his utmost to hinder the
communion of Saints, and to keep them asunder. He knows two are better then
one: and therefore he stirred up the primitive persecutours to banish the
Christians, and to confine them to isles and mines, Cyprian. epist.
where they could not have access one to another.

Verse 19. For what is our hope, etc] A very lively and lofty expression: such
as the Apostle ordinarily uses in speaking of heavenly glory. Nos Christus,
nec coelum patitur hyperbolen: A man can hardly hyperbolize in speaking of
heaven.

Verse 29. For ye are our glory and joy] Let no man therefore envy us these
temporary good things, a competent maintenance: there are better things abide
us above.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. No longer forbear]
OR, (...).
Stand under our burden of vehement desire after you. See a like expression,
Isa 42.14. As a traveling woman bites in her pain as long as she is able, and
at length cries out aloud; so God is patient till he can hold no longer, etc.

We thought it good] Publica privatis anteferenda bonis. A public spirit is a
precious spirit.

Verse 2. To establish you] Who happily are somewhat unsettled by the troubles
that befell me amongst you. But as young trees shaken, root the better, so
should you. Capite in an epistle to the brethren at Basil, writes thus,
Pauciores vobiscum perimuntur, quod ita Domino visum est ut stabiliantur seu
lenibus pluvijs, a^ sem^nt^^ m^llioribus, plantulae in arbores maximas
proditurae.

Verse 3. (...) Prove.
That no man should be moved] Gr. Flattered, as a dog slattereth, by moving his
tail, q.d. The devil, by flattering you, with promise of more ease by a
contrary course, will but do as a dirty dog, defile you with sawning.

That we are appointed thereunto] Viz. By Gods decree, whereunto if damned
ghosts must subscribe, Romans 9.19, 20. how much more should Gods elect, 1 Pet. 1
6? It is but a delicacy to dream of heaven to be had, without much hardship.

Verse 4. We told you before] Darts foreseen are dintlesse: premonition is the
best premunition. Troubles foretold come never a whit the sooner, but far the
easier: whereas coming unexpected, they find weak minds secure, make them
miserable, leave them desperate.

Verse 5. To know your faith] That is, Your perseverance, and increase in
faith. That which the devil mainly endeavors is, to hind^r and unsettle our
faith, as he dealt by Eve, and Peter, Luke 22.31, 32. to batter this buckler,
Ephesians. 6.16. for then he knows he may do what he will with us. Omnia perdidit,
Seneca
qui fidem amisit.

Lest^^y some means the tempter] Who feels our pulses, and fits his assaults
accordingly. See the Note on Mat. 4.3.

And our labor be in vain] So it proves many times by Satan's malice. Other
laborers can find their work as they left it, not so Ministers: the devil
comes and marreth all.

Verse 6. And brought us good tidings] Here the devil was disappointed. He had
been nibling, but could not fasten: this matter was not malleable. God stints
him, and staves him often, when he would worry his poor lambs, turning all to
their eternal good.

Verse 7. We were comforted] Nothing so cheareth up the heart of a godly
Minister, as his peoples tractablenesse. If this be wanting, his very heart is
broke, though they be otherwise never so kind and courteous to him.

Verse 8. For now we live] A joylesse life is a lifelesse life. An
unsuccessefull Pastor has little or no joy of his life. Thus shall ye say to
him that lives, 1 Samuel 25.6. that is, that lives at hearts-ease. All the
days of the aff^^cted are evil, Prove. 15.15. As good be out of the world (say
they) as have no joy of the world. Now, I have no greater joy, faith S. John,
then to hear that my children walk in the truth, 3 John 4 This revived his good
old heart, and made it dance Levalto's in his bosom.

Verse 9. For what thanks, etc.] q.d. No sufficient thanks. Spiritual joy
vents it self by an infinite desire of praising God, whereby it seeks to fill
up the distance betwixt God and the good soul. In our thanksgivings let there
be modus sine modo, as B^^nard has it. Let us still deliberate what more to
do, as David, Psalm. 1 16.12.

Verse 10. Night and day praying exceedingly] Prayer must be constant and
instant, with utmost assiduity and intention of affection, Luke 18.1. See the
Note there.

Verse 11. Now God himself, etc.] At the very mentioning of prayer, he falls a
praying. Good affections soon kindle in a gracious heart.

Direct our way unto you] A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs
his steps, Prove. 16.9. Let God be our Pilot, if we mean to make a good voyage
of it. Let our hand be on the stern, our eye on the star: let our course, as
the mariners, be guided by the heavens.

Verse 12. To increase and abound] By doubling his word, be signifies a double
portion of Gods grace, which he wishes unto them: We are sure to receive as
much good from God by prayer, as we can bring faith to bear away. Hitherto ye
have asked me nothing: Ask, faith Christ, Ask enough, Open your mouth wide, etc.

Verse 13. To the end he may stablish] Love is of a ferruminating, stablishing
property. That grace will not hang together, nor hold out that is severed from
charity.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. How ye ought to walk]
EVery good man is a great Peripatetick, walks much. Christ also walks: so does
the devil, apostates, heretics, worldlings; but with this difference. Christ
walks in the middle, Rev. 1.13. Revel. (...)
the devil to and fro, up and down, Job 1.7. his motion is circular, and
therefore fraudulent, 1 Pet. 5.8. Apostates run retrograde, they stumble at the
cross and fall backward. Heretics run out on the right hand, worldlings on
the left, Jam. 1.14 Hypocrites turn aside unto their crooked ways, Psalm.
125.5. They follow Christ, as Samson did his Parents, till he came by the
carease: or as a dog does his master, till he meets with a carrion. The true
Christian only walks so as to please God: his eyes look right on, his eyelids
look strait before him, Prove. 4.25. He goes not back with Hezekiah's Sun, nor
stands at a stay, as Joshuah's but rejoices as a strong man to run his race,
as David's Sun, Ps. 19 5. Yea he shines more and more unto the perfect day, as
Solomon's, Prove 4.18.

Verse 2. For ye know what, etc.] It is expected therefore that ye do them:
else the more heinous will be your sin, and the more heavy your reckoning, Isa.
59.11, 12. What brought such roarings and trouble on them, and that when
salvation was looked for? Our iniquities testify to our faces, and we know
them.

Verse 3. For this is the will of God] This is his prescribing will, which we
must obey: as we must submit to his disposing will, the will of his providence,
and grow acquainted with his approving will, the will of his gracious
acceptance, Mat. 18.14. Joh. 1.23.

Verse 4. To possess his vessel] That is, his body, wherein the soul is, To^a
i^ toto, and tota in qualibet part. If any ask, why so glorious a soul should
be in this corruptible body? Besides Gods will, and for the order of the
universe, Lib. 2. did. 1.
Lombard gives this reason, That by the conjunction of the soul with the body
(so far its inferior) man might learn a possibility of the union of man with
God in glory, notwithstanding the vast distance of nature and excellence, the
infiniteness of both in God, the sinitenesse of both in man.

In sanctification and honour] Chastity is a man's honor: incontinency se^s on
an indeleble blot, Prove. 6.33. Cast u^ quasi (...) (...) (...) ab (...)
venerat^o.


Verse 5. Not in the lust of concupiscence] Or, In the disease of lust, that
dishonorable disease, Romans 1.26. that wastes not only the substance of the
body, but the honesty and the honor of it.

Verse 6. That no man go beyond or defraud] Or, Oppress or theat. Thest by
unjust getting is either (...) or (...), by violence or cunning contrivance.

The Lord is the avenger] Though happily they lie out of the walk of humane
justice, as not coming under man's cognizance.

Verse 7. For God has not called us] See the Note on Ephesians. 4.1. It is a true
rule given by the Ancients, Confusiones libidinum sunt signa cujuslibet sectae.
Simon Magus had his Helena, Carp^^rates his Marcellina, Apelles his Philumena,
Montanus his Priscilla and Maximilla, etc.

Verse 8. He therefore that despiseth] That thinks it a trick of youth to
fornicate, and a trick of wit to overreach or oppress: that holds it a matter
of nothing to set light by the former lessons, ^o shall find that he has to
deal with God, and not man in this business; and that it is by the Spirit of
God that we have spoken unto him, who will punish their contempt of his
counsels.

Verse 9. Ye need not that I write] Since the divine nature, whereof ye are
partakes, prompteth you to it, as common nature does brethren to love one
another. The very name of a brother is potent enough to draw affections.

Are taught of God] Therefore have no such need to be taught by men, as those
that are yet strangers to the life of God, Quan^^ Goris^us mag^ster, quam cito
discitur, quod docetur? says Augustine. Nescit ^arda molimina, gratia Spiritus
sancts, faith Ambrose. All Christ's scholars are nimble and notable prosi^^en^s.

Verse 10. Toward all the brethren] This universality of their love showed the
sincerity of it, and that it was for the truths sake, 2 John 2. One or more
good men may be favored of those that love no good man, as Jeremy was of
Nebuzaradan, because he foretold the victory.

Verse 11. (...).
Study to be quiet] Gr. Be ambitious of peace: as earnest and eager after it,
as the Ambitionist is after honor.

And to do your own businesse] Not oaring in other men's boats, nor meddling in
other men's bishoprics, 1 Pet. 4.15. Tu fuge, ceu pestem (...)

With your own b^^nds] Or else with your own brains, as students, which is by
far the harder labor.

Verse 12. La^k of nothing] He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand,
but the hand of the diligent makes rich, Pro. 10 4. Iabal that dwelt in tents
and tended h^ards, had Iubal to his brother, the father of music. Iabal and
Iubal, industry and plenty not without sweet content dwell together.

Verse 15. But I would not have, etc.] Ignorance is the mother of mistake, and
of caussesse trouble, of error and of terror: as the Roman soldiers were
once mu^n affrighted at the sight of the Moons ^clipse, till the General had
undeceived by a discourse of the natural cause thereof.

That ye sorrow not] Non est lugendus qui moritur, sed desideranaus, faith
Tertullian. Abraham mourned moderately for (...) decased wife, Genesis 23.2. as is
imported by a small caph in the word ^ocothab, to weep. So did David for the
child born in adultery, though for Absalom he exceeded. It is one of the dues
of the dead to be lamented at their funerals. But Christians must know a
measure, and so water their plants, (...) (...)
as that they drown them not.

Even as others, which have no hope] Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille quem gehenna
suscipit, qu^m Tartarus devorat, etc. Let that dead man be lamented whom hell
harbors, whom the devil d^vou^^th, etc. But let us (whose departed ^ouls
Angels accompany, Christ imbosometh, and all the Court of heaven comes forth to
welcome) account mortality a mercy; and be grieved that we are so long detained
here from the company of our Christ, faith Hierom.

Verse 14. Sleep in Iesus] Dead in Christ. The union then is not dissolved by
death. But as by sleep the body is refreshed: so by death it is refined. Let
our care be to cleave clo^e to Christ in the instant of death: so shall he be
to us both in life and death, advantage.

Verse 15. By the word of the Lord] Or, In the word, etc. in the self-same
words that the Lord used to me, probably, when I was rapt up, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4.
and heard wordlesse words.

Shall not prevent them] They shall rise e^e we shall be rap^, and as they have
been before us in death, so shall they be in glory: Now priority is a
privilege.

Verse 16. With a shout] Ingenti Angelorum jubilo, (...).
and acclamatione, says Arctius. With a huge applause and acclamation of
angels, such as is that of Mariners, (...).
when near the haven (Italiam Italiam laeto clamore salutans) or that of
soldiers, when to join battle with the enemy.

And with the trump of God] To require the law, in manner as it was given.
Mount Sinai only was then on a slame, but now the whole world, etc. Then God
came with ten thousands of his Saints: but now thousand thousands shall
minister to him, and ten thousand thousands shall stand before him.

Verse 17. Then we which are alive] He speaks thus of himself as alive at
Christ's coming, because we should daily expect it, and even hasten to it.

Shall be caught up together] This is that mystery mentioned, 1 Cor. 15.51. and
not till now made known to the world. See the Note there.

In the clouds] As Christ also ascended, Acts 1. These be the wagons and
charriots that Christ will send for us, as Joseph set his fathers family down
to Egypt.

And so shall we ever be, etc.] O^ blessed hour! O thrice happy union! Nothing
ever came so near it, as the meeting of Jacob and Joseph, or of those two
cousins Mary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.

Verse 18 Wherefore comfort, etc.] Scripture-comforts come home to the heart,
so do not philosophical. Nescio quomodo (says Cicero (...)) medicina morbo
est imbecillior. M^^ch Adam. (...)
And albeit it is m^rvellous sweet to meditate (as Mr Knox found it on his
deathbed, so that he would have risen and gone into the pulpit to tell others
what be had felt in his soul) yet there is a special force of strong
consolation in Christian communication, which the Lord usually wa^^reth with
the dews of divine blessing.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. But of the times and the seasons]
When Christ shall come to judgment, this is to be reckoned inter arcana
imperij. See the Note on Mat. 24 36. The times and the seasons God has put in
his own power, Act. 1.7 This is a key that he keeps under his own girdle.

Verse 2. The day of the Lord] That day, by a speciality, Luke 21.34. that
great day, Revel. 6.17. that day of the declaration of Gods just judgment.
Romans 2.5, 16. that day of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. of God, 2 Pet. 3.13. where in
he will show himself to be God of Gods, and Lord of Lords.

As a thief in the night] Who gives no warning, Mat. 24.43. See the Note there.

Verse 3. For when they shall say] Security is the certain usher of
destruction, as in Benhadads army, and Pompeys, before the Pharsalian field.
Some of them contended for the Priesthood, which was Caesar's office, others
disposed of the Consulships and offices in Rome, as if all were already their
own: Pompey ^^mself being so wretchedly wre^chlesse, that he never considered
into what place he were best to retire, if he lost the day.

Then shall sudden destruction] As Philosophers say, that before a snow the
weather will be warmish: when the wind lies, the great rain falls; and the air
is most quiet, when suddenly there will be an earthquake.

Verse 4. Should overtake you as a thief] Though it come upon you as a thief in
a time uncertain. Free you are from the destruction of that day, though not
altogether free from the distraction of it, till somewhat recollected you
remember that now your redemption draws nigh. Hence the Saints love Christ's
appearing, 2 Timothy 4 8. Look for it with stretcht-out necks, and long after it,
Rev. 22.20.

Verse 5. We are not of the night, etc.] Qu. Curtius.
Alexander willed that the Grecians and Barbarians should no longer be
distinguished by their garments, but by their manners: so should the children
of light, and of darkness.

Verse 6. As do others] What wonder that the Grecians live loosly, faith
Chrysostom, but that Christians do so, this is worse, yea intolerable.

But let us watch and be sober] We must not be like Agrippa's dormouse that
would not awake till cast into boiling lead, Comment. i^ Di^^cor.
or Matthiolus his asses fed with hemlock, that lie for dead, and are half
hileded, ere they can be arroused. But rather we should resemble Aristotle and
others, who were wont to sleep with brazen balls in their hands, which falling
on vessels, purposely set on their beds sides, the noise did dissuade
immoderate sleep.

Verse 7. Are drunk in the night] But now, alas, drunkenness is become a
noonday devil. Drunk. ^up by M. Harris.
Once Peter's argument (says a reverend Divine) was more then probable, These
men are not drunk, for it is but the third hour of the day. Now men are grown
such husbands as that, by that time, they will return their stocks, and have
their brains crowing before day.

Verse 8. Be sober] Drunkenness misbeseemeth any man, but especially a Saint:
for it robs him of himself, and lays a beast in his room.

Putting on the breast plate of faith and love] Faith is the forepart of this
breast plate, whereby we embrace Christ, and love the hinder part thereof,
whereby we imbosome the Saints.

Verse 9. God has not appointed us] As the has all drunken beasts, 1 Cor.
6.10. Yea all those dry drunkards, Isa. 28.1. that will not a wake (though
never so much warned) out of the snare of the devil, etc. 2 Timothy 2.25.

Verse 10. Whether we wake or sleep] That is, live or die, our souls cannot
miscarry: because Christ will have out the full price of his sons death. See
Romans 14.8. with the Note there.

Verse 11. Comfort your selves together] This he subjoyns as a singular help to
the practice of the former points of duty. Socialt charity whets on to love and
good works, as iron whets iron, as one billet kindles another, etc.

Verse 12. And we beseech you, brethren] Do not so exhort and edify one
another, as to think that now the public Ministry is no further useful or
needful. Let your Pastors have all due respect, be your gifts never so
eminent.

Verse 13. (...) Apud Grae^os majori in honre habebantur Philosophi quam
ortores. ^llienim recte vi^ endi, etc. Lact^ntiu^.
Very highly] Gr. More then exceedingly: Turks and Papists shall else condemn
us, who honor every hedge-priest of theirs, and have them in singular esteem,
above their merits. The Grecians gave great respect to their Philosophers above
their Orators, because these taught them how to speak, but those how to live
well.

For their works sake] Which is high and honorable, divine and heavenly, a
worthy work, 1 Timothy 3.1. Such as both in the preparation to it. and execution
of it draws them to God, keeps them with God, and to be ever mindful of
God, and no less active for God, Ephesians 4 12. by gathering together the Saints,
and building up the body of Christ.

And be at peace among your selves] So shall your Pastor have the better life,
and follow his work with more content and comfort.

Verse 14. Warn them that are unruly] Cry Cave miser, stop them in their cursed
carier, tell them that hell gapes for them, and is but a little before them:
snatch them out of the fire, saving them with fear, Jude v.: 3.

Comfort the f^^ble-minded] The d^spiriced, faint-hearted, sick and sinking
under the sense of sin and fear of wrath. A Christian should have feeding lips,
and a healing tongue. The contrary whereunto is deeply detested, Ezekiel. 34 4.

Support the weak] (...).
Set to your shoulder and shore them up. Deal not as the herd of Deer do with
the wounded Deer, forsake and push it away from them.

Verse 15. See that none render] Nothing is so natural to us; and Aristotle
commends revenge as a piece of manhood, when indeed it is doghood rather.
Excellently Lactantius, Non est minus malireferre injuriam, quam infer. It is
as bad to recompense Wrong as to do wrong. See the Notes on Mat. 5.44. and Romans
12.17.

But ever follow that which is good] Not to do good, is to do evil, not to
save a man, when we can, is to destroy him, Mar. 3.4. See the Note there.

Verse 16. Rejoice evermore] A duty much pressed in both testaments, but little
practiced by many of Gods Whinnels, who are ever puling and putting singer in
the eye, through one discontent or another. The wicked may not rejoice. Hos.
9.1. the Saints must, Psalm. 32.11. and 33.1. and that continually, striving to
an habitual cheerfulness, which is when faith heals the conscience, and grace
husheth the affections, and composeth all within; what should ail such a man,
not to be perpetually merry?

Verse 17. Pray without ceasing] While prayer stands still, the trade of
godliness stands still. All good comes into the soul by this door, all true
treasure by this merchants-ship. Paul begins, continues and concludes his
Epistle^ with prayer. Nehemiah sends up ejaculations ever and anon. Of Carolus
Magnus it was spoken, Carolus plus cum Deo quam cum hominibus loquitur, that he
spoke more with God then with men. Our hearts should be evermore in a praying
temper: and our set times of prayer should not be neglected, though we be not
always alike prepared or disposed thereunto. Disuse breeds lothnesse to do it
another time.

Verse 18. In every thing give thanks] If God give prosperity, praise him, and
it shall be increased, faith Augustine. If adversity, praise him, and it shall
be removed, or at least sanct^fied. Job blessed God as well for taking as
giving, Job 1. He knew that God afflicted him, Non ad exitium, sed ad
exercitium, to refine him, not to ruin him. But this is Christianorum propria
virtus. says Hierome, a practice proper to Christians, to be heartily
thankful for crosses. Basil spends all his Sermon upon this Text, in this
theme. Every bird can sing in a Summers-day, and it is easy to swim in a warm
bath: but in deep affliction to cover Gods altar not with our tears, as Mal,
2.13. but with the calves of out lips, Hos. 14.2. this none can do but the
truly religious.

Verse 19. Quench not the spirit] In his motions or graces. See he Canon for
the fire on the altar, and observe it, Lev. 6.12,13. Confess here as Hezekiah
did. 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7. And take the Apostles counsel, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up this
fire on the hearth of our hearts: let the Priests lips blow it up into a flame,
despise not prophesying, etc. It may be quenched either by the withdrawing of
fuel (neglect of ordinances) or by casting on water (falling into foul
courses.)

Verse 20. Despise not] i.e. Highly honor, and preciously esteem, as an
honourary given by Christ to his church at his wonderful derfull ascension.
Ps. 51.17. Ephesians. 4.8, 11.

Prophecying] That is preaching, 1 Cor. 14.3. so called, because they took
their texts out of some of the Prophets.

Verse 21. (...) Epicbarm.
Prove all things] Tak^ nothing that you hear upon trust, but bring all to the
Test, Isa. 8.20. To the law, i.e. the old Testament, and to the testimony, i.e.
the new, which is by S. John often called the Testimony.

Hold fast that which is good] Orthodox, current, agreeable to, and approvable
by the Scriptures: especially that which God has made good and sweet to your
own fouls. Hold fast that thou have, etc. Have thou found honey? eat it, Prove.
25.16. Go on to heaven eating of it, as Samson did of his honey comb.

Verse 22. Abstain from all, etc.] Whatsoever is heterodox, unsound and
unsavory, shun it as you would do a serpent in your way, or poison in your
meats. Theodosius tare the Arrians arguments presented to him in writing,
because he found them repugnant to the Scriptures. And Augustine retracteth
even ironies only, because they had the appearance of lying. God commanded the
Jews to abstain from swines flesh; they would not so much as name it, Etias
Tibisbit.
but in their common talk would call a sow, dabhar, Achar, another thing.

Verse 23. That your whole spirit, soul, body.] The Temple consisted of three
parts, so does man; the body is as the outer court, the soul as the holy place,
the Spirit as the most holy. So the world is three stories high, the earth, the
visible heaven, and the third heaven.

Verse 24. Faithful is be, etc.] Prayer must be founded upon the faithfulness
of God in fulfilling his promises. Hereby faith will be strengthened, and
affection excited. Prayer is a putting the promises in suit.

Verse 25. Brethren, pray for us] The best may need the prayers of the meanest.
God will have us beholden herein one to another, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22. How earnest
is that great Apostle in begging prayers, Act. and Mon. sol 1565.
Rom 15.30. Pray for me, I say, Pray for me, I say (quoth father Latimer) for I
am sometimes so fearful that I could creep into a mouse-hole, sometimes God
does visit me again with his comfort, etc.

Verse 26. With an holy kisse] Our very civilities should savor of sactity,
and our common conversation relish of religion, Zech. 14.20, 21.

Verse 27. That this Epistle be read] It is a mattes of greatest necessity, and
importance that the holy Scriptures be daily and duly read by all. A sad
complaint it is, which reverend Moulin makes of his Contrymen the Prench
Protestants; Moulins Theophilus, p. 27 8.
Whiles they burned us, says he, for reading the Scriptures, we burnt with
zeal to be reading of them ^ now with our liberty is bred^ls^ negligence and
diseste^m of Gods word. And is it not so with us at this day? Our Ancestors in
Hen. 8 cline would sit-up all night in reading and hearing, and were at great
charges. Some gave five marks for a Bible, that we may have for five shillings,
etc. Act. and Mon. fol. 750.


Verse 28. Amen] Amen is, 1. Assenting. 2. Assevering. 3. Assuring.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the second Epistle of S Paul to the
THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. In God our Father, and the Lord etc.]
AS God is in his people of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. So are they in God: and as
Christ is at Gods right hand, so is the Church at Christ's right hand, Psalm
45.9. Yea they are in him, and part of him, etc.

Verse 2. Grace be to you, etc.] See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.2.

And the Lord Jesus Christ] Who is both the fountain, Ioh. 1.16, and the
conduit, Ioh. 1.17. For of his fullness we have all received grace for grace.
Grace, that is, Gods favor and reconciliation: For grace, that is, for the
favor and love, that God the Father bare unto his son, Ephesians. 1.6.

Verse 3. We are bound to thank God] Duty is a debt, and a good heart is not
well till it have discharged it. As he that has somewhat lying on his stomach
cannot be at ease till he has got it up: so neither must we, till disburdened
in sounding forth Gods praises for the good he has bestowed on us, or on
others for our use. This says Luther, is sancta crapula: And it can be no hurt
to have our hearts thus overcharged.

Verse 4 For your patience and faith] Faith patienteth the heart, by putting
the head into heaven aforehand, and giving a man a glimpse of future glory.
Faith drinks to a suffering Saint in a cup of Nepenthes, and says, Be of good
courage, and of good carriage under the Cross. Flebile principium melior
fortuna sequetur. The right hand of the Lord can mend all.

Verse 5. Which is a manifest token] The saints sufferings hero are an ocular
demonstration of a future judgment, (...) Indig^^atio.
wherein all their wrongs shall be righted, all their labor of love
recompensed. This held Jobs head above water, when else he had been overwhelmed
with the floods of affliction. Job 19.25. So Dan. 12.1, 2. Though things be
otherwise darkly delivered, yet when the Jews were to lose land and life, then
plainly the general judgment is mentioned. So Heb. 11.35.

Verse. 6. To recompense tribulation] To trouble these troublers of Israel, and
that thorowou^ all eternity, because they would be always troubling Gods
people if they might ^ as it is said of the Scorpion, that there is not one
minute, wherein it does not put forth the sting. Plin.


Verse 7. Rest with us] As Noah's Ark, after much tossing, rested upon the
mountains of Ararat: as the Ark of the Covenant formerly transportative, was at
length serled in Solomon's Temple. The word here used properly signifies
remission and relaxation from hard labor, Apoc. 14.13. they rest from their
labors. Av^ow.
And as the sleep of a laboring man is sweet: so here.

With his mighty angels] O what a glorious day must that needs be, when to many
glorious S^ns shall shine at once: The Lord Chris out-shining them all, Velut
inter stellas luna minores!

Verse 8. In slaming fire] Natural fire, 2 Pet. 36, 7. whereby the elements
shall melt like scalding lead upon the wicked, whiles they give account with
all the world on a slaming fire about their ears. Of this last dreadful fire
the very Heathen had some blind notions. Esse quoque, in fatis meminit, etc.
Ovid Metam lib. 1. Denat deer.
Luncretius and Tully say somewhat to it, but little to the purpose.

And that obey not the Gospel] This is the grand sin of this age, Joh. 3.19. No
sin will gripe so in hell as this. This will be a bodkin at the heart one day,
I might have been delivered, but I have wilfully cut the throat of my poor soul
by refusing those rich offers of mercy made me in the Gospel.

Verse 9. Who shall be punished] Here Is the pain of sense, eternity of
extremity.

From the presence] Here Is the pain of loss, which is, of the two, the greater.

And from the glory of his power] God will set himself to inflict upon the
damned such a measure of misery, as his power can extend unto.

Verse 10. To be glorified] This is the chi^f end of his coming: like as he
reprobateth some, that his mercy in electing others may the more appear.

To be admired] When they shall be seen to shine as the firmament, nay* as the
stars, Dan. 12.3. nay as the Sun, Mat. 13.43. nay as Christ himself, that Sun
of righteousness, to the great admiration of all men.

Verse 11. The work of faith with power] Without which power neither the
goodness of God, nor the good pleasure of his goodness, that is his decree of
glorifying us, nor the work of says could be effected.

Verse 12 That the name of our Lord] It is much for the honor of the Saints
that Christ shall account himself glorified in their glory. Neither is it for
their honor only, but for their advantage: for this glory of Christ shall
redound unto them: therefore it is a added by the Apostle, And ye in him.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Now we beseech you, brethren]
Christ's spokesmen must be fair spoken, so wooing for him, that they may win
upon men's hearts; leading by the hand those that are willing, and drawing after
a sort those that are less willing, that they may present them as a chaste
virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

By the coming of our Lord] He draws an argument from the matter under hand,
wherewith their hearts were now heated before hand. It must be an elaborate
speech that shall work up-on the heart.

And by our gathering together unto him] In that last and great day, when all
the Eagles shall be gathered to that once dead, Mat 24.28. Ephesians. 1.10.
but now all-quickning carcass: when the sign of the son of man shall be lifted
up as an Ensign, and all the Saints shall repair to it, as the soldiers do to
their colors.

Verse 2. That ye be not soon shaken] As seamen are tossed by a tempest, and
even brought to their wits ends, Psalm. 107.27. (...), a nomine (...), sa^um.
That ye be not shaken out of your wits, and put besi^e your selves; ^o the
words may be rendered. And indeed errors and heresies, sanam tollunt de
cardine mentom.

Or be troubled] Or, terrified, as with a sudden hubbub, alarm, (...).
tumult.

Neither by spirit] Pretended revelations, such as was that whereby the old
impostour consened that young Prophet into a lions mouth.

Nor by Word] Traditions, unwritten verities, etc.

Nor by letter] Counterfeited, supposititious, spurious, such as were those
Gospels that went under the names of S. Thomas, S. Bartholomew, etc. Or by
wresting and writhing that passage of his former letter, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. to
another meaning then ever the Apostle int^nded it. So S. Austin was served, Aug
lib 1 de Trin c. 3.
and the foresaw it: I believe, says he, that some of my readers will imagine
me sensisse quod non sensi, ^ut non sensisse quod sensi, that I was in many
things of another mind, then ever I was indeed. And it sell out accordingly.
For as Baronius witnesses, Baron. Annal Tom. 6.
after S. Austins death there arose up diverse, Qui ex ejus scriptis male
perceptis complures invexerunt errores, who by mistaking of what he had
written, brought in many pernicious errors and vouched him for their author.

As that the day of Christ] Peter's seoffers asked, Where is the promise of his
coming? As if Christ would never come. these were afraid he would come too
^oon, and take them with their task undone. The devil usually tempts by
extremes, as he did our Savior, Mat. 4. and as he did Mr Knox upon his death
bed, first to despair, by setting his sins before him, and then to presumption,
by reminding him of his reformations.

Verse 3. Except there come a falling] Gr. An apostasy, viz. (...).
of people from the truth, when the whole world went a wondering, and a
wandering after the beast, Revel. 13.3. To the fathers these prophecies of
Antichrist were riddles. The prophecy is sealed to the end, Dan. 12. till
unsealed by event. Austin says ingenuously he understood not this text. And
herein he did better then those other of the Latin Fathers that interpreted it
of the falling away of sundry Nations from the Roman Empire.

And that man of sin] That breathing devil, so portentously, so pee^l^sly
vicious, Lips. Ant. left.
Vt ejus nomen non hominis, sed vitij esse videatur (as Li^sius says of one
Tubusus a Roman Praetor) that sin it self can hardly be more sinful.

The son of perdition] Destined to destruction, even to be cast alive into
the lake of fire burning with brimstone, Revel. 19.20. Onuph, in vita
Well might Pope Marcellus the second strike his hand upon the table, and say,
Non video qu^modo qui locum hunc altissimum te^ent, salvari possunt. Cor^^ a
Lapide to Nam 11.14
I see not how any Pope can be saved. When I was first in orders (said Pope
Pius Quintus] I had some good hopes of salvation: When I was made a Cardinal, I
doubted: but now that I am Pope, I do almost despair.

Verse 4, (...).
Ipho opposith himself] Who stands in full opposition to Christ, as a
counter-Christ. The enemy and adversary is this wicked Haman, Esth. 7.6. so
this man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome. When the Pope sets forth any bulls,
commonly he thus concludes, Non obstantibus constitutionibus Apostolicis,
caeterisque, contrarys quibuscuque, The constitutions and ordinances of the
Apostles, and all things else to the contrary not withstanding. Tamen est ipsis
simun Dei^ver bam.
The Popes interpretation of Scripture, though it never so much cross the
text, yet it is to be esteemed the very Word of God, says Hosius.

And exalts himself] Perfrica frontem (said Calvus to Vatinius) and digniorem
te dic qui Praetor sieres quam Catonem. Q^inoul. 1962
Pope Boniface 3. set a good face upon it, and arrogated the title of
Universal Bishop. The ancient Romans painted pride with three crowns on her
head. On the first was in^eri^ed Transcende, on the second, Non ob dio, on the
third, Perturbo. The modern Romans see all this daily ^cted by their Bishop.

Above all that is called god] In the year 1540. Pope Paul the third suffered
himself to be thus blasphemously slattered. Paulo tertis optim^ maximo in
terris Deo. In the year 1610. books were printed at Bononi an ^at Naples, with
this inscription, Paulo V. vice-deo, Christianae reipublicae Monarchae
invictissmo, Poniificiae omnipotentiae cons^rvatori acerrimo. To Paul the fifth
vice-god, most invincible Monarch of Christendom, most stout Defender of the
papal omnipotency. The Pope can do all that Christ can do, and is more then
God, says Hostiensis the Canonist, and after him Zabarell: Of wrong he can
make right, Cap. 4.
of vice virtue, of nothing something, says Bellarmine. Lib ^^de Pan^i^ Romans
He is listed above the angels, so that he can excommunicate them: he can
dispense against not only the law of nature, but against all the Evangelists,
Prophets, and Apostles, says Pope John 23, in extravs one of his parasites
clawed him thus, Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris habenas:
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.


Or that is worshipped] Or, That is August, (...).
above Princes and potentates. He is cried up for Lord of Lords and King of
Kings, one that has both the swords throughout the world, and an^llimited
Empire over all reasonable creatures, Dulia adorandiu, etc. How he trod upon
the Emperor of Germany, and how he lathed Henry 2. of England, and Henry 4. of
France till the blood followed, is better known, then that I need here to
relate. Sed exorto Evangelij jubare sagaciores (ut spero) principes ad nutum
Romani Orbily non solvent subligacula, says one.

Verse 5. Remember ye not] Satan usually hides from us that which should help
us. But as the soul should be as it were an holy Ark: so should the memory be
as the pot of Manna, preserving holy truths for constant use.

Verse 6. What with holds, etc.] viz. The Roman Empire, which had its rise,
reign and ruin, whereupon the Popedom was founded, and grew to that excessive
greatness, that it labored with nothing more then with the weightinesse of it
lest.

Verse 7. Does already work] In those ancient Apostates and Antichrists S. ^ohn
complains of. Tertullian condemns the Bishops sprouting ambition in these
words, I hear that there is a peremptory edict set forth alate. Pontisex
scilicet maximus, Episcopus Episcoporum dicit, This he called, (...)
etc. Thus says the chief-Priest, the Bishop of Bishops, etc. Odi fastum
illius Ecclesiae, says Basil, Vehicalis insidentes circumspecte vessiti,
epulas curantes prosu at, etc.
I hate the pride of that Western Church. Ammia^us Marcellinus (a Heathen
Historian) sharply taxes the roman Bishops of his time for their pride and
prodigality. How stiffly did Gregory the great oppose John of Constantinople for
affecting the title of Universal Bishop? And yet how basely did the same
Gregory collogue with Phocas the Emperor, that himself might be so styled.
Zonaras.
This Phocas, a wild, drunken, blo^^y, adulterous tyrant, advanced the Bishop
of Rome (Gregory's successor) to the primacy, and was therefore slaughtered by
Heracliut, who cut often his wicked hands and feet, and then his genitals by
piecemeal.

Until he be taken out of the Way] That is, The Roman Emperor have removed
his seat to Constantinople, that Rom^ may become the nest of Antichrist. In
mari, bistor.
Ioannes de Columna writes, That Otho Emperor of Germany thought to have
^uated himself at Rome (as former Emperors had done) and began to build him
there a stately palace. But at the earnest importunity of the Romans he gave
over that design. the like had been attempted 300 years before by Constans
nephew to Heraclius, Theophanes. Zonaras. ^i^^enu^. Genebr. Chron.
but could never be effected. This was by a singular providence of God (says
Genebrard, a Popish Chronologer) that the kingdom of the Church prophesied of
by Daniel might have it is seat at Rome. If he had said, that the kingdom of
Antichrist, prophesied of by S. Paul and S. John might have it is seat in that
City seated upon seven hills, he had said the very truth, he had hit the nail
one the head.

Verse 8. (...).
And then shall that wicked] Gr. That lawless, yokelesse, masterlesse monster,
to whom in the Council of Lateran 1516. (one year only before Luther stood up
to reform) there was granted plenary power over the whole Church; which was
never settled upon him in any former Council. Pope Nicolas the first said, Did.
96.
That he was above law, because Constantine had styled the Pope God. But the
very gloss derides him for this inference.

With the spirit of his mouth] i.e. With the evidence of his word in the mouths
of his faithful Ministers. Vide catalogum Testium veritatis. Bellarmine
confesses to his great grief, Lib 3 de Papa Rom cap. 11.
that ever since the Lutherans have declared the Pope to be Antichrist, his
kingdom has not only not increased, but every day more and more decreased and
decayed.

With the brightness of his coming] At the last day. The holy City shall they
tread under foot forty and two months, Rev. 11.2. that is (as some compute
it) till the year of grace, 1866. But that is but a conjecture.

Verse 9. After the working of Satan] Who (as Gods ape) works effectually in
his, and by his agents upon others. By corrupt teachers Satan catches men, as
a cunning fisher by one fish catches another, that he may feed upon both.

And lying wonders] The devil is ashamed (says the Jesuit Gretser) to confirm
Luthers doctrine by miracles, But he that now requires miracles to make him to
believe, is himself a great miracle, says Austin.

Verse 10. And with all deceivablenesse] Popery is nothing else but a great
lie, a grand imposture, a farrago of falsities and heresies. It is not without
cause, that the Centurists say, Cent. 10. cap. 11
That all the old heretics sled, and hid themselves in the Popish Clergy.

Because they received not the love] This is the great Gospel-sin, punished by
God with strong delusions, vile affections, just damnation.

Verse 11. Strong delusion] Gr. The efficacy of orrour. Wolph. mem^lect.
As in those at Genoa that show the Asses tail, whereupon our Savior rode, for
an holy relic, and perform divine worship to it. And in those that wear out
the marble crosses graven in the pavements of their Churches, with their often
kissing them. Spec. Europ.
The crucifix which is in the city of Burgus, the Priests show to great
personages, as if it were Christ himself: telling them that his hair and nails
do grow miraculously, which they cut and pare monthly, and give to Noblemen,
and holy relics. The Jesuits confess, that the legend of miracles of their
Saints is, for most part false; but it was made for good intention: and herein,
that it is lawful and meritorious to lie, and write such things, Spanish pilg^.
to the end the common people might with greater zeal serve God and his Saints:
and especially to draw the women to good order, being by nature facile and
credulous, addicted to novelties and miracles.

Verse 12. That they all might be damned] Levit. 13.291
Heresy is the leprosy in the head, which is utterly uncurable, and destroies
the soul. See Rev. 19.21.

Had pleasure is unrighteousnesse] These are delivered up to that dead and
dedolent disposition, Ephesians 4 19. loosing at length all passive power also of
awakening cut of the snare of the devil, who takes them alive at his pleasure,
2 Timothy 2. ult.

Verse 13. But we are bound, etc.] Lest they should be discouraged with the
former discourse, the Apostle tells them that being elect they cannot be finally
deceived. So the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 6.9. Zuinglius, after that he
had terrified the wicked, was wont to come in which Bone vir, hoc nihil ad te.
This is nothing to thee, thou faithful Christian. We cannot beat the dogs, but
the children will cry, and must therefore be stilled and cheared up.

And belief of the truth] That is, of Christ the object, in the glass of the
Gospel.

Verse 14 To the obtaining of the glory] This is the end of faith, as faith is
of effectual calling.

Verse 15. Stand fast] Though never so many fall from the faith. Falling stars
were never but Meteors.

Hold the traditions] Hold fast by these, that ye may stand the faster.

Verse 16. And good hope] The fruit of everlasting consolation, Romans 15.4. And
well called good, because it has for it is object the greatest good, and that
which is of greatest certainty, Heb. 11.1.

Verse 17. Stablish you] Taking you by the hand, and laying hold on you, like
as ye lay hold upon his Word, verse 15.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Finally, Brethren, etc.]
QVod superest: (...).
That which yet remains, brethren. Ministers have never done, but have somewhat
more to say (Redit labor actus in orbem) when they have said their utmost.

Pray for us] As he had done for them, Chap. 2.16, 17. See the like, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23, 25. with the Notes. O pray (said a dying Dutch Divine) that God would
preserve the Gospel: Pontifex enim Rom^ and Concilium Tridentinum mira
moliuntur: For the Pope and his Trent conventicle are plotting strange
businesses.

May have free course] Gr. May run its race, as the Sun does, (...). Hist. l.
2. c. 3.
Psalm. 19. Eusebius says that the Gospel spread at first through the world,
like a Sunbeam.

And be glorified] As it was Act. 13.48. The word never works, till it be
received with admiration.

Verse 2. From unreasonable] Men compact of mere incongruities, solaecising in
opinion, speeches, actions, all. (...).


For all men have not faith] And are therefore unreasonable: nothing is more
irrational then irreligion. An unbeliever is no better (but in some respects
worse) then a beast: A brutish person skillful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31.

Verse 3. But God is faithfull] Though men be faithless: and though they be
evil, as verse. 2. yet he shall keep you from evil, from whatsoever adverse
power either of men or devils. Thus the Saints may find and fetch comfort from
God under whatsoever disasters. They go always under a double guard, the peace
of God within them, Phil. 4.7. and the power of God without them, (...).
1 Pet. 1.5. How then can they possibly miscarry?

Verse 4. That ye both do, and will do] Qui monet ut facia^ quod jam facis,
ille monendo laudat, etc. Here the Apostle, Oratour-like, enters their
bosoms: and by praising their present obedience, artificially wresteth from
them a redoubled diligence. Virtus laudata crescit. Thus being crafty he
catches them with guile, as he did those Corinthians, 2 ep. 13.16. It must be
an elaborate discourse that shall work upon the heart.

Verse 5. And the Lord direct] Or rectify your crooked hearts, (...).
and distorted affections, that stand a-crosse to all good, till God set them
to rights. Men's persuasions are but as a key to a lock, that's out of order,
unless God cooperate.

Verse 6. Now we command you] To show how hardly we are divided from evil
company, as loath to depart as Lots wife out of Sodom, Vel ut canis famelicus
ab uncto corio.

That ye withdraw your selves] That ye shun them as studiously as the sea man
does a rock or shelf. (...). Nautarum prop^ium. Nihil agendo male agere
discimus (...).


Verse 7. For your selves know] You idle addle-heads, verse. 11. For to these he
here directs his speech, that by doing nothing had learned at length to do
naughtily.

We behaved not our selves disorderly] Gr. We brake not our ranks, as unruly
soldiers.

Verse 8. any man's bread for nought] But earnd it before we eat it. Bread
should not be eaten, till it sweat in a man's hand, or head. Chrysostom.


Verse 9. Not because we have not power] Posse and nolle nobile est. See the
Notes no 1 Cor. 9.4.6, 7, 11, etc.

But to make our selves an example] Those therefore that have enough to live
on, must yet be doing something whereby the world may be the better: and not
think to come hither merely as rats and mice, only to devour victuals, and to
run squeaking up and down, These are Ciphers, or rather excrements in humane
society. By the law of Mahomet, the great Turk himself is bound to exercise
some manual trade or occupation (for none must be idle) as Solomon the
Magnificent, Peacham.
that so threatened Vienna, his trade was making of arrow-heads, Achmat the last
horn-rings for Archers.

Verse 10. Genesis 3.
That if any would not work] In the sweat of thy nose shall thou eat thy bread,
was the old sanction: Yea Paradise, that was man's storehouse, was also his
workhouse. They bury themselves alive, that, as body-lice, live on other men's
labors: and it is a sin to succor them. Seneca professed, That he had rather
be sick in his bed then out of imploiment.

Verse 11. Working not at all] But making religion a mask for idleness: whose
whole life is to eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport, and sit, and talk, and
laugh themselves fat. These are an odious sort of Christians; a kind of
vagrant people, that having little to do, are set a work by the devil: for
idleness is the hour of temptation. Standing pools are full of vermin.
Behemoth lies in the fens, Job 40.21.

Verse 12. That with quietnesse] Being no medler in other men's matters, but
minding his own. Res tuas age. The pragmaticall person is an odious person, and
the place where he lives longs for a vomit to spue him out. See the Note on 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.

Verse 13. Be not weary in well-doing] No, not to those disorderly (and
therefore less worthy) walkers, if in extreme necessity, or if thereby ye may
win them from the error of their way. As if any prove refractary and
irreformable.

Note that man] (...).
Or, Notice him, as infamous: brand him, beware of him; let him see a
strangenes in you toward him.

That he may be ashamed] (...) Vt quae^a^ ubi se possit prae pudore occulta^e.
Cameron.
Gr. That he may turn into himself, or turn short again upon himself: recognize
his disorders, and return to a better course. The repenting Prodigal is said
to come to himself, Luke 15.17. and those relenting Israelites to bethink
themselves, or to bring back to their hearts, 1 King. 8 47.

Verse 15. Yet count him not, etc. If there be but aliquid Christi, any thing
of Christ to be discerned in him.

But admonish him as a brother] Conscience is a nice and sullen dame, man a
cross, crabbed creature, and will hardly be wrought upon by a Stoicall
sowrnesse, or an imperious boisterousnesse: but must be gently handled, and
fairly admonished. Gentle showrs comfort the earth, when dashing storms drown
the seed.

Verse 16. Now the Lord, etc.] He begins, continues and concludes with fervent
prayer. All our Sacrifices should be salted with this salt, perfumed with this
incense of prayer Colos. 3.17.

The Lord be with you all] Thus he pours out his affection, by prayer upon
prayer for them. A sweet closing up!

Verse 17, 18. So I write, The grace, etc.] This is that Saint Paul would have
every of his Ep^stles stamped with his own hand, viz. prayer for all his people.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. By the commandment of God]
FOr how should he have preached except he had been sent? This he mentions,
Romans 10.15. as a thing impossible. Act. 4. in Verre.


Of God our Saviour] So the Father also is here called. Hoc autem quantum est?
(says Tully) I^ nimirum Soter est, qui salutem dedit. The Greek word here used
is so emphaticall, that other tongues can hardly express it.

Our hope] So Christ is called, because the perfection of our life is hid with
Christ in God. Something we have in possession, but more in reversion.

Verse 2. Mine own sonne] This the Apostle speaks (...), Out of deep
affection, as Chrysostom observes.

Grace, mercy and peace] Not only Grace and peace, as to others. When we pray
for Ministers, we must be more then ordinary earnest for them with God.

Verse 3. That they teach no other doctrine] Either for matter or manner, for
substance or circumstance. What hideous heresies are now-adaies broached and
preached amongst us in City and Country. See Mr Edwards his Gangrena, the
first and second part.

Verse 4. Endless Genealogies] It is but laborious loss of time to search
into those things, whereof we can neither have proof nor profit: the gains will
not pay for the pains, the task is not worthy the toil.

Verse 5. Now the end of the commandment] Or, of the charge; to wit, of that
charge to teach no other doctrine, etc. v. 3, 4. As if the Apostle had said,
This is that that a teacher should aim at, to beget such a love in his hearers
hearts, as may speak them true believers, and good livers. Boni Catholici sunt
(says Augustine) qui and fidem integram sequuntur, and bonos mores. Those are
good Catholics that believe well, live well. (...).


Verse 6. Some having swerved] Having missed the mark, as unskilful shooters,
being heavenly-wide, as Sr Philip Sidney englisheth that Prove^b, Toto errant
coelo.

Verse 7. Understanding neither what] Non curo i^os, says Augustine, qui vel
non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt. I pass not
for the censures of such, Aug contra Fault.
as dare to reprehend what they do not comprehend.

Verse 8. If a man use it lawfully] For discovery of sin, for manuduction to
Christ, and for rule of life, Lex, lux, Prove 6.23. Cyropaed. l. b. 1.
Xenophon telle^h us, That this was the drift of the Persian laws, to keep men
from acting, yea from coveting any thing evil or idle.

Verse 9. Is not made for a righteous] For he is freed by Christ from the
coaction, malediction and irritation of the law.

But for the lawless, etc.] Those masterlesse monsters, that send messages
after Christ, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us. But shall
they thus escape by iniquity? In thine anger thou will cast down these people,
o God, Psalm. 56.7. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. They that will not bend shall
break: They that will not be Christ's subjects, shall be his footstool: his
arrows are sharp in the hearts of the Kings enemies, whereby the people (that
fall not down before him,) fall under him, Psalm. 45.5.

Verse 10. For men-stealers] That steal away other men's children: so those that
steal other men's books and writings, and set them out in their own name: as one
dealt by Diagoras, who thereupon, out of discontent (because he that had done
it was not presently stricken with a thunderbolt) became an Atheist. Diod. Sie.
So Fabricius stole Tremellius his Syriack translation, Villavincentius stole
Hyperius his Treatise, De ratione studij Theologici, and Possevinus lately
translated Dr James his Cyprianus redivivns into his Apparatus Theologicus, and
made it his own doing. Sic vos non vobis.

Verse 11. Of the blessed God] Blessed in himself, and to be everlastingly
blessed of all creatures. Hence he is called, The blessed, Mark 14.61. And
frequently in the Commentaries of the Hebrew-Doctours he is set forth by this
title Baruch hu, He that is blessed.

Verse 12. Who has enabled me] Christ sends none, but whom he gifts. Asinos
elegit Christus and idiotas, sed oculavit in prudentes, simulque dona dedit and
ministeria.

Verse 13. Who was before a blasphemer] Chrysostom observes it of Paul, as his
greatest honor, that although he had obtained pardon of God for his sins, yet
he is not ashamed to reckon them up to the world. So David does penance in a
white sheet, as it were, Psalm. Popish decrees, Act. and. Mon. 1574.
51. titl. So Augustine writes books of Confessions. And I was as obstinate a
Papist, says Latimer, as any was in England, and so servile an observer of the
Popish decrees, that I thought I had never sufficiently mingled my massing-wine
with water, and that I should never be damned, if I were once a professed
Friar. Also when I should be made Bachelour of Divinity, my whole Oration went
against Philip Melancthon and his opinions. And standing in the schools when Mr
Stafford (a godly Orthodox Divine) read, Ibid 9 ^4.
Latimer bad the scholars not to hear him, exhorted the people not to believe
him. And yet the said Latimer confessed himself, that he gave thanks to God
that he asked him forgivenes before he departed.

Verse 14. (...).
Was exceeding abundant] Has abounded to flowing over: as the sea does above
mole-hils. I will scatter your sins as a mist, says God, and they shall be
cast into the midst of the sea. Note those two Metaphors, and despair, if thou
can.

Verse 15. This is a faithful saying] Worthy to be credited and embraced, as
it was by Bilney the Martyr, who by this promise was much comforted in a great
conflict. So was Vrsine by Joh. 10.29. Another by Isaiah 57.15. And another by
Isaiah 26.3. saying, That God had graciously made it fully good to his soul.

Of whom I am chief] Primus, quo nullus prior, as Gerson expounds it, ^mo quo
nullus pejor, as Augustine, worser then the worst. The true Poenitentiary does
not elevate but aggravate his sins against himself, is ever full in the mouth
this way, as Dan 9 5.

Verse 16. Might show forth] By full demonstration and sufficient evidence, so
that all might see and say, (...).
There is mercy with Christ that he may be feared, yea mercy rejoicing against
judgment, that he may be everlastingly admired and adored.

For a pattern to them, etc.] Therefore the Apostle was assured of remission in
an ordinary way, and not by any special revelation.

Verse 17. Now unto the King immortall] Paul cannot mention the great work of
our redemption without a thankful acclamation. The Grecians being restored to
liberty by the Roman General Q. Flaminius, Plut. in Flamin.
he was entertained by them with such applauses and acclamations, whiles they
roared out Savior, Savior, that the very birds that flew over them,
astonished with the noise, fell to the ground. When Hunn^ades had overthrown
M^sites, the Turks General; at his return from the Camp, Turk. Hist. 269
some called him the Father, some the Defender of his country; the soldiers,
their Invincible General; the Captives, Their Deliverer; the women, Their
Protector, etc.

The only wise God] The temple of Sophia] in Constantinople is now the Turks
chief Moschee, Ibid. 342.
and by them still called Sophia, because they hold, even as we do, that the
wisdom of God is incomprehensible.

Verse 18. Son Timothy] This is Timothies task, whom the Apostle fitly
calls Son, according to the custom both of those and these times. Patres
eos di^imus qui nos catechesi instituerunt, says Clement. We call them fathers
that instruct and catechize us.

Verse 19. Holding faith and a good conscience] A good conscience, says one,
is as it were a chest; wherein the doctrine of faith is to be kept safe, which
will quickly be lost, if this chest be once broken: For God will give over to
errors and heresies such as cast a way conscience of walking after Gods Word.
What a blind buzzard then was that Popish Inquisitour, who said of the
Waldenses, You may know the heretics by their words and manners. Sunt enim in
moribus compositi and modesti: sup^rbiam in vestibus non habent, etc. They are
neither immodest in their carriage, D Usher. de Christ Eccles. success etc.
(...).
nor proud in their apparel, etc?

Verse 20. That they may learn] Vt castigati discant: that being buffetted and
bodily tormented by Satan, as Act. 13.2. (for as yet there were no Christian
Magistrates) they may learn,

Not to blaspheme] That is not to hold erroneously; and to live scandalously,
to the reproach of the Gospel. Confer, Prove. 30 9.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Supplications]
OR, D^precations endited by that Spirit of supplication, or of deprecation, as
some render it, Zech. 11.10.

Praiers] (...).
Strictly taken for petitions or requests of good at Gods hands, which go
commonly accompanied with vows of better obedience, as Genesis 28.21, 22. Psalm.
51.14. Hence they have their name.

Intercessions] (...).
Interparlings with God, either for our selves, (whilst we stand upon
Interrogatories with him, 1 Pet. 3.21. as Paul does, Romans 8.33, 34 35. and
expostulate as David often, but especially when Satan, sin, and conscience
accuse us) or for others, whilst we complain to God against such as wrong
them, and withal set our selves seriously to implore his aid for their relief
and rescue.

For all men] i.e. For all sorts of men, as the word (all) is used, Luke 11.42.

Verse 2. For Kings, etc.] Though persecutours, if they have not yet sinned
against the holy Ghost, as Julian had. Voluit scilicet Christus etiam aliquando
Reginam in coelum vehere, Luth in ep ad Ioh. Agris.
says Luther of Elizabeth Queen of Denmark, who lived and died in the truth of
the Gospel. God has his, even among great ones too.

A quiet and peaceable life] Quiet, from inbred tumults and commotions: and
peaceable, from foreign invasions, and incursions of the enemy. See Jer. 29.7.

In all godliness and honesty] And not come to eat the bread of our souls with
the peril of our lives, as they do in diverse places of this land at this day,
Det meliora Deus. He will do it.

Verse 3. For this is good, etc.] viz. This praying for all men. And should we
not frame to that, that God accepts, without questioning or quarrelling? Let us
not dispute, but dispatch our masters will.

Verse 4. Who will have all men, etc.] God wills, to wit, with a will whereby
he inviteth, and puts no bar, not with a will whereby he effects it,
taking away all impediments.

That all men] Not distributively taken, but collectively, as thrice in one
verse, Col 1.28.

Should be saved] viz. If they do what he commands: God does not tie himself
to cause them to do what he commands, that they may be saved.

And to come to the knowledge] The only way to salvation. Pray therefore that
their eyes may be opened, Act. 26.18.

Verse 5. For there is one God] sc. Both of Kings and Subjects, both of
Heathens and Christians. Go boldly to him therefore, for your selves and
others. Have we not all one Father? Mal. 2.10. Art not thou our Father? Isa.
63.16.

One Mediatour] Not of redemption only (as the Papists grant) but of
intercession too. We need no other master of requests in heaven, but the man
Christ Jesus, who being so near us in the matter of his incarnation, will never
be strange to us in the business of intercession. But what horrible blasphemy
is that of the Papists, who in their devotions say thus, Act and Mon. fol. 1453.
By the blood of Thomas B^cket, which he did spend, Make us, Christ, to climb
where Thomas did ascend!

Verse 6. A ransome] Gr. (...).
A counterprice: such as we could never have paid, but must have remained, and
even ^otted in prison, but for our All-sufficient surety and Savior.

Verse 7. A teacher of the Gentiles] His Epistles therefore should be highly
prized by us Gentiles, and diligently studied. S. Peter admires them, 2 Pet. 3
15. and commends them to the Churches reading. And because there are some
things in them hard to be understood, and easy to be wrested from their right
meaning, verse. 16. it was therefore grave advice that one gives young
Christians, that they should begin at the later end of Saint Paul's Epistles,
which treats of points of practice: Since a corrupt life can never have a
sound judgment.

Verse 8. Pray every where] Any place now (be it but a chimney) may make a
goodly Oratory, Joh. 4 21.

Lifting up holy hands] Better washed then Pilates were, rinsed in that blessed
fountain of Christ's blood, Zech. 13.1. Else, God utterly abhors them, Isa.
1.15, 16. The Priests had their laver to wash in, before they sacrified. The
Turks at this day before prayer wash both face and hands, sometimes their head,
and other parts of the body. But what says S. James, chap. 4.8. and the
Prophet Jeremy, chap 4.14. The fountain of goodness will not be laden at, with
foul hearts and hands.

Without Wrath] Or, Rancour, Mat. 5.24. God will not be served, till men be
reconciled. When Abram and Lot were agreed, then God appeared.

Or doubting] Heb. 11.6. Jam. 1.6. without disceptation of reasoning with
carnal reason.

Verse 9. In like manner also] Men have had their lessons. Now for women they
are taught modesty in their attire (such as may neither argue wantonness nor
wastfulnes) silence in the Church, subjection in the family.

Or costly aray] Which yet great ones may wear; but they may not buy it with
extortion, and line it with pride: since clothes are the ensigns of our shame,
our finenesse is our filthiness, and our neatness our nastinesse. See Isaiah
3. where the Prophet inveighes, as if he had viewed the Ladies wardrobes in
Jerusalem^.

Verse 10. (...). Phil. 1.27.
But which becometh] Our common conversation should be as becomes the Gospel
of Christ: And it is a sure sign of a base mind, to think that one can make
himself great with any thing that is less then himself; or that he can win
more credit by his garments, then by his graces. The worst apparel, faith one,
is natures garment, the best, but follies garnish.

Verse 11. Let the woman learn] Not teach, to wit, in the public assemblies,
be she never so learned or godly. See the Note on Romans 16.1.

Verse 12. Nor to usurp authority] As they will easily do, (...), To have wh^^
she will.
if suffered to preach. Preachers are Rulers, Guides, Captains, Heb. 13.7*17.
If the hen be suffered to crow once, etc. Camdens Eliz.
A prudent wife commands her husband by obeying him, as Sarah, Livia.

But to be in silence] Video, taceo, I see and say nothing, was Queen
Elizabeth's Motto. Where should the tongue be but in the head?

Verse 13. For Adam was first formed] (...).
As the vessel is formed by the Potter cut of the clay. See Genesis 2.7.

Then Eve] For Adams use and help: therefore she must not take upon her.

Verse 14. And Adam was not deceived] i. e. He was not deceived so much by his
judgment (though also by that too) as by his affection to his wife; which at
length blinded his judgment.

Being deceived was in the transgression] Vxor mea to^^ in fermento est, said
he in Plautus. See my Notes on Genesis 3.6.

Verse 15. Saved in childe-bearing] Not by it, as by a cause: (...), at Romans
11.28.
but not withstanding the cross laid upon all childe-bearing women, Genesis 3.16.
they shall have free entrance into heaven, if they continue in faith and
charity, etc.

CHAP. III. Verse. 1. If a man desire]
AS no woman, so neither may every man desire the office of a Minister, but
such only as are gifted and fitted for such a service.

He desires a good work] But a hard work. The Ministry is not in idle man's
occupation, but a fore labor, Onus ipsis ^tiam^ angelis tremendum, says
Chrysostom, a burden too heavy for an Angels shoulders, a pains nothing short
of that of a traveling woman, says Melancthon, after Paul, Gal 4.19. There
were that read this text thus, Quicu^que desiderat Episcopatum bonum, opes
desiderant. But this was a foul mistake at best.

Verse 2. A Bishop then must be blamelesse] That is, Every faithful Pastor
must be such as against whom no just exception can be laid, no gross faule
objected. In volu^ry fallings and unavoidable infirmities have a pardon of
course, both with God, and all good men.

The husband of one wife] sc. At once. The Egyptian Priests were forbidden
also polygamy.

Vigilant] Pale and wan with watching. (...), Homer.
(...). A public person should not sleep a whole night together.

Sober] That can contain his passions, (...). B^ne moratum. Huron ad Dam* sum.
and keep a mean.

Of good behaviour] Compositus, modestus. Neat and hand. some in his out ward
habit, venerable in all his behavior.

Given to hospitality] Quie quid habent Clerici, pauperum est: The Ministers
chest is the poor man's box.

Apt to teach] Not able only, as Dr Tailour Martyr, who preached not only every
Lords day and holy day, but whenever else he could get the people together.
Act. and Mon. fol. 1381.
Praedicationis officium suscipit, Greg Pastor.
quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, says Gregory. He Is no Minister that is no
preacher.

Verse 3. (...).
Not given to wine] No Ale-stake, tavern-haunter, that sits close at it, till
the wine inflame him.

No striker] Either with tongue or hand. Such as were Timotheus Herulus, anno
457. Pope Julius 3. who cast away his keys, and girt on his sword. Bishop
Bonner, who usually bu^fetted the poor Martyrs brought before him, pulling off
their beards, etc.

Not greedy of filthy lucre] So as to get by unjust arts, and sinful
practices, as the Pope by allowing the Srews in Rome, and elsewhere. See Fiscus
Papalis by Crashaw.

But patient] Easily parting with his own right for peace-sake, (...).
as Abraham did, as no covetous man will do.

No brawler] Or, Wrangler, quarrelsome, like a cock of the game, that is still
bloody with the blood of others, and of himself.

Not covetous] Not a lover of silver; (...).
and that ( Euclio-like) fits abrood upon his heaps of evil gotten goods, and
will part with nothing.

Verse 4. One that rules well] (...), A good priest in his own family, which
he daily perfumes with Evangelicall sacrifices, till his house, as the house of
David, be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them, Zach. 12.8.

Having his children in subjection] Yet Pope Pelagius forbids a Bishop to have
either wise or children: Distinct 61. Ca^tnensis.
whereof this wise reason is given, because children are argumentum ambulans
super terram. A walking argument of their fathers incontinency. Os durum!

Verse 5. For if a man know not how] A very cogent argument from the less to
the greater: used also by our Savior, Luke 16.11, 12. Eli was justly taxed,
and Augustus heavily upbraided with their domestical disorders, as therefore
unfit for government.

Verse 6. Not a novice] Rude and proud, (...). A young plant.
a young scholar or newly-converted: but well experimented, and sufficiently
commended by men of worth. He that offered to run a race, was led about by the
Crier, Chrysust Hom. 21 ad pop. Antioch.
to see what any one present could object against him, ere he was suffered to
run, as Chrysostom reports. So it should be here.

Verse 7. A good report of them, etc.] For a workman that needs not to be
ashamed: such a one as may muzzle the black mouth of any Campian, that shall
say, as he does of our Church, Ministris little nihil vilius: This is most true
of Popish greasy hedge Priests. See the Note on v. 6.

Verse 8. Not double-tongued] (...) -- Tyr^osque by. lingues. Virg.
That can turn their tales, and tune their fiddles to the base of the times,
saying as the company says, being as the planet Mercury, good in conjunction
with good, and bad with bad.

Verse 9. Holding the mystery] See the Note on 1 Timothy 1.19.

Verse 10. Being found blamelesse] The world will look round about them, and
expect (though unjustly) an Angelical perfection.

Verse 11. Must their wives be grave] As themselves must very 6. Gravity is
such an Elixar, as by contraction (if there be any disposition of goodness in
the same metal) it will render it of the property. So that Deacons wives
cannot be otherwise then grave and gracious, having such husbands as is above
described.

Verse 12. Husbands of one wife, etc.] See the Notes on Verse 2. and 4.

Verse 13. A good degree] Or a fair step to a higher order, i. e. to a
Bishoprike or Presbytership.

And great boldness in the saith] The peace of a good conscience, and the
plerophory of faith. This those that are faithful in the Ministry shall be
sure of; the former preferment they may possibly fail of.

Verse 14. Hoping to come unto thee] And to be an eyewitness of thy
diligence, whereof I doubt not, joying in the mean while, and beholding your
order, and the stedfastnes of your says in Christ, Col. 2 5.

Verse 15. In the house of God] See here the dignity of the Church, and the
duty of Ministers, which is to be faithful as stewards in all Gods house. But
what mean the Papists so to cry up the Church even above the Scriptures (as the
Council of Basil did by their Cardinal Cusanus in answer to the Hussites) nay
above Christ himself, as Hosius and others. Can they mean honestly (quoth that
Martyr) A ^^and Mon. fol. 1478.
that make so much of the wife, and so little of the husband ^ Bastard children
are all for their mother, and are called by her name, etc.

Verse 16. And without controversie] Learned Cameron begins this verse at
those words before, The pillar and ground of truth, and confessedly great is
that mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, C^mer, de eccl. p. 278.
etc. It being a usual form of speech among the Jews (as he proves out of
Maimonides) to preface these very words, The pillar and ground of truth, to any
special doctrine touching religion.

God manifested] Out of the bosom of his father, out of the womb of his
mother, out of the types of the law, etc.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. Speaks expressely]
VErbis non disertis solum, (...).
sed and exertis. Abroad and aloud, that it may be heard all the Church over

Some shall depart from the faith] As did the ancient heretics. the Papists
(in whom all the old heretics seem to have fled and hid themselves) and the
present prodigious Sectaries with their opinionum portenta, our modern
Antitrinitarians, Arrians, Antiscripturi^s, Anabaptists, etc.

Doctrine of devils] Vented by Satan's emissaries and instruments. About the
time of Pope Hildebrand, letters were dispersed up and down, that were said to
be sent from hell: wherein the devil gives great thanks to the Popish Clergy
for the great multitudes of fouls that by their seductions came thronging to
hell more then ever in any age before. Mat. Pa^ i^ Hist. an. Dom. 1072.


Verse 2. Speaking lies in hypocrisie] It was grown to a common Proverb, A
Friar, a lier. One of them undertook to show a feather of the wing of the Angel
Gabriel. The Pope to honor and encourage Tyrone the Rebel, sent him (but who
will believe it?) a plume of Phoenix feathers. The poor people are persuaded to
believe that the thunder of the Popes Excommunication bath so blasted the
English heretics, that their faces are grown all black and ugly as devils;
their eyes and looks ghastly, their breaths noisome and pestilent, etc. that
they are grown barbarous, and eat children, blaspheme God and all his Saints,
etc.

Having their consciences seared] There Is more hope of a sore, then of a seared
conscience, a dead and dedolent disposition, Ephesians. 4. a heart that has
contracted a kind of hoof.

Verse 3. Forbidding to marry] Papists forbid some to marry at any time, as the
Clergy: all, at some times, and that not as a precept of convenience, but
necessity and holiness. In Anselms time, cursed Sodomitry and adultery passed
free without punishment: where godly matrimony could find no mercy. Act. and
Mon. fol. 1061. Ibid. 790
The Cardinal of Cremona after his stout replying in the Council of London
against the married estate of Priests, was shamefully taken the night following
with a notable harlot. They hold that it is far better for a Priest to keep
many whores, then to have a wife. This, say they, is the heresy of the
Nicolai^ns.

To abstain from meants] As the Papists superstitiously do upon certain days:
when to eat an egg is punished with imprisonment, etc. Qui autem to tam diem
Dominicam vacat temulentiae, scortu and aleae, audit bellow homo, Schol. in
epist. ad episc. Basil.
says Erasmus. But he that spends the whole Lord's Day in drinking, dicing and
drabbing, is let go son a good fellow.

Which God has created] He made the grass before he made the beasts, and the
beasts before man, that all might have food convenient for them.

Verse 4. If it be received with thankesgiving] Whilst we taste the sweetness
of the Creator in the creature, and are stirted up thereby to praise his name.
Doves at every grain they pick look upwards, as giving thanks. The Elephant is
said to turn up toward heaven the first sprig or branch that he seedeth on,
etc. Birds chirp and sing to their maker.

Verse 5. By the Word] Of permission, Act. 10.15. and of promise, a new right
purchased by Christ, etc.

And praier] For his leave and blessing. that staff of bread, etc. This is to
eat to the Lord, Romans 14.6, to imitate Christ, Mat. 14. Paul, Act. 27 35.
Samuel, 1 Samuel 9.13.

Verse 6. Nourished up in the Words] Such are fittest to be made Ministers, as
have been well bred, and inured to the reading of the Scriptures; as have
sucked in holy learning together with their mothers milk.

Verse 7. (...). Make a fair excuse.
But refuse] Gr. Shift them off, set them. by, say thou art not at leisure to
attend to them, have no time to lose upon them. Poter as has horas non
perdidisse, said Pliny to his nephew, You might have found you somewhat else to
do.

Exercise thy self] (...) Te nudu^ exerce.
Lay aside thine upper garments, as runners and wrestlers use to do, and
bestirre thee lustily. See Heb. 12.1.

Verse 8. For bodily exercise presiteth little] Somewhat it does (if rightly
used) toward the strengthening of the body, preserving of the health, subduing
of the slesh, etc.

But godliness is profitable to all things] Plutarch.
The B^bylonians are said to make 360. several commodities of the Palm tree:
but there is a (...), a thousand benefits to be got by godliness, Godly persons
are said in Latin, Deum colere, because they are sure by sowing to the Spirit,
to reap of the Spirit life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. Besides that, in this world
they shall obtain joy and gladness (outward and inward comforts) but sorrow
and sighing shall five away. Isa. 35.10.

Verse 9. This is a faithful saying] And yet who has believed our report? The
promises are good freehold, and yet little looked after. Godliness has but
cold entertainment, because she lives much upon reversions.

Verse 10. For therefore] Because godliness has so much happiness laid up in
the promises, verse. 8. and there is so much certainty of the performance of
those promises, therefore we both do and suffer, 1 Cor. 15 58. Finis edulcat
mediae.

Who is the Savior of all men] Not of eternal preservation, but of temporal
reservation. For every man should die the same day he is born, the wages of
death should be paid him presently: but Christ begs wicked men's lives for a
season, says one. Sin has hurled confusion over the world, brought a vanity
on the creature. And had not Christ undertaken the shattered condition of the
world to uphold it, it had fallen about Adams ears, says another Divine.

Specially of those that believe] Who therefore are in a special manner bound
to observe and obey him. Among the Romans they that were saved were wont to
crown him that saved them, (...) etc Polyb^. 6.
and to honor him as a father all their days. We must also set the crown upon
Christ's head, Cant. 3.11. and obey this everlasting father, Isa. 9 6.

Verse 11. These things command and teach] Teach the tractable, command the
obstinate, lay Gods charge upon all.

Verse 12. Let no man despise, etc.] But how should I help it? Might he say:
The Apostle answers, Be thou an example to the believers, a pattern of piety:
For holiness has honor, wisdom makes the face to shine; natural
conscience cannot but stoop to the Image of God, where ever, and in whomsoever
it discerns it, (...), Ignat epist. ad Magnes.
says Ignatius. Youth seasoned with the fear of God is not easily despised.

But be thou an example] Gr. (...).
Such a thing as makes the stamp upon the coin. Exemplis sciola bac^atate
magis aedificant ministri quam concionibus.

Verse 13. Give attendance to reading] First to reading, and then to
exhortation: bringing as a good Scribe, out of a good treasure, new and old.
Father Latimer, notwithstanding both his years and constant pains in preaching,
was at his book most diligently about two of the clock every morning. A rare
example.

Verse 14. Neglect not the gift] Gods gifts groan under our disuse or misuse;
and God hearing gives them the wings of an Engle; so that such may say as once
Zedekiah did, 1 King. 22.^4.
When went the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee? God dries up the arm, and
darkens the eye of idle and Idol shepherds, Zech. 11.17.

With the laying on of the hands] A custom that came from the Church of the
old Testament, Genesis 8.14. Levit. 1.4. and 3.2. is laudably used to this day in
the Ordination of Ministers, but foolishly and sinfully abused by the
upstart-Sectaries.

Verse 13. Meditate upon these things] And so digest them, turn them in succum
and sanguinem. Let your heart fry a good matter, that your pen may be as the
tongue of a ready writer, Ps. 45.1. and not present crude and rude stuff. When
it was objected to Demosthenes, that he was no sudden speaker, but came ever to
the Court after premeditation, he answered, Se si fieri posset, dicturum non
tantum scripta, sed otiam sculpta.

Give thy self wholly to them] (...)
Gr. Be thou in them: totus in hoc sis. It was Mr Perkins his Motto, Verbi
Minister es, hoc age. Thou art a Minister of the Word, make it thy whole
business.

Verse 16. Thou shall beth save] What an high honor is this to faithful
Ministers, that they should be styled Saviors in a sense? So Job 33.24. Obad.
21. Jam. 5.21.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Rebuke not an Elder]
LAsh him not with the scourge of the tongue, (...). Ne plagam in. ^ixeris.
as a puny-boy. Jerk him not as the Pope did Henry 4. of France in the person
of his Ambassador, or as the Bishops and their shavelings did Henry the 2. of
England, till the blood followed. This is not civil usage for an Elder.

Verse 2. (...).
With all purity] Not with some only, but with as purity, for fear of the
worst: and least any impure motion therewhile creep into the heart unawares.

Verse 3. Honor widows indead] That is such as are widows not by divorce, but
by the death of their husbands, and loss of their children: such as was Naomi.
Honor them, that is, take them into the College of widows, to be maintained
at the Churches charge.

Verse 4. Let them learn first to shew] Such any one is in truth, as he is at
home, Ps. 101.2. The hypocrites virtues (as that of the Sarmatians) run all
outward. Something he seems abroad, but follow him home, and you shall soon see
what he it ^ follow stage-plaiers into their thing-house where they disrobe
themselves, and then it will appear they are vile varlets. Like unto this
Apostolical procept was thee of Chil^, one of the wise men of (...), (...)
(...) to govern honestly a man's (...).

And to requite their parents] See the Note on Matthew 15.4.

Verse 5. Trusts in God] Whereas while she had an husband and children, she
trusted overmuch in them. The Hemorroisse sought not to our Savior, till all
her money was gone, Z^ph. 3.12. They are an afflicted poor people: therefore
they trust in the name of the Lord.

Verse 6. Is dead while she liveth] Cum careat pura mente. cadaver agit.
Pamphilus in Terence says the like of a light huswife. Sane hercle homo
voluptati obsequens fuit dum vixit. Saint Paul's Greek cannot well be rendered
but by Terences latin, and Terences latin cannot be well put into other Greek.

Verse 7. And these things give in charge] Often inculcate, and set on with a
great deal of vehemence, that religion suffer not.

Verse 8. But if any provide not] That they may have Gaiusses prosperity,
Mentem sanam in corpore sano: Though the Apostles meaning here is chiefly, as
touching bodily nourishment and outward accommodations.

Specially for those of his own house] Socrates, (...)
an Infidel, took care of the welfare of his family and allies, as Libanius
testifies, Bishop Ridley was very kind and natural to his kinsfolk, And the
Lord Cromwell before the time of his apprehension, Act. and Dson. fol. 1559.
Ibid. 1086.
took such order for his servants, that many of them, especially the younger
brethren which had little else to trust unto, had honestly lest for them in
their friends hands, to relieve them whatsoever should befall him.

Verse 9. The wife of one man] As Anna, Luke 1.36. Such are held to be more
modest, to whom the thoughts of death has been enough to forbid the banes of
second marriage.

Verse 10. Well reported of, etc.] A good name is better then precious
ointment, Eccles. 7.1. And rather to be chosen then great riches, Prove. 22.1.
Provident we must be to preserve it, learning of the unjust steward by lawful
(though he did it by unlawful means:) for our Savior noted this defect, when
he said, The children of this World are ^i^ser in their generation then the
children of light, Luke 16.8. (...).


Verse 11. To wax wanton] To run away (as pampered Palfreys) with the bit
betwixt their teeth, and to play the jades.

Verse 12. Having damnation] Or public reproach, as Verse 14. for their
desultory lightness and inconsiderate rashness.

Cast off their first faith] Not that of their baptism (as diverse of the
Indians do that have been baptized by the Spaniards) but their viduall
promised chastity and service to the Saints.

Verse 13. They learn to be idle] It is an art soon learned, by doing nothing
to do naughtily. Nihil agendo male agere discunt. Idleness is the hour of
temptation: and an idle person is the devils tennis-ball, tossed by him, at his
pleasure.

Wandering about from house to house] As vagrants, or as pedlers opening their
packs, and dropping here a tale, and there a tale. A practice flatly forbidden
by God, Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer. The
Hebrew word signifies a peddler. (...) Whence (...)
And another Hebrew word used for defaming or slandering, Psalm. 15.3. properly
notes a footing or trotting it up and down, for a foot.
prying and spying, and carrying tales and rumors, 2 Samuel 19.27. Beeman. de
origin ling lat.
The Greek word also (...), and the latin word Arguo, first signifies to be
idle, and next to reprehend others. Because they that have little to do at
home, will be over-busie abroad, in censuring and slandering others.

And not only idle] The first born of idleness, is to do nothing: the next
issue that she has is, to do evil. Otium negotium, Idleness is a kind of
business.

But ^atlers also] (...).
Gr. Trist^rs: Magno conatu magnas nugas agunt. The Rabbis have a Proverb,
That ten Kabs of speech descended into the world, and the women took a way nine
of them.

And busy bodies] For every fool will be meddling, Pro. 20 3.

Speaking things, etc.] It is a very hard thing well to manage many words,
(...), In multilaquio stultiloquium.

Verse 14. Give none occasion to the adversary] The devil or his instruments,
whose mouths he often borrows to blaspheme and rail with.

Verse 15. Turned aside after Satan] Revolted from Christian religion, going
out of Gods blessing into the worlds warm Sun. These could not choose unto
themselves a worse condition.

Verse 16. Have widdows] That are widows indeed, that have neither children
nor nephews to relieve them, verse. 3. of whom by the law of nature they may
require (...), aliment and succor.

And let not the Church be charged] How then will Churchrobbers answer it, if
Church chargers be in a fault? Let them give us a just Commentary upon Prove,
20.25. and remember Cardinal Wolsey, and his sacrilegious instruments: five of
whom came to fearful ends, as Scultetus records and concludes with this
with, Scultet Annal. dec 1 p. 332.
Vtinam his and similibus exemplis edocti discant homines res semel Deo
consecratos timide attrectare. I would that men would be warned by these
examples, and better advised how they meddle with Church maintenance, thereby
to enrich themselves.

Verse 17. Worthy of double honour] viz. Countenance and maintenance; they may
give themselves continually and cheerfully to preaching and prayer, Act. 6.4.
Let them have reverence and recompense.

They who labour] Even to lassitude, (...).
as he does that cleaves wood, or that toileth in harvest, or that goes on
warfare, 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4, Preaching is a painful work, and enfeebleth a man
exceedingly, whence the Prophet cries out, My leannesse^ my leanness. And our
Savior at little past thirty, was reckoned by the Jews to be toward fifty,
Joh. 8.57. It is supposed by Divines, that he had so spent himself in
preaching, that he seemed to the Jews to be much elder then he was.

Verse 18. Worthy of his hire] Of his meat, Mat. 10.10. of his wages, as here.
Harvest-labourers have meat and drink, and double-wages.

Verse 19. Receive not an accusation] If to be accused were sufficient to make
a man guilty, no good Minister should be innocent. Praedicare nihil aliud est
quam derivare in se surorem totius mundi, says Luther. Truth has always a
scratcht face. Men hate him that reproves in the gate. Every fool has a bolt
to shoot at a faithful Preacher.

Verse 20 Them that sin] i. e. Those Presbyters that sin publicly,
scandalously, as did Peter, Gal. 2.14. and those who were convicted, by two or
three witnesses, as ver. 19. Rebuke before all: yet not as if they were
whipping boys. See the Note on ver. 1. of this Chapter. But if the fault be
not known abroad, that rule of our Savior takes place, Mat. 18.15, 16.
Constantine the Great was heard to say, That if he should take a Presbyter in
the act of adultery, he would cover the matter with his imperial robe, rather
then it should come abroad to the scandals of the weak, and scorn of the wicked.

Verse 21. (...).
Without preferring one] Or, Without precipitation or prejudice. Omne judicium
a se aufert, qui adcausam praejudicium assert. A Judge must not fit to hear
persons, but causes: therefore justice is drawn blinde-fold.

Doing nothing by partiality] (...).
By tilting the balance o'th'one side, as the words signifies. An even hand
must be carried betwixt party and party. The contrary whereunto is called by
the Greeks (...), siding.

Verse 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man] The best that can come of rashness is
repentance. (...) Plutarch.
Scipio would not yield that a wise man should ever come in with, Had I Wist.
In ordination of Ministers all possible care and caution is to be used.
Chrysostom thinks that that earnestnes used by the Apostle in the former
verse, belongs chiefly to this. Some also make the two last verses a reason of
this.

Verse 23. Drink no longer water] Timothy living among the luxurious Ephesians,
was so abstemious, that the Apostle is fain to prescribe him pbysick.
Hypocrites will be chaste only in the mountains where are no women, and sober in
Scythia where are no vines: but Lot was chaste in the midst of Sodom; and
Anacbarsis temperate among the debauched Athenians. The faithful in the world
are like a pearl in puddle; they lose nothing of their virtue. though amidst
the vicious.

Verse 24. Some men's sins] The Judge of the earth keeps his petty-sessions
now, letting the law pass upon some few, reserving the rest till the great
assizes. Some wicked God punishes here lest his providence, but not all, lest
his patience and promise of judgment should be called into question, Augan Ps.
30.
as Augustine has observed.

Verse 25. Cannot be hid] As putid hypocrisy shall be detected (fir the name
of the wicked must rot) so wronged innocence shall be cleared, as the ecclipsed
moon wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendor.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. Count their own masters]
ANd not under a pretense of Christian liberty, and because in Christ Jesus
there is neither bond nor free, seek to shake off the yoke of obedience that
God has hung upon their necks, See 1 Pet. 2.28.

That the name of God and his doctrine, etc.] Be traduced as a doctrine of
liberty. Heathens^ly at the catch, 1 Pet. 2.12. (...).
spying and prying (as the word there signifies) and imputing all public
judgments to Christians miscarriages. Nunc male audiunt castiganturque vulgo
Christiani (says Lactantius) quod aliter quam sapientibus convenit vivant, and
vitia sub obtentu nominis celent. Lactan de opis. Dei ad Demet.
Christians are very hardly spoken of at this very day, because their
conversation is not as becomes the Gospel of Christ, but they think to cover
their faults with the fig leaves of profession.

Verse 2. Partakers of the benefit] i. e. Of Christ, who is here called the
benefit, as Joh. 4.10. the gift of God.

Verse 3. If any man teach otherwise] Discover himself Heterodox, (...).
out of affectation of singularity, etc. as diverse do in this licentious age;
broaching things different from the received doctrine, as holding it with
Phocion, a goodly thing to dissent from others.

Consent not to wholesome words] Words that have a healing property in them. The
Scripture (as that library of Alexandria] (...).
may be properly said to be the souls physic. By the reading of Livy, Curtius,
Aventinus, and other Historians, many are said to have been recovered of diverse
desperate diseases. Joh. Bodin. de utilit historiae.
O facile and beatum curationis genus, says mine author. But the reading of
the holy Scriptures does a far greater cure then this upon the soul.

Verse 4. He is proud] Gr. He is blown up, big-swolne. (...).
Swelling is a dangerous symptom in the body; but much more in the soul. Pride
and self-concit is a bastard (says one) begot betwixt a learned head, and an
unsanctified heart: which being once conceived in the soul, causes it to swell
till it burst asunder with unthankfulness to God for the bestowing, with envy,
scorn and disdain of men in the imparting of such gifts, as may be to them
beneficial.

Knowing nothing] sc. Aright, and as they ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. See the
Note there. The Gnostics boasted, that they knew all things knowable. Irenaeus
says, that they were so besotted with an opinion of themselves, that they
accounted their own writings to be Gospel. Such self-admirers also were the
Illuminates (as they called themselves) the Manichees, the Novatians: And such
are now the Jesuits, the Sectaries, etc.

Do^ing about questions] Gr. Question sick. As the Schoolmen, and our new
Questionists.

And strifes of words] (...).
Frivolous questions and quarrels. The wit of heretics and schismatikes will
better serve them to devise a thousand shifts to elude the truth, then their
pride will suffer them once to yield, and acknowledge it.

Verse 5. Perverse disputings] Endless and needless discourses and exercises,
opposite to those above, Chap. 4.13, 14, 15.

Of men of corrupt mindes] That want not time, but waste it, Aliud agendo.

From such withdraw thy self] Gr. Stand off, keep at a distance, as you would
from one that has a plague sore. (...).


Verse 6. But godliness with contentment] True piety has true plenty, and is
never without a well-contenting sufficiency, a full self-sufficiency. The
wicked in the fullness of his sufficiency is in straits, Job 20 22.
Contrariwise the godly in the sulnes of their straits are in an all sufficiency.

Verse 7. We can carry nothing out] But a winding sheet, as Saladines shirt,
which he commanded to be hung up at his burial, a bare Priest going before the
bier, Carrion Chron.
and proclaiming, Saladine the mighty Monarch of the East is gone, and has
taken no more with him then what you see. M Rogers Trea. of love.
Indeed I read of one that being ready to die, clapped a twenty shillings piece
of gold into his mouth, and said, Some wiser then some: If I must leave all the
rest, yet this ^^le take with me. Turk Rist.
But this was none of the wisest men you will say: As that great Chaliph of
Babylon was none of the happiest, that was starved to death by the great Cham
of Cat^ia, amidst the infinite treasures of gold, silver and precious stones
that he and his predecessors had most covetously heaped together, whereof he
willed him to eat and make no spare. It is with us in the world (says one) as
it was in the Jewish fields and orchyards; pluck and eat they might, while
there, not pocket, or put up. Or as boys, that robbing an orchyard meet with
the owner at the door.

-- modo quem for tuna fovendo De Annibald Silias ^^al.

Congestis opibus donisque refer sit opimis,
Nudum tar tare a port arit navita cymba.
Verse 8. And having food and raiment] Houses are not named: for that then they
were to stand ready to run from place to place, and to leave house and all
behind them. Food and raiment, (...), as Isidore elegantly here observes,
Food not junkets, raiment not ornament, garments quasi gardments, to guard us
from the cold air. Nature is content with a little, grace with less: As, Not
to starve, not to thirst, says Galen. Cibus and potus sunt divitiae
Christianorum, (...) Gol. Greenbam. Aelian.
says Hierome. Bread and water with the Gospel are good cheat, says another.
Epicurus could say, That he would think himself as happy as might be, Si aquam
haberet and offam, if he could get but a morsel of meat, and a mouthfull of
water. Cic de finib, 1, 2.
This was strange from Epicurus. But Epicurci mihi videntur m^lius facere quam
dicere, says Tully. Epicurus and his followers practiced better then they
held. A little of the creature will serve turn to carry a man through his
pilgrimage. Insaniae igitur damnandi sunt (says Vives, qui tam multa tam anxie
congerunt, quum sit tam paucis opus. He is little better then mad, that heaps
up such a deal, when far less will do the deed.

Verse 9. But they that will be rich] Dives qu^ ficri valt, and cito vult
fieri, Juve^. Prove. 28.20.
That are resolved to have it howsoever, -- rem, rem, quocunque modorem. He
that hastes to be rich, shall not be innocent.

And a snare] As the Panther, which so loves man's dung, that if it be hanged a
height from it, it will leap and never leave till it have burst it self in
pieces to get it.

Drown men in destruction and perdition] (...) Such a drowning as is desperate.
Ita demergunt ut in aquae summit^to rursus non ^bulliant, so as they never
show themselves above water any more. We ro^d of the inhabitants of Oenoe, a
dry Island besides Athens, that they bestowed much labor to draw into it a
river to water it, and make it more fruitful. But when all the passages were
opened, and the receptacles prepared, the water came in so plentifully, that it
over-flowed all: and at the first tide drowned the Island, and all the people.
So fares it with many covetous caitiffs, who seem to be of Nevessan the
Lawyers mind, He that will not venture his body shall never be valiant; He
that will not venture his soul shall never be rich. Hubertus, an English,
Cormorant, made this will, I yield my goods to the King, my body to the grave,
my soul to the devil.

Verse 10. For the love of money] Phocylides says the same, (...)
Covetousness is the mother of all mischief.

The root of all evil] As there is life in the root, when there is no sap in
the branches: so covetousnes often lives, when other vices die and decay, as in
old men; who because they are likely to leave the world, spet on their hands,
and take better hold.

They have erred from the faith] Selling themselves to the devil, as Judas,
Ahab, that Pope for seven years enjoyment of the Popedom.

And pierced themselves thorow] Aul. Gel, lib. 30 cap. 1.
Vndique transfixerunt, They have galled and gored themselves. The covetous man
has his name in Hebrew of a word that signifies sometimes to pierce or wound,
Psalm. 10.3. with Joel 2.8. He that will be rich takes no more rest then one
upon a rack, or bed of thorns: when he graspeth earthly things most greedily,
he embraces nothing but smoke, which wringeth tears from his eyes, and
vanishes into nothing. Three vultures he has always seeding upon his heart,
Care in getting, Fear in keeping, Grief in spending and parting with that he
has: so that he is in hell aforehand.

Verse 11. But thou o man of God] If Timothy were that Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Revel. 2.1. that left his fist love (as some think he was) this
counsel was but needful. Christ cautions his Disciples to beware of
worldliness, Luke 21.34.

Flee these things] R^mis velisque, with all thy might, that thou be not tackt
with them, taxt for them.

Follow after righteousnesse] These be notable counterpoisons against
covetousnes. Paul shows him a better project.

Verse 12. Fight the goodfight] Not only follow after the former graces, but
fight for them, rather then fail of them.

Luy hold on eternal life[While others lay hold on wealth, honors, etc. Catch
at the crown, which is hanged up on high, as it were, and provided for
conquerours only, that so fight as to finish, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Tempus est nos de
illa perpetua jaw, Cie. ad Attie. lib. 10.
non de bac exigua vita cogiture, could the Heathen Orator say. It Is high time
now we should think of heaven. Catch at the opportunity, as the echo catches
the voice.

Verse 13. Who before Pontius Pilate] Not dissembling the truth, though jeared
by Pilate, who scornfully asked him, Joh 18.38.
What Is truth? q. d do you stand upon your life, and yet talk of truth? Julian
and his Heathen instruments had set out certain foolish and false relations
under Pilates name, purposely to cast dirt upon Christ: which are refuted by
Augustine and Cyril.

Verse 14 Without spot] Of foul sins, Deuteronomy. 32.5.

Vnrabukeable] So as no just exception can be laid against thee for allowance
of lesser evils.

Until the appearing] Illustrem illum adventum, (...).
as Beza renders it: the bright, clear or radiant appearing. St Paul would have
Timothy so carry himself, as if Christ should then come: and to remit nothing
of his zeal, though he should live till that time.

Verse 15. Which in his times he shall shew] Let no man therefore ask, Where is
the promise of his coming? Though he be slow, yet he is sure: and his time is
the best time, wait, Jam. 5.7.

The blessed and only potentate] A lively and losey d^scription of God, whom
yet none can possibly describe. One being asked, What God was, answered,
Siscirem, Deus essem.

Verse 16. Dwelling in the light] So that the Seraphims in their addresses to
him, clap their wings on their faces, Isa. 6.2. as men are wont to do their
hands, when the lightning slasheth in their eyes.

Nor can see] We can see but Gods back-parts and live; we need see no more that
we may live for ever.

Verse 17. That they be not high-minded] The devil will easily blow up this
blab, if we watch not. Should the Ant think her self some great business,
because gotten upon her hillock?

In uncertain riches] Riches were never true to any that trusted to them. Mim^^.
Vitrea est fortuna: cum splendet, frangi^ur.

Who gives us all things richly to enjoy] Thus riches cannot do for us. The
covetous enjoyes nothing, not the sick, nor the discontented, nor any else
unless with riches God give us himself.

Verse 18. That they do good] Not the richer the harder; as the Sun moves
slowest, when it is at the highest in the Zodiac: or as the Moon, when it is
fullest of light, gets furthest off from the Sun.

Rich in good works] This is to be rich in God, Luke 12.21. When our works are
good, Quoad fontem and quoad finem.

Ready to distribute] Diod. Sic. l. 1.
A virtue much commended in the Kings of Egypt; practiced by the Pythagoreans,
Essenes; but especially by those primitive Christians, Act. 4.

Verse 19. Laying up in store] As wise merchants, happy usurers, parting with
that which they cannot keep, that they may gain that which they cannot lose.

On eternal life] (...).
Or as some copies have it, Of life indeed. Aeterna vita, vera vita. Aug.

Verse 20. That which is, etc.] viz. The treasure of true doctrine, esteeming
every particle of it precious, as the filings of gold.

Verse 21. Which some professing] Gr. Promising, as the Gnostics, and other
heretics.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. Paul an Apostle, etc]
THe Preface of this Epistle seems to be an abbridgement of that of the Epistle
to the Romans. See the Notes there.

Which is in Christ Jesus] All out of Christ are living carcases, walking
sepulchers of themselves.

Verse 2. Grace, mercy, and peace] See the Note on 1 Timothy 1.2.

Verse 3. Whom I serve from my fore-fathers-] Those twelve Tribes, that served
God instantly day and night. Act. 26.7. That was a desperate resolution of the
Heathen Orator, T^l. de not. deo. l. 3.
Me ex ea opinione, quam a majoribus accepi de cultu Deorum immortalium nullius
unquam oration, aut docti, aut indocti movebit. I will never stir an inch from
the religion of my forefathers, for any man's persuasion. Paul forsook his
Pharisaisme to serve God, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had done with a pure
conscience.

Verse 4. Being mindesull of thy tears] Timothy was a man of many tears, Act
and Mon. sol 1457.
so was David, Paul, Luther, Bradford, of whom it is said, that he did seldom
eat, but he bedewed his trencher with tears, and that few days passed him
without plenty of tears shed, before he went to bed: -- (...) Ibid.


Verse 5. In thy Grandmother Lois, and mother] A sweet happine^^e to any child
to have a good mother and grandmother. For these have great opportunity of
dropping good things into their little Lemuels, as being much about them. The
mothers of the Kings of Judah are constantly mentioned: and as they were good
or evil, so were their children Partus sequitur ventrem. The birth follows the
belly.

Verse 6. Stir up the gift] Blow up thy smaller spark into a flame. Grace in
us is like a dull sea-cole fire (says one) which if not now and then blown and
stirred up, though there be no want of fuel, (...).
yet will of it self at length die and go out. The word here used by the
Apostle is Plato's word. The Apostle seems to have bin well read in Plato's
writings.

Verse 7. The spirit of fear] (...), called elsewhere the spirit of bondage,
(...), Romans 8.15. The law will convince the judg^ment: but it is the Gospel that
convinces the lust and he affection.

Of power, and of a sound minde] These two fitly stand together. Sin unrepented
of, lies rotting at the heart, and by rotting weakneth it: as a rotten rag has
no strength.

Verse 8. Afflictions of the Gospel] Affliction is Evangelij genius, says
Calvin. Hence it is called the word of Christ's patience, Revel. 2.

According to the power of God] For unless he support us by his power, we
shall never bear up in affliction.

Verse 9. With an holy calling] All that follows (to those words in the end of
verse. 10. Through the Gospel) comes in by a Parenthesis, and is so to be read.

Verse 10. By the appearing] By his coming in the flesh: of which also the
Psalmist speaks, Ps. 96.13.

Brought life and immortality to light] As he drew light out of darkness at
the creation. And as he then made light on the first day of the week, so on the
same day he abolished death, etc. by his resurrection from the dead.

Ver. 11. A teacher of the Gentiles] His writings therefore should be the more
highly prized and studied by us Gentiles, as being properly ours: like as Ps.
127. was a Song made (specially) for Solomon.

Verse 12. I know whom I have ^rusted] Here was not a faint hope, or a
conjecturall confidence, but a plerophory of says. Bernard.
The reason where of is thus rendered by a Father, Quia in charitate nimia
adoptavit me, quia verax in promissione, and potons in exhibitione, because God
who of his free grace has adopted me, is both able and faithful to fulfill
his promises. Luth. apud Jo. Manliam.
That was a notable speech of Luther, Ipse viderit ubi anima mea man sura fit,
qui pro casic sollicitus ^^it, ut vitam pro ea posuerit. Let him that died for
my soul, see to the salvation of it.

That which I have committed] A child that has any precious thing given him,
cannot better secure it, then by putting it into his fathers hands to keep: so
neither can we better provide for our souls safety, then by committing them to
God. Aug de bo^o pers^u ^hap 6.
Tutiores aurem vivimus, si totum D^o damus, non autem nos illi ^x part and
nobis ex part committimus. We shall be sure to be safest, if we commit our
selves wholly to God: and seek not to part stakes with him therein. The ship
that is part in the water, and part an the mud, is soon beaten in pieces.

Verse 13. Hold fast the sorm] The catechisticall principles, that method,
system, short sums of Divinity that St Paul had compiled for Timothies use;
called here not only a form, as Romans (...).
6.17. but a short form, or brief method; such as has both perspicuity and
brevity.

Verse 14. That good thing that was etc.] Thy crown of recompense, Revel. 3.11.
Or thy Converts, thy crown of rejoicing, Theophyl.
I These. 2.19. Or the purity of thy doctrine, 1 Timothy 6.20.

Verse 15. All they which are in Asia] All the Ministers there. Revel 6.13.
(...) 16.^.^6.
These stats fell from heaven, as fast as me fig tree makes abort, with any
never so light and gentle a wind.

Phygellus and Hermogenes] Famous only for their recidivation and apostasy.
Hermogenes took after Hormogene^ the retrograde Rhetorician; who at 22 years of
age was an excellent Orator, but by 24. Mente ^apsus est, forgot all his skill,
and became a very dunce, G. Rhodigin l. 11. c. 40.
Null a evidente causa, says mine author.

Verse 16. He often resresh^d me] Gr. (...).
Poured cold water upon me, as that Angel did upon the wracked limbs of
Theodorus the Martyr, mentioned by Socrates and Russinus in the days of Julian
the Apostate.

Verse 17. He sought me out very diligently] Whit vehement desire and intention
of affection: not as a coward seeks after his enemy, (...).
whom he hopes he shall never find; but as Saul sought David, or as the wise
men the babe of Bethlehem, etc.

Verse 18. The lord] That is, God the Father grant he may find mercy of the
Lord, that is, of God the Son, as Jehovah from Jehovah, Genesis 19.24.

That he may sinde] For his care in finding out me, v. 17.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Be strong]
TOgether with the word, there goes forth a power, as Luk 5 17.

Verse 2. (...).
Commit them to faith full men] No talent is given us for private and proper
use, but that we be trading and transmitting it also to others. Syn^sius speaks
of some, who having a treasure of abilities in them, yet would as soon part with
their ^earts as with their meditations, etc. the canker of whose great skill
shall be a witness against them.

Verse 3. Endure hardship] Never dream of a delicacy: think not to find God in
the gardens of Egypt, whom Moses found not but in the burning-bush. Many love
Canaan, but loath the wilderness, commend the country, but look upon the
conquest as impossible; would sit in the seat of honor with Zebedee's
children, but not drink the cup of afflict^on. These deceive themselves.

As a good soldier, etc.] Christ says to us (as the black Prince his father
sent to him, Hist. ^f France, p. 1, 6.
sighting as it were in blood to the knees, and in a great distress) Either
vanquish or die.

Verse 4. With the affairs] Or, Gainful negotiations: with marriage-matters,
say the Pap^sts here, but without all show of sense. The Council of Chalcedon
strictly forbids Ministers to m^ddle in worldly matters. Ca^^ 3.


Verse 5. Except he strive lawfully] Tam circaciborum quam contiacati^^ac
h^n^statis rationem, so^ch Cassianus,

Verse 6. The hush and man laboring si^st] Sp^s alit agricolas, Noilli falsi
sunt (says Salust) qui diversissimas res expe^^a it, (...) vol^ptatem and
prami^ virtutis. (...).
They are utterly out, that think to have the pleasure of sloth, and the
guerdon of goodness.

Verse 7. Consider what I say] Apply to thy self these forementioned similies,
and so buckle close to thy business.

And the Lord give thee] Unless God open Hagars eyes she cannot see the
fountain that is hard by. Rebecca cooks the Venison, but Isaac only blesses.

Verse 8. Remember that Jesus] Remember it for thine encouragement; that
Christ, for a reward of his sufferings, was both raised and exalted, Phil. 2 9.

Verse 9. But the word of God is not bound] It runs and is glotified, 2 Thessalonians.
3.1. being free and not fettered. I preach, though a prisoner, says Paul: so
did Bradford and other Martyrs. Act and Mon. fol. 1457.
Within a few days of Qu. Mary's reign almost all the prisons in England were
become right Christian schools and Churches (says Mr Fox:) so that there was
no greater comfort for Christian hearts, then to come to the prisons to behold
their virtuous conversation, and to hear their prayers, preachings, Ibid 1.8 2.
etc.

Verse 10. That they may also obtain] viz. By my pains in preaching, though
bound, and by example of my patience in suffering bonds, etc.

Verse 11. It is a faithful saying] A found and a sure assertion, Romans 8 17.
Afflictions are the praeludia triumphi.

If we be dead] As Christ, ver. 8.

Verse 12. If we suffer] No wearing the crown, but by bearing the cross first.
Epist ad Mel^m^th.
Ne Jesum quidem audias gloriosum, nisi videru prius crucisixum, says Luther.
Christ himself was not glorified, till first crucified. Q. Elizabeth is said to
have swam to her crown through a sea of sorrows: so must we.

If we deny him] See the Note on Mat. 10 33. God usually retaliates, paies men
home in their own com, proportions jealousy to jealousy, provocation to
provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Isa. 66.3, 4.

Verse 13. If we believe not] See the Note on Romans 3.3. Some sense it thus:
Though we prove perfidious, yet he^ is no loser by us, as having all within
himself. Howbeit hereby we show that we have no interest in Christ; for he
cannot deny himself, though we can deny him.

Verse 14. Strive not about words] Either out of novelty, or nicen^sse. As
Longolius who would not use the word Ecclesia, but in stead thereof Respublica
Christiana. Another Italian Bishop for Episcopus took up the Heathenish word
Flamen: So Castalio for Angelus has Genius, J^h M^nl^ loc. con. Lu^^Vives.
etc. And Pomponius Laetus was full of such like fooleries, aerie
contestations, and empty strifes.

Verse 15. Study to show thy self] There are crept into Gods Sanctuary such
Levites to divide the word, that are not worthy the place of Gib^onites to
cleave wood: like those unlearned Logicia us in Plato, Lacerant doct^inas,
sicut caniculi panniculos, says he: They tear up a text, and torment it, they
wrest the Scriptures and wrong them, set them upon the wrack, and make them
speak what they never meant. These should be driven from the work, as those
bastard Levites were by the Tirshata, Ezra 2.63.

Rightly dividing the word of God] (...).
The Syriack renders it, Rightly preaching the word. Aeschines says, An
Orators oration, and the law (so a Preachers Sermon and the Word) must be
unisons. And it Galen could say, That in anatomizing man's brain, Gol. de usu
par. lib 7.
P^ysicians must carry themselves as men do in the Temple: How much more must
Divines do so, in dividing Gods holy Word?

Verse 16. (...).
But shun] Gr. Go round about them, viz. to suppr^sse them on every side. St
Peter calls them bubbles of words, full of wind, 2 Pet. 2.18.

Verse 17. Eat as does a gangrene] Which presently overruns the parts, and
rakes the brain, pierces into the very bones, and if not suddenly cured by
cutting often the part infected, kills the patient. Lo such is heresy and
error: which made Placilla the Empress earnestly beseech her husband
Theodosius Senior not to confer with Eunomius the heretic, Sozom. l 7. c. 7
lest he should be perverted by his speeches. Jac Revius de vit. Pont.
Anastasius second Bishop of Rome, anno 497. while he sought to win Acacius the
heretic, was seduced by him.

Verse 18. (...).
Have erred] Gr. Have missed the mark, as unskil^ull Archers: or as
inconsiderate Mariners, by misreckoning of a point, they have misled the haven,
and run upon the rocks.

That the resurrection is past] Epiphan baeres. 41.
These were (likely) the progenitors of Marcion, who taught that there was no
resurrection of the body to be believed, but of the soul only.

Verse 19. Nevertheless the foundation] viz. Of Gods election, which is here
compared to a sealed book: on the one side of the seal is written, The Lord
knows them that are his. On the other side, And let every one that names,
etc. This the Apostle sets forth, for the better settling of such as were
shaken by the fall of Hymenaeus and Philetus, two such forward profess^urs.

The Lord knows them, etc.] In respect of the freeness of his election, and
immobility of his affection. Howbeit this knowledge that God has of his, is
carried secret, as a river under ground, till he calls and separates us from the
rest.

That names the name of Christ] He may have an infallible seal of salvation
that but names Christ's name in prayer, that can say no more then, Ah Father,
desiring and resolving to depart from iniquity.

Verse 20. There are not only, etc.] Wonder not therefore, murmr not that
there are a mixture of good and bad in Gods house. He knows how to serve
himself of both, Romans 9.20, 21, 22. Neither be offended, that some of great
note fall away, as did Hymen^^s and Philetus: God has his vessels of all sorts.

Verse 21. Purge himself from these] From these seducers, or arch-heretikes,
those vessels of dishonor, whose doctrine defiles worse then any kitchen
stuff, or leprosy.

He shall be a vessel, etc.] You know (said John Careless, Act. and Mon^ol.
1743.
the Martyr in a letter to Mr Philpot) that the vessel before it be made
bright, is soiled with oil, and many other things, that in may scour the
better. O happy be you that you be now in this scouring house: for shortly you
shall be set upon the celestial shelf, as bright as Angels, etc.

Verse 22. Fly also youthful lusts] (...).
Fly them he must with post-haste, though such a chaste and chastened piece, as
he was. Youth is a slippery age, slippery as glass, easily contracting dust
and filth, as the word used by David imports, Psalm. 119.9. and should
therefore cleanse its ways, by cleaving to the Word. (...) erveo.
Youth is a hot age, as the Greek word signifies; a black dark age, as the
Hebrew word notes, Eccles. 11.10. Therefore put away evil from thy flesh,
says the wife man there out of his own experience. St Paul repeats and
inculcates this precept upon his son Timothy, as men do not only anoint their
flesh, but rub in the ointment. He knew that all was but enough. Summopere
cavendum divino praeconine dista factis d^ ficientibus crubescant. Nihil
turpius peripatetico claudo. says one.

Verse 23. But foolish and unlearned, etc.] Vitiligatorum naenias devita. (...).
Shift them off, set them by as seeds of sedition. Shake off vain questionists,
as great triflers: Such were the Schoolmen, in det^station of whole vain
jangling, and doting about questions Luther says, Luth tom 1. oper. let. cp^.
7.
Prope ^st, ut jurem nullum esse Theol^gum Scholasticum qui unum cap^t
Evangelij intelligat. I could almost swear that there is not a Schoolman that
understands one Chapter of the new Testam^nt. One of their Doctors said, That
he had publicly expounded the book of Job. But by that time he came to the
tenth and eleventh Chapters, Joh, M^^l. loc. ^on page 473.
he did ver^y believe that Job was torn and tortured by his interpretations,
then ever he had been by his botches and ulcers.

Verse 24. Must not strive] (...).
Scold, wrangle, Nerixandramit tatur veritas, ut fere sit, lest by striving
about the truth we utterly lose it. Facta est files Evangeliorum, files
temporum: and cum fides una esse d^beat, ^o poe^e ventum est ut nulla sit. A
sad complaint of Hilary. Erasmus observes, That in the primitive t^nes there
were so many sects and heresies, and so much pretending to the truth by them
all, that it was a witty thing to be a right believer.

Patient] (...) Su, tine, a^stine.
Or, Tolerant of evil both persons and occurre^ces: he shall have his back
burden of both, and must both bear and forbear.

Verse 25. Those that oppose themselves] Though they should deal as absurdly
with us, as those that deny the snow to be white, etc. Arist Topi^ 1. (...)
Arguite di^utatos. Sic Lorin^^ ver^it.
Aristo^le forbids to dispute with such. But Christ commands not only by force
of argument to convince them, Jude 22. but also to hand^e them gently, and in
meekness to instruct them.

If God xill give them, etc.] Repentance is Gods gift: neither is it in the
power of any to repent at pleasure. Some vainly conceit, that these five words,
Lord have mercy upon me, are as efficacious to send them to heaven, as the
Papists that their five words of consecration are to transubstantiate the
bread. But as many are undone (says a Divine) by buying a counterfeit jew^l:
so many are in hell by mistake of their repentance.

Verse 26. (...).
Recover themselves] Put away their spiritual drunkenness, 1 Samuel 1.14. and
go forth and shake themselves, as Sampson out of sins lethargy.

Taken alive] But to be destroyed, 2 Pet, 2.12. (...) Taken alive, and in
hunting
without repentance unto life, Act. 11.18.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Perilous times]
GR. Hard times. Hard hearts make hard times. (...).
Ejusixodi tempora d^scripsit (says Casaubon of Tacitus, and the same may we
say of St Paul) quibus nulla unquam aut vir^^tum steriliora, aut virtutibus
inimiciora: He describes these last and loosest times of the world, barren of
virtues, but abounding with vices. There was never any but Noah, that with two
faces, saw both before and behind. But that ancient of days, to whom all
things are present, has here told us, that the last shall be the worst.

Verse 2. Lovers of their own selves] This sinful self-love is the root of all
the rest, that follow in this black bed-^oll.

Boasters] Or, Arrogant, as that Pyrgopolynices, Isa. 10.8,9, 10, 11. Vide Jun
in loc.
Thras^nicall Lamech, Genesis 4 23. where he brags and goes on to out-dare God
himself. Spaniards are said to be impudent braggers, and extremely proud in the
lowest ^bbe of fortune.

Verse 3. Without natural affection, etc.] True Christians live soberly, as
touching themselves, righteously toward men, Tit 2 12.
and godly toward their God. But these Antipodes are as touching themselves,
self-lovers, silver-lovers, pleasure-mongers, incontinent, boasters, proud,
heady, high-minded. As for their carriage toward others, they are blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, (...).
without natural affection, truce breakers, or irreconcilable, false
accusers, or devils, fierce or savage, despisers of those that are good,
traitors, etc. And as to God, they are not lovers of God, but unthankful,
unholy. And such dust-heaps as these, a man may find in every corner of the
Church.

Verse 4. Heady] Head long and headstrong, (...).
rash and inconsiderate, Qui non vident (...), that look not well about them,
but make desperate adventures.

Lovers of pleasure] Not considering that the pleasure passes, (...) Chrysostom.
but the pain that attends it is perpetual. Momentaneum est quod d^lectat,
aternum quod cruciat. Let not men take pleasure in pleasure. It was not simply
a sin in Esau to go a hunting ^ But yet the more he used it, the more profane
he waxed, and came at length to contemn his birthright. Who are void of the
spirit, but sensual ones, Jude 18, 19? Who say to God, Depart from us, but
those that dance? Job 21.10, 11. Better be preserved in brine, then rot in
honey. These pleasure-mongers are set last, as the worst of all.

Verse 5. Having a form of godlinesse] Hollow professors are as hollow trees
in an old wood; tall, but pithlesse, saplesse, unsound. Their formality is
fitly compared to a bulrush, whereof the color is fresh, (...) 58.3.
the skin smooth, he is very exact that can find a knot in a bulrush: But pill
it, and what shall you find within but a kind of spongeous unsubstantiall
substance, etc. These as if religion were a Comedy, do in voice and gesture act
divine duties, in heart renounce them.

Verse 6. Creep into houses] (...) (...) (...).
Gr. Shoot themselves into the inner rooms of houses, Quisese immergunt. by
their p^thanology and counterfeit humility, as the Jesuits and many of our
modern Sectaries.

Lead captive silly women] Gr. Take them prisoners, and then make prize of
them, 2 Pet. 2.3. Egregiam vero landem, and spolia amplaresertis, etc. But
omnes ha^eses ex Gynae^ijs. It is the guise of heretics to abuse the help of
women, to spread their poisonfull opinions. They get an Eudoxia, Justina,
Constantia on their side: and so work upon Adam by Eve. Of women they have ever
made their profit, that have attempted any innovation in religion.

Verse 7. Ever learning, and never able] Because resolved not to lose their
lusts. Intus existens prohibebat alienum: There was that within that kept out
holy learning. It was therefore an excellent prayer of holy Zuinglius before
his publ^ke Lectures, Father of lights, Scu'tet. A^^a.
illighten our minds, and open our hearts, so as that we may both understand
thine oracles, and be transformed into them, etc.

Verse 8. Now as Iannes and Iambres] Numenius the Pythagorean calls him
Mambres. These were those Egyptian sorcerers: their names S. Paul had either
by tradition, or out of some Jewish records. Tract Menachoth, cap 9.
Apuleius in his second Apology, mentions one Ioa^nes among the chief
Magicians. The Babylonian Thalmud also makes mention of these two by name, as
chief of the Sorcerers of Egypt.

Verse 9. As theirs also was] Exodus 8.19. When they were set, and could not
with all their skill make a louse: but by further resistance manif^sted their
folly unto all men. So did that jugler of Antwerp, all whose enchantments were
made void by Mr Tindall the Martyr present at that supper, where and when he
should, Act and Mon. fol. 985.
but could not play his feats, and show his cunning.

Verse 10. But thou have fully known] Or, (...).
Thou have exactly trod in my track, followed my footsteps: as Irenaeus did
Polycarps, as Pareus did V^sins: whence that Poet,

-- sacra docente Parco

Vividus Vrsini spiritus or a movet. Paulus Melissus


Verse 11. What persecutions I endured] Gr. (...).
What manner of persecutions. A Christian may without sin be sensible of
injuries and indignities. Only it must be the mourning of Doves, and not the
roaring of Bears. A sheep may be as sensible of the biting of a dog, as a swine
is, though he raise not such a dust, make not such a dinne.

Verse 12. Yea, and all that will live] Carry they the matter never so
discreetly, they must suffer. Many dream of a delicacy, they conceit a godly
life without persecution. These would pull a rose without pricks. Armat
spinarosas, mella tegunt apes. Thucydides complains of his contrymen,
Boethius.
that none of them would (...), suffer ought for goodness sake. Too few there
are, that now-adaies will do so.

Verse 13. Shall wax worse and worse] In deterius proficient, a sorry kind of
profiting, Quando And batarum more res procedat. Thus the Illuminates (as they
called themselves) a pestilent sect in Arragon, professing and affecting in
themselves a kind of Angelical purity, Spec. Europ.
fell suddenly to the very counterpoint of justifying bestiality. And though
these men and their light are quenched some while since, yet under pretense of
new lights have not our C^urch-forsakers wheeled, and wheeled about so long to
th^ng^t-h^nd, that they are perfectly come round to the left?

Verse 14. But continue thou, etc.] Gr. (...).
Abide, Keep thy station: Thou shall surely be put to it, as that prophetical
man in the ecclesiastical history went to the pillars a little before an
earthquake, and bad them stand fast, for they should shortly be shaken.

Verse 15. And that from a childe] Gr. From a suckling. as all children, (...).
so those especially that are dedicated to the work of the Ministry, should be
betimes inured to Scripture-learning.

To make thee wise] (...).
Gr. To wise thee, that thou may wise others, as Dan. 12.3. The same Hebrew
word signifies, 1. To understand. (...).
2. To instruct others. 3. To prosper.

To salvation] He is the wise man that provides for eternity. And when all the
worlds wisards shall very wisely cry out in hell, Nos insensati, Sapientes
sapien^er descendunt in infernil. (...)
We sools counted their lives madness, etc. They shall shine as the brightness
of the fi^mament, Dan. 12.3.

Verse 16. All Scripture is given] Gr. Breathed by God, both for matter and
words. What frontlesse heretics then are our upstart Anti-scripturists, M
Edwards his Gangrene, p. 18, 19.
that dare affirm, That the Scriptures are not divine, but humane invention:
and that the penmen wrote as themselves conceived; they were the actions of
their own spirit, etc? Also that the Scriptures are unsufficient and uncertain,
etc.

And is profitable for instruction] See my True Treasure, page 40 And hereunto
add for Consolation according to Romans 15.4. though this also is here
comprehended in Doctrine and Instruction for righteousness. (...).
The same Greek word signifies to exhort and to comfort.

Verse 17. That the man of God] The Minister, and so consequently the people
too, (...) omnibus ^umeris absolutus.
for whose use the Minister has all.

May be perfect] With a perfection of parts, able and apt to make use of the
holy Scriptures to all the former purposes, for the behoof or benefit of his
hearers. The authority of the Fathers (says a grave and learned Div^ne) M.
Bol^^on ^ is four last things page 147.
I never urge for necessity of proof (the Scripture is thereto all-sufficient
and superabundant) but only either in some singular poin^s to show consent: Or,
2. In our controversies against Antichristians, Antinomists, Neopelagians, etc.
Or, 3. When some honest passage of sanct^fication or seasonable opposition to
the corruption of the times, is falsely charged with novelty, singularity, and
too much precisenes.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. I charge thee therefore]
MAtters of greatest importance must be pressed with greatest vehemence. As God
puts not forth great power, but for great purpose, Ephesians. 1.18, 19 so
neither must we use great earnestness, but in affairs of great moment. It is a
weakness to be hot in a cold matter, but worse to be cold in a hot matter.
Farellus persuading Calvin (then a young student, and bound for Italy) to stay
and help in the Lords work at Geneva, pronounced Gods curse upon his studies
(which Calvin pretended) in case he staid not. Whereupon, M^lch. Adami in vita
Calv. page 114.
Non ausas fuit Calvinus ad Farelli tonitrua plus quam Periclea (says mine
author) jugum vocationis, quod sibi a Domino imponi videbat, detractare.
Calvin durst not stir after such a charge, but staid it out there to his dying
day.

Verse 2. Be instant] Gr. Stand over it. Stand close to it. (...).
Chrysostom at Antioch having preached many Sermons against swearing, was at
length asked, when he would preach upon another subject? He answered, When you
leave swearing, I Will leave preaching against swearing.

In season, out of season] On the Lord's Day, on the week day, Volentibus
nolentibus dic importunum, Tu vis errare, tu vis perire, ego nolo, says
Augustine. Let men know whether they will or no, that for lack of preaching
they shall not perish. The shewbread stood all the week before the Lord; to
show, that preaching is not ou^ of season on any day. The Friars of Basil held
that it was Lutheranum diebus profanis praedicare, Mel^h. Adam. Act. and Mon
fol. 11 11. Ibid. 86 ^^
Heretical to preach on working-daies. But Anthony Person, Martyr, told his
persecutours, That they were bite sheeps and not Bishops for neglecting to
preach: It being as great a wonder at Rome to hear a Bishop preach, as to see
an Ass sly, said Dr Bassinet. Ibid 1559. Ibid. 1380.
But Bishop Ridley preached usually every Sabbath Day and holy day: so did B.
Jewel, Dr Tailor Martyr, Mr Bradford, even during his imprisonment: Preaching,
reading and praying was all his whole life. Ibid. 1457.
He did sharply reprove sin, pithily improve errors, sweetly preach Christ
crucified, earnestly persuade to a godly life, etc.

With all long-suffering, etc.] Sidecimus quisque, si unus persuasus fuerit, ad
consolationem abunde sufficit, says Chrysostom. If you gain but the tithe of
your hearers, or less, it is well.

Verse 3. Sound doctrine] Alex Aphrod. problem.
Which as honey, Vulnera purgat, ulcera mordet, purges green wounds, but
causes pain to exulcerate parts. Children, though they love and lick in honey,
yet will not endure to have it come near their lips, when they have sore mouths.

Having itching cars] Horat.
Which must have clawing preachers; such as will never auriculas mordaci rader^
v^ro, deal plainly and faithfully with their souls.

Verse 4. Turn their cars from the truth] Aristotle writes, That Vultures are
killed with oil of roles. De mirahil. ^uscult.
Sweet smells enrage Tigers. Swine cannot live in some parts of Arabia, says
Pliny, by reason of the pleasant sent of aromaticall trees, there growing in
every wood.

Verse 5. Endure afflictions, do the work] Honor ministerij est in onere,
dignit as in diligentia, corona in contemptu.

Make full proof] (...).
Or, Accomplish thy Ministry: So executing every part of it, as to make it thy
whole business. Verbi minister es, hoc age, was Mr Perkins his Motto. Thou art a
Minister, look to it.

Verse 6. Ready to be offered] (...) He speaks of it as done already.
To be poured out as a drink offering upon Gods altar. Thus the Apostle
expresses himself emphatically, pathetically, elegantly, setting forth by what
death he should glorify God, viz. by being beheaded. Whether my death be a
burnt-offering, a drink offering (by fire or sword) or a peace offering (that I
die in my bed) I desire it may be a freewill offering, a sweet sacrifice to the
Lord.

The time of my departure] He makes nothing of death. It was no more betwixt
God and Moses, but Go up and die. So betwixt Christ and Paul, but launch out,
and land immediately at the fair haven of heaven.

Verse 7. I have fought a good fight] The nearer any thing is to the center,
the more strongly and swiftly it moves. The wine of the spirit is strongest in
the Saints, when they are drawing to an end. His motions are quickest, when
natural motions are slowest, most sensible when the body begins to be
senseless, most lively when the Saints are a dying.

Verse 8. There is laid up a crown] Beyond a crown, the wishes of mortal men
extend not. Alexander inviting many to supper, provided a crown of 180 pound to
be given to those that drank most. One and forty killed themselves, with
drinking, to get that crown. Shall these do more for a trifle, then we will do
for heaven?

A crown of righteousnes] So salvation is called: not for that it is of right
due to us, but because it is purchased for us by the righteousness of Christ,
and shall be freely given to those that are justified by faith.

Verse 9. Do thy diligence, etc.] We want much of our comfort in the want of a
friend, Eccles. 4.9. Optimum solatium sodalitium. How does David bemoan the
less of Jonathan? How did D. Tailour prize the company of his fellow-prisoner,
that Angel of God, as he called him, John Bradford? What a mercy did S. Paul
count it, that sick Epaphroditus recovered, Phil. 2.27?

Verse 10. Demas has for saken me] Blazing comets, as long as they keep aloft,
shine bright: but when they begin to decline from their pitch, they fall to the
earth. Jonathan followed the chase well, and with gre^dy pursuit, till he met
with the honey: so does many a Demas.

And is d^ parted unto Thessalonica] Where he became an Idol Priest, as says
Dorotheus.

Verse 11. For he is profitable] Once unprofitable (Act. 15.38. See the Note
there) but now profitable, Philom. 11.

Verse 12. Tychicus have I sent] For what end, see Ephesians. 6.22. with the Note
there.

Verse 13. The cloak that I left] O sup^llectilem Apostolicam! O what a small
deal of housholdstuff had this great Apostle, Er^s in Ioe.
says Erasmus ^a cloak to keep off the rain, and a few books and writings.
Tota ^ti^^m sup^ll^x mea est char tacea, says he in another place. Er^s in
farrag. epistol.
All my stock is in books. And of judicious Calvin it is reported, that all the
goods that he left behind^ him, his library being sold very dear, come scarce
to 300 florens, that is about go pounds of our money. Seek thou great things
for thy self? Ier. 45.5.

Verse 14. Alexander the copper-smith] Who was once Martyrio propinquus, says
Calvin, near unto Martyrdom in Paul's cause, Act. 19.33. A glorious professor
may become a furious persecutour. Let him that stands, take he^d lest he fall.

The Lord reward him] This is neither a curse, Author quest. apud Just. Mar.
nor a railing speech (says an Ancient) but a prediction well beseeming an
Apostle, that avenged not himself, but rather gave place to wrath, Romans 12, 19.

Verse 15. He has greatly resisted our words] Or, our pr^echings, not our
persons only. This was a foul fault. See I These. 4. 8. Exodus 16.8.

Verse 16. No man stood with me] So that Paul might have said as Socrates did,
(...). Plato.
(...), My friends, I have never a friend. And as Plato, A friend is a very
mutable creature.

Verse 17. The Lord stood] God is never so sweet and so seasonable to his
Saints, as in the day of their deepest distress. He loves to help those that
are forsaken of their hopes.

The preaching might be fully known] Or, Soundly proved to be a divine
ordinance, by my constancy and contempt of death.

Out of the mouth of the lion] Nero, who first orientem fidem, Romae
cruentavit, as Tertullian speaks, put Christians to death, and made a bloody
decree, That whosoever confessed himself a Christian, should, Dedicator dam
nationi^ chri, li. anorum. Teit.
without any more ado, be put to death as a convicted enemy of mankind.
Tertullian calls him, The Dedicatour of the condemnation of Christians.

Verse 18. And the Lord shall deliver] Experience breeds confidence.

Unto his heavenly kingdom] So David argues from temporals to eternals, Psalm.
23.5, 6.

Verse 19. Salute Prisca etc.] See the Note on Romans 16.3.

Verse 20. At Miletum sick] See the Note on Phil. 2.27.

Verse 21. Do thy diligence, etc.] The Apostle quickneth Timothy as Tully did
his friend. Quamobrem si me amas, etc. si dormis expergiscere, si stas
ingredere, si ingrederis curre, si curris advola. Credibile non est quantum ego
in amore and fide tua ponam. Make all possible haste hither, for I rely much
upon thy love and loialty.

Verse 22. Grace be with you] Gods blessing be with you always, Amen. Act. and
Mon. 1365. Laur. Saunders.
Even now to ward the offering of a burnt sacrifice, etc. said that Martyr in a
letter to certain friends.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to TITUS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. The faith of Gods elect]
NOt the election of Gods faithful ones, as the Arminians make it.

And the acknowledging of the truth] It is usual with S Paul in the beginning
of his Epistles, to utter much in few, and to set down the sum of the whole
Gospel, as here he does Justification, Sanctification, and the hope of
salvation, and all by the acknowledging of the truth.

Verse 2. God that cannot lie] The word of promise binds God: therefore it
seems (says one) that it is stronger then God: for he can as soon deny himself
as his promise.

Verse 3. Manifested his word] As when he laid plainly, He that believes is
the Son has eternal life.

Verse 4. Common saith] Common to the communion of Saints, verse. 1. and to them
proper and peculiar; for all men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

Verse 5. Set in order] (...) Co^sicias.
Gr. Set straight, or make up the things that I left unfinished.

Verse 6. The husband of one wise] Here the Apostle canonizeth (says an
Interpreter) Stult^t.
the marriage of Min^sters.

Verse 7. A Bishop must be blamel^sse] As was Moses, Samuel, Paul, Bradford,
Bucer, etc. who led convincing lives: so that their foes could not many thing
stain them, nor their friends sufficiently commend them.

Not soon angry] (...).
Bil^osus and bellicosus, testy and techy, easily blown up in^o ^age, that will
not be laid down without revenge.

Verse 8. Temperate] (...).
No slave to his fleshly appetite: but one that can master himself, and give
laws to his lusts. See my Common place of Abstinence.

Verse 9. (...).
Holding fast, etc.] As with tooth end nail, against those gain-saiers that
would snatch it from us.

Verse 10. For there are many unruly] Lawless, yokelesse, masterlesse men,
untractable, untameable, that refuse to be reformed, hate to be healed. God
will hamper these Belialists, 2 Samuel 23.6.

Verse 11. (...).
Whose mouths must be stopped] Gr. Muzzled, as bandogs are. C^c. de divinat
La^rli^^. Fides puni^a Virgil. Cres semper mendax, ^ala bellua, and bell^o
dese^. Camde^s Eliz. fol ^04 Cre^iz^c ^^ ^ Cret^^^^h^^^de Fr^en. A (...). (...)
(...) Casaub.
Frogs they ^^y will leave croaking, if but a light be hanged over the lake
wherein they are. Let but the truth come clearly in place, and heretics will
be soon fil^nced. But if they will not, another course must be taken with them.

Verse 12. Even a Prophet of their own] Epimenides the Poet, who by his
contrymen the Cretians was counted a Prophet, and had divine honors done to
him after his death.

The Cretians are always liers] So were the Carthaginians, Tyrijque bilingues.
The French had so often deceived the English, that such as they mean to
deceive, they call by a common byword, Ias A^^l^^, The English. The Cretians
were loud liars, even to a Proverb. Of Delon Homer says, That he had an art in
lying. But Eu^aem^a Joannes (that Cretian Dae noni^ck) wins the whet^on^ one
from all his contrymen, whiles he blusheth not to tell the world in print,
that these are the doctrines and practices of the Protestants, to worship no
God, to frame our religion to the times, to pretend the public cause to our
private lusts, to break our words, as we see good for our purpose, to cover
deadly hatred under fair flatteries, to confirm tyranny by shedding the blood
of innocents, etc.

Verse 13 Rebuke them sharply] Gr. Precisely, rigidly, (...), ^ uttingly.
severely, and to the quick. A Metaphor from Chyrurgeons, who must not be
melch-hearted, faith Celsus: but pare away the dead flesh, Ne pars sincera
trabatur. Howbeit, Chirurges misericordes esse non opartes.
that is a good rule given by a godly Divine, that although there must be some
warmth in a reproof, yet it must not be scalding hot. M Wbatcy in his Atchetyp.
Words of reviling and disgrace, they scald, as it were. But words that tend to
stir up the conscience to a du^ consideration of the error, or evil reproved,
they be duly warm, and tend to make the physic work more kindly.
Evangelizatum non maledictum missus es, said O^col ^mpadius to Farellus: laudo
zelum, modo non d^sideretur mausu^tudo. Vinu^ and oleum in tempore suo insund
^dum. Evangelistam non tyrannicum leg s^atorem praestes. Thou art sent to
preach, not to rail. Thy zeal ^ commend so it be mingled with me^knesse. Wine
must be poured into men's wounds one while, Oecolamp epad Gul. Fa^d.
and oil another. Thou must show thy self a peaceable preacher, not a
tyrannical Lawgiver, etc.

Verse 14. Not giving heed to Jenish fables] Wherewith their Talmud is full
far^^: which whiles they hug overhard, as Cleopatra did the ^^ ^^es that sucked
her blood, they perish.

Verse 15. Unto the pure all things, etc.] This Piscator holds a sufficient
warrant for us to use, Ne for^^, and other Heathen-expressions; like as the
Apostles used, (...), etc. Pise^t in Mare^a 14 3. Pas praesat ad Lexic.
abused by the Greeks to signify then wicked and devilish oracles. But Pas^r
is utterly against it.

Is nothing pure] Their own table is a In^re to them, yea Gods table. The
Saints are kept at hard commons, but have their keeping of free-cost: the
wicked have larger cates, but pay sweetly.

Conscience is d^siled] To wit, with sins, and so can no more judge of it, then
a man can discern of colors in a foul and soiled g^^sle.

Verse 16. They prosesse that they know] Aliud in titulo, aliud in pyxi^e.
Out-fide Christians, who perform as Ephraim, dow-b^ked duties, are almost
persuaded, as Agrippa, come near Gods kingdom with that young Pharisee; faint
chapmen that go without the bargain, as he did that came kneeling to our
Savior, and saying, What shall I^d, to inherit eternal life? These do vir^ut
is strag^lam pudesacere, put honesty to an open shame, as Diogenes said to
Antipater, who being vicious wore a white cloak, the ens go of innocence.

Being abominable] (...).
Gr. Such as stink above ground, and are of an offensive savor.

To every good work reprobate] Or injudicious: such as cannot make a right
judgment of any good works, so as to approve and relish them, to see a beauty
in them, as good, etc.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. But speak thou, etc.]
QVasidicat, The worse others are, the better thou must bet keeping a constant
countermotion to the corrupt courses that are in the world through lust. A pearl
in a puddle retains its preciousnes: and fish in the salt waters retain their
freshness.

Verse 2. That the old men be sober etc.] Not as it is said of the Flemings,
Er^sm. in Mor^^ cncom.
that quo magis senescunt co magis stultescunt, the elder the foolisher.
Solomon and Asa were so. And the Heathen Sages wisely warn us, That old age is
to be feared, as that which comes not alone, but brings with it many diseases
both of body and mind. Sape fit us S^tan, qu^m juvenem capere non potuit,
annesum fallat and capiat, suth Bucholcerus. Many that have held out well in
youth, have failed and been shamefully foiled in old age.

Verse 3. (...).
In behaviour] Or, In habit, apparel, gate gesture.

Teachers of good things] As was Bathsheba, Prove. 31.1.2. Lois, 2. Lim. 1.5.
Monica, etc.

Verse 4. (...).
To be sober] Or wise: teaching them as Schoolmasters do their d^c^ples: so the
word signifi^s. He was a foolish man that said, E^^ip.
(...), I love not to have a woman wile, A prude ^ wise is of the Lord. Such an
one was Abigail, and Aspasia, Mil sia the wise of Cyrus, who was said to be
(...), Fair and wise withal. Aelian la^^ 1.


Verse 5. To be discrect, chaste, etc.] Conjugi^m humanae divina Academia vi^^.
Match good may be learned by wedlock.

Keepers at home] Carrying her house on her back, as the sn^^ does. Sarah was
found in the tent, so was Jael the wise of Heber. The Egyptian women ware no
shoes, that they might the better keep home.

Verse 6. Young men likewise exhort] See the Note on 2 Timothy 2.22.

Verse 7. A pattern of good] Gr. A stamp. (...).
Digging thy Sermons out of thine own breast, ^^d living them, when thou have
done.

Verse 8. May be ash ^ned, having etc.] O it is a brive thing to stop an open
mouth, to thrat^le envy, to cu^ off all occasion of ev^lspeaking.

Verse 9. Not answering again] Not chatting or thwarting.

Verse 10. Not purloining] Interverting, Aulent cu^ talia ures. Virg^l
emb^z^ling their masters estates, ordinary among the Romans, which made them
call servants and th^eves by one name: ordinary among the Hebrews; whence that
saying of R. Gamali^l, Marbe gn badim, marbe gezil, He that mul^ipli^th
servants, multiplieth thieves. Pirke-aboth, chip 1.
ordinary also amongst us, whence that Proverb. He that will be rich must ask
his servants leave.

Verse 11. For the grace of God etc.] This is rendered as a reason why servants
should be faithful, because to them also belongs the promise of salvation,
yea the reward o^ inheritance, as if they were sons: and to them the Gosp^l is
preached as well as to others.

Has appeared] As the Sun in heaven, (...).
or as a beacon on an hill

Verse 12. Dexying ungodlinesse] Every Gospel truth strikes at some sin, and
thereby may be discerned.

Soberly, righteously, and godly] This is the Christian man's motto, his sym^ol,
and the sum of his whole duty, Haec tria perp tuo meditare adverbia Pauli:
Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tu^.


The Egyptians when they praised their deceased friends, Diod Sicul.
were wont to commend them for these three things, their godliness, righteousness
and temperance.

Verse 13. Looking for] As with necksstretcht out, (...) Romans 8 19. Julg. 5.28.
or head put forth; as Siseras another looked out of her lattice for her sons
happy return.

Verse 14. That he might redeem us] God will have the price of Christ's blood
out: he will thoroughly purge us.

A peculiar people] Gr. (...).
A people that comprehend all that God sets any score by, 1 Pet. 2.9.
that contain all his gettings: called elsewhere the people of acquisition.

Zealous of good Works] Give God thine affections: else thine actions are still
born, and have no life in them.

Verse 15. (...) Ne^^ 10 plus sapere ausit.
Let no man despise thee] Or have occasion to think himself wiser then thee.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. To be ready to every]
AS the Be, so soon as ever the Sun breaks forth, slies abroad to gather honey
and wax. A ready heart makes riddance of religious duties.

Verse 2. To speak evil of no man] Unless it be in an ordinance, for the
reformation of the unruly, pleasing all in that which is good to edify.

Verse 3. For we our selves also] I Paul, and thou Titus were as bad as others:
let us therefore show all mercy and meeknes to others. Aut sumus, aut fuimus,
aut possumus esse quod bic est.

Serving diverse! ^sts] Captivarum suarum captivi Plu^^ren R^^a villrix.
gentian, captivi v^iorun Oren (...) Dra^^^^ ^e re non^ n^inu. conservo ser
vimu. (...) epist. l. 12
As the Persian Kings Were Lords of the world, but slaves to their Concubines.
The Assyrian led away the Egyptians naked and bare soot, Isa. 29.2. So does
Satan, sinners. Hence, though never so great, they are called vile persons, as
Antiochus, Dan. 11.21. Because they have as many Lords, as lusts. Felix at that
very time that he trembled before Paul, could not but covet and expect a bribe
from him.

Hatefull] Gr. Horrible, as hell it self, or justly odious to others.

Verse 4. Kindenes and love] His native goodness, and his communicated goodness
to us, not yet existing, nay resisting.

Verse 5. (...).
Which we have done] We that are bankrupts in Adam, would yet fain be doing,
and think to be saved for a company of poor b^ggarly duties: as bankrupts will
be trading again, though but for pins, etc.

But according to his mercy] God is not merchant: his kingdom is not partum,
but paratum. He that said, Coelum great is non accipiam, I will not have heaven
on free cost, Vega.
went without it.

Verse 6. (...).
Which he shed] Gr. Poured out (as it were by pail fuls) his spirit (the best
thing) upon all flesh (the basest thing) Joel 2.28.

Verse 7. Be made heirs] Not purchasers: all is of free grace, Horreo quicquid
de meo est, ut sim meus. Paul was a most constant preacher of grace. Bernard.
Augustine. (...)


Verse 8. That thou affirm constantly] Be well settled in it thy self, and
avouch and aver it confidently to others: being ready to make it good, if
questioned.

Be carefull] Bend their wits, and beat their brains. (...).


To maintain good ^orks] To exceed and excel others in their honest functions
and faculties: (...) Plutarch.
to be their crases-masters, to bear away the bell from all that are of the
same trade or profession. This was Tully's study to be best at any thing he
ever undertook: should it not then be a believers?

Verse 9. But foolish questions] Such as is that of the Papists, whether an
ass drinking at the font, do drink the water of baptism, and so may be said
to be baptized? Est quaestio digna asinis, says Melancthon. Such questionists
are (as Stapleton says of Bodin) magninugatores, great triflers.

Verse 10. A man that is an berotike] All heresies are found to flow (says
Chemnitius) Loc com part loc. 2.
either from the supercilious pride of Samosatenus, or from the sophistry of
Arrius, or from the ignorance of Aetius. These men's wit will better serve them
to devise a thousand shifts to elude the truth, then their pride will suffer
them once to yield and acknowledge it. And here this rule of St Paul takes
place. Nestorius was an unlearned and proud man, but very bold and well-spoken:
Insomuch as thereby he often carried it, and so seduced the Emperor Theodosius,
as that Cyril, a very good Bishop was thrown out of his place. Zanch Mise.
epist. dedicat.
Howbeit he was afterward restored again with honor, when the Emperor had
better bethought himself, and the heretic Nectorius was condemned and cast out.

Verse 11. Condemned of himself] Since, as a headstrong horse, he gets the bit
between his teeth, and runs away. Thus did the Pharisees, Toties puncti, and
puncti, minime tamen Ad resipiscentiam compuncti, as one says, They shut the
windows lest the light should come in.

Verse 12. Come unto me to Nicopolis] The inhabitants of this City are said so
to have hated the braying of an Ass, that they would not endure to hear the
found of a trumpet. So some pretend such an hatred of hypocrisy, that they
will not abide the profession of piety.

Verse 13. That nothing be wanting] Those that labor in the Lords work, must
have all necessary accommodations and encouragements. They must be set forth
and brought forward on their journey, and in their negotiations worthy of God,
3 John 6. Deductione honorifie a, Act. 15 3. and 20.38. and 21.5. A Balaam will
not deal hardly with his Ass, if once he perceive the Lord to be in him, and
to speak by him: Shall we deal unworthily with Gods Ministers, in whom God is
of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. and has given unto them the ministry of
reconciliation? 2 Cor. 5.18.

Verse 14. To maintain good works] See the Note on Verse 8. of this Chapter.

That they be not unfruitfull] As drone-Bees or body-lice, living upon others
labors, and so opening the mouths of Heathens, who will be ready to say, as he
once did, Odi homines ignava opera, philosopha sontentia.

Verse 15. That love us in the faith] That best ligament of love. The Church is
the only daughter of her mother, and is called Ecclesia, of calling all hers
together. Religion has its name of binding, because it binds men all in a
bundle, and makes them be of one heart, and of one soul, Act. 4.32. to serve
the Lord with one shoulder, Zeph. 39. to glorify God with one mind, and with
one mouth, Romans 15.6. there being no such oneness in the world, as among true
believers.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to PHILEMON.
Verse 1. Paul a prisoner, etc.]
THis is a notable Epistle, and full of worth; Plena roboris and lacertoruoa
est tota episto^a;
each word having its weight, each syllable its substance. From an abject
subject, the receiving of a runaway servant, St Paul soars like an heavenly
Eagle, and flies an high pitch of heavenly discourse. Elocutine tota gravis and
brevis, densus sentent^^s, sanus judiciis, etc. as Lipsius says of Thucydides,
Lips not ad Po^ lit, l. 1. c. 9.
may we say of our Apostle.

Our dearly beloved] Or, Our lovely one, as Hierome renders it. (...)
Dil^g^bi^i.


And fellow-labourer] This shows, say some, that Philemon was a Minister of the
Gospel.

Verse 2. And to our beloved Apphia] For Appia: but this was the manner of
pronunciation at Tarsus, S. Paul's country. This Apphia was (says Theodoret)
Philemons wife; whose good will might make much to the furtherance of S. Paul's
suit.

And Archippus our fellow-souldier] Who seems to have sojourned with Philemon.
See the Note on Col. 4.17.

And to the Church in thy house] Every Christian family is a Church. But Phil
mons house was (belike) a public meeting. house, and so continued for many
years after, as Theodoret witnesses.

Verse 3. Grace to you. etc.] See the Note on 1 Co^. 1.3. and on 2 Cor. 1.2.

Verse 4. I thank my God] Thus the Apostle begins most of his Epistles. (...).
As any man is more or less gracious, so is he thankful. The same Greek word
for grace signifies thankfulness. Neither is these any think that seals up
more comfort to the soul, then for a man to be able from the bottom of his
heart to praise God. Self-love may make an hypocrite pray from the bottom of
his heart, etc.

Verse 5. Hearing of thy love and faith] Love is first mentioned as more
notice: But faith is the mother grace, the womb wherein love, and all the rest
of that heavenly offspring are conceived.

Verse 6. That the communication, etc.] This is that which S. Paul praid for
Philemon, ver. 4. For the fifth verse comes in by a parenthesis.

Verse 7. (...).
The bowels of the Saints are refreshed.] Gr. Rested, as it were, after much
toil and travels, which made their hearts ache.

Verse 8. (...).
That which is convenient] Or, That which is thy duty. Ossicium autem est jus
actionis ad quemcunque statum pertinens, says Jul. Scaliger.

Verse 9. Yot for loves sake, etc.] Here Is brave oratory, such as might well
mollisie the hardest heart. Petendo movet, and movindo petis.

Paul the aged] And therefore venerable. Coguata sum (...)
Old age and honor are in the Greek tongue very near akin? It is a crown
(says Solomon) and that of glory, when found in the way of righteousness,
Prove. 16.31. These bear a resemblance of the Ancient of dates, Dan. 7.

Verse 10. My son Onesimus] Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians, makes
mention of Onesimus, as Pastor of Ephesus, next after Timothy. The Roman
Martyrologue says, that he was stoned to death at Rome, under Trajan the
Emperor.

Verse 11. But now profitable] So is every true convert: there is little cause
that men should boast they are no changelings, since whosoever is in Christ is a
new creature. St Anthony Kingston came to Mr Hooper the Martyr a little before
his death, and said, I thank God that ever I knew you: for God did appoint you
to call me, being a lost child. Act. and Mon. fol. 1368.
For by your good instructions, whereas I was before both an adulterer and
fornicatour, God has brought me to forsake, and detest the same, etc. Savoy,
for the strait passages infested with thieves, was one called Malvoy, or
ill-way; till a worthy adventurer cleared the coasts, and then it was called
Savoy or Salvoy, the safe-way. Such a change there is in every good soul.

Verse 12. That is, mine own bowels.] Pray for me, mine own heart root in the
Lord (said Mr Bradford in a letter to Mr Saunders) Quem in intimis visceribus
habeo ad convivendom and commoriendum.

Verse 13. In the bonds of the Gospel] Which is bound after a sort, when the
preachers thereof are imprisoned.

Verse 14. Would I do nothing] Posse and nolle nobile est. He that goes to the
utmost of his chain, may possibly break a link. Concedamus de jure ut careamus
lite. August.
Part with somewhat for peace-sake.

Verse 15. For perhaps be therefore] God has a hand in ordering our disorders
to his own glory and cur good. He teaches us by our temptations. This made Mr
Fox say, That his graces did him most hurt, and his sins most good.

He departed for a season] Here the Apostle makes the best of an ill matter.
Converts are to be gently handled, and their former evil practices not to be
aggravated.

Verse 16. Both in the flesh] Perhaps Onesimus was Philemons kinsman.

And in the Lord] Sanctior est copula cordis quam corporis. He that is joined
to the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

Verse 17. A partner] One in commons with thee. (...).
Amicorum omnia communia.

Receive him] Take him to thee, put him in thy bosom, (...).
make much of him. How effectually does this great Apostle plead the cause of
this poor fugitive, now happily brought home to Christ? He deals as one that
had himself received mercy, 1 Cor. 7.25. Steep thy thoughts (says one) in the
mercies of God, and they will die thine, as the die fat does the cloth, Col
3.12.

Verse 18. If he has wronged thee] His shameful escape the Apostle sweetly
mitigateth by the name of wrong; his theft, of debt. See ver. 15. and compare
herewith, Genesis 45.5.

Put that on mine account] To the like effect speaks the Lord Christ on our
behalf to his heavenly father, in his daily intercession.

Verse 19. Thou owe unto me etc.] If Cleanthes gave himself to his Master
Socrates: If Alexander could say that he owed more to Aristotle that taught
him, then to Philip that begat him: If another could say, that he could never
discharge his debt to God, to his parents, and to his schoolmaster: how deeply
then do men stand obliged to their spiritual fathers, and teachers in Christ?

Verse 20. (...).
Yea, brother, let me have joy] Or benefit by thee. An elegant allusion it is
in the original to the name of Onesimus: and it is as if the Apostle embracing
Phil^mon, and hanging about his neck should say, I prithee now let me be so
far beholden to thee, etc.

Verse 21. Knowing that thou Will, etc.] Who could ever have the heart to
resist such rhetorike? Suade medulla.
Is not here the very marrow of most powerful persuasion? a golden sloud of
eloquence, as Tully says of Aristotle's Politiques?

Verse 22. But withal, prepare, etc.] Thus he dispatcheth his own private
business in one word, as it were: his main care was, that Owsimus might do well:
a fait mirror for Ministers.

Verse 23. Epaphras my fellow-prisoner] Clapped up, belike, for visiting and
countenancing S. Paul, to whom he was sent by the Colossions with relief,
whiles he was prisoner at Rome. The ecclesiastical history tells us of one
Philcas a Martyr, who going to execution, seemed as one deaf at the
persuasions, and blind at the tears of his friends, Quo no io potest terrenu
lachrymia slecti cupas oculi coelessem gloriam contu e^tur'
moving him to spare himself. And when one Phil ramus defending him said. How
can he be moved with earthly tears, who has his eyes full fed with heavenly
glory? He also was taken in, and both presently beheaded.

Verse 24. Marcus, Arist, rchus, Demas] Here Demas was in good credit with the
Apostle, but soon after fell away: like as glass, and some baser metals shine
brightest in the fire, when nearest of all to melting; or as the candle gives
a great blaze, when going out with a stench. Hypocrites have their non-ultra,
when the godly man's Motto is (as was Charles the fifths) Vlterius, Further yet,
on, on.

Verse 25. The grace of our Lord] Say the world what it will, a grain of grace
is worth a world of wealth. the blessings that come out of Sion, are better
then any that come out of heaven and earth, Psalm 134 3. For they our-last the
days of heaven, and run parallel with the life of God, and line of eternity;
Pray for them therefore in the behalf of our selves and others, as Paul
constantly does for grace, not with graceless Nero, but with the Lord Jesus
Christ; one good cast of whose pleased countenance was better to David then his
crown scepter, Psalm. 4*7, 8.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the HEBREWS.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. God who at sundry times, etc.]
SEe my True Treasure, Page 1, 2, 3.

Verse 2. Heir of all things] Be married to this heir, and have all, Vbitu
Caius, ego Caia, may the Shulamite say to her husband, as the Roman Ladies said
to theirs.

Verse 3. Upholding all things] Both in respect of being, excellencies and
operations. Seneca rendering the reason why Jupiter was by the Ancient Romans
surnamed Stator, says it was, Quia ejus been ficio stant omnia, because all
things are upheld by him. How much better may this be said of Christ? Sin had
hurled confusion over the world, which would have fallen about Adams ears
(says one) had not Christ undertaken the shattered condition thereof, to
uphold it. He keeps the world together, as the hoops do the barrel.

Purged our sins] By his merit and spirit.

Verse 4. Better then the Angels] Therefore is his doctrine, the Gospel, with
more heed to be heard, then the law ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator, that is Mases, Gal. 3.19.

Verse 5. This day] Either the day of eternity, and so it is meant of Christ's
eternal generation; or else the fullness of time, wherein God brought his
first begotten into the world, and mightily declared him to be the on of God by
the resurrection from the dead, Act. 1.33. Romans 1 4.

Verse 6. And let all the Angels of God] The manhood of it self could not be
thus adored (because it is a creature) Phil, 2.8.
but as it is received into unity of person with the Deity, and has a
partneragency therewith, according to its measure, in the work of redemption
and mediation.

Verse 7. A flame of fire] Hence they are called Seraphims, because they flame,
like heavenly Salamanders in the fire of pure and perfect love to God and his
people: And Cherubims from their winged swiftness, swift they are as the
wind: which may seem to be the sense of this text, compared with Psalm. 104.4,
5.

Verse 8. Thy throne, o God, is forever] Christ is God then, as is here set
forth by many arguments. God has laid help in one that is mighty. I and the
Father am one.

Verse 9. Has anointed thee] This imports two things. 1. Ordination to his
office, and so the Godhead also of Christ was anointed. 2. Qualification for
it, and so the manhood only, And as the holy oil was compounded of diverse
spices, so was Christ filled with all gifts and graces, Act. 10.38. but
especially with wisdom, as a Prophet, holiness as a Priest, and power as a
King.

Verse 10. The Works of thy bands] Psalm. 8.3. they are called the works of Gods
fingers, artificially elaborated; that heaven of heavens especially, whole
artificer and workman is God, Heb. (...).
11.10. The Apostle there intimates, that it is c^uriously and cunningly
contrived.

Verse 11. They shall perish] The visible heavens are defiled with man's sin,
and shall therefore be purged by the last fire, as the vessels that held the
sin offering were to pass the fire.

They shall all wax old] See the Note on Romans 8.22.

Verse 12. But thou art the same] As in effence, so in will and counsel.
Repentance with man is the changing of his will: Repentance with God is the
willing of a change: Mutatio rei, non Dei, effectus non affictus, facti non
confily.

Verse 13. Sit on my right-hand] As mine equal in honor and power.

Verse 14. Sent forth to minister, etc.] The Saints are the Spouse, the bride,
yea the members of Christ; and so in nearer union then Angels, or any creature.
This the devil envied, and fell from his station.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. We should let them slip]
OR, Run out, as water runs through a riven vessel. The word mingled with says
in the heart, (...).
as Act. 16.14. must be care. fully kept, and it will safely keep us, Prove.
6.20, 22. Some render it, Nequando prater fluamus, lest we pass by the things
we have heard, as a river swiftly passes by the side of a City, as the fashion
of this world passes a way as a picture drawn upon the ice, soon vanishes,
etc.

Verse 2. For if the Word, etc.] Moses-law, Gal. 3 19.

Was stedfast] Ratified with this sanction, Aut faciendum aut patiendum, either
do it, or die.

And every transgression and disobedience] that is, every commission and
omission,.

Verse 3. If we neglect] He says not, If we reject, renounce, persecute: but
if we neglect, let slip, shift off, as the word is, Heb. 12.25. and as those
re^nsant guests did, (...).
Mat. 22. say we rather with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. And
with that Dutch Divine, Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and submittemus illi,
sexconta si nobis essent colla. Let the Lord utter his mind, and he shall have
ready obedience, whatever come of it.

So great salvation] The doctrine of the Gospel, that grace of God that
brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. I am fully persuaded (says a late learned light
of our Church) that in these days of grace, D. Preston.
the Lord is much more quick and peremptory in rejecting men: the time is
shorter, he will not wait so long as he was wont to do. The ground is, How
shall we escape if we neglect, etc?

Verse 4. And with diverse miracles] Whereby, as by the wings of the wind, the
doctrine of the Gospel was divulged at first. But he that now requires a
miracle, is himself a miracle, The establishing of the present reformation is
and will be that miracle which we are in these times to look for. It is that
which the former age had despaired of, the present admireth, and the future
shall stand amazed at.

Verse 5. For unto the Angels, etc.] The Jews, as they had embraced the
Pythagorean transanimation, Mat, 16.14. (...) etc.
so the Platonike opinion of Angels, moving the heavens, and ordering the
world; whom therefore they worshipped, intruding into those things, whereof
there was no found either proof or profit, Colos. 2.18. The Angels (say
Proculus the Platonist and Plutarch) are messengers that carry Gods mind to
men, and men's requests to God. But who told them all this. Egregie dicis, sed
quomodo probas? said Aristotle of Moses, may we better say of these bold
affirmers.

Verse 6. But one in a certain place] The full sense is, Accommodatio est
facitis ad personam Christi, si interpretes non vellent esse nimli inge. niofi
Amel. in Psalm. 8 5. Paulisper.
But he has subjected it to Christ, as David testified, Psalm. 8 4, 5. where
whatsoever is spoken to man, is here applied to the man Christ Jesus; and so is
proper to the Saints by virtue of their union with Christ. In which respect,
they are more glorious then heaven, Angels, or any creature.

Verse 7. A little lower] Or, For a little While, viz. Ab utero ad urnam, from
the womb to the tomb, from his birth to his burial, from his abasement to his
advancement.

And did sit him over the works] Lions hate apes, but fear men; whereof no
other probable reason can be given, but this here in the text; insomuch as the
most timorous men dare kick and beat the hugest elephants.

Verse 8. Under his feet] It is not said, Under his hands, but under his feet.
1. That he may trample upon them with his feet, and not dote upon them with his
heart. 2. That by them, as by a step or stirrup, he may raise his heart to
things above. A sanctified fancy can make every creature a ladder to heaven.

He left nothing] No, not Angels.

Not yet all things put under him] Rebellis fact a est, quia ho^o numini
^^eatura bomini. Aug.
The creature rebelleth against man, because he rebelleth against God. If the
Master be let upon, the servants will draw, and fight for him.

Verse 9. But we see Jesus] The Saints hold all in capite tenure, in Christ.
Now in him all things are already subjected unto us, and made serviceable to
our salvation.

For the suffering of death] Or that he might be in a condition to suffer
death, this Sun of righteousness went ten degrees backward, not only below his
Father, Job. 14.28. but below the Angels: for man (as man) is inferior to the
Angels.

Verse 10. For it became him] That is, God, whose perfect wisdom, justice,
etc. shines most clearly in that great work of our redemption: then the which
God could not have done any thing more beseeming himself; what ever the worlds
wizards conceit to, the contrary, 1 Cor. 1.23.

For Whom are all things] See the Note on Romans 11.36.

To make the captain, etc.] He that is Captain of the Lords hoasts, Josh. 5.14.
is also Captain of our salvation. This is comfort.

To make perfect] (...).
Or, Consecrate. The Priests were first consecrated with oil, then with blood:
so was Christ first by the Spirit, and then by his own blood.

Verse 11. Are all of one] viz. of Adam: Only with this difference; that we are
of Adam and by Adam, but Christ was of Adam, not by Adam: for he was not
begotten, but made, and so original sin was a voided.

He is not ashamed] Christ was not ashamed of us, when we had never a rag to
our backs: Should we be ashamed of him and his service?

Verse 12. I Will declare, etc] Psalm. 22.22. A Psalm of Christ's sufferings,
entitled, upon, Ajaleth Shachar, that is, The morning-stagge, such an one as
the huntsman singleth out to hunt for that day. Christ thus hunted and praying
for deliverance, promises to praise Gods name amidst his brethren, that is,
his faithful servants.

Verse 13. I Will put my trust in him] Which he needed not, had he not been a
man subject to misery.

And the children, etc.] Christ is the everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. and the
Saints are the travel of his soul, that prolong his days upon earth, Isa.
53.10.11. Filiabitur nomine ejus, Psalm. 72.17. There shall be a succession of
Christ's name, till he present all his to his heavenly Father at last day, with,
Behold I, and the children whom thou have given me.

Verse 14. (...).
Children are partakers] Little children: Christ also became a little child,
the babe of Bethlehem, Isa. 9 6. catch him up, as old Simeon did; Kiss him,
lest he be angry, Psalm. 2. Stumble not at his weaknest, bat gather assurance of
his love, and grow up unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians 4.13.

Him that had the power of death] As the hang man has the power of the
gallows, to kill men with death, Rev. 2.23.

Verse 15 And deliver them,] So that to those that are in Christ, death is but
the daybreak of eternal brightness: Not the punishment of sin, but the
period of sin. It is but a sturdy Porter, opening the door of eternity: a
rougher passage to eternal pleasure. What need they fear to pass the waters
of J^rdan to take possession of the land, that have the Ark of Gods Covenant in
their eye? Tollitur mors, non ne sit, sed ne obsit. As Christ took away, not
sin, but the guilt of it, so neither death, but the sting of i^.

Who through fear of death] That King of terrors, as Job calls death: that
terrible of ad terribles, as Aristotle. Nature will have a bout with the best
when they come to die. But I wonder (says a grave Divine) how the souls of
wicked men go not out of their bodies, as the devils did out of the
daemoniacks, rending, raging, tearing, soming. I wonder how any can die in
their wits, that die not in the says of Jesus Christ. Appius Cl^ndius loyed
not the Greek Zeta, because when it is pronounced, it represents the gnashing
teeth of a dying man. Sigismund the Emperor being ready to die, commanded his
servants not to name death in his hearing, etc.

Verse 16. For verily be took not] Or, (...).
For no where took he, q. d. We sinde not any where, either in the Scriptures,
or in any Church record.

But he took] He assumed, apprehended, caught, (...).
laid hold on, as the Ange^ did on Lot, Genesis 1.16. as Christ did on Peter, Mat.
14.31, as men use to do upon a thing they are glad they have got, and are loath
to let go again. It is a main pillar of our comfort, that Christ took our
flesh: for if he took not our flesh, we are not saved by him.

Verse 17. In all things] Except in sin, (...)
as the brazen serpent was like the fiery serpent, but had no sting.

To make reconciliation] To expiate our sins, (...).
and to appease Gods wrath.

Verse 18. He is able to succour] And no less apt then able: as he that has
been poor or troubled with toothache, will pity those that are so.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Holy brethren]
HOly, because partakers of a calling that is heavenly. 1. Ratione fontis,
Phil. 314, 15.2. Ratione finis, to the fruition of heavenly privileges in
Christ.

Verse 2. As also Moses was faithfull] And yet how unworthily handled by the
author of the Marrow of Modern Divinity, that sly Antinomian, in diverse
passages of his book, as might easily be instanced.

Verse 3. Worthy of more glory then Moses] In whom these Hebrews trusted, Spec.
Europ.
Job. 5.45. And the Jews at this day hold, That the law of nature shall bring
to heaven those that observe it, but the Hebrews (unto whom the law of Moses
was peculiarly given) by keeping it shall have a prerogative of glory. Poor
seduced souls!

Verse 4. He that built all things] Moses and all.

Is God] That is Christ, whom he had proved to be God by many arguments, Chap.
1. Messiah therefore is to be preferred before Moses.

Verse 5. (...) ex verbo (...)
As a servant] Famulus ingenuus, a servant of the better fort, a man of
worship, as the word seems to import: though it be honor enough to be
Christ's servant, of the meanest in his family.

Verse 6. If we hold fast] See here a just description of the invisible Church
of Christ.

Verse 7. Wherefore as the holy Ghost] It is well observed by Calvin, Hier.
Epist ad Algesiam. Joh Ae^^ran, apud so, Manl. loc com.
that the words after Wherefore, to verse. 12. should be enclosed with a
parenthesis, and then the sense is clear. If Hierome and Egranus had observed
so much in this and other places, they would not so sharply have censured St
Paul for his obscurities and incongruities, and lame senses and sentences.

Verse 8. Harden not your hearts] Some hearts are so hard, that neither
Ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy can possibly mollify them. Such
an heart is in some respects worse then hell. And if God broke David's bones for
his adultery, and the Angels backs for their pride, the Lord, if ever he save
any, will break his heart too.

Verse 9. Tempted me] God must be trusted, but not tempted, as he is, when men,
1. Question and awake his power; 2. Limit the holy one of Israel, and presume
to prescribe to him, set him a time, etc. 3. Neglect the use of means, and
serve not his providence.

Verse 10. I Was grieved] The Hebrew text has it, I was nauseated, and ready
to rid my stomach at them, to spew them out of my mouth.

They do always erre] They must needs err, that know not Gods ways. Yet cannot
they wander so wide, as to miss of hell.

Verse 11. They shall not enter] This the Apostle propounds to the unbelievers
of his time, that they may beware, Alterius perditio tua sit eautio. See thou
another suffer shipwreck? Look well to thy tackling.

Verse 12. In departing from] (...). Infidelity is the mother of apostasy; as
in Cranmer: but worse in John Dudley Duke of Northumberland in Queen Mary's
days, who being brought to the scaffold on Tower Hill, and having promise of
life, if he would recant his profession, dastard like forsook his master, and
exhorted the people to the Romish religion. Speeds Chron.
Which his death-Sermon afterward came forth in print by authority.

Verse 13. But exhort one another] A special preservative from apostasy. See
my Commonplace of Admonition, and my Treatise on Mal. 3.17.

Lest any of you be hardened] Continuance in sin hardens the heart, and
gradually indisposeth it to the work of repentance. Qui non est body, etc.
There is a deceitfulness in sin, a lie in vanity, Jon. 2.8.

Verse 14, For we are made par takers] Christ's consorts, coheyrs with him, Romans
8.17. This we are in present, if we persevere to the end.

The beginning of our confidence] Gr. Of our subsistence, (...).
or substance, that is, of our faith, Heb. 11.1. whereby we subsist, and become
sons of God, as Ambrose expounds it.

Verse 15. Whiles it is said] so. To you now, as it was said to them of old,
verse. 7. We must see our own names written on every precept, promise, example,
etc. Hos. 12.4. There God spoke with us.

To day if ye Will hear, etc.] The negligent spirit cries, Cr^ Domino, To
morrow Lord. In crastinum seria. But who can tell what a great-bellied-day may
bring forth? Either space or grace may be denied. God may leave men under his
Ordinances, as rocks in the midst of rivers, as blind at noonday.

Verse 16. Howbeit not all] Yet all fell in the wilderness, save Joshua and
Caleb. Good men are often wrapped up in a common calamity. The righteous perishes,
Isa. 57.1. so the world thinks: But whether they live, they live unto the
Lord, or Whether they die, they die unto the Lord, etc. The good corn is cut
down together with the tares, but to another, and to a better purpose. Romans
14.8.


Verse 17. (...).
whose carcases fell] Gr. Whose members, joints, limbs. Cadavera a cadendo. O
that we could make that use of their disaster, that Waldus the French Merchant
(father and founder of the Waldenses) did of that sad sight that befell him,
For walking in the streets, and seeing one fall suddenly dead, he went home and
repented of his Popish errors and profane courses.

Verse 18. To them that believe not] Or, That will not be persuaded,
uncounsellable persons, that acquiesce not in wholesome advice.

Verse 19. Because of unbelief] A bloody sin, Job. 3.19. No sin will gripe so
in hell as this. The devil will keep holyday there, in respect of unbelievers.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. Let us fear]
WIth a fear not of diffidence, but of diligence. See the Note on Phil. 2.12.
and on 1 Cor. 10.12.

Lost a promise] Some render it thus, Lest we should seem to fall short of the
promise, that is left us, etc. But where is that promise left us, may some say?
It is closely couched in the former commination, Chap. 3.18. God swear that
unbelievers should not enter: and therefore intimates a promise, that believers
shall enter. A Be can suck sweet honey out of bitter thyme; so cannot a Fly
do.

To come short of it] (...).
To come lag and late, when the gate is shut, the drawbridge taken up, as
those foolish Virgins, or as lazy race-runners, or as those that come a day
after the fair, an hour after the feast, and so are frustrated.

Verse 2. The Word preached] Gr. The Word of hearing, i. e. The promise that
fell from the Preachers lips into their ears. (...).
Nescio quid divinum in auscultatione est, says one; I know not what divine
business there is in hearing: but sure I am, that what we hear does more
deeply affect us, and more firmly abide with us, and stick by us, then what we
read.

In them that heard it] In their hearts, as in so many vessels. Faith and the
promise meeting make a happy mixture, a precious confection.

Verse 3. For we Which have believed] Believers (and they only) have heaven
aforehand in pretio, in promisso, in primiti is, in the price that was paid
for it, in the promise of it (which is sure-hold) and in the first fruits, the
graces of the spirit, which are as those grapes of the land of Canaan.

Verse 4. And God did rest] Here the Apostle shows what that rest of
believers is. Not that seventh-daies rest, verse. 5. nor that other rest, Psalm.
95. meant of the Land of Canaan, but another and better typified in both those,
viz. A spiritual resting from our own works or sins, so as God rests in his
love to us, Zeph. 3.17. and we sweetly acquiesce in our interest in him, Psalm.
116.7.

Verse 5. If they shall enter] q. d. Then never trust me more. Yet Ambrose here
takes the words for a forcible affirmation, q. d. Si introibunt, been habebunt.

Verse 6. Seeing therefore it remaineth] This is a deduction from the former
text of the Psalmist. Such as is that of our Savior, Mat. 22.32. from Ex. 3.6.
And such inferences rightly drawn, are the very word of God, 1 Cor 7.10.

Verse 7. After so long a time] Four hundred years almost passed between
Joshua's and David's days. Davies to day, was not Joshua's to day.

To day, if ye Will hear] That, day, of salvation, wherein the Lord does offer
us mercy in the Ministry of his Word, showing us our misery, and exciting us
to use the remedy.

Verse 8. For if Jesus, etc.] That is, Joshuah, who had his named changed when
he was sent as a spy into Canaan, Numb, 13.16. from Oshea to Ioshuah, from, Let
God save, to, God shall save. Under the Law (which brings us, as it were, into
a briery wilderness) we may desire, wish and pray, that there were a Savior:
but under the Gospel, we are sure of salvation. Out Jesus is Jehovah our
righteousness.

Verse 9 A rest to the people of God] Gr. A sabbatisme, an eternal rest, a
Sabbath that has neither evening, Genesis 2.2. nor labor, Isa 5^^2. Apecal 1.
Revel. 14.13. But they shall enter into peace, rest in their buds, be ravished
in spirit, receive the full import and purport of the weekly Sabbath, rest from
travel and trouble. 2. Of the seventh year-sabbath: for the creature, the
ground shall rest from it is vanity and slavery, Rom 8.20, 21.3. Of the
seventh-seven-years Sabbath, the Iubilean Sabbath: for their debts shall be all
discharged, their morgages released, their persons set at liberty from sins and
Satan's sl^very.

Verse 10. From his own Works] From the servile work of sin. Psalm. 1.23.
These are our own works, as a lie is the devils own, Ioh. 8.44. When be
speakth a lie, be speaks of his own: so when we do evil, we work de nostro
and secundum hominem, 1 Cor: 3.3. It is as impossible for us naturally to do
good, as for a road to spet cordials.

Vest 11. Let us labour] Here he resumes and re-enforces his former
exhortation; that his words may be as nails and goa^s fastened by the masters of
Assemblies.

Fall after the same example] God hangs up some malefactors, as it were in
gibbers, for a warning to others. Jethro grew wife by the plagues that befell
his neighbour-prince Pharaoh, as Rabbi Solomon oblerveth. Excuploa Me. rius qui
amt ille sap^t.
And Belshazzar is destroyed for not profiting by his fathers calamities, Dan.
5.22. Then have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this.

Verse 12. Quick and powerfull] Gr. Lively and energeticall: sc. In hearts that
can tremble at Gods judgments, as David did, Psalm. 119.120. As for hypocrites,
the Word Will ransack them, and give them a very glimpse of the judgment to
come, as it did Faelix, Herod, etc. God smites the earth with this rod of his
mouth, Isa. 11.4. he dasheth them in the teeth, and makes them spet blood, as
it were; hewing them by his Prophets, and slaying them by the words of his
mouth, Hos. 6.5. Rev. 11.5.

Soul and spirit] See the Note on 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.

And is a discerner] Gr. A curious Critic judging exactly, and telling tales
of the hearers: disclosing the words that they speak in their very
bed-chambers, as 2 King. 6.12.

Verse 13. Neither is there any creature] No not the creature of the heart, the
most secret thoughts and intentions.

That is not manifest in his sight] Or in the sight of it, that is, of Word
preached: but every the least fibra, the smallest string in the heart, that
would escape the sight of the most exact Anatomist is hereby cut up, See 1 Cor.
14.24.

But all things are naked and open] Naked, for the outside, (...).
and opened, dissected, quartered, cleft in the backbone (as the word here
signifies) for the in side. Erasmus rendereth it resupinata, making it a
metaphor from these that he with their faces up wards, that all passengers may
see who they are. Theodoret read^th it, Has the thro^t cut.

Unto the eyes of him] Or rather, of it, of the word, wherewith We have to do.
The word, like a sacrificing sword, slits open, and, as it were, unridgeth the
conscience.

Verse 14. We have a great high-Priest] Who by a new and living way will bring
us into the rest above mentioned. A great High Priest Christ is, because 1.
Real, not typical. 2. Eternal, and needed not succession, as Aaron. 3.
Entering (not into the holy places made with hands, but) into heaven it self,
Heb. 9.24.

Verse 15. Whick cannot be touched] Christ retains still compassion, though
freed from personal passion: Manet compassio. cuam cum impa Jibilitate.
And though freed from feeling, has still yet a fellow-feeling, Act 95. Mat.
25.35. Trajan the Emperor being blamed by his friends for being too gentle
toward all, answered, that being an Emperor he would now be such toward
private men, as he once, when he was a private man, wished that the Emperor
should be toward him. Christ has lost nothing of his wonted pity by his
exaltation in heaven.

Tempted] Or, Pierced through. Luther (...).
was a piercing preacher, and met with every man's temptations: and being once
demanded how he could do to? Act. and Mon
Mine own manifold temptations (said he) and experiences are the came thereof:
for from his tender years he was much beaten and exercised with spiritual
conflicts.

Verse 16. Let us there fore come boldly] In the sense of sin to wrap our
selves in Christ's righteousness, and so go boldly to the throne of grace, this
(says a reverend man) is an honor to Christ our High Priest.

CHAP. V. Verse I. Both gifts]
Of things without life.

And sacrifices] Of living creatures.

For sins] Christ, as God, was the Priest Altar to offer up and to sanctify
the sacrifice: And, as God-man, he was the sacrifice: for the Church was
purchased by the blood of God, Act, 20.28. A bloody Spouse she was unto him, as
in a sense it may he said.

Verse 2. Who can have compassion] Or, Bear anything With reason, (...).
and not be easily angry, but show as much mercy as is meet for his, whether
they have ignorantly offended, or upon deliberation. they cannot commit more,
then he can remit.

He is compassed With infirmity] Christ was compassed With that which we call
miserable, not that we call sinful infirmity.

Verse 3. He ought as for the people] A priest is a person by Gods appointment
taken from amongst men, and for men to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin in
their, and his own behalse.

Verse 4. And no man takes, etc.] Or if he doc, he shall smoke and smart for
it, as did Nadab and Abibu, Vzzah and Vzziah, etc. In physicis aer non facit
seipsum ignem, sed fit a superiori; as Aquinas notes upon this text. No man
might come uncalled to the King of Persia, upon pain of death. What then shall
become of such as come without a call to the King of heaven? Christ would not
let the devil preach him, Mark I. Quia extra vocationem (as one well notes)
because he had no calling to such an office.

Verse 5. Glorified not himself] As the Pope does, who will needs be styled,
Pontifex maximus, the greatest High Priest (whereas Christ is called only the
great, and not greatest high Priest, Heb. 4.14.) Pope Hildebrand especially:
whom when no man would advance to Peter's chair, he gat up himself. Heidsoll.
Quis enim melius de me judicare potest, quam ego? said he, Who can better
judge of me then my self?

But he that said unto him] He glorified him, or made him high Priest.

To day have I begotten then] Add the words following, Ask of me, and a. and
the sense is full. For to ask of God those things that pertain to the peoples
safety and salvation is the proper office of an High Priest. Christ as he
expiated his peoples sins by his own blond, so he made intercession for them,
1. A little before his attachment, Job 17.1, 2. etc. 2. In the very time, when
the sacrifice was hanged up, Luk, 23.34.3. In the heavenly Sanctuary, Heb. 9 24.

Verse 6. Thou art a Priest, etc.] The former proof was not so evident: bus
this puts the matter out of all question, A Minister should use sound speech
that cannot be contradicted: that he that is of the contrary part may be a
shamed, having nothing reasonably to oppose, Tit. 2.8. The Jew would object,
That Christ was not of the Tribe of Levi, therefore no Priest. the apostle
answers; Yes, a Priest, but after another order, and proves it. This is (...),
colla^ is testimon^ is demonstrare, as Paul did, Act 9 22. to confirm and
assert.

Verse 7. Prayers and supplications] Gr. Deprecations, (...).
and most ardent requests, uttered With deep sighs, hands lifted up, and
manifold moans.

Unto him that Was able to save him, etc.] Neither let any here object, That
many Marty is suffered with less ado, may with great joy and triumph. For, 1.
What were all their sufferings to his? 2. He therefore suffered the worst, that
they might the better suffer. 3. They were lifted up with the sense of Gods
love, which he for present fest not. 4. Their bodily pains were miraculously
mitigated: as Rose Allen being asked by a friend, how she could abide the pain
full burning of her hand held over a candle, Act. And Men. fol. 1821.
so long till the very sinews cracked asunder? She said, at the first it was
some grief to her; but afterward, the longer me burned, the less the felt, or
well near none at all. Sabina a Roman Martyr, crying out in her travel, and
being asked by her keeper how she would endure the fire next day; On well
enough, said she: for now I suffer in childe-birth for my sins, Genesis 3. but
then Christ shall suffer in me, and support me.

And was heard in that he seared] Or, He was heard (that is, (...).
Delivered) from his sear. I or no sooner had he prayed, but he met his cnemics
in the face, and asked them, Whom seek ye? I am he.

Verse 8. Yet learned be obedience] He came to know by experience what a hard
matter it was, thus to obey God. Schola crucis, (...) N^ument: docume^a.
schola lu^^, Gideon by threshing the men of Succoth, taught them, Judge.
8.7-16. Gods chastisements are our advertisements. See my Treatise on Rev.
3.19. p.145.

Verse 9. (...).
And being made perfect] Or, Being offered up in sacrifice, or being complcated
by this experimental knowledge of passive obedience also.

The anthour] (...).
And finisher too, cap. 12.2. Gr The cause, viz. by his merit and essicacy.

Verse 10. (...).
Called] Gr. Spoken unto, called by name, or entitled an High Priest, etc.
therefore he is truly so. For persons and things are as God calls them.

Verse 11. Of Whom We have, etc.] The digression here begun holds on to the end
of the next Chapter.

Hard to be uttered] Gr. Hard to be expounded. But dissiculty does not
dishearten, but rather what on heroic spirits to a more serious search: it
does not weaken, but waken their earnestness. not amate, but animate them.

Seeing Me are dull] (...) Mako.
Gr. Slow*paced and heavy*banded. Our minds me like narrow mouthed vessels.
Our Savior therefore spoke as the people could bear, like as Jacob drove as
the little ones could go.

Verse 12. Ye have need that one] But people plead their rotten cha^ters of age
and marriage against Catechism.

Verse 13. In the Word of righteousnesse] That is in the more solid doctrine of
the Gospel concerning Christ, who is our righteousness.

Verse 14. (...).
To them that are of full age] Or that are perfect, comparatively perfect, not
only past the spoon, but full grown.

Who by reason of use] Gr. By reason of habit, got by continual custom, and
long practice, as in an expert Artist.

Have their senses exercised] Their inward senses]: for the foul also hat her
senses, (...).
as the body has. Instead of seeing, faith; of hearing obedience; of smelling,
hope; of tasting, charity: of touching, humility.

To discern good and evil] Does not the ear try words, and the mouth taste his
meat? Job 12.11. Eye bath not seen, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9. Where the carcass is, the
Eagles Will be. Saints have a spiritual sagacity: and they lay hold on
eternal life.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. Let us go on unto perfection]
GR. Let us be carried on, as with a force, Act. 2.2. (...).
breaking through all impediments, aiming at the highest pitch, and eying the
best paterns. It is a low and unworthy strain in some to labor after no more
grace then will keep life and soul together, that is hell and soul a sounder.

Repentance from dead Works] these are the six Principles of Christian
religion, that must be laid as a foundation.

Verse 2. Doctrine of baptismes] Inward and out Ward, Falminis and sluminis, of
water, and of the spirit, that washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5

And of laying on of bands] hereby is meant the whole Ministry, and order of
Church government, Wilsons theol. Ruaes.
as prescribed by the Word. The Scripture is to be taken in the largest sense,
if nothing hinder, neither matter, phrase, nor scope.

Verse 3, If God permit] If God give me life and ability, (...) as (...) of
l^^^ming.
and you capacity and stability: for many fall away, whose damnation sleeps
not.

Verse 4. Who were once enlightned] Knowing persons, and those they call the
Wits of the World, are in greatest ding^r of the unpardonable sin; which begins
in apostasy, holds on in persecution, ends in blasphemy.

And have t^ast^^] As Cooks do their sauces with the tip of their finger only,
or, as the Israclites casted (...) of the land, and yet perished in the
wilderness.

Partakers of the holy Ghost] Of his common and inferior gif^s and operations.
These a man may lose, and have his d^ops^ (...) to sin seven times more
enl^m^ed then before, Mat. 12.41.

Verse 5. And have tasted the good Word] Catching at the promises, as children
do at sweetmeats, rejoicing therein, as the stony-ground-hearers did,
conceiving a rolling opinion, as Haman did, that they are the men when the King
of heaven will honor.

Verse 6. If they shall fall away] Totally and finally, as Judas and Julian
did, and as Mr John Glover thought he had done, and did therefore eat his meat
against appetite, only to defer the time of his damnation, which by mistake of
this text, he though he could not possibly avoid. But God, who comfort those
that are cast down, did not only at last rid him cut of all his fears, but also
flamed him to such mortification of life, as the like lightly has not been
seen, Act. and Mon. fol. 55^.
says Mr Fox, who knew it.

And put him to an open shame] As if they had not found him the same that they
took him for. In those that have wilfully resisted divine truths made known to
them, and after taste despised them, a per^wasion that God has forsaken them
(set on strongly by Satan) stirs up an hellish hatred against God; carrying
then to a revengefull desire of opposing whatsoever is Gods, though not always
openly (for then they should lose the advantage of doing hurt) yet secretly and
subtly, and under pretense of the contrary, as one well observes.

Verse 7. And brings forth herbs] So the fruitful Christian (that watered
with the Word and Spirit, brings forth a harvest of holiness) shall receive
the blessing of increase, Job. 1.2. Such trees as brought forth fruit fit for
meat, were not to be destroyed, Dout. 20.19. But trees that were not for fruit,
were for the fire, Mat. 3.10.

Verse 8. Is rejected, and is nigh to cursing] the sin against the holy Ghost
is therefore unpardonable, because God (not suffering himself to be derided, or
his Spirit of truth to be found a liar) smites these sinners against their own
souls, with blindness and reprobacy of mind, whence follows. 1. An
impossibility of repentance, since it is the work of that spirit whom they have
despited and will not suffer any saving operation of his to fasten on their
souls. 2. Such a desperate fury invadeth them, that they resist and repudiate
the matter of remission, the blood of Christ, thereby if they might have mercy,
yet they would not; but continue raying and raging against both the physic and
the physician, to their endless ruth and ruin.

Verse 9. But beloved, We are perswaded] He would not be mistaken. Zuinglius
when he had inveighed against vice, would usually close up lus discourse with
Probe vir hac xibil ad te. All this is nothing to thee, thou honest man.
Scultes Annal.
We can hardly beat the dogs cut of doors, but the children will cry.

Things that accompany salvation] Cr. That have salvation, (...) i.e. (...)
that comprehend it, are contiguous to it, and touch upon it. Grace and glory
differ not, but in degree.

Verse 10. For God is not unrighteous] That is, unfaithful, 1 John 1.9. There
is a justice of fidelity, as well as of equity.

To forget your Work] The Butler may forget Joseph, and Joseph forget his
fathers house: but forgetfulness befalls not God, to whom all things are
present, and before whom there is written a book of remembrance for them that
fear the Lord, and think upon his name, Mal. 3.17.

Verse 11. Do show the same diligence] A man may as truly say the sea burns, or
fire cools, as that certainty of salvation breeds security and loosnes.

To the full assurance] All duties tend to assurance or spring from it. strive
we must to the riches of full assurance, Colos. 2.2. But in case our assurance
be not so fair, yield not to temptations and carnal resonings. Coyns that have
little of the stamp left; yet are current.

Verse 12. That ye be not slothfull] A ready heart makes riddance of Gods work.
shake off sloth.

But followers of them] It was a good law that the Ephesians made, that men
should propound to themselves the best paterns, (...).
and ever bear in mind some eminent man.

Verse 13. For When god made promise] Of those many that by says and patience
had inherited the promises, the Apostle instanceth in Abraham, famous both for
his says in Gods promise, our. 13. and for his patience, v. 15.

Verse 14. Blessing I will bless thee] Now the whom god blesses, shall be
blessed, as Isaac said of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.

Verse 15. After he bad patiently endured] Waited many years for an Isaac, and
yet longer for eternal life. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord, says
dying Jacob. Genesis 49.18.

Verse 16. Swear by the greater] So do not they that swear by sundry creatures
and qualities, God can hardly spare such, J^r. 5.7.

An end of all strife] The end of an oath is to help the truth in necessity,
and to clear men's innocence, Exodus 22.11.

Verse 17. God willing more abundantly] His word is sufficient, yet tendering
our infirmity he has bound it with an oath, and let to his seal. His Word
cannot be made more true, but yet more credible. Now two things make a thing
more credible. 1. The quality of the person speaking. 2. The manner of the
speech. If God do not simply speak, but solemnly swear, and seal to us
remission of sins, and adoption of sons by the broad seal of the Sacraments,
and by the privy seal of his spirit, Should we not rest assured?

Verse 18. We might have strong] Such as swalloweth up all worldly griefs, as
Moses his serpent did the Sorcerers serpents, or as the sire does the fuel.
the Sacraments are gods visible oaths unto us: he takes, as it Were, the body
and blood of his Son into his hand, and solemnly swears to bestow upon us all
the purchase of Christ's passion. Nche^. 8 10.
Should not therefore the joy of the Lord be our stength? The comforts of
Philosophy are (...) (as Plato has it, as Socrates found it, when he was to
die) that is, toys and trifles. Nescio quomodo imbecillior est medicina quam
morbus, says Cicero, the disease is too hard for the medieme. But the
consolations of God are strong in themselves, and should not be small With us.
Job 15.11.

Verse 19. Both sure and studfast] Spes in terrenis, incerti nomen boni: Spes
in divinis, nomen est certissimi.

And Which enters into that] This anchor is cast upward, and fastened not in
the depth of the sea, but in the height of heaven, whereof it gets firm hold,
and sure possession.

Verse 20 Whither the fore-runner] Like as the High Priest once a year entered
^to the Holy of Holies to pray for the people.

CHAP. VII. Verse 1. For this Melchisedech]
SOme make him the same with Shem:] Others say it was the holy Ghost, others
say Christ himself under the habit of a King and Priest. It is most probable
that he was a mortal man, and a Canaanite, but yet a most righteous man, and a
Priest of the most high God by special dispensation: And that Kedarlaomer and
the other Kings that over ran the country, and spoiled it, forbear, out of
reverence to the man and his office, to meedle with Melchisedcehs territories.

Verse 2. Gave a tenth part of all] So to set forth his thankfulness to God
for the victory. The Lord is the man of war, Exodus 1.3. The Lord and Victour
of wars, as the Chaldee there expresses it. Conquerours should send to him,
as Joah to David, to take the honor of the day, 2 Samuel, 12.28. The very
Heathens, after a victory, would consecrate something to their gods.

Verse 3. Without father] viz. That we find mentioned in the holy Scripture.
Hence the Melchisedechian heretics held, That he was the holy Ghost, or at
least some created Angel.

Like unto the Son of God] As having neither fellow not successor.

Verse 4. How great this man Was] It is goodness that renders a man great, and
the grace of God that ennobleth, Isa. 43.4. Heb. 11.2. Keep close to God, and
then ye shall be some of Gods Rabbis, as Daniel calls them, Chap 9.27. See Job
32.9. Great men indeed; not with a a belluine, but with a genuine greatness.

The tenth of the spoils] Gr. The top of the heap.

Verse 5. To take tithes of the people] If tithes be Jewish, (...) M Harm.
says on, and yet Ministers must have a maintenance, how will men satisfy
their consciences in the particular quantity they must bestow upon them? The
Scripture speaks only of the tenth part. Can any show us where the old
apportion is reversed, and which is that quota pars now that conscience must
rest in?

Verse 6. Received tithes of Abraham] Gr. (...).
Tithed or tenthed Abraham, by the same Divine Right, whereby he blessed him.
Melchisedech did not take only that which Abraham was pleased to give him, but
he tithed him, says the text, he took the tenths, as his due.

Verse 7. The less is blessed, etc.] The Pastor therefore blessing his people
according to his office, is greater then his people, in that respect.

Verse 8. That be liveth] Tithes then are due to the Ministers of Christ that
lives, because due to Melchisedech, to whom Abraham paid them as a Priest, and
tith-taker, and type of Christ. Who therefore should receive them for him, but
those that are in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20?

Verse 9. Levi also paid tithes] If any shall object, So did Christ also, since
he was in the loins of Abraham too; It may be answered, That though Christ was
of Abraham, yet he was not by Abraham. But Levi was both.

Verse 10. In the loins of his father] So we were all in the loins of Adam when
he sell (as all the county is in a Parliament Man) and sell with him.

Verse 11. If therefore perfection] i. e. Justification, sanctification,
salvation.

Verse 12. A change also of the Law] For we are not under the law, but under
grace. The Gospel is post naufragium tabula, a plank after shipwreck, and has
its remuneration, Heb. 11.6, viz. of grace and mercy, by Law here some
understood only the law of Priesthood.

Verse 13 Pertains to another tribe] That of Judab, v. 14. which therefore is
first reckoned, Revel. 7. among those that were sealed; as of those that came
by Rachel, Nephthali has the first place; because in that tribe Christ dwelt,
viz. at Capernaum, Vt utrobique, superemineat Christi praerogativa.

Verse 14. Nothing concerning Priesthood] For when Reuben by defiling Bilhah,
lost his birthright, the birthright was given to Iosebh, the kingdom to
Judah, and the Priesthood to Levi. But God translated the Priesthood, and
settled it upon his Son Christ, who sprang out of Judah, in a time, when it was
commonly bought and sold to the vilest of men, and all was out of order.

Verse 15. After the similitude of Melchisedech] i. e. After an order distinct
and different from that of Aaron.

Verse 16. Of a carnal command.] i. e. External and ceremonial,

But after the power] Both of God the Father who made him a Priest, and of God
the Son who is the Father' of eternity, Isa. 9.6. and a Priest for ever: which
word [ for ever] the Apostle expounds and improveth in the last clause of
this verse, The power of an endless life.

Verse 17. For he testifieth] Hieron.
Thus the Author still argues out of Scripture: as knowing that, Quicquid non
habet autheritaum ex Scripturis eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua approbatur,
Whatsoever is not grounded upon Scripture authority, is as easily rejected as
received

Verse 18. For there is verily a disannulling] Gr. (...).
An outing, cassating, expunging.

Of the commandment] See the Note on Ver. 12. and 16.

For the Weakness and unprofitablenesse] sc. To justify, sanctify, save,
Romans 8.2. though as a schoolmaster to Christ, and a rule of life, it is of
singular use still.

Verse 19. But the bringing in] The Law is a superintroduction to Christ our
hope, who is the end of the law to every believer, Romans 10. 4.

We draw nigh to God] Ephesians. 3.12.
Having boldness and access with confidence by the faith of Christ our high
Priest: who lead us by the hand, and presents us to his heavenly father, as
Joseph did his two sons to Jacob, that the might bless them.

Verse 20. Not without an oath] A singular confirmation: what a monstrous sin
then is unbelief?

Verse 21. And will not repent] Will not change his mind upon pretense that
second thoughts are better. Those that can play with oaths, and can slip them
as easily as monkies do their collars, have nothing of God in them.

Verse 22. Jesus was made a surety] As he was our surety to God for the
discharge of our debt (the surety and debtour in law are reputed as one person)
so he is Gods surety to us, for the performance of his promises.

Verse 23. By reason of death] Neither their holiness, nor learning could
privilege them from deaths impartial stroke. -- Non te tua plurima Pentheu,
labentem texit pictas. All our learning also is soon refuted with one black
Theta, which understanding us not, snappeth us unrespectively without
distinction, and puts at once a period to our reading, and to our being.

Verse 24. He continues ever] What need then is there of a Vicar, as the Pope
will needs be styled?

An unchangeable] (...).
Gr. Impassable. He needs no successor.

Verse 25. To the uttermost] Perpetually and perfectly, so as none shall need
to come after him to finish what he has begun, He is a thorow-Saviour, a
Savior in solidum, and does not his work to the halves.

Verse 26. Who is holy] As the High Priest of old, Lev. 21.18. Exodus 28.

Harmlesse] Without any birth-blot.

Vndesiled] Free from a stuall pollution, without original blemish or actual
blot, 1 Pet. 1.19.

Higher then the heavens] That is, then the Angels, those heavenly Courtiers,
Dan. 10.13.

Verse 27. (...).
Who needs not daily] Or, On a certain day of the year, sc. at the feast of
the exp^ations, Levit. 16.29. See Heb. 1.1.

First for brown sins] Else how could he stand before God for others: The
Priests therefore had their laver wherein to wash, before they offered any man's
sacrifice. The brazen Altar stood without, the incense-altar of gold, within
the Sanctuary: to signify that our own lusts must be sacrificed, ere we take
upon us to pray for our selves or others. David observes this method, Psalm,
25. and Psalm. 51. He first gets pardon for himself, and then makes request for
Sion.

Verse 28. For the law maketh] As if the Apostle should say, Shall I sum up
and shut up all in a word? The law makes men high Perists which have
infi^mity, etc. Dull scholars must have it over and over. Seneca.
Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam sat is discitur.

CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. Who is set on the right-hand]
ANd is therefore a King, as well as a Priest, as was Melchisedech.

Verse 2. (...).
A Minister of the sanctuary] Or, A public officer, an Agent for the Saints,
about holy things.

Which the Lord pitched] Christ's body was conceived in the Virgins womb, not by
humane generation, but by divine operation. See Chap. 9.11. Joh. 1.14. He was
the stone cut out of the mountains without hands, Dan. 2. Cant. 2.1.
The rose of Sharon that grows without man's care.

Verse 3. Somewhat also to off^r] To wit, His own body, An offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. By Mount Olivet stood
the garden of Gethsemane, where Christ was taken and led into the City through
the Sheep-gate to be offered up, like an innocent sheep, on the altar of his
cross, for the sins of his people.

Verse 4. He should not be a Priest] Because not of the tribe of Levi, whose
Priesthood lasted to long as Christ lived on earth, and was done away by his
death.

Verse 5. Of heavenly things] So he calls the mystery: of Christ, showed
hereby to Moses in the Mount, and shadowed out to the people by the services of
the Tabernacle.

Verse 6. Of a better Covenant] Or rather T^stament ((...) and not (...))
heaven being conveied to the elect by legacy, It is part of Gods testament to
write his laws in our hearts, etc. All that he requires of us is to take hold
of this Covenant, to receive his gift go righteousness, to take all Christ,
etc. and this also he has promised to cause us to do, ver. 10. Isa. 56. Rom 5.


Verse 7. had been faultlesse] Such as had not been weak and unprofitable, Chap
7.18. See the Note there. If the people could have performed it, and have been
perfected by it.

Verse 8. For finding fault with them] Or, Finding fault with it, that is, with
the Covenant, he says to them, Behold the days, etc. So Junius reads, and
senseth it.

Verse 9. The Covenant that I made] He means not here the Covenant of grace
made with Abraham, but, circumcsion, the legal ceremonies and services, that
burden which neither they not their fathers could bear.

When I took them by the hand] Teaching them to go, taking them by the arms,
Hos. 11.3. keeping their feet, ^ Sam. 29. and leading them through the deep as a
horse in the wilderness, than they should not stumble, Isa. 63.13.

And I regarded them not] Heb. Although I was an husband unto them, q.d. Yet
nevertheless they forsook the guide of their youth, and forgot the Covenant of
their God, Jer. 31.32. Pro. 2.17.

Verse 10. I Will put my laws, etc.] Gods Covenant is to write his laws and
promises in his people minds, so that they shall have the knowledge of them,
And in their hearts, So that they shall have the comfort, feeling and fruition
of them.

Verse 11. And they shall not teach] The full performance of this promise is
reserved to the life to come; when we shall need no ordinances, but shall be
all taught of God.

Verse 12. I will be mercifull] I will be propitious through Christ the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.

Will I remember no more] Daniel comin. by Trussell.
Nihil oblivisci solet praeter injurias, said Cicero of Caesar. He was wont to
forget nothing but shrewd turns. And of our Henry the sixth it is storied, that
he was of that happy memory, that he never forgot any thing but injury. Let us
but remember our sins with grief, and God will forget them: Let us see them to
confession, and we shall never see them to our confusion. He is a forgiving
God. Nehem. 9.31. None like him for that, Micah 7.18. He does it naturally,
Exodus 34.6. Abundantly, Isa. 55.7. Constantly, Psalm. 130.4. Job. 1.27. Mal. 3.6.

Verse 13. He has made the first old] He has antiquated and abolished it.
This the Apostle often inculcates, because the Jews went about to establish
their own righteousness, and it is a piece of popery natural to us all, to
think to go to heaven by our good meanings, and good doings.

Is ready to vanish away] So is the old man in Gods people: that is their
comfort.

CHAP. IX. Verse 1. Then verily the first Covenant]
HEre the Apostle proves what he had propounded, Chap. 8. verse. 5. that his
assertion might be sound, such as cannot be condemned, Tit. 2.8.

Ordinances] Gr. Justifications, viz. Ceremonial, rituall, typical. (...).


A worldly Sanctuary] i.c. Terrene and shadowy, opposed to true and heavenly.

Verse 2. The first wherein was, etc.] He speaks nothing of he outer court, as
not pertinent to his present purpose. But there was both in the Tabernacle and
Temple, the Holy of Holies, the Sanctuary, and the Court of the people:
Answerable whereunto are in man, The spirit, soul and body. 1 Thessalonians. 3.23. And
as the cloud, 1 King. 8.10, 11, filled first the most holy place, and then the
holy, and then the outer Court; so does the holy Ghost renew the spirit of our
mi^des, and then our wills and affections, and then the our ward man.

Verse 3. And after the second veyl] This was not of any hard debar^ing matter,
but easily penetrable then, and now also rent by Christ, to show our easy
access to God with confidence by the faith of him. Ephesians. 3.11.

Verse 4. The golden Censer Or the Altar of incense, which though it belonged
to the most holy place, yet was placed without the veil, Exodus 30 6, etc. that
it might be of daily use, the sweet incense offered thereon, easily piercing
through the veil, and filling the most holy with it is savor.

Wherein was the golden pot, etc] In, or near to the Ark of the Covenant was
this golden pot of Manna, and Aarons rod, and the Tables of the Testament, and
the propitiatory or covering, and a crown of gold round about it. To insinuate
thus much (says one) that we must be like the Ark of the Covenant, being
builded and reared up still toward the mark: not only when the Lord seedeth us
with the sweet Manna of his mercy, but also when he afflicts us with the
sharp rod of his correction: and always keep the Tables of the Testament,
which are the Commandments; that by says in Christ, who is the propitiation
for our sins, we may obtain the golden crown of eternal life.

Verse 5. And over it the Cherubims] The Ark covering the Law within it, the
Mercy-feat upon it, and over them two Cherubims covering one another; All these
set forth Christ covering the curses of the Law, in whom is the ground of all
mercy; which things the Angels desire to pry into, as into the pattern of Gods
unsearchable wisdom and goodness.

Verse 6. Were thus ordained] Gr. Prepared, sitted. finished by the hand of the
artificer, and therefore called worldly in a good sense, ver. I. (...).


Verse 7. For the errours] Cr. The not knowings of the people: Those errors
that they could not help, (...).
and yet must else have answered for, Ignorant sane improbus omnis, says
Aristotle. Ignorance is the source of all sin, the very wellspring from which
all wickedness does wooze and issue. What will not an ignorant man do, who
knows not but he may do any thing? The dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of em^l^y, Psalm 74.12. Christ therefore expiated the ignorances
of his people.

Verse 8. The way into the holi^st] That is, into heaven, typified thereby.

Was not yet made manifest] In regard of performance, and that evidence of
says and doctrine that is held forth under the Gospel. The mystery of Christ
was manifested piece meal, and parcel-wi^e Heb. 11.

Verse 9. (...).
Which was a figure] Gr. A Parable; that is, such a from of service as
intimated some greater matter then to the sense appeared; and called upon the
people to look through the type to the truth of things, through the history, to
the mystery.

Verse 10 Till the time of reformation] Gr. Of direction or correction, that
is, Evangelicall and spiritual worship, that shall take place in the Church,
till the times of the restitution of all things shall come at the last day,
Act. 3.21.

Verse 11. Of good things to come] i.e. Of spirituals that were expected as
things to come, when Christ came with a Cornu-copia, a horn of salvation in his
hand. The Latins call prosperous things, Res siound^s, things to come.

A more perfect tabernacle] i. e. His humane nature, not made with hands, 107
of this building, that is, not by the power of nature, by the ordinary course
of generation.

Verse 12. (...).
Neither by the blood of calves] As the Leviticall high Priest did, ver. 7.

Having o^tained] Gr. Having found. See Romans 4.1. The Latins also use invenire
for acquirere, to find, for to obtain. See also Mat. 16.25. Christ overcame by
suffering, and by his own blood purchased his Church, as an Acheldama, or field
of blood.

Verse 13. (...) ^or it^lu ciny, and cat carb n^s exti^^ per^nsti sunt
The ashes of an heiser] Gr. Ashis and cinders m^xt together, as a monument of
Christ's most base and ut most affl^ctions; and of our justification and
sanctification through faith in his name.

Sprinkling the unclean] With an hysop-bunch: to note, That none can have
comfort either by the merit or spirit of Christ, without true mortification.

Verse 14. By the eternal spirit] That is, By his deity, called the Spirit of
holiness, Romans 1.4. and the spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. that gave both value and
virtue to his death, both to satisfy, and to sactifie.

Purge your conscience] This is that eternal redemption, verse. 12.

From dead Works] The most specious performances of unregeneraoe persons are
but dead works: because they proceed not from a principle of life, and have
death for their wages, Rom 6. A will written with a dead man's had can hold no
law. God will be served like himself.

Verse 15. For the redemption] Here he shows the reasons why it was needful
that Christ should enter by his own blood verse 12. scil. to expiate our
sins, and to possess us of heaven.

Verse 16. For where a testament is] See the Note on Chap. 8.6. Here the
testatour is Christ, heirs the Saints, legacies the gifts of the spirit,
Executour the holy Ghost, wintnesses Apostles, Martyrs. etc.

Verse 17. Whiles the Testatour liveth] For it is in his power to alter it at
his pleasure, as reason requires. Our Henry the second first crowned, and then
cast off his eldest son Henry, not suffering him to be what himself had made
him.

Verse 18. Was dedicated] Or initiated to holy use, Levit. (...).
16.15, 16.

Verse 19. He took the bloud] See Exodus 24 8.

And sprinkled both the book] which as it seems, was laid on the Altar to be
sanctified thereby. the very book of cod is sprinkled with the bold of Christ,
that it may be opened, and of use to the faithsull.

Verse 20. Saying, This is the blood, etc.] A tropicall and sacramental
expression, whereunto our Savior seems to allude in those words of his, This
Cup is the new testament in my blood, etc. The Sacraments of the old testament
had a resemblance unto the New: but that was for works of the Law, this is for
remission of fins.

Verse 21. He sprinkled with bloud] This sprinkling had a fore-shadowing of
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Peter 1.2. Isaiah 52.15. by his
finger, that is, by his Spirit, Luke 11.20. with Matthew 12.28.

Verse 22. Purged With bloud] Which yet of it self impureth and fouleth.

Verse 23. But the heavenly things] Those spiritual good things set forth by
the types of the Law: Or the Church under the Gospel, called Jerusalem that is
above, etc.

Verse 24. (...).
To appear in the presence] As a Lawyer appears for his client, opens the case,
pleads the cause, and it is carried.

Verse 25. Not that he should offer] As Popish Masse-mongers will have it.
Eamus ad commun^m errorem (said Domitius Calderinus to his friends, when they
persuaded him to go to Mass, Anno Domini 1442.) Let us go to the common
error.

Verse 26. To put away sin] To abrogate it, Heb. 1.18. to bind it in a bundle,
seal it up in a bag, Dan. 9.24. cast it behind him as cancelled obligations,
Mic. 7. blot out the black handwriting, with the red lines of his blood drawn
over it.

Verse 27. But after this the judgement] Every man's deaths-day is his doomsday.
Many of the Fathers held that men's souls were not judged till the last day.
Which opinion is as contrary to Purgatory (for which Bellarmine alleges it)
as the truth.

Verse 28. The second time without sinne] Imputed to him, as Isa. 53.6. 2 Cor.
5.21. See the Note there.

CHAP. X. Verse 1. A shadow of good things, etc.]
THat is, of Christ, says one, When the Sun is behind, the shadow is before;
when the Sun is before, the shadow is behind. So was it in Christ to them of
old. This Sun was behind, and therefore the Law or shadow was before: To us
under grace the Sun is before, and so now the Ceremonies of the Law, these
shadows, are behind, yea vanished away.

Verse 2. No more conscience of sin] Christ, though he took not away death, yet
he did the sting of death; so though he took not away sin, yet he did the guilt
of sin.

Verse 3. Made of An^ every year] A solemn confession of them, and what great
need they had of a Savior to expiate them; laying their hands on the head of
the sacrifice, in token that they had in like sort deserved to be destroyed.

Verse 4. Should take away sinnes] And so pacifi^ conscience: For sin is to
the conscience as a more to the eye, as a dagger to the heart, 2 Samuel 24.10. as
an adders sting to the flesh, Prove. 23.32.

Verse 5. But a body have thou prepared] A Metaphor from Mechanics who do
artificially fit one part of their work to another, and so finish the whole.
(...).
God fitted his Sons body to be join with the Deity, and to be an expiatory
sacrifice for sin.

Verse 6. Thou have had no pleasure] viz. As in the principal service, and
satisfaction for sin.

Verse 7. Lo I come] As an obedient servant bored through the ear, Exodus 21.
with Psalm. 40.6, 7. Wise and willing to be obsequious. Servus ^st nomen
officij, A servant is the masters instrument, and (...), says Aristotle,
wholly at his beck and obedience.

It is written of me] Christ is author, object, matter and mark of old and new
Testament. Therefore if we will profit thereby, we must have the eyes of our
minds turned toward Christ, as the faces of the Cherubims were toward the
Mercy-seat.

Verse 8. Which are offered by the law] To the great cost and charge of the
offerers. This we are freed from, and are required no more then to cover Gods
altar with the calves of our lips.

Verse 9. Lo I come] True obedience is prompt and present, ready and speedy,
without shucking and hucking, without delays and consults, Ps. 119.60.

He takes away the first] Clear consequences drawn from Scripture, a^e sound
doctrine, Matthew. 22.32. See the Note there.

Verse 10. By the which will] That is, By the execution of which will, by the
obedience of Christ to his heavenly Father.

Verse 11. Take away sin] Seperando au^erre, (...) Vndique tollere.
sunder it from the soul, strike a parting blow betwixt them.

Verse 12. But this man] Opposed to the plurality of Leviticall Priests. One
sacrifice, and once for ever, not many and often, as they. And he sat down,
when as they stood daily offering often times. Note the Antithesis, and Christ's
precellency.

On the right hand of God] Which he could not have done, if he had not expiated
our sins, Ioh. 16.10. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father. He could
not have gone to his Father, if he had not first fulfilled all ^ighteousnesse,
and fully acquitted us of all our iniquities.

Verse 13. Romans 16.^0.
Expecting till his enemies] Admire and imitate his patience. The God of peace
shall tread Satan and the rest under our feet shortly.

Verse 14. He has perfected] He would not off the cross till all was finished.

Verse 15. (...).
The holy Ghost also witnesseth] viz. By inspiring the Penmen, 2 Timothy 3.16.
acting and carrying them into all truth, 2 Timothy 1.21. as it were, by an holy
violence.

Verse 16. I will put my lawes] See the Note on Heb, 8.10.

Verse 17. Will I remember no more] Therefore there needs not any repetition of
a sacrifice for sin in the New Testament.

Verse 18. When remission of sin is] viz. An Impletory remission, as now in
the new Testament, not a promissory as under the old.

Verse 19. To enter into the holiest] viz. By our prayers, which pierce heaven
and prevail with God.

Verse 20. (...) Recens ^^^cta^us.
By a new] Fresh, and as effectual at all times, as if Christ were but newly
sacrified for us.

Through the veyl, that is, his flesh] Whereby we come to God, dwelling bodily
therein. Like as where I see the body of a man, there I know his soul is also,
because they are not severed: so is it here.

Verse 21. Over the house of God] As Jehojadab was over the temple, presided
and commanded there, 2 King. 11.5. All power is given to Christ both in heaven
and earth, for our behoof and benefit.

Verse 22. Let us draw near] Come, for the Master calls, Mark 10.49.

With a true heart] That is, With a heart truly and entirely given up to God,
uprightly propounding Gods service in prayer, and that out of a filial
affection, delighting to do his will, and therefore well content to wait, or,
if God see good, to want what it wishes, desirous rather that Gods will be
done then our own, and that he may be glorified, though we be not glorified;
acknowledging the Kingdom, power and glory to be his alone. This is a true
heart.

In full assurance of faith] Not with a quarter or half-winde, (...).
but with full assurance, such a gale of faith as fills the sails of the soul,
and makes it set up its top-gallant as it were.

Having our hearts sprinkled, etc.] Faith ever purges upon sin, and works
repentance f^o^ dead works.

Verse 23. Without wavering] Gr. (...).
Without tilting or tossing to one side or other. This amounts to more then
that conjecturall confidence of the Popish dubi^^n^^, and that common faith
that holds men in suspense, and hangs between heaven and earth, as a Meteor.

Verse 24. And let us consider] Christians must study one another cases, the
causes and cure of their spiritual distempers, sollicitous of their welfare.

To provoke unto love] To whet on, as Deuteronomy. 6.7. (...).
to sharpen and exti^ulate, as Prove. 27.17. to rouse and raise up their dull
spirits, as 2 Pet. 2.13. to set an edge on one another, as Bores whet their
tusks one against another, says Nazianzen.

Verse 25. Not for saking] Schism is the very cutting asunder of the veins and
arteries of the mystical body of Christ. We may not separate, but in case of
intolerable persecution, heresy, idolatry, and Antichristianisme.

The assembling of our selves together] In Church Assemblies, (...).
and Christian meetings; as ever we look for comfort at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together (the same word, as here) unto him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. the day whereof approaches, as in this text. Christ will come
shortly to see what work we make in this kind.

As the manner of some is] It was then, it was afterward, and is still in
these siding and separating times. The Donatists made an horrible rent for the
life of Cecilia^. So did diverse other for the pride and profaneness of Paulus
Samosatenus. But never was there any schism so causlesse and senseless, as
that of our modern Sectaries.

Verse 26. For if woe sin wilfully] Against the grace of the Gospel, despising
and despiting it, as those that fall into the unpardonable sin. Some good
souls by mistakes of this text have been much afflicted, as Master John Glover.
Other odious Apostates have utterly despaired. Others of the Ancients have
unworthily cashiered this Epistle out of the Canon, because of this passage.

There remains no more sacrifice] For sins against the law, though against
knowledge, there was an atonement, Levis 6.1. though it were for perjury: abut
for this sin against the Gospel, that repudiates the remedy, there is no
sacrifice; abused mercy turns into fury.

Verse 27. Fearful looking for] Though judgment be not speedily executed, yet
it is certainly to be expected. Winter never rots in the air, or dies in the
dams-belly, as they say. Could but men foresee what an evil, and a bitter
thing sin is, they durst not but be innocent.

Verse 28. He that despised] i. e. He that with a high hand violated it, or
fell into any capital crime, and it came to light, died without mercy. As for
those heinous offenses, that not being discovered, and sufficiently proved,
came not under the Judges cognizance, the Lord, for the easing of men's
consciences, and for the saving of their lives, appointed they yearly feast of
expiations, Levit. 16.29.

Verse 29. Who has trodden under ^oot] Respecting him no more then the vilest
and filthiest dirt in the street, or the most abject thing in the world, as
Ambrose expounds it: he disdains to receive benefit by Christ's propitiatory and
expiatory sacrifice, he would not if he might, he is so satanized.

The blood of the Covenant] That is, The blood of Christ, whereby the Covenant
is sealed, the Church purchased, the atonement procured, and heaven opened for
our more happy entrance.

Where with he was sanctified] By external profession, and by participation of
the Sacraments.

An unholy thing] Gr. A common, profane thing, as if it were the blood of a
common thief or unhallowed person, yea, or of a dead dog. In the Passover they
sprinkled the door and lintell with blood, but not the threshold, to teach
them, that they must not tread upon the blood of Jesus, as they do in an high
degree that sin against the holy Ghost.

And has done despite, etc.] Spitting at him their hellish venom, persecuting
and blaspheming his immediate effect, work and office, and this out of
desperate malice, and desire of revenge, without any color of cause, or
measure of dislike. One that had committed this sin, wished that his wife and
children, and all the world might be damned together with him.

Verse 30. I will recompense.] And if God will avenge his elect, Luke 18.7. How
much more his Son, and his Spirit?

Verse 31. It is a fearful thing] For who knows the power of his anger? even
according to thy fear is thy wrath, Psalm. 90.11. A melancholy man can fancy
vast and terrible fears, fire, sword, racks, strappadoes, scalding lead,
boiling pitch, running bell-mettle, and this to all eternity: yet all these are
nothing to that wrath of God, which none can either avoid or abide.

Verse 32. But call to remembrance] q. d. You cannot utterly fall away, as
those abovementioned: for as much as you have given good proof already of the
reality of your graces.

After ye were illuminated] Till they had a sight of heaven, they could not
suffer: but no sooner out of the water of baptism, but they were presently in
the fire of persecution.

Verse 33. Made a gazing stock] Gr. Set upon a theater: (...).
take it either properly, or metaphorically: both befell Christians. See I Cor
4.9.

Ye became companions of them] Sympathy has a strange force: as we see in the
strings of an instrument: ^. Sibb^.
which being played upon (as they say) the strings of another instrument are
also moved with it. After love has once kindled love, then the heart being
melted is fit to receive any impression. Two spirits warmed with the same heat,
will easily solder together.

Verse 34. For ye had compassion] Gr. Ye sympathized. See the Note on ver. 33.

And took joyfully] The joy of the Lord was their strength, as it was theirs,
Act. 5.41. who took it for a grace to be disgraced for Christ.

The spoiling of their goods] If a Heathen could say when he saw a sudden
shipwreck of all his wealth, Well, fortune, I see thou would have me to be a
Philosopher, should not we, when called to quit our movables say, well, I see
that God would have me to lay up treasure in heaven that is subject neither to
vanity, nor violence?

Knowing in your selves] Not in others, in books, etc. but in your own
experience and apprehension in the workings of your own hearts.

That ye have in heaven] When we lose any thing for God, he seals us a bill of
exchange of better things, of a double return, He will recompense our losses,
as the King of Poland did his noble servant Zel^^slaus; having lost his hand in
his wars, he sent him a golden hand.

Verse 35. Cast not away your confidence] Since it is your shield and buckler,
Ephesians. 6.16. but if battered with temptations, beat it out again. Demosthenes was
branded with the name of (...), One that had lost his bucklen.

Verse 36. For ye have need of patience] Whereas they might object: But where
is this recompense you tell us of? Oh, says he, You have need of patience to
wait Gods time of recompense. Good men find it often more easy to bear evil,
then to wait till the promised good be enjoyed. The spoiling of their goods
required patience, but this more then ordinary.

That after ye have done the will of God] viz. By suffering it, and
long-suffering, till he reward it.

Verse 37. (...).
For yet a little while] Tantissum, tantidum, adhuc pu^i^lum. A little, little,
little while. Gods help seems long, because we are short.

Now the just shall live by faith] In the want of feeling: he shall rest upon
God in the fail of outward comforts, as the believing Jews were to do in the
Babylonish captivity, Habak. 2.4. quoted here by the Apostle, though with some
variation of words.

But if any man draw back] Gr. (...)
Steal from his colors, run from his Captain, revolt from Christ, turn
renegado, relinquishing his religion, as did Julian, Lucian, and other odious
Apostates.

My soul shall have no pleasure] Christ has no delight in dastards,
turn-coats, run-awaies. He will not employ them so far as to break a pitcher,
or bear a torch, Judge. 7.7. Baldwin the French Lawyer, that had religionem
ephemeram, as Beza says of him, M^^^h. A^a^.
for every day a new religion, being constant to none, became D^o hominibusque
quos toties sese lerat, invisut, Hated of God and men, whom he had so often
mocked. Theodorick an Arrian King, did exe^edingly affect a c^rtain Deacon,
although an Orthodox. This Deacon thinking to ingratiate, Eusebius.
and get preferment, became an Arrian. Which when the King understood, he
changed his love into hatred, and caused the head to be struck from him,
affirming, that if he kept not his faith to God, what duty could my one expect
from him.

Verse 38. Who draw back unto] Apostates have martial law, they run away, but
into hell mouth. A worse condition they cannot lightly choose unto themselves.

CHAP. XI. Verse 1. Now faith is the substance]
HAving mentioned the life of faith, Chap. 10.38. and the end of faith (or the
reward of it) the salvation of the soul. verse. 1 Pet. 1.9.
39. he now descends to the description of this glorious grace ( Jam. 2.1.) and
says, that it is the substance or subsistence or Basis, and foundation of
things hoped for. It is the same that our author had called confidence, chap.
10.35. (...).
Polybius speaking of Horatius his keeping the field against the enemies forces
says, that the enemies more feared his hypostasis (the word here used) his
confident binding upon the victory, then his strength.

The evidence of things, etc.] The Index, (...).
or the clear conviction by disputation, or by making syllogismes from the
word. Indeed it is the word (to speak properly) that is the convincing evidence
of things not seen: but because the word prositeth not further then it is
mingled with faith in the heart, therefore that which is due to the word, is
here ascribed to faith.

Verse 2. The Elders obtained, etc.] Gr. Were attested unto; (...).
and are here eternalized in this notable Chapter, This little book of Martyrs,
as one fitly calls it. Faith honors God, and gives him a testimonial,
Ioh. 3.33. such as is that, Deuteronomy. 31.4. God therefore honors faith,
according to ^ Sam. 2.30. and gives it his testimonial, as here.

Verse 3. Through faith we understand] It is the nature of faith to believe God
upon his bare word, and that against sense in things invisible, and against
reason in things incredible. Sense corrects imagination, reason corrects sense,
but faith corrects both. Aufer argumenta ubi fides quaeritur. Verba
philosophorum excludit simplex veritas piscatorum, says Ambrose. I believe,
and that is enough; though I cannot prove principles and fundamentals of faith.

That the worlds were framed] Gr. (...) A^^abre sacta.
Were neatly made up.

By the word of God] By that one word of his Fiat, let it be so and so. By the
way take notice, that faith here described is taken in a large sense, as it
has not the promises only, but the whole Word of God for it is object. Look how
the Israelites with the same eyes and visive faculty wherewith they beheld the
sands and mountains, did look upon the brazen serpent also; but were cured by
fastening upon that alone; so by the same faith whereby we are justified, we
understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, and believe all
other truths revealed; and yet faith as it justifies looks upon Christ alone,
not knowing any thing here, but Christ, and him crucified, as is well observed
by a learned Divine.

Were not made of things, etc.] Of any praeexistent matter, as Plato held. See
my Notes on Genesis 1.1.

Verse 4. A more excellent sacrifice] Good actions and good aims, make a man
good in the sight of God. Cain may offer as well as Abel. Doeg may set his foot
as far within the Sanctuary, as David, the Pharisee as the Publican, but with
different success.

God testifying of his gifts] By fire from heaven, or some other visible
expression of his gracious acceptance, whereby Abels faith was confirmed
touching life and salvation in Christ.

Being dead, yet speaketh] Or, (...).
is yet spoken of; Being registered for the first Martyr in the Old Testament,
as Stephen was in the New, and as Mr Rogers was here in the Marian persecution.

Verse 5. (...).
By faith Enoch was translated] Or carried from one place to another. He
changed his place, but not his company, for he still walked with God, as in
earth, so in heaven.

That he should not see death] The Arabic version adds, He was translated
into paradise, where a plentiful amends was made him for that which he wanted
of the days of the years of the lives of his fathers in the days of their
pilgrimage, Genesis 47.9.

And was not found] And yet the Lord killed him not, as the Chaldee has, Genesis
5.24. but took him up in a whirlwinde, say the Hebrew Doctors as Elias was.

That he pleased God] He walked with God in all well-pleasing, being fruitful
in every good work, Col. 1.10.

Verse 6. But without faith] That is, without Christ, in whom the Father is
well-pleased, Ioh. 14.6.

For he that comes to God] sc. Forma pauperis, that comes a begging to him in
the sense of his own utter indigence, as Jacobs sons came to Joseph, and as the
Egyptians hard bestead came to him, saying, We will not hide it from my Lord,
how that our money is spent, etc. Genesis 47.

Must believe that he is] Zaleucus Lawgiver of the Locrians, speaks thus in
the proem to his Laws, Hoc inculcatum sit, esse Deos, Let this be well settled
in men's minds, that there is a Deity, and that this Deity will reward the
devout. But what an odd conceit was that of the Cretians to paint their
Jupiter without either eyes or ears? And what an uncertainty was she at, Med^^.
(...)
that praid, O Deus quisquis es, vel in coelo, vel in terra, O God whoever thou
art, for whether thou art, and who thou art, I know not. Servi^^ in Ge^^ lib. 1.
This uncertainty attending Idolatry caused the Heathens to close their
petitions with that general Dijque, Deaeque, omnes, Hear all ye gods and
goddesses. And those mariners, Ion. 1.5. every man to call upon his God: and
lest they might all mistake the true God, they awaken Jonah to call upon his
God. Christian petitioners must settle this, that their God is Optimus,
Maximus, such in himself, and such toward them, as he stands described in his
holy word.

Verse 7. Moved with fear] Opposed to the security of the old world, who would
know nothing till the very day that the flood came, Mat. 24. Noah trembled at
Gods judgments, whilst they hanged in the threatenings; and was no less
affected then if himself had been endangered. See the like in Habakkuk, after
that he threatened the Chaldeans, Chap. 3.16. and in Daniel, chap. 4.19. Noah
took things foretold him by God, (...).
by the right handle, as the word properly signifies.

By the which he condemned the world] Of deep and desperate security, that dead
lethargy, where into sin and Satan had cast them.

And became heir] Heir apparent: he was hereby evidently declared to be such.

Verse 8. When he was called] A man may follow God dry^^od through the red sea.
He is to be obeyed without sciscitation, with a blind obedience. Abraham
winked, as it were, and put his hand into Gods, to be led whithersoever he
pleased. Magnus est animus, Seneca.
qui se Deo tradidi^: pusi^^us and degener qus obluctatur. That Is a brave man
indeed that can wholly resign up himself to God -- Quo ^at^ trahunt,
retrahuntque, sequamur.

Verse 9. Virgil.
He sojourned in the land] There he had his commoration, but in heaven his
conversation, content to dwell in tents till he should fix his station above.

With Isaac and Iacob] Perhaps together, as near neighbors. When Abraham
parted with Lot, he would part with him no further then the right hand is from
the le^t, Gen, 13.9. There is singular comfort in the society of Saints.

Verse 10. Which has foundations] Heaven has a foundation, earth has none;
but is hanged upon nothing as Job speaks. Hence things are said to be on
earth, but in heaven.

Whose builder and maker] Gr. Whose cunning artificer, and public workman. God
has bestowed a great deal of skill and workmanship upon the third heaven.

Verse 11. Because she judged him, etc.] At first she laughed, through
unbelief, at the unlikelihood: but afterward she bethought her self, and
believed. This later is recorded, the former pardoned. So Genesis 18.12. Sarah
laughed within her self, saying, After I have waxen old shall I have pleasure,
my Lord being old also? Here was never a good word but one, viz. that she
called her husband Lord, and this is recorded to her eternal commendation, 2
Pet. 3.6.

Verse 12. As the stars, etc.] The seed of Abraham (says one) are of two
sorts. Some are visible members of a Church, yet have earthly hearts, dry and
barren as the sand. Others as the stars of heaven, of spiritual hearts,
minding things above.

Verse 13. (...) ab a s^nul and (...) ^^abo.
And embraced them] Gr. Saluted them, kissing Christ in the promises, and
interchangeably kissed of him, Cant. 1.1. being drawn together (as the word
signifies) by mutual dear affection.

Verse 14. Plotin. ap. Aug. deciv^ Dei.
That they seek a Countrey] Fugiendum est ad clarissimam patriam: ibi pater,
ibi omnia. A way, home to our Country, says one, there is our father, there is
our All, says one. To die, is in Bernards language no more then repatriasse,
to go home again.

Verse 15. If they had been mind^full] But to that they had no mind at all,
because their idolatry too much prevailed, Joshua 24.2. Genesis 31.19 yet not so
much as among the Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 12.31.

Verse 16. God is not asha^^ed] But honors them as his confederates, because
for his cause they ^enounted the world. No man ever did or suffered any thing
for God, that complained of a hard bargain.

Verse 17. Abraham, when he was tried] Often trials which Abraham passed, this
last was the forest, No son of Abraham can look to escape temptations, when he
sees that bosom, in which he desires to rest, so assaulted with difficulties.

Offered up his son Isaac] Ready he was so to have done, and therefore it is
reputed and reckoned as done indeed, 2 Cor. 8.12. See the Note there.

Verse 18. Of whom it was said] This was one of those many promises that
Abraham might think were all lost in the loss of his Isaac. Never was gold
tried in so hot a fire.

Verse 19. That God was able]. He founded his faith upon Gods fidelity and
omnipotency. These are the Iachin and the Boaz, the two main pillars, whereupon
faith rests.

Verse 20. By faith Isaac blessed] Patriarchall benedictions were prophetical:
the blessing of godly parents is still very available for the good of their
children: and justifying faith is not beneath miraculous in the sphere of its
own activity, and where it has warrant of Gods Word.

Verse 21. When he was a dying] The spirits motions are then many times
quickest, when natural motions are slowest, most sensible, when one body
begins to be sensless^, most lively when the Saints ^^e a dying. The Sun shines
most amiably toward the descent. The rivers, the nearer they run to the sea,
the sooner they are met by the tide. So here.

Verse 22. Gave commandment concerning] He died upon the promise, and held
possession by his bones, to testify his firm hold of heaven.

Verse 23. Hid three months of his Parents] That they hid him no longer,
argued weakness of their faith: which yet is both commended and rewarded.

He was a proper childe] Fair to God, Act. 7.20. (...).
having a divine beauty and comeliness, Special endowments are a fore-token
of special emploiment. The very Heathen in choosing their Kings, had a special
eye to bodily beauty. See 1 Samuel 10.23. and 16.19. and 17.42.

Not afraid of the Kings commandment] Because unjust and impious. See the Note
on Act. 4.19.

Verse 24. (...)
When he was come to yeares] Gr. Grown a great one, and so knew what he did,
understood himself sufficiently.

Refused to be called the son of Pharaohs] And so to succeed in the kingdom
(for we read not of any son that Pharaoh had) yea in the kingdom of Ethiopia
too: for being sent on his foster-fathers quarrel against the King of
Ethiopia, Histories tell us, that he afterward married that Kings daughter; for
the which he was checked of his brother and sister.

Verse 25. Choosing rather to suffer] The happiest choice that ever the good man
made. It was a heavy charge that Elihu laid upon Job, that he had chosen
iniquity rather then affliction, Job 36.21. The Church is said to come from the
wilderness (of troubles and miseries) leaning on her beloved, Cant. 8.5 The
good soul will not break the hedge of any Commandment, to avoid any piece of
foul way. Quas non oportet mortes praea^ligere? says Zuinglius. Zuing- epist 3.
What deaths had we not better choose, what punishment undergo, yea, what hell
not suffer rather, then go against our consciences rightly informed by the
good Word of God?

The pleasures of sin for a season] Job fitly calls sparks the sons of fire,
being engendered by it upon fuel, as pleasures are by our lusts upon the
object. But they are not long-lived, they are but as sparks, they die as soon
as begotten, they perish with the use, Col. 2.22. Good God, said Lysimachus,
for how short pleasure how great a Kingdom have I lost! May not the voluptuous
Epicure say so much better?

Verse 26. Esteeming the reproach, etc.] Reproach is here reckoned as the
heaviest part of Christ's cross. And if we can bear reproach for him, it is an
argument we mean to stick to him: as the servant in the law that was content to
be boared in the ear, would stick to his master.

Then the treasures in Aegypt] Aegype for it is power and pride is called Rahab,
Psalm. 87. famous it was for it is learning, 1 King. 4.30. Act. 7.22. and is
still for it is fruitfulness: so that where Nilus overfloweth, they do but
throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests in less then four months.
Thence Solomon had his chief horses, 2 Chronicles. 9. and the harlot her fine linen
Prove. 7.16. and yet Moses upon mature deliberation, esteemed the reproach of
Christ, etc. So did Origin choose rather to be a poor Catechist in Alexandria,
then, denying the faith, to be with his fellow-pupill Plotinus in great
authority and favor.

For he had respect, etc.] We may safely make any of Gods arguments our
encouragements: look through the cross, and see the crown beyond it, and take
heart, Quis non patiatur, ut potiatur?

Verse 27. As seeing him who is invisible] An elegant kind of contradiction.
Let us study Moses his Optics, get a Patriarchs eye, see God and set him at
our right hand, Psalm. 16. This will support our courage, as it did Micaiahs;
who having seen God, feared not to see two great Kings in their Majesty.

Verse 28. Through faith he kept the Pass over] It is the work of faith
rightly to celebrate a Sacrament Speak therefore to thy faith at the Lords
Supper, as Deborah did to her self, Awake, awake, Deborah, awake, awake, utter
a Song.

Verse 29. They passed through the red sea] Which threatened to swallow them,
but yet preserved them. Faith will eat it is way through the Alps of
seemingly-insuperable difficulties, and find unexpected out-gates.

As by dry land] Israel saw no way to escape here, unless they could have gone
up to heaven: which because they could not (says one) heaven comes down to
them, and paves them a way through the red sea.

Assaying to do were drowned] Here that holy Proverb was exemplified, The
righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead,
Prove. 11.8. See Isa. 43.3. God usually infatuateth those whom he intends to
destroy, as these.

Verse 30. By faith the walls of Jericho] So do daily the strongholds of hell,
2 Cor. 10.4. See the Note there. Wherein, albeit the Lord require our
continual endeavors for the subduing of our corruptions during the six days
of this life, yet we shall never find it perfectly effected, till the very
evening of our last day.

Verse 31. With them that believed not] To wit, that gave not credit to those
common reports of God, and his great works, but despised them as light news,
and refused to be at the pains of further enquiry.

When she had received the spies] Whom to secure she told a lie, which was ill
done. The Apostle commends her faith in God, but not her deceit toward her
neighbor, as Hugo well observes.

Verse 32. Of Gideon, of Barac, etc.] Here the names only of sundry Worthies of
old time per praeteritionem conglobantur, are artificially wound up together,
for brevity sake. All these were not alike eminent, and some of them such, as,
but that we find them here enrolled, we should scarce have taken them for
honest men: yet by faith etc. Christ carries all his of what size or sort so
ever, to the haven of heaven, upon his own bottom; as a ship does all the
passengers that are therein to the desired shore.

Verse 33. Wrought righteousnesse] Civil and military, spiritualized by faith,
and heightened to its full worth.

Obtained promises] Faith winds it self into the promises, and makes benefit
thereof. A Be can suck honey out of a ^lower: so cannot a Fly do. Faith will
extract abundance of comfort in most desperate distresses out of the precious
promises, and gather one contrary out of another, honey out of the rock, etc.
Deuteronomy. 32.36.

Verse 34. Escaped the edge of the sword] As David by the force of his faith
escaped Saul's sword, Eliah Ahabs, Elisha the Syrians, 2 King. 6. etc. and
diverse of Gods hidden ones at this day have escaped by a strange providence,
when studiously sought after as sheep to the slaughter. See the prefatory
epistle to Mr Shaw^ Sermon.

Verse 35. Women received] As the Sarepton, Shunamite, widow of Naim, etc. No
such midwife as faith: It has delivered even graves of their dead.

Others were tortured] Gr. (...)
They were tympanized, distended, stretched upon the rack, as a sheeps-pelt is
upon a drumhead. Others render it, They were bastonadoed or beat^^ with bats or
cudgels to death, as if it were with drummesticks.

Not accepting deliverance] On base terms: they scorned to fly a way for the
enjoyment of any rest, except it were with the wings of a Dove, covered with
silver innocence. As willing were many of the Martyrs to die as to dine.

That they might obtain a better resurrection] The resurrection they knew would
recruit and rectify them. This held life and soul together. So Dan. 12.3.
These miserable Caitiffs (says Lucian the Atheist of the Christians of this
time) have vainly persuaded themselves of a glorious resurrection, and hence
their foolhardy frowardness to die.

Verse 36. Of cruel mockings] As Jeremy, Amos, Elisha, Go up, baldpate, Go
up, sc. To heaven, as they say (but who will believe it?) that your Master
Elias did. So they mowed at David, mocked at Isaiah, Chap. 28.10. (the sound of
the words, as they are in the original, carries a taunt) jeared our Savior,
Luke 16.14. Set these Hebrews upon the stage, as mocking stocks, Chap. 10.33.

Verse 37. (...).
Were tempted] Or (as others read the words) They were burned. One says, That
it was almost as great a miracle that Joseph did not burn, when his mistress
tempted him, as it was for the three children not to burn in the Babylonish
fire. Luther was often tempted to be quiet, with great sums of money, and highest
preferments. Julian by this means drew many from the faith.

In sheepskins and goatskins] That might have rustled in silks and velvets, if
they would have yielded. Saepe sub attrite lati^at sapientia vest.

Afflicted, tormented] None out of hell were ever more afflicted then the
Saints, to the wonder and astonishment of the beholders.

Verse 38. Of whom the world] They were fitter to be set as stars in heaven.

Verse 39. Received not the promise] viz. Of Christ's incarnation.

Verse 40. Some better thing] i. e. Christ that great mystery, as 1 Timothy 3.16.
that chief of ten thousand, etc. that gift, Job. 4.10. that benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2.

CHAP. XII. Verse 1. With so great a cloud]
OR cluster of witnesses, whose depositions we should hearken to, and rest in.
Justin Martyr confesses of himself, that seeing the pious lives, and patient
sufferings of the Saints, he concluded that that was the truth that they
professed, and sealed with their blood. These, in things imitable, are as the
cloud that led Israel; but in things unwarrantable (for in many things we fail
all) as the black of the cloud, which who so follows with the Egyptians, is
like to be drowned, as they.

Let us lay aside every weight] Or burden, (...).
or swelth. He that runs in a race will not have a burden upon his back, or
shut up himself in a strait-bodied suit.

The sin which does so easily beset us] Or that sticks so close to us, (...).
or that troubles and puzzles us, or that curbs us and girds us in, that we
cannot run at liberty. Inordinate passions (says one) come like foul weather,
before we send for them; they often prevent all action of the will: but good
affections are so overlaid with sin (which compasses us about) that if we
gather not wind under their wing (so ponderous the flesh is) they cannot mount
up to purpose.

Let us run with patience] This seems to be a contradiction (as one observes)
for running is active, patience passive: but he that here runs without
patience, never gets to the end of the race; for in the race of Gods
commandments, men have foul play: one rails, another stops him, etc.

The race] Gr. (...).
The strife-race, for we must run, and fight as we run, strive also to
outstrip our fellow-racers.

Verse 2. (...).
Looking unto Jesus] Gr. Looking off those things that may either divert or
discourage, and looking unto Jesus with loving and longing looks.

The author and finisher] The Alpha and Omega, the beginner and ender. In all
other things and arts, Non est ejusdem invenire and perficere, the same man
cannot begin and finish. But Christ does both, Phil. 1.5.

Endured the crosse] Ran with a courage though he ran with the cross upon his
back all the way.

Despising the shame] Whereof man's nature is most impatient. Christ shamed
shame (says an Interpreter) as unworthy to be taken notice of, in comparison
of his design.

Verse 3. For consider him] Gr. (...) Comparatione^ instituite.
Make the comparison betwixt Christ and your selves, betwixt his sufferings and
yours, and then you will see a difference. Our troubles are but as the slivers
and chips of his cross. I am heartily angry (says Luther) with those that
speak of my sufferings, which if compared with that which Christ suffered for
me, are not once to be mentioned in the same day.

Lest ye be wearied and faint] Gr. Loosened, (...).
as the nerves are in a swoon or palsy: or, let go, as water spilt upon the
ground. This to prevent, keep your eye upon your Captain, and that cloud before
mentioned. There were in Greece certain fields called Palaestae, where young
men exercised themselves in wrestling, running, etc. In these were set up
statues of sundry valiant Champions, that the young men that ran or wrestled
might fix their eye upon them, and be encouraged. When Hierom had read the life
and death of Hilarion, he folded up the book, and said, Well; Hilarion shall be
the Champion that I will follow.

Verse 4. Ye have not yet resisted] q. d. You may do, and must look to do. And
if you cannot endure words for Christ, how will you endure wounds? If you have
run with the footmen, and they have tired you, how can ye contend with
horses? Jer. 12.5.

Striving against sinne] That is, Against sinners that persecute you, or the
sin that does so easily beset you, and solicit you to spare your self, and
rather to yield a little then to suffer so much. The Tabernacle was covered
over with red (and the Purple-fathers tell us they take that habit for the same
intent) to note that we must defend the truth even to the effusion of blood. If
we cannot endure Martyrdom (if called thereunto) and sweat a bloody sweat for
Christ's sake, we cannot be comfortably assured that we are of his body. Christo
submittemus (said that Dutch Martyr) sexcenta si nobis essent colla. We will
submit to Christ, though we should suffer never so many deaths for his sake.
Act. and Mon. fol. 1474.
John Lea^e a young man, burnt with M. Bradford, hearing his own confession,
taken before the Bishop, read unto him, in stead of a pen took a pin, and so
pricking his hand, sprinkled the blood upon the said bill of his Confession,
willing the Messenger to show the Bishop that he had sealed the same bill with
his blood already. See the story of Will. Pikes, Act. and Mon. 1853.

Verse 5. Legenda h^^^ sunt cum inter rogatione, Pis^^.
And ye have forgot the exhortation] Or, Have ye forgot the consolation? Are
the consolations of God small unto you, Job 15.11? Do ye in stead of wrestling
with God, wrangle with him, refusing to be comforted (as Rachel) out of the
pettishnesse of your spirits, as he, Psalm. 77.2? Will ye not as children, ^at
your milk, because you have it not in the golden dish? Will ye be like the
hedge hog, of which Pliny reports, that being laden with nuts and fruits, if
the least ^ilbeard fall off, will sling down all the rest in a pettish humor,
and beat the ground with her bristles.

Despise not thou the chastening] See my love tokens, page 37. Count it not a
light matter, a common occurrence, such as must be born by head and shoulders,
and when things are at worst, they will mend again. This is not patience but
pertinacy, strength but stupidity, The strength of stones, and flesh of brass,
Job 6.12. When Gallienus the Emperor had lost the Kingdom of Egypt, What?
said he, Sine lino Aegyptio esse non possumus? Cannot we be without the hemp of
Egypt? But shortly after he was slain with the sword. Turk hist. 185.
When the Turks had taken two Castles in Chersonesus, and so first got footing
in Europe, the proud Greeks said, that there was but a hogsty lost, alluding to
the name of the Castle. But that foolish laughter was turned within a while
into most bitter tears. When Callice was lost under Q. Mary, those of the
faction strove to allay the Queens grief, saying, that it was only a refuge for
runagate-heretikes, and that no Roman Catholic ought to deplore, but rather
rejoice at the damage; At Regina gravi jamdudum saucia cura,
Vulnus alit venis --


Nor faint when thou art rebuked] If we faint in the day of adversity, Prove.
24.10.
out strength is small, says Solomon: and it is, Non quia dura, sed quia
molles patimur, says Seneca. Not for that we suffer hard things, Judge. 8.21.
but because we are over-soft that suffer them. As is the man so is his
strength, said they to Gideon. Joseph's bow abode in strength, even when the
iron entered into his soul, Genesis 49.24. and Jobs stroke was heavier then his
groaning, Job 23.2. Invalidum omne natura querulum, says Seneca. It is a
weakness to be ever puling. See my Love Tokens, p. 44, 45.

Verse 6. For whom the Lord loves] Whom he entirely loves and cockereth above
the rest of his children. That Son in whom he is well pleased, says Mercer on
Prove. 3.12. whom he makes his white boy, says Theophylact here. See my
Love Tokens, page 54.55.

And scourges every Sonne] Lays upon them hard and heavy strokes. When
Ignatius came to the wilde-beasts, Now, says he, I begin to be a Christian.
Omnis Christianus crucian^u, says Luther: And he has not yet learned his ABC
in Christianity, says Bradford, that has not learned the lesson of the
cross. When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did, and how he
felt himself, he p^inted to his sores and ulcers, (whereof he was full) and
said, Hae sunt gemmae and pretiosa ornamenta Dei, etc. These are Gods gems and
jewels where with he decketh his best friends, Joh. Manl. loc, com p. 127.
and to me they are more precious then all the gold and silver in the world.

Verse 7. God deals with you, etc.] Corrections are pledges of our Adoption,
and badges of our sonship. One Son God ^ad without sin, but none without
sorrow. As God corrects none but his own, so all that are his shall be sure to
have it; and they shall take it for a favor too, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Verse 8. Then are ye bastards] Qui excipitur a numero flagellatorum, excipitur
a numero filiorum, says one. He that escapes affliction may well suspect his
adoption. I have no stronger argument against the Popes Kingdoms, says Luther,
then this, Quod sine cruce regnat, that he raigns without the cross, they have
no changes, surely they fear not God.

Verse 9. And we gave them reverence] Pater est. si pater non esses, etc. It is
my Father, etc. This cooled the boiling rage of the young man in Terence.
Nicolas of Jenuile a young French Martyr, when he was condemned and set in the
cart; his father coming with a staff would have beaten him: Act. and Mon. fol.
837.
but the officers not suffering, it would have struck the old man. The son
crying to the officers, desired them to let his father alone, saying, he had
power over him to do what he would amp;c.

And live] For corrections of instruction (and God never chastises, but
withal he teaches, Psalm, 94.12.) are the way of life, Prove. 6.23. and 15.31.
See my Love Tokens, page 25, 26, 27.

Verse 10. After their own pleasure] To ease their stomachs, vent their
choler, discharge themselves of that displeasure they have (and perhaps
without cause) conceived against us. Not so the Lord: Fury is not in me, says
he, Isa. 27.4. Though God may do with his own as he pleases, yet he does never
over-do. For it goes as much against the heart with him, as against the hair
with us: It is even a pain to him to be punishing, Lam. 3.33.

That we might be partakers] thus bitter pills bring sweet health, and sharp
winter kills worms and weeds, and mellows the earth for better bearing of fruits
and flowers. The Lilly is sowed in its own tears, and Gods vines bear the
better for bleeding. The Walnut tree is most fruitful when most beaten, and
Camomile the more you tread it, the more you spread it. Aloes kills worms, and
stained clothes are whitened by frosting.

Verse 11. The peaceable fruit of righteousnesse] That crown of righteousness
wrought out unto us by afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.17. These are the preludes of our
triumph, yea a part of our salvation. Look therefore through the anger of Gods
corrections, says one, to the sweetness of his love therein, as by a rainbow
we see the beautiful image of the Suns-light in the midst of a dark and
waterish cloud. And look upon these afflictions as on so many wayward and
touchy guests; which while they stay, watch every officer, but when they
depart, they pay freely.

Verse 12. Lift up the hands] Pluck up your good hearts, and buckle close to
your business; how else will you run the race that is set before you? as
verse. (...).
I. Gird up the loins of your minds: a drooping spirit makes no riddance of the
way. Set all to rights, as the world signifies.

Verse 13. Make straight paths] Seek not by-waies (those highways to hell)
leap not over the hedge of any Commandment, so to escape any piece of foul way:
but as those kine of the Philistims held straight on their way to Bethshemesh,
1 Samuel 6.12. though they had calves at home: so let us to heaven, though we
have diverse things to divert us. Let thine eyes look right on: and let thine
eyelids look straight before thee, Prove. 4.25.

Verse 14. Follow peace] Gr. Pursue it, though it flee from you. Psalm. 120.7.
I am peace (says David) but when I speak of it, they are for war.

And holinesse] Or chastity, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. such a holiness as is opposed to
fornication and profaneness. v. 16.

Without which] The Article may be neuter: and then the sense is, Without which
following peace and holiness, or an holy peaceablenesse, none shall see God to
their comfort.

Verse 15. Lest any man fail] Or, Fall short, as Chap. 4.1. See the Note there.
Short shooting loses many a game: he that in a race lies down ere he come to
the goal, gets not the garland. Pe^^everance crowns all our virtues. But its an
easy thing to fall a napping with the foolish virgins (yea the wise also
slumbered) which will prove to our cost, when God shall send forth summons for
sleepers.

Lest any root of bitternesse] Any scandalous sin to the corrupting of others,
and the corroding of our own conseiences: and out of which we recover not
without much ado, till we have felt what an evil and a bitter thing ^inne is,
as David did, Psalm. 51.

Verse 16. Fornicatour or profane] He instanceth in some roots of bitterness.
Esa^'s profaneness appeared in these particulars. 1. In that he was no sooner
asked for the birthright, but he yielded. 2. That he parted with it for a
trifle, a little red, red, as he called it in his haste and hunger. 3. That he
did this, being, as he thought, at point of death. 4. That he went his way when
he had done, as if he had done no such thing: he showed no sign of remorse or
regret. Hence he is four of five several times branded with, This is Edom.

Who for one morsel, etc.] Many such Edomites now-adaies that prefer earth
before heaven, a swine-sty before a sanctuary, as the Gadarens, their part in
Paris before their part in Paradise, as that carnal Cardinal. Vale lumen
amicum, said Theotimus; Ambros.
Farewell eyes, if I may not drink and do worse, ye are no eyes for me. He
would rather lose his sight then his sin: so will many rather part with heaven
then with their lusts. O what mad men are these that bereave themselves of a
room in that City of pearl, for a few carnal pleasures, amp;c. Pope Sixtus the
fifth sold his soul to the devil to enjoy the Popedom for seven years.

Verse 17. He was rejected] Or, Repulsed. For Isaac, (...)
when he saw that he had done unwilling justice in blessing Jacob, he durst not
reverse the blessing: for he feared an exceeding great fear, Genesis 27.33.
Neither natural affection, nor Esau's importunity could make him repent and
repeal what he had done.

Though he sought is carefully with tears] Tears they were of discontent, for
he cries, and at same time threatens his brother Jacob. Some weep for sin, some
for misery, some for joy, some for compassion, some for revenge and in
hypocrisy, as Esau here, who rued his deed, but repented not his sin.

Vetse 18. For ye are not come, etc.] q. d. You are not under the law, but
under grace: beware therefore of profaneness and licentiousness. For think
you that God has hired you to be wicked? Are you delivered to do all these
abominations? Jer. 7.10. Ought you not to walk Gospel-high, Phil. 1.27? Will
not the Angel (Christ) that goes along with you, destroy you after that he
has done you good, if ye turn not and repent according to the rules of his
Law, the Gospel? Exodus 33.2, 3, 4, etc.

Verse 19. And the sound of a trumpet] Showing the nature of Gods Law, to
manifest Gods will, men's sins, and to warn them of the wrath deserved: likewise
to summon them to appear before the Judge.

The voice of Words] That is, The delivery of the Decalogue, called the words
of the Covenant, Exodus 33.28. the ten words.

Verse 20. For they could not endure] This shows the nature and use of the Law,
contrary to that of the Gospel. It is a killing letter, written in blood,
holding forth justice only, and no mercy.

Verse 21. Moses said, I exceedingly] This Paul might have by tradition, or
rather by revelation, unless he gathered it from Exodus 19.19. compared with
Dan. 108, 16, 17, 19.

Verse 22. But ye are come to Mount] And the blessings that come out of Sion
(Grace and peace that come by Jesus Christ) are better then all other the
blessings of heaven and earth, Psalm. 134.3.

The heavenly Jerusalem] As Jerusalem was distinguished into two Cities, the
superior and the inferior, so is the Church into triumphant and militant; yet
both make up but one City of the living God.

To an innumerable company] Gr. To Myriads, or many ten thousands of Angels.
Some have said that they are 99. to one, in comparison of the Saints: grounding
their conceit upon the Parable of the lost sheep, Luke 15.

Verse 23. To the general Assembly] Or public meeting of a whole Country, as
at a great Assize, or some solemn celebrity. The Roman Emperors raised up
ample Amphitheatres in a circular form, that the people sitting round about
might have a commodious sight of such pleasant spectacles as were set before
them. That which Pompey erected was of such extent, that it was able to receive
40000 men, as Pliny witnesses. But O what a glorious Amphitheatre is that of
heaven? What a stately Congregation-house? O praeclarum diem cum ad illud
animorum concilium caetumque proficiscar and cum ex hac turba and colluvione
discedam! Cic desenect^te.
Surely, if Cicero or some other Heathen could say so, how much more may we
exult and say, O that dear day when we shall go out of this wretched world, and
wicked company; to that general Assembly of holy and happy souls! And how
should we in the mean while turn every solemnity into a school of Divinity: as
when Fulgentius saw the Nobility of Rome sit mounted in their bravery, it
mounted his meditation to the heavenly Jerusalem. And another when he sat and
heard a sweet consort of music, M. Es^y. Art of Meditat. by D. Hall.
seemed upon this occasion carried up for the time beforehand to the place of
his rest, saying very passionately, What music may we think there is in heaven!

Which are written in heaven] In Jerusalem records were kept of the names of
all the Citizens, Psalm. 48.3. so in heaven. And as the Citizens of Rome might
not accept of freedom in any other City: so neither should we seek things on
earth, as those whose names are written in the earth, Ier. 17.

Verse 24. That speaks better things] Every drop whereof had a tongue to cry
for vengeance: whence it is called bloods in the plural, Genesis 4.10.

Verse 25. See that ye refuse not, etc.] Gr. (...).
That ye shift him not off, by frivolous pretenses and excuses, as those
Recusant guests did, Mat. 22. It is as much as your souls are worth. (...).
Look to it therefore.

That speaks from heaven] By his blood, Word, Sacraments, motions of his
Spirit, mercies, etc. If we turn our backs upon such bleeding embracements, and
so kick against his naked bowels, what will become of us? And mark, that he
speaks of himself, as one.

Verse 26. Whose voice then shook, etc.] viz. When he gave the Law. What shall
he do when he comes to judgment?

Not the earth only, etc.] Not men only, but angels, who stand amazed at the
mystery of Christ. As for men, they will never truly desire Christ, till they
are shaken, Hag. 2.7. Gods shaking ends in settling; it is not to ruin, but to
refine us.

Verse 27. And this word, Yet once more] The Apostle commenteth upon the
Prophet whom he cites, and from that word of his, Yet once, concludes the
dissolution of the present frame of the world by the last fire, and the
establishing of that new heaven and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness,
2 Pet. 3.12, 13. The force of Scripture-words is then well to be weighed by
those that will draw there-hence right consequences: And they have done
singular good service to God and his Church, that they have employed their time
and their talents for the finding out the sense of the Text, by fishing out the
full import and signification of the Original words. In which kind learned Mr
Leigh by his Critica Sacra upon both testaments, has merited much commendation.

Verse 28. A kingdom which cannot be moved] As the mighty Monarchies of the
world could: for those had their times and their turns, their ruin as well as
their rise, so that now they live but by fame only. Not so the Kingdom of
heaven. You may write upon it the Venetian Motto, Nec fluctu, nec flatu
movetur: Neither winds nor waves can stir it.

With reverence] Gr. With bashfulnesse, as in Gods holy presence. See Deuteronomy.
23.13.

Verse 29. A consuming fire] viz. To profligate professors, ungirt Christians,
Isa. 33.14.

CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. Let brotherly love continue]
IT shall continue in heaven; pity therefore but it should on earth. No such
heaven upon earth, next unto communion with God, as the communion of Saints.

Verse 2. Have entertained Angels] As Abraham and Lot, who pursued hospitality,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12.13. and had such guests as they hoped not for.
The Galatians received St Paul as an Angel; so did Cornelius entertain Peter.
Every child of God is an earthly Angel: and in entertaining them, Angels also
(which are their Guardians) are entertained. The Philosopher told his friends
when they came into his little low cottage, The gods are here with me. (...).
God and his Angels are where the Saints are.

Verse 3. Remember them that, etc.] Learn hence, says one, That it is no new
thing for the world to put bonds on them, who seek to bring them out of
bondage. It is very probable that Micaiah was that disguised Prophet, who
brought to Ahab the fearful message of displeasure and death for dismissing
Benhadad, for which he ever after hated him, and held him in prison.

As being your selves also in the body.] Not the body of Christ or the Church,
as Calvin senseth it, but in the body of flesh and frailty, subject to like
afflictions: so Erasmus, Beza, Pareus, others.

Verse 4. Marriage is honourable] And yet say the Rhemists upon, 1 Corinthians.
7.9. Marriage of Priests is the worst sort of incontinency. Is not this to play
the Antichrist?

And the bed undefiled] Admonimus in ipso etiam matrimonio quandam esse
scortutionis speciem, B^z. Confess p. 194.
siqu^ puro Dei dono pure and sancte non utatur, ad eum finem cujus caiua est
institutum, says Beza. The Marriage Bed, though lawful may be defiled by
excess, etc. and a man may be an adulterer of his own wife.

God will judge] The Anabaptists of Germany, Joh. Manl. loc. com. p. 487.
inferred from hence, that therefore men ought not to punish adulterers: for
God reserved them to his own judgment. Two of them, Monetarius and Hetserus,
were notorious whoremongers: being a pair of such Preachers, as Zedekiah and
Ahab were, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire, because they committed
adultery with their neighbors wives, and spoke lies in Gods name, etc. Jer.
29.22, 23. But what a bold man was Latimer Bishop of Worcester, who presented
to Henry the eight, for a New-years-gift, Act. and Mon. 1594.
a new Testament with a napkin, having this posie about it, Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge?

Verse 5. Be content with such things] Not to be content, is to be covetous. If
men cannot bring their means to their mind, Clem. Alex.
let them bring their mind to their means. A little will serve to bear our
charges till we come home to heaven. Bonus pacis indiget. See the Note on 1
Timothy 6, 6.8.

For he has said] Five times in Scripture is this precious promise renewed;
that we may press and oppress it, till we have expressed the sweetness out
of it, Isa. 66.11.

I will not forsake thee] (...).
I will not not not forsake thee. Leave us God may to our thinking, but forsake
us he will not. Only we must put this and other promises in suit, by praying
them over. God loves to be bound by his own words, to be sued by his own bond.

Verse 6. So that we my boldly say] Having such a promise to build and found
our faith upon; we may well proceed to this holy gloriation against all
opposition.

Verse 7. (...).
Them which have the rule] Gr. Your Captains, your Guides, (so Ministers are
called) Your Chieftains and Champions, that bear the brunt of the battle, the
heat of the day, and upon whom, as upon his white horses, the Lord Christ
rides about conquering and to conquer, Revelation 6.2.

Verse 8. Jesus Christ the same] This was the sum of their Sermons, Act 9.11.
and is the substance of their and your faith: which therefore you must stick
to, standing fast in the street which is called Straight, and not wherried
about with diverse and strange doctrines.

Verse 9. (...).
Be not carried about] Error is a precipice, a vortex, or whirl-pool, which
first turns men round, and then sucks them in.

With diverse and strange doctrines] That agree neither with themselves, nor
with the truth.

That the heart be established] Ballasted as a ship, balanced as the Be with a
little stone taken up by her, when she has far to fly in a high wind, Ne
leve alarm remigium praecipitent ^^abra ventorum, as Ambrose observes, lest
the bigger blast should dash her to the ground.

Not with meats] As if they were holy, or helpful to salvation.

Verse 10. We have an altar] That is, A sacrifice, even Christ our Passover,
whose flesh is meat indeed, John 6. but to believers only, not to those that
pertinaciously plead for Ceremonies and services of the Law, Gal. 5.4. Hic
edere, est credore.

Verse 11. Are burnt without the Camp] And so the Priests had no part of the
sin offering: to show that they have no part in Christ that adhere to the
Leviticall services. See Levit. 16.27.

Verse 12 Without the gate] See how punctually the old Testament is fulfilled
in the new. Hardly could those before Christ divine what this meant, till he
had suffered it, and the Apostle had opened it. Event is the best key to types
and prophecies.

Verse 13. Bearing his reproach] The reproach of Saints is the reproach of
Christ, and their sufferings his, Colos. 1.24. And Nehem. 4.3, 5. God is more
provoked then Nehemiah. He that says, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, repaies
oft-times, when we have forgiven, when we have forgotten; and calls to reckoning
after our discharges.

Verse 14. For here we have none] Improve this argument for the working our
hearts off from the things of this world: the beauty of all which, is but as a
fair picture drawn upon the ice, that melts away with it.

But we seek one to come] And here we must all turn Seekers. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, etc. Matthew. 5.33. See the Note there.

Verse 5. The fruit of our lips] Covering Gods altar with the calves of our
lips, Hos. 14.3. This shall please the Lord better then an Ox or Bullock, that
has horns and hoofs, Psalm. 69.31. This also is the seekers sacrifice, v. 32.

Verse 16. Forget not] We very easily forget what we care not to remember. The
richer the harder, usually.

For with such sacrifices] How improvident are we that will not offer a
sacrifice of alms when God sets up an altar before us?

Verse 17. That have the rule over you] Gr. That are your Leaders or Captains.
But now, as once in Alcibiades his Army, most will be leaders few learners. See
the Note on Verse 7.

Verse 18. Willing to live honestly] Tantum velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret.
David could wish well to the keeping of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.4, 5. and
affect that which yet he could not effect.

Verse 19. That I may be restored] Prayer raigns over all impediments. See this
excellently let forth by M. Harris in his Peter's enlargement.

Verse 20. Now the God of peace] He that would reap prayers, must sow them.
What could the Hebrews do less then pray for him, that praid so heartily for
them?

Our Lord Jesus] Here Is his kingly office. God has made him both Lord and
Christ, Act. 2.36.

That great shepherd] That feeds his people daily and daintily with divine
doctrine. Here Is his Prophetical office.

Through the bloud] Here Is his Priestly office. And here we must begin, if we
will reckon them right.

Verse 21. In every good work, etc.] Works materially good, may never prove so
formally and eventually: As when they are but external, partial, coactive,
inconstant, etc.

Verse 22. Suffer the Word] Sharp though it be, and to the flesh tiresome, yet
suffer it. Better it is that the Vine should bleed then die. But many are like
the nettle, touch it never so gently, it will sting you. Tange montes and
fumigabunt. Offer to wake men out of their sleep, and they will brawl, in that
case with their best friends; yea though it be with them here, as once it was
with those that had the sweating sickness, If they slept they died.

Verse 23. Know ye that our brother] Good news should be spread abroad, and are
a fit matter for Christian Epistles, as one well observes from these words.

Verse 24. Salute all them] This Epistle then was first read to the people, who
are required to deliver the Apostles commends to their Ministers: The Papists
debar the people, not of the Scriptures only, but of all books of the
Reformed Religion: And for a terror not to retain such books prohibited I have
seen (says Sir Edwin Sands) in their printed instructions for confession,
Spec. ^urop^
the hearing or reading of books forbidden set in rank amongst the sins against
the first Commandment.

They of Italy salute you] Few Saints there now: The Italians hold integrity
for little better than silliness; they blaspheme oftener then swear, S. Edw.
Sands.
they murder more then revile or slander. And yet even in Italy there are full
four thousand professed Protestants. But their paucity and obscurity (says
mine Author) shall enclose them in a Cipher.

Verse 25. Grace be with you] See the Note on Philem. verse 25.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle general of Saint JAMES.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. To the twelve Tribes]
ONce very devout, Act. 26.7. still the most nimble and Mercuriall wits in the
world, but light, acriall and f^^aticall, apt to work themselves into the fools
Paradise of a sublime dotage.

Which are scattered abroad] Banished from Rome by the Emperor Claudius,
Sueton. cap. 25.
Act. 18.1. and called by S. Peter, Strangers of the dispersion, 1 Pet. 1.1.
The Jews at this day are a disjected and despised people, according to Deuteronomy.
28.64. having neither country nor resting place; even in Jerusalem there be
not to be found at this day an hundred households of them. Breen v. Enqui


Verse 2. Count it all joy] The world wondreth (says Master Phi^pot the
Martyr) how we can be so merry in such extreme misery. But our God is
omnipotent, who turns misery into felicity. Believe me there is no such joy
in the world as the people of Christ have under the cross; Act. and Mon. fol.
1668.
I speak it by experience, etc.

Into diverse temptations] Crosses seldom come single (Catenata piorum crux) as
neither do mercies, Ali^^ ex ali^ m^lum. Terent.
but trooping and treading one upon the heels of another. After rain comes
clouds, Eccl. 12.2. As in April, no sooner is one shore unburdened, but another
is brewed.

Verse 3. The trial of your faith] Yea such a well knit patience, as makes a
man suffer after he has suffered, as David did from Shimei, but first from
Absalom. Tile-stones till baked are not useful: but well burnt and hardened
they stand out all storms and ill weather. See my Love Tokens, p. 170.

Verse 4. Let patience have her perfect work] Patience must not be an inch
shorter then the affliction. If the Bridge reach but half way over the Brook,
we shall have but ill-favored passage. It is the devils desire to set us on a
hurry: he knows his temptations will then work best.

Verse 5. If any of you lack wisdome] That is, Qui placide sortem far scit
ille sapit.
Patience to bear afflictions as he ought, cheerfully, thankfully, fruitfully,
so as to be able to say, Well for the present, and it will be better hereafter,
which is the patient man's Motto.

Let him ask it of God] It has been questioned by some, Aquin. 2.2 q. 136.
Whether a man can have patience, sine auxilio gratiae, without the help of
Gods grace. But Christians know they cannot. It is not patience but pertinacy
in godless men.

And upbraideth not] Neither with present failings, nor former infirmities. Qui
exprobrat, reposcit. So does not God; Tacit.
unless in case of unthankfulness. For then he will take his own, and be
gone, Hos. 2.8, 9.

Verse 6. But let him ask in faith] See the Note on Heb. 11.6.

Nothing wavering] We are too ready in temptation to doubt, yea to hold it a
duty to doubt. This (says one) is to light a candle before the devil, as we
use to speak.

Verse 7. That he shall receive] Unless he strive against his doubting, and
wade out of it, as the Moon does out of a cloud, Qui timide rogat negare docet.
He that prays doubtingly, shuts heaven gates against his own prayers.

Verse 8. Unstable in all his waies] As he is that stands on one leg, or as a
(...) on a smooth table. Contrariwise, a believer is as a squ^re-stone set into
the building, 1 Peter 2.7. Shaken he may be, but he is rooted as a tree, wagge
he may up and down as a ship at anchour, but yet he removes not.

Verse 9. (...).
Rejoice in that be is exalted] Gr. In his sublimity, in that hig^ honor of
his, John 1.12. This should make him hold up his head, but not too high, be
cheerful, but not withal scornful. Laetisimus, sed non s^^^ri, gandentes in
Domino, sed caventes a recidivo. B^rn.


Verse 10. In that he is made low] Drawn from that high esteem of outward
excellencies. He is now made a greater man, because be seems too big for
them: Or low, that is lowly.

Verse 11. Shall the rich man fade] Perish eternally, if he trust in uncertain
riches, and not in the living God. See Jam. 5.1. Thus that saplesse fellow
Nabal faded, when his heart died within him, not could his riches any more
relieve him then they did that rich and wretched Cardinal, Henry Beanford
Chancellor of England, in the reign of Henry the sixth, who murmured at death,
that his riches could not reprieve him till a further time. Fire (qu^th he)
will not death be hired? Will money do nothing? No: money here bears no
mastery. Act. and Mon. (...), 925.


Verse 12. Blessed is the man] Provided that God teach him, as well as chastise
him, Ps. 94.12. instruct him as well as correct him. See my Love Tokens, par. 2.

He shall receive the crown] A man can be content to have his head broken with
a bag of gold, so he may have it, when its done.

Verse 13. I am tempted of God] The inclination of man's heart to good, is of it
self and properly of God, as light is of the Sun. His inclination to evil is by
accident only of God, like as darkness is of the Sunset by accident, being
properly not of the Sun, but of the earth.

Verse 14. Drawn away of his lust] Satan has only a persuading ^l^^ght, (...)
quasi (...)
not an ^^f^rcing might. Our own concupiscence carries the greatest stroke.

And entised] As the silly fish is by the bait covering the hook, being first
drawn aside into the clear water.

Verse 15. When lust has conceived] As the plot of all diseases lies in the
humors of the body; so of all sin, in the l^st of the soul. There is in it a
(...), a tacit consent, a seed-plot of all sin. Emp^doclis vocabu um apud
A^istot.
The Papists say (but falsely) that it is the smallest of all sins, not
deserving any more of Gods wrath, then only a want of his beatificall presence,
and that too without any pain or sorrow of mind from the apprehension of so
great a less. There are also of ours that say, That it is not forbidden by the
law: but sure we are, it is cursed and condemned (and therefore forbidden) by
the Law.

Verse 16. Do not erre] Winder not, as wandering stars, (...).
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. by seeking
to father your faults upon God, as Adam did, Genesis 3.12.

Verse 17. Every good gift, etc.] An Hexameter verse in the Greek: as little
intended perhaps by the Apostle, as the first line in Tacitus, which yet may be
scanned a long verse.

And perfect giving] Not temporals only (which are good Gifts,) but spirituals
also, those perfect givings. The greatest excellencies in us do as much depend
upon G^^, as the effigies in the glass^ does upon the face that causes it; or
as the light does upon the Sun that father of all the light in the lower
world.

With whom is no variablenesse] No Parallax, (...).
as there is with the Sun, when he d^clines and leaves us darkling. This word
notes the Suns motion from East to West, as the following word (...), turning,
notes his motion every year from North to South. that which the Apostle would
here assent is, that God tempts no man to evil, because he is unchangeably
good, and can be no other.

Verse 18. Of his own will begat ^e us] Gr. Brought he us forth, (...).
as a special instance of his free grace and fatherly goodness, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.

Verse 19. Swift to hear] Reaching after that word of truth, the Gospel, ver.
18. and drinking it (...) as the dry earth does the dew of heaven. Life does
now enter in to the soul at the ear, as at first death did. Genesis 3.

Slow to speak] We read often, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, but
never, He that has a tongue to speak, let him speak: for this we can do fast
enough without bidding.

Slow to wrath] Slow to snuff at those that reprove you* See the Note on Heb.
13.22. Rage not when touched, though to the quick.

Verse 20. Exodus 32. Mark 6.
For the wrath of man] Unless it be as Moses and Christ's anger was, pure and
free from guile and gall, prompting us to pity, and pray for the party.

Verse 21. (...).
All filthinesse] Gr. The stinking filth of a pestilent ulcer. (...).
Sin is the devils vomit, the souls excrement, the superfluity or garbage of
naughtiness, as it is here called, by an al^usion to the garbage of the
sacrifices cast into the brook Kidron, that is, into the Town-ditch. Retentio
excrementorum est parens morborum. Out with it therefore.

Receive with meeknes] It is ill sowing in a storm: so a stormy spirit will not
suffer the Word to take place. (...).


The engraffed word] Engraffed upon the heart, as the science upon the stock:
or sowed in the soul, and mingled with faith, that it may bring forth fruit to
God.

Verse 22. Isidor. l. 11. c. 3.
And not hearers only.] The Panotij in Scythia are said to have such large
ears, as that therewith they cover their whole bodies. Such are our hearers
only.

Deceiving your own souls] Either as by false reckoning, or false reasoning.
(...).


Verse 23. His natural face] Gr. The face of his nativity, that wherewith he
was born into the world.

Verse 24. Straightway forgetteth] Naturalists make mention of a certain
creature called Cervarius, that though he be feeding never so hard and
hungerly, if he cast but back his head, he forgets immediately the meat he was
eating, and runs to look after new.

Verse 25. (...).
Whosoever looks into, etc.] As into a glass wishtly and intently with the body
bowed down. Get thee Gods law as a glass to ^oot in, Ser. of repent.
says M. Bradford: So shall thou see thy face foul arraied, and so shamefully
saucy, mangy, pocky and scabbed, that thou can not but be sorry at the
contemplation thereof. It is said of the Basilisk that if he look into a
glass, he presently dies* Sin does. Physicians in some kind of unseemly
convulsions wish the patient to view himself in a glass, which will help him
to strive the more, when he shall see his own deformity: So reflect, etc.

Not a forgetful hearer] Some are as hour-glasses, no sooner turned up, but
running out immediately.

Verse 26. But deceiveth] The heart first deceives us with colors, and when
we are once a doting after sin, then we j^yn and deceive our hearts by
fallacious reasonings.

Verse 27. And widdows] A vine whose root is uncovered thrives not: a widow,
whose covering of eyes is taken away, joys not.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. The Lord of glory]
OR, Have not the glorious faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Faith is a
glorious grace indeed.

With respect of persons] i. e. Of their outward quality or conditions, as
rich, poor, of this side or that, etc. Zanchy relates of a certain Frenchman, a
friend of his, and a constant hearer of Calvin's at Geneva, Zanch Miscel.
praesat.
that being solicited by him to hear Viret an excellent Preacher, who preached
at the same time that Calvin did, he answered, If S. Paul himself should preach
here at the same hour with Calvin, Ego, relicto Paulo, aud^r^m Calvinum, I
would not leave Calvin to hear Paul. This is not only partiality but
anthropolatry or Man-worship, says he. Grynaeus reports a speech of George
Duke of Saxony: Although I am not ignorant, Lect. in Hag. p. 41.
said he, that there are diverse errors and abuses cr^pt into the Church, Nolo
tamen amplecti Evangelium quod Lutherus annunciat, yet I will no^^ of that
Gospel-reformation that Luther preaches, Compertum est, It is for certain,
says Erasmus, that many things are condemned as heretical in Luthers
writings, Erasm epist. ad Cardin Mogunt
that in Austins and Bernards books are approved for sound and pious passages.

Verse 2. For if there come, etc.] It is probable says an Interpreter here,
that the Primitive Christians, the better to ingratiate with the richer Pagans,
gave them very great respect, contrary to that Psalm. 15.4. But I rather think
the Apostle speaks in this text of wealthier Christians, unworthily preferred
before better, but poorer persons.

Verse 3 That wears the gay cloth.] As Hospinian tells us of the dogs that
kept Vulcans Temple, and as others say of the Bohemian curres, that they will
fawn upon a good suit, but fly upon one that is in ragged apparel: So is it
with many. Vestis virum.

Verse 4. (...).
Are ye not then partia^] Or, Are ye not f^r so doing, condemned in your own
consciences? Or, Neither have ye so much as once doubted or guestioned the
matter within your selves, whether in so doing you have not done amiss.

Verse 5. Ch^sen the poor] This the world wonders and stumbles at. (...)
Heathen Romans would not receive Christ (though they heard of his miracles and
mighty works) into the number of their gods, because he preached poverty, and
made use of poor persons. Aig^land King of Saragossa in Arragon, refused to be
baptized, (...).
because he saw many Lazars and poor people expecting alms from Char^^mains
table: and asking what they were, was answered, That they were the messengers
and servants of God. And can he keep his servants no better, said he? I Will be
none of his servants. Revel. ^.
But what says Christ? I know thy poverty: but (that is nothing) thou art rich.
And, The poor are Gospellized; not only receive it, Mat. 11.
but are changed by it.

Heirs of the Kingdom] Heads destinated to the diadem, says Tertullian.

Verse 6. (...).
Oppress you] Subjugate you, and bring your heads under their gi^dles: trample
upon you with the feet of pride and cruelty; yea, devour you, as the greater
fish do the lesser.

Draw you before the judgment seats] Vex you with lawsutes, and by might rob
you of your right. Cedit viribus aequum.

Verse 7. Am. Marc. lib ^ cap. 2.
Do not they ^^^spheme] That is, Cause to be blasphemed, as Romans 2.24. 1 Timothy
1.20, Marcellinus a Heathen Historian, taxes the Christians of his times for
their dissensions; biting and devouring one another, till they were even
consumed one of another. A sad thing that a Heathen should see such hellish
miscarriages among Christ's followers.

Verse 8. If ye fulfill the royal law] Acknowledging Gods sovereignty, and
sending a lamb to the Ruler of the earth, Isa. 16.1. seeking the help of that
free or noble spirit of his, Psalm 51.13. that royal, ruling spirit, as the
Greek version there has it.

Verse 9. Ye commit sin] That Is flat: though ye have thought otherwise. See the
Note on Verse 4.

Verse 10. He is guilty of all] The whole Law is but one copulative, Exodus
16.18. Ezekiel. 18.10, 11, 12, 13. I ^yr. Clavit.
He that breaks one Commandment habitually breaks all: not so actually. The
godly keep those Commandments, that actually they break: But a dispensatory
conscience keeps not any commandment.

Verse 11. For he that said] God spoke all those words, Exodus 20.
and said: there is the same divine authority for one Commandment as another.
The Pharisees had their minutula legis: but Christ cries them down, Mat. 5. The
Jews at this day set s^esly argue, Cursed is he that abides not in all things,
therefore he is not cursed, that abides in some things only.

Verse 12. As they that shall be judged] Or, As they that should judge by the
law of liberty; which is so called, because it does freely and fully discover
unto every man, without respect of persons, the errors and evils of his life.
And we should walk as paterns of the rule. See the Note on Matthew 11.19.

Verse 13. For he shall have mercie] See the Note on Matthew 5.7.

And mercy rejoices against judgement] That is, (...), ab (...) Cervix,
^eadeth on the neck of judgment.
The merciful man glories, as one that has received mercy, and shall not
come into condemnation: for Gods mercy rejoices against such a man's sins, as
against an adversary, which he has subdued and trampled on.

Verse 14. Though a man say he has faith] Saying serves not the turn. Livy
tells us of the Athenians, Live. de^ 4.
that they waged Word-warre against Philip King of Macedony. Quibus s^lis
valebant, and that was all they could do. M^n may word it with God, and yet
miscarry, Isa. 58.2, 3. He is too wise to be put off with words: he turns up
our leaves, and looks what fruit: whereof if he mi^^e, he lays down his
basket, and takes up his ax, Luke 13.7. Christianity is not a talking, but a
walking with God, and at the last day it shall be required of men, non quid
legerint, sed quid egerint, non quid dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint, Not what
they have said, but how they have acted.

Can faith save him?] That is, An ineffectuall faith, that works not by love,
such as is the faith of the Solifidians.

Verse 15. If a brother or a sister] As it may b^^all the best to be: and they
are not of the Cameleon-kinde to live (with Ephraim) upon wind, Hos 12.1. to
be fed with fair words, or to be clothed with a suit of complements. Sion
should be taken by the hand, Isa. 51.18. And Tyrus converted, leaves hoarding
and heaping up wealth, and falls to feeding and clothing Gods poor people, Isa.
23.18.

Verse 16. And one of you say] This age abounds with mouth mercy, which is
good cheap. But a little handful were better then a great many such mouth-fuls.

Be you warned] But with what? with a fire of words. Be filled: But with what?
with a mess of words. Away with these aerie courtesies.

Verse 17. Is dead, being alone] That is, Being worklesse: for life discovers
it self by action; so does true faith by trust in God, and love to men. A tree
that is not for fruit, is for the fire.

Verse 18. My faith by my works] It appeared by the fruits it was a good land,
Numb. 13.23. It appeared that Dorcas was a true believer by the coats she had
made: so here.

Verse 19. (...).
Believe and tremble] Gr. Roar as the sea, and shrike horribly, Act. 16.29.
Mar. 6.49. Their hearts ache and quake within them: and shall any man mock at
Gods menaces?

Verse 20. But will thou know] Interrogatio docturientis, says Piscator. A
question made by one that is desirous to teach.

Verse 21. Justified by works] sc. Declarative and in foro humano, but not
before God, Romans 3.2. It is says that justifies the man: but they are works
that justify faith to be right and real, saving and justifying.

Verse 22, Wrought with his works] Or, Was a help to his works, and was her own
midwife to bring them forth of her self, into the open light, Heb. 11.17.

Was faith made perfect] That is, Declared to be operative and effectual.

Verse 23. And it was imputed] See the Note on Genesis 15.6. on Romans 4.3. and on
Gal, 3.6.

The friend of God] A very high style. If Eusebius held it such an honor to be
the friend of Pamphilus, and Sir. Fulk Greevill Lord Brook, to be friend to Sr
Philip Sidney, causing it to be so engraven upon his tomb: What is it to be the
friend of God? And yet such honor have all the Saints.

Verse 24. By works a man is justified] Declaratively, as by faith
apprehensively, by God effectively.

Verse 25. The Messengers] Gr. The Angels, so Luke 7.24. Act. 12.15. See the
Notes there.

Verse 26. As the body, etc.] Yet is not charity the soul of faith, but the
vital spirit only.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Be not many masters]
MAsters of opinions, that boldly obtrude upon others their own placits, and
will not have them disputed or debated: Praesat, in^^. Sent. Est ipsissimum Dei
verbum. Hosius.
Such are the Sorbonists, who rejoice to be called, Magistri notri Parisienses,
our Masters of Paris. Bacon the Carmelite was called, Doctor resolutissimus,
because he would endure no guessing or may be's. The Popes parasites persuade
the people, that what interpretation soever he gives of Scripture, be it right
or wrong, it is without further trial to be received, as the very word of God.

Verse 2. For in many things, etc.] This is, Euphormio.
Triste mortulitatis privilegium, the sad privilege of mankind, as one
phraseth it, to have leave to offend sometimes. Every Pomgranate has at least
one rotten grain within it, said Crates. (...).
And it is the honor of God alone to be perfect, says Plato. Hierom
pronounces a curse upon him that shall say, that the fulfilling of the whole
law is impossible to any. But Patres legendi eum venia; Hierome was out in
this, and too blame.

A perfect man] That is, A prudent man, Ps. 37.30, 31.

Verse 3. That they may obey us] Horses, ass^s, camels, elephants, God in great
wisdom for the use of man, has made without galls, that they might with the
more ease be made tame and serviceable.

Verse 4. Whither soever the governour] Johnston. de Not. constant.
Peterent coelum navibus Belgae, si navibus petiposset, says one.

Verse 5. Boasts great things] Gr. (...).
It does magnifically lift upit self, as an untamed horse does his head. It
exalts it self and exults of great things. It walks through the earth, and
faceth the very heavens, Psalm. 73.9. It can run all the world over, and bite at
every body: being as a sharp rasour, that does deceit, that instead of shaving
the hair cutteth the throat, Psalms 52.2.

Verse 6. A world of iniquity] A new found world. Not a city or a country
only, but a world of iniquity, a sink, a sea of sin, wherein there is not only
that Leviathan, but creeping things innumerable.

The course of nature] Gr. Psalm. 104.46.
The wheel of our nativity. Their breath as fire devoureth, Isa. 33.10.

And it is set on fire of hell] That is, of the devil (called elsewhere the
gates of hell) as the holy Ghost (on the other side) set on sire the Apostles
tongues with zeal, that flame of God, Cant 86. Act. 2.3. Evil speech is the
devils drivell: a slanderer carries the devils pack.

Verse 7. For every kind of beasts, etc.] See the Note on Heb. 2.7.

Verse 8. But the tongue, etc.] Where then are our Justiciaries with their
pretended perfection? David's heart deceived him, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will look
to my ways, I will bridle my tongue. But presently after, he shows how soon he
brake his word, My heart was hot, etc. and I spoke with my tongue. Pambus in
the ecclesiastical history, could never take out that one lesson read him out
of Psalm. 39.1.

An unruly evil] There be but five virtues of the tongue reckoned by
Philosophers. But there are 24. several sins of the tongue, as Peraldus
recounteth them. The Arabians have a proverb, Cave ne feriat lingua tua collum
tuum. Take heed thy tongue cut not thy throat. An open mouth is often a purgatory
to the master.

Verse 9. Therewith bless we God] And so make our tongues our glory.

Therewith curse we men] Yea the best of men; as Come and his accomplices fear
not to object to Moses the meek, with one breath, pride, ambition, and
usurpation of authority.

Verse 10. Out of the same mouth] As it did once out of the mouth of Pope
Julius the second: who in the battle of Ravenna on Easter Day between him and
the French, as he sat by the fire reading of his prayers, Annal Gallic.
and having news of the defeat, he slung away his book, saying, Sit ergo gallus
in nomine diabolorum. The devil take the French. Is not this that mouth that
speaks great things, and blasphemies? Rev. 13.5.

Verse 11. Does a f^untain send forth] The fountain or rather the botch of
sensual and sinful pleasure does. Sin is a bitter-sweet, (...).
the poison of aspes, which first tickleth, and then kills. All creature
comforts are dulcis acerbitas, says one. Tertull.
Amarissima voluptas, says another.

Principium dulce est, at finis amor is amarus:
Leata venire Venus, tristis abire solet.
Verse 12. Both yield salt water and fresh] That is strange that is reported of
the rivers of Peru, that after they have run into the main sea, yea, some write
20 or 30, miles, Abbots his Geog.
they keep themselves unmixt with the salt water: so that a very great way
within the sea, men may take up as fresh water, as if they were near the land.
But that is as sure as strange that an eye witness reports of the Danuby and
Sava (two great rivers in Hungary) that their waters meeting mingle no more
then water and oil: Blunts vo^age. p. 10.
so that near the middle of the river I have gone in a boat (says mine
author) and tasted of the Danuby, as clear and pure as a well: then putting my
hand not an inch further, I have taken of the Sava, as troubled is a
street-channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they run 60 miles
together, etc.

Verse 13. Who is a wise man] Not he that words it most: for in multiloquio
stultiloguium, and as any one is more wise, he is more sparing of his censures,
but every fool will be meddling.

With meekness of wisdome] As it is said of Athanasius, that he was high in
worth, and humble in heart; N^zianz, in en^om Athana.
a Lodestone in his sweet, gentle, drawing nature, and yet an Adamant in his
wise and stout deportment toward those that were evil.

Verse 14. Bitter envying] Properly so called; for it slows from the gall, it
shows that the man is in the gall of bitterness, and of kin to the star
called Wormwood, Revel. 8.11. It is also an evil, wherein is steeped the venom
of all other vices.

Glory not] viz. Of your wisdom.

Lie not against the truth] As if ye were true Christians, when in truth you
are not so.

Verse 15. Earthly, sensuall] Here Is a true character of carnal wisdom: The
world is a pearl in its eyes, in cannot see God.

Verse 16. Easy to be entreated] Tractable, docible, not as horse and mule
that must be ruled with rigor, not with reason, Psalm; 32.9.

Verse 18. Is sown in peace] Only we must not think to sow and reap, all in day.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. From whence come warres]
THat is, (...).
Word-wars, needless and endless strifes and contentions.

Even of your lusts] Gr. Of your pleasures: for wicked men take pleasure in
unrighteousness; it is their meat and drink, Pro. 4.17. they cannot sleep, nay
live without it, verse. 16. Look how Tartarians feed upon carrion with as great
delight, as we do upon venison: as the Tuckish gally-slaves eat opium, as it
were bread: and as the maid in Pliny fed on spiders. and digested them into
nourishment: so do sensualists feed upon sins murdering morsels, and swallow
them down with delight.

Verse 2. Ye lust and have not] viz. To the satisfying of your lusts; for
that is an endless piece of work. Lust still cries Give, Give: and is ever sick
of a spiritual dropsy: the barren womb, the horsleeches daughter, the grave,
is nothing to this gulf, to this cu^se of unsatisfiablenesse.

Because ye ask not] He must be of a sedate spirit that prays to purpose. How
shall we think God will hear us when we hardly hear our selves? Married couples
must agree, that their prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7.

Verse 3. Ye ask and receive not] Ye ask and miss, because ye ask amiss. It
is the manner that makes or marres an action.

Verse 4. Yea adulterers and adulteresses] You that have your hearts full of
harlotry, that go a whoring from God after the creature, that mind only
earthly things, Phil. 3.19. and woo this Mundus immundus, this Propudium, this
vile strumpet the world, that lays forth her two breasts of profit and
pleasure, and ensnareth many: for the which she must be burnt, as a whore, by
the fire of the last day.

Verse 5. That the Scripture says in vain] No: it does not only say, but do:
not only convince us that an evil and an envious spirit possesses us (such a
spirit as lusts to have other men's abilities eclipsed, that so our candle
might shine alone) but also it gives more grace: it not only convinces, but
converteth the soul, Psalm. 19.7. It causes a man to rejoice heartily in the
good parts of others; and this is more then to excel others in any excellency,
if this be wanting.

Verse 6. But he giveth] Or, It, that is, The Scripture gives, etc.
transforming us into the same image, and conforming us to the heavenly pattern
by the spirit that breaths in it. (...).


God resists the proud] Gr. Sets himself in Battle-array against such,
above all other sorts of sinners, as invaders of his territories, and forragers
or plunderers of his chief treasures. Pray therefore to be preserved from the
perilous pinalce of self-exaltation: God defieth such as deifie themselves; the
knows them afar off, Ps. 138.6, he cannot abide the sight of them.

But gives grace to the humble] Humility is both a grace, and a vessel to
receive grace. God pours the oil of his grace into broken vessels, contrite
spirits.

Verse 7. Resist the devil] i. e. Worldly and fleshly lusts stirred up by the
devil, Ephesians. 4.26. Lust resisted is sin materially, not formally: for the
guilt is done away, in that we do not allow it, M Ca^e^^ of Temp^.
but abhor it, as some are of opinion.

And he will flee from you] He is but a coward therefore: for like the
Crocodile, if you follow him he flees, if you flee from him he follows you.
In all other fights, the first encounter is sharpest; but here, easiest: for
the old serpent having his head bruised and crushed, cannot now so easily
thrust in his mortal sting, unless we dally with him, and so lay our selves
open.

Verse 8. Draw night to God] viz. In duty, and he^'l draw nigh to you in mercy.
Sanctify him, Levit. 10.3. and he will satisfy you, Psalm. 91.16. The very
Turks are remorselesse to those that bear up: but they receive humiliation with
much sweetness.

Cleanse your hands] For else there is no coming near God, Josh, 24.19.

Ye double-minded] Ye that have your hearts divided betwixt two, and as it were
cloven asunder: Out with the corruption that cleaves to your hearts: and then
there will be a constancy and an evennesse in your mouths and manners.

Verse 9. (...).
Be afflicted] Or, Be miserable: Ye are so, but see your selves to be so. Or,
Afflict your selves, viz. with voluntary sorrows for your sins. See that ye be
active here.

And mourn] (...).
Savouringly and soakingly, with a deep and down tight sorrow, so as a man
would do in the death of his dearest friend. The Greek work imports a
funeral-gri^f.

And ^^^p] In judgment at least: and then, dry sorrow may go as for as we^,
where teats will not come.

Let your laughter be turned] Turn all the streams into this one cha^^^, that
may drive the mill, that may grind the heart Meal was offered of old, and not
whole corn.

And your joy to heavinesse] (...) Tr^st^^^ cum vul^^s (...). Bu^^^as.
Such as makes a man hang down his head, and go heavily through grief and shame.

Verse 10. Humble your selves] He beats often upon this most needful, but much
neglected duty of humiliation: and all is little enough; there being nothing
that more goes against the heart and the hair with us, then to go downward; and
yet it must be done, or we are undone.

And he shall lift you up] The lion of Judah rents not the prostrate prey.
Da^ie^s Chro. (...)
Bat as William the Conqueror ever held submission satisfactory for the
greatest offenses, and often received rebels into grace: so does Christ much
more. The Sun in the morning gathers clouds, but then it soon scatters them
again: so does the Sun of righteousness cast men down, that he may raise them
up again.

Verse 11. Speak not evil, etc.] As Ezekiels hearers did of him By the walls,
and in the doors of the houses, Chap. 33.30. and as too many of ours do; for
the which they will be full dearly accountble. The talebearer has the devil
in his tongue, the tale-hearer in his ear.

Speaks evil of the law] Which flatly forbids detraction.

And judges the Law] As not severe enough, or as overstrait.

Verse 12. There is one law-giver] What do thou then do pierking into his
place, by censuring and defaming another? Is not this to be a Pope in thine own
cause, exalting thy self above God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. or at least appealing from
him to thy self?

Verse 13. We Will go into such, etc.] As if they were pettygods within
themselves, and needed not to call God into counsel, or to take his leave along
with them. But such confident exchange language became not the mouths of
scattered exiles. And yet it is the common sin in the dispersed Jews in all
places to this day.

Verse 14. Ye know not What, etc.] God delights to cross such vain boasters,
and to confute their confidences, that speak and live, as if their lives were
riveted upon eternity. They might easily observe that many things fall out
betwixt the cup and the lip, betwixt the chinne and the challice. Ne glorietur
igitur accinctus quasi discinctus. Sell not the hide before ye have taken the
beast. Who knows what a great bellied day may bring forth? Proverbs 27.1.
Whiles a woman is yet with child, none can tell what kind of birth is will
be, Luke 12.16, 17.

It is even a vapour] Thy breath is in thy nostrils, ever ready to puff out: at
the next puff of breath thou may blow away thy life. Petrarch relates of a
certain holy man, Lib 3. Memor.
that being invited to a feast on the morrow, he answered, I have not had a
morrow-day to dispose of, this many a year: If you would any thing of me now, I
am ready.

Verse 15. If the Lord will, etc.] So Socrates taught Alcibiades to say, If God
Will, etc. And another could say, (...).


Nullius est foelix conatus and utilis unquam,
Consilium si non detque juvetque Deus.
Verse 16. In your boastings] Of long life and suitable success. Psalm. 64.9.
God will shoot an arrow at such suddenly, as he did at the rich fool,
Nebuchadnezzar, Haman, Herod, Senacherib, and other bragadochio's.

Verse 17. To him that knoweth] Lest they should reply, We know all this, that
except we live and God list, we can do nothing: Do ye know to do well, says
he, and do it not? this increases your guilt.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Go to now ye rich men]
THose rich wrethes mentioned, Chap. 2.6, 7. That blasphemed God, and oppressed
men. Magna cognatio ut reisic nominis, divitijs and vitijs.

Weep and howl] Better weep here, where there are wiping-handkerchiefs in the
hand of Christ, then to have your eyes whipped out in hell. Better howl with men,
then yell with devils.

That shall come upon you] Gr. That are even now stealing upon you. (...).


Verse 2. Your riches are corrupted] Being subject to vanity and violence, Mat.
6.19. See the Note there. Provide your selves therefore bags, that wax not old;
treasure that fails not, etc, Luk 12.33.

Verse 3. And shall eat your flesh] i.e. With hellfire, which shall consume
your flesh, nay your souls with eternal torments. Some strong poison is made
of the rust of metals: none worse then that of money.

For the last daies] Wrath for the day of wrath: or store for old age, it being
the old man's care, as Plutarch observes, (...), That he shall not have what to
keep him while alive, and what to bury him honestly when dead.

Verse 4. Kept back by fraud crieth] Bloodshed, Genesis 4.10. unnatural lust,
Genesis 18.21. and oppression (whether by force or fraud) cry to God, and he will
hear, for be is gracious, Ex 22.27.

Lord of sabbath] Who has all power in his hand, and can easily reach you.
(...).
Verse 5. Ye have lived in pleasure] Ye have lain melting in sensual delights,
which have drawn out your spirits, and dissolved them.

Upon earth] No place of pleasure to good men, but of purgatory, banishment and
bondage. A place of that nature, that (as it is reported of the Straits of
Magellan) which way soever a man bend his course (if home-ward) he is sure to
have the wind against him. (...) 16.^5
It was a heavy charge laid upon Dives, Son, remember that thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things, etc.

And been Wanton] Fullness breeds forgetfulness, Deuteronomy. 32.15.

As in a day of slaughter] For sacrifice; when they used to have good cheer,
Prove. 7.14. And hereunto the Wiseman alludeth, Pro 17.1. The Apostle here
seems to intimate, that these rich sensualists lived upon the cream of
sinning, and had such plenty, that they picked out none but the sweetest bits to
nourish their hearts withal.

Verse 6. Ye have condemned and killed] Take it either properly or
metaphorically, or usurers and extortioners, that not only ^ob, but ravish the
poor, that are fallen into their nets, Psalm. 10.9. that is, their bonds, debts,
morgages, as Chrysostom interprets it: there is neither equity nor mercy to
be had at their hands; hence they are called men-eaters, Cannibals, etc.

And be does not resist you] Meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries and
indignities from unreasonable men. Veteremf^rendo injuriam invitas novam.
A Crow will stand upon a sheeps-back, pulling of wool from her side, she
durst not do so to a Wolf or a Mastiffe.

Verse 7. Be patient therefore] q. d. You poor oppressed ones, hold out faith
and patience. You shall shortly have help As the mothers breasts ache to be
suckling, so does Gods heart yern to be helping.

Unto the coming of the Lord] sc. By particular deliverance: and not only by
the general judgment. Let patience have line and rope.

Waits for the precious fruit] Being in novum annum semper dives, as the
proverb is, ever rich against the next year. Spes alit agricolas. Hope holds up
the husbandmans heart.

And has long patience] He looks not to sow and reap in a day, as the
Hyperboreans are said to do, that sow shortly after the Sunne-rising with them,
and reap^, Heresbach. de re ^ustic.
before the Sun set: because the whole half year is one continuate day with
them.

Verse 8. For the coming] See Verse 7. And he when he comes, shall set all to
rights: We shall see so much reason in his proceedings, which now we comprehend
not, that we shall yield him the only Wise God.

Verse 9. Grudge not, etc.] Groan not, Grumble not, (...).
grow not sour, and sullen one to another.

Lest ye be condemned] As Sarah had been, if the Lord had come, as she desired
him, to judge bewixt her and her husband. The most guilty are commonly most
querulous and complaint-full.

The Judge stands before the door] If the Magistrate be present we may not
offend another, to defend our selves. Ecce judex pro foribus: Therefore, Hold a
blow, as we say.

Verse 10 For an example of suffering] Examples very much affect us, as they
did many of the Martyrs. See the Note on Mat. 5.12.

Above majori discit arare min^r.

Verse 11. We count them happy] If they suffer as they should do, not else:
Mithridates showed long patience, such as it was, forced and fained. He was in
a kind of fever called Epialis, wherein men be cold without, but hot as fire
within. This fever he quenched with his vital blood, shed with his own hand.

Ye have heard of the patience of Job] His impatience is not once mentioned
against him: but he is crowned and chronicled here for his patience. God
passes by infirmities, where the heart is upright.

And have seen the end of the Lord] That is, how well it was with Job at the
last. Or (as others will have it) what a sweet end the Lord Christ made,
whereunto you were some of you eyewitnesses, and should be herein his
followers.

Verse 12. But above all things] Swear not in jest, least ye go to hell in
earnest. See the Note on Mat. 5.34, 35. and on Mat 23.16, 18.

Verse 13. Is any among you afflicted] Any one may: for grace is no target
against affliction.

Let him pray] Not only because prayer is suitable to a sad disposition, but
because it is the conduit of comfort, and has virtutem pacativam, a settling
efficacy.

Is any man merry] (...).
Gr. Is he right set, Well hung on, as we say? All true mirth is from the
rectitude of the mind, from a right f^ame of soul, that sets and shows it self
in a cheerful counte^ance.

Let him sing Psalmes] So that in all estates we must be doing somewhat for
God, T'am Dei meminisse opus est, quam respirare.

Verse 14. Is any man sick?] Behold he Whom thou love is sick, said Martha to
our Savior, Mat. 11. Si amatur, quomodo infirmatur, says Augustine? If
Christ's friend, how comes he to be sick? Well enough: Its no new thing for
Christ's best beloved to be much afflicted.

Let him send for the Elders] This help God has previded for such as are by
sickness disabled to pray for themselves. Sick Abimelech was sent to Abraham]
(a Prophet) for prayers.

Anointing him with oyl] As an extraordinary sign of an extraordinary cure.
From mistake of this text, the Church in stead of Pastors had Ointers and
Painters in times of Popery, who did not only ungere, but emungere, anel^ men,
but beguile them of their moneys, and of their souls. Neither want there at
this day, that hold this anointing the sick as a standing ordinance for
Church Members amongst us: and they tell of strange cures too effected thereby.

Verse 15. And the prayer of faith] The Greek word for prayer has its
denomination, from well pouring out the heart, (...).
or from well cleaving to God. Afflictions (says one) cause us to seek out
Gods promise, the promise to seek faith, faith to seek prayer, and prayer to
find God.

They shall be forgiven him] And so he shall be cured on both sides.

Verse 16. Confess your faults] To any such godly friend, as can both keep
counsel, and give counsel. Often times the very opening of men's grievances
eases: the very o^ening of a vein cools the blood. Howbeit, it is neither
wisdom nor mercy (says a good Divine) to put men upon the rack of confession,
further then they can have no ease any way else. For by this means we ^aise a
jealousy in them toward us, and often without cause: which weakneth and
tainteth that love that should unite hearts in one. (...).


The effectual servent praier] Gr. The Working prayer, that sets the whole man
a work to do it, as it should be done, and so works wonders in heaven and
earth; being after a sort omnipotent, as Luther said.

Verse 17. Subject to like passions] For he fled at the threats of Jezabel,
Factus seipso imbecillior, says one: and he would have died, when under the
Juniper, discontented.

Verse 18. And the earth brought forth] When the roots and fruits seemed all
dried up, and the Land past recovery. But prayer never comes to late, because
God never does.

Verse 19. If any do err from, etc.] Err about fundamentals, fall into deadly
heresy, Damnable, Peter calls it, 2 Epist. 2 1.

Verse 20. Shall save a soul] A high honor to have any hand in such a work.

Cover a multitude] i.e. He shall be a means that God shall cover them.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the first Epistle general of S. PETER.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. To the stranger^]
THat is, To the provincial Jew. See the Note on Jam. 1.1.

Verse 2. Through sanctification unto obedience] To the means as well as to the
end (...) sanctification as well as to salvation. Some there be (says Mr
Philpot in an Epistle of his to the Congregation) that for an extreme refuge in
their evil doings, run to Gods election, saying, If I be elected I shall be
saved, whatever I do. Act, and Mon^ fol, 1663.
But such be great tempters of God, and abominable bl^sphemers of his holy
election: These cast themselves down from the pinatle of the Temple in
presumption, that God may preserve them by his angels through predestination.
Gods election ought to be with a simple eye considered, to make us more warily
walk according to his Word, and not set cock in the hoop, and put all on Gods
back, to do wickedly at large. Thus he.

Verse 3. Blessed be the God] A stately proeme, and such as can hardly be
matched again, unless it be that of S. Paul to the Ephesians, chap. 1.3.

Unto a lively hope] Sure and solid, clearing the conscience, and cheating the
spirit.

Verse 4. Undefiled, and that fades not] The two Greek words here used are
also Latin: Amiantus is a precious stone (says D. Isidor E^ym. 1.16.^.4.
Playfire out of Isidore) which though it be never so much soiled, yet it
cannot be blemished. And Amarantus is the name of a flower, Paedagog. l.1. c 8.
which being a long time hung up in the house, yet still is fresh and green, as
Clemens writes. To both these possibly the Apostle might here allude. And it
is as if he should say, the crown that you shall receive, shall be studded with
the stone Amiantus, which cannot be defiled: and it is garnished, with the
flower Amarantus which is fresh and green, etc.

Verse 5. (...).
Who are kept] As with a guard, or as in a garrison, that is well fenced with
walls and works, and so is made impregnable.

By the power of God] Much seen in the Saints perseverance. My father is
stronger then all: none therefore can take you out of my hand^, since I and the
Father am one, Joh. 10.

Verse 6. If need be, ye are in heavinesse] When our hearts grow a grain too
light, God sees it but needful to make us heavy through manifold temptations.
When our water (as it were) looks but a little too high, our heavenly father, a
Physician no less cunning then loving (says one) does discern it, and quickly
sits us, Baynes letters
whom he most tendereth, with that which will reduce all to the health some
temper of a broken spirit.

Verse 7. that the trial of your faith] If affliction (which is the trial of
our faith) be so exceeding precious, what is faith then, and the promises
whereon faith lays hold? There are that by the trial of faith understand here
a well-tried faith, which is called gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.18.

Verse 8. Parae^^.
Whom having not seen] They had not been, belike, at the feast of the Passover
(at which time our Savior suffered) but came up to the feast of Pentecost, and
were converted, Act. 2.

And full of glory] (...).
Gr. Glorified already; a piece of Gods Kingdom and heavens happiness
aforehand. O the joy! the joy! the inexpressible joy that I find in my soul,
said a dying Saint.

Verse 9. The end of your faith] The period and perfection, the reward and meed
of it, in all fullness. See Psalm. 19.12. Prove. 22.4.

Verse 10. The Prophets have enquired] This highly sets forth the weight and
worth of it, since such men took such pains about it. Base spirits are busied
about light matters; Numb. 14.24.
as Domitian spent his time in catching flies, Artaxerxes in making
knive-hafts: Not so Caleb, who had another spirit, and followed God Wholly: So
did the ancient Prophets, as Isaiah: whiles the merry Greeks were taken up at
their Olympic games in the year 1540. Buchol. Chron.
from the flood, the Prophet Isaiah sees that heavenly vision of Christ
sitting on his throne, and hears that thrice happy Trisagion, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3.

Verse 11. Searching What, etc.] (...).
With greatest sagacity and industry, as hunters seek for game, and as men seek
for gold in the very mines of the earth.

The sufferings of Christ, etc.] Macarius was utterly out, in saying that the
prophets knew that Christ should be born for men's redemption, but that they
knew nothing of his death and sufferings. Isaiah writes of them more like an
Evangelist then a Prophet, and is therefore called the Evangelicall Prophet.

Verse 12. Not unto themselves] In regard of the accomplish-of those oracles
that they uttered: And yet to themselves, in regard of their right and interest
therein.

They did minister] None must hold themselves too good to serve the Saints.

The Angels desire to look into] To look wishly and intently, as the Cherubims
of old looked into the Mercy-seat, (...) Prono capite, and propenso collo
accura^e ^^rospicere.
Exodus 25.18, 19.

Verse 13. Wherefore gird up, etc.] We are seldom comforted, but we have need
to be exhorted. So apt are our hearts to security, and so apt is Satan to
interrupt our joys, with his base injections.

Gird up the loins of your minde] Gird your selves and serve God, Luk 17.8. A
loose discinct and diffluent mind is unfit for Gods service. Girding implies,
1. Readiness. 2. Nimblenesse, handinesse, handsomeness.

Hope to the end] Gr. Hope perfectly or entirely, q. d, Do not ^y halves, (...).
let there not be any odd reckonings between God and you; but work out your
salvation, Phil. 2.12. See the Note th^^e.

For the grace] That is, for the glory.

That is to be brought unto you] It must be brought unto us (such is out
duines) we will scarce go seek it, hardly be persuaded to live happily, reign
everlastingly.

Verse 14. (...).
Not fashioning your selves] As a plaier is fashioned to the o^ seen speeches
and carriages of him, whom he personateth.

In your ignorance] Men may remain grossly ignorant amidst abundance of means,
as these Jews did. Who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger etc?
Isa. 42.19, 20.

Verse 15. In all manner of conversation] Our very civilities must favor of
sanctity, and our common conversation relish of religion. (...).
S. Paul's civil conversation was in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Holiness must be written
upon our bridles when we war, upon our cups when we drink Zach. 14.20, 21. It
is said of a certain Scotch-Divine, that he did even eat, and drink, and sleep
eternal life.

Verse 16. Be ye holy] i.e. Separate from sin and dedicated to God; in
conformity to whom stands our happiness. See the Note on Mat 5 48.

Verse 17. (...) Inco^^tus, con^^ ^oratio.
Of your sojourning] Having your commoration on earth, but your conversation in
heaven. Fugiamus ad coelestem patriam, etc. could a Heathen say.

In fear] Those that fear of all others are likely to hold out, Jer. 32.4^.

Verse 18. Received by tradition] Children are very apt to follow their parents
example, whether of good or evil. Me ex ea opinione quam amajoribus accepi de
cultu deorum, nullius unquam movebit oration, says Tully. I will never for sake
that way of divine service, that I have received from my fore fathers.

Verse 19. Without blemish] Of original pollution.

And without spot] Of actual sin.

Verse 20. Who verily, etc.] So careful was God to make all sure concerning
our redemption in Christ, says one here.

Verse 21. Might be in God] And so in a safer hand then cur own. He has laid
help upon one that is mighty.

Verse 22. Ye have purified] Animabus vestris castificatis, etc. A metaphor
from the legal purifications.

Verse 23. Born again] A man shall never have occasion to curse the day of his
new birth.

Verse 24. A^^fl^^sh is grasse] To live is but to lie a dying. Can a picture
continue that is drawn upon the ice?

Verse 25. The Word of the Lord, etc.] This sentence is the Motto of the Dukes
of Saxony. See Psalm. 119.89. Manl^^ee co^. 4 19.


CHAP. II. Verse 1. All malice and all guile]
OUt with this leaven utterly, 1 Cor. 5.7. Howsoever we otherwise fail, let us
not in these be found faulty at all. These are not the spots of Gods children,
Deuteronomy. 32.5.

Verse 2. Desire the sincere] As in children, all speaks and works at once,
hands, feet, mouth, See David's desire, Psa 42. (...).
1 and 119.20, 40, 131.

The sincere] Gr. Guilelesse, unmixed milk, not sugared or sophisticated with
strains of wit, excellency of speech, etc. 1 Cor. 2.1.

That ye may grow thereby] After generation (1 Pet. 1.23.) Augmentation. That
word which breeds us feeds us: As the same blood of which the babe is bred and
fed in the womb, strikes up into the mothers breasts, and there, by a further
concoction, bebecometh white, and nourishethe it. And as milk from the breasts
is more effectually taken, then when it ha^h stood a while, and the spirits are
gone out of it: So the word preached rather then read, furthereth the souls
growth.

Verse 3. If so be ye have tasted] As babes taste the milk they take down, Isa.
66.11. We are bid to suck and be satisfied with the breasts of consolation, to
press and oppress the promises, till we have expressed, and even wrung the
sweetness out of them. This will make us even sick of love, our sleep will be
pleasant unto us, and our hearts filled with gladness. The Saints taste how
good the Lord is, and thence they so long after him. Optima demonstratio est a
sensibus, as he that feels fire hot, and that tastes honey sweet, can best say
it is so.

Verse 4. As unto a living stone[Living and all quickening, as Act. 7.38.
Lively, that is life-giving oracles. He that has the Son has life, 1 John
5.12.

Disallowed indeed of men] for the Cock on the dunghill knows not the price
of this jewel.

And precious] In vita Apol. l 3. c. 14. Alsted. Chronel. p. ^09.
Far beyond that most orient and excellent stone Pantarbe. celebrated by
Philostratus; or that precious adamant of Charles Duke of Burgundy, sold for
20000 ducats, and set into the Popes triple-crown.

Verse 5. Ye also as lively stones] Gods house is built of growing stones, of
green timber, Cant. 1.

To offer up spiritual sacrifices] Such as are prayers, Psalm. 141.2. Praises,
Heb. 13.5. Alms, Heb. 13.16. Our selves, Romans 12.1. Our Savior, whom we
present as a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.1. laying our hands on his
head, seeing him bleed to death, and consumed in the fire of his Fathers wrath
for our sins.

Verse 6. (...).
Wherefore it is contained] The Jews were so well versed in Scripture, that in
quoting of texts, there was need to say no more to them then, It is Written, It
is contained, etc. they could tell where to turn to the place presently: And
this was a great furtherance to the conversion of many of them, by the
preaching of the Apostles.

Shall not be confounded] the Hebrew text has it, Shall not make haste, Isa.
28.16. Haste makes waste, as we say, and often brings confusion. Children pull
apples before they are ripe, and have worms bred of them.

Verse 7. (...).
He is precious] Gr. He is a price, or an honor. If you had not found all
worth in him, you would never have sold all for him.

Verse 8. And a rock of offence] Like that rock, Judge. 6.21. out of which comes
fire to consume the reprobate.

Which stumble at the Word] An ill sign, and yet an ordinary sin.

Verse 9. But ye are a chosen generation] A picked people, the dearly beloved of
Gods soul: such as he first chose for his love, and then loves for his choice.

Aroiall Priesthood] Or (as Moses has it, Exodus 20.6.) kingdom of Priests.
Priests Gods people are in respect of God Kings in respect of men. The
righteous are Kings, M^^ny righteous men have d fired, etc. says Matthew,
chap. 13.17. Many Kings, says Luke, chap 10 24. Indeed they are somewhat
obscure Kings here, as was Melchisedech in the Land of Canaan: but Princes they
are in all lands, Psalm. 45.16. and more excellent then their neighbors, let
them dwell where they will, Prove. 12.26.

A peculiar people] Gr. A people of purchase: such as comprehend, as it were,
all Gods gettings, (...).
his whole stock that he makes any great reckoning of.

Show forth the praises] Gr. (...).
Preach forth the virtues by our suitable practice. the picture of a dear
friend should be hung up in a conspicuous place of the house: so should Gods
holy image and grace in our hearts.

Verse 10. Which in time past Were not] If Plato thought it such a mercy to him
that he was a man, and not a woman, a Grecian, and not a Barbarian, a scholar
to Socrates, and not to any other Philosopher, what exceeding great cause have
we to praise God, that we are born Christians, not Pagans, Protestants not
Papists, in these blessed days of Reformation, etc?

Verse 11. As pilgrims and strangers] Excellently does Justin Martyr] describe
the Christians of his time; ^pist ^^ Ding.
they inhabit their own countries, says he, but as strangers; they partake of
all as Citizens, and yet suffer all, as forraigners; every strange land is a
Country to them, and every country a strange land.

And strangers abstain] Thoughts of death will be a death to our lusts, Lam.
1.9. Her filthiness is in her skirts, and all because she remembers not her
last end. As the stroaking of a dead hand on the belly cures a tympany, and as
the ashes of a viper applied to the part that is stung draws the venom out of
it: so the thought of death is a death to sin.

From fleshly lusts] Those parts in our bodies that are the chiefest and
nearest both subjects and objects of lust and concupiscence, are like unto the
dung-gate, 1 Chronicles. 26 16. whereby all the fil^h was cast out of the Temple.
God has placed them in our bodies like snakes creeping out of the bottom of a
dunghill, and abased them in our eyes, that we might make a base account and
estimation of the desires thereof, as one well observes.

Which war against the soul] Only man is in love with his own bane (beasts
are not so) and sights for those lusts, Ca^ell of temptation.
that fight against the soul. And whereas some might say that other lusts fight
against the soul, as well as fl^shly lusts, it is answered that other lusts
fight against the graces, but these more against the peace of the soul.

Verse 12. Having your conversation honest] Leading convincing lives, the best
arguments against an Atheist adversary. (...).


They speak evil of you See the Note on Mat. 5.11.

Which they shall behold] Whiles they pry and spy into your courses (as the
Greek word imports) to see what evil they can find out and fasten on.

In the day of visitation] When God shall effectally call and convert them. See
the Note on Ma,. 5 16.

Verse 13. Full. answ. to D Fern.
Submit to every ordinance] That is, Although the Ordinance or Government, in
the manner of its constitution be from man, yet because of the necessity of its
institution it is from God; submit to it, though of man, for the Lords sake.

Verse 14. Or unto Governours] In the kingdom of Christ this is wonderful,
Miseel ^p ded
says Zanchy, that he wills and commands all Princes and Potentates to be
subject to his Kingdom, and yet he wills and commands likewise that his
Kingdom be subject to the Kingdoms of the world.

Verse 15. (...).
Ye may put to silence] Gr. Muzzle, or halter up, button up their mouths, as we
say. See the Note on Mat. 22.34.

Verse 16, As free] See the Note on Gal. 5.13.

Verse 17. Honor all men] As made in the image of God, as capable of heaven,
and as having some special talent to trade with.

Honor the King] i.e. The Roman Emperor, who disclaimed the name of a King,
to avoid the hatred of the people, and yet sought the full right of Kings, and
so to destroy the liberty of the people. But Kings that will be honored must
be just, Ruling in the fear of God. 2 Samuel ^3 3. Tortuosis, curvis (...)


Verse 18. To the froward] Cross, crooked, frample, foolish. The Greek word
comes of an Hebrew word, that signifies, a fool.

Verse 19. This is thank-worthy] God accounts himself hereby gratified, as it
were, and even beholding to such sufferers: this being the lowest subjection,
and the highest honor men can yield unto their maker.

Verse 20. For What glory is it] In peace offerings there might be oil mixed,
not so in sin offerings. In our sufferings for Christ there is joy; not so when
we suffer for our faults.

Verse 21. Leaving us an example] Gr. A copy or pattern. (...).
Christ's actions were either moral, or mediatory. In both we must imitate him.
In the former, by doing as he did. In the later, by similitude, translating
that to our spiritual life, which he did as Mediator; as to die to sin, to
rise to righteousness, etc. and this not only by example (as Petrus Abesardus
held of old, and the Socinians at this day) but by virtue of Christ's death and
resurrection working effectually in all his people; Anton. Tract. 17 cap 1
paragr 5.
not as an exemplary cause only, or as a moral cause by way of meditation, but
as having force obtained by it, and issuing out of it, even the Spirit that
kills sin, and quickens the soul to all holy practice. In vita ejus a^u^ Su^^um
There is a story of an Earl called Eleazar, a passionate Prince, that was
cured of that disordered affection by studying of Christ and his patience. Crux
pendentis, cathedra docentis, Christ upon the cross is a Doctor in his Chair,
where he reads unto us all a lecture of patience. The Eunuch, Act 8.32. was
converted by this praise in Christ. It is said of Hierome, that having read the
godly life and Christian death of Hilarion, he folded up the book, and said,
Well, Hilarion shall be the Champion whom I will follow. Should we not much
more say so of Christ?

Verse 22. Who did no sinne] S. Paul says, He knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. to
wit, with a practical knowledge (we know no more then we practice) with an
intellectual he did: for else he could not have reproved it.

Neither was guile found in his mouth] Which imports, that they sought it. The
wicked seek occasion against that godly.

Verse 23. But committed himself] Or, The Whole matter. We also shall do our
selves no disservice, by making God our Chancellor, when no law else will
relieve us. And indeed the less a man strives for himself, the more is God his
Champion. He that said, I seek not mine own glory, adds, but there is one that
seeks it, and judges. God takes his part ever; that fights not for himself.

Verse 24. Who his own self] Without any to help or uphold him, Isa. 63.5. he
had not so much as the benefit of the Sun-light, when in that three hours
darkness he was set upon by all the powers of darkness.

Bar our sins] Gr. Bare them aloft, viz. (...).
When he climbed up his Cross, and nailed them thereunto. Surely he has borne
our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Isa. 53 4 He takes away the sins of the
world, Joh. 1.29.

That We being dead to sinne] Or, (...).
Separated from sin, or unmade to it, cut off from it, the old frame being
utterly dissolved.

By Whose stripes] Or, Wales. This he mentions to comfort poor servants,
whipped and abused by their froward Masters. Sanguis medici factus est medicina
phrenctici, The Physicians blood became the sick man's salve. We can hardly
believe the power of sword salve. But here is a mystery that only Christian
religion can assure us of, that the wounding of one should be the cure of
another.

Verse 25. As sheep] Then the which no creature is more apt to stray, less apt
and able to return. The Ox knows his owner, etc.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Be in subjection to your husbands]
YEt with a limitation: Subject the wife must be to her husbands lawful
commands and restraints. It is too much that Plutarch lays as a law of wedlock
on the wife, to acknowledge and worship the same gods, and none else, but those
whom her husband does.

Be Won by the conversation] i. e. Be prepared for conversion; as Austins
father and himself were, by the piety of his mother Monica.

Verse 2. (...).
Whiles they behold] Curiously pry into. Carnal men watch the carriages of
professors, and spend many thoughts about them.

Your chaste conversation] When Livia the Empress was asked, how she had got
such a power over her husband that she could do any thing with him? She
answered, Multa modestia, by my much modesty. A prudent wife commands her
husband, by obeying. D^o. in August.


Verse 3. Whose adorning] Mundus muliebris. See Isa. 3.18. where the Prophet as
punctually inveighs against this noble vanity, as if he had viewed the Ladies
wardrobes in Jerusalem.

Let it not be that outward] Vestium curiositas, deformitatis mentium and morum
indicium est, says Bernard. Excessive neatness is a sign of inward
nastinesse. It was a true saying of wise Cato, Cultus magna cura, magna est
virtutis incuria. They are never good that strive to be so over-fine.
Superfluous apparel says Cyprian, is worse then whoredom.

Verse 4. But let it be the hidden] Vestite vos serico pietatis, byssino
sanctitatis, purpur a pudicitia, Taliter pigmentata Deum habebitis amatorem. It
is Tertullians counsel to young women, Lib. de cult soe^^;
Cloth your selves, says he, with the silk of piety, with the satin of
sanctity, with the purple of modesty: So shall you have God himself to be your
suitor.

In that Which is not corruptible] Or, In the incoruption of a meek a quiet
spirit, etc. a garment that will never be the worse for wearing, but the better.

Of great price] God makes great reckoning of a quiet mind, because it is like
himself. He promises earth to the meek, and heaven to the incorrupt or
sincere, and pure in heart.

Verse 5. Who trusted in God] And therefore would not by unlawful means seek
to get or keep their husbands love and favor; but trusted God for that. So
Hezekiah trusted in God, and pulled down the brazen serpent, 2 King. 18.4, 5.
opposing his presence to all peril.

Verse 6. Calling him Lord] See here, how in a great heap of sin, God can find
out his own, and accept of it. There was no good word in all the whole
sentence, but this, that she called her husband, Lord. God is pleased to single
out this, and let it as a precious diamond in a gold ring, to Sarah's eternal
commendation.

And are not afraid, etc.] Fear they must, verse. 2. and yet they must not. Fear
God, but not their husbands undeserved checks or threats for obeying God. One
fear must expel another, as one fire drives out another.

Verse 7. Likewise ye] Officium ascendit, amor descendit.

According to knowledge] Where should w^^dome be but in the head? This must be
showed, Vxoris vitium out tollendo, aut tolerando, said Varro, either by
curing, or at least covering his wives weaknesses.

As unto the Weaker vessel] Glasses are to be tenderly handled: a small knack
soon breaks them. So here. Viperavirus ob venerationem unptiarum evomit, says
Basil. The Viper, for the honor of coupling with his mate, Et tu duritiom
animi, su ferila tem, tu c^^le^^tatem ab untouls revereatiam non depo ^s?
casts up his poison: and wilt not thou for the honor of marriage, cast away
thy harshnesse, roughness, cruelty to a consort?

As being heirs] Souls have no sexes, Gal. 3.28.

That your prayers be not hindered] Isaac prayed in the presence of his wife.
This course of praying together, apart from others, being taken up by married
couples, will much increase and spiritualize their affection one to another.
But jarring will make them leave praying, or praying leave jarring.

Verse 8. (...).
Be courteous] Gr. Friendly-minded, ready to any good office.

Verse 9. Or railing, for railing] Convitium convitio regerere, quid aliud est
quam lutum luto purgare? says one. To render railing for railing, is to think
to wash off dirt with dirt.

That ye should inherit a blessing] Blessings by words, (...).
properly. They that will speak good words to men, shall hear good words from
God: they shall have his good word for them in all places, and in the hearts of
their greatest enemies, as Jacob and Job had.

Verse 10. Love life] Man is (...), a creature that loves life, says
Aristotle. Who is the man that wills life? says David, Psalm. 34 12. And
hereunto every man will be ready to answer, Ego, I do, as Austin observes.
But when the condition shall be added, Cohibe linguam, etc. Refrain thy tongue,
etc. then, says he, scarce any will appear, or accept the motion.

And see good daies] That is, Prosperous and peaceable days: for all the days
of the afflicted are evil, Prove. 15.15. a joylesse life is no life. Rebecca was
weary of her life, and so was Eliah when he sat under the Juniper. Multi etiam
magni viri sab Elia Juniper^ sedent: It is many a good man's case.

Verse 11. Seek peace, and ensue it] A contentious man never wants woe: Vt
habeas quietum tempus perde aliquid, was a Proverb at Carthage, as Austin
relates it: Et concedamus de jure ut careamus lite. For a quiet life let a man
part with his right sometimes.

Verse 12. His ears are open unto, etc.] Gr. His ears are unto their prayers,
q^d. though their prayers are so faint that they cannot come up to God, God
will come down to them. He can feel breath, when no voice can be heard, Lam.
3.56. Fletu sape agitur non affatu.

Verse 13. And who is he that will, etc.] Natural conscience cannot but do
homage to the image of God, stamped upon the natures and works of the godly, as
we see in the carriage of Nebuchadnezzar and Darius toward Daniel. M. Bolton.
I have known some (says a grave Divine) the first occasion of whose
conversion was the observation of their stoutnesse under wrong and
oppressions, whom they have purposely persecuted with extremest hate and
malice.

Verse 14. But and if ye suffer] q. d. Say you meet with such unreasonable men
made up of mere incongruities and absurdities, 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
that will harm you for well-doing, yet you shall be no loosers.

Verse 15. Sanct fie the Lord God] Consider and conceive of him, as he stands
described in the Scriptures, and as related to his people: resting upon his
power and love, for safety here, and salvation hereafter.

Ready always to give an answer] Gr. To make apology, a bold and wise
profession of the truth, with due observation of just circumstances. To
dissemble is ever a fault: but not to profess, is then only a fault, when a
man is silent, Intempestive and loco minime idoneo, at an unfit time and place.
Let me be counted and called proud, or any thing, Modo impij silentij non
arguar, said Luther, so I be not guilty of a sinful silence.

A reason of the hope] Not every trifling question, or malicious cavil. Christ
answered the Governor not a word to some things, and yet he Witnessed a good
confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13.

With meekness and fear] Lest you should dishonor a good cause by an ill
carriage.

Verse 16. Having a good conscience] Which you cannot have, if you deny or but
dissemble the truth. George Marsh the Martyr being examined before the Earl of
Darby, kept himself close in the point of the Sacrament. But after his
departure, thus he writes. I departed much more troubled in my spirit then
before, because I had not with more boldness confessed Christ; Act. and Mon
fol. 1419.
but in such sort as mine adversaries thereby thought they should prevail
against me; whereat I was much grieved: for hitherto I went (...), as much as
in me lay, to rid my self out of their hands, if by (...) without open denying
of Christ and his Word, that co^^^^ed ^e, etc.

(...)-doers] Malefactors not Martyrs.

^he^ may be ashamed that falsely accuse] This is an excellent (...) stopping an
open mouth. Oh these real apologies are very ^owerfull. Thus did the Primitive
Christians plead for themselves, Non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendation^
vitiorum pristinorum, says Tertullian, known from all others by their reformed
lives. Thus did those old Protestants the Waldenses, In moribi^ sunt compositi
and modesti, etc. said that Popish Inquisitour their professed adversary. Their
doctrine, said he, is naught, but their lives are unblameable. The man's life
(says Erasmus concerning Luther) is approved of all men: his veriest
adversaries cannot accuse him for any thing in point of practice. Lewis King of
France, Necho^es reperia^^ quod calumnien^u^.
having received certain complaints against the Protestants of Merindoll and
Chabriers, sent certain to enquire into the business, Anno Dom. 1513.
and hearing what they related to him, he swore a great oath that they were
better men then either himself was, or any other of his subjects.

Verse 17. That ye suffer for well-doing] The cause, and not the pain makes the
Martyr. Together with the Lord Cromwell was beheaded (in Henry the eighths
time) Speeds Chron
the Lord Hungerford, neither so Christianly suffering, nor so quietly dying
for his offense committed against nature. What a sad thing was that related by
Eusebius, that the cruel persecution under Diocletian was occasioned chiefly
by the petulancy, pride, and contentions of the Pastors and Bishops: which
gave occasion to the tyrant to think that Christian religion was no better then
a wretched devise of wicked men.

Verse 18. That he might bring us] To reconcile and bring men again to God, was
the main end of Christ's coming and suffering. This is the wonderment of Angels,
torment of devils, etc.

Verse 19. He went and preached] Righteousness, i. e. Repentance, 2 Pet. 2.5.
and the faith of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 4.6. whereby some of those many that
perished in the waters, arrived at heaven. Nunquam sero si serio. Christ went
to them as an Ambassador sent by his Father, and spoke to their hearts.

Verse 20. Which sometimes were disobedient.] Gr. Vnperswadable,
uncounsellable. They jeared where they should have feared, and thought Noah no
wiser then the Prior of St Bartholomews in London, Holinshead.
who upon a vain prediction of an idle Astrologer, went and built him an house
at Harrow on the hill, to secure himself from a supposed flood, foretold by
that Astrologer.

Verse 21. Baptism does also now save] It is of permanent use; and effectual
to seal up salvation whenever a man believes and repents. Hence we are once
baptized for all. See Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5. The Popes decrees say, That
Confirmation is of more value then Baptism, and gives the holy Ghost more
plentifully and effectually.

Not the putting away] That none bear himself bold upon his Christendom:
Unregenerate Israel is to God as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7. A man may go to hell with
baptismall water on his face.

But the answer] The Stipulation, or confident interrogation, (...).
such as is that of the Apostle, Romans 8.33, 34, 35. and of Jeremy pleading with
God, Chap. 12.1, and reasoning the cause with him. David from his circumcision
promised himself victory over that uncircumcised Philistim, so may we from our
baptism, against all spiritual wickednesses.

Verse 22. Angels and authorities] Psalm. 68.17. The word rendered Angels
signifies Seconds, as being second to Christ, or next to him. See Dan. 10.13.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. Christ has suffered]
AS Chap. 3.18.

In the flesh] In humane nature, so must we suffer in sinful nature, subduing
it to God, and ceasing from sin, nailing it and nailing it to the cross of
Christ.

Verse 2. That he no longer, etc.] To spend the span of this transitory life
after the ways of ones own heart, is to perish for ever.

Verse 3. In lasciviousness, lusts, etc.] The true picture of a Pagan
conversation, which yet is too too common among those that call themselves
Christians. The world is now grown perfectly profane, and can play on the
Lord's Day without book; making it as Bacchus Orgies, rather then Gods holy day,
with piping, dancing, drinking, drabbing, etc. We may say as once Alsted of his
Germans, that if the Sabbath Day should be named according to their observing
of it, Demoniacus potius quam I) ominious diceretur, A^sted. Encyl.
it should be called not Gods-day, but the devils.

Excess of Wine] Or, (...)
Red and rich faces, as they call them.

Revellings] Stinkes says the Syriack: Drunkards are stinkards. (...).


Banquettings] Gr. (...).
Compotations, or good-fellow-meetings: some render it, bibbings, sippings,
tiplings, sitting long at it, though not to an alienation of the mind.

Verse 4. (...).
They think it strange] Gr. That they think it a new world, marvelling what is
come to you alate. It is I, said the harlot, Arego nonsu^^.
but it is not I, said the convert.

Into the same excesse] Gr. (...).
Bubbling or boiling, as the raging sea, soaming out its own filth.

Verse 5. Who shall give account] Of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches,
Jude 15. Angels did their first execution in the world upon luxurious
Sodomites: they will be very active doubtless against such at the last day.
See 2 Pet. 2.10. and mark that word, Chiefly.

Verse 6. For, for this cause] See the Note on 1 Pet, 3.19.

That they might be judged] Either by God chastising them, 1 Cor. 11.32. or by
themselves, verse. 31. The Gospel melts the hearts of Gods elect with voluntary
grief for sin, it makes them condemn themselves in the flesh.

But live according to God] The Father of spirits, with whom the spirits of
just men departed are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Eusebius and Austin make
mention of certain Arabians, who said that the soul dies with the body, and
revives not again till the resurrection of the body. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 20. Angto^
6 de haeres.
This old heresy is now, among many others, dug out of the grave, and held
by certain Sectaries amongst us.

Verse 7. Be ye therefore sober, etc.] To be sober in prayer (says one) is to
pray with due respect to Gods Majesty, without trifling or vain babbling: To
let our words be few, Eccles. 5.3. Also it is to keep Gods counsel, not to be
proud or boast of success, or speak of the secret sweetness of Gods love
without calling: It is to conceal the familiarity of God in secret.

And watch unto praier] Against dullness of body, drowsiness of spirit,
satanicall suggestions, distractive motions, which else will muster and swarm
in the heart like the Flies of Egypt.

Verse 8. Charity shall cover] This is meant of mutual love, whereby we
forgive offenses one to another, and not that which should justify us before
God in a Popish sense, as appears by the precedent words, and by Prove. 10.12.

Verse 9. Without grudgings] Without shucking and hucking. See 2 Cor. 8 12.
with the Note there.

Verse 10. Even so minister] Clouds when full, pour down, and the spouts run,
and the eaves shed, and the presses overflow, and the Aromaticall trees sweat
out their precious and sovereign oils, and every learned Scribe brings out his
rich treasure, etc.

Verse 11. If any man speak] i. e. Preach. Every sound is not music, so
neither is every Pulpit-discourse preaching.

At the Oracles of God] Those lively and life-giving oracles, Act 7.38.
the holy Scriptures. These he must expound with all gravity and sincerity, not
seeking himself, nor setting forth his own wit and eloquence, so putting the
sword of the spirit into a velvet scabber'd, that it cannot prick and pierce
the heart.

Which God giveth] Liberally and magnifically. (...).


Verse 12. Think it not strange] Ne tanquam hospites percellumini, Stand not
wondering, and as if struck into a maze. Fain would this flesh make strange of
that which the Spirit does embrace (says Mr Saunders Martyr, in a letter to
his wife.) Act. and Mon. fol. 1360.
O Lord how loath is this loitering sluggard to pass forth in Gods path. It
fantasieth, forsooth, much fear of fray-bugs. And were it not for the force of
faith which pulls it forward by the rain of Gods most sweet promise, and of
hope which pricks on behind, great adventures there were of fainting by the
way. But blessed, and everlastingly blessed be our heavenly Father, etc.

Concerning the fiery triall] John Brown of Ashford, through the cruel
handling of Archbishop Warrham, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester, was so
piteously entreated (says Mr Fox) that his bare feet were set upon the hot
burning coals, to make him deny his faith: Act. and M^n. fol. 1^77.
which not withstanding he would not do, but patiently abiding the pain,
continued in the Lords quarrel unremoveable. See the like of Rose Allen, Act.
and Mon. 1820.

As though some strange thing] Forecast afflictions, which being foreseen
come no whit the sooner, but far the easier: It is a labor well lost, if they
come not, well spent if they do; whereas coming upon the sudden, they find
weak minds secure, make them miserable, leave them desperate. Bishop Latimer
ever affirmed, that the preaching of the Gospel would cost him his life, to the
which he no less cheerfully prepared himself, then certainly was persuaded,
that Winchester was kept in the Tower for the same purpose; and the event did
too truly prove the same. Being sent for to London by a pursuivant, and coming
through Smith field, he merrily said, Act and Mon, fol 1579.
That Smithfield had long groaned for him. To the Leiutenant of the Tower he
said, You look I think, that I should burn; but except you let me have some
fire I am like to deceive your expectation: for I am like here to starve for
cold.

Verse 13. But rejoyce] As the Apostles did, Act. 5.41. See the Note there.

With exceeding joy] Gr. Dancing a galliard, Leaping Levalto's, (...).
lifting up your heads, because your redemption draws nigh. Vincentius
laughing at his tormentours, said, that death and tortures were to Christians,
Jocularia and ludicra, matters of sport and pastime; Luther.
and walking upon hot-burning coals, he boasted that he walked upon roses:
Other Martyrs said, that they felt no more pain in the fire, then if they lay
upon a bed of down. Constantine embraced Paphnutius, and kissed his lost eye:
So will Christ deal at last day by his suffering servants.

Verse 14 Happy are ye] See the Note on Mat. 5.11, 12. The word signifies,
(...).
Ye are out of harms-way, out of the reach of danger.

Rests upon you] With great delight and content. (...)
How strangely were the holy Martyrs spiritualized and elevated, carried out of
themselves, and beyond themselves, as were easy to instance?

Verse 15. As a busie-body] Gr. A bishop in another man's Diocese, a
pragmaticall person that meddleth with other men's matters, without call or
commendation.

Verse 16. Suffer as a Christian] Under the Emperor Antoninus the Philosopher,
there fell out a very bitter storm of persecution in France, which swallowed up
sundry Martyrs, Bucholc.
as Maturus, Pothenus, Attalus and Blandina: which good woman in the midst of
all her sufferings, often cried out, Christiana sum, I am a Christian. By which
word she gathered new strength, and became more then a Conqueresse. So Sabina,
another glorious Roman Martyr, crying out when she was in prison, Job. Manl.
and being asked by the Jailour, how she would endure the fire next day, that
made now so much ado in her travel? Very well said she, I doubt not: for now I
suffer as a sinner, but then I shall suffer as a Christian.

Verse 17. Judgment must begin] The mortality at Corinth began at the
believers, 1 Cor. 11.30. infidels escaped scot-free. Gods cup is first sent to
Jerusalem. There was bread in Moab, when there was none in Israel, Ruth 1.1.
The stormy shower lights first on the high-hils: and having washed them,
settleth with all the filth in the valleys.

Verse 18. Scarcely be saved] Hard and scarce: not at all from outward miseries
(whereof he is sure to have his back-burden) and not without somewhat ado from
hell torments. The wise Virgins had no oil to spare: the twelve Trib s served
God instantly and constantly day and night, and all little enough, Act. 26.7.

Where shall the ungodly, etc.] Surely no where: not before Saints and Angels,
for holiness is their trade. Not before God, for he is of more pure eyes, etc.
Not before Christ: for he shall come in flaming fire rendering vengeance. Not
in heaven, for its an undefiled inheritance, etc.

Verse 19. Commit the keeping] As a precious depositum. So did our Savior both
in his life time, Pet. 2.23. and at his death, Luke 23 46.

As unto a faithfull] Who will rather unmake all, Psalm. 114.8.
then we shall miscarry.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Who am also an Elder]
GR. Leo 1. Petrum in consortium individu^^ Trinitatis assumptu^ j^^lavir. (...)
A fellow Elder, not a Commander, a Lord paramount, a Compeer and Consort to
the blessed Trinity, as Pope Leo the first, and Nicolas the third blasphemously
said he was.

Verse 2. Feed the flock] Being both learned and loving. The Greek word for a
shepherd, signifies one that earnestly desires after his sheep.

Not by constraint, but willingly] It is with the Pastors of Germany for most
part, says Melancthon, as with him in Plautus, that said, Ego non servio
libenter herus meus me non habet li^e^^er, tumen utitur me, ut lippis oculis.

Verse 3. Neither as being Lords] About the year 1260. the Clergy and Laity of
England, set themselves against the Popes exactions: and when the Legate
alleged that all Churches were the Popes, J^^^ vius in vit. Po^^^
Magister Leonardus made answer, Tuitione non fruitione, desen sione, non
dissipatione.

Verse 4. Ye shall receive a crown] A crown imports perpetuity, plenty,
dignity, the height of humane ambition. Quarta perennis erit was Sr Thomas
Bodly his posie.

Verse 5. Yea all of you be subject] In regard of love and modesty, not of
change and confusion of offices.

Be clothed with humility] The Greek word imports, (...)
that humility is the riband or string, that ties together all those precious
pearls the rest of the graces: if this string break, they are all scattered.
Humility, as charity, is the band of perfection: yea the word here used
signifies no^ only alligare, but innodare, say some; to tie knots, (...).
as delicate and curious women use to do of ribands to adorn their heads or
bodies: M. Cawdrey
as if humility were the knot of every virtue, and the grace of every grace.
Contrariwise, how ugly and unseemly is pride on the back of honor, head of
learning, face of beauty, etc? Chrysostom calls humility the root, mother,
nurse, foundation and band of all virtues. (...).
Basil the storehouse, treasury of all good.

God resisteth] See the Note on Jam. 4.6.

And gives grace] i.e. Honor and respect: as appears by the opposition, and
by Pro. 3.34, 35.

Verse 6. Under the mighty hand of God] If God can blow us to destruction, Job
4.9. nod us to destruction, Psalm. 80.16. what is the weight of that mighty hand
of his, that spans the heavens, and holds the earth in the hollow of them?

That he may exalt you] The lower the ebb, the higher is the tide, A deluge of
sorrows may assault us, but they shall exalt us. And the lower the foundation
of virtue is laid, the higher shall the roof of glory be over laid.

In due time] In the opportunity of time, in a fit season. The very Turks,
though remorslesse to those that bear up, yet receive humiliation with much
sweetness.

Verse 7. Casting all your care] Your carking care, Act. and Mon. fol. 1743.
your care of diffidence. I will now with you sing away care (said John
Careless Martyr in a letter to Mr. Philpot) for now my soul is turned to her
old rest again, and has taken a sweet nap in Christ's lap. I have cast my care
upon the Lord which cares for me, and will be Careless, according to my name.

Verse 8. Your adversary the devil] Satan envies our condition, that we should
enjoy that Paradise that he left, the comforts he once had. Hence he disturbs
us, and is restless, out of his infinite hatred of God and goodness: as the
Scorpion still pu^s forth his sting, and as the Leopard bears such a natural
hatred against men, that if he see but a man's picture, he slies upon it, and
tares it, Annibal, whether he conquered, or was conquered, never rested. Satan
is over-overcome, and yet he walks up and down seeking to devour: he commits
the sin against the holy Ghost every day, and shall lie lowest in hell: every
soul that he drew thither by his temptation shall lie upon him, and press him
down as a millstone under the unsupportable wrath of God. The word here rendered
an adversary, properly signifies an adversary at law. Against whom we have an
Advocate Jesus Christ the just one, 1 Ioh. 2.2. who appears for us, Heb. 9.24.
to nonsuit all accusations, and to plead our cause.

Whom he may devour] Gr. Whom he may drink up at one draught.

Verse 9. Steadfast in the faith] Gr. Stiff, solid, settled. (...) Plutarch.


That the same afflictions] Art not thou glad to fare as Phocion, said he to
one that was to die with him? Ignatius going to suffer, triumphed in this, that
his blood should be found among the mighty Worthies, and that when the Lord
makes inquisition for blood, he will recount from the blood of righteous Abel^
not only to the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, but also to the blood of
mean Ignatius.

Verse 10 But the God of all grace] Thus the Apostle divides his time betwixt
preaching and prayer, according to his own advice, Act. 6.4. and the practice
of those ancient Ministers, Deuteronomy. 33.10.

Verse 11. To him be glory, etc.] Non loquendum de Deo sine lumine, said the
Heathen, we may not mention God, but with praise to his name, say we.

Verse 12. I have written briefly] Gr. In few. The holy Scripture has fullness
of matter in fewness of words, the whole counsel of God shut up in a narrow
compass. The Lord knows that much reading is a weariness of the flesh,
Eccles. 12.12. and has therefore provided for our infirmity.

Verse 13. The Church that is at Babylon] At Rome say the Papists, that they
may prove Peter to have been Bishop of Rome. But though this be far set, yet
here they grant us, that Rome is that mystical Babylon mentioned in the
Revelation. It is probable that S. Peter meant no other Babylon then the
Metropolis of Chaldaea, where he, being the Apostle of the circumcision,
preached to those dispersed Jews, and other Gentiles that he had converted.

Verse 14. With a kiss of charity] So called, because their love to one
another was by this symbol or ceremony both evidenced and increased.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the second Epistle general of S. PETER.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. A servant]
THe Pope, who will needs style himself, A servant of servants, is herein the
successor not of Peter, but of cursed Cham. He stamps in his coin, That Nation
and country that will not serve thee, shall be rooted out, and so bewraies his
putid hypocrisy.

Like precious faith] Precious as gold tried in the fire, that makes rich,
Revel. 3.18, And like precious (though of different degrees) In regard of 1.
The Author, God. 2. The object, Christ. 3. The means of working it, the Spirit
and Word. 4. The end of it, salvation. 5. The essential property of it, of
handfasting us to Christ. A child may hold a ring in his hand, as well, though
not as fast as a man.

Verse 2. Through the knowledge] There is not a new notion, or a further
enlargement of saving knowledge, but it brings some grace and peace with it.
All the grace that a man has, it passes through the understanding: and the
difference of stature in Christianity grows from different degrees of
knowledge. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17.

Verse 3. To glory and vertue] To glory as the end, to virtue as the means. The
very Heathens made their passage to the temple of honor through the temple of
virtue. Do worthily, and be famous, Ruth 4.11.

Verse 4. Exceeding great and precious] Every precious stone has an egregious
virtue in it: Cardan. Subti. l 7.
so has every promise. The promises, says one, are a precious book, every
leaf drops mirthe and mercy. The weak Christian cannot open, read, apply it;
Christ can, and will for him.

That by these ye might be partakers] As the Sun when it applies it is beams
to a fitly disposed matter, and stays upon it, begins to beget life and
motion, and makes a living creature; so do the promises applied to the heart
make a new creature, See a Cor. 3 6.

Of the divine nature] That is, of those divine qualities, called elsewhere,
The image of God, The life of God, etc. whereby we resemble God, not only as a
picture does a man in outward lineaments, but as the child does his father in
countenance and conditions. It was no absurd speech of him that said, That the
high parts that are seen in heroical persons do plainly show, that there is a
God. Neither can I here but insert the saying of another, Well may grace be
called the divine nature: for as God brings light out of darkness, comfort out
of sorrow, riches out of poverty, and glory out of shame; so does grace turn
the dirt of disgrace into gold, etc. As Moses his hand, it turns a serpent into
a rod.

Verse 5. And besides this] q. d. As God has given you all things pertaining
to life and godliness, and has granted you exceeding great and precious
promises, so must you reciprocate, by giving all diligence, or making all
haste, that ye be not taken with your task undone. Acti agamus.

Add to your faith] Faith is the foundation of the following graces: Indeed
they are all in faith radically. Every grace is but faith exercised.

Adde] Gr. (...).
Link them hand in hand, as Virgins in a dance. Or, Provide your selves of this
rich furniture: one grace strengthens another, as stones do in an arch.

Verse 6 And to knowledge, temperance] That ye be Wise to sobriety, not
curiously searching into those things, whereof ye can neither have proof nor
profit. Some are as wise as Galilaeus, who used perspective glasses to descry
mountains in the Moon.

Verse 7. Mar. 10.11. Joh. 11.3.
And to brotherly kindness, etc.] Love we must all men, but especially the
family of faith, as our Savior loved the young man, but not so, as he did
Lazarus.

Verse 8. If these things be in you] What God does for us, he does by grace in
us. And it is the growing Christian that is the assured Christian. Whilst we
are yet adding to every heap, we shall be both actuosi and fructuosi; and so
get more abundant entrance, and further in to the kingdom of Christ.

Verse 9 But he that lacks these] Those that add not to their stock of
grace, shall have no comfort either from the time past, for they shall forget
they were purged from their sins, or from thoughts of the time to come, for
they shall not be able to see things far off, to ken their interest in the
kingdom of heaven.

Cannot see far off] Being pur-blinde, blinking, Lusciosi, qui siquando
oculorum aciem intendunt, ut certius aliquid cernant, minus vident quam ante,
(...).
says Vives. If weak-sighted men look wishly upon a thing, they see it no whit
the better, but much the worse.

And has forgotten] As if he bad been dlpt in the lake of Loathe, and not in
the laver of baptism. Diverse of the Spanish converts in America forget not
only their vow, but their very names that they received, when they were
baptized.

Verse 10. Give diligence] Say not here as Antipater King of Macedony did, when
one presented him a book treating of happiness, (...), I am not at leisure.
But do this one thing necessary, with all expedition.

Your calling and election] We must not go (says one) to the university of
election, T. C^ on Colos.
before we have been at the grammar school of Vocation: First, we are to begin
below at our sanctification, before we can climb to the top of Gods counsel,
to know our election.

Sure] Some copies have it, Sure by good works: and indeed these settle the
soul, 1 Cor. 15.58. as a stake, the more it is struck into the ground, the
faster it sticks.

Ye shall never fall] Stumble ye may: but he that stumbles and falls not, gets
ground.

Verse 11. Ministered unto you abundantly] Ye shall go gallantly into heaven,
not get thither as many do, with hard shift, and much ado. A ship may make a
shift to get into the harbor, but with anchors lost, cables rent, sails torn,
mast broken: another comes in with sails and flags up, with trumpets sounding,
and comes bravely into the haven: so do fruitful and active Christians into
Christ's Kingdom.

Verse 12. Act and Mon. fol 1^89.
I will not be negligent] Ministers must carefully watch and catch at all
opportunities of benefitting the people. Dr Tailour the Martyr preached at
Hadley his charge on any day, as often as he could get the people together: and
once a fortnight at least went to the almhouse, and there exercised his charity
both spiritual and corporal.

Verse 13. (...).
To stir you up] Gr. To rouse you and raise you, ex veterno corporis, teporis
and oblivionis, Grace in the best is like a dull sea-coal-fire; which, if not
stirred up, though it want no fuel, will yet easily go out of it self.

Verse 14. I must put off] See the Note on 2 Cor. 5.1. What is this life, but a
spot of time betwixt two eternities? Our tents shall be taken down.

Verse 15. (...).
After my decease] Gr. Mine out-going, or Passage to heaven. The Apostle in
this expression has respect doubtless to that, Luke 9.31. As Daniel 6.15.
referres to Psalm. 2.1.

To have these things always, etc.] Dilexi virum (said Theodosius concerning
Ambrose) I could not but love the man exceedingly for this, that when he died,
he was more sollicitous of the Churches then of his own dangers. And I am in no
less care (says Cicero) Mihi non minori curae est, etc. Cicer. Lael.
what the Commonwealth will do when I am dead, then whiles I am yet alive.

Verse 16. Cunningly devised fables] Artificially composed and compiled, (...).
not without a show of wisdom and truth, to deceive silly people. The Jesuits
confess that the legend of miracles of their Saints is for most part false:
but it was made, say they, for good intention, that the common people (the
females especially) might be drawn with greater zeal to serve God and his
Saints.

Verse 17. This is my beloved Sonne] See the Notes on Matthew 3.17. and 17.5.

Verse 18. When we were with him] Witnesses of his glory, and the same were
shortly after witnesses of his agony. Envy not the gifts or honors of others:
since they have them upon no other terms, then to undergo the sorer trials.

In the boly Mount] Holy for the while, as are our Churches, during the public
assemblies.

Verse 19. A more sure word] The authority of the Scriptures is greater then of
an angels voice, of equal command to Gods audible and immediate voice, and of
greater perspicuity and certainty to us: for besides inspiration, it is both
written and sealed.

As unto a light] As the Governor of a ship has his hand on the stern, his
eye on the pole star: so should we on Christ the daystar, Rev. 2.28. and 22.12.

Verse 20. Of any private interpretation] That is, of humane interpretation:
Private is not here opposed to public, but to divine, or to the holy Ghost.
The old Prophet may bring a man into the Lions mouth, by telling him of an
Angel that spoke to him.

Verse 21. As they were moved] Forcibly moved, acted, (...).
carried out of themselves to say and do what God would have them.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. Who privily shall bring in]
OR, Fraudulently soist in false doctrines under the title of truth, and
pretext of piety. Some truths they shall teach, (...).
the better to persuade to their falsehoods. Together with the gold, silver, and
ivory of orthodox tenets, they have store of apes and peacocks, as Solomon's
ships had. Sunt mala mist a bonis, sunt bona mista malis.

Denying the Lord that brought them] Or, Freed them, viz. from their former
idolatries and enormities, Vt verbum (...) frequentius significat, says one.
Or, that bought them, as they conceited, and others charitably imagined: but it
proved otherwise, as appeared by their apostasy.

Verse 2. A^^. de civ. Del.
The way of truth shall be, etc.] The ancient Christians were generally hated
and hooted at by the Heathens for the heretikes-sake, who were also a kind of
Christians, as Austin complains. And Epiphanius adds that many Pagans
refused to come near the Christians to join with them in any good exercise,
Improbis scelestorum illcrum factis consternati, as being offended at the
unclean conversation of diverse heretics, the Priscillianists especially, whose
doctrine was,

Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.

Verse 3 With feigned words] Covetousness in never without a cloak, and
flattering words (1 Thessalonians. 2.5.) for a color: as, what wool is so course, but
will take some or other color? Seducers pretend the glory of God, and good of
souls to their worldly and wicked practices, Phil. 3.18, 19.

Verse 4. If God spared not the Angels] Though but for one sin only, and that
in thought only. It sprang from the admiration of their own gifts, it was
confirmed by pride and ambition, it was perfected by envy, stirred by the
decree of exalting man's nature above Angels in and by Christ. Some say it was a
transgression of some Commandment in particular (not expressed) as Adams was.

Verse 5. Bringing in the floud] And so burying them all in one universal
grave of waters.

Verse 6. And turning the Cities] Burying them likewise in the dead sea, after
that he had rained down hell from heaven upon them. See my Notes upon Genesis
19.24, 25.

Making them an ensample] Hanging them up in gibbets, as it were, that others
might here and fear.

Verse 7. (...).
Vexed] Gr. Laboring under it, as under an heavy burden, and as much tortured,
as if he had been set upon a rack, as it is verse 8.

Verse 8. In seeing and hearing] Every sinful Sodomite was a Hazael to his
eyes, a Hadadrimmon to his heart.

Vexed his righteous soul] Guilt or grief is all that the good soul gets by
conversing with the wicked.

Verse 9. The Lord knows how] He has ways of his own, and commonly goes a
way by himself, such as we think not of; helping them that are forsaken of
their hopes: Peter (if any man) might well say, The Lord knows how to deliver
his: for he had been strangely delivered, Act. 12.

Verse 10. But chiefly] See the Note on Heb. 13.4.

That walk after the flesh] That is, The harlot; as filthy dogs follow after a
salt-bitch: so the harlot is called, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Act. and Mon. fol 7 51.
The Helvetians had an old custom in their towns and villages, that when they
received any new Priest into their Churches, they used to premonish him before,
to take his Concubine, lest he should attempt any misuse of their wives and
daughters.

To speak evil of dignities] Here we have a lively picture of the Popish
Clergy. Aretine, by a longer custom of libellous and contumelious speaking
against Princes, had got such an habit, that at last he came to diminish and
disesteem God himself. How boldly and basely does Baronius bellow against the
King of Spain his Sovereign? And he defends himself against another Cardinal
reprehending his fierceness thus, An imperious (impetuous he should have said)
zeal has no power to spare God himself.

Verse 11. Which are greater in power] viz. then the mightiest Monarch, Dan.
10.20. and are therefore called principalities and powers, 1 Pet. 3.22. Mighty
ones, Isa. 10.34. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Exodus 12.23, 27. 2 Samuel 24.15. 2 King.
19.35. This is all for our comfort, they being our guardians. See my
Commonplace of Angels.

Verse 12. As natural bruit beasts] Some men put off all manhood, fall beneath
the stirrup of reason, and are beastialized, yea satanized.

Speak evil of the things] Dare to reprehend what they do not comprehend,
dispraise sound doctrine.

Verse 13. To riot in the day-time] See the Note on 1 Thessalonians. (...).
5.7. The word here rendered riot. comes of a root that signifies to break: for
there is nothing that does so break and emasculate the minds of men as rioting
and revelling. Luxury draws out a man's spirits, and dissolves him.

Spots they are] Blots of goodness, (...).
botches of Christian society.

Verse 14. Having eyes full of adultery] Gr. Of the adultresse, As if she were
seen sitting in the eyes of the adulterer. Plutarch Kign pucillam and pacillam
o ut^ significat.
The wanton Greek was said to have his eyes, (...), Non virgins, sed
meretrices, not maids but minions. Archesilaus the Philosopher told a young
wanton, Vitijs nobis in animum per oculos est via. Quinul.
Nihil interest quibus membris cinaedi sitis posterioribus an prioribus. The
leper was to shave his eyebrows, to teach us to take away the lust of the
eyes, Levit. 14.9.

And that cannot cease to sinne] Though they have made many Covenants with God,
promises to men. So Pro. 19.19. They break all, as easily as Samson did the new
ropes^

Exercised with covetous practices] Which they constantly follow, as the
Artificer does his trade.

Verse 15. The wages of unrighteousnes] The Mammon of unrighteousnes, wages of
wickedness.

Lucra injust a putes justis aequalia d^mnis:
Dum peritura paras, per male parta peris.
Verse 16. The dumb Ass speaking] The Angel (some think) spoke in the Ass, as
the devil had done in the serpent. Who now can complain of his own inability
and rudeness to reply in a good cause, D. Ha^^'s contempl.
when the dumb Ass is enabled by God to convince his master? There is no mouth
into which God cannot put words: and how often does he choose the weak and unwise
to confound the learned and mighty?

Verse 17. These are wells, etc.] Not fitted, nor filled with wholesome
doctrine, but as the brooks of Tema, Job 6.17. in a mo^sture they swell, in a
drought they sail. The river Novanus in Lombardy at every Mid-summer solstice
swells and runs over the banks: but in mid-winter is clean dry. So these.

Verse 18. (...).
Great swelling words] Gr. Bubbles of words, full of wind, big swollen fancies,
sesquipedalia verba. Swenckfeldius the heretic bewitched many with those big
words (ever in his mouth) of Illumination, Revelation, Deification, the inward
and spiritual man, etc. Faith, he said, was nothing else but God himself
in-dwelling in us. And have we not those now that tell their disciples they
shall be Christed, Godded, etc?

Through much Wantonnesse] As Hetserus and Monetarius the Anabaptists, Joh.
Manl lcc. com 321. and 490
who corrupted many matrons, whom they had drawn to their side.

Verse 19. Promise them liberty] As Mahometisme, and Popery, which is an
alluring, tempting, bewitching religion. Sr Walter Raleigh knew what he said,
that were he to choose a religion for licentious liberty and lasciviousness, he
would choose the Popish religion. No sin past, but the Pope can pardon: no
sin to come, but he can dispense for it. No matter how long men have lived in
any sin (though it be the sin against the holy Ghost) extreme unction at last
will salve all.

Verse 20. Again entangled] As a bird in a gin, as a beast in a snare. Sape
familiaritas implicavit, saepe occasio peccandi voluntatem fecit. Isidor solil.
l. 2.


The later end is worse] They fall ab equis ad asinos, from high hopes of
heaven into hell-mouth; where they shall have a deeper damnation, because they
disgrace Gods housekeeping, as if they did not find that they looked for in
religion.

Verse 21. It had been better] Nocuit sane Judae fuisse Ape stolum, and Juliano
Christianum: to begin well and not to proceed, is but to aspire to an higher
pitch, that the fall may be the more desperate. Non quaeruntur in Christianis
initia, fed finis, Act. and Mon. fol 993.
says Hierom, B. Bonner seemed at first to be a good man, and a favourer of
Luthers doctrines.

Verse 22. The dog is turned] Proverbia hac sunt Canonica, quae Christiano
nauseam commoverent. God will spue out apostates for ever, teaching them how
they should have spued out their sin.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. This second Epistle]
SO must Ministers with one Sermon peg in another: and never cease beating and
repeating the same point, says S. Aug de doct. Christian.
Augustine, till they perceive by the gesture and countenance of the hearers,
that they understand it, and are affected with it.

I stir up] Gr. I rouse you, who perhaps are nodding with the wise virgins,
Mat. 25.5. (...).


Your pare mindes] Gr. Pure as the Sun. Chrysostom says of some in his time
that they were ipso coelo puriores, Hom. 55. in Math.
more pure then the visible heavens: and that they were more like angels then
mortals.

Verse 2. Mindful of the words] See the Note on 1 Cor. 15.2. Run to this
armory of the Scriptures for weapons against seducers and epicures.

Verse 3. Scoffers] Those worst kind of sinners, Psalm. 1.1. those abjects of
the people, Psalm. 35.15. those Pests, (...).
as the Septuagint render them, Psalm. 1.1. those Atheists that jear when they
should fear, and put far away the evil day, that make no more matter of Gods
direful and dreadful menaces, then Leviathan does of a sword, he laugeth at
the shaking of a spear, Job 41.29.

Verse 4. Where is the promise, etc.] The sleeping of vengeance causes the
overflow of sin (the sinner thinks himself hail-fellow with God, Psalm 50.21.)
and the overflow of the sin causes the awakening of vengeance.

Verse 5. Willingly ignorant of] A carnal heart is not willing to know what it
should do, lest it should do what it would not, Act. 28.27.

That by the word of God] And that by the same word again they may as soon be
dissolved, yea reduced to their first original, Nothing. A learned man
propounds this question, How did the Lord employ himself before the world?
And his answer is this, D. Preston of Gods attrib. p. 34.
A thousand years to him are but as one day, and one day as a thousand years.
Again, Who knows (says he) what the Lord has done? Indeed he made but one
world to out knowledge: but who knows what he did before, and what he will do
after? Thus he.

And the earth standing, etc.] God has founded the earth upon the seas, and
established it upon the floods, Psalm. 24.2. This, Aristotle reckons among the
wonders in nature, and well he may. God has set the solid earth upon the
liquid waters for our convenience, Psalm. Lib. de mirabil.
104.6 7.

Verse 6. Being overflowed with water] Therefore that is not altogether true,
that all things continue as they were at first, as the scoffers affirmed, ver.
4.

Verse 7. Reserved unto fire] The old world was destroyed with water, Propter
ardorem libidinis for the beat of their lust, says Ludolphus: the world that
is now shall be destroyed with fire, Propter teporem charitatis, for their want
of love.

Verse 8. One day is with the Lord, etc.] Nullum tempus occurrit regi, How much
less to the Ancient of days? In God there is no motion or flux; therefore a
thousand years to him are but as one day.

Verse 9. Not willing that any should perish] See the Note on 1 Timothy 2.4.

Verse 10. The heavens shall pass. etc.] The very visible heavens are defiled
with men's sins, Revel. 18.5. and must therefore be purged by fire; as the
vessel that held the sin-offering, was in the time of the law.

Shall be burnt up] This the very Heathens knew in part, as appears by the
writings of Lueratius, Cicere de natura Deorum, and Ovids Metam. lib. 1.

Verse 11. What manner of men] Even to admiration, Quales and quanti, as the
word signifies, Mar 13.1. How accurate, (...).
and how elevate above the ordinary strain!

Verse 12. Looking for] As Sisera's mother looked out at a window, and
expecting the return of her son, said, Why are his charriots so long a
coming? So should we look up and long for Christ's coming in the clouds, those
charriots that carried him up, and shall bring him back again.

The heavens being on fire. etc.] A far greater fire then that at
Constantinople, Blnnts voyage.
where 7000 houses are said to have been on fire at once, an. Dom. 1633.

And the elements shall melt,] And fall like scalding lead, or burning
bell-metall on the heads of the wicked, who shall give a terrible account with
the world all on fire about their ears. Whether this shall fall out in the year
1657. (as some conjecture, because in the year of the world, 1657. Alsted.
Chr^^oi.
the old world drowned, and because the numerall letters in MVnDI
ConfLagratiIo, Make up the same number) I have nothing to affirm. Sure it is,
the Saints shall take no hurt at all by this last fire, but a great deal of
benefit. Methodius writes that Pyragnus (a certain plant so called) grows
green, and flourishes in the midst of the flames of burning Olympus, as much as
if it grew by the banks of a pleasant river. And of this he says, that himself
was an eyewitness. Praeclarum sane novissimi diei indicium and documentum.

Verse 13. According to his promise] Which is good sure-hold. For he paies not
his promises with fair words, as Sextorius did, but with real performances.

Verse 14. That ye may be found of him] Watching, working, well-doing. See the
Note on Mat. 24 43, 44.

Verse 15. That the long-suffering, etc.] Romans 2.4. which sentence Peter picks
out of Paul's epistles, as one of the choicest, and urges it here.

Even as our beloved brother, etc.] Ingenium est profiteri per quos profeceris,
says Pliny. S. Peter makes honorable mention of S. Paul: so Ezekiel of his
contemporary Daniel.

Verse 16. Wrest as they do. etc.] When we strive to give unto to the
Scripture, and not to receive from it the sense: when we factiously contend to
fasten our conceits on God, like the harlot, take our dead and putrified
fancies, and lay them in the bosom of the Scriptures, as of a mother, when we
compel them to go two miles, which of themselves would go but one, when we put
words into the mouths of these oracles by mis-inferences or mis*applications,
then are we guilty of this sin of wresting the Scriptures. Cadem Scripturarum
faci ^^s.
Tertullian speaks of some that murder the Scriptures to serve their own
purposes.

Verse 17. Fall] As leaves fall from the trees in Autumn.

Verse 18. But grow] In firmness, in fineness^ at least, as an apple does in
mellownesse: as Oaks grow more slowly then willows and bulrushes, yet more
solidly, and in the end to a greater bulk and bigness.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the first Epistle general of S. JOHN.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. That Which Was from the beginning]
CHrist, the eternal God. See the Note on John 1.2.

Which we have heard, etc.] The man Christ Jesus, the Arch-prophet. (...).


Which we have seen] And what so sure as sight? See Luke 1.2. This was denied
to many Kings and Prophets, Luke 10.24. To have seen Christ in the flesh was
one of the three things that Austin wished: which yet Saint Paul set no such
high price upon, in comparison of a spiritual sight of him, 2 Cor. 5.16. See
the Note there. (...).


Which we have looked upon] Diligently, and with delight: How sweet shall be
the fight of him in heaven? With what unconceivable attention and admiration
shall we contemplate his glorified body out-shining the brightest Cherub?

Verse 2. For the life was manifested] Christ who is life essential swallowed
up death in victory: and brought life and immor. tality to light by the Gospel,
2 Timothy 1.10.

Verse 3. Declare we unto you] That ( Theophylus-like) ye may be at a
certainty, fully persuaded, Luke 1.1. having a plerophory or full assurance of
understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of Christ, Colos. 3.2. See
the Note there.

And truly our fellowship] If any should object: Is that such a preferment to
have fellowship with you? What are you, etc! He answers, As mean as we are,
we have fellowship with the Father and the Son: Union being the ground of
communion, all that is theirs is ours.

Verse 4. And these things Write We] Out of the Scriptures, those wells of
salvation, draw we waters with joy, Isa. 12.4. suck these breasts of
consolation, and be satisfied, Isa. 66.11. Nusquam inveri requiem nisi in libro
and claustro, Hom. in Genes
says one. Chrysostom brings in a man laden with inward trouble, coming into
the Church: where, when he heard this passage read, Why are thou cast down my
soul, etc? hope in God, etc. he presently recovered comfort.

Verse 5. That God is light] He is (...), Light essential, and they that walk
with him must be as so many crystal glasses with a ligh^ in the midst; for
can two walk together, and they not be agreed? Am. 3.8.

Verse 6. If ^^ say that, etc.] As they do that profess to know God, but in
works do deny him, Tic. 1.16. See the Note there.

And walk in darknesse] There is a child of light that walks in darkness,
Isa. 50.10. but that is in another sense. I he wicked also, that are here said
to walk in darkness have their sparkles of light, that they have kindled, Isa.
50.11. but it is but as a light smitten out of a flint, which neither warms,
nor guides them, but dazelleth their eyes, and goes out, so that they lie down
in sorrow.

Verse 7. We have fellowship one, etc.] That is, God and we: inasmuch as we are
made partakers of the divine nature, and are pure as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. in
quality, though not in an equality.

And the blood of Jesus] That whereas Gods pure eye can soon find many a foul
flaw in the best of us (our righteousness being mixed, as light and darkness,
dimnesse at least in a painted glass, died with some obscure and dim color,
it is transparent and gives good, but not clear and pure light) lo here a
ready remedy, a sweet support, The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us
from all sin.

Verse 8. If we say that we have] If any should be so saucy or rather silly, as
to say with Donatus, Non habeo Domine quod ignoscas, I have no sin for Christ
to cleanse me from, he is a loud lier, and may very well have the whetstone.

Verse 9. If we confesse] Home agnoscit, Dew ignoscit. Aug.
And Consessio p^cca^i est vomitus sordium animae. Judah (his name signifies
confession) got the kingdom from Reuben.

He is faithfull] And yet Bellarmin^ says, De ^ustific. l. 1. cap 21.
That he cannot find in all the book of God, and promise made to confession of
sin to God.

From all unrighteousnesse] All without exception: why then should we put in
conditions, and as it were enterline Gods Covenant?

Verse 10. We make him a liar] For the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
Romans 11.32. See the Note there.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. That ye sin not]
PResuming upon an easy and speedy pardon. The worser sort of Papists will
say: when we have sinned we must confess; and when we have confessed, we must
fin again, that we may confess again: so making account of confessing, as
drunkards do of vomiting. But we have not so learned Christ.

And if any man sin] Being taken before he is aware, Gal. 6.1. See the Note
there.

We have an Advocate] Who appears for us in heaven, and pleans our cause
eff^ctually. See Heb. 9.24.

Jesus Christ the righteous] Or else he could not go to the Father for us. See
the Note on Joh] 16.10.

Verse 2. He is the propitiation] Heb. Copher: He coffers up, is it were, and
covets our sins, Psalm. 78.38. See the Note on Romans 3.25.

Verse 3. We know that we know him] By a reflex act of the soul: hence the
assurance of says, the fruit of fruitfulness, 1 Cor. 15.58.

That we know him] with a knowledge not apprehensive only, but affective too.

Verse 4. He that says I know him] Here he disputes against Verbalists and
Solifidians. See Jam. 2.14. with the Note there.

Verse 5. That we are in him] In communion with him, and in conformity to him.

Verse 6. To walk even as he walked] This is the same with that Col. 2.6. to
walk in Christ, and with that 1 Pet. 2.21. to follow his steps, See the Note
there.

Verse 7. I write no new commandment] The Apostle studiously declineth the
suspicion of novelty. We should ever set a jealous eye upon that which is now,
and stand in the old way, Jer. 6.16. in the ancient paths, Jer. 18.15. Gods
people are called the ancient people, Isa. 44.7. And Idolaters are said to
sacrifice to new gods, that came newly up, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Truth, and wine, is
better with age, Luke 5.39. And of witnesses Aristotle well says, (...).
the older they are, the more credible, because less corrupted.

Verse 8. A new Commandment] See the Note on John 13.34.

Verse 9. And hates his brother] As Paul presses faith, and Peter hope, so
John love, those three cardinal virtues, 1 Cor. 13.13.

Verse 10. (...).
None occasion, etc.] Gr. No scandal: i. e. no occasion of spiritual falling,
whereby a man is made any manner of way worse, and back warder in goodness:,
Quod fieri posest vel dicto, velfacto, sive exemplo in moribus says learned
Lyserus, which may be done by word, deed, or evil example.

Verse 11. He that hates, etc.] There is a passion of hatred (says a famous
Divine) This is a kind of averseness and rising of the heart against a man,
when one sees him; so that he cannot away with him, nor speak to, nor look
courteously or peaceably upon him, etc. 2. A habit of hatred, when the heart is
so settled in this alienation and ess^rangement, that it grows to wish and seek
his hurt. This is manslaughter, 1 John 3.5.

Verse 12. I Write unto you little children] A Christian has his degrees of
growth; childe-hood, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Youth or wellgrown age, when he is past the
spoon, as here: old age, Au, 21.16.

Verse 13. Him that is from the beginning] The Ancient of d^ie^, Ol^ men love
to speak of ancient things. These are ancient things, 1 Chronicles. 4.22.

Because ye have overcome the wicked one] The glory of young men is their
strength, Prove. 20.29. The Hebrew word there ^endered young men, signifies
choice men, se. for military implo^ments: neither can they better show their
valor, then by resifting the devil, that he may flee from them.

Because ye have known the Father] We say, Hom. O^^ib. 1.
He is a Wise child that knows his father (and the Greeks have a Proverb to
the same purpose) but God has no child so young, that more or loss knows
him not, The bastardly brood of Rome are all for their mother,

Verse 14. Because ye have know him] The same again, as Verse 13. which to a
carnal heart may seem superfluous. Et certe sihumano ingenio conscripti essent
libri illi, quos pro sacris (ita us verissime sunt) agnoscimus and veneramur,
bonum alicubi dormitasse Homerum diceremus, said one. But far be it from us to
reprehend what we cannot comprehend.

Verse 15. Love not the World] You fathers, and you young and strong men, let
me caution you (before I speak again to the little children, verse. 18.) to
beware of worldliness. A man may be very mortified, and yet very apt to dote
on the world.

If any man love the world] Have it he may, and use it too, as the traveller
uses his staff (which either he keeps or casts away, as it furthers or
hinders his journey) but love it he must not, unless he will renounce the love
of God. See the Note on Mat. 6.24. Col. 312.

Verse 16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of, etc.] That is, Luke 4.
pleasure, profit, preferment; the worldlings trinity, as one faith. Compare
here with Christ's threefold temptation.

But is of the world] Base and bootlesse, Nec verum, nec vestrum, To know the
vanity of the world (as of a mist) you must go a little out from it.

Verse 17. And the World passes away] As the stream of a swift river passes
by the side of a City. Animantis cujusque, vita in fuga est. Life it self wears
out in the wearing, as a garment: all things below are mutable and momentary.
Will thou set thine heart upon that that is not? says Solomon.

And the lust there of] So that although thou were sure to hold these things of
the world, yet they may be suddenly lost to thee, because then can not make
thine heart delight in the same things still. Not the world only, But the lust
thereof passes away: there is a curse of us satis^iableness^ lies upon the
creature* (...), says the Orator: There is a satiety of all things, The
worlds comforts are sweeter in the ambition hen in the fruition: for after a
little while we loath what we lately lusted after, as Amnon did Tamar. Men
first itch, and then scratch, and then smart. Dolor est etiam ipsa voluptas.

Verse 18. Little children] Children may be easily cozened, and made to take a
sheep-counter for an angel, because broader and brighter: so young Christians
are soon seduced: hence they are here cautioned.

Verse 19. But they were not of us] No more were our Antitrinitarians, Arrians,
Antiscripturists, ever of cur Church, other-wise then as wens or botches
whatever our adversaries aver and cavil. So of old, because the Waldenses and
Manichees lived in the same places, and were both held heretikas, the Papists
maliciously gave out that the Waldenses (those ancient Protestants) were
defiled with the errors of the Manichees and Catharists, which yet they ever
abhorred,

Verse 20. But ye have an Vnction] that oil of gladness, the holy Ghost, In
derision hereof, Domi^ian the tyrant cast S. John into a caldron of boiling
oil, but he by a miracle came forth unhurt.

Me know all things] Not all things knowable, but all things needful to be
known.

Verse 21. Because ye know not, etc.] Because ye are utterly ignorant: for God
has no blind children, but they all know him from the least to the greatest.
Howbeit, the Angels know not so much, but they would know more, Ephesians. 3.10.
Should not we?

Verse 22. That denies that Jesus] Papists deny him as a King, in setting up
the Pope; as a Priest, in setting up the Mass; as a Prophet, in piecing their
humane traditions to the holy Scriptures.

Verse 23. The same bath not the Father] See the Note on Job. 5.23. Mahomet
speaks very honorably of Christ, but denies his Divinity, and that he was
crucified. He acknowledges that he was the Word and power of god, and that all
that believe in him shall be saved, etc.

Verse 24. Hi Let that therefore abide] Persevere and hold fast the says of
the Gospel without wavering in it, Ephesians. 4.14 or starting from it, 2 Pet.
2.20. Be as the center, or as mount Sion, steadfast and unmovable.

Verse 25. Even eternal life] Hold therefore the doctrine of says sound and
entire by the hand of faith, that ye may receive the end of your faith, the
salvation of your souls.

Verse 26. That seduce you] That carry you into by-waies, high ways to hell.

Verse 27. But the anointing] See verse. 20. It was an aggravation, of the fall
of Saul, 2 Samuel 1.21. as though he had not been anointed: so for the Saints,
to fall their own steadfastness.

Verse 28. Little children, abide in him] q d. Your enemies are many and
crafty; therefore keep home, keep home: this shall be no grief unto you, nor
offense of heart, as she said, 1 Samuel 25.31.

Verse 29. Is born of him] And exactly resembles him, as a child does his
father. See 1 Pet. 1, 17. and the Note on Match 5.9.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Behold What manner]
QValem and quantum, as 2 Pet. 3.11. See the Note on Joh. 1.12. If Jacob was at
such pains and patience to become son in law to Laban; if David hold it so
great a matter to be son in law to the king, What is it then to be sons and
daughters to the Lord Almighty? 2 Cor. 6.18.

The World knows us not] Princes unknown are unrespected; Unkent, unkiss, as
the Northern Proverb has it. After the sentence was pronounced upon Mr Bainham
the Martyr, Act. and Mon. sol 939.
he was counseled by M. Nicolas Wilson to conform himself to the Church: To
whom he answered, I trust I am the very child of god, which ye blind asses
(said he) do not perceive.

Verse 2. What we shall be] Great things we have in hand, but greater in hope;
much in possession, but more in reversion. Let this comfort us against the
contempts cast up on us by the world, blind and besides it self in point of
salvation.

For we shall see him as he is] Now we see as in a glass obscurely, 1 Cor
13.1^.
as an old man through spectacles, as a weak eye looks upon the Sun: but in
heaven we shall see him as he is, so far as a creature is capable of that
blissful vision.

Verse 3. Purifieth himself] That Is true hope that runs out into holiness.
Faith and hope purge, and work a sutablenesse in the soul to the things
believed and hoped for.

Even as be is pure] In quality. though not in an equality.

Verse 4. Sin is the transgression] As there is the same roundnesse in a little
ball, as in a bigger, so the same disobedience in a small sin as a great.
Council Trident.
Papists tell us that concupiscence is not truly and properly a sin: but S.
Paul says otherwise, Romans 7. There are amongst us, that say, That original
sin is not forbidden by the Law: but sure we are it is cursed and condemned by
the law, as that which has in it a tacit consent to all sin.

Verse 5. To take away our sins] Shall sin live that killed Christ? Shall I
drink the blood of these men? said David of those that but ventured their lives
for him. O^ that each Christian would turn Jew to himself, and kill the red
cow, etc.

Verse 6. Sins not] Sin may rebel, it cannot reign in a Saint.

Verse 7. Let no man deceive you] As if you might pass e caene in coelum, she
to heaven with dragons wings, dance with the devil all day, and sup with Christ
at night; live ail your lives long in Dalilah's lap, and then go to Abraham's
bosom when you die. These are the devils dire-dawbers, that teach such
doctrine, his upholtsers that sow such pillows. Ezekiel. 13.18.

Verse 8. (...).
He that commits sinne] That makes a trade of it, and can art it (as the
word properly signifies) not act it only.

Is of the devil] Bears his image, wears his livery: is as like him as if spet
out of his mouth.

That be might destroy the Works] The devil then has his works in the very
hearts of the elect, for whose cause Christ came into the world.

Verse 9. For his seed] The new nature which causes that sin cannot carry it
away, without some counter-buffs.

He cannot sine] i.e. Sinningly, so as to be transformed into sins image:
cannot do wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mic. 7.

Verse 10. In this the children of God] As David's daughters were known by their
garments of diverse colors, 2 Samuel 13.18. So are Gods children by their piety
and charity.

Verse 11. That We should love, etc.] this beloved disciple was all for love.
See the Note on Chap. 2.9.

Verse 12. Who Was of that Wicked one] Tertullian calls Cain the devils
Patriarch. Cain is dead, faith another, but I could wish that he did not still
live in his heirs and executours, Bucbol.
Qui clavam ejus sanguine Abelis rubentem, u^ rem sacram circumf^runt, adorant
and venerantur, who bear about and make use of Cains club, to knock on the head
Gods righteous Abels.

And slew his brother] Gr. Cut his throat. Acerbissima sunt odia (ut ita
nominem) says one, (...).
These Divinity hatreds are most deadly.

Because his own Works, etc.] The old enmity, Genesis 3.15. So Numb. 22.3, 4. Moab
Was irked, because of Israel, or did fret and vex at them, as Exodus, 1.12. yet
hey were allied, and passed by them in peace, and, by the slaughter of the
Amorites, freed them from evil neighbors, which had taken away part of their
Land, and might do more, as one bath well observed.

Verse 13. Marvel not my brethren] Since it was so from the beginning, and the
very first man that died, died for religion: so early came martyrodome into the
world.

Verse 14. We know that we have passed] Not we think, we hope, etc. --
fortunam rudentibus op^^
If we would not have with the Merchant an estate hanging upon ropes, and
depending upon uncertain winds, let us make sure work for our souls. This is a
jewel that the Cock on the dunghill meddles not with. Sensum electionis ad
gloriam. in hac vita nullum agnosco, says Greevinchovius the Arminian, I know
no such thing as assurance of heaven in this life. Papists allow us nothing
beyond a conjecturall confidence, unless by special revelation, Miserable
comforters!

Verse 15. Whosoever hates his brother] Not to love then is to hate, as not to
save a man is to kill him, Mark 3.4.

Is a murtherer] Because he wishes him out of the world, as Caracalla did his
brother Geta, of whom he said, Divus sit, mod^ non sit vivus, I would he were
in heaven or any where, so that I were rid of him. By like reason we may say
that sin is God-murther: forasmuch as sinners are God-haters, Romans 1.30. and
could wish there were no God, that they might never come to judgment. The
godly man on the contrary cries out with David, Vivat Deus, Let the Lord live,
and blessed be the God of my salvation, etc. Ps. 18 46.

Verse 16. Because he laid down] See the Note on Joh. 15.13 Romans 5.8.

We ought also to lay down our lives] If Pylades can offer to die for Orestes,
merely for a name, or out of carnal affection at the best: Should not
Christians lay down their own necks one for another, as Aquila and Priscilla
did for Paul, Romans 16.4?

Verse 17. (...).
This Worlds good] Gr. Livelihood, Which is all that the world looks after.

And shuts up his bowels, etc.] Not drawing out unto him both his sheaf and
his soul, Isa. 58.9.

Verse 18. Let us not love in Word] Words are light-cheap: and there is a great
deal of mouth-mercy abroad. Julian the apostate is not presently a friend to
Basil, though the write unto him, (...), Dio.
thou art my friend and beloved brother. The Roman legions loved Otho the
Emperor, says the Historian, and gave him all respect, (...), not from the
teeth out ward, but from the heart-root. See the Notes on Jam. 2.14, 15, 16.

Verse 19. And shall assure our hearts] This, says father Latimer, is the
sweetmeats of the feast of a good conscience. There are other dainty dishes in
this feast, but this is the banquet.

Verse 20. Conscia ^ens ui cui^ sua est, ita concip^^ ^^trapectera pro facto
spemque metumque ^uo. O^^d.
If our heart condemn us] Conscience is Gods spy, and man's over-seer,
Domesticus index, judex, carnifex; Gods deputy-Judge, holding court in the
whole soul, bearing witness of all a man's doing and desires, and accordingly
excusing or accusing, absolving or condeming, comforting or tormenting.

Verse 21. Then have we confidence] Sincerity is the mother of serenity. Since
qua, tranquillitas emnis tempestas est, says Isidore. Uprightness has
boldness. It is not a peace, but a truce, that the wicked have such a storm
will befall them, as shall never be blown over. Israel is the heir of peace,
Galatians 6.16. Isa 32.17.

Verse 22. And what soever we ask] sc. According to his will. Fiat voluntas
mea, quia tua, said Luther. I can have what I will of God, said one; for my
will shall be concentrike with his will.

Because we keep] The obedience of faith emboldens us: yet may no may say as
the prodigal, Give me the por^ion that belongs to me. It was a proud speech
of that Emperor that said, Antonin Philos.
Non sic Deos coluimus, ant sic vivimus, ut ille not vinceret, We have not so
served God, that the enemy should overcome us.

Verse 23. And this is his commandment] This is the sum and substance of the
Gospel, that we believe and love: and the more we believe Gods love to us, the
more love shall we bear one to another, for our love is but a reflex of his.

Verse 24. By the Spirit] Christ hat satisfied the wrath of the Father: and now
the Father and Christ both, as reconciled, send the Spirit, as the fruit of
both their loves, to inhabit our hearts. And truly, next unto the love of
Christ in dwelling in our nature, we may well wonder at the love of the holy
Ghost, that will dwell in our defiled souls.

CHAP. IIII. Verse 1. But try the spirits]
AS Lapidaries do their stones, as goldsmiths do the ^etals. A Bristow stone
may look as well as an Indian diamond; and many things glister besides gold.
Try therefore before you trust that which is doctrinally delivered unto you:
being neither over-credulous, the fool believes every thing: nor rashly
censorious, as those were that said of our Savior, This man blasphemeth. See
the Note on 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Because many false Prophets] Both the old Church, Deuteronomy. 13.1. and the new.
Act. 20.30 were ever pestered with them.

Verse 2. Herby know ye the spirit] Bring it to this test. Gold may be rubbed or
melted, it remains orient; so does truth. Whereas error as glass (bright, but
brittle) cannot endure the hammer of fire.

That confesseth] That preaches Christ crucified.

Verse 3. Is not of God] And yet he is not called an Atheist, or an Antitheist,
but Antichrist, that is an opposite to Christ: as if his opposing should not be
so much to Christ's nature, or person, as to his unction and function.

Verse 4. And have overcome] viz. In your head Christ, and by the help of his
holy spirit, your sweet inhabitant, whereby ye are more then conquerours,
because sure to overcome and triumph.

Verse 5. They are of the World] i. e. The seducers: fit lettice for such lips,
Dignum patella operculum. Vosinfernates estis, Ye are from beneath, I am from
above, says Christ, Job. 8.23.

There fore speak they of the World] The water rises not (unless forced)
above the fountain. Out of the warehouse, the shop is furnished. Carnal
teachers gratify their hearers with pleasing positions. the Papists in their
petition to King James for a toleration, plead this as an argument, That their
religion is agreeable to men's nature; and indeed it is an alluring, tempting,
bewitching religion, giving way to all licentiousness and lasciviousness, So
Mahomet in his A^choran tells his followers concerning venery, That God did not
give men such appetites to have them frustrate, but enjoyed, as made for the
gust of man, not for his torment; and a great deal more of such paltry stuff.

Verse 6. Hears us] Christ's sheep are rational; they can discern his voice
from that of a stranger: and will hear it not with that gristle only that grows
upon their heads, but with the car of their soul, which tries doctrines, as
the mouth does meat, Job. 3. and knows the spirit of truth, and the spirit of
error.

Verse 7. Beloved, let us love one another] This beloved Disciple breaths
nothing but love: as if he had been born with love in his mouth, as they say.

Verse 8. Knows not God] If moral virtue could be seen with mortal eyes,
says Plato, it would draw all hearts unto it. If God were well known, he could
not but be best beloved, and all that are his, for his sake.

Verse 9. In this Was manifested] The very naked bowels of his tenderest
compassions are herein laid open unto us, as in an anatomy. God so loved his
son, that he gave him the world for his possession. Ps. 2.7. but he so loved
the world, that he gave Son and all for its redemption.

Verse 10. Not that we loved, etc.] Deus prior nos amavit, tantus, tantum, and
gratis, tantillos and tales. God, though so great, Bern.
loved us first and freely, though such and so worthless. He loved us, because
be loved us, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. the ground of his love being wholly in
himself. He works for his own names sake, Ezekiel. 20.8, 14*44, 22. four several
times, not withstanding his word and oath, 13, 15, 23.

Verse 11. If god so loved us] His one example easily answers all our
objections, takes off all our excuses. As that our brother is our inferior,
our adversary, of whom we have better deserved, etc.

Verse 12. No man has seen God] If we read that any has seen him, we must
understand it, that indeed they did see, Rab. Maim. more Nevochimd. 3.07.
Mercavah, velo harocheb, the chariot in which God rode, but not the rider in
it, as that Rabbi speaks.

Verse 13. He has given us of his spirit] That is, of the fruits of his
Spirit, his holy motions and graces. For through the two golden pipes the two
Olive-Branches empty out of themselves the golden oils of all precious graces,
into the Candle-stick the Church.

Verse 14. And We have seen] sc. By special privilege (that which natural
eye never saw, v. 12.) the back-parts of Jehovah, his wisdom, justice, mercy,
etc. we can see no more and live, we need see no more that we may live.

Verse 15. Whosoever shall confesse] See the Note on 1 Cor. 12.3.

Verse 16. And we have known and beleeved] That is, we know by believing. See
the Note no Joh. 6.69.

God is love] Pelican tells of some in his time, that used to read this piece
of Scripture to their friends at their feasts. A pious practice surely, and
well beseeming those that feast before the Lord. The Primitive Christians had
at such times their kiss of love, 1 Pet. 5.14. And S. Austin had these two
verses written on his Table, Quisquis amat dictis absentum roders famam,
Hanc mensam indictam novorit esse sibi.


Verse 17. In the day of judgement] Those that bear his image shall hear his
Euge: he will own them and honor them in their says, that works by love,
shall be found unto praise, honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 1.7. He that was so willingly judged for them, shall give no hard
sentence against them.

Verse 18. There is no fear in love] But complacence and acquiescence in the
person beloved.

Because fear has torment] Quom metuunt, oderunt. Whomsoever men fear, they
hate, says the Proverb. And odium timorem spirat, says Tertullian. Hatred
has fear, which sets the soul on a rack, as it were, and renders it rest less.

Verse 19. Because be first lovedus] See the Note on Verse. 10 Mary answers not
Rabboni till Christ first said unto her Mary. Our love is but the reflex of
his. And as the reflected beams of the Sun are weaker then the direct, so are
our affections weaker then Gods.

Verse 20. Whom be has seen] Sight usually makes love. Jnvenal greatly
wondereth at one, Quinunquam visae fiagrabat amore puellae, who loved a party
whom he had never seen.

Verse 21. Love his brother also] If he be a good man, love him in god, if bad,
for God.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. Loves him also that is begotten]
His love, as Aarons ointment, sloweth down from the head to the meanest
member. Gods image wheresoever it appears, is very lovely.

Verse 2. That we love the children of God] Really, aright, and not for self or
sinister respects. Godliness begins in the tight knowledge of our selves, and
ends in the right knowledge of God. a Christian begins with loving God for
himself, but he ends in loving himself and others, in and for Christ.

Verse 3. For this is, etc.] See the Note on Joh. 14.15.

His commandments are not] See the Note on Mat. 11.30

Verse 4. Even our faith] Which shows a man a better project, puts his head
into heaven aforehand, gives him to taste of the hidden manna. Now his mouth
will not water after homely provisions that has lately tasted of delicate
sustenance. Are we afraid of men, says one? faith sets hell before us, Are we
allured by the world? faith sets heaven before us.

Verse 5. But he that beleeveth] A believer walks about the world as a
conqueror. He says of these things here below, as Socrates did when he came
into a fair, and saw there sundry commodities to be sold, Quam mult is ego non
egeo? Nec babeo, nec careo, nec curo, as another said, I neither have these
things, nor need them, nor care for them. He has his feet, where other men's
heads are, Prove. 15.24. Rev. 12.1.

Verse 6. That came by water and bloud] So to fulfill and answer the legal
washings and sacrifices, so to signify that he justifies none by his merit,
but whom he sactifieth by his spirit: and so to set forth the two Sacraments of
the new Testament. See The Note on Joh. 1934.

Verse 7. Three that bear record] viz. That Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
These three heavenly Witnesses have given testimony hereof in earth. See the
Note on Joh. 5.32 and 8.18.

These three are one] In essence and will. As if three lamps were lighted in
one chamber, albeit the lamps be diverse, yet the lights cannot be severed: so
in the Godhead, as there is a distinction of persons, so a simplicity of
nature.

Verse 8. The Spirit and the Water] The Spirit of sactification testified by
saving graces and new divine gifts, the water of repentance, and the blood of
Christ applied by faith. These be the three Witnesses of a man's happiness
here. When the waters of sactification are troubled and muddy, let us run to
the witness of blood.

Verse 9. If we receive, etc.] If two or three witnesses establish a truth with
men, shall we deny that honor to Gods testimony?

Verse 10. Has the witness in himself] Carries in his heart the counterpane
of all the promises.

Has made him aliar] As one may deny God in deed, as well as in word, so he
may give him the lie too in like manner, sc. by going away, and not heeding all
the grace that he offers by Christ: for such a one says in effect, Tush,
thee is no such thing as Christ: or at least no such benefit to be reaped by
his passion, as they would persuade us, etc.

Verse 11. That God has given to us, etc,] How plain is the holy Scripture in
things needful to salvation? These God has written for us, as it were, which
the beam of the Sun, that none may plead difficulty. But we are, most of us, of
the Athenian strain, of whom Tully says the Proverb went, Athenienses s^ire
quae recta sunt, sed facere nolle, that they knew what was right, Cic desenct.
but had no mind to make use of it.

Verse 12. Has life] For he is the prince and principle of life: and all out
of him are dead whiles they live. Non ille din vixit, sed diu fuit, says
Seneca of one, Non multum navigavit, sed multum jactatus est, of another at
sea, He was long, but he lived little, He was much tossed, but not much
furthered, He moved much, but removed not at all, as a horse in a mill, as a
dog in a wheel, etc. See the Note on Joh. 1.4.

Verse 13. That ye may believe] That ye may be confirmed, continued and
increased in it.

Verse 14. According to his will] One said, he could have what he would of god,
and Fiat voluntas mea, said Luther in a certain prayer, but then he finely falls
off with, Men voluntas, Domine, quiatua, Let my will be done, Lord, but so far
forth, as it is thy will.

Verse 15. We know that we have] Iste vir potuit quod voluit, That man could do
what he would with God, said one concerning Luther. See the Note on Joh. 15.16.

Verse 16. Act. and Mon. sol, 46.
A sin which is not unto death] when John Frith and Andrew Hewet were at the
stake, Dr Cook openly admonished all the people, that they should in no wise
pray for them, no more then they would do for a dog. At which words Frith
smiling, desired the Lord to forgive him.

There is a sin unto death] That unpardonable sin of doing despite to the
Spirit of grace. Rockwood, a chief persectour at Callice in the days of Henry
the 8. to his last breath staring and raging, cried, the was utterly damned:
And being willed to ask God mercy, Ibid. 1119.
he braied and cried our, All too late: for I have sought maliciously the
deaths of a number of the honestest men in the town, whom I knew to be so: All
too late therefore, All too late.

Verse 17. There is a sin not unto death] All fins and blasphemies shall be
forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, etc. See the Note
on Mat. 12.31, 32.

Verse 18. Sins nor] sc. That sin to death, v. 16. not other sins, as other
men do. See the Note on Chap. 3.9.

And that wicked one toncheth him not] viz. Tactu qualitativo, as Cajetan
expounds it, with a deadly touch: he thrusts not in his sting so far as to
infuse the venom of that sin that is properly his sin, Joh. 8.44. and with
which he touches their spirits that become the serpents feed.

Verse 19. Lies in Wickednesse] As a lubber in a lake, as a carcass in its
slime. In fermento tota jacet uxor, says he in Plautus. This people is wholly
set upon Wickedness, said Aaron, Exodus 32.22. is under the power and
vassallage of the devil. Nil mundum in mundo.

Verse 20. And we know] This he brings in here for a corollary and conclusion
of all.

Verse 21. Keep your selves from idols] Negatively at least (as those 7000 in
Israel, that had not bowed their knees to Baal) if not positively, by open
declaration of your utter dislike, as did Daniel and his associates.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the second Epistle of S. JOHN.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. The Elder to the elect Lady]
SAlmeron the Jesuit says (but very absurdly) that Seneca's letters to S.
Paul, and S. Paul's to Seneca, (as they are called) are for matter not much
unlike this of S. John to the elect Lady, and to Gaius, and that of S. Paul to
Philemon. Judicium sit penes lectorem. Me thinks they are no more like then
harp and harrow.

Verse 3. For the truths sake] This is the love that will hold again, and is a
sure sign of love unfeigned, when it is thus well founded. Sinisterity is
opposite to sincerity. Some love the Saints as Isaac loved Esau, for the
venison that he brought him, etc.

Verse 3. Grace be with you, etc.] This blessing belongs not only to the Lady
and her children, but to all that rightly read and hear the words of this
Epistle, Revel. 1.3.

Verse 4. I rejoiced greatly] This cheared up his good old heart more then any
outward respects, or courtesies whatsoever. See 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.

Walking in the truth] Not taking a step or two, not breaking or leaping over
the hedge to avoid a piece of foul way, but persisting in a Christian course,
etc. not starting aside to the right hand or the left.

Verse 5. That we love, etc.] God lays no other commands upon us then what we
may perform by love, that lightneth and sweetneth all. His subjects and
soldiers are all volunteers, Psalm. 110.3.

Verse 6. As ye have heard] He studiously declines the suspicion of novelty.
(...) See the Note on 1 John 2.7.

Verse 7. For many deceivers] Gr. Cheaters, cozeners, (...)
such as can cog a die to deceive the unskilful, Ephesians. 4 14. cast a mist to
delude even the quick-sighted.

Verse 8. That we lose not, etc.] The godly, when they fall into foul courses,
or grow remiss and leave their first love, may lose what they have wrought, 1.
in respect of the praise of men. 2. In respect of their own former feelings of
Gods favor. 3. In respect of the fullness of their reward in heaven. The
Nazarite that broke his vow, was to begin all anew, Numb. 6.

Verse 9. Has not God] And so consequently, has nothing. Aug. Bern.
Habec omnia qui habet habentem omni ^, He has all, that has the Haver of
all: But sine Deo omnis copiaest egestas. Plenty without God becomes penury.
The wicked for want of God, in the fullness of his sufficiency is in straits,
Job 20.22. as he that has God for his portion, in the fullness of his straits,
is in a sufficiency.

Verse 10. And bring not this doctrine] If he hold not the foundation, but be
found heterodox and heretical.

Receive him not, etc.] Illam domum in qua fuerit inventus hareticus diruend^m
decernimus: Down with that house, that harbors an heretic, said the Council
of Toulouse in their Constitution against the Albigenses, whom they mistook for
heretics.

Neither bid him God speed] Show not love, where you ow nothing but hatred. I
hate every false way, says David. And I shall look upon Auxentius, as upon a
devil, so long as he is an Arrian, said Hilarious.

Verse 11. Is partaker of his evil] 1. By his sinful silence and
dissimulation. 2. Next, by confirming the sinner in his evil way. 3. Lastly, by
offense given to others.

Verse 12. That our joy may be full] See, says one, an Apostle furthered and
quickened by the graces of a woman. When such Grandees in grace have benefit by
communion of Saints, how much more they whose measures are less?

Verse 13. The children of thine elect] Who probably sojourned with S. John for
education-sake. The Lady might say to the Apostle, as he in Virgil did to
Aeneas, -- sub te toler are magistr^
Militiam -- tua cernere facta
Assuescant, primis and te mirentur ab annis.


A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the third Epistle of S. JOHN.
Verse I. Unto the well-beloved Gaius]
ARich Corinthian, rich in this world, and rich in good works: A rare bird, at
Corinth especially: Rom 16.23. 1 Cor. 1.14.
where Saint Paul found them the richer the harder, and far behind the poor
Macedonians in works of charity.

Verse 2. That thou may prosper] Gr. (...)
That thou may make a good voyage of it, and come-safe and sound to thy
journeys end.

Even as thy soul prospereth] By the blessing of him that dwelt in the bush,
Deuteronomy. 31.16. Now the soul prospers, when it has close communion with God,
and enjoyes the light of his loving countenance, preferring his favor before
the worlds warm Sun.

Verse 3. Testified of the truth] This was their ingenuity, thus, at least, to
requite their Host, by giving testimony of his liberality.

Verse 4. I have no greater joy] See the Note on 2 Ioh. 4.

Walk in truth] Not walk to the alehouse, walk about with tales to shed blood,
walk after the flesh, as too many of our hearers do, to our singular
heart-break.

Verse 5. Thou do faithfully] That is, out of faith, and as beseems a
faithful Christian. They that give alms, etc. and not out of faith, they do
worse then lose their labor: for they commit sin.

Verse 6. (...)
After a godly sort] Gr. Worthy of God, as seeing God in them, and as beseems
his servants, who are Princes in all lands, Psalm. 45.

Verse 7. They went forth] To preach, and gain souls to God: And this they did
gratis, as Paul, because the false-apostles did so at Corinth, seeking occasion
against the true teachers, 2 Cor. 11, 12.

Verse 8 That we might be fellow-helpers] And so receive a Prophets reward. See
the Note on Mat. 10.41.

Verse 9. Diotrephes, who loves, etc.] Ambition is like the Crocodile, which
grows as long as it lives. What stirs made proud Paulus Samosatenus in the
Primitive Church? What continual quarrellings were there between the Bishops
of Coustantinople and of Rome for the primacy? and between the Archbishops of
Canterbury, and of York for precedence? What a deal suffered learned Zanchy at
Argentina from his ambitious colleagues, and diverse of our English Divines and
others, from the lordly Prelates? Pareus was wont to say, That the chief cause
of all the Churches troubles was the Church-mens affectation of dominion. This
trouble-town if we could cast out of the Church, said he, great hopes there
were that we should all, (...), concur and consent in one and the same truth.
Isidor. Pelus. ^ 4.^^ 55. (...)


Verse 10. Prating against us] One would wonder what he could prate against S.
John, and yet he did, and that maliciously. True it is, he did but trifle and
play the fool (as the Greek word signifies) in that he prated: but he showed
his malice nevertheless. So do the Jesuits, as in many other their practices,
so in this, that in their writings against us, they confirm that with glorious
words and arguments, which westick not at; to make the world believe, that we
deny all that which they so busily, and so bravely prove, and so to make us
odious: Whereas they leave the main matter in controversy utterly unproved,
thinking to carry it away with out-facing and great words.

Verse 11. Follow not] Make not such a man as Diotrephes your pattern for
imitation: though he russle it amongst you, and will needs be the only man.

Verse 12. Of all men] Of all good men: for God reckons of men according to
their goodness. As a good name only is a name, Eccl. 7.1. and a good wife only
a wife, Prove. 18.22.

And of the truth it self] That Is enough: Does the truth report well of a man?
then he needs not care, what the world can say.

Yea, and we also] Which we do not use to do without special caution. It is a
fault to be too forward to testify of any.

Verse 13. I will not with inke] In vain is the word written in books, unless
it be also written in our hearts, ler 31.

Verse 14. But I trust] He could promise nothing peremptorily, but submits to
God. See the Note on I am. 4.15.

Face to face] As iron whets iron, so does the face of a man his friend.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Epistle general of S. JUDE.
Verse 1. Jude the servant]
TO distinguish him from Iudae the traitor, lest he should suffer by mistake,
as Nicolas the Deacon is thought to do, as if he were author of the Sect of
the Nicolaitans, which Christ hated.

To them that are sanctified] Or, To them that are beloved, as other copies
have it.

Preserved] Kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Verse 2. Mercy unto you, etc.] Mercy from the Father, peace from the Son, and
love from the holy Ghost.

Verse 3. Of the common salvation] That wherein all Saints have a share.

For the faith] That faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. the doctrine of faith.

Once delivered] Once for all, not ^only as but one only rule, but as but once
sent to a Nation: So that if lost, or any way corrupted, it will not be given
again; another edition of it is not to be expected. Contend earnestly for it
therefore, conflict one after another, as the word signifies. Hold fast the
faithful word, (...)
as with both hands, Tit. 1.9. See the Note.

Verse 4. For there are certain men] Not worthy to be named, as that rich
glutton, Luk 16.

Crept in unawares] Stealing their passage; (...)
and making as if they minded nothing less.

Ordained to this] Gr. Written down, enrolled, (...)
set down in the black bill.

Turning the grace of our God] Gr. Translating it from its proper end,
perverting it, by arguing from mercy to liberty; (...)
which is the devils Logic.

Verse 5. Afterward destroied] Their preservation was but a reservation, as was
Senacheribs, Pharaohs, and theirs whom God threatened to destroy, after that he
had done them good, Josh. 24.20.

Verse 6. Kept not their first estate] Their original integrity or
principality. Of this sin of the Angels, the cause was the will of the Angels,
good in it self (but mutable and free) not by working neither, but by not
working, says a Divine.

But left their own habitation] Being driven thence and hurled into hell.

Verse 7. Giving themselves over] In scortationem effusae, Weatying and wearing
themselves out with that beastly sin; (...) babet. (...) A^ben. l. 13
as did Proculus Messalina and Lais, who died in the act of uncleannefle. The
word here used signifies, says Arctius, Scortationi immori, and contabescere
illius d^siderio.

And going after strange flesh] See the Note on Genesis 19.5.

Are set forth] Gr. Are thrown forth. (...)


For an example] Herodotus says the like of the destruction of Troy, that the
tuines and rubbish thereof are set forth for an example of this rule, that God
greatly punishes great offenses.

Verse 8. Defile the flesh] By nocturnall pollutions, which we must pray
against. The devil can fasten that filth upon the soul, when we sleep, that he
cannot do at another time.

Despise dominion] Gr. Set it at naught. (...)
Se^ the Note on 2 Pet. 2.10.

And speak evil of dignities] Gr. Blaspheme glories: so the Papists do
familiarly those Princes they count heretics; as Henry the fourth of France,
whom they called Huguenot-dog, etc. Our Edward the sixth bastard. Of Qu.
Elizabeth they reported in print some years after her death, That she died
without sense or feeling of Gods mercies.

Verse 9. About the body of Moses] As desirous thereby to set up himself in the
hears of the living, There is a strange strife still, not of earchly, but of
spiritual powers, about the possession of man's heart. If Satan can get that,
he is safe. And so Satan's Vicar. It was a watchword in Gregory the 13. time in
Q. Elizabeth's days, My son, give me thy heart. Be in heart a Papist, and go
where you will, do what you will.

Verse 10. Of those things which they] So do the Papists in railing against
imputed righteousness, assurance of salvation, the testimony of Gods Spirit
witnessing with our spirits, etc.

In those things they corrupt themselves] As in eating, drinking, carnal
copulation, In R^ais
etc. holding neither mean nor measure, as he in Aristophanes, (...), who was
good for nothing else but to epicurize.

Verse 11. In the Way of Cain] The devils Patriarch, the first Apostate: (...)
this was fulfilled literally in Alphonsus Diazius, who slew his brother John,
because he was a Protestant: and mystically, in all that are guilty of
spiritual parricide.

Andran greedily] Gr. Were poured out, as water out of a bottle: they ran
headlong after the wages of wickedness, not caring which way they came by it,
so they had it.

Verse 12. (...)
These are spots] Or, Rocks, or muddy-holes, that harpy-like not only devour,
but defile all that they touch.

In your feasts of charity] See these described by Tertullian, ^. advers^
gentes, cap. 39.

When they feast with you] Thrusting themselves into your company, whether
invited or not: sin having oaded an impudency in their faces.

Feeding themselves] As fatted cattle fitted for the slaughter.

Without fear] Of being ensnared by the creatures, Pro. 23.2.

Clouds they are] Light, and constant only in their inconstan^y.

Twice dead] Killed with death, Revel. 2.23. Such as for whom hell gapeth.

Verse 13. Wandering starres] That were never better then Meteors. Sr Francis
Drake in his travels reports, That in a certain Island to the southward of
Celebes, among the trees night by night did show themselves an infinite swarm
of (...) seeming worms, flying in the air, whose bodies no bigger then an
ordinary sly, did make a show, and give such light, as if every twig on every
tree had been a lighted candle, or as if that place had been the the starry
sphere. Lo such were these impostours.

Verse 14. And Enoch also] Enoch foretold the day of Judgment before Noah the
deluge. That day is longer before it comes, but shall be more terrible when it
is come.

The Lord cometh] Sir. Maranatha. Hence the Jews say, that the great
excommunication Muranatha was instituted by Enoch.

Verse 15. Toconvince all] To set them down, (...)
to leave them excuselesse, speechless, self-condemned.

Of all their hard speeches] Their rude, crude, crooked, cross speeches,
uttered with perverse lip 1; so Solomon calls them, Pro. 4.24. as if the upper
lip stood, where the nether lip should.

Verse 16. These are mumurers] Vt porci saginati, says Aretius, as boars in a
frank.

Complainers] Invalidum omne nature a querulum, says Seneca. Weak ones are
never without their ailments.

After their own lusts] So many lusts, so many Lords.

Great swelling words] Bubbles of words. See the Note on 2 Pet. 2.18. The
Syriack renders it, stupendous stuff.

Having men's persons] Licking up their spettle, as it were, and loading the
Mouse with the Elephants praises.

Verse 17. Of the Apostles] Paul and Peter, from whom Saint Jude borrows much
of this his Epistle. See my Preface to Gods love-tok^ns.

Verse 18 Mockers] Who fleer when they should fear. See the Note on 2 Pet. 3.3.

Verse 19. W^oseparate] From Church Assemblies, upon pretense of n^wer lights,
greater holiness. The Arabic renders it, Intermitters, sc. of Church-worships.

Ser suall] Gr. Animal; such as have no more then a reasonable foul, and are
yet in their pure naturals, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...)


Having not the spirit] Unless it be the spirit of delusion, as Muncer the
Anabaptist had, who wrote a book against Luther, Scultet. Annal. 138.
dedicated it, To the most illustrious Prince Christ (as his words are)
upbraideth Luther with want of the Spirit, and calls him a carnal man, a
silly soul, etc.

Verse 20, Building up] By holy conference, a singular help, a most needful,
but too much neglected duty.

Praying in the holy Ghost] Whose creature fervent prayer is.

Verse 21, Keep your selves] Remit nothing of your former fervor:

Verse 22. (...) alias (...) Haec est sancta violentia, optabilis rapina Huron.
Su^ton.
And of some] Or (according to other copies) Resell their false reasonings, and
dispute them out of their errors.

Verse 23. Out of the fire] viz. of hell: as the Angel pulled Lot out of
Sodom, as ye would save a drowning man, though ye pulled off some of his hair
to save him.

Even the garment spotted] As Nero's was, when he rode in the same horse-litter
with his own mother.

Verse 24. That is able] q. d. I can only counsel you, its God must keep you.

Verse 25. See the Note on 1 Timothy 1.17.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON THE REVELATION of S. John the Divine.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. The Revelation]
OR, manifestation of many divine mysteries by the Mediator (who came out of
his Fathers bosom to John, who had the mind of Christ, and that purposely for
the behoof and benefit of the Family of faith, who are all of his
Cabinet-councel. Joh. 1. 1 Cor. 2.16. Gal. 6.10. Psalm. 25.14.


Things which must shortly] That is, sooner or later in their proper season.
Gods time seems long, because we are short. Nullum tempus occurrit regi, says
the Lawyer. The Ancient of days is not to be limited.

Verse 2. Who barc record of the Word] This John the Divine, then, was John the
Evangelist: what ever Dennis of Alexandria dispute to the contrary.

Verse 3. Blessed is be that readeth] sc. With attention, affection,
application and practice: Hier^e^ist ad P^ulm. Aegid Abbas Norimberg
As knowing that this book has, Tot sacramenta quot verba, so many words, so
many mysteries; and that these words are, Vivenda non legenda, not more to be
read then to be lived, as one said once of the hundred and nineteenth Psalm.

Verse 4. (...)
From him which is] An august description of the Father by a manifest allusion
to Exodus 3.14. Some Critic, reading the words as they lie in the Original,
would be apt to complain of an incongruity, Non d^he^t verba (...) ^ra
uli^s^bess^ regulis Donat^. Greg.
and to say, Nove and duriter dictum. But God methinks, should have leave given
him by these Logodaedali, to pronounce his own name undeclined, and, by an out
rule; who himself is undeclined, and comes not under any rule.

And from the seven spirits] So the holy Ghost is here called, for his manifold
gifts and operations, in the hearts of those seven, and all other Churches* In
like sort he is called, The seven golden pipes through which the two olive
branches do empty out of themselves the golden oils of all precious graces into
the golden candle-stick the Church, Zach. 4.2, 3. So, some interpret those
seven eyes upon one stone, Zach, 3.9. concerning the Spirit in his several
operations upon Christ, according to Isa 1.2.

Verse 5. And from Jesus Christ] Who is here set last of the three persons,
because more is to be said of him; both as touching his threefold office, and
a threefold benefit there-hence redounding unto us.

That has loved us] See Ezekiel. 16.6, 8, 9. Christ that heavenly Pelican,
Pierij b^erogl^ph.
revived his dead young-ones with his own heart-bloud, He saw the wrath of God
burning about them, and cast himself into the midst thereof, that he might
quench it. Judah offered to be bound, that Benjamin might go free. Jonathan
perilled his life, and quitted his kingdom for love of David. Arsinoe
interposed her own body betwixt the murderers weapons, and her children. But
what was all this to this incomparable love of the Lord Jesus? When the Jews
saw him weeping for Lazarus, Behold, say they, how he loved him? When we see
him weeping, bleeding, dying for us, Shall not we much more say so?

Verse 6. And has made us Kings] To rule in righteousness. to lord it over
our lusts, to triumph over, and trample on all our spiritual adversaries,
being more then conquerours through him that loved us, and laid down his life
for us, that we might reign in life by one Jesus Christ, Romans 5.17. And surely
if (as Peter Martyr once wrote to Q. Elizabeth) Kings are doubly bound to serve
God, both as men, and as Kings: What are we, for this spiritual kingdom? Judge
5.28.


And Priests unto God] To offer up to him the personal saer fice of our
selves, Romans 12.1. the verbal of praise, (...)
and real of alms. Heb. 1.15, 16. See the Note on 1 Pet. 29.

Verse 7. Bell old he cometh] He is already upon the way, and will be with us
shortly. Let us hasten his coming, and say ^s Sisera's mother, Why are his
chariots (his clouds) so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?

Shall nail] Gr. Shall smite their breasts or thighs: the elect as repenting,
the reprobate as despairing. Iisdem, quibus videmus, oculis, flemus: so here,
(...), they shall look and lament.

Verse 8. Which is, and which was] The Father is called, He that it, Exodus 3.13
The Son, He that was, Joh. 1.1. The holy Ghost, He that comes, Joh. 16 8, 13.
as Aretas observes.

Verse 9. In the kingdom and patience] Christ has a twofold kingdom, 1. Of
power. 2. Of patience. Nec nisi per a^gusta ad augusta, etc. I have no stronger
argument against the Popes kingdom, says Luther, quam quod sine cruce regnat,
Luth. T 2.
then this that he raigns without the cross. The glory of Christ's Church (said
George Marsh Martyr) stands not in out ward shows, Act. and Mon. fol. 1423.
in the harmenious found of bells and organs, nor yet in the glistering of
mit^es and copes, etc. but in continual labors and daily afflictions for his
Nam^s sake.

Was in the Isle Patmos] He tells us not how he came thither, he boasts not of
his banishment, Virtus proprio contenta theatro. Virtue is no braggard.

Verse 10. I was in the Spirit] Acted by him, and carried out of himself, as
the demoniack is said to be in the unclean spirit, as being acted and agitated
by him. Sec the Note on 2 Pet. 1.21.

On the Lords day] The first day of the week, the Christian Sabbath, Mat.
24.20. called the Lord's Day from Christ the author of it; as is likewise the
Lords Supper, and the Lords Church, Kirk, (...), the very word here used. To
sanctisie this Sabbath was in the Primitive times a badge of a Christian. For
when the question was asked, Servasti Dominicum? Keep thou the Sabbath? The
answer was returned, Christianus sum. inter^^ittere non possum, I am a
Christian, I must keep the Lord's Day.

And heard behind me] Not, before me: implying, that the Spirit calls upon
us being secure, passing by, and not regarding those things it calls for.

As of a trumpet] To teach us, that the things here delivered to the Church
must be ever sounding in out ears and hearts, indwelling richly in us, Col.
3.16.

Verse 11. Greg. Mag.
Send it to the seven] As all holy Scripture, so this piece especially may well
be called, The Epistle of Almighty God to his creature.

Verse 12. And being turned I saw] It is well observed here by a learned
Interpreter, M. Brightman
That every godly endeavor does receive some fruit greater then a man can hope
for; John turned himself to behold the man, and behold (over and besides) seven
Candlesticks, which he had not the least suspicion of.

Verse 13. And in the midst] Christ is in the holy assemblies, in the beauties
of holines^c: he walks in his garden, Cant. 6.1. he comes in to see his
guests, Mat. 22.11. The face of God is seen in Sion, Psalm. 84.7.

Agarment down to the fi^t] As a Counselor, Isa. 9.6.

And girt] It implies readiness, nimblenesse, handinesse and handsomenes^e. We
also must gird our selves, and serve the Lord Christ, Luk 17.8.

About the paps] This implies his entire love, seated in the heart.

Verse 14. White like wooll] Noting his antiquity, or rather his eternity, and
unspeakable purity. Thales, one of the Heathen Sages, called God (...), The
most ancient of Beings. Di^g Lae^^


As a flame of fire] Sharp and terrible, such as pierce into the inward parts,
Heb. 4.13. See the Note there.

Verse 15. And his f^et] He stood firm then when he was cast into the fire of
his Fathers wrath. He trod the wine press alone, and set his feet on the necks
of all his and our enemies. He lost no ground, when he grappled with the devil
on his own dunghill, Matthew. 4. He will also bruise Sa^^^ under our feet
shortly, Romans 16.20.

As the sound of many waters] Audible, Some. Scip.
terrible, forcible. Some Catadupes are deaf^ed by the fall of this Nilus. But
the Spouse cries out, O thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions
hearken to thy voice; cause ^e to hear it, Cant. 8 13.

Verse 16. And he had in his right-hand] See here the dignity and safety of a
faithful Minister. Whiles a child has his father by the hand, though he walk
in the dark, he fears nothing.

A sharp two-edged sword] The word, like a sacrificing sword, slits open, and
as it were, unridgeth the conscience.

Verse 17. I fill at his feet as dead] The nearer any one comes to Christ, the
more rottennes enters into his bones.

And be laid his right-hand] The same right hand wherein he held the seven
stars, verse 16. Christus sic omnibus attentus, ut ^^lli dotentus: sic curat
universos quasi singulos; sic singulos, quasi solos, Every godly Minister is
Christ's particular care.

Fear not] Till rid of fear, we are not fit to hear.

Verse 18. That lives and was dead] So can every regenerate man say, Luke
16.32, Ephesians. 2.1. See the Note there. All Saints are heirs of the grace of
life, 1 Pet. 3.7.

And have the keyes] The Pope therefore is not key-keeper, as he falsely
boasts; telling us, That God has put under his feet the beasts of the field,
the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea: that is (as he interprets it)
all the souls in earth, heaven, and purgatory.

Verse 19. Write the things which thou have seen] That is, the Gospel, the
history of Christ (as some think) which he wrote at Ephesus after his return
from Pathmos, above forty years after our Saviors death.

Verse 20 The mystery] In this whole book there are so many words, so many
mysteries: which made Cajetan forbear to comment upon it: though many Monks
(far less able then he) thought it a goodly thing to be meddling in these
mysteries, Apoca'y^^im fat^or me nesci^e exponere jux^a sensum literalem:
exponat cui Deu^ concesserit. Cajet.
which they as little understod, as he that derived Apocalypsis of (...), and
clipsor quod est velo, quoth Faber the Augustinian Monk.

Are the Angels] Ministers are fitly called stats, which affect these inferior
things by motion, light and influence.

Are the seven Churches] Lighted by Christ the high Priest morning and evening
continually: and thereby as much differenced from the rest of the world, as
Goshen was from Egypt, in that palpable darkness.

CHAP. II. Verse 1 Unto the Angel]
THis was Timothy, as some think; who not stirring up the gift of God that was
in him, had remitted somewhat of his former fervor. By the style here given
him (Angel) he is monished not more of his dignity, then of his duty. That
Angel at Bochim, Judge. Eccle^. 56.
2.1. is thought to have been Phineas. And some interpret that of Solomon,
Neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an error of the Priest. It is
good counsel to Ministers that one gives, Ange'orum induist is nom^n, induite
and naturam, nesit (^^ dixit nonnemo) nomen inanc, crimen immanc.

Verse 2. I know thy works and thy labour] Not thy works only, but thy labor
in doing them, and what ends thou put upon them. How accurately did our
Savior cast up and count how long the multitude had been with him, how little
they had to eat, how ill it would fare with them if sent away fasting, etc. Mat
15.32.

And how thou can not bear] Moved with a zeal of God, and having a stomach
for him. Mihi sane Auxentius nunquam aliud quam dia^olus erit, quia Arrianus,
says Hilary. I shall look upon Auxentius, as upon a devil, so long as he is an
Arrian.

Verse 3. And have born] Beat the false Apostles thou could not; but have
borne much from them. Morientium nempe serarum violen^iores sunt mors^s. Beasts
bite hardest when to bite their last.

Verse 4. Thou have left thy first love] Those first ripe fruits that Christ's
soul desires, M^c 7.1. that kindness of youth, that spousall-love that God
so well remembers, Jer. 2.2. This, Ephesus had left, and so became Aphesis,
remiss and retchlesse, possessed with a spirit of sloth and indevotion. And
surely he is a rate and happy man that can say in a spiritual sense (as it was
said of Moses) that after long profession of zeal, his sight is not waxed dim,
his holy heat not abated, that runs not retrograde, as did Solomon, Asa,
others, with whom the end was worse then the beginning.

Verse 5. From whence thou art fallen] viz, From thy former feelings, and
present fitnes for Gods kingdom, Luke 9.62.

Andrepent] See the practice of this second repentance, in the relapsed Spouse
returning to her old husband, Cant. 9. See the Note on 2 Cor. 7.11. See an
excellent Letter of the Lady Jane to that apostate Harding, sometime her
Chaplain, Act. and Mon. fol. 1292. and what sweet counsel Bradford afterward
gave the same Harding, Ib. fol. 1564. besides the example of Mr Bartlet Green
Martyr, fol. 1680.

And do the first works] Begin the world again (as the Nazarite was to do,
that had broken his vow, Numb. 6.) and, to let thee up afresh, make a gathering
of prayers, and see that thy works be better at last then at first.

And remove thy Candlestick] Sins are the snuffs that dim our Candlestick, and
threatens the removal of it. And surely if we repent not, a removal thereof
may be as certainly foreseen and sore-told, as if visions and letters were
sent us from heaven, as to these seven Churches.

Except thou repent] Minatur Deus ut non puniat. God therefore menaceth, that
men may be warned. As a Be stings not till provoked: so neither does God
punish till there be no remedy, a Chron. 36.16.

Verse 6. But this thou hast] That they might not say, Jer. 2.17. and 18.12.
when called upon to repent, Nay, but there is no hope. Christ picks out that
which is praiseworthy in them, and commends it. Despair carries men to hell,
as the devils did the swine into the sea. Cast not away therefore your
confidence, etc. Iren^us. Theod.


The works of the Nicolaitans] Who taught a community of wives, and that it was
but a thing indifferent to commit adultery.

Verse 7. Let him hear] Not with that gristle only that grows upon his head,
but with the ear of his heart. Let him draw up the ear of his heart to the ear
on his head, that one found may pierce both. Or Let him hear what, etc. that
is, Let him hear for himself, hear and know that (each member for his own good)
that was delivered to the whole Church.

To eat of the tree of life] This tree is Christ. The devil also (as he loves
to be Gods ape) has prompted Mahomet to promise to such as die in war for
the Mohammedan says, delicious fare in Paradise, pleasant walks, and other
sensual delights eternally to be enjoyed, ^ lunts voyage. p 67.
notwithstanding any former sins.

Verse 8. Of the Church in Smyrna] Sweet Smelling Smyrna, the poorest but
purest of the seven.

Verse 9. I know thy works and tribulation] Mark (says one) the conjunction,
Works and tribulation. Active stirting Christians are like to suffer much. Of
Sardis and Laodicea only, we read not of any troubles they had.

And poverty, but thou art rich] Poverty discommends not any to Christ: money
bears no mastery in his kingdom. Thou art poor, says he here: but that is
neither here nor there: its a matter of nothing, that.

That say they are Iews] That is, right worshippers, as the Turks at this day
style themselves Mus^lmans, that is, the only true believers, Cyprian
Papists the only Catholics. Faciunt and vespa favos. and simiae imitantur
homines.

Verse 10. Fear none of those things] Quit thy heart of that cowardly passion,
and die rather then deny the truth. Put on that resolution, Necesse esse ut
eam, non ut vivam. Duty must be done, though I die for it.

Behold the devil] viz. By his imps and instruments whom he acts and agitates,
Ephesians 2.2. But he and his are overruled and limited: for he shall cast some
of you, not all of you, into prison, not into hell, that ye may be tried, no^
destroyed; and this, for ten daiesonly, not for any long continnance.

A crown of life] A crown without ears, corrivals, envy, end.

Verse 11. Shall not be hurt of the second death] Shall not be killed with
death, Bern
as ver. 23. Death shall not be to him (as it is to the wicked) a trap door to
hell, but janua vitae, porta coeli, an in let into life eternal.

Verse 12. And to the Angel] See the Note on Verse 1. and on Chap. 1.16.

Verse 13. Even where Satan's seat is] There was the Court of King Attalus ( --
discedat ab aula qui velit esse pius; Flee thee away, O thou seer, for this is
the Kings Court, Amos 7.13.) and there was after wards the seat of the Roman
persecuting Proconsuls, Qui ab ascens^re suo Satana perurgebantur, as Bernard
has it. Such a seat of Satan is both old and new Rome. At Constantinople
(which was called new Rome) Arrius that arch-heretike, Sedens in latrina
effudit intestina, voided his entrails at the stool, and left Mahometisme there
behind him as his excrement. Yet, as at Pergamus also God had a Church, so
has he still even at Constantinople; the Patriarch whereof Cyril has lately
set forth a Confession of the faith of those Eastern Churches, agreeable in all
points almost to the Protestant religion, but diametrally opposite to Popery.

Thou hold fast] As with tooth and nail, (...)
or by main strength.

Who was slain] An honor not granted to the Angels of heaven, as Latimer was
wont to say.

Verse 14. I have a few things] More he might have had, but the Lord is not
extreme to mark what is amiss in his weak, 2 Chronicles. 15.17
but willing people. The high places were not removed: nevertheless (though
that was his fault) the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

And to commit fornication] Nothing has so enriched hell (says one) as fair
faces. These were those Balaams-blocks, that Israel so stumbled at.

Verse 15. The doctrine of the Nicolaitans] See the Note on Verse 6. In the
year 1067. The Popish Synod of M^llain make laws against simony, and the
heresy of the Nicolaitans: by which later they meant Priests-marriage. Brutum
fulmen, novum crimen.

Verse 16. Or else I will come unto thee] He was in the midst of the seven
golden Candlesticks before. But when he comes to correct, he comes out of his
place, Isa. 26.21. and it is a motion, that he has no such mind to, Lam 3.33.
it is to do his work, his strange work, Isa. 28.21.

With the sword of my mouth] With fearful threatenings, terrible executions,
Having vengeance in readiness for the disobedient, 1 Cor. 10.6. Elisha had his
sword as well as I^hu and Hazael theirs, 1 King. 19.17. See Hosea 6.5. Jeremy
1.10. Isa. 11.4.

Verse 17. Of the hidden Manna] That is, of Christ, whom none of the Princes of
this world knew: but God has revealed him to his hidden ones by the Spirit, 1
Cor. 2.8, 10. with Ps. 83.3. (...) (...).
and given them to taste of that heavenly gift.

A white stone] In token of absolution. With this white stone may the Saints
comfort themselves against all the black coals wherewith the world seeks to
besmear them. If Libanius could say, Let Basil praise me, and I shall sing away
all care, who reproacheth me; May not we much more say so of Christ? It is be
that justifies us: who shall condemn us? Rom 8.34

A new name] Better then that of sons and daughters, Isa. 56.5. The assurance
whereof is (says Father Latimer) the sweet meats of the feast of a good
conscience, which is unconceivable and full of glory.

Verse 18. Who has his eyes, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 1.14, 15.

Verse 19. The last to be more] This is not every man's happiness. See the Note
on verse 4. It is a disputable question (says one) whether any Christian
(except he die soon after his conversion) do go on from strength to strength
without some sensible decay of the inward power of that grace wherewith he is
endued.

Verse 20. Thou suffer that woman Iezabel] It is a fault then, not only to
be active in evil, but to be passive of evil. Non faciendo malus, sed patiendo
fuit, said the Poet concerning the Emperor Claudius. The Kings of the earth
are taxed, Revel. 18. for not rooting out the Romish religion, and setting up
the truth.

Verse 21. And I gave her space to repent] In space comes grace, proves not
always a true Proverb. They that defer the work, and say, that men may repent
hereafter, say truly, but not (...). The branch that bears not timely fruit is
cut off, Ioh. 15.2 The ground that yields not a seasonable and suitable return,
is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 68. The chick that comes not at the clucking of the
hen, becomes a prey to the kite, etc.

Verse 22. Behold I will cast her into a bed] A bed of affliction for that bed
of security, upon which she had stretched her self, Amos 64. God has his
season, his harvest for judgment, Mat. 1.30. Men may expect a time of healing
and curing, when they shall find nothing else, but a time of trouble, Ier.
14.19. One may defer a sore till it be incurable. See Ezekiel. 24.13.

Verse 23. And I will kill her children with death] All men die (says a
Divine, descanting upon this text) but all are not killed with death. As a
godly man said, that he did agrotare vitaliter, so godly men do mori
vitaliter. He that can so die, is fit to die; and the contrary. O it is a
woeful thing to be killed with death.

Verse 24. But unto you I say] Here Christ comes with his fan, shedding and
shoaling out his own from others, that they might not be disheartened, when
worse men were menaced.

The depths of Satan] That science falsely so called. 1 Timothy 6.20. Those
profound points, which the Impostours professed and pretended to: as the
Gnostics, who would needs be held the only knowing men; the Illuminates, and
other seducers.

Verse 25. Hold fast] Hold by strong hand, (...)
tugg for it with those that would take it from you.

Verse 26. And keeps my works] In opposition to Iezabels works, q. d. that
keeps himself unspotted of the world, that foul lusk that lies in that
wicked one, 1 John 5.19.

Verse 27. And he shall rule them] q.d. I will communicate my self wholly to
him. See Ps. 139.6, 7, 8, 9 Mat. 19.28.1 Cor. 6.2, 3.

Verse 28. I will give him the morning starre] i. e. I will clear his wronged
innocence, Psalm. 37.6. and grant him a glorious resurrection, Dan. 12, 3.

Verse 29. He that has an ear] See the Note on Verse 7.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. I know thy work]
SApiens nummularius Deus est: nummum fictum non recipiet. Bern.
Though men may be deceived, God is not mocked. He knows that many cry, The
temple of the Lord, that yet nothing care for the Lord of the temple. Deifica
professio and diabolica actio. Ambros.
God likes not such creaking and cracking.

And that thou have aname] Many content themselves with a name of Christians;
as if many a ship has not been called Safeguard, or Good speed, which yet has
fallen into the hand of Pirates.

And art dead] All thy specious works therefore are but dead works; thou can
not serve the living God.

Verse 2. Be watchfull] Rouse up thy self, and wrestle with God, shake thee out
of sins lethargy, as Sampson went out and shook him, when the Philistims were
upon him.

That are ready to die] Because tainted with the infection of hypocrisy, that
pernicious mar-good.

Perfect before God] Gr. Full, without halting or halving. Tacitus.
Omnis Sarmatarum virtus extra ipses. All the hypocrites goodness runs out
ward: it is shored up by popularity, or other base respects.

Verse 3. And thou shall not know] Calamity the more sudden the more terrible:
for, 1. It amates and exanimates a man, as an unexpected storm does a Mariner,
and as Satan intended Jobs messengers should do him. 2. It can as little be
prevented, as Eglon could prevent Ehuds deadly thrust.

Verse 4. Thou have a few names] Though no thank to the Pastor, who was a
mercenary eye-servant. Here the peoples praise is the Pastors shame.

They shall walk with me in white] That is, they shall be glorified with
perfect righteousness, purity, clarity, dignity and festivity.

For they are worthy] In Christ's account and acceptance. Like as those were
not worthy, that came not, when called to the participation of his benefits,
Mat. 22.8.

Verse 5. Clothed in white] See the Note on Verse 5.

The book of life] Wherein the just that live by says are written.

But I will confess his name] His well-tried faith shall be found to praise,
honor and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. See the Note
there.

Verse 6. See the Note on Chap. 2.7.

Verse 7. That is holy] And therefore to be sanctified in righteousness, Isa.
5.16.

True] And therefore to be trusted.

That has the key of David] And is therefore to be sought unto for a door both
of utterance and of entrance, Col, 4.13.2 Cor 2.12. Act, 16.14.

Verse 8, An open door] A fair opportunity of doing thy self good: which those
that go about to deprive thee of, shall be sure to lose oleum and operam, their
toil and tallow.

A little strength] A little grace well improved may do great matters, and set
heaven open to a soul: The vine is the weakest of trees, but the most
fruitful. Philadelphia with her little strength is discommended for nothing:
she made all best use of it.

Verse 9. I will make them] The coversion of the Jews shall be the wonder of
the Gentiles,

Which say they are Jews, and are not] The perverse Jews at this day pretend
(but maliciously) that those few Jews that turn Christians, are not of them,
B^unts voyage, p. 1.2.
but poor Christians hired from other places to personate their part.

That I have loved thee] The Church is the dearly-beloved of Gods soul, Jer.
12.7. (...)
or (as the Septuagint render it) his beloved soul.

Verse 10. The word of my patience] So called, 1. Because we must suffer for
the truth of it. 2. Because hid in the heart, it works patience.

I will keep thee] From the hurt, if not from the smart of it: from the common
distraction, if not from the common destruction.

Which shall come upon all the world] So the Romans, in their pride, called
their Empire.

To try them that dwell] sc. By that sharp and sore persecution under Trajan
the Emperor.

Verse 11. That no man take thy crown] Not that crown of eternal life (for
that is unloosable) but that honor that God has put upon thee, ver 9. A
Christian may, by falling into reproachful courses, lose what he has wrought,
2 John 8.1. In respect of the praise of men. 2. In respect of inward comfort.
3. In respect of the degrees of glory in heaven: He may miss of being a pillar
in the temple of God, as ver. 12.

Verse 12. Which is new Ierusalem] It was a pride in Mon^nns to over-ween his
Pepuza and Tymium (two pelting Parishes in Phrygia) and to call them
Jerusalem, Eus^^. (...) 17.
as if they had been the only Churches. And surely, it is nothing else but
pride in the Brownists to avow that their Churches are nothing less then the
now Jerusalem coming down from heaven: See Mt B^y'y his (...)-sive, p 27.
that the very crown, scepter and throne of Christ's kingdom consists in them,
etc.

My new name] viz. That which he received from his Father in his exaltation,
Ephesians. 1.20. Phil. 29.

Verse 14. And unto the Angel] Archippus, it may be: for he was a Pastor here,
and began to cool long before this, Col 4.17.

These things says the Amen] The God of Amen, as Isaiah calls him, faithful
in performing his promises to the remnant that he reserved, in this lukewarm
Church, among so careless a multitude. To these Christ became a beginning of
the Creation of God: so the new birth is here called: as being of no less fame
and wonder then the making of the world.

Verse 15. That thou art neither cold] Such are our civil Justiciaries,
politic professors, neuter-passive Christians: a fait day mends them not, and
a foul day pairs them not, peremptory never to be more precise; resolved to
keep on the warm side of the hedge, to sleep in a whole skin, suffer nothing,
do nothing that may interfere with their hopes, or prejudice their preferments.

I would thou wert] Better be a zealous Papist, then a lukewarm Protestant.
Campian. rat. 10 B^^stow, mot 36 Coster ad Os^and.
A zealous Papist (says one) dare tell us to our heads, that our religion is
error, our selves heretics, our end destruction: that one heaven cannot hold
us hereafter, one Church now: that our damnation is so clearly set down in our
own bibles, that there needs no more to assure us thereof, then to open our
eyes and read it: that if we be not damned, he will be damned for us, etc. This
is better then forlorn wretchlesnesse in right religion, and that detestable
indifferency above-specified.

Verse 16. I will spue thee out] I will please my self in thy just punishment.
Ah (says God as one ridding his stomach) I will case me of mine adversaries, I
will avenge me of mine enemies, Isa. 1.24. Now the basest places are good
enough to cast up our gorge in. The hypoerites punishment must needs be heavy.

Verse 17. 1 Cor. 3.2.
Because thou saiest] Sidixisti, satis est, periisti, says Augustine. He that
thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

And know not] What ever thou deemest and dreamest of thy self, as setting
up thy counter for a thousand pound, and working thy self into the fools
paradise of a sublime dotage.

Verse 18. I counsel thee] Having first convinced thee, verse. 17. who before
were uncounsellable. The Gibeonites sent not for Joshua till besieged. The
Gileadites sought not after Jephthah till distressed: nor will men hearken
after Christ, till driven out of themselves.

To buy of me] Buy the truth and sell it not. Make a through sale of sin and all
(with the wise Merchant) to purchase Christ the pearl of price, for whom S.
Paul (that great trader both by sea and land, 2 Cor. 11.23, 25, 26) counted all
but dung and dogsmeat, Phil. 3.7, 8. Diogenes taxed the folly of the men of his
times (may not we the men of ours?) Quodres pretiosas minimo emerent,
venderentque vilissimas plurimo, that they undervalued the best things, but
overvalued the worst.

Gold tried in the fire] Precious faith, 1 Pet. 1.7.

White raiment] The righteousnesses of the Saints, that of justification, and
the other of sanctification.

Eye-salve] That unction, 1 John 2.20. Light and sight, the saving knowledge of
heavenly mysteries.

Verse 19. As many as I love] q.d. Think not that I hate you, because I thus
chide you. He that escapes reprehension may suspect his adoption. God had one
Son without corruption, but none without correction. We must look through the
anger of his correction, to the sweetness of his loving countenance: as by a
rainbow we see the beautiful image of the Suns light, in the midst of a dark
and waterish cloud. See more in my Treatise upon this verse, the second Edition.

And repent] So they did in likelihood: for Eusebius commends this Church, as
greatly flourishing in his time.

Verse 20. Behold I stand] Christ stands, he does not sit: now whiles a man is
standing, he is going. Christ is but a while with men in the opportunities of
grace: he will not always wait their le^sure. The Church sought him (when once
gone) with many a heavy heart, Cant. 3.

And knock] By the hammer of my Word, and hand of my Spirit.

And he with me] Christ is no niggardly or beggarly guest. His reward is with
him, he brings better commodities then Abraham's servant did, or the Queen of
Sheba; gold, raiment, eye salve, etc.

Verse 21. Even as I also] That is, Because I also overcame, by virtue of my
victory, (...) for (...) See the like John 17.2. Luke 4.36. It is by Christ
that we do over-overcome, Romans 8.37.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. A door was opened in heaven]
THat is, Preparation was made for the manifestation of more heavenly mysteries.

Was as it were of a trumpet] To rouse and raise up his attention. For it might
fare with him, as with a drousie person, who though awaked, and set to work, is
ready to sleep at it. Compare Zach. 4.1.

Come up hither] Not by local motion, but by mental illumination.

I will show thee] That thou may show the Church, that they have a most
glorious and almighty deliverer.

Verse 2. I was in the spirit] See Chap. 1.10.

And behold a throne] So Isaiah was prepared for his prophecy by such a sight,
Chap 6.1. And Ezekiel (besides that stupendous vision, chap. 1.) heard behind
him a voice of great ^^^hing; saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his
place Chap. 2.12.

Sat on the throne] As Judge of heaven and earth, Genesis 18 25.

Verse 3. Like a Jasper and a Sardine] God is here resembled (says one) by
three precious stones, holding forth the three persons in Trinity. A Jasper
having (as they say) a white circle round about it, representing the eternity
of the Father. A Sardine-stone of a fleshy color representing Jesus Christ,
who took our flesh upon him. Cottons 7 vial, p. 5. out of Brigh^m
An Emrald being of a green color, refreshing the eyes of them that look upon
it, representing the Spirit, who is (as the rainbow) a token of fair weather,
and is a comfortable refresher, wheresoever he comes.

Verse 4. And round about] The Saints are round about God, Psalm. 76.11. a
people near unto him, Psalm. 148.14.

Four and twenty Elders] A full Senate, a stately Amphitheatre of the
firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, clothed as Priests, crowned as
Kings and Conquerours.

Verse 5. Job 31.3. Job 9.4.
Lightnings and thunderings] Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange
punishment to persecutours? Who ever hardened himself against Gods Church and
prospered? Have these workers of in^quity no knowledge, who ^at up Gods people
as they eat bread, Psalm. 144? Sur^ly, if they had but so much wit for
themselves, as Pilates wife had in a dream they would take heed of having any
thing to do with just men. If any man will hurt Gods Witness^s, fire proceeds
out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies, Revel. 11.5. It was therefore
no ill counsel that a Martyr gave his persecutour, If thou will not spare us,
yet spare thy self. It is a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of
the living God.

The seven spirits] See Chap. 1. verse 4.

Verse 6. A s^n of glasse] The Word, say some, the World, others.

Four beasts] O^ living wights: Not Angels, but Ministers, (...)
those earthly Angels: who are set forth, 1. Full of eyes for their
perspicacity and vigilance. 2. Furnished with six wings apiece for their
pernicity and promptitude to scour about for the peoples benefit. 3. Qualified
with all necessary endowments, for the discharge of their duties, being bold as
lions, painful as oxen, prudent as men, delighted in high flying, as Eagles.

Verse 8. Full of eyes within] To look to themselves also as well as to the
flock, Act. 20.28. lest whiles they preach to others, etc. 1 Cor. 9.27.

They rest not] Gr. They have no rest, and yet they have no unrest neither: the
sweet content they take in their continual emploiment, is fitter to be
believed then possible to be discoursed.

Holy, holy] This they double, treble and warble upon, In quibusdam
exemplaribus.
nine times over.

Verse 9. And when those beasts] When the Preachers are performing their
office, as Heralds of Gods praises.

Verse 10. The four and twenty Elders] The people yield their assent, and say
Amen: the want whereof S. Paul accounts no small loss, 1 Cor. 14.16.

And cast their crowns] Canutus King of England set his crown upon the
crucifix, and proclaimed, saying, Hen. Hunting^^
Let all the inhabitants of the world know, that there is no mortal man worthy
the name of a King, but he to whose beck heaven, earth and sea, by his laws
eternal are obedient. When the great Turk comes into his Temple, he lays by
all his state, and has none to attend him all the while. Solomon's mother set
the crown upon his head (so does the Church upon Christ's head) in the day of
his espousals, Cant. 3.11.

Verse 11. Thou art worthy] If we would have our souls set as a pearl in that
fai^ ring of heavenly courtiers, that compass the lambs throne, let us praise
God, as they do.

For thou have created] Our service must not be rash but reasonable, Romans 12.1.
such as whereof we can render a reason. Joh. 4.
God hates a blind sacrifice, a Samaritan service, when men worship they know
not what, nor why.

And were created] Gods power put forth in the creation and administration of
the world is twice here mentioned; as that which can never be sufficiently
admired and adored. See my Notes on Genesis 1.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. In the right hand]
GR. On, or, At the right hand. There it lay ready, but none could make ought
of it, till the Lamb took it not only at, but out of the Fathers right hand,
and opened it, ver. 7.

A book written] This book of the Revelation, which till the Son of man had
received of his heavenly Father to show unto his servants, neither they nor he
(as Son of man) knew (so much at least) of that day and hour of his second
coming.

And on the back-side] As wanting room within.

Verse 2. And I saw a strong Angel] Angels are very desirous to know the
mystery of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. and to profit daily in that knowledge, Ephesians.
3.10.

Verse 3. Nor under the earth] That is, In the sea, as Exodus 20.4.

Neither to look thereon] Or, therein, because sealed up.

Verse 4. And I wept] Out of a deep desire of knowing the Contents of this
book. And as our Savior going toward his cross, turned again to the weeping
women, and comforted them, so he soon satisfied the desire of this his dejected
Disciple. Tears are effectual Orators. Luther got much of his it ^sight in^
to Gods matters by this means. So did Melancthon, when he wept out those words,
Quos fugiamus habemus (Pontificios) quos sequamur non intelligimus. It is said
of Sir Philip Sidney, that when he met with any thing that he well understood
not, he would break out into tears -- faciles motus men's generosa capit. The
Spouse, Cant 7.4.
seeking him whom her soul loved, had eyes like the pools of Heshbon glazed
with tears. And Daniel had greatest revelations after three weeks of heavines,
Chap. 10.2.

Verse 5. And one of the Elders] A common Christian, points the Divine to the
Arch-prophet, whom for present he thought not on. Act. 8 26. R^m. 1.12.
An eloquent Apollos may be better informed by a Tent-maker, and a great
Apostle be comforted by an ordinary Roman.

Behold, the lion of the Tribe of Judah] So Moses sets forth our Savior.

The root of David] So the Prophets. They have Moses and the Prophets, says
Abraham. To the Law, and to the Testimony. Gen 49.9. Isa. 11.1. Luke 16.29. Isa
8.20.
If any speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them, nor to be gotten for them.

Has prevailed] Gr. Has overcome, or surpassed, (...).
sc. all creatures in worth, to do this great work.

Verse 6. In the midst of the Throne] As a fit Mediator betwixt God and men,
even the man Christ Jesus, who gave a ransom, 1 Timothy 2.5, 8.
etc.

A Lamb as it had been slain] This form of speech is put (says an Interpreter)
to show the continual recent virtue of Christ's death, eternally effectual
before God, as whereby once for all he has purchased eternal redemption. Some
think that he still retains in heaven the prints and scars of those wounds that
he received on earth in his hands, feet and side. His glorified body (says
one) is that golden censer, which through the wounds that are in it, as through
chinks or holes, fumeth forth always a pleasant and sweet savor in the
nostrils of his Father.

Having seven hor^s] Plenty of power. Antichrist has but two horns, Chap.
13.11.

And seven eyes] No want of wisdom, no need of a visible head to the Church,
or any other Vicar general to Christ, then the holy Ghost, called here, The
seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.

Verse 7. And he came and took] As Mediator he took it, as God he gave it. All
things are delivered unto him of the Father: and no man knows the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, Mat. 11.27. See the Note there.

Verse 8. Fell down before the Lamb] As they had done before the throne, Chap
4. See Joh. 5.23. Divine adoration is an honor due to the manhood of Christ
also, as it is taken into union with the Godhead.

Full of odours] Therefore sweet to God, because Christ pours unto them of his
odours, Rev. 8.3.

Which are the prayers of Saints] That is, their own prayers and praises
recorded, verse. 9. And this is added as an Exposition, to let us know what is
meant by odours. See the like, Joh. 2.21. and 7.39. Rev. 1.20.

Verse 9. And they sung] A general joy in heaven and earth. Surely, 2 Cor 4.^.
it is a pleasant thing to see the light: how much more to see the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ? What a deal of triumph and
exultation is here all the Church over upon the opening of this book, upon the
receipt of this Revelation? Should not this excite and kindle in our hearts a
more earnest desire of understanding these mysteries? Oh I could find in my
heart;to fall afresh upon the study of the Revelation, had I strength to do it,
said my Reverend old Master unto me, a little before his death: Mr John Ballam I
mean, Minister of the Word for many years at Evesham, where I heard him (in my
childehood) preaching many a sweet Sermon upon the second and third Chapters of
this Book.

A new song] For the new work of redemption, besides that old song, Chap. 4.
for that of creation.

Out of every kindred] Let this be noted against the doctrine of universal
Redemption, that is now again so violently cried up amongst us.

Verse 10. And we shall reign on the earth] Reign over our lusts, reign with
and in Christ over all our enemies by a spiritual not secular scepter; and at
last judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.

Verse 11. Round about the throne and the beasts] That is, round about the
beasts and the Elders. Angels encamp about the Saints, as ministering spirits,
and are glad of the office, that there God manifested in the flesh may be seen
of them: and the multivarious wisdom of God in man's redemption be displaied
unto them. 1 Timothy 2.16. Ephesians 3.


Verse 12. With a loud voice] Betokening their earnest affection; which also is
here notably expressed by the many particulars they ascribe to Christ, as if
they could never give enough to him. Now if Angels, who have nothing so much
benefit by him, do thus magnify him; how much more should we? Our hearts
should be enlarged, our mouths opened, and we not a little ve^^d at our own
vile dullness in being no more affected with these indeleble ravishments.

Verse 13. And every creature] The whole creation groaneth under vanity, and
rejoices, as it were, in the fore thought of that liberty of the sons of God
at the last day, whereof it shall partake, Romans 8.21. See the Note there.

Verse 14. And the four beasts] The Saints were the Precout^urs in this blessed
Quire, and now they are the Succentors also. They began the Song, and so
conclude it, as having far greater benefit by Christ then all other creatures,
and God expects a proportion, that our returns be some what answerable to our
receipts.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. One of the seals]
THat is, The first of the seals, as Genesis 1.4. Mar. 16.2. M Cotton.
Under these seven seals falls Rome pagan (says an Interpreter) as under the
seven trumpets Rome Christian, under the seven vials Rome Antichristian. So all
the judgments in the Revelation are still upon Rome. Hence Mr Dent calls his
Exposition upon the Revelation, The ruin of Rome.

The noise of thunder] This first beast was like a Lion, Chap 47. whose roaring
is as thunder.

Verse 2. And behold a white horse] The Apostles and Apostolic Preachers of
the primitive times: white for their purity of doctrine, discipline and
conversation. (...) (...) l. 2. ^^p 3.
Horses for their n^^ble and swift spreading the Gospel, which ran through the
world like a Sunbeam (as Eusebius has it) and was carried abroad as on
Eagles, or as on Angels wings. A horse has his name in Hebrew from devouting
the ground by his swiftness, and was therefore by the Heathens dedicated to
the Sun; whose going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto
the ends of it, Psalm. 19.6. Cranz in Sax.
Cranzius tells us, that the Saxon Princes, before they became Christians, gave
a black horse for their arms, but being on^^ baptized, a white horse; with
reference, happily, to this text.

He that sat on him] Christ, Chap. 19.11. Psalm. 45.5.

Had a bow] The doctrine of the Gospel, whereby the people fall under him,
Psalm. 45.4. Adve ^ I^d c. 7


Conquering and to conquer] Brit^nnorum inaccessa Romany lo^^, Christo ^^men
patuerunt, says Tertullian. Christ cam^ and conquered this kingdom: which the
Romans with all their power could not do. A Christo vinci, summa victoria est,
vinciri summa libertas, says another, There is no such conquest as to be
conquered by Christ, no such liberty, as to be hound by him.

Verse 3. Come and see] John's better attention is called for. How dull and
drousie are the best in perceiving and receiving heavenly mysteries! A sea-coal
fire, if not stirred up, will die of it self, so will our spark and spunk of
light. Christ calls upon those that had come far to hear him, saying, Let him
that has an ear hear, Mat. 13. See Zach. 4 1.

Verse 4. That was red] Portending troubles and tragedies, bloody wars and
terrible persecutions. Those ten first were so cruel, that S. Hierom writes in
one of his Epistles, that for every day in the year were murdered 5000, except
the first day of January.

To him that sat thereon] Christ, Mat. 10.34. Zach. 1.8. He stands over his
Church as the Agonothetes. So he did at S. Stephens martyrdom, Act. 7. he
moderates and overrules the enemies cruelty.

And that they should kill one another] viz. The persecutours should rise up
and destroy one another, as the Romans did the Jews, Tacit.
and the Jews the Romans in diverse provinces: And as the Emperors who got
nothing (most of them) by their adoption or designation to the Empire, Nisi ut
citius interficerentur, but to be cut off the sooner. All or most of the
persecuting Caesar's died unnatural deaths.

A great sword] That of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.17. which takes away peace, by
accident, Mat. 24.6. Christ threatens the contempt of the Gospel with wars and
rumors of wars. Our late Edgehill-battle was fought in the vale of Red-horse;
as if God had meant to say, I have now sent you the red horse, to avenge the
quarrel of the white.

Verse 5. A black horse] Famine discolours and denigrates, Lam. 4.7, 8. Turk
Hist. fol. 426.
It accompanies war for most part, and in sieges is very extreme, as at
Samaria, where an asses head was worth four pounds: at Rome, where this
proclamation was made in the market, Pone pretium humanae carni: At Scodra,
where horses were dainty meat, yea they were glad to eat dogs, cats, rats, etc.
At Antioch in Syria, Ibid 18.
where many Christians (in the holy war, as they called it) were glad to eat
the dead bodies of their late slain enemies. (...)


Had a pair of balances] Gr. The beam of scales. To show that bread should be
delivered out by measure, as is threatened, Ezekiel 4.6. Deuteronomy. 26. and men
should be stinted and pittanced.

Verse 6. In the midst] The voice of the Lamb, Chap. 5.6. Who appoints and
orders all: he cuts us out our several conditions, cautioning for the wine and
oil, when other food fa^leth.

A measure of wheat] A quart, say some, a pottle others, (...)
an allowance for a day. Among the Greeks (says Suidas) Chaenix dictim
dabatur. And that the Israelites in the wilderness (according to Rabanus) had
each of them, three Chaenices of Manna by the day, that was to be ascribed to
the divine bounty, as Junius notes.

Verse 7. See the Note on Verse 3.

Verse 8. A pale horse] Fit for pestilence, and pale death to ride on.

And hell followed] sc. To them that were killed with death, Revel. 2.23. (See
the Note there) that died in their sins, which is far worse then to die in a
ditch.

Over the fourth part of the earth] That is, of the Roman Empire. This fell out
in the days of Decius: Orosius bearing witness, that the pestilence which
then raged did extend no further, Quam ad profligandas ecclesias edicta D^^ij
cucurrerunt, that is, then the proclamations of Decius came for the overthrow
of the Churches.

Verse 9. Under the altar] i. e. Under Christ, Heb. 13.10. under his custody
and safe-gard, Or, Under the altar, that is lying at the bottom of the altar,
as beasts newly slain for sacrifice. See Phil. 2.17. and 2 Timothy 4.6.

Which they had] Gr. Which they had, (...)
and would not be drawn by any terrors or tortures to part with. They may take
away my life (said one) but not my faith, my head but not my crown.

Verse 10. And they cried] When God intends deliverance to his people, he
pours out upon them the spirit of grace and supplication, Zach. 12.9, 10.

How long, O Lord] Calvin had this speech always in his mouth; breathing out
his holy desires in the behalf of the afflicted Churches, with whose sufferings
he was more affected, B 22 in vita.
then with any thing that befell himself.

That dwell on the earth] In opposition to the inhabitants of heaven. As names
written in heaven stand opposed to those that are written in the earth, Luk,
10.20. Jer. 17.13.

Verse 11. And whiterobes] Their innocence was cleared, and their persecutours
convinced. God would speak for them in the hearts of their greatest enemies.

Until their fellow servants also] We doubt not (says a learned Interpreter
here) but that the crowned Saints do in general know the afflicted condition
of the Church militant, and do wish them deliverance: M ^^ b^^.
but our special necessities and occurrences of particular persons they cannot
know. Brother Bradford (said Bishop Ridley, Act and Mon. fol 1566.
a little before he was offered up) so long as I shall understand thou art in
thy journey, by Gods grace I shall call upon our heavenly Father to set thee
safely home: and then, good brother, speak you for the remnant that are to
suffer for Christ's sake, according to that thou then shall know more clearly.
But this is to be taken with a grain of salt.

That should be killed] Under Liciuius, Julian the apostate, and the Arrian
Emperors.

Verse 12. There was a great earthquake] Understand hereby those horrible
commotions and confusions that fell out in the Roman Empire upon those ten
bloody persecutions, and the earnest supplications of the Saints, which can
work wonders in heaven and earth. Socr^t. l 1. c. 15
The death and destruction of the persecutours, was (as it was said of the
death of Arrius) Precationis opus non morbi, the effect of faithful prayers
calling for full and final vengeance.

The Sun became black] It is ordinary in Scripture to set forth horrible
commotions of Commonwealths by such figurative expressions as these, Jer.
4.23. etc. Joel 2.10, etc. Isa. 13.10.

Verse 13. And the stars] Romes dunghill Deities together with their Chemarims,
or Chimney-chaplains, the Priests. Confer Isa. 34.4. Dan. 8.10. Exodus 12.12.
Numb. 33.4.

Verse 14. And every mountain] See the Note on Verse 12. Cinis quidam noxius e
Visuvio emissus, Romam venit (inquit D^o) ita ut incolae puture caeperunt omnia
sursum deorsum ferri, solemque in terram cadere, ac terram in coelum
conscendere. I my self saw, says Bellarmine, a huge hill removed by an
earthquake, and brought down to a Town, which was wholly covered by it, and as
it were buried under it. Perhaps he meant Pleurs in Rh^tia, which was
overcover'd suddenly with a mountain, so that 1500 persons were buried there
alive.

Verse 15. And the Kings of the earth] Who came in to help their gods against
the Mighty, against Constantine, Theodosius, etc. that threw out their Priests,
and pulled down their Temples. These Kings and Grandees were Maximianus,
Maximinus, Maxentius, Galerius, Licinius, Julianus, etc. and their accomplices,
who were routed, ruined and driven into holes and corners by the Christian
Emperors: and afterward so pursued by divine Justice, that they came to
shameful ends. Dioclesian poisoned himself. Maximian hanged himself. Maximinus
likewise and Maxentius became their own deaths-men. Galerius died of a
loathsome disease. Julian had his deaths wound from heaven, Eusebius. ^ist. l. 9.
(...) 8. and 10. and lib. 8. c. 27. I^e^ devita Constable. l. 1 cap. 51, 52.
and died ^aving and blaspheming.

Verse 16. And said to the mountains] Which yet was but a poor shelter: for
mountains melt, and rocks rent at his presence.

Verse 17. Who shall be able to stand] They could not stand before their own
mis-giving hearts, and soul-condemning consciences, how much less before God
that was greater then their hearts? God sent his hornet, which drove out these
Canaanites, Exodus 23.28. Facti sunt a cord suo fugitivi, as Tertullian has it.

CHAP. VII. Verse 1. And after these things]
THis whole Chapter is purposely interlaced between the opening of the sixth
and seventh seal, for the support of the poor suffering Saints, that they sink
not under their many pressures.

Four Angels] Ministers of indignation, whether good or evil angels, the
Doctors are divided.

Holding the four windes] Those b^somes of the air, Mundi (...). Rupert.
as Rupertus calls them, and Scripture-emblems of spiritual influence, Joh.
3.8. Cant. 4. ult. Ezekiel. 37. 9.

Nor on any tree] The Philosopher compares men (the Scripture good men often) to
trees, which y benign winds are filled with fruits.

Verse 2. Another Angel] Whether Christ or Constantine acted by Christ, it much
matters not.

Having the seal] Whereof Christ is the great Lord Keeper.

With a loud voice] Out of his great care of his elect. As Croesus his dumb
son burst out into loud speech to save his father. (...). Herod.


To the four Angels] Who are at Christ's beck and check.

Verse 3. Hurt not] Reprobates often fare the better for those few righteous that
are amongst them: they are therefore singularly foolish for seeking to rid
them, and root them out, as the Heathen Emperors did.

In their fore-heads] Not in their hands only, as the vassals of Antichrist (
chap. 13.16.) who have free liberty to dissemble, deny their religion, do any
thing, so the Catholic cause be thereby advanced. My son, give me thy heart,
said Gregory the thirteenth to our English Papists, let who will have thy
tongue and outward man.

Verse 4. An hundred forty and four thousand] A competent company. Not so many
as the locusts, chap. 13. and yet more then most thought they had been.

Verse 5. Twelve thousand] Out of each Tribe so many: God enclines toward all
the elect with an equal good will: neither shall any one complain justly that
others have been more regarded then he: as one well observes here.

Verse 6. Of the tribe of Nepthali] Who is first reckoned among those by
Rachels-side, because at Capernaum in this Tribe, Christ inhabited. Any
relation to him ennobleth. Bethlehem though it be the least, is yet not the
least among the Princes of Judah, for that out of her came the Governor of
Israel, Mat. 2.6. with Mic. 3.6.

Verse 7. Of the tribe of Levi] Levi is taken in, Dan cut out of the roll for
his shameful recidivation, and revolt from the true religion, Judge. 18. This,
Jacob foresaw and bewailed in that holy ejaculation on his deathbed, Genesis
49.18. There is no reckoning made, or account given of this Tribe (as there is
of the rest) 1 Chronicles. 7. The fable of Antichrist to come of Dan, is so thin a
devise, Lib 3. de Pont. To. cap. 12.
that Bellarmine could not but see through it, and disclaim it.

Verse 8. Of Joseph] That is of Ephraim, who, though Joseph's younger son, yet
had the first-birth-right.

Verse 9. A great multitude] All the faithful from the Apostles to the end of
the world. In all ages there were some that sought righteousness: Neither was
it ever so hard with the Church as the Host at Nola (in the story) made it; who
when ^e was commanded by the Roman Censor to go and call the good men of the
City to appear before him, went to the Churchyards, and there called at the
graves of the dead. O ye good men of Nola come away, for the Roman Censor calls
for your appearance; Anton di Guevara.
for he knew not where to call for a good man alive. In the very midst of
Popery there were many faithful Witnesses, and more of such as (like those two
hundred that went out of Jerusalem after Absalom) went on in the simplicity of
their hearts, and knew not any thing, 2 Samuel 15.11.

Verse 10. Salvation to our God] Not to this, or that Popish Saint or
Mediator: of all whom these triumphers might say, as that Heathen once,
Contemno minutos istos Deos modo Iovem (Iesum) propitium ha^eam, I care not for
all those small-gods, so I may have Jesus on my side.

Verse 11. And all the Angels] See the Note on Chap. 5. verse 11.

Verse 12. Amen: Blessing and glory, etc.] The Angels assent to what the Saints
had said, and add much more, according to their greater measure of knowledge
and love to God: Write we after this fairer copy.

Verse 13. And one of the Elders] See the Note on Chap. 5. verse 5.

Verse 14 Which came out of great tribulation] It is but a delicacy that men
dream of, to divide Christ and his cross. The Bishop of London, when he had
degraded Richard Bayfeild Martyr kneeling upon the highest step of the Altar,
he smote him so hard on the breast with his Crosier-st^ff, that he threw him
down backward, and brake his head so that he swounded: Act. and Mon.
And when he came to himself again, he thanked God that he was delivered from
the malignant Church of Antichrist, and that he was come into the true Church
of Christ militant, and I hope shall be anon with him in the Church triumphant,
etc.

And made them white] Other blood stains what is washed in it; this blood of
the spotless Lamb, whitens and putifies.

Verse 15. Therefore are they] Not for the whiteness of their robes, but
because they are washed in the meritoricus blood of the Lamb.

Before the thro^^ of God] A good man is like a good Angel, (...)
always standing before the face of God.

Shall dwell among them] Gr. Shall pitch his tent, or shall keep the feast of
Tabern^cles amongst them, or shall hover and cover over them, as the cloud did
over Israel in the wilderness; so that under his shadow, they shall safely and
sweetly repose themselves.

Verse 16. They shall hunger ^o more] They shall be as it were in heaven
afore-hard, having, Malorum ademptionem, bonorum adeptionem, freedom from
evil, and fruition of good, here in part, hereafter in all fulness^.

Verse 17. Shall ^eed them and lead them] An allusion to Psalm. 23.2. where
David seems to resemble powerful and flourishing doctrine to green pastures,
and the secret and sweet comforts of the Sacraments to the (...) waters.

And G^d shall Wipe away] A metaphor from a nurse, which not only suckleth her
dear child crying for hunger, but also wipes off the tears.

CHAP. VIII. Verse 1. The seventh seal]
THe business or parts whereof are the seven Trumpets, that sound a dreadful
alarm against the Roman Empire, ready now to be (...) for the innocent blood,
and upon the instant sait of the Martyrs, Chap 6.10.

There was silence in heaven] That is in the Church on earth, often called, The
kingdom of heaven. This half-hours silence was either for horror and
admiration, or for attent expectation, or (as some will have it) for religious
awe and devotion: Christ the High Priest being now about to offer incense
(those prayers of the Martyrs, Chap. 6.10.) there was in the Church (as used to
be in the Temple at such times, Luke 1.10.) a deep silence. So among the
Romans, the people in time of worship were enjoined favere linguis, to spare
their tongues. And in the Greek Church one stood up and cried, (...) peace
people, leave off your discourses.

Verse 2. Which stood before God] In a waiting posture, ready pr^st to do his
pleasure.

Seven trumpets] To be sounded at seven several times: to show that God
suffers not his whole wrath to arise at once against his creatures, but
piecemeal and by degrees: proving, if peradventure they will repent and
recover out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

Verse 3. And another Angel] An Angel after another manner; not by nature, but
by office. Christ the Angel of the Covenant. For I cannot be of his mind, M
Bright^^.
who makes this Angel to be Constantine, the odours given him, to be the power
of calling the Council, the golden Altar, Christ in the midst of this holy
Assembly; the thick cloud of odours, the whole matter brought most happily to
effect: which yet is a pious interpretation.

Much incense] The merit of his own precious passion, Heb. 9.24. and 13.5.

Upon the golden Altar] viz. Himself, as Chap. 6.9.

Verse 4. The smoke of the incense] The Saints prayers perfumed with Christ's
odours, ascended, that is, were highly accepted in heaven, Act. 10.4. Exodus
3.9. as well appeared by the answer they had here in the next verse. The Church
is said, To ascend out of the wilderness of this world with pillars of smoke,
Cant. 3.6. Elationibus fumi, with raised affections, and with strong
supplications, wherein how many sweet spices are burned together by the fire of
faith, as humility, love, etc. All which would stink worse in Gods nostrils
then the onions and garlic of Egypt, did not Christ perfume and present them.

Verse 5. And filled it with fire of the Altar] Fire, in token of fierce
indignation, and from the Altar; for Christ came to send fire on the earth,
Luke 12.49. Fire and sword, Mat. 10.34. through men's singular corruption and
obstinacy, in not stooping to the scepter of this Kingdom. Hence fire and
brim-stone, storm and tempest, A fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.27. From the same
Altar Christ, prayers go up, vengeance comes down.

Verse 6. Prepared themselves] Having got sign, as it were, by that which
Christ did in the former verse, they set too in order to sound their trumpets.

Verse 7. Hail and fire mingled with bloud] In stead of the fire of love (says
one) mixed with the sweet rain of healthsome doctrine, and spirit of Christian
lenity, the fire of contention, M Forbes.
and frosty hailstones of destruction ruled all. Yea so far herein were the
Bishops carried one against another, as it is monstrous what malice, falsehood
and cruelty they practiced, especially in the times of Constan^, Constantius,
and Valens the Arrian Emperors.

And the third part of trees] Men of ma^k.

And all green grasse] Meaner men.

Were burnt up] Were tainted with errors and heresies, whereof this age was so
fertile and full (that as Hierom speaks) it was a witty thing to be a right
believer.

Verse 8. A great mountain] Some notable haeresiarch, possibly Pelagius, a Monk
of Bangor, Morgan by name, that is, in the Welsh tongue, a seaman. This Morgan
traveling beyond sea to spread his heresy, called himself Pelagius, by a
Greek word of the same signification; because it sounded better in the ears of
foreign Nations. Lib 1. de great. Christ advers. Pelag.
Hence Augustine, Quid eo pelago (says he) vult mergi Pelagius, unde per
petram liberatus est Petrus?

Verse 9. And the third part] Heresy as a gangrene spreads and kills, as the
leprosy in the head, it renders a man utterly unclean, Levit. 13.44. So
cunning are some seducers, and so close in the conveyance of their collusion,
that if possible the very elect may be deceived.

Verse 10. There fell a great starre] Falling stars were never but meteors.
That grand apostate of Rome may well be meant by this blazing, burning comet.
He was in falling by degrees from the time of Constantine till Phocas, who set
him upon the chair of pestilence.

The third part of the rivers] i. e. Corrupted true doctrine, and perverted the
Scriptures with his false gloss^s.

Verse 11. Was called wormwood] Because himself was in the gall of bitterness,
and did imbitter others. See Jer. 23.15. and Deu. 29 18. with Junius his Note
there.

Verse 12. And the third part of the Sun] The Prelates and Patriarchs.

And the third part of the Moon] The inferior Church Officers.

And the third part of the starres] The community of Christians. All began to
be overspread with gross ignorance, not only of heavenly truths, but of
humane sciences, which are here called the night, in comparison of
Gospel Light. Gregory the great (thought to be that Angel mentioned in the next
verse) though better then any that succeeded him in the Popedom, calling
himself the servant of Gods servants, and carrying himself modestly in the
days of Mauricius the Emperor; yet when Mauricius was slain by the traitor
Phocas, how basely did he claw the traitor, and collogue with him: commending
to his care the Church of Rome, and often minding him of Peter's primacy, and of
that speech of our Savior, Thou art Peter, etc. for no other end, but that he
might enlarge his jurisdiction over all Churches, by the favor of that
parricide?

Verse 13. And I beheld and heard an Angel] Or, an Eagle, (...).
as some copies read it. See the Note on Verse 12. Gregory the great seems to
be pointed at, who is said to be the worst of all the Popes that went before
him, and the best of those that came after him. Hence he is here brought in
flying betwixt heaven and earth. And that he cried with a loud voice: pointing
at and painting out that to be Antichrist that should challenge to himself the
title of Universal Bishop, and had an host of Priests ready to follow him, Hic
prope est, and in foribus, said he, and he said right, for his immediate
successor, Boniface the third, fulfilled the same that he had foretold.

CHAP. IX. Verse 1. A star fall from heaven]
GR. That had fallen from heaven, viz. when the third Angel sounded, Chap.
8.10. Then the Bishop of Rome began to fall, (...).
but here, in Boniface the third and his successors, He is fallen, he is
fallen from his primitive integrity into the deepest gulf of impiety. The
Jesuits (to blind the matter) tell us, that by this star is meant Luther,
whom Satan sent out to disturb the Church, and God sent them to withstand him.
Bugenhagius also, a Dutch-Divine, when he first read Luthers book of the
Babylonish Captivity, rashly pronounced him the most pestilent heretic that
ever the Church was pesterd with. But a few days after having thoroughly read
and weighed the contents of that book, he recanted and affirmed, that all the
world was deceived, Scultet. Annal.
and Luther only was in the right: And so not only himself became a Lutheran,
M^t. Par^s. an. 1072.
but many others also persuaded by him.

The key of the bottomless pit] Whereinto he lets souls innumerable: so that
in the days of Hildebrand letters were set forth, as sent from hell, wherein
the devil and his Angels give the Popish Clergy many thanks for sending them in
so many souls as they never had in any age before.

Verse 2. And there arose a smoke] Of heretical opinions and flagitious
practices. All the old heretics fled and hid themselves in the Popish Clergy.
Those dark corners also of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.
Act. and Mon. fol 1117.
Take heed (said the Lord Audely Chancellor of England) how you deal with
Popish Priests: for (you may believe me) some of them be knaves all. Petrus de
Aliac^ long since wrote, De re^orm eccl.
Ad hunc statum venit Romana Ecclesia, ut non esset digna regi nisi per
reprobos. The Church of Rome has for a long season been ruled by a rabble of
reprobates.

Verse 3. Locusts upon the earth] So the Monks, Friars, Jesuits, etc. Igna.
Conclave
are fitly called for their numerosity and voracity. The Jesuits have
sometimes maintained 200000 scholars. The Duke of Bavaria's house is so
pestered with them (says one) that notwithstanding his great revenues, he is
very poor, as spending all his estate upon those Popish flesh-flies. Think the
same of other Princes and places where they are received.

As the scorpious of the earth] They are the sorest soul-stingers (says an
Interpreter) that ever the world had. Pliny testifies of the Scorpion, that
there is not one minute, wherein it does not put forth a most venomous sting to
do mischief. It creeps on crookedly, and so it strikes the more at unawares.
Its sting is not much felt at first, but soon proves uncurable.

Verse 4. And it was commanded] As David charged his Captains to handle the
young man Absalom gently: so and much more sollicitous is the Lord of his
servants safety.

The grass of the earth, nor any green thing] I say that under the Papacy was
true Christianity, says Luther, yea the very ke^nell of Christianity. Lu^h
contra Anabapt.


Verse 5. And to them is was given] This is often repeated in this book: to show
that though Antichrist and his actuaries bandy and bend all their forces to
destroy souls, yet they are bounded by God, and can do no more then is given
them from above.

Five moneths] Locusts use to live no longer. See Pliny l. 11. cap. 29. There
are that interpret these five months of those 500. De pap. Rom 1. 3. c. ^2.
years, wherein the Pope stood in his full pride and power For, ab eo tempore
quo per v^s Papa Antichristus esse coepit (says Bellarmine) non modo non
crevit ejus imperium, sed semper magis ac magis decrevit. Since you first began
to call the Pope Antichrist, he has lost a great part of his command and
commodity.

Verse 6. Shall men seek d^ath] Being brought, through anguish of conscience,
and fear of wrath, to that pitiful plight, that Roger Bishop of Salisbury was,
in King Stephens time, through long and strait imprisonment. He was so hardly
bestead (says the Historian) Vt vivere noluerit, mori nescierit, that live he
would not, die he could not. Popish pardons, pilgrimages, dirges, etc. would
not quiet or cure distempered consciences, or shake out the envenomed arrows of
the Almighty, Haeret later^ lethalis arundo.
that stuck fast in them. A broken leg is not eased by a silken stocking.
Nescio quomodo imbecillior est medicina, quam morbus, said Tully of his
philosophical consolations: so may these well say of their Popish paltry
applications. The medicine is too weak for the malady. The Papists say, That
the reformed Religion is a doctrine of desperation. This we are sure is true of
theirs, Act. and Mon. 1904, 1907.
as were easy to instance in Stephen Gardener, Dr Pendleton, Francis Spira,
Guarlacus, Bomelius, Latomus, Crescentius, etc.

Verse 7. Like unto horses] Fed and fierce, to run and rush into the battle, as
being driven by the devil. Bern.
Si videris persecutorem tuum nimis saevientem, scito quia ab ascensore suo
daemone perurgetur.

Were as it were crowns] Triple crowns, miters, head-tiares, shaven crowns:
which last is a ceremony so bald, that some Priests in France are now ashamed
of the mark, and few of them have it, Spec. Europ.
that can handsomely avoid it.

As the faces of men] But beware of men, Mat. 10.17. See the Note there.

Verse 8. As the hair of women] Insinuative, and inductive to sin.

As the teeth of lions] Joel 1.6. Catching and carrying to their dens all they
can come by, as Tecelius did out of Germany, as Otto sent by Gregory 9. did out
of England, where he left not so much money, as he either carried with him, or
sent to Rome before him

Verse 9. And they had brest-plates] Their pretended donations, privileges and
exemptions from the secular power; shaking their tippets at Kings, whom they
have trampled on, and forced to go barefoot on the hard stones, till they bled
again. Thus dealt they by our Henry the second: yea they lashed him with rods
upon the bare, (...) Revi^s de (...) po^^is. page 149.
and said, Domine, noli minari: nos enim nullas minas timemus, qui de talicuria
sumus quae consuevit imperare regibus and imperatoribus. Sir, never threaten
us: for we care not for your threats, as being of that Court that commands
Kings and Emperors.

And the sound of their wings] They are loud and bold-spoken: make a great
noise, raise a great dust, and thereby think to carry it. Herein they are like
the heretic Nestorius, who is said to have been, (...) Mis^^l. epist delic.
Homo indoctus, superbus, contemptor Patrum, sed audax and magnae loq^entiae, a
proud Ass, but bold above measure, and of a loud language, whereby he so far
prevailed for a time, that he seduced good Theodosius, and procured a writ for
the banishment of Cyril that godly Orthodox Divine.

Verse 10. And they had tails] This may be well meant of their Surrogates,
Officials, Chancellours, Registers, Apparitours, the fag end of their execrable
train. See Isa. 9.15.

Verse 11. And they had a King over them] Being herein wiser then those other
locusts, Proe 30 27.

The Angel of the bottomless pit] That apostate star, ver. 1. the devils
lieutenant General, the Western Antichrist the Pope, not excluding the Turk
that Antichrist of the East, that comes next to be spoken of. And indeed they
may well go together: for they both set up another law then that of Christ,
they kill the contrary part, they give liberty to the flesh, they will not have
their religions to be disputed, etc.

Is Abaddon] A destroier. Annot. ad loc.
I know not (says learned Junius) whether the holy Ghost in this name has not
some respect to the etymology or notation of Hildebrand, which signifies, Fidei
incendium, the firebrand of the faith.

Verse 12. Two woes more hereafter] In respect of order: for in respect of
time, the woes of the fifth and sixth trumpet are together, and do run parallel.

Verse 13. From the four horns] To show, says one, Christ his sufficiency of
power to raise up instruments of his justice, according as by the sins of men
he is provoked.

Verse 14. Loose the four Angels] That is, those four potent peoples, the
Arabidns, the Saracens, the Tartars, and the Turks, that they may march out
against Christendom, to murder and massacre the third part of men. These are
called Angels, because sent of God to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant.

Verse 15. And the four Angels were loosed] As fierce and fell creatures out of
a cave, now set upon spoil and rapine. They have a Proverb in the Eastern
parts, Where the great Turk once sets his foot, there never grows grass
again: He blasts and desolates all.

For an hour and a day] At any time whenever God shall command them out, and
bid them fall on: they are at an hours warning in arms at an instant. Mr
Brightman gathers from this text, that the Turkish Empire shall determine
about the year, 1696.

The third part of men] Mahomet the first was in his time the death of 800000
men. Selymus the second, Turk Hist. fol. 434. Ibid. 885.
in revenge of his loss received at the battle of Lepanto, would have put to
death all the Christians in his dominions, who were in number infinite, etc.

Verse 16. Two hundred thousand thousand] Not so many at any one time, but in
several ages and battles. Howbeit the Turk goes usually into the field 200000
strong: many times he has more, as in that famous battle fought by Bajazet
against Tamer-lane, where he had well-nigh a thousand thousand. Of his common
soldiers, called Asapi (which for the most part are miserable Christians) he
makes no great reckoning or other use, Tunk. hist. 317.
then to blunt the swords of his enemies, or to abate their first fury: thereby
to give the easier victory to his Janissaries, and better soldiers, which are
all horse for most part.

Verse 17. Brest-plates of fire, etc.] Muskets, harquebuzes, pistols, and other
spet-fires; but especially those great-guns, Ch^lcondylas. Pea^^^^s valley of
vanity.
and murdering-pieces, so much used by the Turks, those mighty Ordnance they
brought before Constantinople, the Rhodes and other places, nothing inferior
to those two, that were cast by Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, the one whereof he
called the Earthquake, the other Grandiabolo, or the great devil.

Verse 18. The third part of men killed] Not only of Christians, but also of
their own: Turk hist. 1153
most of their poor being forced with victuals and other necessaries to follow
their great armies in their long expeditions: of whom scarce one of ten do ever
return home again, but there perish by the way: if not by the enemies sword,
yet by the wants, intemperatenesse of the air, or immoderate pains taking.

By the brimstone] By the gunpowder, or by their sulphured bowstrings, which
they discharge as out of their mouths, whereunto they draw or lay them.

Verse 19. Plin Turk h^st.
In their mouth and in their tails] Like the Serpent Amphisbaena that has a
head (to do hurt) at both ends. Perhaps the Turks perfidy is here pointed at:
they keep leagues no longer, then stands with their own profit.

Verse 20. 1 Cor 10.10.
That they should not worship devils] As all idolaters do. The devil is (...),
says Synesius, glad to be worshipped in an idol, as he was by Israel in a calf.

Verse 21. Math^ol. in Dioscorid.
Neither repented] Being stupefied, as those Asses in Hetruria, that feed upon
hemlock, They that make them are like unto them. See Isa. 44.17.

CHAP. X. Verse 1. Come down from heaven]
NOt from the bottomless pit, as Antichrist that opposite to Christ's unction
and function.

Clothed with a cloud] Not yet so clearly to be seen and enjoyed by his, as
when he shall come in the clouds.

A rainbow upon his head] The effect of the Sun shining against a cloud, and
is, Nuncius foederis and serenitatis, the Angel of Gods Covenant, and of fair
weather.

His feet as pillars of fire] His meanest members stand out the hotest
persecutions.

Verse 2. A little book open] The Bible translated and explained. It is called
a great roll, written with the pen of a man, that is, Isa. 8 1. Deu^ 30.11.
clearly, that the simplest of men may conceive it. But it is little in
comparison of the volumes of School-Doctours and Popish-Decretals, wherewith
the world was pestered, when the Bible lay locked up and obscured. We may well
say of it as S. Bartholomew (quoted by Dionysius) said of Divinity, (...), that
in sundry respects it is both a little and a great Book.

He set his right-foot upon the sea] As Lord of sea and land, ma^gre all
heretics and Antichrists, that sought to throw him out of possession. Neither
the beast that arises out of the sea, Chap. 13.
nor the other that arises out of the earth shall be able to do it. (...).


Verse 3. As when a lion roareth] Gr. Loweth like an Ox, mugit for rugit. See
here an ox in a lion, mildness mixed with fierceness. Satis est prostrasse
leoni. This lion preys not upon the prostrate. Non mihi placet vindicta sed
victoria, said Caesar. So may Christ say, I seek not revenge but victory.

Seven thunders uttered their voices] As the echo of Christ's loud voice. No
sooner had he spoken, but great was the company of preachers, sons of thunder,
who should speak powerfully, Psalm. 68.11.
prophecy and cry down superstitious worships and heretical doctrines before
peoples, Nations, tongues and Kings, verse. 11. of this Chapter. This was
fulfilled in Wicliffe, Husse, Luther, Lambert, and other heroical Reformers.
Conter Amos 3.7, 8.

Verse 4. Had uttered their voices] Not audible only, Di^stiu^.
but articulate: so as that John heard and was much affected. Nescio quid
divinum in auscultatione est: there is no small efficacy in a lively voice to
work upon the heart. In Demosthene aliquid d^est Demosthenis, quando legitur
non auditur. Val. Max.


Seal up these things] viz. Till the time appointed. See Dan. 8.26. and 12.9.
Or, for that the things were the secrets of Gods kingdom, Math. 13. not fit or
possible to be revealed, 2 Cor. 12.4.

Verse 5. Lifted up his hand] And so swore solemnly, Genesis 14 22. Numb. 14.30.
Ezekiel. 20 5. Because it seemed improbable (if not impossible) that ever Babylon
should down, Rome be ruined. But all the judgments in the Revelation (those of
the seven seals, seven trumpets and seven vials) are still upon Rome Pagan,
Christian, and Antichristian. We may therefore conclude with that Emperor of
Germany, Frederike 2. Roma diu titubans, varijs erroribus acta
C^rruet and mundi desinet esse caput.
Rome tottering long, shall once be shattered,
And of the world shall cease to be the head.


Verse 6. That there should be time no longer] i. e. The Beasts time shall be
no longer, but till the days of the seventh trumpet, which were shortly then
approaching. Or there shall be now no longer delay and protraction of time.

Verse 7. The mystery of God] The conversion of the Jews called a mystery, Romans
11.25. the bringing in of the Gentiles fullness, Ephesians. 3 3,4,6. the kingdom
of the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7.18. then when all the kingdoms of the
world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ, Chap. 11.15.

Verse 8. In the hand of the Angel which standeth] This description of Christ
is here purposely repeated, that we may learn to trust in his power, and fly
to his wisdom, as Agur did, Pro. 30.1, 2. for the understanding of divine
mysteries.

Verse 9. Give me the little book] Let Preachers ply the throne of grace, if
ever they will preach to purpose. Been orasse, est bent studuisse, said Luther.
Three things make a Preacher, Reading, Prayer and Temptation. He that will
understand Gods riddles must plough with his heifer the Spirit, which is not
given, but to them that ask it. Alsted. Ch^on. 450 Ibid 267. Vide parcum in
Genesis pro^^g.


And eat it up] By reading and meditation: Ministers must so devour and digest
the holy Scriptures, that as good Scribes they may draw out new and old for the
use of the Church upon all occasions. Jacobus de Voragin^ was so called, Quod
esset veluti vorago bibliorum, because he had as it were devoured the Bible. So
Petrus Comestor for the same reason. Joannes Gati^s a Sicilian, was so well
versed in the Scriptures, and so great a Divine, that he once said, Si libri
sacri perirent, se per Dei gratiam restititurum, That if the Bible were lost
out of the world, he could restore it. Some think that Ezra did so after the
Babylonish captivity: but I cannot think so.

Verse 10. Sweet as honey] The word is so to the spiritual palate; whereas to
the carnal it relisheth no better then the white of an egg, or a dry chip.
Luther said, He would not live in Paradise without the word: At cum verbo etiam
in inferno facile est vivere, but with the word he could live even in hell it
self. See Ps. 19.10. and 119.103. Jer. 15.16. Tom. 4. (...).


My belly was bitter] By reason of the trials and tribulations that usually
follow upon the faithful preaching of the Word. Opposition is Evangelij
genius, says Calvin. And, Praedicare est nihil aliud quam derivare in se
furorem mundi, says Luther. To preach is to get the ill will of the world.

Verse 11. Thou must prophecy] For all the sorrow, thou and thy successors
must set close to the Lords work, for the regaining of those peoples, nations,
etc. whom Antichrist has enslaved.

CHAP. XI. Verse 1. A reed]
THat is, The word o^ God, that little book that he had newly eaten. This is
the only rule of faith and discipline, whereby all in the Church must be made
and meted.

Like unto a rod] Or, Scepter. The word is that rod of Christ's strength,
whereby he rules in the midst of his enemies, Prove 1.1. A Mashal do minari.
Psalm. 110 2. It is that right Scepter, Psalm. 45.6. which he swaies, and
whereby he sovereigns. The Proverbs of Solomon are called in Hebrew Mishle, or
Master-sentences. And the Scriptures bear the title of Chieftains, Prove. 8.6.
and of Lords of collections, as some render Eccl. 12.11.

Measure the temple of God] The Church that had been so woefully wasted and
oppressed by Antichrist, that it stood in need of new-measuring and repairing.

That worship therein] In the temple, as being all spiritual Priests, and in
the altar; as placing all their confidence in Christ's death alone.

Verse 2. But the court] The Antichristian rout, cast out as reprobate silver,
as refuse stuff, not worth the measuring.

Given unto the Gentiles] Antich^^ and his adherents. Papagans are no better
then Pagans. Are ye not children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of
Israel, says the Lord, Amos 9.7.

The holy City] The true Church. See Daniel 7.21. Ephesians. 2.19.

Forty and two moneths] This number is one and the same with the 1260. days.
The allusion is unto Dan. 7.25.

Verse 3. And I will give unto my two, etc.] sc. Power to purge the Church, and
to stand for the truth, all the while it was trodden under foot, Videsis
Catalogum Testium veritatis ab Illyrico editum. Zuinglius records, that
Luther and he (both at one time, the one not knowing, nor hearing of the other)
began to write against the Popes indulgences. And of Luther and Melancthon he
writes thus, Divisae his operae, sed men's fuit unica, pavit
Ore Lutherus oves, flore Melancthon apes.


Unto my two Witnesses] The whole succession of faithful Preachers, under the
tyranny and rage of Antichrist. These are said to be Two, that is, Few: or Two,
that is enough, Deuteronomy. 17.6. Or, Two, in reference to those noble Two's, Moses and
Aaron, Elijah and Elisha, Zerubbabel and Jehoshuah, in allusion to whom these
Witnesses are here described.

Clothed in sackcloth] As calling men to repentance: or as bewailing their
blindenes: or as wanting better clothing.

Verse 4. These are the two Olive-trees] See Zach. 4.3, 11, 14. In this book of
the Revelation the holy Ghost borrows all the elegancies and flowers in the
story of the old Testament, thereby to set out the story of the new in
succeeding ages.

Verse 5. Fire proceeds out of their mouths] So that a man were better anger
all the witches in the world, then Gods faithful Witnesses: for they have ever
vengeance in a readiness for the disobedient, 2 Cor. 10 6. God inflicting what
they either denounce or desire of him, against their adversaries.

Verse 6. That it rain not] That the influence of divine grace be withheld
from those, that despise the Gospel: so that they become as those mountains of
Gilboah, 2 Samuel 1.21. or that accursed earth, Heb. 6.8.

Verse 7. And when they shall have finished] Like as Christ, That faithful and
true Witness (as he is called, Revel. 3.14.) when he had preached (...) about
the same time as here, was slain by a Roman Governor, raised with an
earthquake, and received up into heaven in a cloud: so these. And, Art thou not
glad to fare as Phocion? said he to one that was to suffer with him. (...).
Plut.


Shall overcome them] By arms, not by arguments.

And kill them] This killing whether it be already past, or yet to come, it is
hard to say. But if to come, some think it shall be but a civil death, that is,
of them as Witnesses only, not a natural death as men: M Tho. Goodw.
And so the same persons shall rise again, and enjoy the fruit of their former
labors, and ascend into a greater glory.

Verse 8. And their dead bodies] This shows it cannot be meant of a natural
death: for how should their bodies lie dead (in that sense) for three years and
an half; or (say it were) for a shorter time.

Of the great City] Rome, of whose greatness Lipsius and Stapleton have
written. See Chap 17.18. and 18.26. (...) Arist Po^^ 3.
Hence she is called the great Whore, and great Babylon, not without reference
unto the old Babylon: which was so great a City, that when it was taken by
Cyrus, some part of it knew not what condition they were in, till three days
after.

Verse 9. Three days and a half] i. e. For a short time, till out of their
ashes others should arise to stickle for Christ. The Pope never rested, but had
one or other faithful Witness to oppose him; either to his face (as Joan^es
Sarisburiensis, Qui praesens praesentem Pontificem redarguit: and Mancinellus,
I^^ R^v p. 145.
who reproved Alexander the sixth in a Sermon at Rome, and had therefore his
hands cut off, and his tongue cut out, whereof he died.) Or else in some more
remote part of his dominion, as Savanarola (whom Guicciardin and Mirandula
highly commend:) De (...) fort dial. 118.
P^trarch who writes thus, Babylon altera, nempe propinquior atque recentior
adhuc stat, cito it idem casura, si essetis viri: Babylon would soon down,
would you but play the men. Besides a cloud of other Witnesses, that might here
be called in.

Not suffer their dead bodies] So fulfilling that, Ps. 79.2. ^^. Rev p. 195.
Some they would not suffer to be bu^^ed: others they dug up again after
burial, as (besides many of our Martyrs) they unburied and burned the bones of
Hermannus Ferrariensis after they had sainted him: because he was said to have
followed the doctrine of the Waldenses, those ancient Protestants. Cardinal
Poole had a purpose, if he had lived, to have taken up K. Henry the eights
body, Act. and Mon. fol 1905.
and to have burned it. 'Twas generally observed, that as Winchester and Bonner
did always thirst after the blood of the living, Ibid. 1439.
so was Cardinal Pooles lightening (for the most part) kindled against the
dead: and he reserved this charge only to himself.

Verse 10. Shall rejoice over them] As they did at the Council of Constance,
Ibid. 1622. In terris mandatant quod apud ^^seros di^^^unt Ibid 1947.
when they had burnt John Husse and Hierome of Prague. So, upon the news of the
Bishops burnt at Oxford, Gardner came out rejoicing to the Duke of Norfolk,
Now, said he, let us be merry and go to dinner. But it was the last he did eat,
and he went to hell to digest it too. So upon the news of the French Massacre,
Th^an.
a Jubilee was proclaimed at Rome: the Cardinal of Lorrain gave a thousand
crowns to the messenger. The Pope caused the Massacre to be painted in his
Palace: those of Ireland he will surely pourtray in his Chapel or Oratoury.

These two Prophets tormented them] As Elias did Ahab, Jeremy and Ahab, their
slagitious contrymen; and as the Martyrs here did their persecutours. Dr
Fuller came to William Wolsey his prisoner, and said, Thou do much trouble my
conscience; wherefore I pray thee depart and rule thy tongue, so that I hear no
more complaint of thee, and come to Church when thou will, etc, Act and Mon.
fol. 15^7.
The end of carnal joy is sorrow (says Mr Bradford, Martyr in a certain
letter.) Now let the whoremonger joy with the drunkard, Ibid. 475.
swearer, covetous, malicious, blind buzzard Sr John. For the Mass will not
bite them, not make them to blush, as preaching will. Now may they do what they
will; come devils to the Church, and go devils home: for no man must find
fault; and they are glad of this. Now have they their hearts desire, as the
Sodomites had, when Lot was gone, etc.

Verse 11. And they stood upon their feet] That is, they set themselves stoutly
and vigorously to fight against Antichrist. As William O^kam, Tu me gladio
desende a Pap^e injurin, and ego te verbis ac scriptis desenda^.
who being excommunicated by the Pope for writing some things against him, fled
to Ludovicus the Emperor, who was likewise excommunicated, and said unto him,
Defend thou me with arms: and I will defend thee with arguments. The Bishops
also of those times that sided with the Emperor, though they were none of the
best, yet they resolved and avowed never to yield to the Pope, Sed si
excommunicaturus veniret excommunicatus abiret, cum aliter se habeat antiquorum
canonum authoritas.

Verse 12. To heaven in a cloud] As Christ did. See the Note on Verse 7.

And their enemies beheld] Not without rage and regret to see how they were
crossed, and the truth more and more propagated. Trucidabantur and
multiplicabantur, says one. The Church as the Lilly is increased by its own
juice: Totum mundum sanguine and oratione convertit, says Luther, She converts
all the world by her sufferings and supplications.

Verse 13. A great earthquake] Since the Reformation, what stirs and broils
have there been all over Christendom^^ Gods sword has ridden circuit, Ezekiel.
14.17. and is not yet sheathed, nor can it, Jer 47 6, 7. as being still in
commission.

And the tenth part, etc.] Ruit alto a culmine Roma. Lewis the twelfth, King of
France, threatened that he would destroy Rome, and coined money with an
inscr^ption to that purpose. Se perditurum Ba^y (...) est. ^^vet. Hist. of the
Co^n^. of Trent 43.
George Fransperg (a General under Charles Burbon,) that sacked the City of
Rome, caused a halter to be carried near his colors, saying, that with that he
would hang the Pope: encouraging his soldiers (who were most of them
Lutherans) with the great opportunity they had to get spoils. But the sins of
the City are not yet full.

Gave glory to the God of heaven] Confessed their sins, as Achan, and changed
their minds, as those Mal. 3.18. It is said of the Burgundians, that being
afflicted and oppressed by the Hunnes, they applied themselves to Christ the
God of the Christians, Alsted. Chron. 3 ^5.
whom, after a long debate, they concluded to be the Almighty God.

Verse 14. The second woe is past] Visionally past, not eventually.

The third woe] Woe to the wicked, but joy to the Saints, At once the Sun rises
upon Zoar, and the fire falls down upon Sodom. Abraham stands upon the hill,
and sees the Cities burning.

Verse 15. Great voices in heaven] i. e. Great joy and triumph in the Church
militant.

Are become the kingdomes] They have renounced Popery, given up their names to
the Gospel, and received the Reformation.

For ever and ever] Not for a thousand years only, as the Millenaries hold.

Verse 16. And the four and twenty Elders] See the Note on Chap. 4.9.

Verse 16. Because thou have taken] Thou have slain and subdued those thine
enemies, that sent messengers after thee, saying, We will no^ have this man to
rule over us.

Verse 18. Were angry] Sed vanae sine viribus irae: the wrath of these men
turned to the glory of God.

That they should be judged] According to their prayer, and thy promise, Chap.
6.10, 11.

And should destroy them] God usually retaliates and proportions jealousy to
jealousy, provocation to provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. frowardnes to frowardnes,
Psalm. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety, Lev. 26.18, 21 destruction to
destruction, as here. He paies them home in their own coin.

Verse 19. And the temple of God] Abundance of light shall be diffused in the
Church: and heavenly mysteries more clearly revealed, and more commonly
understood.

And there were lightnings] Utter destruction to the wicked, as there was to
Jericho, at the sound of the seventh Trumpet. Josh. 6.16.


CHAP. XII. Verse 1. And there appeared]
THis and the two next following Chapters are an Exposition of the former
vision.

A great wonder] As shadowing out and showing great wonders.

In heaven] That is, in the Church, or (according to some) in the visible
heaven, where Sun, Moon and Stars are.

A woman] Alma matter Ecclesia. The Church is called a woman, for her 1.
Weakness. 2. Fruit^ulnes. 3. Lovingnes, 2 Samuel 1.26.

Clothed with the Sun] With Christ's own comlines, Eze. 16.14. She is also
conspicuous, Mat. 5.14. and scorched with persecution, Cant. 1.6. All which
notwithstanding, she is comely, Vxor fulges radijs mariti, says the Civilian.

And the Moon under his feet] She treads upon the worlds trash, bears patiently
all changes and chances, and though the curs of the world bark at her, she
shines still.

En peragit cursus surda Diana suos.

A crown of twelve stars] A crown in token of victory.

And of twelve stars] Those white horses, chap. 6 2. the twelve Apostles and
their successors, in and by whom mystical Christ goes forth conquering and
to conquer.

Verse 2. Bodin Theatr. Not. page 350.
And she being with childe] And so soon smelt out by the Bears of the world.
Vrsa praegnantem mulierem non solum teri gravitate notam, sed ea^ etiam quae
pridie conceperit, solam ex omni turba consectatur.

Cried, travelling] Being hard beset with cruel persecutours, she longs to be
delivered of a Christian Emperor, that might put her out of her pain and
misery.

Verse 3. A great red Dragon] A Dragon the devil is called for his
sharp-sightednesse (the Dragon has a very quick eye, (...). S^a^g.
and is said to sleep with open eyes) as also for his mischievousnesse to
mankind; and lastly, for his serpentine subtilty, Genesis 3. The comfort is,
That as the devil is a Lion, so is Christ, there is courage for courage. And as
the devil is a serpent, so Christ compares himself to the brazen serpent:
there is wisdom for wisdom. A great Dragon the devil is, as being God of the
world; and red all over with the blood of souls, which he has swallowed down,
as S. Peter has it, 1 ep. 5.8.

Seven heads] To plot, and ten horns to push men into the pit of hell.

Seven crowns upon his heads] Pretensed authority for what he did against the
Church. It passed in France in manner of a proverb, That the modern Council (of
Trent) had more authority then that of the Apostles, because their own pleasure
was a sufficient ground for the decrees, without admitting the holy Ghost.
Hist. of the Coun. of Trent fol. 820.
That Popish Council was carried with such infinite guile and craft, that the
Papists themselves will even smile in the triumphs of their own wits (when they
hear it but mentioned) as at a master-stratagem.

Verse 4. And his tail drew] A monstrous tail for length and strength. One
interprets it of his dog-like flattering tail, Eras. Chil. (...).
whence the proverb grew, Cauda blandiri. Julian the apostate drew many from
the faith by flatteries and fair promises. Luther was offered a Cardinalship to
be quiet. The Pope offered Q. B. Carltons thanks. remem. p. 12. Iac Revius de
vit. Pontis.
Elizabeth to confirm the English Liturgy by his authority, granting also the
use of the Sacraments under both kinds, so that she would join her self to the
Roman Church. And how the Pope clawed our King, when he was in Spain, an. 1623.
is better known, then that I need here to relate.

For to devour her childe] As that Dragon Pharaoh (so he is called, Isa. 51.9.)
sought to make away for the newborn babes of Israel, Exodus 1. Thus the Dragon
Maximinus devoured Alexander the son of Mammaea: and thus Decius devoured the
two Philips, because they seemed somewhat to favor the Christians. Thus Philip
King of Spain suffered his eldest Son Charles to be murdered by the cruel
inquisition, because he was any whit inclinable to the reformed Religion.
Constantine the great had like to have lost his life for the like cause, but
that God strangely preserved him for a better purpose.

Verse 5. And she brought forth a man-childe] Constantine, the Christian
Churches first and chief Champion.

Who was to rule all Nations] The whole Roman Empire, but especially to
overruled and subdue the Churches many and mighty enemies: as Constantine did
most notably.

Caught up to God and to his throne] To rule in the Church next under God
himself. And to this height of honor he was caught, when the Empire was cast
upon him, not once thinking of it. De. civ. Dei, l. 5. cap 25.
Bonus Deus Constantinum magnum tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta
optare nullus auderet, says Augustine.

Verse 6. And the woman fled] viz. After the battle mentioned in the next verse
was fought and finished. See Verse 13.14.

Where she has a place] To wit, that Temple that was so exactly measured,
Chap. 11.1, 2. called here a wilderness, as was that of Iudaea, Mat. 3.
because but thinly inhabited. The elect are but a handful to a housefull of
Atheists and Papists. Or else, in allusion to the wilderness of Arabia; through
which the Israelites fled from that Dragon Pharaoh.

That they should feed her there] Those two Prophets, Chap. 11. were appointed
to feed these hidden ones, Psalm 83.3. with the hidden Mannah, Revel. 2. Their
time and hers agree.

Verse 7. And there was warre] viz. Whilst the woman was bringing forth: and
after that her son was advanced to the Empire.

Michael and his Angels] Constantine and his Armies.

Against the Dragon] Maximinus, Maxantius, Licinius, and other ^yrants, acted
and agitated by the devil.

Verse 8, And prevailed not] They were so totally routed and ruined, S^u^tet.
(...). to. ^. p. 118.
that they could never rally or rage any more. Iucundum Christiano homini
spectaculum est, quasi coram cernere certantem Christum cu^ Antichristo, says
one, concerning Luthers Reformation. It was a pleasant sight to see Christ and
Antichrist striving for the better. For whatsoever the Pope with his Bulls, or
the Emperor with his light-bolts did to hinder it, still the Gospel ran and
was glorified: And as then, so ever since, ma^gre the malice of Rome and of
hell. Their late utmost endeavors, and some successes for a season, were but
as the last spruntings, or bitter-bites of dying beasts.

Verse 9. Was cast out] Full sore against his will. If the enemies had but as
much power as malice, the Church should never rest. But they shall be utterly
routed and outed: as at this day they are here to our great comfort.

That old serpent] When he was young, he out witted our first parents, 2 Cor.
11.3. then when their reason was not depraved. Now that he is old, and we but
children, E^h. 4.34. had we not need look to him, and not be ignorant of his
wil^s?

Which deceives the whole world] Having for that purpose his set and composed
machinations, 2 Cor. 2.11. his methods artificially molded, Ephesians. 6.11. his
depths, sleights, coggings of a die, etc.

Verse 10. And I heard a loud voice] Great joy was thorowout the Churches of
Christ, as great cause there was, when Constantine came to the Empire. That was
very remarkable, that Constantine being now a Conqueror, should cause a table
to be hanged up on high before the doors of his palace, Eusebius. in vita Constan.
wherein was painted a Dragon that lay thrust through with a dart under his own
and his subjects feet.

For the accuser of our brethren.] So the devil is called (says one) in direct
and full opposition to that special name and office of the holy Ghost. The
comforter or pleader for us. (...)
The Russians are so malicious one toward another, that you shall have a man
hide some of his own goods in the house of him whom he hates; and then accuse
him for the stealth of them: Just so deals the devil many times by Gods dearest
servants.

Which accused them] And upon some such articles too, as h^ is able to prove
against them. Hence he is said to stand at I^hoshua's right hand; at the upper
hand, because his accusation was as true as vehement. But here is the comfort,
Zach 7 38 Heb.^.
Christ appear^ in heaven for his (as a Lawyer appears for his client) to
nonsuit all the devils accusations. The Spirit also (as an Advocate) makes
request in our hearts to God for us, (...).
and helps us to make apologies for our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. But may not the
Saints say to Satan (first drawing them to sin, and then accusing them) as he
did to Joab, Lib. 2. c. 2^
2 Samuel 18.12, 13.

Verse 11. By the blood of the lamb] By his merit and spirit. Christ's blood (as
Pliny says of Polium) is a preservative against serpents.

And they loved not their lives] When one said to a certain Martyr, Act. and
Mon.
Take heed, it is an hard matter to burn: Indeed, said he, it is for him that
has his soul linked to his body, as a thiefs foot is in a pair of fetters. In
the days of that bloody persecutour Diocletian, Certatim gloriosa in certamina
^uebatur (says Sulpitius) multoque avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus
quarebantur, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur, etc. Those
ancient Christians showed as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdom, Non
majori unquam triumpho vi^imus quam (...) december annorum stragibus vinci non
pot^ (...) Sulpit.
as in the faith of miracles: the valor of the patients, and the savagenes of
the persecutours striving together, till both, exceeding nature and belief,
bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and readers.

Verse 12. Rejoice ye heavens] Ye that have your conversation in heaven, and
shall shortly remove your tents thither.

Woe to the inhabiters of the earth] Earthworms that load themselves with
thick clay, and strive with the toads, who shall die with most earth in their
mouths.

And of the sea] Seamen are, for most part, very profane and godless. See Jude
13. Isa. 57.20. Mr Brightman by these inhabitants of the sea understands the
Clergymen, as they call them, who set abroach gross, troubled, brackis^, and
sowrish doctrine, which does rather bring barrennes of godliness to their
hearers, and does gnaw their entrals, then quench their thirst, or yield any
other good fruit.

For the devil is come down] Indeed he was cast down: but that the devil
dissembles, and makes as if he came for his pleasure sake, and so makes the
best of an ill matter.

Having great wrath] Indignation, commotion of mind, perturbation of spirit,
(...).
inflammation or heaving of the blood, by apprehension of an injury. Satan's
malevolence was a motive to his diligence. Natural motion is more swift and
violent toward the end of it.

Because he knoweth] By the signs of the last judgment, which cannot be far
off, and by conjectures, wherein he has a singular sagacity.

That he has but a short time] He therefore makes all haste he can to out-work
the children of light, in a quick dispatch of deeds of darkness.

Verse 13. He persecuted the woman] As the matter of his calamity. The devil
infinitely hates Christ, and sins that sin against the holy Ghost every moment.
His instruments also, carried with hellish malice, cease not to malign and
molest the Church, to their own utter ruin: for Christ must reign when all is
done.

Verse 14. Two wings of a great Eagle] That is, sufficient means of safety and
protection from petill, Exodus 19.4. By this great Eagle, some mighty personage
seems to be designed, Ezekiel. 17.3, 7. And this may very well be Constantine,
whose peculiar surname was Great: but yet so (says an Interpreter) as that the
great honor and riches, wherewith, as with wings, M Forbes.
he upon good intention endowed the Church, is an occasion to make her flee to
the wilderness, all true and sincere Religion by degrees decaying in the visible
Church.

Verse 15. Cast out of his mouth water] Those barbarous Nations Goths, Hunnes,
Vandals, Lombards, others, stirred up by the devil to overrun the Empire, and
afflict the Church. Or else, it may mean those pestilent and poisonfull
heresies, Arrianisme, and the rest, wherewith the Church was infested,
according to that of Solomon, The mouth of the wicked belcheth out evil things,
Prove. 14.28.

Verse 16. And the earth helped the woman] That is, the multitude of Christians
meeting in the general Councels, those four first especially, held at Nice
against Arrius, at Constantinople against Macedonius and Eunomius, at Ephesus
against Nestorius, and at Chalcedon against Eutychus. These helped the Church
exceedingly against inundations of heresies; and were therefore by Gregory the
great received and embraced as the four Gospels.

And the earth opened her mouth] An allusion to Number. 16.22. Look how the earth
swallowed up those malcontents, so did God root out pernicious heresies with
their authors and abettours, by the power of the Scripture, and the zeal of
the orthodox Doctors, so that they suddenly vanished out of sight, after a
mavelous manner.

Verse 17. Was wroth with the woman] Who yet had done him no wrong: but he and
his are mad with malice (when their designs miscarry especially) and are ready
to sue the Church, as he in Tully did another, Oral. pro C. R^b. Pos^h.
Quod totum telum corpore non recepisset, because he had not taken into his
body the whole dagger, wherewith he had stabbed him.

To make war] That war which is mentioned, Chap. 13.7.

Which keep the Commandments] A just deseription of a godly Christian. Aug.
Boni catholici sunt qui and fidem integram sequuntur and bonos mores. To be
sound in faith, and holy in life, this is the kernel of Christianity.

CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. And I stood]
Where I might best see the beast that came out of the sea.

I saw a beast] The Church, flying into the wilderness from the Dragon, falls
upon this Beast, which is nothing better then the Dragon under a better shape,
Sic alind ex alio malum. This beast is that Antichrist of Rome.

Rise up] Not all at once, but by degrees.

Out of the sea] Out of the bottomless pit, Chap. 11.7. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.

Having seven heads] To plot.

And ten horns] To push. Craft and cruelty go always together in the Churches
enemies. The Asp never wanders alone; and those birds of prey go ^ot without
their mates, Isa. 34.16.

And upon his horns] The Kings that are the popes vassals. See Rev. 17.11.
These are the props of his power.

The name of blasphemy] This is his true name: his pretensed name is mystery.

Verse 2. Like unto a leopard] Which is the female among the panthers the
property whereof is, as Pliny tells us, with her sweet smell to allure the
beasts unto her, hiding her terrible head till she has them within her reach,
and then teareth them in pieces, Just so deals Rome with her unhappy
proselytes. The Papacy is an alluring, tempting, bewitching Religion. No sin
past, but the Pope can pardon it: none to come, but he can dispense with it,
Etiamsi per impossible, matrem Dei quis vitiasset, said Tecelius.

As the feet of a Bear] Which stands firm on her hinder feet, and fights with
her fore-feet: so does the Papacy with its Canons, Decrees, traditions, etc.

As the mouth of a lion] Wide, ravenous, roaring, and ^^satiable.

And the Dragon gave him his power] This bargain was offered to Christ, Mat. 4.
but he would none of it. The bramble in Jothams parable thought it a goodly
thing to reign: So did not the vine and fig tree.

Verse 3. One of his heads as it were wounded] Either by the invasion of the
Goths; or by that fatal schism in the Church of Rome, anno 1378. when there
sat three Popes at once, Lib 3 de Papa Romans cap. 11.
for forty years together: or by the falling away of Protestants from the
Popedom, from the days of Wicliffe, John Husse, the Waldenses, Luther, to
this present. Bellarmine bewails the business, that ever since we began to
count and call the Pope Antichrist, his kingdom has greatly decreased. And
Cotton the Jesuit confesses, that the authority of the Pope is incomparably
less then it was; and that now the Christian Church is but a diminitive.

And his deadly wound was healed] By that false Prophet, ver. 11. that is by
the Sorbonists, Jesuits, Trent-fathers, and other Popish Chyrurgeons. The
Jesuits give out, That the devil sent out Luther, and God raised up them to
resist him: but great is the truth, and will prevail, when all falsehood shall
fall to the ground. It is but a palliate cure we here read of.

And all the world] sc. Of Roman-Catholikes.

Wondered] Or had wondered, till the beast was wounded.

Verse 4. And they worshipped] Admiration bred adoration. Idolatrous Papists
are worshippers of the devil; whom though in word they defy, yet in deed they
deifie.

Who is like unto the beast?] Papa potest omnia, qu^ Christus potest, says
Hostiensis. The Pope can do whatsoever Christ can do: yea and more too, it
should seem by these wise wonderers: Cap. quarto.
for who is like unto the beast? say they. Papa est plus quam Deus, says
Francis Zabarell, The Pope is more then a God. De Pap. Romans lib. 4.
And why? for of wrong he can make right, of vice virtue, of nothing something,
says Bellarmine. Mosconius cannot be content to derive Papa from Papae the
Interjection of admiring, De mojestat. militant eccles: l. 1 c. 1.
because he is stupor mundi, the worlds wonderment (that ye may know him to be
the beast here mentioned) but he must style him King of Kings and Lord of
Lords: having ruledome over all rational creatures, Dulia ador andus, etc.

Verse 5. And there was given unto him] As once was to Antiochus that little
Antichrist, Dan. 7.25. What cracks the Pope makes of his illimited power and
prerogatives, who knows not? What blasphemies he belcheth out of the fable of
Christ, of eating his pork, Al despito di Dio, in despite of God; of suffering
himsels to be styled the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, as
Pope Martin the fourth did, of drinking an health to the devil, as another of
them did, who has not heard? Baronius at the year 964 reckoning up certain of
the Popes, calls them monsters, an abomination of desolation in Gods Temple,
etc. Cardinal Benno says of Pope Hildebrand, That he was a blasphemer, a
murderer, a whoremaster, a necromancer, an heretic, and all that is naught. The
Church of Rome (says another of their own Writers) has deserved now for a
long time no better of God, then to be ruled by reprobates. Marcellius the
second, Pope of Rome, Jac. Revius, p 175.
said, That he could not see how any Pope could be saved.

Forty and two moneths] Here Mr Brightman calculates and pitches the ruin of
Antichrist upon the year 1686. or thereabouts.

Verse 6. In blasphemy against God] As when Pope Leo the first, and (after him)
Nicolas the third affirmed, that Peter their predecessor was taken into
fellowship with the blessed Trinity, as one with them. See verse. 5.

And his tabernacle] Christ's humanity ( Joh. 1.14. and 2.19. this he
blasphemeth, by transubstantiating a crust into Christ. Or, the Church of
Christ, which he counts and calls the Synagogue of Satan.

And them that dwelt in heaven] The glorified Saints, whom either he despiteth
with obtruded honors, such as they acknowledge not: or else barks and rails at
uncessantly as Arch-devils, detestable heretics, common pests, etc. as Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, Vbicunque inve nitur nomen Calvini, delea, tur. Ind. expu^.
whose very name he has commanded to be razed out of all books, wheresoever
any man meets with it.

Verse 7. To make war with the Saints] As he did with the Albigenses,
publishing his Croysades against them, as if they had been Saracens, and
destroying ten hundred thousand of them in France only, if Perionius may be
believed. Not to speak of the many thousands since slain in battle by the Popes
Champions in Germany, France, Ireland, and now also in England: besides those
many more that have died for Religion by the bloody inquisition, by the hands
of the hang man, 3600 in the Low Countries by the command of the Duke of Alva,
800 here in Qu. Mary's days, etc. The Beast has even made himself drunk with
the blood of the Saints.

And to overcome them] So it seemed, but so it was not. See Revel. 12.11. The
Saints never more prevail and triumph, then when it seems otherwise. Of them
the enemies may say, as the Persians did once of the Athenians at the field of
Marathon.

(...) Sto^aeus.

We fell them, yet they fall not, thrust them through;
They feel no mischief, but are well enough.
Over all kindreds and tongues] Here the holy Ghost points to the Popish
Catholicisme. The Jesuits will still needly have the Roman Church to be the
Catholic Church, though so many kindreds, tongues and Nations have utterly
disclaimed it. Herein they are like that mad fellow Thrasilaus in Horace, who
laid claim to all the ships that came into the harbor at Athens, though he had
no right to the least boat there.

Verse 8. Whose names are not written] He then that lives and dies a Papist
cannot be saved.

Slain from the foundation] sc. 1, In Gods purpose. 2. In his promise. 3. In
the faith of his people. 4. In the sacrifices. 5. In the Martyrs: the first
that ever died, died for Religion.

Verse 9. If any man have an ear] q. d. Let all that have souls to save, beware
of this beast: for is it nothing to loose an immortal soul? To purchase an
ever-living death? Purus putus Papista non potest servari. Confer Revel. 19.21.
Its confessed of all, that a learned English apostate Papist cannot be saved.

Verse 10. He that leads into captivity] q. d. Be of good cheer: Antichrist
shall one day meet with his match, drink as he brewed, be paid in his own coin,
filled with his own ways, have blood again to drink, for he is worthy. See
Isa. 33.1. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.

Here is the patience] q. d Here is matter for the trial, exercise and
increase of the Saints graces. Hard weather tries what health. The walnut tree
is most fruitful, when most beaten. Or, here is support for the Saints, and
that which may well make them to hold out faith and patience.

Verse 11. And I beheld another beast] Another in shape, but the same in
substance with the former. For here Christ appears not as an Emperor, but as
an Impostour. That these two are both one, see Rev. 17.11. and 19.20,

Coming up out of the earth] Set up by earthly men and earthly means: Ioh. 8.23.
of base beginning; Gigas quasi (...) Ego supernas, v^s infernates estis, says
our Savior to the Jews. I am from above, ye are from beneath: ye are
earth-sprung, as so many mushromes.

And he had two horns] Two horns in his mitre, two keys in his hand, two swords
borne before him, a twofold pretended power, secular and sacred, as King and
Priest, in the Lambs stead, whose Ape he is.

Spoke as a dragon] That is, says one, he used an absolute command over
consciences, Dioda^.
raised himself through devilish pride and execrable boasting, Rev. 18.7.

Verse 12. And he exerciseth] The power of speaking blasphemies, of waging
wars, of ruling over kindreds, tongues and Nations, etc. notwithstanding his
wounded head, which is after a sort cured by the sedulity and subtilty of the
Jesuits, and other the Popes emissaries. Forbes.
The first beast (says an Interpreter) is the Kingdom of Rome under the
Pontificality: the second beast is the Pontificality wonderfully quickening the
wounded beast to that estate: both are one and the same except in
consideration, as I have said.

Verse 13. And he does great wonders] By his are of juggling: for true miracles
he can do none, nor his master the Dragon to help him. Hence they are called
lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10 sorceries, Rev. 18.23. and impostures here,
ver. 14.

So that he makes fire] As another Elias. This the Pope does daily by his
excommunications, casting firebrarnds, as it were, from on high at those that
slight him: and moreover he relleth us of some, Aventin. An^al.
that for with-standing his edicts, were thunderstruck to death.

Verse 14. That they should make an image] An Emperor, says Aretius, an image
of him at least, chosen indeed by the seven Electours of Germany, but confirmed
by the Pope; who therefore is said to give life to the image of the beast,
whereby he both speaks and acts, ver. 15. For if the Pope confirm not the
new elect, he is no Emperor.

Verse 15. Should be killed] What slaughters Charles the fifth made at Magdeburg
and elsewhere by the Popes appointment; and what bloody work has been done in
Germany, now for this eight and twenty years, or thereabouts by the
now-Emperour and his Father, against the Protestant party, I need not here to
relate.

Verse 16. All both small and great] Emperor and else. The Pope having by his
nephew persuaded the King of Bohemia Maximilian (afterward Emperor) to be a
good Catholic, with many promises of honors and profits, intimating the
succession of the Empire, which else he should hardly obtain, Hist of the Coun.
of Trent 418.
was answered by the King, that he thanked his Holiness, but that his souls
health was more dear to him then all the things in the world. Which answer they
said in Rome was a Lutheran form of speech, and signified an alienation from
that Sea; and they began to discourse what would happen after the old Emperors
death.

To receive a mark] The Popish Clergy say, that in their Ordination they
receive an indeleble character. They may choose whether they will have it in
their foreheads (where it cannot be hid) or in their right hands, where they
may either hide it, or show it, as they think good. See the Note on Revel. 7.3.
The mark common to all the Popish rabble is, S. Peter's Keys branching out it
self in every Antichristian doctrine and idolatrous practice. I can never
sufficiently admire (says one) the speech of blessed Luther, M. Heyricks
Serm^p 108.
who though he was very earnest to have the Communion administered in both
kinds, contrary to the Doctrine and custom of Rome, yet he professes, If the
Pope, as Pope, commanded him to receive in both kinds, he would but receive in
one kind. Its a general rule among the best, that what the Pope commands, as
Pope, though it be good or indifferent, as to pray, read, lift up an eye,
hand, to wear black or white, etc. it is a receiving of the mark of the Beast,
etc.

Verse 17. Might buy or sell] As at Rome, oaths, laws, Ro^^ omnia vaen^l^a.
vows are soluble, and all things else are saleable.

Vendit Alexander cruces, altaria, Christum:
Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.
The Pope sels crosses, altars, Christ, and all:
Well he may sell, for he bought them at the stall.
Also its well known, that the Pope flatly forbids trade and traffic with all
whom he has excommunicated, as he did with the Albigenses in the Lateran
Council: And as he did with one Tooly in Qu. Act and Mon.
Mary's days; who being hanged for felony, and defying the Pope, was (after
his death) suspended and excommunicated, that no man should eat or drink, buy
or sell with him, bid him good morrow, etc.

Or the name of the beast] To be called a Roman-Catholike, which is better
esteemed among Papists then the name of a Christian. It is notoriously known
(says Dr Fulk) that the most honorable name of Christian is in Italy, and at
Rome a name of reproach; Ann^^. in Acts 11. sect. 4.
and usually abused to signify a fool or a dolt.

Or the number of his name] That keep somewhat more aloof, and yet privily
comply with Papists, and drive the same design with them; though more slily
and covertly, and top themselves perhaps unperceivedly. What Is the reason the
Pope will not dispense in Spain or Italy, if a Papist marry a Protestant, yet
here he will: but because such Protestants receive the number of his name, and
will soon be drawn to him?

Verse 18. Here is wisdome] That is, Work for wisdom: as ver. 10. Here is the
patience and faith of Saints.

It is the number of a man] Such as a man, by search, may find out, if he have
his wits about him, as we say. Others sense it thus: the whole number of the
Beast, whatsoever is numbered to belong unto him, is but the number of a man;
humane in ventions and will-wisdome. M* Cotton,
Men will have it so, and this is the sum of all Popish Religion.

Six hundred threescore and six] Amongst the many conjectures, that of (...),
seems to me most probable, as most ancicent and authentike. The year of Romes
tuine is by some held to be 1606. Bernard^s oss^verat Antichr^stum suturum
meridianum demonem: (...) a meridie erit, and ibi sedebit. In Cant. ser. 33.
It Is plain, says one, Satan shall be tied up 1000 years: 666 is the number of
the beast, Antichrist shall so long reign: these two together make the just
number.

CHAP. XIIII. Verse 1. A Lamb]
IN opposition to that counterfeit lamb, Chap. 13. 12. A lion he can show
himself at pleasure.

Stood] Ready pressed for action, as at the stoning of Stephen. or he stood
sentinel for such as he here reserved to himself under the reign and rage of
Antichrist.

An hundred forty and four thousand] The same that were sealed, Chap. 7. all
the holy Martyrs, confess^urs, believers.

Having his Fathers name] His father and their father, Exodus 28.38.
his God and their God: this was written on their foreheads, as Holiness to the
Lord was upon the Highpriests.

Verse 2. As the voice of many waters] The Word of God (called here a voice
from heaven has (says an Expositour) three degrees of operation in the hearts
of men. 1. It works wondering (as the sound of many waters) and acknowledging
of a strange force, and more then humane power, Mar. 1.22, 23. Luke 4.32. M.
Forbes.
Joh. 7.46. 2. It works not only wonder but fear, as thunder does: thus it
wrought in Felix, and may do in any reprobate. 3. In works in the elect, peace
and joy: it makes music in the soul, far sweeter then that of harpers, 1 Pet.
1 8.

Verse 3. A new song] See the Note on Chap. 5.9.

But the hundred, etc] To whom alone it was given to understand the mysteries
of Gods kingdom. Others could not skill of it.

From the father] i. e. From the Antichristian rout and rabble. These
dunghill-cocks meddle not with that jewel, the joy of faith, but speak evil of
that they know not.

Verse 4. Which were not defiled with women] Which have not moiled themselves
with fornication corporal or spiritual, as those Israelites, Numb. 24. by
Balaams counsel; and as Papists at this day, seduced by those effeminate
locusts, Chap 9.8. As for their shavelings that plead this text to prove
marriage a defilement, let them hear the Apostle, Heb. 12.4. and another almost
as ancient: Siquis coinquinationem vocet commixtionem legitimam, Ignatiu^
habet inhabitatorem draconem Apostatm. If any call lawful marriage a
defilement, that man has a devil dwelling in him.

These are they which follow the Lamb] As the sea-mans needle does the
North Pole: or as the hop, in its growing, winding about the pole, follows the
course of the Sun from East to West, and can by no means be drawn to the
contrary: chasing rather to break then yield.

These were redeemed] For royal use. See Verse. 3.

Being the first fruits] Separated and sanctified unto him from the rest of the
world.

Verse 5. And in their mouth] Children they are that will not lie, Isa. 63.8.
neither is a deceitful tongue found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.13. They will
rather die then lie. The officers of Merindoll answered the Bishop that moved
them to abjure, that they marvelled much that he would go about to persuade
them to lie to God and the world: affirming that they punished their children
very sharply, when they took them with a lie, even as if they had committed a
robbery; for the devil is a lier, Act. and Mon. fol. 86^.
etc.

For they are without fault] 1. By Imputation. 2. By Inchoation.

Verse 6. And I saw another Angel] This is held to be John Wicliffe, who wrote
more then two hundred volumes against the Pope; and was a means of much good to
many. The Lady Anne, wife to King Richard the second, sister to Wences^ans King
of Bohemia, by living here was made acquainted with the Gospel: whence also
many Bohemians coming hither, conveyed Wicliffes books into Bohemia, whereby a
good foundation was laid for the following Reformation.

In the midst of heaven] Not in fastigio coeli, in the height of heaven, as
some render it; but allow rather, and as it were in the mid-heaven, because of
the imperfection of his doctrine, when it was first divulged.

Having the everlasting Gospel] The ancient truth, no new Doctrine. A Gentleman
being asked by a Papist, Where was your Religion before Luther? answered, In
the Bible, where yours never was.

Verse 7. Fear God] Let one fear drive out another (as one fire does another)
the fear of God, the fear of your fellow creatures, who draw you to diolatry.
For this it is, that the second Commandment is the first with punishment.

Give glory to him] By confessing your sins, and amending your ways. See Josh
7.19. Jer. 13.16.

For the hour of his judgment is come] The judgment that he will exercise
upon Idolaters, and their mawmets, as once in Egypt. See Joh. 12.31. Act.
17.30, 31. Act. 14.15. Bu^bol^.


And the fountains of waters] Quantum miraculi sit in admiranda illa fluminum
perennitate, nemo, credo, philosophorum satis explicare hactenus potuit, says
one.

Verse 8. And there followed another Angel] Martin Luther with his book de
captivitate Babylonia, which when Bugenhagius first read, he rashly censured
for the most pestilent book that ever was written: But upon better
deliberation, he retracted his former sentence, and became a means to convert
many others

Of the wine of the wrath] Of the intoxicating enraging wine, that sets men a
madding after her:

Nam Venus in vinis, ignis in igne furit. There is a story of Walter Mapes,
sometimes Archdeacon of Oxford, who relating the Popes gross simony,
concludes his Narration thus, Sit tamen Domina materque nostra Roma baculus in
aqua fractus: and absit credere quae vidimus. Rome had ravished this man out of
his wits.

Verse 9. And the third Angel] Understand by this third Angel, all the
Reformers and Preachers of the Gospel after Luther, to the end of the world.

If any man worship] See Mr Perkins his Treatise. A Papist cannot go beyond a
reprobate.

And receive his mark] He says not this of those that have the name or the
number of the Beast. For we doubt not but many were carried away by him, as
those 200 were by Absalom in the simplicity of their hearts, 2 Samuel 15.11.
knowing nothing of his treason.

Verse 10. Of the wine of the wrath of God] Wine for wine. God delights to
retaliate and proportion: as he that said, Fumos vendidit, fumo pereat.

Without mixture] viz. Of mercy, with which God usually moderateth the cup of
believers afflictions. See Jam. 2.13. They only sip of the top of Gods cup,
Illud tantum quod suavius est and limpidius: Reprobates drink the dregs.

In the presence of the holy Angels] Who shall be not spectatours only, but
executioners also, as once at Sodom.

In the presence of the lamb] Notwithstanding their Ag^^^ Dei's, and other
superstitious trumperies.

Verse 11. And the smoke of their torment] Vtinam de gehenna ubique
dissereretur, says Chrysostom. Would to God men would every where think and
talk more of hell, and of that eternity of extremity that they shall never else
be able to avoid or to abide. Surely one good means to escape hell, is to take
a turn or two in hell, by our daily meditations.

Verse 12. Here is the patience] See Chap. 13.10. The beast, being thus
declared and declaimed against, will rage above measure: hold out therefore
faith and patience.

Verse 13. Avoice from heaven] That voice of Christ, Joh. 5. 24. and 8.51.

Write, Blessed are the dead] Though by the Pope accursed and pronounced damned
heretics.

Which die in the Lord] Especially, if for the Lord: which is (said father
Latimer) the greatest promotion in the world, such as is not granted to any
Angel in heaven.

From henceforth] As well as heretofore in those primitive persecutions.

Rest from their labours] The sleep of these laborers, oh how sweet is it!
Quale sopor fessis in gramine -- they get the goal, they enter the haven,

Italiam socij laeto clamore salutant.

And their works follow them] They die not with them, as Hortensius his
Orations did. Mors privare potest opibus, non operibus.

Verse 14. A sharp sickle] An instrument to cut down corn, Deuteronomy. 16.9. and the
bunches and branches of the grapes, Isa. 18.5. It betokens sharp and sudden
vengeance. What more beautiful to behold then the field before harvest, then
the vineyard before the vintage, etc? This is spoken for the consolation of the
persecuted people of God.

Verse 15. Thrust in thy sickle] This is not a command, but a request of the
faithful, which is soon fulfilled. It is like that of the Church, Psalm.
102.13. Arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion: for the time ^o favor her,
yea the set time is come.

Verse 16. And he that sat on the cloud] That is Christ, who soon
condescendeth to the suits of his servants. Iste vir potuit quod voluit, said
one concerning Luther. The death of Arrius was, Precationis opus, non morbi,
the fruit of prayer, rather then the effect of his disease, says another. He
was brought to confusion by the prayers of Alexander, the good Bishop of
Constantinople.

Verse 17. And another Angel] The community of faithful Christians that
combine against Antichrist, to pull him out of his throne, and cut his comb.

Verse 18. And another Angel] A type of true Pastors, M Forbes.
says an Interpreter: by whose plain and powerful preaching the other are
informed and stirred up to consecrate their hands to the Lord. Such an Angel
was Zuinglius, who died in battle: such was Beza in that battle that was fought
in campis Druidensibus: Such were the Angrognian Ministers, and such were
sundry of our late Army preachers, M. Marshall, M. Ash, my dear brother M. Tho.
Jackson now of Gloucester, etc.

Which had power over fire] Not Christum and evangelium flammeum praedicans, as
a Popish varlet slandered Beza at the forementioned fight, but as pacifying
the fire of contention amongst brethren, and setting them all together against
the common enemy.

Thrust in thy sharp sickle] Fall on, quit you like men, be valiant for the
Lord of Hosts: Cursed is he that does the Lords work negligently, Cursed is he
that withholds his sword from blood. Thus the faithful Ministers
strengthened the hands and hearts of the soldiers to battle, and made them
stick close to their colors and Commanders.

Are fully ripe] Ripe for vengeance, as the Amorites were, when they had filled
the land from one end to another with their uncleanness, Ezra 9.11. About the
year of grace, 1414. Theodoricus Vrias an Augustinian in Germany, complained,
That the Church of Rome was then become, Ex aurea argenteam, ex argentea
ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut in stercus abiret; Jac. Rev. p. 229
of gold silver, of silver iron, of iron earth, which would shortly turn to
muck.

Verse 19. And the Angel thrust in] Down go the Antichristians immediately, by
the power and prowess of the Christian armies, thus edged and eneagered by
their Preachers. This we have seen fulfilled in our late wars to our great
comfort, at Edgehill and Nazeby-fight especially.

Into the great wine-presse] Lacus iste locus caedis. This wine press is
called Armageddon, chap. 16.16.

Verse 20. And the wine press was troden] viz. By Christ the King, with his
heavenly horsemen, Chap. 9 13, 14.

Without the City] i. e. Without the Church, happily in Judaea, whither the Pope
being driven from Rome. shall (...) and sit, till Christ shall unroost him with
the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Even unto the horse-bridles] To confute the pride and cruelty of those bloody
Papists that threatened to ride their horses up to the saddle-skirts in the
blood of the Lutherans: so Farnesius, Miner^us, Felix of Wartenburg, Sr Charles
Ellerker, Charles the ninth of France. Flac Illyr. Act. and Mon.
that cruel Queen, who when she saw some of her Protestant Subjects lying
dead, and stripped upon the earth, cried out, The goodliest Tapistry that ever
she beheld. These and the like shall be one day glutted with blood, which they
have so barbarously thirsted after. Satiate sanguine. quem sitiisti, etc. as
she said of Cyrus. Justin. l. 1.


CHAP. XV. Verse 1. And I saw another signe]
DIstinct from the former, and describing the utter overthrow of Antichrist in
this, and the following Chapters.

Great and marvellous] A just wonder it was indeed, the miracle that we in
these last times are to look for, that the Kingdom of Antichrist should be so
easily and suddenly over-turned by the preaching of the Gospel, as once the
walls of Jericho were by the blowing of Rams-horns.

Seven Angels] i. e. Certain Citizens of the Reformed Churches.

Having the seven last plagues] Being the several parts of the seventh
Trumpet, and said to be the last that shall in this life be inflicted: though
far worse follow in hell, whereof all these are but typical. Here the leaves
only (as it were) fall upon reprobates, but hereafter the whole trees.

Verse 2. As it were a sea of glasse] The word of God mingled with the virtue
of the holy Ghost, say some. The world full of affliction, say others.

Having the harps of God] Hearts full of heaven.

Verse 3. And they sing] There cannot but be music in the temple of the holy
Ghost.

The song of Moses] As being delivered out of spiritual Egypt.

And the song of the Lamb] That mentioned, Chap. 14.3. and the same in effect
with that of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15, 17.

Verse 4 who shall not fear thee] q. d. How mad are the enemies, how sottish is
the world that fear not thee, who art the proper object of fear? Psalm. 76.11.
The Greeks call him (...), quasi (...), fear: the Chaldee Dechilah for the same
reason: and Jacob styled him, The fear of his father Isaac.

For thou only art holy] Before it had been said of his Holiness, Who is like
unto the beast? Now, who shall not fear thee, o Lord, for thou only art holy?

For all Nations shall come] As being deeply affected with thine heaviest
plagues upon Antichrist; they shall better bethink themselves, They shall
return and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3. ult.

Are made manifest] i. e. Are begun to be, and more and more shall be, if our
sins hinder not.

Verse 5. The temple of the tabernacle] These words are all one with those,
chap. 11.19. to the consideration whereof we are here recalled, after so long
an interruption.

Verse 6. Clothed in pure] Habited as holy Priests.

With golden girdles] Here an Interpreter gives this note, M. Bernard.
That they which are lewd and vicious, though never so wise, politic, rich and
valiant, shall not be Gods instruments to plague Antichrist and his kingdom.
This their priestly apparel shows also, how that these Angels come forth in
the Churches cause, and for her sake without any other by and sinister respect.

Verse 7. And one of the four beasts] The faithful Pastors by their divine
discourses of the pure worship of God, the intolerable tyranny of Antichrist,
etc. stir up the spirits of Gods servants to set them selves against that man
of sin, and to execute upon him the judgment written. This honor have all
his Saints, Psalm. 149. ult.

Seven golden vials] Vessels of large content, but narrow mouths: they pour out
slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God.

Full of the Wrath of God] Filled out of the cup of his wrath, mentioned in the
former Chapter.

Verse 8. And the Temple was filled] This shows that God graciously approves
and miraculously protects the reformed Churches. See Exodus 40.34, 35. 1 King.
8.10. So he did the Hussites in Bohemia. All Germany was up in arms against
them. Actum jam de Hussitis videbatur. Verum Germani, nondum viso host, Panico
terrore perculsi, diffugerunt, says the Historian. And when things seemed to
be in a desperate condition, the Germans smitten with a panick terror, fled
all away before they had looked the enemy in the face. How wonderfully is
Geneva preserved in the midst of many mighty enemies? What should I speak of
Rochel relieved, and Leiden rescued both from heaven? We of this Nation have
lately seen as much of Gods glory and power in our Temple, as ever did any.

Till the seven plagues] No Anticristian could understand the end of the
present plagues, till eaten into a better mind. Vexatio dat intellectum.

CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. Go your waies]
A Proof of the divine calling of the Ministers of the Gospel.

Pour out the vials] See the Note on Chap. 15.7.

Upon the earth] Upon Antichrist and his adherenrs, Roma facta est ex aurea
ferrea, ex ferrea terrea, said one of her own favorites.

Verse 2. And the first went] They went not all at once. Note the patience of
God, waiting men's return unto him.

Verse 2. Upon the earth] Antichrists footstool, his branded slaves.

A noisome and grievous sore] The French disease, say some: the devils disease,
say others, viz. Spite and envy at the Reformation wrought in Bohemia, Germany,
England, etc. upon the discovery of the Papists hypocrisy and filthiness.

Verse 3. Upon the sea] The Popish Council (called a Sea, from the concourse
thereunto from all parts) that of Trent especially, with their deadly decrees,
making the traditions of the Church the rule of faith, etc.

Died in the sea] As the fishes of Jordan do as soon as they fall into the Mare
mortuum: and as the fishes in the river Nilus did, when the waters thereof were
turned into blood.

Verse 4. Upon the rivers, etc.] The persecutours and impostours; the Jesuits
especially, who have lately added twelve new Articles (by the authority of Pope
Pius 4.) raised out of the Council of Trent, and added to the Nicen Creed, Se^
these ^. Ar^ic in the ep^st pr^fix. (...) B Jewels works.
to be received with others, as the true Catholic faith; to be believed by as
many as shall be saved. And those that receive them not, are not suffered to
live amongst them. This is worse then the six Articles in Henry the eighths
time, that whip with six cords, as they called it.

Verse 5. The angel of the Waters] The same that poured forth his vial upon the
waters, verse. 4

Thou art righteous] Gods judgments are sometimes secret, Justin. l. 1. Val.
Max. Act. and Mon. Camden. See the Mirror or Look^^^-giasse both sor Saints
and sinners, set forth by my most loving and highly honored friend M. San.
Clark, Pastor. and Preacher of the Word at Bennet-Fink, London; unto whom not
only F^give thanks for his help in this publicatio^, but also all the Churches,
that shall get good thereby.
always just, and so to be acknowledged. We shall one day see the reason of
all, and say as Jehu did, 2 King. 9 36.

Verse 6. For they have shed] As Minerius that monster, the cruel Duke of
Alva, bloody Bonner, the Guises, and other of the Popes Champions.

Thou have given them blood to drink] As Tomyris dealt by Cyrus, the Parthians
by Crassus, the Romans by those Jews that cried out, His blood be upon us, etc.
as our laws do by the Priests and Jesuits, and those that receive them,
proceeding against such as are traitors to the State. The putting out of the
French Kings eyes, who promised before with his eyes to see one of Gods true
servants burned: The death of Charles the 9* of France, author of the Parisian
massacre, by exceeding bleeding at sundry parts of his body, who sees not to
be the just hand of God upon them? This Charles beholding the bloody bodies of
the butchered Protestants, in that execrable massacre, and feeding his eye upon
that woeful spectacle, breathed out this bloody speech, Quam bonus est odor
hostis mortui! How sweet is the smell of a (...) enemy? and shortly after
breathed out his accursed soul, Inter horribilium blasphemiarum diras, says
the Historian, tantum sanguinis vim projiciens, etc. after the Beza had
forewarned him (but in vain) by that verse,

Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente time.

So Julian, Attilas, Felix of Wartenburg, Henry 3. of France, stabbed in the
same chamber wherein he, then being Duke of Aniou, had contrived the French
Massacre. So let thine enemies perish, O Lord.

Talia quisque luat, qualia quisque facit!

Verse 7. And I heard another] That in the mouth o^ two witnesses this truth
might be established. Let God be justified, and every mouth stopped.

Out of the altar] Under which lie the souls of those that were slain for the
testimony of Jesus, Chap. 6.

Verse 8. Upon the Sun] The Popes supremacy, say some; the Scriptures, say
others; by the light whereof they are laid open to the world (dancing naked in
a net, and yet not seeing their own nakedness, Act. and Mon. fol. 1657.
as Mr Philpos Martyr told Chadsey) and by the dint whereof, H^s. 6.5.
God smites the earth, Isa. 11.4. that is, the consciences of these Popelings,
glued to the earth. He even hews them by his prophets, and slaies them by the
words of his mouth.

Verse 9. (...).
And men were scorched] Or parched, scalded, roasted: This is by accident in
regard of the Scriptures: for the Lord speaks peace to his people; and his
word is good to those that are good, Orig. in Number. Homil. 27.
Mic. 2.7. But as Origin says of devils, so may we say of Papists; there is no
greater torment to them, then the Word of God. Sp^c. Europ.
In hoc eorum omnis flamma est, in hoc uruntur in^^ndio, Hence they burn up
Bibles, tanquam doctrinam peregrinam, as strange doctrine: En^bir loc. com.
cap. E^^les.
Hence they censure S. Paul as savouring of heresy, and could find in their
hearts to purge his Epistles. Eckius is not afraid to say, That Christ did
never command his Disciples to write, but to preach only. Bellarmine says, the
Bible is no more then commonitorium, a kind of storehouse for advice. Hosius
says, Ipsissimum Dei (...).
That the Popes interpretation, though it seem never so repugnant to the
Scripture, is nevertheless the very Word of God. The Council of Basil answered
the Hussites (requiring Scripture-proofs for such doctrines as were thrust upon
them) that the Scriptures were not of the being of the Church, but of the
well-being only: that traditions were the touchstone of doctrine, and
foundation of faith.

And blasphemed the name of God] The truth of God contained in the Scriptures.
What a devil made thee to meddle with the Scripture? Act. and Mon.
said Stephen Gardener to Marbeck. They tell us of diverse, that have been
possessed by that means: and assure us, that ^u^ condemnation is so expressly set
down in our own Bibles, and is so clear to all the world, that nothing more
needs hereto, then that we know to read, and to have our eyes in our heads,
Alex. Cook.
at the opening thereof.

Verse 10. Upon the scat of the Beast] This City of Rome, which was never yet
besieged (since it became the seat of Antichrist) but it was taken, and shall
be again shortly to purpose.

And his kingdom was full of darknesse] It appeared to be so (as motes appear
in the Sunshine) by the clear light of truth shining upon it. A Scottish mist
is here already fallen upon a piece of his Kingdom: and what further service
God has for their and our armies to do against the Pope in Ireland, or
elsewhere, (...).
we expect and pray. God grant us good agreement among our selves, and then
much may be done abroad.

And they gnawed their tongues] Being as mad with malice, as Boniface the 8.
was of discontent; who being suddenly taken prisoner at his fathers house by
Sarah Columnus his mortal enemy, Turk. hist. 126.
and brought to Rome, laid up in the Castle of S. Angelo, within 35. days
after, most miserably died in his madness, renting himself with his teeth, and
devouring his own fingers.

Verse 11. And blasphemed the God of heaven] As they did in 88, when the
Spaniards gave out, That Christ was turned Lutheran: And as Faux the
Gunpouder-traitour did, when he told those that took him, that not God, but the
devil had brought to light and to naught that desperate design. Lonicer.
theatr. histor.
Thus they set their mouths against heaven, and their tongue walks through the
earth: as if Augustus Caesar were dealing with some god Neptune: or the three
sons, trying their archery at their fathers heart, to see who can shoot
nighest. What an execrable blasphemy is that of John Hunt a Roman Catholic in
his humble appeal to King James in the sixth Chapter of that Pamphlet? See D
Sheld. mark of the^ Beast.
The God of the Protestants is the most uncivil and evil-mannered God of all
those who have born the names of gods upon the earth: yea worse then Pan god of
the clowns, which can endure no ceremonies, nor good manners at all.

And repented not] This leopard ( Chap. 13.2.) can never change his spots:
because they are not in the skin, but in the flesh and bones; in the sinews and
most inward parts. Tigers rage and tear themselves at the sound of a drum, and
at the smell of sweet spices: so do these savage Papists, when called to
repent.

Verse 12. Upon the great river Euphrates] i. e. Upon whatsoever yet hinders
the destruction of spiritual Babylon, and the coming in of the Jews; as the
Turkish Empire, etc.

That the way of the Kings] Christians, say some, who are Kings in
righteousness, and come from the East, or from Christ, That dayspring from on
high, Luke 1.78. Others understand this Text of the Jews, who are most of them
in the East, dispersed through Turkey, Tartary (the ten Tribes especially) and
China. Junius says, Tartars, of Tothar, a remnant or residue
That which is called the land of Sinim, Isa. 49.12. may probably be meant of
China: which, if it be the meaning, there may be many of the Jews, whose
conversion we daily expect and pray for. See Isa. 11.15, 16. Zach. 10.10, 11.

Verse 13. Three unclean spirits] Spiritual fathers, as the Papists call their
Jesuits, who seek to subject all to the Pope, and the Pope to themselves;
being ultimus diaboli crepitus, as one speaks, Arist denat. animalium.
the last attempt of a daring devil. These are the Popes Janissaries,
bloud-hounds, vultures, whose nest (as Aristotle says) cannot be found;
Aristoph.
yet they will leave all games to follow an Army, because they delight to feed
on carrion.

Like frogs] For their filthiness, impudency, loquacity, with their continual
brek^k^kex coax coax.

Come out of the mouth] That is, By the counsel and command, by virtue of that
vow of Mission, whereby the Jesuits are bound to the Pope, to go whither he
shall send them, about whatsoever attempt he shall enjoin them. Yea, if their
Governors command them a voyage to China or Peru, without dispute or delay
they presently set forward. Hence happily they are called spirits.

Verse 14. The spirits of devils] Or breathing devils.

Working miracles] Lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians 2.9.

Unto the Kings of the earth] The Popes Nuncio's, Legates a latere, and other
emissaries stir up the spirits of Princes to embroil the world with wars, for
the upholding of his tottering greatness: but all in vain. The greatest
impostors have ever been the greatest Courtiers. The Arrians in their age, and
of them the Jesuits learned it.

And of the whole world] Papists shall call in the help of foreign Princes out
of Asia, Africa, America, to suppress the heretics, as they call them. But
with evil success: for they shall associate themselves only to be broken in
pieces, Isa. 89. Exorientur, sed exurentur, Rev. 9 18. The mountain of the Lord
shall be lifted up above all mountains. These auxiliaries shall speed no better
then those subsidiary Syrians, 2 Samuel 10.18, 19.

Verse 15. I come as a thief] Who gives no warning. See the Note on Mat. 2.44.

Blessed is be that watcheth] The prophecy is here interrupted (as Genesis 4.18.)
to fore-wa^n and fore-arm the Saints, Luke 12.37,, 8, 43. they are three times
said to be blessed that watch.

Verse 16. And he gathered] God has an overruling hand in that which the
frogs of Rome do at the Courts of Kings, and orders the disorders of the
world to his own glory.

Called in the Hebrew Armageddon] That is, They shall receive a famous foil,
such as Sisera did at the waters of Megidde, Judge. 5.19.

Verse 17. Saying, It is done] What is done? The mystery of iniquity is
abolished, and the mystery of God is fulfilled. So Cicero when he had slain
those of Catilines conspiracy, he came to the people, and said, vixerunt, they
were alive, but now the world is well rid of them.

Verse 18. And there were voices] A description of the last judgment, when
heaven and earth shall conspire together for the punishment of the wicked. See
Mat. 24.2 Pet. 3. and 2 Thessalonians 1.8.

Verse 19. and the great City] The whole Antichristian State.

Divided into three parts] By the earth quake disjected and dissipated.

And the cities of the Nations] That came to aid Antichrist.

And great Babylon] Augustine, and other Ancients do call Rome the Western
Babylon: and do so compare them, as that Abraham was born in the flourish of
the first Babylon, Christ of the second.

The cup of the wine] That wherein God delights, as a man would do to drink a
cup of generous wine.

Verse 20. Fled away] Either swallowed up by the water, or consumed by the fire.

Verse 21. A great hail] Bigger then that which brained the Kings of Cana^n,
Josh. 10. perhaps this shall be fulfilled according to the letter. Howsoever,
the elements shall melt like scalding lead upon Antichristians and other
Atheists: and they shall answer for all, with flames about their ears.

CHAP. XVII. Verse 1. And there came]
THis and the following Chapters are set for explanation of the dark and
difficult passages in the former in the three last vials especially.

One of the seven] Probably the seventh.

And talked with me] Familiarly, as the Samaritesse with her contrymen, (...)
Joh. 4 42. or as the Master with his scholar.

I will show unto thee] Thou shall not only be an ear, but an eyewitnes.
Segnius irritant animum demissa per aures; Quam que sunt oculis commissa
fidelibus. Horat.


The judgement] The damnation of her: the destruction is reserved to the next
Chapter.

Of the great whore] The whore of Babylon, more infamous and notorious, Salust.
then any Thais, Lais, Phryne, Messalina, Orestilla (cujus praeter formam nihil
unquam bonus laudavit) or Pope Joane, Func. com. in Chronol
of whom Funccius the Chronologer speaks thus. Ego Funccius non dubito quin
divinitus ita sit permissum ut foemina fi^ret Pontifex, and eadem meretrix,
etc. I doubt not but that God therefore permitted a notorious harlot to be
advanced to the Popedom (and this about the very time when the Popes were most
busy in subjecting the Kings of the earth, and making them their vas^als) that
he might point out to men this whore here mentioned, with whom the Kings of the
earth committed fornication.

Verse 2. With whom the Kings] As submitting their scepters to his keys; and
becoming his feudataries.

And the inhabiters of the earth] So that she is not a noble whore only, but a
common strumpet: prostituting her self to the meanest for their money, as in
the pardon office.

Have been made drunk] Hence it is so difficult to convert Idolaters: there is no
dealing with a man that is drunk. Whoredom and wine take away the heart, Ho^.
4.

Of her fornication] Both spiritual and corporal. Sixtus Quintus lupanar
utriusque Vener^s Romae condidit (says Agrippa) and decessit tubidus voluptate.

Verse 3. Into the wildernesse] Whether the true Church fled, Chap. 12. of
which they must be (says one) that can learn to know the Romish Church to be a
Whore, condemned of God.

I saw a woman] See the Note on Verse 1.

Sit upon] Not going a-foot, as Christ and the Apostles did: but magnificently
mounted, as the Pope is ever, either upon a stately palfrey (Emperors holding
his stirrup) or upon men's shoulders. England was once called the Popes ass,
for bearing his intolerable exactions.

Upon a scarlet colored beast] The proper color of the Court of Rome: and it
well serves to set forth their pomp and their hypocrisy. Innocent the fourth
gave a red hat to his Cardinals, to show them (as he said) that they should be
ready to shed their blood for the truth. But that Painter was nearer the point,
who being blamed by a Cardinal for coloring the visages of Peter and Paul too
red, tartly replied, that he painted them so, as blushing at the stateliness
and sinfulness of his successors.

Full of names of blasphemy] His head only before was busked with the
blasphemy, Chap. 13.1. now his whole body. Thus evil men and seducers grow
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13.

Verse 4. In purple and scarl^^] Clothing for Kings and Nobles, over whom this
whore domineers much more then the concubines did over the Kings of Persia.

And decked with gold] Gr. Gilded with-gold, (...).
to note her hypocrisy and outsidenesse, gold without, copper within. The Pope
styles himself the set vant of Gods servants, but yet stamps in his coin, That
Nation and Country that will not serve thee shall be rooted out. At the
absolution of King John of England, Daniels hist.
8000 marks o^ silver were presently delivered to Pandol^us the Popes Legate,
who trampled it under his feet, as contemning that base matter, but yet
received it, and sent away to Rome.

And precious stones and pearls] Besides the rich stones that are in the Popes
tripple crown, of inestimable price and value, he carries in his pantosse
(which he holds out to be kissed) the picture of the cross, Heid^^ld
set in pearls and precious stones, Vt plenis fancibus cruc^m Christi d^rideat,
says one, Pope Sixtus quintus was wont to give to Tiresia his harlot,
pantosses covered with peatle. I^^. Re^ (...).
He spent two hundred and threescore thousand crowns upon a Condui^, which he
built for his pleasure: and yet he brought in fifty hundred thousand crowns
into the new treasury built by himself in the Castle of S. Ang^^^. At the
coronation of Pope Leo X, Vno e^ l^e 1000000 a^^orum (...) ^61 Ibid.
a thousand thousand crowns are said to have been spent in one day. Pope Paul
the second was wont to sleep all day, and spend whole nights in weighing
moneys, and beholding jewels and precious pictures.

A golden cup full of abominations] Gold, if it be right, they say, discovers
and expels poison. Put poison into a cup of gold, and it will hiss and send up
certain circles like rain bows. Hereby is signified (says an author) that God
threatens judgment and (...) to those that pour poison into divine doctrine,
as the Pope does with his mad mixtures.

Verse 5. D. James of the co^r. of Script. Prelace.
Mystery] This word Mystery is in the Popes mitre, says Brocard the Venetian,
and many more who have been at Rome, and profess to have seen it. The whole
Antichristian state is a Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and is much
conversant about mysteries, Sacraments, Ceremonies, pompous rites, etc.
murders, treasons, thefts, etc. they easily dispense with, but none of their
Ceremonies. Let God, say they, see to the breach of his own Law: we will look
to ours.

The mother of harlots] The Church of Rome to this day delights to be styled
holy-mother-Church. Holy she is in the sense that the Hebrens call harlots. And
such a mother, as bastards have for their mother, by whose name they are
called: the Father is seldom mentioned by them.

Verse 6. Drunken with the blood, etc.] Bishop Bonner delivered Richard Woodman
with four more, requiring of them to be but honest men, members of the Church
Catholic, and to speak good of him. And no doubt (says Woodman) he was worthy
to be praised, because he had been so faithful an aid in the devil his masters
business: for he had burned good Mr Philpot the same morning. In whose blood
his heart was so drunk, as I suppose, he could not tell what he did, as it
appeared to us both before and after. For but two days before, he promised us
we should be condemned that same day, that we were delivered: yea, and the
morrow after, he sought for some of us again, yea and that earnestly. Act and
Mon. sol 1800.
He waxed dry after his great drunkenness: wherefore he is like to have blood
to drink in hell, as he is worthy, if he repent not, etc. It is wisdom (said a
certain unknown good woman in a letter to Bonne^) It is wisdom for me and all
other simple sheep of the Lord, to keep us out of your butcherly stall, as long
as we can: especially seeing you have such store already, that you are not able
to drink all their blood, least you should break your belly, Ibid. 1672.
and therefore let them lie still, and die for hunger, etc. Thus I kept the
bandogs at staves end (said Shetterden the Martyr) not as thinking to escape
them, Ibid. 1521.
but that I would see the foxes leap above ground for my blood, if they can
reach it.

I wondered with great admiration] All things are portentous in the Popedom:
What monsters were Pope John 12 and Hildebrand, as Luitprandus describes the
one, Lib. 6. de (...). gest in Europ. In vita Hil^eb.
and Cardinal Benno the other, both of their own side? Tertia cl^ssis continet
Papas vel potius (...), says Alstedius. After the thousandth year of Christ,
there was no where less piety, then in those that dwelt nearest to Rome, as
Machiavel observes.

Verse 7. Wherefore did thou marvel?] Nil admirari prope res est una, Numici.
We wonder at things out of ignorance of the causes of them. Hinc admiratio
peperit philosophiam. Alsted. Chron. Disput derep. l. 1 cap. 12.


Verse 8. Was, and is not] Was, before the time of this Revelatian in the Roman
government, which was afterward usurped by the Pope. A thing that the first
Bishops of Rome dreamt not of. And yet Tertullian taxes the rising ambition of
the Popes in his time thus: I hear, says he, that there is an edict set forth,
Libide pudicitia
and that very peremptory, in these terms, Pontifex scilicet maximus Episcopus
Episcoporum dicit. Thus says the High Priest, B^ron Annal. Tom. 4.
the Bishop of Bishops, etc. Odifastum illius Ecclesiae, I hate the pride of
that Church of Rome, says Basil.

Go into perdition] Go, not run: by degrees, not all at once. He now takes long
strides to ward the bottomless pit; which is but a little before him, and even
gapes for him. There stands a cold sweat on all his limbs already.

Shall wonder] Admiration bred superstition; and illumination draws men off it.
Julius Palmer Martyr, was a most obstinate papist all King Edwards days: and
yet afterward, in Q. Mary's time, suffered most cruel death at the Papists
hands at Newbury, Act. and Mon. 1755, 1756.
for the most ready and zealous profession of the truth. His words to one
Bullingham walking in Paul's after his conversion were these: Oh that God had
revealed these matters unto me in time past! I would have bequeathed this
Romish Religion, or rather irreligion to the devil of hell, from whence it
came. Believe them not, Bullingham; I will rather have these knees pared off,
then I will kneel to yonder Jackanapes (meaning the rood.)

And yet is] In regard of that imperial power then extant, which the Pope
should afterward take to himself.

Verse 9. Here is the minde] q. d. Here is work for wise men to busy their
brains codicibus. about. (...).
Sapientia est vel cordibus.

Seven mountains] The Jesuits cannot deny but that Rome is here pointed at, as
being set upon seven hills. So the ancient Rome was, whereof the present Rome is
but a carcass, as retaining nothing of the old but her ruins, and the cause of
them her sins.

Verse 10. And there are seven Kings] That is, kinds of government.

Five are fallen] Kings, Consuls, Dictatours, Decemvirs, Tribunes.

One^^] i.e. The Heathen Emperors.

And the other is not yet come] scil. The Christian Emperors.

A short space] scil. At Rome: for Constantine soon translated the seat of the
Empire to Bizantium, calling it Constantinople; and left Rome to be the Popes
nest. Zonaras Cedrenus. Joh de co'um^^ in mari hist.
The Emperor Constans, nephew to Heraclius, and after him, Otho had some
thoughts to set up again at Rome, but could not: that so the kingdom of the
Church foretold by Daniel, might there be seated, says G^nebrard, Geneb.
Chron.
if he had said the kingdom of Antichrist foretold here by John the Divine,
he had hit it.

Verse 11. He is the eighth] viz. The Pontificality.

And is of the seven] i.e. Shall exercise that monarchical power, that was
before in the seven heads.

Verse 12. Are ten kings] Of ten several Kingdoms, Naples, Spain, Portugal,
France, Polony, Bohemia, Hungary, Denmark, Sweden, and this of England, which
as it was the first of the ten that submitted to the Popes yoke, so was it the
first that shook it off again, in Hen. 8. time.

Verse 13. These have one minde] This is the unity, or rather conspiracy of the
Church of Rome. The Spouse only is but one, Cant. 6 9. Other societies are but
as they clay in the toes of Nebuchadnezzars image: they may cleave together,
but not incorporate one into another.

Verse 14 The Lamb shall overcome them] 1. With a spiritual victory, by a
sweet subjection; at least by a conviction of their consciences. 2. With an
external victory, as the imperialists in Germany, the Papists here.

Verse 15. Are peoples] Fitly called waters for their instability and
impetuosity.

Verse 16. These shall hate] As base fellows use to hate their harlots, when
they find them false.

And shall make her desolate] Shall deny to defend her.

And naked] By denying her maintenance, and laying her open to the world by
their Remonstrances. King Henry 8. Act and Mon.
and the French King, some half a year before their death, were at a point to
have utterly rooted the Bishop of Rome out of their realms, Spec. Europ.
and to exhort the Emperor to do the same, or else to break off from him. The
Realm of France was ready (upon the Popes refusal to re-blesse K. Henry 4.
upon conversion to them) to withdraw utterly from the obedience of his Sea,
and to erect a new Patriarch over all the French Church. The then Archbishop of
Burges was ready to accept it: and but that the Pope, in fear thereof, did
hasten his benediction, it had been effected, to his utter disgrace and decay.

And shall eat her flesh] Be so bitterly bent against her that they could find
in their hearts to tear her with their teeth. See Job 19.22.

And burn her with sire] For an old bawd. It is reported that in Meroe, the
Priests of Jupiter had so bewitched the people with their superstition, that
they would sometimes send to the king of Ethiopia for his head: which was never
denied them, Alex ab Ale^^^ andro.
till it came to King Erganes; who upon so insolent a demand, slew them all,
and took away their Priesthood. Why is not the same now done to the
Bridge-maker of Rome?

Verse 17. For God has put] As he sent Nebuchadnezzar against Tire, Alexander
against Asia, and Attilas against Rome, who surnamed himself the Worlds
scourge, so he will one day send these Kings against Rome. It had been burnt
when Charles the 5. took it, but that the soldiers were kept in by a kind of
violence. Gods time was not yet come for that purpose.

Verse 18. Is that great City] Rome, that radix omnium malorum. This is
confessed by Bellarmine, Ribera, Alcasar and other Jesuits. The Rhemists are
so straited that they know not which way to turn them, or how to deny so clear
a truth, which yet they are not willing to acknowledge. The wit of heretics
will better serve them to devise a thousand shifts to elude the truth, then
their pride will suffer them once to yield and acknowledge it.

CHAP. XVIII. Verse 1. I saw another Angel]
SOme excellent and worthy man (says Mr Brightman) such an one as should come
suddenly before he be looked for, as those things do that slip down from heaven.

Having great power] Or authority: as having in hand a great business, (...).
viz. the denouncing of Romes utter ruin.

And the earth was lighted] He delivered himself clearly and expressly: so as
that all men may well understand his meaning. Ribera the Jesuit gives this
note upon this text, that the judgment of Romes desolation shall be (not kept
secret, but) made manifest to all men,

Verse 2. And he cried mightily] So to awaken Babylon, that slept no less
securely, then that old Babylon, whose King Shesack was feasting and carousing
in the bowls of the Sanctuary, when the City was taken the same night. The
people also did so little fea^ it, Herodot. l. 1. Arist. Polit l* 13.
that it was three days after the City was taken by Cyrus, ere some of them
heard, what was befallen them.

Is fallen, is fallen] Certo, cito, penitus. Or, with a double Fall. They have
fallen culpably, and shall fall penally. This was also long fince foretold by
Sibylla in the eighth book of her Oracles, (...).
Tota eri^ in cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses.
Rome (during the Roman felicity) was never taken but by the Gauls: but since
it became Pontificiall, De rem u^r. fort dial. 118.
it has been made a prey to all barbarous Nations, and never besieged by any
that took it not. There yet stands, near at hand, a second Babylon (says
Petrarch) cito itidem casura, si essetis viri. This would soon be down, if you
would but stand up as men.

The habitation of devils] Which, by a sweet providence of God, for the good of
mankind, are banished (as likewise fierce and wild beasts are) to deserts
and dispeopled places. See Mat. M^r. 5.
12.43. (It is an allusion to Isa. 13.20. and 14.23. Ier. 50.39) yet not so,
but that, by divine permission, they haunt and pester the greatest throngs of
people, yea the holiest assemblies. Some take the words in another sense thus:
It is become an habitation of devils, that is, of idols; and this has wrought
her ^uine. In the year 610. Boniface 4. instituted the feast of All Saints,
after that he had begged of the Emperor the Pantheon of Rome, which he
consecrated to the honor of All Saints, Alsled. Chron. p. 346.
and set up the Virgin Mary in the place of Cybele the mother of the gods.

Verse 3. For all Nations] All Roman-Cacolicks. (...).


The merchants of the earth] The Popish Emissaries that huckster the Word, and
make merchandise of men's souls, 2 Pet. 2.3. (...).
after they have taken them prisoners, and made prizes of them, 2 Timothy 3.6.

Through the abundance of her delicacies] Or, (...).
of her insolences. Proh pudor! haec res est toto notissima coelo, sang
Petrarch two hundred year since, speaking of the luxury and insolency of the
Court of Rome.

Verse 4. Another voice] This was Christ's voice, whether mediate or immediate,
it appears not. See Ier. 51.45.

My people] A people Christ had, and still has, where Antichrist most
prevails. There are thought to be no less then 20000 Protestants in Civil it
self, a chief City of Spain. S Edw. Sand^.
Even in Italy there are full 4000 professed Protestants: but their paucity and
obscurity (says mine Author) shall enclose them in a cipher.

Partakers of her sins] Esto procul Roma qui cupis esse pius.

Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, etc.

Adam Daml^p Martyr had been a great Papist, and chaplain to Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester: after whose death he traveled to Rome, Where he thought to have
found all godliness and sincere religion. In the end he found there, as he
said, such blaspheming of God, contempt of true religion, looseness of life
and abundance of all abominations, that he abhorred any longer there to abide:
although he was greatly requested by Cardinal Pool there to continue, Act. and
Mon. fol. ^118.
and to read three lectures a week in his house: for the which he offered him
great entertainment. The like is recorded of Mr Rough Martyr, that being before
Bonner, he affirmed, that he had been twice at Rome, and there had seen plainly
with his eyes, Ibid. 1843.
that the Pope was the very Antichrist: for there he saw him carried on men's
shoulders, and the false named Sacrament borne before him; yet was there more
reverence given to him, then to that which they counted their God. Mr Ascham
(schoolmaster to Q Elizabeth) was wont to thank God that he was but nine days
in Italy, M. Fullers Holy stat^^, (...). 1^^.
wherein he saw in that one City of Venice more liberty to sin then in London
he ever heard of in nine years.

And that ye receive not of her plagues] Musculi ruinis imminentibus
praemigrant, and aranei cum telis primi cadunt, says Pliny. Plin l 8 c. 28.
Mice will haste out of an house that is ready to drop on their heads, and
spiders with their webs will fall before the house falls. Cerinthus the
heretic coming into the Bath where S. John was washing, (...). Lib. 4. c 14.
the Apostle sprang or leapt out of the bath, says Eusebius: as fearing, lest
being found in his company, he should partake of his plagues. It is dangerous
conversing with wicked men, 1. For infection of sin. 2. For infliction of
punishment. Ambrose closing up the story of Ahab and Iezabels fearful end,
fitly says thus: Fuge ergo, dives, bujusmodi exitum: sed sugies hujusmodi
exitum, si fugeris hujusmodi flagitium. Fly therefore, O rich man, A mb de Nab.
Jezrael, c. 11.
such an end as Ahab had, by shunning such evils as Ahab did.

Verse 5. (...).
For her sins have reached] Gr. Have followed thick or been thwacked one upon
another, thick and threefold, as they say: (...)
there has been a concatenation or a continued series of them. Others read,
Her sins are glewed and souldered together: or they cleave and are glewed to
heaven. Matthew Paris speaking of the Court of Rome says, Hujus faetor usque
ad nubes fumum teterrimum exhalabat. Her filthiness has sent up a most
noisome stench to the very clouds of heaven, as Sodoms did: therefore shall
Babel (the glory of kingdoms) be as the destruction of God in Sodim and
Gomorrah, Isa. 13.19.

Verse 6. Double unto her double] This is spoken to the good Kings that shall
sack Rome, that they do the Lords work thoroughly; not sparing Agag, as Saul did,
to the loss of his kingdom, not dismissing Benhadad, as Ahab did to the loss
of his own life.

Verse 7. She has glorified her self] As mother of Churches, Queen of Nations.
Steuchus (one of her Parasites) says, That Kings have but the use and
administration of their Kingdoms, the right and property belongs to her. Pope
Boniface wrote thus to Philip the Fair, King of France, Volumus te scire te in
temporali and spirituali nobis subjacere, etc. Contra sentientes pro insanis
habemus. We would ye should know, that ye are to be subject unto us both in
temporals and spirituals: and that none that are in their right minds can be
otherwise minded. The King thus answered him again; Sciat tua maxima fatuitas,
etc. Alsted Chron. 359.395.
I would your singular Foolishness should know, that I acknowledge no such
subjection, etc. It was tartly and trimly replied by one Leonard to Rustandus
the Popes Legate, claiming all the Churches here in England to be the Popes,
Omnes Ecclesias Papae esse, tuitione non fruitione, de^^^sione non
dissipation^, That if the Pope had such right to all Churches, it was to defend
them, Jac Rev. de vit. Pontif p* 178.
not to devour them.

Verse 8. Therefore shall her plagues] Security ushereth in destruction. God
shall shoot at such with an arrow suddenly, and fetch them off, as he did the
rich fool, Luke 12.

Come in one day] To confute their fond conceit of an eternal Empire. See the
like Isa. 48.9. When the wars began in Germany, anno 1619. it was reported,
that a great brass Image of the Apostle Peter (that had, Tu es Petrus, etc.
Thou are Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, engraven about it)
standing in Saint Peter's Church at Rome, there was a great and massy stone
fell down upon it, and so shattered it to pieces, that not a letter of that
sentence was left legible, save these words, Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will
build my Church. This was ominous to that tottering title of Rome, and might
have taught the Popelings, That God is about to build his Church upon the
ruins of their worm-eaten title. The Lord thereby see med to say the same unto
them, Ezekiel. 7.6.
that once he did to Israel by Ezekiel, An end is come, the end is come, it
watches for this, behold it is come. Sed surdis fabulam. This has been long
and loud rung in their ears, but they will not be warned.

Death] That is, War, that deadly evil called an evil, (...), Isa. 45.7. I
make peace and create evil, that is, War, a woeful evil that hews its way
through a wood of men in a minute of time, from the mouth of a murdering-piece,
and causes thousands to exhale their breath, without so much as Lord have
mercy upon us. (...)


And mourning] For the loss of dead friends.

And famine] The usual concomitant of war, in sieges especially. See the Note
on Rev. 6.5.

For strong is the Lord] Full able to effect it, seem it to Babels brats never
so improbable, or impossible,

Verse 9. (...).
Shall bewail her and lament] As with the voice of Doves, tabring upon their
breasts, Na^um 2.7. The chief of these mourners shall be the Spaniard likely;
who yet has no such great cause, In respon. Apol. (...) Card Colum.
if he look well about him: for he is yearly excommunicated by the Pope, for
detaining from him the Kingdom of Sicily, as Baronius witnesses. It were to
be wished that he would intimate his Predecessor Charles the fifth; who upon a
displeasure conceived against Pope Clement the eighth, Scultet. Annal. D^^ad^^
l. p. 2.
abolished the Popes authority thorowout all Spain, Exemplo ab Hispanis ipsis
posteritati relicto, posse Eccles^asticam disciplinam ^itra nominis Pontifi^ij
authoritatem conservari, says mine author, i. e. The Spaniards themselves
setting forth to the world, That the Church may be governed without the Popes
authority.

Verse 10. (...) Atn^^ae^^ l. 13
Standing afar off] As fearing their own safety, they will not venture
themselves for an old withered harlot, that is now ( Lais-like) ready to be
extinct in the last act of her uncleanness

For in one hour] God will make short work of it, when once he begins, Romans
9.28. This should be an (...) to Christian Princes and States, to set upon the
service. The Pirates war was Incredibili celeritate and temporis brevitate
confectum, says Austin, soon dispatched: Aug. de civ Dei
so shall this.

Verse 11. And the merchants of the earth] The Popes Indulgencers, and other
officers of his Exchequer. John. Manl. loc. com p. 49 ^.
What huge sums of money did Tecelius and his companions rake together out of
Germany? The Pope had yearly out of England above nine tu^s of gold: Polydor
Virgil was his Collectour of the Peter Pence here. Otto (one of the Popes
Muscipulatores, Mice-catchers, as the story calls him) departing hence, left not
so much money in the whole Kingdom, as he either carried with him, or sent to
Rome before him. It was truly and trimly said by Pope Innocent 4. Vere enim
hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia, and puteus inexhaustus. England was
then a gallant garden to the Pope, and a wellspring of wealth, that could not
be drawn dry.

For no man buyeth their merchandize] Men shall see further into their
fopperies and knaveries, then to endure to be any longer gulled and cheated.
William of Malmsbury began to groan long since under the grievance. Romani
hodie (says he) auro trutinant justitiam, pretio venditant canonum regulam.
The Romans now-adaies sell justice, sacraments, masses, dispensations,
benefices, all: Mantuan comes after and cries out, -- vaenalia nobis
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, coelum est vaenale, Deusque.


Temples, Priests, altars, rites (I tell no tale)

Crowns, sacrifices, heaven and God are set to sale.

The Leaguers here for the liberty of the Kingdom in the days of King John,
drove Martin the Popes publican out of the Land; Iac. Revius.
the King also cursed him grievously at parting, Lib. 3 de pour. Rom c. (...).
with Diabolus te ad inferos ducat and perducat. But now much more then ever
these merchants want Chapmen, as Bellarmine sadly complains. Their markets are
well fallen, their Euphrates much dried up.

Verse 12. The merchandise of gold] All this is taken out of Ezekiel 27. All
countries have catered and purveied for the Pope, who has had it either in
money, or other commodity: but money answered all things.

Thyne-wood] A wild kind of Cedar, very sweet and sound: for it will not
easily rot.

Verse 13. And Cinnamon] Galen writes that in his time cinnamon was very rare,
and hard to be found, Lib. 1. Antido ^.
except in the storehouses of great Princes. And Pliny reports, That a pound of
cinnamon was worth a 1000 denarij, that is 150 crowns of our money.

And chariots] Or Sedans, as we call them.

And the souls of men] Tecelius the Popes pardon monger, persuaded the people
in Germany, that whosoever would give ten shillings, Act. and Mon. fol. 771.
should at his pleasure deliver one soul out of the pairs of purgatory; and as
soon as the money rang in the basin, that soul was set at liberty. But if it
were one jot less then ten shillings, it would profit them nothing. This
gainful gullery Luther cried down with all his might, and so ma^red the
Market. This gave occasion to that saying of Erasmus, whom when the Electour of
Saxony asked, Why Luther was so generally hated? He answered, Scultet. Annal.
dec. ^.
for two faults especially; he has been too-busie with the Popes crown, and
the Monks paunches.

Verse 14. And the fruits] Those first ripe fruits, Mic. 7.1. greedily desired
and bought up at any rate by the richer and daintier sort of people. (...).


Which were dainty and goodly] Gr. Fat and fair liking: pleasant to the eye as
well as to the taste; confections, suckets, sweetmeats, second and third
services.

Verse 15. Which were made rich by her] By their fat benefices, Commendams,
Spec. Europ.
golden Prebendaries, some one yielding ten or twenty thousand by the year. The
Archbishopric of Toledo is worth an hundred thousand pounds a year; which is a
greater revenue then some Kings have had. What a vast estate had Wolsey gotten?
Act. and Mon.
So that rich and wretched Cardinal Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester, and
Chancellor of England in the reign of Henry the sixth, who asked, Wherefore
should I die being so rich? etc.

Verse 16. With gold and precious stones] All these avail not in the day of
wrath. Neither need we envy wicked men their plenty: it is their portion, all
they are like to have. The whole Turkish Empire is nothing else, says Luther,
Nisi panis mica, quam dives pater familias projicit canibus, a crust cast to
the dogs, by God the great householder. I have no stronger argument (said the
same Luther) against the Popes kingdom, Quam quod sinc cruce regnat, then this,
that he suffers nothing. Surely there is the more behind: there will be
bitterness in the end no doubt.

Verse 17. So great riches is come to nought] Gr. (...).
Is desolated, or become a wilderness. Petrarch writes that in the treasury
of Pope John 22. were found by his heirs two hundred and fifty tuns of gold.
And of Boniface 8. it is recorded, That he was able to show more money then all
the Kings in Christendom.

And every ship-master] i. e. Cardinal, Patriarch, Archbishop, though but
titular and imaginary, without jurisdiction, as are the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem and Alexandria; which the Pope successively
consecrates, ever since the holy Land and the Provinces about it were in the
hands of Christian Princes, anno 1100. so loath is the Pope to lose the
remembrance of any superiority or title, Spec. Europ.
that he has once compassed.

And all the company] The Cardinals and Archbishops train and retinue, those
in office especially. What a pompous family kept Wolsey, consisting of one
Earl, nine Barons, Rex Platon. p. 26
very many Knights and Esquires, and others to the number of four hundred.

And sailers] Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc.

And as many as trade by sea] All the Clergy, the Jesuits especially, without
whose lusty help (says one) S. M Brightman.
Peter's fish-boat had stuck in the sand, and had rushed against the rocks long
since.

Verse 18. What City is like unto this] q. d. Who would ever have thought we
should ever have seen this dismal day of Romes destruction? It was wont to be
said, Roma cladibus animosior, Rome is unconquerable. The Pope wrote once to
the Turk that threatened him, Niteris incassum Petri submergere navem:
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.


Verse 19. And they cast dust] As men willing to be as far under ground, as now
they were above ground. Having lost their livelihood, they had little joy of
their lives.

All that had ships in the sea] All Churchmen, i. e. All, for the most part:
some of them have little enough. Sanders was starved, Stapleton was made
professor of a petty University, D Featly his Trans explod.
scarce so good as one of our free-schools. On Harding his Holiness bestowed a
Prebend of Gaunt, or (to speak more properly) a Gaunt Prebend. Allin was
commonly called the starveling Cardinal, etc.

Verse 21. Thou heaven] i. e. The Church on earth.

And ye holy Apostles, etc.] i. e. Ye Pastors and Teachers! who as ye have
been most shot at by her, so now you are specially called to triumph over her,
Psalm. 58.11.

Verse 21. And a mighty Angel] For further assurance a sign is added, and an
allusion made to Jer. 51.63. And here it is easy to observe a notable
gradation: an Angel, a strong Angel takes a stone, M. Forbes
and a great stone, even a millstone, which he lets not barely fall, but
casts, and with impetuous force thrusts into the bottom of the sea, whence
it cannot be boyed up. Thus is set forth to the eye also the irreparable ruin
of Rome.

Verse 22. And the voice of Harpers, etc.] Thine Organs and Sackbuts, thy
chaunting and Church music shall cease.

And the sound of a milstone] Anciently they used handmils, which did make a
great noise in the Cities, as Diodate here notes.

Verse 13. And the light of a candle] The candle of the wicked shall be put
out: they that here love darkness better then light, (...).
shall hereafter be thrust into outer darkness, where they shall never see the
light again, till they see all the world on a light fire.

For thy merchants were the great men] The Pope creates his Cardinals by these
words, Estote fratres nostri and Principes mundi, Be ye brethren to us, and
Princes of the world. They hold themselves Kings comperes.

Verse 24. And in her was found] Rome has ever been the slaughterhouse of the
Saints, as Jerusalem was before her, Mat. 23.

And of all that were slain] For she has a hand in all the wars of Europe;
besides all the Christian blood shed by her instigation, in those holy wars, as
they called them, for the recovery of the Land of Canaan.

CHAP. XIX. Verse 1. I heard a great voice]
IN obedience to that exhortation, Chap. 18.20. Rejoice over her, thou heaven,
etc.

Saying Allelujah] i. e. Praise the Lord. Was not he a wise man that gave this
derivation of the word Al a^^ssimus, le levatus est, lu lugebant Apostoli,
jajam resurrexit? Acutum sane decompositum. This word is in the old Testament
first used, Psalm. 104.35. where consuming of sinners is mentioned: as in the
new Testament here, where the destruction of Antichrist is foretold.

Unto the Lord] Gr. Is the Lords, as Psalm. 3.8. He is the true proprietary.

Verse 2. Which did corrupt the earth] I read of one, who journeying to Rome,
as soon as he came within the City shut his eyes, and so kept them: as
resolving to see nothing in that City (which he knew to be very corrupt, and a
corrupter of others) but only the Church of S. Peter. See the Note on Chap.
18.4. Su^inx. (...). p. 753.


Verse 3. And again they said Allelujah] As unsatisfiable in performing so
divine a duty. Some think that the Hebrew word is retained to import, that
after Rome is ruinated, the Churches of the Gentiles shall by their uncessant
praises provoke the Jews to join with them, and concelebrate the mercy: like as
the Spouse, by praising her beloved, stirred up those dull daughters of
Jerusalem. to seek him with her, Cant. 5.9, 10, etc. with Chap. 6.1.

And her smoke rose up] Like that of Sodom: Yet wretched Romanists will not be
warned; whose judgment therefore is here revealed after that of the firing of
Rome.

Verse 4. And the four and twenty Elders] The former Allelujah was more
private^ every good heart being lifted up with joy and thankfulness, when first
they hear the good news of Antichrists overthrow. Now this is the joint
Allelujah of the public Congregation, praising and magnifying God. This may
bea further means to move the Jews to come in.

Verse 5. And a voice came out] This is the Lambs voice, his all-quickning
voice, which shall rouse and raise the dead and dedolent Jews; powerfully
pulling the vail from their hard hearts, which yet were somewhat moved and
mollified by the former Alleluja's: so that now all the servants of God, small
and great, Jew and Gentile shall praise him with one concent.

Verse 6. And I heard as it were the voice] See how morigerous the Saints are,
and ready hearted to obey God. No sooner are they bidden to praise God, but
they are at it, dicto citius. See the like Psalm. 27 8.

Saying Alleluja] This was the Hosanna Rabba, as the Jews call it: D. (...) 1
de (...) word p. ^^2.
the victoria Hallelujatica, as the old Brittans called their victory over the
Saxons. The story is this. Under the conduct of Germanus (here in Britain) who
came over from France to subdue the Pelagian heresy (which then prevailed
amongst us) against a mighty Army of Saxons and Picts, the Britains prevailed
only by the three times pronouncing the word Hallelujah: which voice ecchoing
and redoubling from the acclamation of his followers among the mountains, nigh
to which the enemy had encamped, frighted them and won the conquest, upon
which it was called victoria Hallelujatica.

Raigneth] i. ^. He now makes it appear that he reigns, which Averroes and
some other of the worlds wisards doubted of, yea denied: because they saw bad
men prosper, good men suffer.

Verse 7. Has made her self ready] Being first made ready by the grace of
Christ. Certum est nos facere quod facimus: sed ille facit ut faciamus. The
bowls of the Candlestick had no oil, Aug.
but that which dropped from the Olive-branches, Zach. 4.

Verse 8. And to her was granted] It is here clear (says an Interpreter) that
there shall be as great difference between the state of Gods Church now, and
that which is to come after Romes ^uine, Bernard.
as between the time of honorable persons only betrothed, and the high,
joyful and glorious day of their public marrying; and as between the time of
a King coming on to his Kingdom, and his actual and powerful reigning, as
King indeed.

That she should be arraied] This also is given her, as well as her rich
raiment: which she can no more put on by her self, then she can purchase it.

Clean and white] Or, Pure and bright. Pure, says one, because imputed
righteousness is pure indeed, and has no spot in it; M* Cotton.
but not bright, you can see no great matter in it: it makes no great show
before men (as in herent righteousness does, Mat. 5 16.) but before God. A man
may be very much defiled and subject to many scandals, and yet be clothed with
the garment of imputed righteousness.

The righteousness of Saints] Gr. Righteousnesses, that twofold righteousness
imputed and imparted.

Verse 9. Write] To wit this ensuing sentence, for the use of posterity, worthy
to be written in letters of gold.

Blessed are they that are called] So they have hearts to come at Christ's call,
and not show themselves unworthy to taste of his Supper by framing excuse, as
those recusant guests did, Luke 14.

These are the true sayings of God] q. d. This foregoing sentence is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Verse 10. And I sell at his feet] So taken he was with the joyful tidings of
his Contrymen (the Jews) conversion, that he fell down as Abraham did upon
the good news of Isaac's birth, Genesis 17.17. And it may be he took this Angel
to be Christ, the Angel of the Covenant: Euph^r.
But that was his error. Triste mortalitatis privilegium est, licere a^iquando
peccare.

See thou do it not] An elliptick and concise kind of speech in the Greek,
betokening haste and displeasure at that was done. (...).
Papists will needs despite the Angels with seeming courtesies and respects:
And whereas the Council of Laodicea, says, It behooves Christians, (...), not
to pray to* Angels. Cap. 35.
Surius and Caranza make the words to be, Non oportet Christianos ad angulos
congregationes facere: and the title they make, De ij^ qui angulos colunt, in a
clean contrary sense to the Councels intention.

Verse 11. And I saw heaven opened] i. e. He saw things done before his eyes,
as it were: so do not we, but are left to conjectures. Here is showed, says
one, the foil of the Beast, bearer up of the whore, and no question but now
highly chafed with her fall. This is the last and noblest act of Christ's
riding, for the Dragon and his Vicars utter destruction. Thus he. Here is
showed, says another Interpreter, in what state the Church shall be in, upon
the ruin of Rome, even as a people standing in arms under their General Christ
Jesus for a time, till the last battle be fought, and the enemies destroyed.

Behold, a white horse] Christ riding as an Emperor triumphing, and as a
righteous Judge, Psalm. 9.8 and 96.10, 13.

Verse 12. His eyes were as a flame of fire] A quick* sighted Judge, an
intelligent warrior. Counsel and strength are for the war, 2 King. 18.20.

And on his head were many crowns] Let the Tripple-crowned Pope look to
himself: Christ out-crowns him by far.

And he had a name written] His holy and reverend name Jehovah, Je^. ^3.
importing his Godhead: for he is Jehovah our righteousness. And as thus, No
man knows the Son but the Father, Mat. 11.26. for as God he is
incomprehensible, Judge. 13.18. What is his name, or what is his sons name, if
thou can tell? Prove. 30 4. Who shall declare his generation? Isa. 53.8.

Verse 13. Dipped in bloud] In the blood of his enemies, as a victour returning
from a huge slaughter. Caesar is said to have taken prisoner one million of
men, and to have slain as many. Mahomet the first (Emperor of the Turks) to
have been the death of 800000 men: Turk. ^^st.
Scanderbeg to have slain 800 Turks with his own hand. But our Conqueror shall
outdo all these; when he shall tread them in his anger, and trample them in
his fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon his garments, and he will
stain all his raiment. Isa. 63.3.

The word of God] Joh. Idiotismus Ioannis Pare^.
1.1. and 5.7. Hereby it appears, that this was John the Evangelist that wrote
this book.

Verse 4. And the armies which were in heaven] The heavenly-minded Hero's, that
sight his battles, are all in his livery, horsed and habited as he, in whom
they are more then Conquerours, because they are sure to conquer before they
fight.

Verse 15. A sharp sword] The word, Ephesians. 6.17. the rod wherewith he smites the
earth, Isa. 11.4. The breath of his mouth, whereby Antichrist shall be
over-thrown, as by force of arms, so also of arguments.

The Nations] The Paganish-Papagans. See the book entitled Paganopapismus:
wherein is proved that Papisme is flat Paganism, and that the Papists do
resemble the very Pagans in above sevenscore severa^l things.

And he treads the wine-presse] At Armageddon, Chap. 16.16.

Verse 16. And on his thigh] Where his sword hangs, Psalm. Non minor est virtus
quam querere parta (...).
45.3. to show that he will keep what he has gained ( Vincere s^is Annibal,
victoria utin^s^is, said one) Or, on his thigh, quia filiabitur nomine ejus,
Psalm. 72.17. the name of Christ shall endure for ever, it shall be begotten, as
one generation is begotten of another, there shall be succession of Christ's
name: He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hands, Isa. 5.10. Confer Genesis 46.26.

Lord of Lords] This title the Pope usurps: but what said Miconius in a letter
to Calvin upon the view of the Churches enemies? Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus
est: alioqui totus desper assem, I am glad that Christ is Lord of Lords; for
else I should have been utterly out of hope.

Verse 17. Standing in the Sun] Where he might best be heard, as an Herald. And
he well types out such, as by clear light of truth, shall make known the
certain destruction of the enemies, before the battle he fought.

Unto the supper of the great God] They that would not come to the supper of
the Lamb, shall be made a supper to the fowls of heaven.

Verse 18. That ye may eat] He alludes to Ezekiel. 39 4.17. Gog and Magog were a
type of Antichrist. Behold, I am against thee, o Gog, the chief Prince of
Meshec and Tubal, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 38.3. where, if Gog be the great Turk,
and Meshec Cappadocia, where he first settled himself, Why should he be called
Prince of Tubal also, that is, of Spain, France and Italy, as Hierome and
Josephus interpret it (neither do Bellarmine and Gretser dissent?) Is it not to
show, that after the fall of Babylon, the Antichristians shall call in the Turk
and other Pagan Princes to invade and distress the Church, that they may all
perish together, and feed the fowls with their dead carcas^^?

Verse 19. And I saw the Beast] The Churches enemies are even ambitious of
destruction. Judgments need not go to find them out; they run to meet their
bane.

Verse 20. And the Beast was taken] Taken suddenly, (...) proprie d^e^tur de
ijs quos sugiemes arripimus. Bez.
or as he was flying, and so thinking to escape. Dio makes mention of a
notable thief that did much mischief in Italy (afterward the Popes seat) in
the days of Severus. This Emperor used all the means he could to catch him,
but could not do it, Dio. in Severo.
Quippe qui visus non videbatur, non inveniebatur inventus, deprehe^sus non
capiebatur, says the Historian. But this subtle Beast meets with his match
and more: for he is caught and cast into the lake, etc. Christ is a conqueror
so soon as ever he comes into the field, Vexit, vidit, vicit. When the enemies
are tumultuating, he comes upon them as out of an Engine, and hurls them
headlong into hell.

And with him the false prophet] This is the same with the Beast: only the Pope
is called the Beast in respect of his civil power, and the false prophet in
respect of his spiritual. See the Note on Chap. 13 12.

These both were cast alive] Death shall not end their misery, but they shall
suffer most exquisite torments. Potentes potenter torquebuntur.

Verse 21. Slain with the sword] Not so deeply damned, and yet so slain as to
be made a prey to the infernal vultures; and then the fattest carcass shall be
the finest prey, the greatest sinners the sorest sufferers.

CHAP. XX. Verse 1. And I saw an Angel]
COnstantine the great, the Churches male-childe, Chap. 12.

Having the key] Not that key, Chap. 9.1. but another.

A great chain] The succession of Christian Emperors.

Verse 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon] Chap. 12.7, 9. He took him in a
field-fight, and since then till now we have heard little of him, more then
that he substituted the Beast, Chap. 13. whose destruction being declared, the
prophecy returns to show the judgment of the Dragon.

And bound him] From the open slaughtering of the Saints, as he had done by the
Heathen Emperors: for from molesting and mischieving of Gods people, other
wise he is not bound one hour, Job 1. 1 Pet. 5.8. And how his vicegerent the
Beast has bestirred him, during the thousand years, who knows not?

A thousand years] Hos explicare fat^or trepide m^ aggredi, says Pareus. He
begins the thousand at the destructi^n of the Temple, anno 73. and so it ends
in Pope Hildebrand, who stepped into that chair of pestilence, anno 1073. Others
begin it at the birth of Christ, and end in Silvester 2. Others at Christ's
passion, and end in Benedict 9. But they do best in my opinion, that begin at
Constantine, and end in Boniface the 8. who is of his own said to have entered
like a fox, reigned as a Lion, and died as a dog. He excommunicated the French
King, and published this decree, That the Bishop of Rome ought to be judged of
none, although he should carry innumerable souls with him to hell.

Verse 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit] That is, into the earth, Chap.
12.9, 12. Chap. 13.11. the earth is the bottomless pit, out of which the Beast
was raised by the Dragon.

Deceive the Nations] The Gentiles, by defending Gentilisme, and hindering the
course of the Gospel amongst them.

And after that the must be losed] He must, because God has so decreed it, for
the glory of his own name in the defense of his people; but destruction of his
enemies. As also that the devil may show his malice, which God can restrain at
his pleasure. Roger Holland Martyr, said to Bonner: This I dare be bold in God
to speak, which by his Spirit I am moved to say; that God will shorten your
hand of cruelty, that for a time you shall not molest his Church: And after
this day in this place shall there not any be by him put to the fire and
faggot. A^^, and Mon^^* 852.
And it proved so: for none after the suffered in Smithfield, for the testimony
of the Gospel.

Verse 4. And they sat upon them] Resting from former p^rsecutions, and
reigning in righteousness even here upon earth.

And judgment was given unto them] That is, say some, the spirit or discerning
between Christianity and Antichristianisme: Or the clearing of the innocence,
and doing them right, say others. Or, they had their chairs, seats and
consistories, wherein they did both preach the Word, and execute the Churches
censure, as some sense it.

And I saw the souls] This makes against the Millenaries Souls reign not but in
heaven: there are the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. Cotton his
pouring out of the 7. vio^s, p. 26.
True it is (as Mr Cotton well observes) that there are many devises in the
minds of some, to think that Jesus Christ shall come from heaven again, and
reign here with his Saints upon earth a thousand years* But they are, says he,
but the mistakes of some high expressions in Scripture, which describe the
judgments poured out upon Gods enemies in making way to the Jews conversion, by
the pattern of the last judgment. Thus he. The souls here mentioned are the same
I conceive, that were seen under the Altar, Revel. 6.9. and do cry, How long
Lord? These are not capable of a bodily resurrection, nor of an earthly reign.

And they lived and reigned with Christ] They, that is, those that sat on the
thrones (not they that were beheaded) Lived and reigned, as spiritual Kings
(after the same manner, as they are Priests, verse. 6.) for else there should be
more Kings then Subjects.

With Christ] It is not said with Christ upon earth, this is an addition to the
text; or if the words did import a reigning upon earth, yet this would not
infer an earthly reign for a thousand years in great worldly delights,
begetting many children, eating and drinking, and enjoying all lawful
pleasures, as some dream now a-daies. The conceit, I confess is as ancient as
Cerinth^^ the heretic, and P^pias (scholar to S. John) a man much reverenced
for opinion of his holiness, but yet homo ingenij pertenui^, says Eusebius,
not oppressed with wit. Hierom and Augustine explode it, as a Jewish fable, and
declare it to be agreat error, if not an heresy: so do all the (...) at this
day. The Patrons of Christ's personal reign upon earth, Moses's choice, p. 487.
are Mr Archer and Mr Burroughes, who tells us, That if the opinion of some
concerning Christ's coming to reign here in the world before the day of
judgment be not a truth, he cannot make any thing of many places of Scripture,
as this place for one. But if he cannot, yet others can. See an Answer to his
and M. Archers chief Arguments in M. Bayl^ his disswasive from the errors of
the times, Chap. 21. p. 238.

Verse 5. But the rest of the dead] Dead in Baal-worship, as Ephraim, Hos.
13.1. dead in sins, as Sardis, Rev. 3.1.

Lived not again] By repentance from dead works: or they recovered not the life
and immortality that is brought to light by the Gospel.

Until the thousand years] Until, being taught better by Gods faithful
witnesses, they abjured Popery.

This is the first resurrection] From Romish superstitions. M. Fox tells us,
Act. and Mon. fol 767.
that by the reading of Chaucers books, some were brought to the knowledge of
the truth.

Verse 6. Blessed and happy is he] The holy only have part in this
resurrection, (...).
and are therefore happy, or out of harms-way, as the word signifies.

The second death has no power] For they are brought from the jaws of death to
the joys of eternal life, where is mirth without mourning, riches without
rust, etc.

But they shall be Priests] See the Note on Chap. 1.6.

They shall raign] The righteous are Kings, Mat. 13.17. compared with Luke
10.24. Many righteous is the same with Many Kings. See the Note on ver. 4.

A thousand years] These thousand years begin (says Master Brightman) where
the former ended, that is in the year 1300. whereby continuance thereof is
promised for a thousand years forward, among some of the Gentiles: and how long
it shall reign afterward among the Jews, he only knows that knows all.

Verse 7. Satan shall be loosed] i. e. Suffered to rise up in open rage against
the open professors of the truth: and to make havoc of them, as he did of the
Waldenses, Hussites, Huguenots, Professors in Germany, Netherlands, Ireland,
England, etc. He has laid about him lately to purpose. Besides those seas of
Christian blood shed by the Turk, since the thousand years expired.

Verse 8. Gog and Magog] That is Pope and Turk, says Aretius, the Pope a
covert enemy to Christ, the Turk an overt, Ezekiel, 38. and 35.
or open enemy, as Gog and Magog signify. These are set forth by Ezekiel, as
the last enemies of Gods people before Shiloh came; and presently after their
utter overthrow, the state of the City and Temple, is notably described. So,
after the Pope and Turk in that last great battle at Armageddon routed and
foiled, the new Jerusalem is in the following Chapters excellently pourtraied
and depainted: that being a special type of this.

Verse 9. And they went up] As a sloud, Ezekiel. 8.9, 16.

And compassed] As resolved that none should escape them, Ps. 118.11, 12. 2
King. 6.14, 15. and 35.1.

The camp of the Saints] The Church militant.

And the beloved City] The new Jerusalem, Cap. 21.2. (...).
The dearly beloved of Gods soul, Jer. 12.7. or, Gods dearly beloved soul, as
the Septuagint render it. For present, the Turk is the bridle that holds in the
Pope with all his followers, from any universal proceeding against the
Protestants: who herein are greatly advantaged above them, in that their
opposites lie between them and the Turk: or in that their countries coasting so
much as they do toward the North (as Denmark, Swethland, etc.) are out of his
way, Spec Eur^p.
and no part of his present aim. Italy is the mark he shoots at. And when once
he shall rise against the true Church, fire from heaven shall devour him.

Verse 10. And he devil] This Mr Brightman interprets of the Turk, called here
the devil, because instigated and set awork by the devil. Albeit another
learned Exposit^ur is of opinion, that by the fall of the Beast and conversion
of the Jews, the Turks and other States of the East shall be brought to embrace
the Gospel, being first taught thereto by some notable foil. What to think of
this I know not: but cannot but like well of Diodates note upon the fourth
verse of this Chapter; that in all this prophecy it is better and more sure to
expect and stay for the explication by the event, then to give it without any
certain ground.

And shall be tormented] (...).
Gr. Racked: the devil and the damned have punishment without pity, misery
without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, mischief without
measure, torments without end, and past imagination.

For ever and ever] This is as another hell in the midst of hell, and forces
them to cry, (...), Woe, woe, as if they should say, (...), Not ever, not ever,
Lord. Whereto conscience answers as an echo, (...), ever, ever: Hence that
doleful (...), Woe and alas for evermore.

Verse 11. And I saw a great white throne] A lively description of the last
Judgment: to show that henceforth, since the last great battle, the new
Jerusalem should have no disturbance till Christ comes to judgment.

From Whose face the earth, etc.] To show either his terriblenes, or their
renovation, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Romans 8.21.

Verse 12. Small and great] It is the common opinion, that men shall rise again
in that tall and goodly stature of body wherein Adam was created: or at least
in that vigor of age that a perfect man is at about 33. years old, each in
their proper sex. And hereunto some think the Apostle alludeth, Ephesians. 4.13.
But M. Brightman holds, that in the resurrection every one shall appear in that
stature, in which he departed out of this life, and that the contrary opinion
does manifestly contradict this Scripture, (...).

And the books were opened] The books of conscience, says Orig^n, of the
Scriptures, says Augustine: of both, say I: for according to law written shall
the Judge pass sentence, the conscience either accusing or excusing.

The book of life] That Gods elect may be seen and known. God neither needs
nor uses books to judge by: but this is spoken after the manner of men.
Mordecais name was registered in the Chronicles of Persia. Tam^rlane had always
by him a Catalogue of his best servants, and their good deserts, Turk. ^ist.
22^.
which he daily perused.

Verse 13. And the sea] Those that perished in the waters, and those whose
ashes were scattered upon the waters, as John Husses: whom after they had
burnt, they beat his heart with their staves, and cast his ashes into the
river. But there is a substance of the Saints bodies preserved, by a secret
influence from Christ their head, and their dust is precious.

Verse 14. And death and hell] There shall be an utter end of all evils and
enemies, nothing left to disquiet the Church. She shall see them afar off, as
Lazarus did the rich man, and be able to say of them, as she did of her
accusers, Joh. 8. they are all gone.

Verse 15. And whosoever] As those Priests were cashiered that could not prove
their pedigree, Ezr. 2.62, 63.

CHAP. XXI. Verse 1. And I saw a new heaven]
NEw for form and state, but the same as before for matter and substance: as an
old garment translated is called a new one: and as who so is in Christ is a new
creature.

Passed away] i. e, Where purged from their vanity and defilements.

And there was no more sea] i. e. Trouble and tumult. The sea is of it self
restless, and often tossed with storms and tempests, Isa. 57.20. As for the
element of water it shall remain, probably, as earth, air, and fire doc.
Andreas thinks there shall be no more sea.

Verse 2. The holy City] The Church in glory, says Diodate. The Church
wayfaring and warfaring, says Brightman, whose interpretation of this text,
Nititur conjectura optabili magis quam opinabili, says Pareus.

As a bride adorned, etc.] Bishop Ridley, the night before he suffered, invited
his hostess, and the rest at Table, to his marriage: for, said he, to morrow I
must be married. Some other Martyrs went as merrily to die, as ever they did to
dine.

Verse 3. And I heard a great voice] To confirm the vision, left it should be
thought a delusion.

Behold the tabernacle] His specially presence both of grace and glory is with
his elect. See Ezekiel. 37.27, 28.

He will dwell with them] He will ind well in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. See the Note
there. The enjoyment of God is heaven it self, therefore God is called heaven,
I have sinned against heaven.

Verse 4. And God shall wipe away] As mothers do their childrens tears. Sorrow
and sighing shall flee away. Ba^a shall be turned into Berachah, sighing into
singing, misery into majesty: as Qu. Elizabeth was exalted from a prisoner to a
Princess; and as our Henry 4. was crowned the very same day that, the year
before, Daniel.
he had been banished the Realm.

No more death] For mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

Neither sorrow] (...).
Properly for loss of friends; for we shall inseparably and everlastingly
enjoy them. We shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, have communion
with them, not only as godly men, but as such and such godly men. And if with
them, why not with others whom we have known and loved in the body?

Nor crying] (...)
Qualis est in tragaedijs, says Aretius.

Nor any more pain] Or, Hard labor for a livelihood to be gotten with the
sweat either of brow or brain.

For the former things, etc.] The Latins call prosperous things, Res secundas,
because they are to be had hereafter: they are not the first things.

Verse 5. Write: for these words are faithfull] Though few men will believe
them: for if they did, what would they not do or sorgo to get heaven?
Cleombrotus reading Plato's book of the immortality of the soul, was so
ravished with the conceit thereof, that he cast himself headlong into the sea.
But how many reading this better book of heavens happiness, are no whit
wrought upon thereby, or in the least measure moved to affect those things
above, that run parallel with the life of God and line of eternity?

Verse 6. It is done] As the punishment of the wicked, Chap. 16.17. (See the
Note there.) So the reward of the righteous is performed and accomplished.

I will give unto him] Whereas some good soul might say: I would it were once
done. Have patience (says God) I will shortly give unto him that is athirst to
drink of that torrent of pleasure, that runs at my right hand, without any
either let or loathing.

Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levarit,
Vina fugit gaudetque meris abstemius undis. Ovid* Metam^

Of the water of life, freely] But merit-mongers will not have it freely:
therefore they shall go without it. Coelum gratis non accipiam, says Viega.

Verse 7. He that overcometh] Gr. He that is overcoming, (...), quasi (...).
or not yielding, though he has not yet overcome. If he but doing at it, and
do not yield up the bucklers.

Shall inherit all things] Tanquam haeres ex ass. All Gods servants are sons,
and every son an heir.

Verse 8. But the fearfull] Cowardly recreants, white-livered milk-sops, that
pull in their horns for every pile of grass that touches them, that are
afraid of every new step, saying as Caesar at Rubicon, Yet we may go back: that
follow Christ afar off, as Peter: that tremble after him, as the people did
after Saul, 1 Samuel 13 7. and the next news is, They were scattered from him,
verse. 11. These lead the ring-dance of this rout of reprobates: and are so
hated of Christ, that he will not employ them so far, as to break a pitcher,
or to bear a torch, Judge. 7.

And unbelieving] Therefore fearful, because unbelieving: for faith fears no
fray-bugs: but why do ye fear, ye small-faiths? says our Savior.

Verse 9. One of the seven Angels] The same, likely, that Chap. 17.1. had
showed him the damnation of the Whore. So studious and officious are the Angels
to serve the Saints, Heb. 1.14.

The Bride, the lambs wife] Vxor fulget radijs mariti, says the Civilian: so
is it here.

Verse 10. To a great and high mountain] As Moses was carried up into mount
Nebo, that from thence he might view the promised land. He that would
contemplate heaven, must soar aloft, fly an high pitch, etc. Take a turn with
Christ in mount Tabor, and be transfigured.

Verse 11. Having the glory of God] Who puts upon her his own comelines,
Ezekiel 16. as Rachel was decked with Isaac's jewels.

Even like a Jasper] And so, like God himself, who is set out by a Jasper,
Chap. 4.3.

Clear as Crystall] There is no such jasper in nature as is thus clear: but
such an one must here be imagined. Nec Christus, nec coelum patitur hyperbolen.

Verse 12. And had a wall] Far better then that of Babylon. Indeed this
celestial China needs no wall to divide it from the Tartars: this is Arabia
Foelix, the people whereof live in security, and fear no enemy.

And had twelve gates] Thebes had an hundred gates, and was therefore called
(...), but nothing so well set, and so commodious for passengers, as this City
with twelve gates.

Twelve Angels] As porters to let in, not as swordmen to keep out, as the Angel
that stood Sentinel at the porch of Paradise, Genesis 3.

Verse 13. On the East three gates] The Church is collected, and heaven filled
from all quarters of the earth. Hence it is by one compared to the Samaritans
Inn ((...)) because it receives and lodges all strangers that come. In the
Synagogue there was not lodging for all: the Ammonites and the Moabites were
excluded the Congregation of Israel. But Christ was born in an Inn, to
signify that in his Kingdom all may be entertained. He is called the second
Adam: the Greek letters of which name (as Cyprian notes) do severally signify
all the quarters of the earth. His garments were divided into four parts,
because out of what coast or part soever we come (says a Divine) Christ has
garments to cloth us, (...)
and room to receive us. There are that have observed that the name of God in
all the chief languages consists of four letters (as (...), De^, Dien, Got,
etc.) to intimate that he has his people in all the four quarters of the
earth, out of all countries, nations and languages.

Verse 24. And the wall] A wall the Church has about it, and a well within it,
verse. 6. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed, Cant. 4.12. This wall of the Church has twelve foundations,
that is, Christ the only foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. first laid by the twelve
Apostles: In whose names also the sum of Christian faith is made up in those
twelve Articles of the Creed, Discessuri ab invicem Apostoli normam
praedication is in commune constituunt, says Cyprian. Cyp de symb^l. Apost l.
The Apostles being to be severed into several Countries to preach the Gospel,
agreed upon this as the sum and substance of their Sermons. It was called
Symbolum, a sign or badge to distinguish Christians from unbelievers.

Had twelve foundations] Foundation is taken either for Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Mat. 16.16. or for the doctrine of the Apostles teaching salvation only by
Jesus Christ, as Ephesians. 2.20. and here. The Papists have lately added twelve
new Articles, raised out of the Council of Trent, to be believed by as many as
shall be saved: as above has been noted.

Verse 15. Had a golden reed] Not those twelve Trent-Articles, or any humane
invention, but the word, as Chap. 1^.1. wherewith is measured not the Temple
only as there, but the City, gates and wall, as Ezekiel. 4.

Verse 16. And the City lies foursquare] So was Babylon of old (as Herodotus
describes it) which yet was taken by Cyrus, Alexander, Herod (...).
and sundry other enemies. Heaven also is taken, but by another kind of
violence, then by force of arms. The solid square whereby it is here set forth,
commends it to us: 1. Heb. 12.28.
For stable and unshaken, Immota manet, as it is said of Venice, which yet
stands in the sea, and has but one street that is not daily overflowed (the
Venetian Motto is, Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur) 2. Turk. hist 1153.
For such as looks every way, to the four corners of the earth, as
Constantinople did: which is therefore said to be a City fatally founded to
command.

Twelve thousand furlongs] About 300. Dutch miles. Nine-veh was nothing to this
City for bigness: no more is Alcair, Scanderoon or Cambalu, which yet is said
to be 28. miles in circuit, being the imperial seat of the great Cham of
Tartary. Quinsay in the same Kingdom, Ibid. 75.
is said to be of all Cities in the world the greatest: in circuit a hundred
miles about, as Paulus Venetus writes, who himself dwelt therein about the
year 1260. But our new Jerusalem is far larger: 12000 furlongs (according to
some) make 1500 miles; and yet he that shall imagine heaven no larger then so,
shall be more worthy to be blamed, then the workmen were that built
Westminster- hall; which King William the second the founder, found great fault
with, for being built too little: saying, It was fitter for a Chamber, Dan
Chron.
then for a Hall for a King of England: and therefore took a plot for one far
more spacious to be added unto it.

Verse 17. An hundred twenty four Cubits] A Cubit is six handfuls.

That is of the Angel] That appeared as a man, but bigger and higher then
ordinary: Now because this holy City is thus measured, and that with the
measure of a man. Some think it to be meant of the Church militant. But some
other passages in this and the following Chapters cannot be otherwise taken
according to the letter, then of the state of full perfection. They do best in
my opinion, that take in both.

Verse 18. Was of Jasper] A stone of great worth and glory, the beauty whereof,
says one, it is easier to admire then to declare. It has a variety of
sweetness in it: such as none of the most cunning wits and sharpest eyes are
able to distinguish. Heaven (we are sure) is such as eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, etc. Sermo non valet exprimere, experimento opus est. Words are
to weak to utter its happiness: get to it once, Chrysostom.
and you will say so.

Pure gold] A metal that shines in the fire, wastes not in the use, rusteth
not with long lying, rotteth not though cast into brine or vinegar (as Pliny
notes) to show that this City is incorruptible, invincible.

Like unto clear glasse] Glistering gold, such as this world affords not.

Verse 19. (...).
And the foundations] The Apostles and their faithful succ^ssours, who were
puriores coelo, says Chrysostom, clearer then the sky, the very stars of the
world, and flowers of the Churches, as Basil calls them.

Verse 20. The fifth Sardonyx] Search is here made through all the bowels of the
earth for something of worth to shadow out the Saints happiness: which if it
could be fully known (as it cannot) it would be no strange thing or
thank-worthy for the most horrible Belial to become presently the holiest
Saint, or the worlds greatest minion the most mortified man. He that desires to
know the nature and virtues of these precious stones may read Epiphanius,
Philo, Francisous, Rurus, and others Degemm^^. Josephus also in the third book
of his Jewish Antiquities. That was an odd conceit, and scarce worth relating,
held by Anaxagoras, Coelum ex lapidibus constare, and aliquando collapsurum,
La^rt.
That heaven was made up of stones, and would one day fall upon men's heads.
That other saying of his is much more memorable: when being asked, Wherefore he
was born? He answered, Vt coelum contempler, that I might busy my thoughts
about heaven.

Verse 21. And the twelve gates] i. e. Gate-keepers, Preachers of the
righteousness that is by faith.

Were twelve pearls] All which do receive their luster and worth from Christ
that pearl of price, Matthew. 13. like as the pearl by beating often upon the
Sunbeams, becomes radiant as the Sun.

Was pure gold] Which no dirty dog may ever trample upon.

Verse 22. No temple] No need of external worships and ordinances, for they
are all taught of God: they see his face, and hear his voice. Now we see but in
part, because we prophecy but in part, 1 Cor. 13.

Verse 23. And the City had no need] He says not there shall be no Sun or
Moon, but there shall be no such need of them, as is now, for the Lamb shall
outshine them; shine they never so gloriously, as they shall in that new
heaven, Isa. 30.26.

Verse 24. And the Nations] See Isa. 60 3. and that he speaks of the life to
come, See ver. 11, 18, 19.21.

Do bring their glory] Despise and cast away all for heaven. Canutus set his
crown upon the crucifix: which, according to the course of those times, was
held greatest devotion. K Edw. 6. Act. and Monfol. 1185.
assured the Popish rebels of Devonshire, That he would rather lose his Crown,
then not maintain the Cause of God he had taken in hand to defend. Nazianzen
rejoiced that he had something of value, ( viz. his Athenian learning) to part
with for Christ, etc.

Verse 25. For there shall be no night there] And so no need to fear a sudden
surprise by the enemy watching his opportunity. (...).
Their day above is a nightlesse day, as a Father calls it.

Verse 26. And they] i. e. The Kings, as ver. 24.

Verse 27. And there shall in no wise] Though the serpent could wind himself
into paradise, yet no unclean person can come into this holy City. Tertullian
called Pompeys theater (which was the greatest ornament of old Rome) arcem
omnium turpitudinum, the stie of all uncleannes. Heaven is none such.

CHAP. XXII. Verse 1. A pure river]
NOt muddy as Nilus, but clear as Callirho^. The allusion seems to be to that
earthly Paradise so well watered, Genesis 2. or else to Ezekiel. 47. This river is
Christ, Joh. 4.14. and so is that tree of life, verse 2. The second Adam is a
quickening spirit.

Verse 2. In the midst of the street of it] In medio foro ejus, where all may
easily come by it; not kept with a strong guard, as the apples of Alcinous,
Hesperides, etc.

Twelve manner of fruits] Heavens happinesses are so many that they cannot be
numbered, so great that they cannot be measured, so copious that they cannot be
defined, so precious that they cannot be valued.

Every moneth] Like the Lemmon tree which ever and anon sends forth new
Lemmons, as soon as the former are fallen down with ripenes.

And the leaves] No want of any thing either for food or physic. Ita balbutit
nobiscum Deus.

Verse 3. And there shall be no more curse] No casting out by Excommunication:
no cause of any such thing.

Of God and of the lamb] He and the Father are one, Joh. 10.30. See the Note
there.

Verse 4 And they shall see his face] How we shall see God, whether with our
minds only, or with bodily eyes we shall behold his invisible Majesty in the
glorious face of Jesus Christ, there can nothing be determined.

And his name shall be] As servants of old had their masters name branded in
their foreheads.

Verse 5. And there shall be no night] See the Note on Chap. 21.25.

For the Lord God] He that is (...), Light essential.

And they shall raign] Reign together with Christ; a part of whose joy it is,
that we shall be where he is, John. 17.20. he will not be long without us.

Verse 6. And he said unto me] This is the conclusion of the whole prophecy:
and it is very august and majesticall.

These sayings are faithful and true] Thus (among other evidences of its
divinity) the Scripture testifies of it self: and we know that its testimony is
true.

The Lord God of the holy Prophets] Some copies have it, The Lord God of the
spirits of the Prophets. He is the God of the spirits of all flesh, but of the
spirits of Prophets in a special manner: for those holy men spoke no
otherwise, then as they were acted or imbreathed by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21. See the Note there.

Sent his Angel] As Chap. 1.1. The authority therefore of this book is
unquestionable, what ever some have surmised from Chap. 20.4. that it was the
work of Cerinthus, or some other millenary.

Verse 7. Blessed is he that keepeth] In memory and manners, Chap. 1. Those
were pronounced happy that read and hear, but so as they retain in mind, and
practice the contents of this book.

Verse 8. Saw these things and heard them] So that there is no color of cause
why any one should doubt or distrust such a witness.

^ fell down to worship] This is the second time. It is hard to say, how often a
Saint may fall into the same sin: howbeit they sin of incogitancy; put them in
mind, and they mend all. They sin of passion, and passions last not long.
There is no way of wickedness in them, they make not a trade of it. Psalm. 139.


Verse 9. See thou do it not] See the Note on Chap. 19.10.

For I am thy fallow-servant] Wicliffe disallowed the invocation of Saints and
Angels, whom he called servants, not gods. For the word Knave which he used
signified, in those days a servant, not as it does in our days a wicked
varlet, as his enemies maliciously interpret it: Bellarmine for one, a man
utterly ignorant of the English tongue.

Verse 10. Seal not] Keep them not up for thine own proper use (as he did that
wrote upon his writings, (...), things for myself) but freely impart them, and
in such fort as that others may conceive and improve them.

For the time is at hand] And every days events shall explain the prophecy.

Verse 11. He that is unjust etc.] q. d. Let things be foretold never so
plainly, and fall out never so accordingly, yet wicked men will be
uncouncellable, uncorrigible, Isa. 26.10. But if any man be ignorant, let him
be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14 38. He falls with open eyes, let him fall at his own
peril: who so blind as he that will not see? H^s 4.1^
Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone. He has made a match with mischief,
he shall have his belly-full of it.

Let him be righteous still] Let him presevere and proceed.

Verse 12. Behold, I come quickly] Therefore quicken your pace, bestir your
selves lustily: your time is short, your task is long, your wages unconceivable.

Verse 13. I am Alpha and Omega] And am therefore worthy to be believed in my
predictions of future events, which I can easily bring about and effect, since
to me all things are present.

Verse 14. That they may have right] That they may be assured of their interest
in Christ and his kingdom. Plutarch tells of Eudoxus, that he would be willing
to be burnt up by the Sun presently, so he might be admitted to come so near
it, as to learn the nature of it. What then should not we be content to do or
suffer for the enjoyment of Christ and heaven?

Verse 15. For Without are dogs] In outer darkness. The Irish air will sooner
brook a toad or snake to live therein, then heaven will brook a sinner.

And whosoever loveth] Though he make it not. Some will not coin a false tale,
that yet will spread it: these are equally guilty, and excluded Gods kingdom,
Ps. 52.3.

Verse 16. Have sent mine Angel] With wearines of flight, as Dan. 9.21.

I am the root] That bear up David by my Deity: but am born of him, in regard
of my humanity.

Verse 17. And the spirit and the bride] i.e. The bride sanctified and set a
work by the spirit, Romans 8.26.

And let him that hears say, Come] Abrupt sentences full of holy affection, q
d. Let him pray daily, Thy kingdom come.

Heu pietas ubi prisca! profana o tempora! mundi
Faex! vesper! prope nox! o mora! Christ veni.
And let him that is athirst come] q. d. If you think me long a coming, come to
me in mine ordinances; there I will stay you with apples, comfort your with
flagons, Cant. 2.5.

That water of life freely] See the Note on Chap. 21.6.

Verse 18. If any man shall add unto these things] Either to this or to any of
the foregoing books of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6. Gal. 3.15. 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. All which not withstanding, the Jews have added their Deuteroseis,
the Turks their Alfurta, the Papists their unwritten verities, which they
equalize (at least) to the Scriptures.

Verse 19. And if any man shall take away] Since every word of God is pure,
precious and profitable, Prove. 30.5. 2 Timothy 3.16.

Verse 20. Even so: Come Lord Jesus] This is the common and constant vote of
all good people: and is therefore pinned as a badge upon their sleeve, 1 Thessalonians.
1.10. See the Note there.

Verse 21. The grace of our Lord] An epistolary conclusion. The Revelation is
rather to be counted an Epistle then a book. Read it as sent us from heaven,
and ruminate what ye read.

Deo soli Gloria.
Mellificium Theologicum, OR THE MARROW OF Many good Authors.

Painfully and carefully extracted and distilled into a Decad of divine
Discourses, by way of Exercitation, Essay, or Commonplace.

Wherein these ten Heads are largely handled: Abstinence. Admonition. Alms.
Ambition. Angels. Anger. Apostasy. Arrogance. Arts. Atheism.


By John Trapp M. A. Pastor and Preacher of Gods Word at Weston upon Avon in
Gloucestershire.

Is^^ ad Ni.oc^^m. (...).

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three golden
Lions in Cornhill, M.DC.XLVII.

The Author to the Reader.
WHen I first sent up some other of my Notes to the Press, I had no intent at
all to publish, for present, this imperfect piece. But being since admonished
by a Reverend Divine (who had the perusal of those unpolished papers of mine)
that I had here and there referred thee, Reader, for further satisfaction, to
my Common-places not yet extant; and therefore by him and others encouraged to
send them abroad, for an Essay, as they were, I have done so as thou see: And
shall either go on, or give over here, as I find my service accepted of the
Saints. Meanwhile, might I but obtain St Paul's request of thee; Romans 15.31.
even for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, to
strive together with me in thy prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered
from irrational and irreligious men, Romans 15.29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
and that I may come unto thy heart with joy, by the will of God, and in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ; O how happy should I hold my
self therein, and how readily should I repay thee thy prayers in the ensuing
words, and say, Now the God of peace be with thy spirit: Amen.

To the learned and reverend Author.
OF Decads ten you premise made,
And here the Tithe alone is paid.
To pay the Tithe commend I do
Ith Laity, but not in You.
Where are the Nine? What does this mean?
A promise fat, a payment lean?
I err. Ith Tithe the Nine I see;
Nine Muses; a full Century.
The payment thus is very right,
Though not in number, yet in weight.
Yet I beseech you add the rest.
Of that that is choice the most is best.
THO. DUGARD, Art. Mag. Cantab.

THE MARROW OF Many good Authors, Extracted and distilled into a Decad of
divine Discourses.
Abstinence.
PROVE. 23.1, 2, 3. When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently
what is before thee:

And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.

Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat.


KIng Solomon, having showed in the last verse of the former Chapter, that
diligence sets a man in the presence of Kings, 1 King. 11.18.
as it had done Jeroboam in his presence, because he found him dexterous and
diligent, handy, and meet for the work ^ he here directs such, when so
preferred, how to behave themselves, if set at table especially: 1. verse. 1.
To consider where to feed, verse. 1. for a man is forced many times amidst the
variety of meats, wherewith great men's tables usually sweat, to eat doubtfully
(as one speaks) not well knowing what piece to pitch upon, what dish to deal
withal. 2. To put a knife to their throat, verse 2.
or in their throat (as Aben-Ezra tenders it) rather then offend by inordinate
appetite. Verse. 3. This is (...) Gal 5 23. from (...).
3. If yet they find themselves over-desirous of those dainti^s, to bridle
themselves in by main force, to lord it over their lusts, not coveting the
cates of a king, but being content with gruell rather, as Daniel and his three
fellows, for the keeping of a good conscience.



Abstinence orders a man in the use of meats, that it be neither unseasonable
for the time, nor unreasonable for the measure.

1. As touching the time. It is a fault not to observe due hours of eating,
Eccle. 10.16, 17. to fare deliciously every day, Luke 16.19. Mat. 24., 8.
(...), eating, in the present tense, continual eating as b^ute beasts. (...) a
privativa par tioula (...), and (...)
To riot in the day time, 2 Pet. 2.13. To feast, when God calls to fasting, Isa
22.12, 13. which is therefore called a day of restraint, Joel 2.15. because we
should then restrain our selves from all meat, if possible, for a season; that
nature may be chastised, yet not disabled for duty: Or at least from bread of
desires, as Daniel that man of desires, Dan. 9.23. He ate no pleasant bread,
neither came slesh nor wine in his mouth, etc. for three whole weeks together,
because it went ill with the poor people of God. Mr Rogers Martyr, D^n. 10.2,
3. Act. and Mon. Ibid. 1155 Fulvius Argentarius ex authoritate senat^^ in
careerem deductus, quod tempore belli funesti ipse so^^^ Letari vis^^ est Plin
l. ^c. 7 Act. and Mun. fol. 15^4.
in a hard time made a motion to forbear one m^al a day. Mr Wiseheart, a
Scotch-Martyr, forbear one meal in three, one day in four, for the most part,
except something to comfort nature. God threatens those that do not abstain in
an evil time, Amos 6.4, 7. And the Romans punished it in one that feasted and
looked out at a window, with a garland on his head, in the second Punick war.

2. For the measure. 1. We may not neglect the body, defraud our Genius,
macerate and unspirit our selves overmuch, as those Col. 2.23. as Timothy,
living among the luxurious Ephesians, 1 Timothy 5.23. And as Nicolas Shetterdens
wife the Martyr, whom he chides in a letter to her for her excessive fasting,
though of a pious intention. The merciful man does good to his own soul: but
he that is cruel, troubles his own f^esh, Prove. 11.17. This later clause Rabbi
Levi expounds (and Mercer is of the same mind) to be meant of those that
place the chief service of God in afflicting and pining their bodies, Merc in
loc.
whereas bodily exercise profits little.

2. We may not pamper the body, cater for the flesh: preserve it we must, make
provision for it we may not. Debtors we are, Romans 13. (...).
to see to it, not to live to it, Romans 8.12. We may not live to eat, but eat to
live: less we must eat then nature desires, and yet so much as refreshes
nature, and makes us fit for the service of God and man. Take heed to your
selves, says our Savior to his Disciples (And who would have thought that
they, who ordinarily fed upon barly-bread, and once had no better a
Sundaies-dinner, then a few ears of corn, rubbed betwixt their hands, should
need any such Take heed?) that your hearts be not overcharged with surfeting,
etc. and so that day come upon you unawares. Luke 21.34.
But the Gospel teaches to live soberly, or, temperately, Tit. 2.12. and
reckons surfeting among the deeds of darkness, Romans 13.13. the works of
wickedness, Gal. 5.21. Such as are manifest to be unworthy of us: 1. As men. 2.
As Christian men. Plato appetitu assi^ilat equo qui sit (...), etc In Phaed.
205.


Reas. 1. As men we should be abstinent; it being the excellency of a man above
a beast; an act of reason subduing lust, of the superior faculties, repressing
the inferior sensualities. And, as in the irascible faculty, it is the glory
of a man to pass by an indignity; and he is a braver man that can conquer his
passions, as Jacob did in the rape of Dinah, then that conquereth a City, as
his sons did the City of She^h^m: So in the concupiscible faculty, it is an
high praise, To abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against the soul; 1 Pet.
2.12. (...). Ars^an ^ 7. Aquinas viti^^ vocat max^me exprobrabile 2. 2. ^ 142.
art. 4. ex Aristo^, Ethic l. 3. c. 10.
to say nay to sensual appetite, and peremptorily to deny his carnal self, as
David did in the water of the well of Bethlehem, and Alexander in his travels
through the dry deserts of India. He was wont to say, That it was the basest
thing in the world to play the Epicure; and had he held to that principle, he
had been safe and happy. But when, as a natural brute beast made to be taken
and destroyed, in what he knew nuturally, he began to corrupt himself (as both
S. Peter and S. Jude have it) be utterly perished in his own corruptions. So
did the old world, 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude 10. Mat. 24 38. So Homer uses the word.
those monstrous men of condition. They were (...), says S. Matthew, Eating as
brute beasts do (so the word signifies, for otherwise it is no fault to eat)
when the flood overwhelmed them. Whether it were lawful for them before the
flood to eat flesh, the Doctors are divided, and I determine not. But after
the flood God said to Noah, and his sons, Gen 9 3.
Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you. But mark that it is
added, Even as the green herb have I given you all things, Hexapla in loc.
that is, soberly, and without curiosity, to take such things as are at hand,
as D^ Willet interprets it. Nature also seems to teach the same thing in
giving man so little a mouth, Deus homini it a august un ventrem pre re liquis
an^^^anti bus dedit, etc. Chrysostom. N^h^lo su^^ asiri^ mel^oris animi ta^^un
^e^sarum de^icias sectante^. Ch^y.
with a narrower throat, a lesser belly then other creatures, as Chrysostom
observes; and in tying concupiscence to the stomach and belly (the lowest
place) as one would tie an horse or ass to the manger, as Plato has it. A fit
resemblance and good enough for such beastly belly-gods, as glut themselves
with Gods good creatures, which they devour, as if their throats were
whirlpools, and their panches bottomless: crying out with the horsleech, Give,
give, stuffing themselves like wooll-packs, and fatting themselves like boars,
till they be brawned, and have (as Eliphaz speaks) collops in their flanks.
Job 15.27.
And whereas they should be (^^th they will needs fall below the stirrup of
reason) they should be, I say, like Ants and Bees those wisest creatures, and
abound rather in pectore ubi est animus, quam in ventre ubi est stercus, in
breast then belly; they re^emble rather the locusts which have but one gut, and
the spider which is little else then belly. Of the Asse-fish Aristotle
affirms, That of all other creatures he has his heart in his belly. Polyhist
^ 22.
And of the Dolphin Solinus observes, That he has his mouth almost in his
very belly, and that he only (of all fishes) moves his tongue. Such are our
greedy-gut Cormorants; they wear their guts in their heads, and their brains in
their bellies: they have a tongue also to talk for, and of their belly-timber,
as that Roman Apicius, that wrote ten books of direction, how to set forth a
feast with all manner of dainties. De (...) dapum (...) inst ruenda Rex Plat. p
^2 (...), etc.
This was Laborious loss of time, as the Philosopher calls it: or as another,
this was Magno conatu magnas nugas agere. Nature is content with a little, as
not to be hungry, thirsty, cold, etc. says Galen, grace with less. And that is
the second thing we were saying.

Socrates, Anacharfis, Cyrus, Caesar, and others. The old Gauls were very
sparing in their diet, H^yl. Geo p 85
and used to fine any one that out-grew his girdle. ^lunts voyage into l. e^^nt.
The Turks at this day (says one) refuse all dainties for a piece of fat
mutton. And when King Ferdinands Ambassadors (that brought a great present to
Solomon the great Turk) were feasted by the Bassaes, their cheer was only rice
and mutton; and that so plainly and sparingly dressed (says the Historian) as
if they had thereby noted our gourmandise and excess, who measure not our
cheer by that which nature requires, but that which greedy appetite desires,
as if therein consisted the greatest nobility. And the drink for the great
Bassaes themselves, Turk. hist. fol. 7^3.
right easy to be had, was fair water out of the river Danubius, etc. Wine is
a prohibited ware amongst them (says my former Author) which makes some
drink with scruple, others with danger. The baser sort, when taken drunk, are
often bastinadoed on the bare feet. And I have seen some, after a fit of
drunkenness, Blunt ubi supr^ 105.
lie a whole night crying, and praying to Mahomet for intercession, that I
could not sleep near them. So strong is conscience, even where the foundation
is but imaginary. Now if these Gentiles, Rom 2.14, 15, 17.
which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the law, and so
show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness with or against them; Shall not the uncircumcision which is by nature,
if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who, by the letter and circumcision, do
transgress the law? Does not that perfect law of liberty, the Gospel, Jam. 1.
(...). Mat. 5.147. Ephesians. 5.15. M^t. 5.20. 1 Cor. 10. 2 Pet 2 13. Jude 13. (...)
Occumenius de s^opul^^ accipit, qui navigantes remorantur. Tert advers. Gent.
c. 39.
reach men to do some thing singular? to walk exactly? to exceed Scribes and
Pharisees, how much more Turks and Heathens? to eat before the Lord? to eat to
the glory of God? to feed with fear of being ensnared by the creature? Which
whosoever do not, these are spots und blemishes, says S. Peter, spots and ro^ks in
your lovefeasts, says S. Jude. Tertullian speaking of those love feasts,
testifies, That great care was taken therein that none should eat or drink
more then was meet, but that the poor should have their portion. Some, I
confess, exceeded at Corinth, and are sharply taxed for it by S. Paul, 1 Cor.
11.21. But, for the general, they were modest and moderate: and are therefore
said to be virgins (such as went not a whoring in their affections after the
creature) and without blemish before the throne of God, Revel. 14.4, 5. as
those that did eat as in Gods presence. Deuteronomy. 12.18. approving themselves to
him even in their repasts and common conversation. Philo well observes, that
the ancient Jews used, Hence some drive (...) of (...).
after their sacrifices, to make their feasts; and in the temples, that the
place and action might mind them of Abstinence and sobriety. Exodus* 18 12.
Thus Jethro, took a burnt offering, and sacrifices for God; and Aaron came,
and all the Elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses father in law before God.
Gauden^ius Casaubonus. Idem qui Graecis divitu^ (...), Plauto D^cta^or.
Baronius ex Gaudentio.
The Jews also had a sort of officers at their feasts called Praefecti morum,
(...) to see that none should eat or drink too much: called they were also
(...), the eyes of the feast, and in the Gospel (...), Rulers of the feast,
Joh. 2.10. And these, they say, were to be Priests, that with their gravity and
authority might overawe the company, and see that there were no disorder. Now
a good man, like a good Angel, is ever looking on the face of God: being (as
Solomon advises) in his fear the whole day throughout. Prove. 23.17.
God, he knows well, is (...), Alleye: whether therefore he eats or drinks, or
whatsoever else he does, he does it as in the sight of God. Cave, spectat Cato,
could never so keep in that Roman from surquedry and indecency, as the sense of
Gods presence does the faithful Christian. He contents not himself with a
natural use of his food (as bruit beasts, and brutish sensualists) but labors
to taste the sweetness of God, in the sweetness of the creature. Besides, he
looks upon his meats as a piece of Christ's purchase, and sees them come
swimming toward him in the dishes, as it were, in Christ's blood. Himself also
he considers, as bought with a price; and therefore resolves to glorify God
with his spirit, and with his body too, which are the Lords. 1 Cor. 6.^0.


Hugo Cardinalis, that the devil has two daughters, Ittam ^udae^^, hanc
E^^nicis olim elocasse, nano vero ^leri ^os and sacerdo te^, etc. Cujus
avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis, Luxuriae ^uj^^ mereirix non sufficit om^is
Act and Mon. fol 1417. Jac. R^v hist. pon^if p. 261.
Covetousness, and luxury or riotousnes: the former he married of old to the
Jews, the later to the Gentiles. But now the Popish Priests and Romish Clergy
have taken them both from their husbands, and use them as their own. We read of
one jolly Pope Julius, that called for his Porke-flesh (forbidden him by his
Physicians) al despito di Dio, in despite of God: and asked why, if God were so
angry for an apple, he might not be as angry for his cold peacock which he
missed at table, having commanded it to be set up for him against supper.
Another of them ( Leo the tenth) is said to have spent a thousand thousand
crowns in one day, at his coronation. The merchants of the earth are said to
have waxed rich through the abundance of Romes delicacies, Revel. 18.3. And the
Kings of the earth, that had lived deliciously with her, are brought in
bewailing her, ver. 9. The merchants also mourn for that none now buy (as they
were wont whiles Babel stood.). their fine flowers, and wheat, their beasts,
sheep, (...).
and other viands. The fruits that thy soul lusted after, say they, are
departed from thee (the Geeek word signifies Antumn-fruit, their second
services, suckets, sweetmeats, Prob ^udor! est res ^aec ^^to no^^ssima coelo
Lege Petrarchoe e^^st elas qui an^e ducentos annos a^l^ pontificiae l^x^^n
fastum^, pluquam Sybariticum acriter insect a^us est.
and delicate confections, wherewith the Roman Clergy refresh themselves even
in their pretended fasts) and all things which were dainty and goodly are
departed from thee; and thou shall find (...) no more at all, ver 14. Look
how, when Sodom was sacked by Kedar-laomer and his company, it is expressly
noted, That they took all their victuals, and went their way, Genesis 14 11. So
shall it be done to spiritual Sodom (so Rome is called, Revel. 11.8. and
fitly.) Sodomes sins were pride, fullness of bread, and and abundance of
idleness. Not to speak of the first and last, who knows not that they (like
the Cater-pillars of Egypt) do eat up the fat and best fruits of the land. For
(says he that made the Anatomy of the English Nunnery at Lisbon) what the
purveyours of the Viceroy have forsaken in the market (as too dear) I have
known the Cator of this house to buy at unreasonable rates, Tho. Robinson his
Anatomy, etc. p. 13.
for their ghostly fathers table, and such of his chickens (the Nuns) as he
most affected; whose greatest, and indeed only care is to prove skillful in the
confection and dressing of such dainty cates, as may best please their wanton
palates. And (as Natritiva facultas est officina generativae, Gluttony is the
gallery that incontinency walks through) the same Anatomist sets forth a great
deal of their fleshly filthiness. Elies sons had a wanton tooth, and this was
an harbinger to other luxurious wantonness. Recte erit, cognate, etc. says
Lewis the 11. of France, in a letter to our Edward the 4. Thus it shall be with
you, Cosen: If you will but come over to Paris, we'll pamper our flesh: and you
shall delight your self in the choicest beauties of the City. After all which,
I will bring you Cardinal Burbon, Alb^hebo tibi Card. Borbon is qu^^quid
peccari^, pro ca qua^^ habet potellate, sactle expiabit. Commens l. 6.
who (according to the power committed unto him by the Pope) shall soon absolve
you from all your sins. The Papacy is an alluring, tempting, bewitching
Religion. Sr Walter Rawleigh knew what be said, That were he to choose a
Rel^g^on for licentious liberty, and lasciviousnes, he would choose the Popish
Religion. No sin past, but the Pope can pardon: No sin to come, but he can
dispense with. No matter how long they have lived in any sin (though the sin
against the holy Ghost) yet extreme Unction at last will salve all. What
marvel therefore, though Papists call for their portion here with the
Prodigal, Eat and drink with the drunken, and begin to beat their fellows,
with that evil servant, Matthew. 24.49? Cry out with those Epicures in Isaiah,
Come, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant? Let in eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall di^, Chrysostom tells us of some such in his time, as would
usually say, Isa 56 ult. 1 Cor ^^. (...) Multi^n ^erri, manduca^, quo^ apu^
inse^os digera^t. Magnatum galeis and rasis sacrifi^^^o^um ver^^^^bus.
Give me to day, and take thou to morrow. But of these Atheists well spoke S.
Austin, Many eat that here, that they must digest in hell. Hell was long since
said by one to be paved with the shaven crowns of those hell-sprung locusts,
That have, as it were, crowns on their heads (that is, vertices rasos, says
Pareus) and a King over then (other locusts have none, Prove. 3.27.) which is
the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name is Abaddon and Apollyon; or the
Destroier, Revel. 9.7, 10. That son of perdition, to whom, though he draw
thousands of souls to hell with him, none must dare to say, What do thou? He
has thousands and ten thousands of these locusts ready pressed for any service:
therefore they are said to be like unto horses prepared unto battle, Revel 9.7.
Pampered they are in their cloisters, as war horses in their stalls or stables,
Every one neighing after his neighbors wife, Jer. 5.8. The husbands of bar^en
women they send in pilgrimage to S. Joyce the Patroness of fruitfulness, Hey!
Geog. page 285 Ipsi interim eu^ peregrinantis uxore vel filiabus suaviter in
moll^ lect^ ^o lutahant. Ca^t. hist. Christa in Mat 23.4.
and lie with their wives in the mean while: Marry they may not, Though they
burn like an oven, Hos. 7.7. nor meddle with flesh on fasting-daies, though
they make no bones of strange flesh any day. Are not these those seducing
spirits S. Paul speaks of, that forbid to marry, and command to abstain from
meats, 1 Timothy 4.3? They twit us with their much fasting, as once the Pharisees
did our Saviors disciples: And shame not to say, that we count fasting but a
moral temperance, a fasting from sin, a matter of policy. We could rejoyn and
tell them, with more truth; that their fasts are mere mo^k-fasts and worse;
whiles, 1. They abstain from certain meats only, not all, which is a doctrine
of devils, 1 Timothy 4.2, 3. The people they tie to bread and water; the Priests
fill themselves, the while with wine, sweet meats and suckets. 2. In setting
certain fasting days under pain of damnation, whether the times be better or
worse. 3. In making them a service to God, and yet consecrating them to the
Saints. 4. In ascribing merit thereto. 5. In making shameful fale thereof.
Their fasts also are often times prefaces and pretexts to their abominable
villainies, as in the Gun-powder-treason: They proclaimed a fast, with wicked
Jezabel, for the success of the great crack and black-day, wherein these
Harpies thought to have made but a breakfast of us all. Nor blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth, Psalm. 1 24.6. O that he
would once at length put into the hearts of the Kings of the earth to hate the
scarlet whore, and to eat her flesh, as it is prophesied, Rev. 17.16. Sanderus
illued regi^ Hen 8 Apoph^hegin mire ^xagitat, ^orverum (...) eise penitits
disturbandos, no iterim ad coha^^tandum convolent. Sand. schism Angl (...).
Diruendisunt etiam psi ^^^oni^rum ^^di, ^e redeant Zisce dictum apud La^at in
Deuteronomy. (...) sruges consumere na^^.
to destroy those crows-nests, the Monasteries and religious houses (as they
call them) that they build no more there, as our Henry the eight did, turning
out those slow-bellies here (as Zisca also did in Bohemia) the Abbey-lubbers, I
mean, that lived upon the spoil, having their souls merely for salt to keep
their bodies from putrefying. Their whole life was to eat and drink, and sleep,
and sport, etc. as if they came into the world, as rats and mice, only to
devour victuals, and to run squeaking up and down, as the Pharisees did to
widows houses, which they devoured under a pretense of long prayers, Mat.
23.13. Such as these are the verm ne of the world, the body-lice of mankind,
the excrements of humane society, etc. are therefore worthy of utter execration
and ejection.

Dum ^alato quid fit optimun jul^^^, coeli ^ala^^un non suspexit. Epi^^r^s
dicebit se cun love etiam para^um esse de joea^itate conte^dere, si aqua^^
hab^re^ and offam, (...).
Epicurius (says Ennius) whiles he looked too much to his palate, looked not at
all to the heavenly palace. Howbeit, if Aelian may be credited, Epicurus was
wont to say, That if he might have but a morsel of meat, and a mouth full of
water, he would hold himself as happy, as the happiest. A strange speech from
him that placed the chief happiness of a man in sensual pleasures. But what
ever his opinions were, his life was temperate, says Tully. Jacob (a far
better man) desired no more but food to eat and clothes to put on, Genesis 28.20.
Epicurei mihi videntur metrus dicere, quam facere (...) de Finib, l. 2.
A little of the creature serves turn to carry us through our pilgrimage. If we
have food and raiment, let us therewith be content, 1 Timothy 6.8. Wh^re note,
says a Greek Father, that he says, having food, not fine fare, and raiment
not ornament. Meat and drink are the rich^s of a Christian, (...) (...) and
pot^^ divitiae unt Christianorum (...) C^em.
says Hierome. Bread and cheese with the Gospel is good cheer, says Greenham.
It is but a little, that a godly man stands in need of, says Clements
Alexandrinus. If you will be content to please Dionysius, you need not eat green
herbs (said the Parasite to the Philosopher). And if you will be content (said the
Philosopher to the Parasite) to feed upon green herbs, you need not please
Dionysius. Elisha dined more comfortably with his coleworts (the coloquintida
excepted) and Elias with his cake on the coals, Non t^niorem illum a
sim^^ag^^e, sed erassiorem and dom. st^cum. Horat. Oppon^t ^a^^m libis and
piacentis, l ^. ep. 10 Vitae conservativum.
and cruse of water, then all Jezabels prophets, with the murdering morsels
they met with at her full Table. Our Savior taught his disciples to pray for
bread (down-tight brown bread) not biscuit or manchet: and daily bread, or (as
the Syriack has it) bread of necessity, as Suidas, such as wherewith we may
subsist, as Brentius, such as may hold life and soul together. And the wanton
Israelites, not content with their bread from heaven, but lusting after quails,
had their wish, but a curse withal. Not, but that it is lawful to feast, to
eat of the fat and drink of the sweet, and send portions to the poor, as they
did Neh. 8.10. God has allowed us not only for necessity or convenience, but
for honest affluence and delight, as Psalm. 23.5. Genesis 43.34. Our Savior
himself was at feasts (as at the marriage at Cana in Galilee: and surely if
feasting ever be in season it is at the recovery of the lost rib:) the people
also were allowed to feast thrice a year before the Lord, and at every such
time to please their appetite, Deuteronomy. 14.26. Thou shall bestow thy money for
what soever thy heart desires, etc. Yet. as the Egyptians carried about a
deaths-head in their feasts to restrain their inordinate appetite: so it must
be remembered, that the belly was the first sword that the devil drew against
us, and does it still, and that, if thou let out thine appetite, it may cut thy
throat. Be not therefore desirous of dainties: for they are deceitful meat.
E^t such things as are set before you, as our Savior bad his Disciples, Luke
10.8. be it but homely, (...) Quicunque appositus suevit cibus. Bez^. Quotidie
exiguo pa^e and balece contentum esse. Melanch Nescio qu^^ Satan id curat, uti
negare non liceat, and tamen secisse ^oceat. Tom 1. episs* p. 625.
so it be wholesome. Luther (as he was a smallmeat-man, and a great faster, so)
for many dai^s together, says Melancthon, I have observed him to concent
himself with a little piece of bread and a herring. Being often invited to
feasts, he came not, lest he should lose so much time: as himself complains
in a certain Epistle: I lose a great deal of time through invitations: And I
know not what Satan procures it, that I cannot say nay, and yet it repents me
to have done it. Be not amongst wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh,
or fleshmongers, as one rendereth it. For the drunkard and the glutton shall
come to poverty, etc. Pro. 23. 20, 21. That Is one motive to temperance.

1. Spend-thrifts entomb their ancestors in their bowels. As they turn rents
into ruffs, and lands into laces, Motive 1. Singul^s auri^^^s bina ^ut ^e^^a
^ependunt (...) D^ guione (...) Horat^^s
hang their patrimonies at their ears, as Seneca says; wear a pretty grove, an
indifferent farm on their backs: so do they waste their substance with riotous
living, as that Prodigal, Luke 16.13. Ingluvies and tempestas, barathrumque
macelli. The Prodigal is called (...) quasi (...), says Clem. Alex. One that
is unsaveable, or one that is undone by himself, (...)
says Aristotle: So was Cleopatra, Heliogabalus, Vitellius, and (to omit many
others) M. Livius, who when he had wasted a great estate in luxurious living,
jested at his own folly, and said, That he left nothing for his heir, Praeter
coelum and caenum, more then air and mire. Another, Phan^a lex, qua ^aveb^^^^
nequis car^^s obso (...) ^res tantum ba^urt qu^ parerent, Scaevola^. Tuberonem,
Ruffum Macrob. Veat^r molestus cliens. (...). Magister artis ^ngen^que lar^itor
Venture. Sub^^^ morimur quia m^^thus vivi^us. Sen. Motive 2.
hearing that there were but 700 crowns left of a vast estate that he had left
him, hanged himself. The belly is a troublesome client, says one, an evil
beast, says another; an ingenious Artist, says a third. What birds soever
fly, what fishes soever swim, what beasts soever run about, are buried in our
bellies (says Seneca) what marvel then though we our selves are soon brought
to burial? And let that be a second Motive to moderate feeding.

2. Gluttony is the bane of the body. For many more perish by intemperance then
by violence, by surfeting then by suffering. Epicures are as desperate as
soldiers, and meat kills as many as the musket. It is holden for c^rtain, The
New-landers cure by S Will. Vaugh. p 23.
That in every two year there is such store of ill humors and excrements
engendered in the best body, that a vessel of an hundred ounces will scarce
contain them. (...) view De Ninia ^ssyr. rage ^ Athenens Dip. nos. lib. 2.
What shall we then think of those greedy gully-guts, that barrel up Gods good
creatures in their bellies, and mast themselves like hogs of Epicures-heard?
How do they hasten their end, and, as it were, dig their own graves with their
teeth. Plures pereunt crapula quam capulo, la^cibus quam lanceis, etc. The
board kills more then the sword: for life is a lamp: and excess of meat does
shorten the one, as too much oil does extinguish the other. Let this warn our
irregulares gulares, that make their gut a gulf, and fur their teeth with
excessive eating, hateful to God, hurtful to themselves. Let them take heed
that they hug not themselves to death; and, by pouring on too much oil, quite
put forth the light of life. Tennismensa sanitatis matter, says Chrysostom.
Socrates is said by sobriety to have had always a strong body: Gorgias and
Gal^n to have lived to an 120 years, Galen. de sanit. tuend 1 5 ^ 12.
by rising ever from the Table with an appetite. Herodicus as student in
Athens, the most weak and sickly of any that then lived, by the testimony both
of Plato and Aristotle: yet by temperance protracted his life to an incredible
length. Cuffes d^ffer of Ag^s, p. 99.
Augustus never drank bat thrice at one meal, and lived near 80 years. And Q.
Elizabeth of England did seldom eat but-one sort of meat, rose ever with an
appetite, New land cu^e 23 (...) H^ppoc. Camd Elizah, Pr^face. Motive 3.
and lived about 70 years. K. Edward 6. called her by no other name then his
sweet sister temperance: she knew, That much meat, much malady.

Lastly, For the soul. Many a man's table is a snare to him: whiles sulnesse
breeds forgetfulness, and that both of God and his works, Isa. 5.12. and of
men and their miseries, as in Nabal that Pamphagus, those Cormorants Amos 6.6.
and Dives. It breeds also wantonness, as in those Israelites that eat and
drank and rose up to play: blockishnes and stupidity, as in the old world, Gula
veslibulum luxuriae. Dio in vita Vitel^ij. Vitell. trepidus, dein temulentus.
Tac. Hinc (...) Epulae sine ^ine petitae Non ulla numina expavesco caelitum,
Sed victimas uni Deorum maxim^ ^entri offero, deosignoro caeteros Cyclops ap
Eurip.
Baltasar, Vetellius, others: drunkenness as in Nabal: cursing and swearing, as
Job suspected by his children, at their feast. It emasculates the spirit, as we
see in Solomon; whose luxury drew out his spirits, and dissolved him. It
indisposeth men to those exercises that are to be performed by the mind, which
is now taken up with the thought of what shall we eat, what shall we drink,
etc? A full belly neither studies well, nor prays well. They serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, that serve their own bellies, Romans 16.10. How can they, when
their kitchen is their shrine, their Cook their Priest, their Table their
Altar, and their belly their god, Phil. 3? etc.

Admonition.
1 THESE. 5.14. Warn them that are unruly.


unruly ones in the visible Church; disordered and dissolute, exorbitant and
enormous livers; such as transgress the tradition, says the Apostle of them,
2 Thessalonians. 3.6. that is, Ephesians. 5.15.
Obey not the form of doctrine delivered unto them, Romans 6.17. Walk not by
rule, but at all adventures, Levit. 26.23. Contra gnomonem and canonem
decalogi, lawless, yokelesse, masterles monsters, sons of Belial, goats,
wild asse-colts, untamed heifers, horses, mules, Psalm. 32.9. Quibus vita est
incomposita, and pessime morata; Calvin.
they run away with the bit between their teeth: break Christ's bonds as Samson
did the green withes, shake Christ's yoke from their shoulders, as the Unicorn,
Job 39.10. send messages after him, as they in the Gospel, We will not have
this man to rule over us, we will not live by his laws. Of these S. Peter 2 ep.
2. and S. Jude v. 8.9.

Who made us to differ? Lord, how is it that thou showest thy felf to us, and
not to the world? Joh. 14.22. 2. For the trial, exercise, correction of his
Saints. 3. For a mutrall scourge to themselves, as the East by the Turks, the
West by the Pope, for their Apostasy, etc.

Heterc^lite, (...).
that kept not his station, but brake the ranks, and is become a master of
misrule amongst the men of this world, whom he acts and agitates, Ephesians. 2 2.
carries them along (as possessed persons) through fire and water, thick and thin:
has them at his beck and check, called therefore, Children of disobedience,
sons of Belial, taken alive, and carried about by him at his pleasure, as
Bajazet was in an iron ^age. (...) (...) 26


Men are therefore obstinate in evil, says the Prophet: Because 1. Their neck
is an iron sinew. 2. Their brow is brass, Isa 48.4. This double distemper lies
upon every carnal person. 1. Natural crossenesse to the law of God, Romans 8.7.
Homo est inversus decalogus. 2. Habitual hardness, contracted by long trading
in sin; Doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, Mic. 7.3. setting their sin
upon the cliffe of the rock, Ezekiel. 24.7. adding to their sinews of iron, br^ws
of brass, to natural impotence, impudence in evil, Jer. 3.3. an
uncouncellable wilfulness in wickedness.

Psalm. 2. that those that will not bend may break, those that will not be
Christ's subjects, may be his footstool: it is sure he will have the better of them.
If they walk contrary to him, he will be as cross to them, Levit. 26.23. If
they be froward, he will be as froward as they for the hearts of them, Psalm.
18.26. They shall have their wills, but then he will have his, Ezekiel. 24.13. In
running from God, and the obedience of his Word, they do but run to meet their
own bane, as the Philistims did at Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. Aut poenitendum, aut
per^undum. Aut faciendum, aut patiendum. Men must either repent or perish: do
Gods law or suffer it. The law was added, because of transgression; and is
given not for the righteous, but for the lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9.
to hamper those unruly beasts, and to tame them with those four tee^h it has.
1. Irritation, Romans 7.7. 2. Induration, Isa. 6.10. 3. Obligation, Genesis 4.7. 4.
Execration, Gal. 3.10. And whereas these men's hope of help is From the Gospel
(which is, Quasi post naufragium tabula, as a plank after shipwreck) that will
not relieve them neither. For as against such there is no law, says the
Apostle of the fruits of the spirit: so, for such there is no Gospel, say I of
the wilfully wicked.

Be wise now therefore, be instructed, Gal. 5.23.
Psalm. 2.10. Tremble and sin not, Psalm. 4.4. Send a lamb to the ruler of the
earth, as an homage-peny, Isa. 16.1. bring presents to Fear, or to him that
ought to be feared, Psalm. 76.11. Receive the Word with all readiness, Act.
7.11. Give your selves first to God, and then to us by the will of God, as
those Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5. Genesis 2^.3.
Obey from the heart the form of doctrine, whereunto ye have been delivered, as
those Romans, Chap 6.17. Captivate your reason, as Paul did, Gal. 1.16. dispute
not, but dispatch Gods commands, as Abraham did. Get an open ^ar, a teachable
spirit: so that a little child may lead you, Isa. 11.6. A heavy ear is a
singular judgment, Isa. 6.10. a dull heart the devils work, 2 Cor. 4.4. See
that ye add not rebellion to sin, Job 34.37. lest ye add wrath to wrath,
Romans 2.5. And here, 1. For time past, look on all the writs of ex cution, and
say as 1 Cor. 10.11. These are as so many types, (...).
moulds, monitours, summoners, real Sermons to us. 2. For present, look up and
see (as David did) the punishing Angel, as it were with a drawn sword. And
though thou may shuffle awhile from side to side, as the Ass did, yet think
not long to escape. 3. For future, think seriously of that dreadful doomsday,
that shall burn as an oven: And, Knowing the terror of the Lord, Act. 24.16.
persuade others, persuade your selves especially, to walk by rule and keep a
clear conscience, that most precious jewel, that ever the heart of man was
acquainted with.

Warn the unruly.
(...), bon^ mentem indite Daven, in Col. 3.16. Amiss^ mentem veponite, Beza.
ad mentem restituite.
restored to their right minds again, as the word here used imports. For sin
makes men sots, Hos. 4.11. madmen, Eccles. 7.25. quite besides themselves, as
the Prodigal, Luke 15.17. Ye which are spiritual restore them therefore, Gal.
6.1. rouse them, 2 Pet. 1 13. raise them out of the pit (you must his ass,
much more his soul, Exodus 23.5.) yea pull them out of the fire, as S. Jude has
it, making a difference out of deep compassion. Or, as Lorinus reads and
renders that text, Arguite disputatos, by strength of argument convince them of
the error of their way, (...). Jam. 5.20.
and so reduce them by right reason. This is to pull them out of the fire of
hell, says Jude. This is to save a soul from death, says James. This is a
holy violence, a desirable rapine, says Hierom. And this is a duty that both
Law and Gospel call for. 1. The Law. Levit. 19.17. Violentia sancta optabilis
rapina.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. 2. The Gospel, Mat. 18.15. Go
tell him his fault between thee, and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy brother. Thou shall rebuke thy neighbor, says Moses: and mark
his reasons.

Joh. 3 A seasonable reproof draws cut the poison of a beginning grudge and
malice. Whereas not admonishing, breeds dwelling ^^^p^^^o^s: suspicions breed a
very habit of mis-interp^etation, mi^-interpretation begets a lothnes to come
to the light to show the reasons of dislike: this lothnesse begets a very
separation in ^eart, Ne ta^en su^er (...) tollas tanquam Vex^llum Cart. in Man.
7.1. Ne pe^^aturn^e jus luas Cast^^. Apud Atheni en^es. olim exsecrationes
pal^i (...) erant con (...) in cos. qui erranti (...) mo^^^^^arent. M^^ 3 4.
and that, a forwardness to blaze his sin. So some render the last clause in
this Text, Thou shall not lift up his sin over him, or display it as a banner
to his disgrace, as malice will make thee do. Others render it thus, That thou
suffer not for his sin: and that needs not: for thou have enough of thine own
to answer for. But thou art bound as to observe Gods Commandments in thy self,
so to preserve them in others. Silence is consent by Gods Law, Levit. 5.1. And
by ill silence to leave men in sin, is as b^d as by ill speech to draw them to
sin. Not to do good, says our Savior, is to do evil; and not to lave, is
to destroy. Keep thy self from thine other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22 Our
Translatours (after Tr^mellius and others) render it, Thou shall not suffer
sin upon him. Sin is so hateful a viper that we should club it down, and
stub it up, where ever we meet with it. Now a man may hinder much sin by
seasonable admonition; Act. and Mon. fol. 1458.
as Bradford kept Bishop Farrar (whiles he was prisoner in the King's Bench)
from receiving the Sacrament at Easter in one kind, which he had promised to
do: And Bishop Ridley (whiles he was prisoner in the Tower) from going to
Mass; Ibid. 19^0.
which once he did. But Mr Bradford being there also prisoner, and hearing
thereof, reduced him by an effectual letter. And as for those unruly ones that
refuse to be reclaimed, yet the spirit of profanenes in them will be much laid,
laid by the majesty of a reproof: which will tame and take down their
insolency, cut their combs, cool their courage; as Nicod^mus did the Councels,
John 7.51, 52, 53. And as Adrianus Boxschofius Preacher of Antwerp did the
Monks at Newburg, that ra^ld at Luther out of the Pulpit. I (says Boxschofius)
am called by the noble Earl of Hoy to convince thee, and all thine of a lie.
Tell me therefore, thou perverse Monk^, and that openly before all this people,
where, when, and in what points has Luther erred? The Monk answered not a
word, but g^t him privily out of the Pulpit, fled away as sast as he could, and
never came more into that country. S^^lt Annal. de^as prima.


Secondly, Our Savior supplies us in that, Mat. 18.15. with another reason. If
he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. Now to gain a soul is more then to
get a world, as he has ass^red us who best knew the worth of souls: for he,
and he only went to the price of them, Rebuke them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith, says S. Paul of those slow-belly Cr^tians. Tit. 1.15.
The Church of Laodicea was sharply reproved, and thereupon soundly repented.
For Eusebius commends it for a Church famous and flourishing in his days;
which was well-nigh 300 years after. An admonition may not presently work: but
afterward (when men are in cool blood) it may be better considered of: Degrees
of grace are not given all at once, Joh. 13.36. But the dispensation of the
grace of God is given us to others-ward, Ephesians. 3.2. that as every one has
received the gift, even so should we minister the same one to another, as good
stewards, out of the care of community. For as no man is born, so neither is he
born anew for himself. 1 Pet. 4.10. Graviter Demost henes Ae^^hini, (...)
The Rabbines have a saying: Lilmod lelammed, a man must therefore learn, that
he may teach others. Ephraim that bore fruit to himself only, is called an
empty vine. But the tongue of the wise is as a tree of life, that feeds many.
And how forcible are right words, says he in Job? Nathan wrought more upon
David by a particular private admonition, then all the lectures of the law for
three quarters of a year before. Now if a brother may be gained, a soul saved
by a wise and loving admonition, who would not strive for such p^arls?

Exodus 23.4. but run further out. The more you rub their gal'd backs, the more
they kick: the more you handle there toads, the more they swell: the more you
meddle, the more will these serpents gather poison to vomit out at you. Say to
wrest the strings of their tongues (...) tune, they will snap and break upon
you: Cast water upon this lime, it will fry the faster. God has threatened to
lay such in the slimy valley, where are many already like them, and more shall
come after them, Job 21.31, 32.

Heb. 13.22. Suffer it, nay pray for a friendly reprover, as David does, Psa.
141.5. And be thankful, as he was to Abigail; knowing that ye have cause to
think and say as bad of your selves, as that worthy man Agur did, Pro. 30.2, 3.
Hezekiah stormed not at Isaiah, but submitted. Job laid his hand upon his
mouth, when reproved. Jonah replies not, but shuts up his prophecy, and lets
God have the last word. The Virgin Mary when publicly checked at the wedding,
holds her peace, Ioh. 2.4. S. Peter commends all S. Paul's epistles, 2 Pet.
3.15. Gal. 2.
who yet had sharply reproved him, and registered that reproof. I confess its
no easy matter to bear an admonition well, though never so well tempered. No
sugar can bereave a pill of his bitterness. It fares with offenders, as with
those that are wakened out of sleep, they are unquiet, and ready to brawl with
their best friends: Dogs in a chafe will bark sometimes at their own masters.
But as an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover
upon an obedient ear. Such shall sinde more favor afterward, Prove. 25.12.
Prove. 28.13.
then one that flattereth with his lips. (...) Dio in Augusto Mercurium a Deo
missum, qui (...) i^ admon^^t.
Bees pass by roses and violets, to sit upon time: so godly men rather heed
sound rebukes then smooth supparasitations. David esteemed better of Nathan
after he had so plainly rebuked him, then ever he did before. See else 1 King.
1.23, 27. Nay Augustus an Heathen prized plain-dealing in Mecaenas and others.
Epictetus called a faithful Monitour, a messenger from heaven. When Luther was
one time very much moved at something, Melancthon interrupted and quieted him
by repeating this verse, Vince animos, iramque tuam, qui caetera vincis.

Next to the not deserving a reproof, Manlij loc. com. page 248.
is the well-taking of it. The woman of Samaria loves Christ the better for
finding her out in her sin. The two disciples going to Emaus constrain Christ
to come in and eat with them, Luke 24.
though he had roundly reproved them, being for ought they knew, a mere
stranger, and one that had nothing to do with them. As young Eaglets are known
to be of the right kind by their steadfast eying of the Sun, so are the true
children of the Church by the right bearing of reproof, Iam 1, 19, 20.

Romans were full of goodness, filled with knowledge, able to admonish one
another, Rom 15.14. The Hebrews are exhorted to exhort one another daily, Heb.
3.13. yea, to study one ^^other, to stir up (or whet on) to love and good
works. And the Colossians must teach and admonish one another, Feb. 10. ^^^
Col. 3 16.
and that in the words of Christ, dwelling richly in them, that out of the good
treasure of the heart they may draw forth good things, new and old, as there is
occasion. Exhort one another with these words, says Paul. And have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. (...). Ephesians. 5.11, 13.
or refute, refell, convince them to be naught by the clear light of Gods Word.
For all things that are (rightly) reproved, are made manifest by this light.

To quicken you hereunto, consider, 1. That God shall be greatly glorified. 2.
Sin either restrained, or justly aggravated. 3. Weak Christians shall be kept
from being scandalized, strong from being grieved. 4. Your selves hereby shall
be both engaged to do that whereof you have admonished another, and comforted
in the discharge of your duty; the omission whereof does often grieve the good
heart, and vex the conscience: As it fell out in that faithful and famous man
of God Mr Sam. Hiron, whose words were these upon his deathbed. A relation of
the manner of M. Hir^ns death, annexed to the first volume of his works.
I confess that in public I have been somewhat full in reproof, in
admonition, in instruction. But in private my backwardnes, my bashfulnes, my
dastardlines has been intolerable: And I may truly say, that if any thing lies
as a burden upon my conscience, this is it. Now for your direction, that old
rule for matter of Alms, holds good in this of admonition: which is a species
of spiritual Alms.

Est modus in dando, Quis, Quid, Cui, Quomodo, Quando. Here then take notice:
1. Who must admonish. 2. For what. Rules to be observed in admonishing others.
3. Whom. 4. How. 5. When.

First, Who must warn the unruly? All, without exception: the precept is
general, Levit. 19.17. Ezekiel. 1.30. Turn ye, and turn others. Besides, we are
all a kingdom of Priests, Rev. 1.6, have all received an ointment, 1 Ioh. 2.20.
which must smell all Gods house over. Women must not preach, yet the elder must
teach the younger to be sober, Tit. 3. Ministers must admonish of authority:
all others of sociall charity: they that are spiritual especially, Gal. 6.1.
and children of light, Ephesians. 5.13.

Next, See whereof we must warn others, and for what, reprove them. Not for
foul sins only, and heinous offenses, but for disorders, as here, and
inordinate walking, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. be it but idleness, talkativenesse,
pragmaticalnesse, censori^ousnesse, etc. For, 1. Small motes in the Saints are
made great beams by the wicked: their least aberrations (as of stars) is soon
observed and noticed, Isa, 19.21.
They watch for my halting, says Jeremy. Make a man an offender for a word,
says Isaiah. 2, Lesser evils tolerated make way for greater. Cain not taking
Gods reproof for frowns, fell afterward to murder. Only let it be remembered
that sins of infirmity must be more gently handled, as those of pride and
presumption more sharply and with severity, Tit. 1.15. Jude 22, 23. When our
Savior ( Samson-like) drove those money-merchants out of his Fathers house
with a scourge of small cords only, as he the Philistims once, with the
jaw bone of an ass, he dealt more gently with those that sold doves. He poured
not out their money, nor threw down their tables, as he had done the rest, but
gently said unto them, Take these things hence, Joh. 1.15, 16.
etc. He knew them belike, not to be so great sinners, he found them more
tractable and easy to be wrought upon. Hence his different dealing.

Thirdly, Whom are we to admonish? 1. Not those without the visible Church, 1
Cor. 5.11, 12. Reproof is a piece of ecclesiastical government^ 2. Not dogs
and swine, Mat. 7.6. mad dogs, sensual swine, that either grunt against
goodness, or furiously fly in the face of such as fairly tell them of their
faults. Rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee: such he means as have wearied
themselves so long in standing and walking in wicked ways, that now they are
set down at rest in scorners chair, Prove. 9.
refusing to be reformed, hating to be healed. These are not worth the warning.
But for all others, see that ye suffer not sin upon them, for fear, favor,
affection, or what other sinister end soever. Only reprove equals with friendly
admonition, superiors with submisse exhortation, inferiors by sharp
reprehension, or (if need be) correction.

Ob. Rebuke not an elder, 1 Timothy 5.1.

Sol. (...). Ne plagam infligas verbera lingu^. Hor.
Not as a puny-boy (as the word signifies) but mildly, etc. else, see v. 19, 20,

Ob. I love not to meddle. Be not many masters, Iam. 3.1.

Sol. No meddling in this case is a kind of soul-murthering.

Ob. It is a thanklesse office.

Sol. Not with the wise, Prove. 9.8. and 28.23. In the sweating-sicknesse, they
that were kept awake, escaped: but the sickness was deadly to them that were
suffered to sleep. Let us keep one another awake: an unpleasing work on both
sides. But such shall have thanks one day.

Ob. I shall lose my labor.

Sol. Venture that, thou have lost many a worse. See Job 6.25. 1 Kin. 5.11.

Ob. I shall lose my friend.

Sol. It may be not. But say thou should, thou shall find a better thing.
See Mar. 10.29.30. He that receives a courtesy, we say, sels his liberty. But
so did not our Savior at Martha^s, at Simons house the leper; nor must we, but
trust God with all. A man had better offend all the world, then his own
conscience.

Fourthly, How must we admonish? First, Zealously, so as the reproof may enter,
the counsel be considered of, Prove. 17.10. There is a curse to those that do
this work of the Lord negligently, Ier. 48.10. as Eli did in dealing with his
lewd sons: and Pope Paul the 5. who being advertised of the deterstable
villainies of his son Farnesius, thought it sufficient to say, Haec v^tia me non
commonstratore didicit. Heyl. Geog. p. 222. Acerbissimo sarcasmo eos
per^^stringit. Gal. 5.1.
He never learned these vices of his father. How did S. Paul sharp up the
sorcerer, Act. 13.10? And our Savior shake up his drousie disciples, Mar.
14.41. though heavy-hearted? From henceforth sleep and take your rest, it is
sufficient. Three words he uses to upbraid them their sleeping the third time,
q. d. Sleep now if you can; the hour is come, the soldiers are at hand, etc.
Next mildly, and in the spirit of meekness. Some warmth must be in a reproof,
but it must not be scalding not, as by words of reproach, reviling, threatening,
Monendo quam minando. Elisha did more with a kiss, then his man with a staff.
No oratory is so powerful as that of mildnes. Ought ye not to walk in the fear
of the Lord, because of the reproach of the Heathen? said Nehemiah, Who could
resist such a sweet and sovereign reprehension?

Lastly, Learn when to admonish. Not when men are in their drink, 1 Samuel 25.36.
or in heat of passion, Pro. 18.19. Good Physicians evacuate not the body in
extremity of heat and cold. Mariners hoise not sail in every wind.
Opportunities must be watched. Samuel reproves not Israel, till sure of their
King. Consider wisely whether it may better be done presently, and in hot
blood, or more conveniently and profitably at another time, Ecel. 3.7. Pro.
29.11.

Alms.
1 TIMOTHY 6.17, 18, 19. Charge those that be rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, neither trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us all things richly to enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, rea^y to distribute,
willing to communicate:

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation, against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life.


COntented godliness is great gain. (...)
This is our Apostles proposition, in opposition to those men of corrupt
minds, that even in those purer times, doubted not to defend, That gain was
godliness, verse. 5, 6. But the love of money is the root of all evil. And they
that will be rich, that are resolved to rake together -- rem, rem, quocunque
modo rem: These fall unavoidably into temptation, and a snare, (...) ^^a
demergunt bomines ut in aqu^e summitate rursus non ebulliant. Wo^erig.
yea (if they stop not the sooner, step not back the faster) into many foolish
and noisome lusts, which desperately drown men in perdition and destruction,
verse. 9, 10.

This to prevent, the Apostle tasketh Timothy; 1. For himself to lay hold on
eternal life, as fast as others do on this worlds goods; to follow after
godliness as greedily as they after gain. 2. For others (after a short
digression) he charge him to charge the rich in this world so to handle their
thorns, that they prick not their fingers, pierce not their souls, gore not
their consciences, either by pride (that hate of heaven, and gate to hell) or
by carnal confidence, as if they were simply the safer, or better for their
abundance: But contrariwise, 1 For God, to trust in him, for that he both lives
and gives us all things, etc. 2. For men, to exercise bounty toward them.
Whereof we have here, 1. A just description, by the matter, measure, manner,
constant continuance, ver. 18.

2. A powerful incitation to the practice of it, drawn ab utili, which every
man hearkneth after, ver. 19.

Charge them that are rich -- that they be rich in good works.



The Scripture ranks all sorts into, 1. Rich. 2. Poor. 3. Men of a mean or
middle condition, such as Agur wished for, Prove. 30.8. Poor men are such as
cannot comfortably subsist without relief. The middle-man is he that gets and
eats: his gettings and eatings are even at weeks end.

The rich man is he, that has any thing over that size of satisfying nature:
that has any overplus, any thing to lay up. Now the rule here is; Every man
according to his ability must relieve his poor brother, as they did, Act.
11.29. Yea, though we may not stretch beyond the staple, and so break all;
(...) Mar. 12.44. for a poor man's livelihood is his life. (...) que ad imum
usque cos exinamerat.
yet in some extraordinary necessity, and exigency, the poor widow must part
with her little All; the Sareptan be no niggard of her oil, though it be in the
bottom, the deep poverty of the Macedonians must abound unto the riches of
their liberality, who to their power, and beyond it too, were willing thereto,
2 Cor. 8.2, 3. The day-labourer must give somewhat out of his gets, the servant
out of his wages, Ephesians. 4.28. The Ruler must not exact his right, Nehem. 5.10.
nor the landed man spare to sell that be has, to give alms thereof, Luke
12.33. as Barnabas (and others) did, Act. 4.37. and was therefore called, A
son of consolation, because he thereby comforted Gods poor afflicted. Holy
Bradford, in a hard time, Act. and Mon. Ibid.
thought not much to sell his chains, rings, and jewels, for relief of others.
Rogers our Protomartyr in Queen Mary's days, made a motion to forbear one meal
a day. Hic apud Buchanan: Sophocardius dicitur.
Mr George Wiseheart a Scotch Martyr forbear one meal in three, one day in
four, for the most part, except something to comfort nature. He lay hard upon a
pouffe of straw, with course new canvasse sheets, which whenever he changed,
Act. and Mon. fol. 1155.
he gave away. Giles of Brussels Martyr, gave to the poor all that he had, that
necessity could spare: and only lived by his science, which was of a Cutler.
Some he refreshed with his meat, some with clothing: to some he gave his shoes,
some he helped with household stuff: to other-some he ministered wholesome
exhortation of good doctrine. Ibid 8 11.
One poor woman there was brought to bed, and had no bed to lie in: to whom he
brought his own bed, himself content to lie in the straw. Being taken, and put
in prison, he ministered to all his fellow prisoners at table, being contented
himself with a few scraps that they left, etc. Dr Tailour Martyr, made it his
custom, once in a fornight at least to call upon Sr Henry Doyle, and other of
the rich Cloth-makers in his Parish to go with him to the Almeshouse, and there
to see how the poor lived, what they lacked in meat, drink, clothing, bedding,
or any other necessaries. Ibid. 1388.
The like did he also to other poor men that had many children, or were sick.
Then would he exhort, and comfort them: and, where he found cause, rebuke the
unruly (this was spiritual alms) and what they lacked, that gave he after his
power; and what he was not able, he caused the rich to minister unto them. M
Ward of Ip^wich, his Christ is all in all. David's desire by Rob. Abbot.
Mr Fox (that reports all the former) never denied any one that asked him ought
for Jesus sake: And being once asked, Whether he knew a certain poor man, that
had received succor from him in time of trouble, he answered, I remember him
well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such. Twice I was
(says the same Mr Fox) in Bishop Hoopers house at Worcester: where, in his
Common Hall, I saw a table spread with good store of meat, and beset full of
beggars and poor folk. And I asking his servants what this meant, they told me,
that every day their Lord and masters manner was, to have customably to dinner
a certain number of poor folk of the said City by course, who were served by
four at amesse, with wholesome meats. And when they were served, Ibid. 1369
being before examined by him or his deputies, of the Lords-praier, the
Articles of the faith, and ten Commandments, then he himself sat down to
dinner, and not before: being, as it is else where storied of him, Spare of
diet, sparer of words, sparest of time. Amadeus Duke of Savoy (afterward made
Pope of Rome, anno 1440.) Ibid.
being asked by certain Ambassadors, whether he had any hunting-dogs to show
them, told them they should see them the next day. And getting together a great
sort of poor folk, he set them with him at his own Table on the morrow, and
said to the Ambassadors, These be the dogs that I keep daily, and wherewith I
use to hunt after heaven. Hi sunt canes ^^ei quos a^o quo^id^e, etc. F^r^
Chro^ol. Hist hobem Specul. belli sacri. p 252. (...) Xenoph: Dio in vita M.
A^tonini Philoso^hi. Act. and Mon. fol 958.
A like course was taken by Charles the great, and by I^go King of Draves and
V^neds, as Aeneas Sylvius reports. Of a certain Bishop of Lincoln it is
said, That he never thought he had that thing, that he did not give. The same
is reported of our General Norrice: and before them both of Cyrus the King,
and of Antonius the Emperor. Queen Anne Bullen carried ever about her a little
purse for the poor; thinking no day well spent, wherein some man had not fared
the better by some benefit at her hand. She kept her maids, and such as were
about her, so employed in sowing and working garments for the poor, that
neither was there seen any idleness then among them, nor any leisure to follow
foolish pastimes. So did Dorcas before her, and so before them both Bathsheba,
or the good houswife that she commends to her son Solomon, She lays her hands
to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaffe, Prove. 31 19, But why this? And
what need she be so work-brittle, being a Queen? It follows in the next
words, verse. ^0. She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea she reaches
forth her hands to the needy. She was of his mind, belike, that said (and
suffered for so saying in King Henry the 8. days) That alms should not be
given until it sweat in a man's hand. Mr Bradford Martyr, counted that hour
lost, Ibid 765.
wherein he did not some good with his tongue, pen or purse. Ibid. 1457.
The young Lord Harrington gave the tenth of his allowance (which was a
thousand pounds a year, during his minority) to the poor and other good uses
(as appeared by his accounts after his death) besides what he gave in the way
as he walked and traveled, The testimony: annexed to his funeral sermon by M.
Stock. p. 92 In his life prefixed to his Prototypes, by M. Henry S^udd^r.
which he did often and much, etc. M. Whately also that late painful and
powerful Preacher of Gods Word at Banbury, as he was much in pressing this
duty of liberality, so himself abounded in works of mercy. He set apart and
expended for the space of many years for good uses, the tenth part of his
yearly comings in, both out of his temporal and Ecclesiastical means of
maintenance. Neither may I here forget that late reverend man of God M. John
Ballam Pastor of the Church at Evesham (my spiritual father, and bountiful
benefactour) nor yet M. Simon Trappe, late Minister of Gods Word at Stratford
upon Avon, my dear and near kinsman, both in the flesh, and in the faith. Both
which, out of that little they had (for God saw fit to hold them here to strait
allowance, 1 Cor. 16 2. M^r. 12.41. Proponamus ^^ nobis u^ Archi^^^s^opun, sic
Arcb^d^a^enil, etc. (...). b^st Christ. Plerisque munus ^ulum p^^^ce
off^ren^^^u^, etc. Beza. in loc. Docet A^ido teles liberalitatem metiendam esse
(...) (...) 4. Lihera^^tas non cumu^o patri no (...) sed largitatatis affectu
desi^i^ur. Ambr.
Archdeacon, to see what every man casts into this treasury, and with what
affection. The people, Mark 12.41. last in money ( brass money, says the
Original:) somewhat they must do, for none might appear empty-handed before
the Lord; but they would do as little as might be: they cast in, says the
Text, not silver or gold, but brasse-money into the treasury. And many that
where rich cast in much. But the poor widow cast in more then all the rest,
says our Savior: less in Arithmeticall proportion, but more in Geometrical,
because all she had. And women are noted for more hard and tenacious then men;
whence in is that the joy for finding the lost groat is propounded in the
person of a woman, Luke 15. But this was a widow indeed, trusting in God, as
S. Paul describes such, in the living God, as this Text has it, who gives us
all things richly to enjoy. This is one part of Gods charge here: and another
is, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, etc.

And that is our first reason (for we need not travel out of the Text to fetch
in reasons for the point in proof) God lays his charge, his solemn charge upon
us, to be much in works of mercy. Now if God should charge the rocks, they
would send forth water: if the stones, they would become bread: if the ravens,
they would fecd Elias: if the quails, they would victual the camp: if the
clouds, they would rain down food from heaven upon his poor people. Shall we
then be more rocky them rocks? more stony then stones? more ravenous then
ravens? more senseless then birds? more empty then clouds?

the rich in this world, that are here required to be rich in good works. Its
one thing to be rich in this world, (...) Luke 12.21. 1 Cor. 1.5. Jam. 2^ 5
Luke 12 33.
and another thing to be rich toward God, as our Savior phraseth it, to be
rich in knowledge, as S. Paul has it, rich in faith, as S. James. This is to
be rich for another world, to lay up a treasure in heaven, to make us purses
that perish nor. Sell that ye have, and give alms, provide you baggs thereby
that wax not old, that are never the worse for wearing, treasure in heaven that
fails not: but the more you take from it, the more you add to it: It grows
in your hands as the loaves did in our Saviors, as the oil did in the widows
cruse, Nec exba^^itur, nec exten^atur, sed d^lies^^t (...)
as the water does in a wellspring. That which a man eats, drinks, wears,
builds, etc. tends but to a natural life, the world that now is (as the Text
has it) and ends with it too. These things are only for this place, and for
this state too; terrene they are and abject, Fine^^ habitura sunt hae^ om^^a
aut s^^^^ aut (...) 1 Cor 6.13.
base and bootlesse, vain and vile, subject to vanity or violence, for the moth
may consume them, or the thief steal them. But if not, yet they serve but to
back and belly, to prop up this life present. Which yet, they cannot. For,
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats. But God will destroy both it and
them. Were it not better therefore by bounty to the poor to make us friends
with the unrighteous mammon, that when we shall be turned out (as it were with
a firmae ejectione) of our clayie cottages, Do number in coelis manus pa^^^ru^
aedificat. Chrysostom. Luk 16.9. 1 John 3.
they (that is either the Angels, or thy riches, or the poor whom therewith
thou have relieved) may receive us into everlasting habitations! that when
these things fail us (as they will, for they are only this worlds goods, as S.
John calls them, and will follow their right masters, as dogs do, when
company parts) our good works may follow us, and speak a good word so us at
Gods dreadful tribunal?

To be rich in good works is a special preservative, a sovereign Antidote
against those two dangerous diseases (connaturall and almost inseparable from
the rich in this world) 1. High-mindednesse, causing men to think great things
of themselves, and to seek great things for themselves. This is a blab that the
devil will easily blow up in rich misers; to think themselves simply the better
men, because richer then others, which is all one, as if the silly Ant, the
higher she gets upon her hillock, the greater she should conceit her self.

2. Carnal confidence in the wedge of gold, in their heaps and hoards of the
wealth of this world; making their gold their God, and trusting to their idol,
which the belly-god does not, who yet hat damnation for his end. Phil 3.19.
Every niggard draws arguments from his riches to prop up his hopes, to confirm
his expectation of a longer and more comfortable life, because of his much good
laid up in store for many years. Now this is so ordinary a thing for those that
are rich in this world, to trust in uncertain riches, that when the Disciples
were astonished at that saying of our Savior, How hardly shall the rich enter
into heaven? and he, for their satisfaction had thus explained himself,
Children, How hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the
kingdom of God? It is easier for a Camel, Mark 10.23, 24, 25, 26.
etc. They were so far from being satisfied, that they were astonished out of
measure, saying, among themselves, Who then can be saved? as knowing that there
were scarce any rich, but trusted in their riches. For prevention whereof, and
that the rich dash not against either of these two dangers, Charge them, as
they love their lives, and would save their souls, to be rich in good works.
This kept David humble, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. And would have kept that rich young
Pharisee from trusting to his great possessions, had he taken our Saviors
council, Mark 10.21, 22. (...), Luke 11, 41. quia divitie Iusident avar^
animo. B^z^.
But his heart was so wedded and wedged to his health, that he went away
grieved at that hard saying, Sell all and give to the poor, as one well beaten:
and seemed to be of that misers mind, that being on his deathbed, clapped a
piece of gold in his mouth, and kept it there; and being asked his reason, he
answered; Some wiser then some: this I mean to keep till I am dead. Rogers of
love.


(...)
Riches are a mere uncertainty, an obscurity, a fallacy: one while they appear,
and another while they disappear, as meteors in the air, as dive-dappers in the
water: as a flock of birds in a man's field: he cannot say they are his, because
they sit there, For they take unto them kings, says Solomon, and flee away.
Instance Job; to day on the throne, to morrow on the dunghill: Pythias pined
to death for lack of bread, Turk h^st. fol 220.
who once was able to entertain and maintain Xerxes his whole army: Bajazet,
that ball of fortune, as one calls him, or rather an example of wealths
uncertainty, as another. Now in dealing with things uncertain (whereof there is
no hold) a wise man will be careful, 1. To make them as sure as he can. 2. To
use them as well as he can, while he has them. But neither can we assure
riches, nor use them better, then by bestowing them on the poor. If this be not
done, all conveyances of law are but mere toies, so are all other carnal
securities. Jer. 22.15, 16.
Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar? says God to Coniah.
Did not thy father eat and drink and do judgment, and then it was well with
him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him. He
that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, Prove. 19.17.
becomes creditour to his Creator, and he will repay it. Philem. 18, 1^.
Christ speaks to such from heaven, as once Paul did to Philemon: If my poor
have received any thing from thee, or owes thee ought, I the Lord Christ have
written it with mine own hand, I will repay it. And can we lay up our wealth in
a safer hand? Can we have a better debtor then Christ? a better bond then the
Bible?

our selves to God, with those merciful Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8 5. and then our
goods to the Saints, that are in the earth, those excellent ones, in whom was
all David's delight, Psalm. 16 3. Thus Obadiah, Thy servant fears God, said he
to the Prophet; 1 King. 18 12, 1^.
but how shall that appear, Obadiah? Why? when J^zabel persecuted the Lords
Prophets, I hid them, and fed them by fifty in a cave, not without the hazard
of my head, if ever it should have been noticed. So Isa. 23 18. The City of
Tyrus turning to God, leaves heaping and hoarding her wealth, and finds
another manner of implo^ment for it, viz. to feed and cloth Gods poor people.
Luke 18. Act 10.1, 2.
So Zacheus converted, gives half he had to the poor: and Cornelius shows his
devotion, the Corinthians their professed subjection to the Gospel, 2 Cor.
9.13. by giving much alms to many people. The wisdom from above is full of
mercy and good fruits, says S. James. And, Jam. ^.17. Jam. 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God and the father is this, to visit the
fatherl^sse and widows etc. to do all offices of mercy to those that are poor
and in misery.

be rich in good works, Bas^^^^ 'Dem est (...) Gal 6.10.
because God, 1. Lives, when we are dead, to recompense our labor of love in
our heirs and executours. He gives us life also, that whiles we have time, we
may do good to all, to the household of faith especially, and not defer the
doing thereof till we are dead. Many miserly muck-worms, are like the
muck-hill, that never does good till carried out: like the fat hog that is good
for nothing, till he comes to the knife: like the poor man's box, that yields no
money till broken up: like trees that let f^ll none of their fruits, till
violently shaken. We are charged to carry lights in our hands: funeral
beneficence ^arries them behind our backs: so that, Luk 12.35.
they light them that come after us; our selves have little benefit. 2. Because
God gives us all things richly to enjoy. Every word enwraps a reason.

1. He gives not paies us, as earned or merited. Freely we receive, freely
therefore we must give: especially, since it is a more blessed thing to give
then to receive: and besides, for this we have received that we may give; since
we are, not owners of what we have, but Almoners, Stewards, purse-bearers to
the King of heaven.

2. Hinc divitiae di^untur (...) Lu 1^.1^. alienae tanquaa adnos f^lios ^ei bic
exularies minus pertinentes Rev. 12.12. Psalm 17.14. 1 Cor 4.11. H^b 11, 37.
Diffi^i^e est ut praesertibus banis quis fruatur and futuri^^ut de delici^s ad
delicias transeat, etc. Hieron.
He gives us, who have little reason to look for it, since we look for heaven,
and may therefore well live upon reversions. This made Abraham content to dwell
in tents, because he looked for a City, Whose maker and founder is God. The
wicked are called the Inhabitants of the earth, and have their portion in this
world: by their good wills the godly should have nothing. And truly, if they
should here both hunger and thirst, and be naked and buffeted, and have no
certain dwelling, but wander about in sheepskins and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, their betters have met with as bad measure,
and were glad of it too, because through manifold tribulations they entered
into heaven. But to step out of one heaven into another, to have here all
things richly to enjoy, and afterward to enjoy that endless joy, this is hard
and happy. Why should such think much to part with a little pelf at Gods
appointment?

3. He gives us all things; What so great matter is it then that we give him
back something? especially since we give him but of his own, as David gladly
acknowledges. Is it not meet that we should give him one day in seven? since
the day is his, the night also is his, Psalm. 74.16.
as the Psalmist has it. So also here.

4. He gives us all things richly, not sparingly, pinchingly: not for bare
necessity only, but for delight and satiety: neither for competence and
convenience only, but honest affluence (as he did them at Cana in Galilee,
Prove. 13.25. Psalm 23.4. In Agapi^ nostrit inopes quosque refrigerio juvamus
Edi^ur quantum esurientes ^upiunt: bibitur quantum pudi^is est utile, etc.
Tertul. advers. gentes, c. 39.
and the five hundred he fed with a few loaves and fishes) so that we eat to
the satisfaction of our souls, Prove. 13.25. and our cups run over with David's.
And why run over, but that they may run into other men's emptier vessels? that
the poor may partake of our redundancies? For is it fit that some should be
hungry in Gods house, and others drunken, as once at Corinth? And not rather
that our abundance should be a supply for others wants, that there may be an
equality? 2 Cor. 8.14.

5. He gives us all things richly, and this to enjoy: not to hoard, much less
to waste: but to bless God in the abundance of all things, and to bless men
with our superfluities at least; that their backs, bellies, bowels, which we
have refreshed, may bless us: that whiles they enjoy our bounty, we may enjoy
their prayers, as Onesiphorus did S. Paul's: 2 timothy 1.18. and God may have their
praises, whiles they cry out as S. Paul brings them in, 2 Cor. 9.15. Thanks be
to God for his unspeak^ble gift. That like good stomachs we may deal something
to the rem^^est members, that they may the better do their office: and that
sitting at the upper end of the Table, and having cut well to our selves, we
may set down some to them that sit below, that they may eat and be satisfied,
and praise the master of the feast. And this is the sixth Reason.

Lay up in store, or lay aside far from thieves, (...).
hide out of harms-way, hoard and treasure up, which rich men love alife to be
doing. 2. For themselves: and they are commonly, all for themselves: but this
also is for the soul, the better part of themselves. The body is but a rag of
themselves, and must shortly be tumbled into the dust. 3. A good foundation,
fit to bear up, when riches will fail them. Heaven only has a foundation, Heb.
11.10. Earth has none, Job. 26.7. and things are often said to be in heaven,
but on earth; on the surface only, ready to slide off, or slip beside. 4. And,
for the time to come. This is spoken in opposition (likely) to that
forementioned uncertainty of riches. By mercy to the poor, Ye shall lay up
much goods for many years, obtain a long th^nin^ of your tranquillity, Dan.
4.17.
yea provide for your own well-doing a thousand year hence. 5. They shall
hereby lay hold on eternal life; and is not that worth having? Revel. 21.
O do not men know what a place heaven is? The pavement is of gold, the walls
of pearl, etc. I do but disgrace it, by seeking to describe it. Rich men have a
price in their hands, wherewith to purchase it, had they but hearts to make use
of it. Neither are the poorest excluded, De^sregnum suum fragmento panis
vendit: quis excusare poterit non emetem, quem tanta vilitas venditionis
accusat? Chrysol. sermon. 41.
disabled: Heaven may be had for a cup of cold water, if rightly given, says
Austin, for a morsel of bread, says Chrysologus. It is fabled of Midas, that
whatsoever he touched was turned into gold. Sure it is, That whatever the hand
of charity touches, though it be but a cup of cold water, it turns it not into
gold, but into heaven; where, The Almighty shall be thy gold, and thou shall
have silver of strength. Yea, Thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of
Ophir as the stones of the brooks, Job 22.24, 25.

There is no mercy in the land, Hos. 4.1. Merciful men are taken away, Isa.
57.1. The love of many is waxen cold, Mat. 24.12. Elias lacks his hostess of
Sarepta, Elisha the Shunamite. Paul cannot find the purpurisse, nor Peter the
Tanner. Job we have not, and Obadiah we find not. Captain Cornelius is a black
swan, and good Onesiphorus not to be heard of. Most men have shut up their
bowels, yea buried them aforehand: their hearts are hardened, their hands
withered. Mouth-mercy there is good store, as once in S, James his days, Go
and be warmed, fed, clothed: But with what? with a fire, feast, suit of words.
But a little handful were more worth then a many of these mouth-fuls. Words
are good cheap: but were their blessing worth a halfpenny (as the beggar told
the Cardinal) they would be advised how they parted with it. Children though
they have their mouths full, and hands full, yet will rather spoil all then
give any away. So is it now-adaies, The richer they are, the harder, as Dives,
whom to upbraid, Lazarus was laid in the bosom of Abraham. Look how the Meon,
the fuller she is of light, the farther off the Sun she gets: And as the Sun
moves slowest, when he is highest in the Zodiac: so are those slowest to
give, for most part, that are highest in estate. And that they may not seem to
sin without sense, to be mad without reason, some sorry shifts they have gotten
together, whereby to defend themselves from the danger of liberality. All or
most of which are excellently answered by Solomon, Eccles. 11.1. to 7. And S.
Paul seems purposely to set forth liberality by a word that signifies
simplicity, 2 Cor. 8.2. in opposition to that crafty and witty willnesse of
theirs, (...)
That clo^k of covetousness. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. where with they think to cover
their baseness, But be not deceived (says S. Paul in a like case) God is not
mocked: sir whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap. He that observes
the wind, shall not sow; Gal 6.7. Eccle^ 11.4. Hos 8.7.
that is, he that stands to put cases, and cast perils, shall never show
mercy to the needy. But he that sows the wind of vanity, shall reap the
whirlwinde of misery. (...) 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.
God shall pull off their vizard of covetousness, and wash off their varnish
with rivers of brimstone. They commonly pass for good honest men, but somewhat
of the hardest, good husbands, near themselves. But God calls and counts
niggards no better then Atheists, Hi^^ divitiae bujas nundi dicuntur alienae,
depositae nimiru and al u^um pauperum nobis ^^mmissae. Luke 16.12. Pauperibus
non impertire rapina est. Qui non cum so^est, servant, occid^t. Prove. 28.27.
because they provide not for a better life, but make their gold their God:
Hypocrites, because they make not conscience of obeying every one of Gods
charges, as well as any one, this, as well as the rest: Thieves, for
withholding good from the owners thereof, Prove. 3.17. that is, from the poor
that are interested in their goods, and for whom they are entrusted:
Murderers, lastly: for not to do good is to do evil, not to save, is to
destroy, as our Savior intimates, Luke 6 9.

This is their sin: and for their punishment: Men shall curse them in their
prosperity, and not pity them in their adversity. God shall set est all ^^arts
from them, as he did from Haman that merciless man, who had none to intercede
for him, in his distress, none to speak a good word for him, or to him.
Himself also will turn the deaf ear to such, Prove. 21.13. Let them look for
nothing but judgment, rigor and hardness, Jam. 2.13.

We do good works. 2. For the measure, That we be rich in good works. 3. For
the manner, That we be ready to distribute. 4. For the continuance, That we be
yet further Willing to communicate, that we wax not weary of well-doing; but,
more perennis aquae, as a spring runs after it has run, so should we give
after we have given, and be still doing good to others, as we have opportunity
and ability.

First then for the matter of our bounty, it must be good that we do. Here, 1.
It must be well gotten that we give; Rules of direction for alms-deeds.
for as God hates bribery for a burnt-offering, Isa 61.8. so robbery for a work
of mercy, Mat 6.1. whereas our Savior says, Take heed that you do not you
ALMS before men, the Syriack Translatour renders it, Take heed that you do not
your justice, or righteousness before men; to teach that a^mes should be of
things well gotten. and to this purpose, the Jews called their Almesbox,
Godwins Heb. an^^q.
Kupha sheltsedacbah, the chest of justice: And they expound that saying of
Solomon, Prove. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness prosit nothing: but
righteousness d^livereth from death. Righteou^nesse, Mercer in loc.
that is Alms, say they. And thereunto they accommodate and connect the next
verse also: The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: no,
though he should give all his goods to the poor, but he casts away the
substance of the wicked, wherewith he thinks to make amends for his
oppressions, and to set off, by his good deeds, for his bad. Selymus the great
Turk could see this by the dim light of corrupt nature. For, when he was upon
his deathbed moved by Pyrrhus (that great Bashaw) to bestow that abundance of
wealth that he had wrongfully taken from the Persian Merchants, Turk.b^st. 567.
upon some notable Hospital, for relief of the poor; he commanded it rather to
be restored to the right owners; which was forth with done accordingly. He
would not offer ex rapina holocaustum, as too many do amongst us, to the shame
of Christianity. When Henry the third King of England had sent a load of freeze
to the Frier-minors to cloth them, Daniels hist, of Engl, fol. 168.
they returned the same with this message, That he ought not to give alms of
that he had rent from the poor, neither would they accept of that abominable
gift. How much less then will the righteous God?

2. To the making of alms a good work, it must be right both quoad fontem, and
quoad fin^m too.

The rise and principle of our liberality, the fountain whence it flows must
be, 1. Faith in God, that he does both accept our persons, as Abel; and will
receive an offering at our hands, as David's, Psalm. 41.1.
without this faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. 2. Love to our
brethren, Bowels of mercy yerning over the needy, considering the poor weakling
(whose health is spent, and wealth wasted) and deeply commiserating him. This
is to love mercy, Micah 6 8, 1 John 3.17. (...)
to draw out thy soul to the hungry, Isa. 58.10. thy soul, and not thy sheaf
only, thy bowels, and not only thy bread. Bowels have no singular number in the
Hebrew and Greek tongue, (...) Est char^tas actuosum and vivum aliq^ (...), it
aque ignea p^ngitur, etc. Hier. Wolf in T^l^an^ ^ab philos^ph. M^^. 18.2. 1
Cor. 13.5. 2 Cor. 9.7. Mat. 6.7. Psalm. 11^.5.
to teach us that we must be much in works of mercy, and do them all out of
deep and dear pity and sympathy. They that have pour^raied charity, have drawn
her out as a naked child with a merry countenance, covered in a cloud, with a
bloody heart in the right hand, giving honey to a Be without wings. Charity is
figured a child, because the charitable ought to be humble and courteous as a
child. Charity is pictured naked, for that she seeks not her own. Charity
looks merrily, God loves a cheerful giver. Charity is covered with a cloud:
Alms must be given privately. Charity holds a bloody heart in the
right hand, A good man is merciful and lends, he first pittieth, and then
relieveth, Charity offers honey to a Be without wings, that is, helps such
as would, but cannot help themselves. This is charity, without the which,
though a man should give all his goods to the poor, yea, and his body to be
burned, he were nothing: All were to no purpose or profit at all. We see then
the rise of our good works. The end follows, and that must be chiefly the
glory of God in our own and other men's comfort and salvation. Our labor, of
love in ministering to the Saints must be showed toward his name, Heb. 6.10 that
is, for his sake and service. Yea whatever we do in word or deed (and he that
shows mercy must both bleed inwardly, speak comfortably, and act charitably)
we must do it in the name, that is, to the glory of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God and the father, that he holds us worthy to do him any such
service. Col. 3.17.
Indignicerte sumus qui stipem pauperi, etc. says a learned Divine. Cartw.
Hist. Christ.
Unworthy we are doubtless of such an honor, as to relieve hungry, thirsty,
naked Christ in his poor members. The Macedonians counted and called it a
favor that they might have their hand in so good a work, 2 Cor. 8.1. (...),
etc.
And David thanks God that of his own he will take an offering, 1 Chronicles. 29.9.
Far be it from us to sound a trumpet, and seek our selves, as the Pharisees:
who, as they were hypocrites, that is, stage-plaiers (as the word properly
signifies) so they did all theatrically, histrionically, (...). Mat. 6.1.
hypocritically, to be seen of men. This was the Butt they shot at, and they
had it: As Stage-plaiers have some small piece of money given them by the
spectatours, so these had the air of applause, They have their reward, says
our Savior. Mercedem suam non Dei, says Hierom; their reward, not Gods,
Egregiam vero laudem, etc. let them make them merry with it, its all they are
like to have. Fruit that grows by the high-way-side, seldom rests till it be
ripe. The cackling hen loses her egg: so does the vainglorious giver his
reward. (...).
Wherefore let him that gives do it with simplicity, with ingenuity, Romans
12.8. not with a squint-respect to his own commendation: Let him account it
enough, that he has God the witness of his heart, who will not forget his
labor of love, but make ample and honorable mention thereof in that stately
Amphitheatre, in that great Panegyris at the last day. Heb 12, 13.
When the Judge shall set them on his right hand (which is a place both of
dignity and safety) and say unto them, Come ye blessed, Mat. 25.34, 35.
etc. For I was hungered and ye gave me meat, etc. Secret thine alms therefore:
Why should the left hand know what the right hand does? Steal we benefits upon
out poor brethren, as Joseph did the money into the sacks. A treasure hid is
safest from thieves: Thy father that sees in secret shall reward thee openly.
It is reported of the Jews, that about their Alms-box they wrote this
abbreviature (...) that is, Baxters.
Agift in secret pacifieth wrath, Prove. 21. 14. And for the matter of our good
works thus much.

Follows next the Measure: and so rich men are required to be rich in good
works, to do good answerable to their ability, and sometimes also above it, as
is abovesaid. Lest if their receipts be found great, their layings out small,
God the chief Lord (who called his servant that had sive talents, to account
for five) should cast back such lewd bills into their faces, and turn them out
of their stewardship with everlasting contempt, Where much is given, much is
required. The Lord looks that rich men should lay up treasures in heaven, Mat
6.20. Now twopence is no treasure: That they should make them friends with the
riches of unrighteousnes, which is not done with a half penny, or some small
sum: to sow bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. and to abound unto the riches of their
liberality, as those poor Macedonians did, Act. 9 39. Act 102. (...) Que virtus
inter alias celebrakatur in regthus and Egyptierum, (...) erum (...) in
precibus, (...) recit ab antur Drod Sic. lib. 1. (...) 1 King. 20.23 with Z^e
97. Heb. 13.16.
to the shame of the richer Cerinthians, who were nothing so free and forward,
2 Cor. 8.2. Thus Zacheus is commended for giving half he had to the poor:
Dorcas for the fulness of her good works: Cornelius for his much alms to many
people. Job was old excellent at this duty, Cha. 31.16, 21. so were also many
others that I might here instance out of histories.

Thirdly, For the manner (for that is all in all, that makes or mars the action)
Rich men stand charged in the Text, to be ready to distribute, to come off
freely and cheerfully, to be ready and and speedy to works of mercy, without
hucking or shucking, consults or delays. Our obedience herein must be prompt
and present, as Araunahs that noble Jebusite, renowned for his bounty: He had
but a Subjects purse, but a Kings heart: These things gave Araunah as a King to
the King. God set him up an Altar, and he was ready with his sacrifice: so
should we. to distribute and communicate forget not, omit not, grudge not, for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Only, he strams upon no man:
whatsoever he finds in his heart to bring, that let him offer, is often
reiterated in Moses law. Men sow cheerfully in good ground, and account their
seed better in the ground, then in the garner. And is not mercy as sure a grain
as vanity? Can we sow upon a better ground then the warm bowels of Jesus
Christ? Sow therefore plentifully, sow cheerfully: God loves a cheerful giver,
and requires us to love mercy, not show it only. It has pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia to contribute to the poor Saints, Romans 15.26. Mic. 6.8.
(...).
It pleased them, it was a free will offering, they were not compeld to it by
law, or drawn to it by importunity of friends. They did not manu dare and vultu
negare, give with the hand, Dat been, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum.
Virtus nolentiu nulla est.
and pull back again with the looks. That which is freely given, is twice
given. And here, exercise will facilitate: as a sword often drawn comes forth
with ease. But God likes not that our alms should come from us as drops of
blood from our hearts: or that it should be squeezed out of us, as verjuice out
of a crab: but that it slow from us, as water out of a spring; as light from
the Sun, as honey from the comb, etc. that we be glad of an opportunity of
showing mercy, and seek it rather then be without it. Blessed is the man that
considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.1. Qui praeoccupat vocem petituri, as
Austin expounds it, that prevents the beggar, and goes home to him, as Dr.
Taylour used to do. Abraham sat in his Tent-door, at midday waiting for
passengers, whom he might receive and refresh in their hot and hard travels. He
staid not to be entreated, but beseeches them to turn in, and take part;
neither was he any peny-father in his provisions. Be not forget full to
entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels anawares, Heb.
13.2.

Fourthly, For the Constancy of their bounty; Rich men must be yet still
communicative, and not weary of well-doing. Heb. 6.10. Phil. 4.16. (...). Revel
2.4. Verisimile est paulatim factu tenaciorem reglect a beneficentra, avarum.
male auditsse. Avaritiae nomine taxari videtur bonus aliogui episcopus, Pat. in
loc.
Ye have ministered to the necessities of the Saints, and do also minister,
says the Author to the Hebrews. And S. Paul commends his Macedonians, that
they had sent once and again to his necessities. And a little before, I rejoice
in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me has flourished
again, v. 10. It had suffered (it seems) a wain, a winter, a decay; as the
Ephesians also (and perhaps Timothy, their Angel) had left their first love: So
these Philippians love and care to the poor prisoner Paul had languished, but
now it revived, reflourished, And ye have well done, says he, that ye did
communicate with mine affliction, v. 14. This is to resemble God, who causes
every day his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall even upon rebels and
reprobates also: to teach us, whiles we have time, no do good to all, even
those that are unworthy, if in extreme necessity. Amongst the Manichees it was
a capital crime, to give a crust to one that was not a Manichee. But if we
will do nothing for the man, yet something in that case, we should do for
manhood. Isa 58.
Hide not thine eyes from thine own flesh, from one that is a man as thy self
art: The good Samaritan did not, and is commended. Howbeit, the household of
faith must especially be looked to, Lam. 3.
and that continually, as God renueth his mercy to them every morning, nay
every moment. He gives unto all men, and at all times liberally, and hits no
man in the teeth; Jam. 1.5.
unless it be with his seldom seeking to him. Joh. 16.24. Isa. 30.18.
Hitherto, ye have asked me nothing, said our Savior to his disciples, that
yet had asked him many things, and obtained them. Eccl. 18.
But to him it seemed nothing, who waits to show them mercy. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing: no more is God with doing good
to his people. Blessed be God, Psalm. 68.19. Psalm. 103. Psalm. 32. Psalm. 36.10.
Luke 6.36 with Mat. 5.48.
says the Church, that daily ladeth us with benefits, that crowns us with
loving kindenesses, and compasses us about with new songs of deliverance. O
bontinue thy loving kindness, says David. It is in the original, Draw it
out. Gods mercies to his are a continued series, there is a concatenation, a
connection betwixt them. Now the rule is, Be merciful, as your heavenly Father
is merciful. Numb. 14.24. Implevit post me. Seldom mercy is as little
accepted, as seldom prayer.
For which another Evangelist has, Be ye perfect, as your Father in heaven is
perfect. The perfection of a godly man is To follow God fully, as Caleb did; to
have a heart full of goodness, as those Romans, chap. 15.14. and a life full
of good works, as Tabitha, Act. 9 33. To follow on to know the Lord, and to do
good to men, whiles he has a day to live. In the morning sow thy seed, etc.
Eccl. 11.

Which to do that we fail not, faint not, look up, lastly, to the recompense of
reward, which is large and liberal. Such as are thus forward to do good for
the matter, rich in good works, for the measure, ready to distribute, for the
manner, and willing to communicate for the constancy of their bounty, they
shall not lose all, says the Text, nay they shall gain a great deal both here
and hereafter. Prove. 11.25. Merito manus illa corruptionis expers, quae neminem
mendicare, osarire, in miseria jacere perpessa est. Banfinius. Bed Hist Aug lib
3 cap. 6.


Here it shall go well with them: they shall lay up a sure foundation for their
souls, bodies, names, estates, posterity.

First, For their souls, The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that
waters shall be watered himself. His soul shall be like a watered garden,
etc. Isa. 58.8, 9. a plain and plentiful place. Of Stephen King of Hungary,
and of Oswald sometimes King of England it is storied, That their right hands,
though dead, never putrified; because much exercised in helping and relieving
the necessitous and afflicted. Sure it is, that the souls of such as do it in
manner aforesaid, decay not, die not, wither not. See pro. 11.17. Luke 16.11,
12, etc. Thus for grace; and for peace, wealth never comforts the heart till it
be bestowed, till distilled, as it were, in good works. The spirits of wealth
comfort the conscience.

Secondly, For their bodies; If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, then
shall thy health spring forth speedily, Isa. 58. But say the merciful man be
sick, as he may and must, God will make his bed in all his sickness: God will
stir up feathers under him: his soul shall be at ease, and his body be sweetly
refreshed: mercy shall be his cordial, his pillow of repose, as it was to
reverend Mr Whately of Banbury, of whom I have spoken elsewhere. In my
Commentary on Mat. 5.7.


Thirdly, For their names: The liberal shall have all love and respect with
men, all good repute and report both alive and dead. And a good name we know,
is better then ointments, Eccles. 7.1. riches, Prove. 22.1. life it self.
Whereas the vile shall not be called liberal, nor Nabal called Nadib, the
churl bountiful in Christ's kingdom, Isa. 32.5. Gods people shall not spare to
call a spade a spade, a niggard a niggard. And although he applaud himself at
the sight of his abundance, not caring though the world hiss and hoot at him:
yet he shall pass among all for a hog in a trough, Populus me sibilat, at mihi
plaudo ipse domi simulac nummos contempler in area. Juven.
for a boar in a stie, and be no otherwise esteemed or accounted then the great
Turk; of whom it is said, That where ever he sets his foot, nothing grows after
him. In a word, God will curse him, men will curse him, and wish to be rid of
him: the place where he lives, longs for a vomit to spue him out as an
unprofitable burden, (...) Hein.
such as the very ground groans under.

Fourthly, Isa. 3 2, 8.
For their estates: The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal
things he shall stand. Eleemosyna ars omnium quaestuosissima. Chrysostom. Quicquid
pauperibus spargimus nobis colligimus D Beddings. Manus pauperu gazophylacium
Ghrisi i. Psalm. 112.
A man would think he should fall rather, by being so bountiful: but he takes
a right course to thrive: for getting is not the way to abundance, but giving,
as we see in the Samaritan, The gainfullest art is almsgiving, says
Chrysostom. Whatsoever we scatter to the poor, we gather for our selves, says
another. Riches laid out this way are laid up, Non percunt sed parturiunt,
says a third. The poor man's hand is Christ's treasury, Christ's bank, says an
Ancient: By our liberality he accounts himself both gratified and engaged,
Prove. 19.17. And his bare word is better then any man's bond. Heaven and earth
must be empty, ere he fail to repay. God will bless the merciful man's stock
and store, Deuteronomy. 15.10. his righteousness and his riches together shall endure
for ever: He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28, 27. that is a
bargain of Gods own making. M. John Rogers his Treatise of love.
A certain poor Minister being asked an alms, called to his wife to know what
money was in the house: And understanding that there was no more then one
threepence only; give him that, said he, for we must sow, or else we shall
never reap. A certain good Bishop of Millain, Malancth apud lo Manl. in loc.
com p. 360.
journeying with his servant, was met by poor people that begged somewhat of
him. He commanded his servant to give them all that little money that he had,
which was three crowns, The servant (thinking with himself, that it were best
keep somewhat for their own use) gave only two of the three to the poor,
reserving the third to bear their own charges at night. Soon after, certain
Nobles meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a good man, and bountiful to
the poor, commanded two hundred crowns to be delivered to the Bishops servant
for his masters use. The servant having received the money ran with great joy,
and told his master. Ah, said the Bishop, what wrong have thou done both me and
thy self? Si enim tres dedisses trecentos accepisses. Surely if thou had
given those three crowns, as I appointed thee, thou had received for them
three hundred. So, thou have lost me a hundred crowns to day. God's a liberal
paimaster, and all his retributions are more then bountiful.

Lastly, For their posterity. The righteous is merciful and lends, and his
seed is blessed, Psalm. 37.26. Jonathan is paid for his kindness to David in
Mephibosheth, Jethro for his love to Moses in the Kenites, 1 Samuel 15.6. some
hundred of years after, he (their Ancestour) was dead. The Egyptians might not
be unkindely dealt withal, for their harboring the Patriarchs, though they
afflicted their posterity. But Moabites and Ammonites were bastardized and
excluded the Tabernacle to the tenth generation, for a mere omission, Deuteronomy,
23.4.
Because they met not Gods Israel with bread and water in the wilderness. Let
there be none to extend mercy unto him (says the Psalmist by a spirit of
prophecy) neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children: And why?
Because that he remembered not to show mercy. Psalm. 109.12, 16. This was
fulfilled in Haman, and is fulfilled in daily experience. Hence riches ill
gotten or ill kept shift masters so often. It is not true that is commonly
spoken, Happy is that son whose father goes to the devil: for such goods
seldom prosper, except it be with some odd one, Dan. 4.27.
that by repentance breaks off, and heals his fathers sin by mercifulness to
the poor; and so makes him friends with those riches of unrighteousness. So
our Savior calls them, either because rich men are for most part unrighteous
themselves, or the sons of unrighteous persons: or else, unrighteous, that is,
uncertain, vain, Luke 16.9. (...), hoc est incertus, vanus, sallax, (...) enim
ex idiotis mo hebraico ac. cipitur etiam pro vero, necesserio, sumo, etc.
pator, Lexic.
vain, deceitful, such as will give us the slip: for so the word may be taken,
according to the use of the Hebrew and Syriack tongues. His riches perish by
evil travel, says Solomon: and he begets a son, and there is nothing in his
hand. Eccl. 5.14. For either he leaves it to a prodigal, that rides to hell
with golden spurs, and forks it abroad, as fast as the miser his father raked
it together. Or, if he be never so good an husband, yet usually he thrives not,
but moles as snow before the Sun. So that a man had better leave his child a
wallet to beg from door to door, then a cursed hoard of goods either gotten by
evil arts, or spared, when they should have been spent, upon the poor and needy.

Thus for the life present, Merciful men lay up in store a good foundation
both for themselves and theirs.

As for the life to come, They lay hold hereby upon eternal life: which by
good works is, 1. Assured them here, Prove. 14.21. Prove. 11.17. Mat. 5 7. Jam.
2.13.2. Enjoyed of them hereafter, 1. At the hour of death: for when riches
shall fail, riches well used shall let us into haven, Luke 16.9. God freely
crowning his own grace in us. 2. At the day of judgment, when there effectual
faith shown by your works shall be found to praise, honor and glory before
God, Angels and men: Christ mentioning and celebrating their good deeds only,
such as they had forgotten, 1 Pet 1 7.
or thought he had taken no notice of, and shall therefore ask, When saw we
thee hungry, and sed thee, naked, and clothed thee, etc. But there is a book of
remembrance written be fore him of all the particulars, Mal. 3.17. Qui non
dedit micav, non obtinuit guitam.
which shall then be produced. When merciless men shall meet with their own
measure, as Dives who denied crumbs, and could not therefore obtain a drop of
water to cool his tongue: they shall in vain tire out the deaf mountains to
quash them to pieces, or grind them to powder: but (will they nill they) must
receive judgment without merey, because they showed no mercy. Then shall Mercy
rejoice against damnation: or glory over it, (...), J^un. 2.12.
as over it is adversary. A godly man moved with compassion lifts up his head,
and overcomes the fear of being condemned in judgment. He can tender to God
mercy, and melting-heartednesse, and thereby expect the same from him, as David
did, Psalm 86.2. Preserve my soul, for I am merciful. Alphousus King of Spain,
was in great likelihood to have been made King of Romans: but lost it to
Richard of England: For being a great Mathematician (says the Chronicler) he
was drawing of lines, when he should have been drawing his purse; Daniel hist.
of Eng fol. 174.
and so fell from his high hopes. So does many a man from his possibilities of
heaven, by busying himself about many things, and not attending the
opportunites of love and good works. Joseph made a gain of the famine, and
bought up the land of Egypt: so might we of the poor, and buy heaven. Not for
any worth of the work: (for alas, what proportion? No more, surely, then
betwixt a kingdom and a nut-shell: But) because faithful is he who has
promised, who also will do it, not to the half as Herod, but to the whole of
his kingdom.

Ambition.
1 JOHN 2.16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world.


PLeasure, profit, preferment (called here the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life) are the worldlings Trinity, to the which he
performs inward and outward worship. According to the three things which the
woman by false suggestion saw in the tree for meat, for the eyes, and for
prudence. And according to our Saviors threefold temptation, Mat. 4. Doct.
solinu.
the last whereof by the vain pomp and glory of the world, he could least of
all endure, and therefore bids the Tempter Avaunt. Our Apostle, ver. 13. of
this Chapter tells us, That a man may be very mortified, even a Father, and yet
very subject to dote on the world: which may be fitly likened to the serpent
Seytnle, whereof it is reported, that when she cannot overtake the flying
passengers, she does with her beautiful colors so astonish and amaze them,
that they have no power to pass away till she have stung them. Balaam could
not but go after the wages of wickedness, the preferment that was proffered
him. Nay Barue (a far better man) is seeking great things for himself, Hezekiah
showing his treasury, Jonas over-tender of his reputation, Nicodemus for the
same cause, coming haltingly to Christ, as a night-bird; and the Apostles
strangely transported with an idle conceit of an earthly Kingdom, wherein they
dreamed there should be (as once in David's and Solomon's days) a distribution
of honors and officers. Hence so many frivolous and fruitless questions and
requests: as that of the mother of Zebedees children, put on by her ambitious
sons, who were ashamed to make the motion. Yea many times most unseasonably and
unsavourily, when Christ had been fore-warning them of his ignominious death,
and fore arming them against the scandal of the cross, they fell into those
absurd disputes, who should be the greatest amongst them, and have the highest
place of preferment, as Mar. 9 31, 32, 33, 34. And whereas our Savior
dissuaded them this solly, and set a child in the midst of them to learn them
lower thoughts, S. John soon sated with such sad discourse, interrupts his
master: and laying hold on something he had said, v. 37. tells a story of
another business, v. 38. Yea, Nazianz.
so sowred were they and swollen with this Pharisaicall haven, that they were at
it again the third time, Luke 22.24. And that, 1. After that our Savior had
foretold them that his death should fall out within three days. 2. When they
had newly received the Lord's Supper, that (...), as a Father calls it. 3. After
that Christ had washed their feet to teach them a lesson of humility and
heavenly mindedness. So ambitious are the best by nature, so licorish after
earthly honors.

(...) 2 Pet. 1.
makes us sand-blinde, and such as cannot see far off, those crowns, scepters,
kingdoms, glories, beauties, braveries above, that should draw up our
affections. Mother earth (since we lost para life) gets our hearts. Cardinal
Burhon will not lose his part in Paris, Act and Mon. fol. 899. Ibid 902.
Godwins Ca^. Assiduo samulitij obsequio ase. rant comes unus, etc. ^ex
Platonicus.
for his part in Paradise. Cardinal Wolsey tode through London with twenty
great mules for his sumpter-horses; caused his Cardinals hat (when it was first
sent him) to be set upon a Cup-board at Westminster, and tapers round about it:
so that the greatest Duke in the land must make courtesy thereunto, and to his
empty seat, he being away. He had as much yearly revenue as all the Bishops and
Deans of this Kingdom put together had. And for his household attendance, he
had one Earl, nine Barons, a great sort of Knights and Esquires, and of others
of inferior rank, four hundred at least. Well therefore might Bayfield the
Martyr conclude of him, Act. and Mon. fol. 954.
My Lord Cardinal is no good man; for Christ never taught him to follow riches
and promotions, to wear shoes of silver and gilt, set with pearls and precious
stones: Nor Christ had never two crosses of silver, two axes, nor pillars of
silver and gilt, etc. Erasmus tells of a Preacher at Rome, Erasm. Ecclesi astes,
site de ratisxe concionandi.
that delivered himself thus before the Pope and his Cardinals, Matto san
Peirro, san Paulo mat: that is, S. Peter was a fool, S. Paul also a fool. And
being convented for this Dectrine, he thus explained himself, D. Heylins Geo.
p. 185.
Either they were fools that lived so poorly, or you (their successors) are
too blame, that live so pompously. Others make mention of a certain painter,
who being blamed by a Cardinal for coloring the visages of Peter and Poul too
red, tartly replied, That he painted them so, as blushing at the ambition of
their successors. it is thought of Cardinal Pool, that toward his later end,
a little before his coming from Rome to England, he began somewhat to savor
the doctrine of Luther, and was no less suspected at Rome, Act. and Mon. fol.
17^0.
and therefore put by the Popedom. Not withstanding the pomp and glory of the
world afterward carried him a way to play the Papist, as it did Demas: of whom
there are that write, that after he forsook S. Paul, he became a Priest in an
Idol-Temple. ^ulianus horcri bar negi^ bo mit es pioa ocare quam tern entis
cogere studuit. Nazianz.
The Author to the Hebrews reckons and ranks the tempting and alluring
promises of preferment among the bloody deeds of the Heathen persecutours, They
were sawn asunder, they were tempted, Heb. 11.37. but no way prevailed against:
As neither was that heroical Luther. Vergerius treating with him from the
Pope, put him in mind of Aeneas Sylvius, who following his own opinions with
much slavery and labor, could get no further preferment then to be Canon of
Trent; But being changed to the better, became Bishop, Cardinal, and sinally
Pope Pius the second. (...) of C^unc. of Trent, lo. 73.
He called to his memory Bessarion of Nice, who of a poor Caloier of Trapezond
became a great renowned Cardinal, and wanted not much of being Pope. This had
been semewhat to a man, Cui embitionis salsugo bibnlam animam possederet. But
this Crmisix of mortification cried cut with S. Paul, I am crucified to the
world, and the world to me, Contemptus est a me Romarus and favor and furor, I
care neither for the fawns nor frowns of Rome. Of the same mould and metal was
D. I atsour, Martyr, whom to reduce, they premised him not only his parden, but
great promotion, and a Bishopric: Sed surdo fabulam; they could not persuade
him, for he looked for a better resurrection. So did William Hunter, Act. and
Mon. for. 1386.
another zeal us Martyr, with whom, after his condemnation, Bishop Bonner
persuaded, saying: If thou will recant, I will make thee a freeman in the
City, and give thee 40lb in good money to set up thine occupation withal; or I
will make thee steward of mine house, and set thee in office, Ibid. 1397.
etc. ibid. 1367.
But a good heart will rather lie in the dust then rise by wickedness: and
sooner part with all, then with the peace of a good conscience. Ibid. 1578.
Thus Hooper desired rather to be discharged of his Bishopric then yield to
certain Ceremonies: Latimer at the coming in of the six Articles in King henry
the 8. time resigned up his office, and remained a great space unbishopped.
Hermannus Archbishop of Colen reformed his Church from certain Papisticall
superstitions, using therein the aid and advice of Martin Bucer. Ibid 315.
Wherefore he was deposed by the Emperor, which he patiently suffered. Bishop
Ridley, when Q Mary was proclaimed, speedily repairing to Fremingham to salute
her, Ibid. 1280.
had such cold welcome there, that being despoiled of all his dignities he was
sent back on a same halting horse to the Tower. But God no doubt recompensed
these men's losses as that King of Poland did his noble servant Zelislaus:
having lost his hand in his wars, Theodoret. l. 3. Qui pro Christi nomine
amiserat tribunatum, retribuease, Christo, accepit imperium.
he sent him a golden hand for it. Valentinian tribune to Julian the Apostate,
was by him discarded and banished for striking a Sextan, who had sprinkled him
with Heathenish holy water, as he went before the Emperor into a certain I
doltemple. But within less then two years after, Valentinian was called home
and created Emperor. And that I may use the words of Orosius, He that for
Christ's names sake had lost a Tribuneship, within a while after succeeded his
persecutour in the Empire it self. Christ is a liberal paimaster: and all his
retributions are more then bountiful.

The Pope his pretended Vicar is not so. He promises our English sugitives
indeed, Os Papae and cul^ Diabo'i in codem, unt praedicameuto.
as large as the devil did, All these things will I give thee, etc. But when
that all comes to all, Sanders is starved; Stapleton made Professor of a petty
University, scarce so good as one of our free-schools: William Raynolds is
nominated to a small Vicarage under value. D. Featley his Transubit, exploded.
p 9.
On Harding his Holiness bestowed a Prebend of Gaunt, or to speak more
properly, a Gaunt Prebend: Roffensis had a Cardinals hat sent him, but his head
was cut off before it came. Allin had a Cardinals hat, but with so thin lining
(means to support his state) that he was commonly called, The starveling
Cardinal. When he creates Cardinals, his words are, Estote francs nostri, and
principes nostri.
Be ye brethren to us, and Princes of the world. And indeed some of them have
Princes revenues, as the Cardinal of Toledo, Ments, Collen, etc. and Princes
spirits, as Cardinal Columnus, Act. and Mon. fol. 500.
who when the Pope threatened to take away his Cardinals hat, He presently
replied, That then he would put on an helmet to pull him out of his throne.
Erasmus writes, that he knew some, who when they were like to die would give
great sums of money for a Cardinals hat, that they might be so styled upon their
tombs and monuments. O vigilantem Consulem qui toto Consulatus sui tempore
somnum, oculis non videl l Psalm. 84 2 Cor 5.9. 1 Thessalonians 4.11. Funccius ante
suppticium sertur hoc distechon pronunciasse, Disce meo exemplo mandato munere
sungl; Et suge ctu peslem (...). Melch Adam. in vita. Herod. l. 2. K Knute the
Dane caused the false Edrics head to be set upon the high est part of the tower
of London: therein performing his promise to a traitor of advancing him above
any lord of the land. Daniels hist. p. 19. Ier, 22. Sic Senecio apud Senecam
Suasor. l. 1.
and so ambitious were the Romans of the Consulship, that when Maximus died in
the last day of his office, Caninius petitioned Caesar for that part of the day
that remained: whence that so memorated jest of Tully, O vigilant Consul, who
never saw sleep all the time of his office! Pity it were but that these men
should have had what they so greatly desired, so dearly purchased, They have
their reward, says our Savior, of such. A poor reward, a little breath of
popular applause, such as is not able to blow one cold blast upon ungodly great
ones, then when they shall be hurried from their stately Palaces, and hurled
into the burning lake: there to cry, Nos insensati, We fools, should have been
as ambitious of heavens honors with Moses, Heb 11. of getting an office in
Gods house with David, of keeping a good conscience with Paul, of being quiet,
and meddling with our business, as he wills his Thessalonians. This if joannes
Funccius the Chronologer, and Justus Jonas the Lawyer (two learned Dutchmen)
had done, they had never died (as they did) by the hands of the hangman. But
this is often seen to be the end of the ambitious, as of Absalom, Haman,
Pharaoh Ophra (Jer. 44.30) whom Herodotus calls Apryes, and tells us, that
he usually boasted that he cared not for any either God or man that should seek
to take away his Kingdom. But at length he was taken in battle by Amasis one
of his own officers, and strangled by the Aeyptians, his own people. Hamio was
hanged at Carthage for his ambition. Roger Mortimer here at Tiburn in Edward
the seconds time, and a hundred more, whom I might easily mention. What got
most of the Caesar's by their overhasty preferment, Nisi ut citius
interficerentur, a one says, but to be slain the sooner, Casar Borgia Duke of
Valence, emulating Julius Caesar, used this saying of his, Aut Caesar, aut
nullus. Not long after, he was slain in the Kingdom of Navarre. Jehoahaz son
of josiah (Jeremy seems to call him Shallum) though younger then his brother
Iehoiakim, ambitioufly steps into the throne after his fathers death: And
before he was well warm in it, he had great thoughts, and would not take it as
his father did. He would build a stately Palace, much enlarge himself, M. Rob
Harris his Abuers Punerall. 2 King. 23.34.
and (as it seems by one affix in the Text, Jer. 22.24. says a learned
Divine) he would take in a piece of Gods house too. But within a while after he
was carried captive to Egypt for his a ambition, and died there ingloriously.
So did Alexander the great in the midst of his victories. He required of the
Jews that their dates should be taken from his reign, and all the Priests sons
born that year should be called Alexanders. Into Grecia he sent to be holden a
god by them. Apelles pictured him with a thunderbolt. Plin l. 6 c. 16.
Lysippus with this posie, Jupiter, asserui terram mihi, tu assere coelum; O
Jupiter take thou heaven: for the earth I challenge to my self. With which
pictures Alexander was so delighted, that he proelaimed none should take his
picture, but Lysippus and Apelles. As for Calisthenes the Philosopher that
dissuaded him from these vanities, he was carried about in a cage, in a most
approbrious manner. That made him to be cut off quickly, and his family to be
rooted out, as the Angel fore-telleth, Dan. 11.4 And as he might have been
forewarned by the example of Ahashuerosh, that is, Xerxes, the son of a former
Darius (not the same, that he over-threw) who though he were the King of 127
Provinces ( Esth. 1.2.) yet was ready to fight for more. He had newly subdued
Egypt, and soon after was addressing himself for the conquest of Greece: But
failed of his design, and was glad to escape for his life in a small boat,
being shortly after slain in his palace by Artabanus one of his own officers.
Then he, Vt cui modo ad vict oriam terra defuerit, deesset ad sepulturam.
Velleius de Pompeio. Nudus pascit aves, etc. Claud. Danchift. f. 50.
that could not hope ever to see all the land that he possessed, and yet could
not be quiet whilst he heard of more, was forced to take up with his length in
a place of burial. Great Pompey had not so much, and William the Conquerours
corpse lay unburied three days: his interment being hindered by one that
claimed the ground to be his.

O therefore that our aspiring Ambitionists would but measure themselves by
their own moddle, Application.
take the length of their own bodies, as he did once in the dust where he lay
last: consider what poor things they are, as they proceed from the slime of
their parents: How helpless in their birth, how uncertain of their life, how
little a thing will cloth them and feed them, how little a thing will make an
end of them. A little viper, a little spider, a little needle at their hearts
will kill them: then, a little sheet will wind them, a little grave hold them,
a little worm eat out their hearts. And should such think great things of
themselves, Gens haec quanquam bonoiem noselant, honerani tamen supra modum
affectant Garald. Cambrens.
or seek great things for themselves? And yet every mothers child of us are
too much the true sons of our great grandmother Eve, and would be more then we
are. This Nation (says one concerning the wild Irish) as also all other
barbarous Nations, though they know not what honor is, yet they affect above
measure to be honored. Three of their Kings being derided for their rude
habits and fashions rebelled in Henry the seconds days. Man bears nothing so
impatiently as contempt, desires nothing so much as respect with others. I have
sinned (said Saul) yet honor me be fore the people. Jehu must be seen, or
all is lost. Ho die me aut Pontisicem vsdebis aut exulu. (...) 'Dio in Nero.
I fear lest the fugitives will mock me, said Zedekiah. This day you shall see
me return from Court either High Priest or an exile, said Caesar to his mother.
Let him kill me, so he may be Emperor, said she of her son Nero. Ambition
rides without reins, as Tullia did over the dead body of her father, to be made
a Queen: And where it has possessed it self thoroughly of the soul, it turns the
heart into steel, and makes it incapable of a conscience, as we see in
Abimelech, Haman, Athaliah, etc. All sins will easily down with the man that is
resolved to rise. In the year of Christ 467. Timotheus Herulus, when he could
not other wise get a Bishopric, went, by night, all about the Monks cells in
Alexandria, and, calling them each by his name, told them, that he was an Angel
sent from God to require them to cast out Proterius their Bishop, and to choose
in his place Timotheus Herulus. And having hereby gained them to his side, and
gotten a great sort of the rude rabble by gifts and fair promises to adhere to
him, Funeij Chrouel.
he invaded the Bishopric of Alexandria by force, slew the good Bishop, and
six others with him on an Easter Day, at the foot of the font, whither he had
fled for shelter, cast out his dead body, drew it all about, and afterward
burnt it. So powerfully did the mystery of iniquity work even in those better
times. Zene the Emperor laid a paper on the altar, that God might write
therein the name of him who should be Bishop of Constantinople. But Flavitias,
corrupting the Sextan of the Church, caused him to write in his name, Niceph.
l. 1.
and so was made Bishop. When none other would lift. Hildebrand up into Peter's
Chair, he gat up himself: for who could better judge of him then himself?
Harden thy forehead (says Calvus to Vatinius) and say boldly, that thou
deservest the Praetorship better then Cato. Perfrica front and digniorem te
dit, qui Praetor fieres quam catonem. Quin, l. 9.^.2.
ambition, I confess, is not ordinarily so broad spoken, but goes difguised,
Turk, bist. 515. (...), etc. ^ 10 Nee ferrs porest Casarve priore a Pom pe^usve
parem. Lucan. D. heylins Geo. p. 103.
under a vail of modesty; necessity, religion, etc. as in those that disparage
themselves, that they may draw in others to commend them: as in Richard the
third, who pleaded the necessiry of the State for his abhorred usurpation: And
as to S lym ^ the Turk, and Hismael the Persian, who did, under the color and
zeal of their religion, both pretend just causes of war; although their evil
dissembled ambitions desires plainly declared unto the world, that they both
shot at one and the same mark, the extending the bounds of their great Empires.
There were many pretenses given out for the civil war betwixt Pompey and
Caesar (says the Historian) but if you will have the truth of it, the very cause
was the desire of preeminence and fole-government. The one could not bear a
superior, nor the other an equal, The same was the ground of all the quarrel
of old, between the Bishops of Constable intinople and Rome: as, of later time,
between Francis King of France, and Charles the fist Emperor of Germany. And
is still between the Kings of Spain, and other Monarchs of Christendom,
whilst they labor so earnestly the setting up of their Catholic Monarchy.
When Captain Drake took St Domingo in America, 1585. in the Town Hall were be
seen the King of Spains arms; and under them a globe of the world, Camd Eliz.
285
out of which arose a horse with his fore-feet cast forth with this
inscription, NON SVFFICIT ORBIS, The world is not enough for me to conquer.
This was laughed at, Romanoi geminos uuum non caperet regnum, quos unum ur^i
reperat holpttium, Cyprian.
as an argument of the Spaniards avarice and ambition, which indeed is
unsatisfiable. One womb could hold Romulus and Remus, not one Kingdom. Athens
could not contain two Alcibiades, nor Sparta two Lysandens. Alexander would not
divide the Persian Empire with Darius. Our Henry the second crowned his eldest
son Henry, whiles he was yet alive, Dan hui. l. 100
and that set him a seeking his fathers death. He also had made his second
son John, Harl of Cornwall, Dorset, Sommerset. Nottingham, Darby and
Lancaster. Which mighty estate was not a means to satisfy but increase his
desires, and make him more dangerous at home. Ibid. 114.
Ambition like the Crocodile, grows while it lives: or like the Ivy which
rising at the foot, will over-peer the highest wall. Base it is and slavish; it
will fall down to rise, Relat. of West relig.
crouch and creep to mount. Sixtus Quintus, says one, was the most crouching
humble Cardinal that ever was lodged in an oven, and the most proud, ambitious
Pope that ever ware crown, And Paul the third (says Thuanus) covered his deep
ambition for a long time with as deep dissimulation of sobriety, gravity,
sanctimony and bodily infirmity, Thuan. bist. l. 1. cap. 16. Act. and Mon. fol.
993.
whereof when he had once got that dignity, he made a full discovery. Bishop
Bonner at first seemed to be a good man, a favourer of Luthers doctrines, and
advanced he was only by the Lord Cromwell, for whom nevertheless (after his
execution) Bonner had not a good word, but the lewdest, vilest, and bitterest
he could speak; Ibid. 1087.
calling him the rankest heretic that ever lived, and that it had been good he
had been dispatched long ago. Alsted. Chron. p 376.
Aeneas Sylvius defended this truth, That the Council was above the Pope, and
commended the Germans for opposing the Pope. But when he saw that this was not
the way to preferment, he turned tippet, taught the contrary Doctrine, and
became Pope. In the inthronization of the Pope; before he is set in his Chair,
and puts on his Triple crown, a piece of tow or wad of straw is set on fire
before him, and one appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi, D. Feat'ey at
Sir Humphrey Lindes funeral. (...), Act. 25.23. (...), Mat. 4.8. (...), 1 Cor.
7.31. Psalm 39.7. Isa 61.6. Glory is in Greek translated riches. (...) 1 Samuel
25.6. Sua cuique civitati religio Laeli est nostra nobis. Stantibus
Hierosolymis, etc. Pro L. Flacco.
The glory of this world is but a blaze. This, if it were well considered by
those ambitious Bishops, they would not buy repentance at so dear a rate. S.
Luke calls all Agrippa's pomp a phantafie: S. Matthew all the worlds glory an
opinion: S. Paul a mathematical figure, that is something in the mind,
nothing out of it. surely in a vain show walks every man, says David, surely
he disquiets himself in vain, heaping up riches, and by riches honors,
according to that of Labans sons, murmuring against Jacob, Genesis 31.1, Of that
which was our fathers has he made all this glory, that is, all this wealth, as
the Chaldee expounds it: for riches make glory, get respect, Thus shall ye
say to him that lives, says David of rich Nabal: for poor men are looked upon
as dead men out of mind. Hence Tully judges the Jews religion to be naught,
because they were so often overcome and impoverished: but the religion of Rome to
be right, because the Romans prospered and became Lords of the world. Hence
Aigoland King of Arragon, coming to the Court of Charles the great, and
promising to be baptized, when he saw many poor people expecting alms from the
Emperors table, and asking what they were? was answered, That they were the
servants of God, he speedily returned and desperately protested, That he would
not serve that God, which could no better prefer and provide for his
servants. But Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, I know thy poverty, Heyl.
Geog p. 69.
says he to one of those seven Churches, but thou art rich, rich in faith, in
good works, etc. Isa. 43 4.
And thou art honorable, For since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee. Virtue is a thousand Escucheons. And
nothing so ennobles as grace, Gen, 1.20, 21.
and being within the Covenant, I have blessed Ishmael: twelve Princes shall he
beget: but my Covenant will I establish with Isaac. The Nobles of Isael made
their staves (the ensigns happily of their honor) instruments of the common
good, Numb. 21.18 And, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant, Mat. 20.26. Those Nobles of Tekoah are much blamed and blemished. for
that they put not their necks to the Lords yoke, Nehem. 3.1. But Theodosius
shall ever be renowned, That held it a greater honor to be a member of the
Church, then Head of the Empire. The righteous shall be bad in everlasting
remembrance, but the name of the wicked shall rot; as Beckets now does, Novi by
sancti de veteribus mibi dubium mo veat, dixit Bes sarion. Dan hist. 99.
who was so solemnly Sainted by the Pope. And yet 48. years after, says the
French History, it was disputed among the Doctors of Paris, whether he were
damned or saved? And one Roger a Norman maintained, That this Saint had justly
deserved death, and suffered not as a Martyr but malefactor. This was to call
a spade a spade: according to that of the Prophet, foretelling that in the
kingdom of Christ, Isa. 32.5.
The vile person should no more be called liberal, nor the churl said to be
bountiful. Honor est in honorante. Now in a godly man's eyes a vile person
(though never so great) is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord,
Equidem pluris jecerim just am commendationthilde; unius alicujas pij and boni
viri quam admira tionem stultam totius multitudinu. Rolloc. in Joh. 2.28. 1 Samuel 2.30. Ruth 4.11. Prove. 8 18. Prove. 22.4.
Psalm. 15.4. And I had much rather (says a worthy Divine) Have the just
commendation of one godly wise man, then the foolish admiration of a whole
multitude. To be praised of a praiselesse person is no praise: therefore the
Lord Christ suffered not the devil to confess him, or tell who he was. But
happy is he, that in all things serving Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men, Romans 14.18, This is a Jew inwardly, his praise is not of men,
but of God, who bath promised to honor them that honor him; and takes order
that they that do worthily in Ephratu, shall be famous in Bethlehem. Honor is
often promised as a reward of religion; and was so performed to David, when
whatsoever he did, pleased the people: To Solomon; for besides wealth and
wisdom, God gave him honor. It is God that fashioneth men's opinions:
therefore Paul prays that his service might be accepted of the Saints; Rom
15.31.
yet was it the bringing of alms, and such usually are welcome. It is God also
that gives preferment. Promotion comes neither from East nor West, no nor yet
from the South (where the warm Sunshine is) but from the Lord. Psalm.
And 75.6. yet how many go daily from his blessing into the warm Sun (as we
say) nay fetch an errand to hell, as some of the Popes did, for honors and
high places. No sooner can they hear flattering promises of preferment, as it
were the melody of Nebuchadnezzars instruments, but they presently fall down
and worship the Babylonish idol. How much better those three children? And
before them, Joseph, who would not yield to his wanton mistress, though he
might have been preferred for it? Moses who refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, and heir of two Kingdoms (as some say) Origin who was
content rather to continue a poor Catechist at Alexandria in daily fear of
death, Arrianus Maturus caret ambuitu: ideo se in equestri gradu teauit, cum
facite posset ascendere altissi mum Plin epist. l. 3 ep 2. Sardinius Gallus cum
posset Senator esse, Gartbaginem migravit, etc. Dro. in vita Claudij.
Numerianus Grammaticus eum magnos honores opesque c^ sequi potuisset, tamen
nosuit. Ib. in Severo. Alsted Chronol. p. 382. D. Prideaux Lect. Act. and Mon.
fol. 1578. (...)
then to be ruffling at Court with Plotinus his fellow-pupill, who refused to
be a Christian? Some Heathens have rejected honors that have been offered
them, for the very cumber and danger that attend them. High seats are never but
uneasy, and crowns themselves often stuffed with thorns. Therefore Frederike
sir-named the Wise, Electour of Saxony, when the Empire of Germany was offered
unto him, scriously refused it. Scriously, I say, and not for fashion only, as
the Canonists command Bishops to do, when the question is asked, Visne
episcopare? Whereunto the Bishop of Meltins craftily answered, Nolens volo, and
volens nolo: But did men know the weight of that charge ( Onus ipsis etiam
angelis tremendum, says Chrysostom) they would neither be so hasty to get it,
nor so loath to forgo it. Father Latimer being to resign up his Bishopric,
when he first put often his rochet in his chamber among his friends, suddenly
gave a skip in the floor for joy, feeling his shoulders so light, and being
discharged, as he said, of such an heavy burden. Fructus honos oneris, fructus
honoris, onus. The Hebrew word for Honor signifies weight or pressure. In
allusion whereunto S. Paul calls the glory of heaven, a weight of glory. But
from aspiring to that heavenly glory, earthly greatness is often times no small
impediment. The Bustard or Ostrich can hardly get upon his wings, whereas the
Lark mounts with ease. Nay, as those that walk on the top of pinacles are in
danger of a precipice, so are great men of greatest ruin. Even height it self
makes men's brains to swim: and he pourtia ed the ambitious man rightly, that
pictured him snatching at a Crown, and falling with this Motto, Sic mea fata
sequor. The poisonfull Aconite, so much desired of the Panther, is purposely
hung up by the hunters in vessels above their reach: whereof they are so
greedy, that they never leave leaping and straining thereat, till they burst
and kill themselves, and so are taken: So do men that aim at honor too high
for their reach, and too great for their merit: their heads are lifted up, but
it is as Pharaohs Bakers was: And it befalls unto them, Hic alicua appetendo
prepria amisit. Judge v. 15. Job ^^2 Quemomnes made ut potioie se comitali fuis
sent in Senaium eum pau o post in carcevem tra beba^t ut al jectum and resariun
Duse Sejano Sparitan.
as to that Duke of Moscoviah, whom when the Tartarian had taken in battle, he
made a cup of his skull with this inscription, All covet all lose. Let not
therefore the bramble be King: let not earthly things bear rule in thine
affections. Fire will rise out of them that will consume the Cedars. Exorientur
sedexurentur, as Jobs flower, Jonas gourd, David's bay tree, or Xerxes his
Steersman, whom he crowned in the morning, and beheaded in the evening of the
same day. The like befell Haman, Sejanus, and many others. Severus the Emperor
finding the emptiness and insufficiency of honors and earthly happinesses
(sweeter far in the ambition then fruition) cries out at last, Omnia fui, and
nihil expedit, I have tried all things, and find no solid content in any
thing. That was Solomon's verdict of them long before: And those in the Parable,
Mat. 20.13. when the end of the day came, when they were to go into another
world, they saw that which before they would not believe, that preferment,
riches, Non melior un quam fuit servm, nec deterior Domino, Galv Chro 478
Vespasianus unus accepto, im perio melior factus. lb 405. Cornel. a Lapid in
Number. 11.11. Gen 14, 21 Sic and Tigra^es, quam cum ^empeius vide ret, (...),
etc. misericordia commotus accessi, etc. 'Dio.
credit, were but a penny, were but empty things, such as wherewith they were in
no wise content. In the very pursuit of them is much anguish, many grievances,
fears, jealousies, disgraces, interruptions, etc. Say a man obtain them, they
neither make him better in prosperity, but the worse (as Caligula, then whom
there never was a better servant, nor a worse Lord. Vespasian is said to be the
only man that ever became better by being made Emperor. Pius Quintus
acknowledged that he was far the worse man after he came to be Pope) Nor can
they bear up the heart in the day of adversity. How crest-fallen was the King
of Sodom when overcome by the four Kings? How basely behaves he himself before
Abraham a stranger, an exile that was before so haughty and refractory! So
Manasseh, that faced the heavens in his prosperity, in trouble basely hides his
head among the bushes, and is therehence drawn, bound and carried captive, 2
Cbron. 33.12. But after the unsanctified enjoyment of them follows the sting of
conscience, that will inexpressibly vex and torment the soul thorowout all
eternity. For if one drop of an evil, unquiet conscience, will extremely
dissweeten a full cup of outward comforts in this life present, as it will, and
make a man weary of the world, Vna guttula malae conscientiae conturbat, totum
mare gaudiorum bumanoru Bucho. Cor. Gallus tantum animi dolorem concepit ut
sibiipsi mortem consciverit, Ioh. Manl. loc com. p. 136. Camd Elizab. fol. 406.
as Abitophel, Judas, etc. What shall we think of hell, where the worm bred in
the froth of these worldly lusts dies not, where the fire of Gods wrath goes
not out? If the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion, and if honors
darlings cannot bear their Princes frowns, but die by them, as it befell
Cornelius Gallus under Augustus, and St Christopher Hatton, Lord Chancellor
under Queen Elizabeth (The Queen having once cast him down with a word, could
not raise him up again, though she visited and comforted him, but that he died
of a slux of his urine, and grief of mind.) How will they bear the wrath of
God, when David (with whom God was, but in jest, as it were) though mounted on
his mountain could not bear his discountenance, Thou did hide thy face, and I
was troubled? Psalm. 30.7.


Angels.
HEB. 1.7. He makes his Angels spirits, his Ministers a flame of fire.


CHrist, the Angel of the Covenant is here preferred before all created Angels,
^ Pet. 3.21.
and worthily, as Lord and heir of all: Who is gone into heaven, and is on the
right hand of God: Angels and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto
him, says says S. Peter. The Papists (not out of Peter, but out of one
Dionysius) discourse largely of the heavenly Hierarchy, and tell us of nine
ranks and subordinations of Angels. But the author is suspected, Satius est
ignorare sine crimine, quam serutaricum discrimine.
and the Scripture herein is silent. Now where the Scripture has no tongue, we
need not have ears, but must content our selves with a learned ignorance, lest
we fall into the sin of those Angel-worshippers, Col. 2.18. intruding into
those those things which they had not seen, vainly puffed up by their fleshly
minds. The Friars so puffed up have names given them by their Governors each
according to his merits: and as they increase in their pretended holiness, so
they proceed in their aerie titles, from Padre benedicto to Padre Angelo, then
Archangelo, Cherubino, and lastly, Sands his relation of West Religion, p. 20.
Cerephino, which is the top of perfection. The Seraphims (those flames of
fire) whom the Papists place in the highest order, as nearest to God, and set
them as rulers over the inferior Angels, Titen. Syntag. page 199.
they also are called here Gods Ministers, yea they are his messengers too
(whatever the Papists say to the contrary) Isa. 6.6. sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. And were not therefore created
(as some have affirmed) many ages before his visible world: for then there had
been a beginning before that In the beginning, Genesis 1.1. Besides, Haec fuit
the^ logorum Graecorum sententia: in qua and ex tatinis erat non nemo. Ibid.
187.
if the Angels be messengers and ministering spirits, what use was there of
them, before there were some to whom they might be sent, and for whom they
should minister? But, say they, If Angels were not created til the world was,
why does not Moses mention their creation?

Some answer thus: lest, if mention should have been made of Angels in the
beginning, God might have been thought to have used their help in the Creation.
Others say, Lest the Jews, Col. 2 18.
so addicted to Idolatry, should (as some did) fall into the sin of
Angel-worship. Chrysostomes reason is not to be rejected, Hom. 2. in Genesis
That Moses his purpose was only to set forth a description of the sensible and
visible works of God, applying himself to the rudeness of that people: and
therefore omitting the doctrine of heavenly spirits, as far above their
understanding, and less belonging to them, or us. For if the Theology for
Angels were written, we should need another Bible: the creation and government
of Angels containing as great variety of matter, as does the religion of
mankind. Howbeit it is probable they were created the first day, Genesis 2.1.
with, Orthodoxi quidam patres senserunt Angelos creatos esse primo die. quod iu
dixerat Deus, Fiat Lux. i. e. naturae lucide. Bucholc.
and in the highest heavens (as Christ's soul was created with, and in his body
in the Virgins womb, the self-same moment) and are therefore called Angels of
heaven. Besides, those morning stars and sons of God are said to sing and shout
when God laid and fastened the foundation of the earth, Job 38.4.6, 7.
Morning-stars they were all then, and Angels of light, sons also of God, as
made in his image, and resembling him as his children, both in their substance,
which is incorporeall, and in their excellent properties, which are life and
immortality, blessedness and glory.

But now, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning? The
devil and his Angels kept not their first estate, Isa. 14.12. The ground of
their sin was amor sui luordinatus, whence discontent, rebellion, apostasy.
Yates his Madel, p. 176, 177.
but left their own habitation, Jude ^. For their sin; some say, it was pride
in affecting Divinity: Some say it was envy stirred by the decree of exalting
man's nature above Angles, in and by Christ: Some say a transgression of some
commandments in particular, not expressed, as Adams was. Whether in Paradise or
heaven there are that dispute, I have nothing to say; neither yet for the time
when they fell; some think it was the second day, because it is not added, That
God saw what he had done that day to be good. Sure it is, That his Angels he
charged with folly. Job 4.18.
Neither were they (as the Spaniards say of the Portugals) Pocos y locos few
and foolish: for there was a Legion of them in one man, Hey Geog p. 63 Mat 8.
which is six hundred at the least. There are that understand of them those
ninety and nine sheep in the Parable, to that one of lost mankind. The
Schoolmen would gather out of 2 Kin. 6.16. that as many Angels fell as stood,
but the Scripture defines nothing of that. It is probable that one fell first,
and the rest followed after, which are therefore called his Angels, Job. 8 44.
evil Angels, such as the Saints shall judge, 1 Cor. 6.3. Reprobate, apostate
Angels, in opposition to those holy and elect, Mat. 25.31. 1 Timothy 5.21. who
stand and continue holy, not by means of Christ's mediation, but Gods eternal
election, and his preventing them with actual grace, which made them effect
and execute at the first, what ever thing it was wherewith it pleased God to
prove their obedience. Christ, I know well, is called the Head of Angels, but
this is in another manner of sense then he is head of the Church, which is
united and subjected unto him in a more near and communicative way, as his
members, without the which he holds not himself complete, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Head
of Angels Christ is, first as God; for the gives them all they have, both
essence and continuance. 2. As Mediator, he uses their service for the
guarding and guilding of his Church and chosen. Not that Christ needs their
assistance, as Princes need the counsel and aid of their subjects, whom
therefore they associate. The holy Angels receive more from Christ, then they
perform or bring to him. But he makes use of their service, 1. To seal up his
love unto us by employing such noble creatures about us. 2. To make and
maintain love between us and Angels, till we come to walk arm in arm with
Angels: For, I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by,
Allusively to the walks and galleries about the Temple. Mat. 18.10.
says Christ to Jehoshuah the High Priest; that is, among the Angels: who are
elsewhere said to stand always looking on the face of God, to receive
commandments, for the accomplishment of all designs for our good. And this
they do willingly, speedily, constantly, zealously, reverently, with an awful
respect to the divine majesty, Isa. 6.2.
before whom they cover both their feet (as conscious of a comparative
imperfection) and their faces with their wings, as a man claps his hands on his
eyes at some extraordinary resplendent brightness suddenly shining upon him.
As with two of their wings they fly, With wearines of flight.
yea weary themselves, as it were, with eager flight to do us any good office,
Dan. 9.21.
as Gabriel did to the Prophet Daniel, with the message of the Messiah:
Theodoret elegantly sets forth their emploiment about God and his people in two
words, (...) 1 They sing praise to God, Job. 38.7. Isa. 6 3. Heb. 1.6. Angelos
Proeulas Academicus and Plutarchus, esse putant (...) Jerentes ad bondnes, and
baminum vota al Deos. Psalm 91. Mat. 4^
whom they perfectly know and love, and therefore perfectly adore and honor.
2. I hey minister (whole myriads of them) both to him and us, Dan. 7.10. and do
his will for our good, Psalm. 103.20. rejoicing more in their names of office
then of honor, of emploiment then preferment, to be called Angels (that is,
messengers) then Principalities, Thrones, Dominations, Ephesians. 1.20. Accounting
it better prodesse quam praeesse, to do good, then to be great, to dispense
Gods benefits to the Saints then to enjoy them themselves. Hence they are with
and about the Saints as their companions, guides, protectours, monitours, and
rulers of their actions. As they rejoice at their conversion (because the room
of the apostate Angels, whereby their society was much maimed, is supplied by
the elect) so when they are converted, they bear them in their arms (as the
servants of the house delight to do their young master) and are at all times at
their right hands (to set forth their dexterity and readiness to help them) in
holy duties especially. Angelu maxim in pulico cetu circumsistuntur pis. bleo
Tabernacuti cu'za Cherubinu lotus and soris reserta.
Satan stood at Iehoshuah's right hand, as he was sacrificing, to resist him,
Zech. 3.2. So did Gabriel at Zacharies right hand, as he was offering incense,
to enform and comfort him, Luke 1.11. This they do still, though invisibly and
infensibly (that God might draw up our hearts heaven ward, and teach us to have
our conversation above, though our commoration be here beneath.) Devils are not
so ready to tempt and devour us, as the Angels are, to help and deliver us: as
evil angels suggest temptations, so do good Angels holy motions. And as our
good endeavors are often hindered by Satan, so are our evil by the Angels: else,
were not our protection equal to our danger, and we could neither stand nor
rife. The devil moved Balaam to go (God bad him go if he thought good, Eccl.
11. ^le.
as Solomon bids the young man, Follow the ways of his own heart) a good Angel
resifts him, and speaks in the mouth of his ass to convince him, B. Hall
contemplat.
If an heavenly spirit (says one) stand in the way of a sorcerers sins, how
much more ready are all those spiritual powers to stop the miscarriage of Gods
dearest children? How often had we fallen yet more, had not these guardians
upheld us, whether by removing occasions, or casting in good instincts? Michael
opposed Satan about the body of Moses: so do the Angels still about the bodies
and souls of the Saints, while they are alive. As when they are dead, they
presently convey their souls into Abraham's bosom through the devils
territories, and in despite of him, for he is the Prince of the air. And for
their bodies, they shall gather them together at the last day from the
uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of heaven, Mark 13.27.

Quest. But how shall they know the righteous from the wicked?

Answ. Very easily. For, 1. They have ministered unto them, and been conversant
about them. And if a servant know his masters corn from another man's, Mali in
area nobiscum esse possunt, in borreo non possunt. Aug.
and the tares from the wheat, why should not the Angels as easily know the
Lords crop?

2. The elect are marked from the rest, Ezekiel 9. and shall soon be discerned, if
by nothing else, yet by the lightsomenesse of their looks, and lifting up of
their heads, for their redemption draws nigh. Whereas the wicked shall look
ghastly and rufully, the devil claiming his own, and these men's hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming upon them,
Luke 21.16. Then shall they be everlastingly shamed, Dan. 12.2. and sentenced,
Jude 14. Mat. 13.
Mat. 25.41. Neither helps it, that they are a multitude: for Christ comes with
thousands of his Angels, to do execution, to bundle up the tares, and cast
them into the furnace. Now if Ezekiel, Daniel, John, etc. (men that had good
causes and consciences) did so tremble before one Angel, coming with good
tidings in a lesser manifestation of Christ's glory; what then shall these do,
when Christ comes to judgment, and when he visits what will they answer?
etc. Job 31.


Anger.
EPHESIANS. 4.26. Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath, etc.


COncessit quod naturae est, negavit quod culpae, says Ambrose upon these
words, M. Gataker.
and after him Cassiodore. It is not evil (says one) to marry, but good to be
wary: So neither is it a sin to be angry, but hard not to sin, when we are
angry. Anger is a tender virtue: and such as by reason of our unskilfulnesse
may be easily corrupted and made dangerous. Mat. 16.23. Mark 3.5.
He that in his anger would not sin, must not be angry at any thing, but
sin. Our Savior was angry with Peter, and angry with the Pharisees for the
hardness of their hearts. Moses was even blown up with holy anger at the
people, for the golden Calf: and Gods blessing on every good heart, that, in
such a case, has a stomach for God. Meekness, surely, here would be no better
then mopishnesse, and not so good as madness, Psalm 139.
Do not I hate them that hate thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, says
David, I count them mine enemies. This is the anger of zeal, found in Phineas,
Elias, Elisha, our Savior: and should have been found in Adam toward his wife,
in Eli toward his sons, John 2.17. Genesis 13.7. Radicem bonam and finem bonu^.
in Lot toward his servants, etc. It must have a good rise, and a good-end,
says Bucer: else it becomes a mortal, not a venial sin, as the Papists
fonely conclude from Mat. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, etc. There is a just cause then of anger: sin, as an offense to God
(here Nebuchadnezzar was out, Dan. 3.19.) And there must be a just measure
observed, Mark 35. (...) significat eam tia offensum, ut evrum etiam
mise^cretur. etc. Ira smor brevis est. Horat Lib 2. de fide ortho lexa c 10.
that our anger for sin render us not unfit either to pity the sinner (as our
Savior in his anger did the obstinate Pharisees) or to pray for him (as Moses
for those idolaters, he was so enraged at, Exodus 32.31, 32.) Anger that is not
thus bounded is but a momentary madness, says the Heathen, it restreth in the
bosom of fools, says Solomon, whether it be Bilis, iracundia, aut infensio
(for into those three degrees Damascene distinguishes it) A^ger, Wrath, and
Hatred, The one (says he) has beginning and motion, but presently cease:
the other takes deep hold in the memory: the third desisteth not without
revenge. Clichtoveus compares the first to fire in stubble: the second to fire
in iron: the third to fire that is hid, (...)
and never bewraieth it felf, but with the ruin of the matter wherein it has
caught. Some are sharp, some are bitter, a third kind are implacable, says
Aristotle. The first are the best, that as children are soon angry, Melch.
Adam. in vit.
and as soon pleased again. Be ye children in malice, 1 Cor. 14.20. Vrsinus was
of somewhat a hasty nature: So also was Calvin, Vt fit in ejusmodi ingeniis,
says he that writes their lives. For as any man is more industrious and
ingenious, so he teaches more teachily and painfully. Yet had they so learned
to moderate their anger, as not to utter a word, in their passion, Bezae
collegae saepe dicebant eunt fine selle vivere Melch. Adam.
unbeseeming a Christian. But of Zeza, his Colleagues would often say, That
like the Dove he was (...), without a gall. And it should seem so by that which
he writes of himself in a certain Epistle to Mr Calvin: The Jesuit (says he)
disputing about the Eucharist, called us, Vulpes and serpents and simias,
foxes, serpents, apes, etc. My answer was this, Nos non magis credere, quam
Transubstantiationem, That we believed all that, as much as we did
Transubstantiation. So Giles of Brussels Martyr, Act. and Mon. fol. 811.
when the Friars (sent to reduce him) did any time miscall him, he ever held
his peace; insomuch that those blasphemers would say abroad, that he had a dumb
devil in him. Cassianus reports, that when a certain Christian was held captive
of infidels, tormented with diverse pains and ignominious taunts, being demanded
by way of scorn and reproach, Tell us what miracle thy Christ has done? He
answered, He has done what you see, that I am not moved at all the cruelties
and contumelies you cast upon me. This was indeed to walk as Christ walked, who
did not strive, nor cry, nor did any man hear his voice in the streets, who
when he was reviled, Mat. 12.19 Pet. 2.23.
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously. So did Moses, when murmured against by Aaron
and Miriam. He was meek and complained not: therefore without any delation of
his, the Lord struck in for him. The less any man strives for himself, the
more is God his Champion. But the wrath of man as it works not the
righteousness of God, Jam. 1.19, 20. Romans 12.18 Give place to wrath. 1. To the
wrath of God, which by revenge ye prevent. Brevis demon
so it prevents his justice: Wherefore be slow to wrath, says S. James, as God
is; not fretfull and froward as the devil is, Anger is a short devil, says
Chrysostom, the fury of the unclean spirit, Qui suis follibus and flatibus
intendit, who enflames the heart, sets the tongue on fire from hell, makes it
hotter then Nebuchadnezzars oven, so that he cares not what he speaks, as
Jonas; what he does, as Saul: who falling into a rage, the devil possessed him,
and kindled such a fire, as could not be quenched, till he fell into the
unquenchable lake. So true is that of Eliphaz, Wrath kills the follish man,
Job 5.2.
delivers him up to the destroier, if it rest in his bosom especially, and
lodge a night with him, which is the second degree above mentioned.

Let not therefore the Sun go down upon your wrath: for that is all one as to
give place to the devil, Ephesians, 4.26. Pythagorici siquando per ira^ ad maledict
a prorupissent, art solu occubitum, dextris, mutuo datis, gratiam redirt
graverunt. 1 John 3. Numb 28.29. M Wherely in his Prototypes.
who hereby enters the heart, and takes possession. Many there are that suffer
the Sun not only to go down upon their anger, but to run his whole race, yea
many races, ere they can be reconciled: whereby their anger becomes inveterate,
and turns into malice: for anger and malice differ but in age. Now cursed be
this anger for it is fierce, and this wrath for it is cruel, Genesis 49 7. it is
the murder of the heart, Mat. 5.21, etc. the fountain of the murder both of the
tongue and hand. Hence it is said, He that hates his brother is a man-slaier.
He is so in desire, he would be so indeed, if he durst, Were there a sword in
my hand, I would surely slay thee. There is a passion of hatred (says one) and
there is the habit of it. The former is a kind of averseness and rising of the
heart against a man, when one sees him, so that he cannot away with him, nor
speak to, nor look courteously or peaceably upon him; but ones countenance falls
when he sees him, and he even turns away, and, by his good will, would have
nothing to do with him: This is the passion of hatred. The habit of it is,
when the heart is so settled in this alienation and estrangement, that it grows
to wish and desire, and seek his hurt, yea to rejoice and glory when it can
effect it: as Joseph's brethren, who sat down to eat and drink, when they had
cast him into, the pit: as Lamech, who boasted of his manhood this way
(dogge-hood rather, for revenge is no better) as Alexander Phereus, Plutarch.
who consecrated the J^velin, wherewith he slew Polyphron.

This is that third and worst sort of anger, which, being smoothered, will
languish: but let out, will flame into further mischief, as we see in Esau, who
vowed his brothers death, and Cain who wrought it. Act. and Mon. fol 914.
But that I believe and know (said Friar Brusierd in a conference with Bilney)
that God and all his Saints will take revengement everlasting on thee, I would
surely with these nails of mine be thy death. We read also of a like saying of
another Friar Augustine of Antwerp, testified by Erasmus in his Epistles: who
openly in the Pulpit at Antwerp, preaching to the people, wished that Luther
were there, Erasm. epist. l. 10. ad ^btrect atorem This Story was he that
advised not to lop off the twigs, but to strike at the root the L. Elizabeth.
Act. and Mon. fol. 1925. Camd Elizab tra^fl. fol. 141. Dan hist. 42.
that he might bite out his throat with his teeth. So doing he would nothing
doubt to resort to the altar with the same bloody teeth, and receive the body
of Christ. Dr Story (that bloody persecutour of the Saints in Queen Mary's
days) when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, could not forbear to curse her
daily in his grace at board, and was worthily hanged for his treason, anno
1571. Being herein like the foolish Be, who loses her life to get revenge.
Valerius Maximus could not tell, whether Sylla or his anger were first
extinguished. William the Conqueror to be revenged on the King of France (who
being young and lusty jeasted at his great belly, whereof he said he lay in at
Roven) entered France in the chiefest time of their fruits, making spoil of all
in his way, till he came even to Paris (where the King of France then was) to
show him of his up sitting. And from thence he marches to the City of Mants,
which he utterly fackt, and in the destruction thereof gat his own by the
strain of his horse among the breaches, so ending his wars, and his life
together. His successor Edward the first did not so: For going against Bruce
King of Scots, Idem, ibidem. fol. 201.
he adjured his son and Nobles, that if he died in his journey they should
carry his corpse with them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred,
till they had vanquished the usurper, and absolutely subdued the Country. A
desire more martial then Christian, showing a mind so bent to the world, that
he would not make an end, when he had done with it: and so set upon revenge,
Lib 9.^ 3.
that he designs it beyond his life. Sedira mortalium debet esse mortalis,
says Lactantius. Are we mortal, and shall our anger be immortal? the rude
rage of the rebels in Kets conspiracy was such, that some, being disabled
almost to hold up their we^pons, would strive what they could to strike their
enemies. The life of K. Edward 6. by Sir Ioh. Hoyw, p. 71.
Others being thrust through the body with a spear, would run themselves
further, to reach those that wounded them deadly. So sweet is revenge to
corrupt nature: Tamar will defile her self with incest, to be even with her
father in saw Judah: Absalom will run any hazard to have his peny-worths on
Amnon: David desperately swore the death of Nabal, and his household by such an
hour. To be revenged is more honorable then to be reconciled, Inim^cot u^cisct
pottus quam illis reconciliari, bonestun cense. tur. Rhetor. l. 9. cap. 1. Iam.
4.5. 1 Samuel 25, 31. Isa. 28. Mat. 5.48. 1 Samuel 24.19.
says Aristotle. This is the voice of nature, and thus the spirit that is in
us lusts to envy: but the Scripture gives more grace, teaches better
things, speaks to us, as Abigail did to David, when he was marching
furiously, Then shall it be no grief unto thee, nor offense of mind to have
brideled thy passions, and to have held thy hand from blood. Nay, it shall be a
singular comfort to have conquered thy passions ( For the meek shall increase
their joy in the Lord) and a sweet seal of our spiritual sonship, that we are
the children of our heavenly Father, yea that we are perfect as he is perfect,
and can do that which a natural man cannot, as Saul acknowledges. Elisha
feasteth his enemies, and is freed of them; the bands of Syria come no more
into the bounds of I^ael. Absalom invites Ammon, and Alexander Philotas to a
feast, to kill them thereat. But Isaac expostulates the wrong with Abimelech
and his company, forgives them, fcasts them, Genesis 26.^0.
and has them his friends for ever. This was a noble revenge, and fit for
Christian imitation. Ioshuah marches all day, and fights all night for the
Gibeonites, that had so deceived him. Cranmers gentleness in pardoning wrongs
was such, that it grew to a Proverb, Act. and Mon. fol. 1^92.
Do my Lord of Canterbury ashrewd turn, and then you shall be sure to have him
your friend, whiles he lives. He never raged so far with any of his household
servants, as once to call the meanest of them varlet or kuave in anger, much
less to reprove a stranger with any reproachful word. Here was a perfect man,
Iam. 3 2.
as S. James defines him that can rule his tongue, in his passions especially,
which once affote are very violent, and (like heavy bodiesdown steep hills) once
in motion move themselves, and know no ground but the bottom.

from anger, and refrain strife, free not thy self in any wise to do evil,
Psalm. 37.8. Thou do evil in fretting, Helps to repress rash anger.
thou shall do worse in venting, and suffering the fire to break out as David
did, Psalm. 39. When therefore thou find thy self incensed and chafing ripe,
Prove. 30.32, 33 If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self (by any
froward look or gesture) r^f thou have thou, he evil (by medi^ating revenge,
yet) lay thy hand upon thy mouth, silence thy self. Surely the churning of milk
brings forth butter; and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood; so
the forting of wrath (the uttering of it) brings forth strife, Irasera est
furibunda incantemus came di vinae Scripturae carminibus. Chrysostom. Job 15.4.
Act. 15.9. Luke 1.5. Isa 17. 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 12.30, 31.
presently lay a necessity of silence upon thy self, till thou be able to speak
quietly and composedly, till the heat be somewhat over: As Ahashuerosh walked a
while in his garden, ere he would pass sentence upon Haman. Another repeated
the Greek Alphabet, ere he would say or do any thing in his anger. He does
better that repeateth some grave sentences of Scripture, such as is this, Be
angry: but sin not: Be slow to wrath: Avenge not your selves, but give place to
wrath: Submit to God: resist the devil and he will sly from you. This devil of
anger, if thus resisted by Scripture, will surely sly, he cannot bide by it,
Mat. 4. Especially, if we set our selves to pray it down, as David did, Ps, 39.
When Job brake out and was waspish, Surely, said Eliphaz, thou restrainest
prayer, else it would never be thus with thee.

Secondly, Get thy heart purified by faith. For faith makes patience. When the
Disciples heard that they must forgive till seventy times seven times in a day,
Lord, say they, increase our faith, The wisdom from above is first pure, and
then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. But, from whence are wars and contentions amongst
you? (as it is in the next verse) Are they not hence, even of your lusts that
war in your members? These make you unquiet and out of order within: and hence
it is that you are so froward and discontented with others. The wicked are as
the raging sea, troublesome and tumultuous; the covetous person troubles his
whole house, Nabal was such a son of Belial, so fierce and furious that there
was no speaking to him: Yea, David when he had defiled his conscience, and not
yet repented of his adultery and murder, how rigid was he, or rather cruel in
his handling of the Ammonites, in recking his teen upon them for the misusage
of his Ambassadors? He put them under saws and harrows of iron, he made them
pass through the brick-kilne, etc. The devils are most impure and therefore
most malicious: Christ on the other side, most pure, and therefore most gentle.
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, says
Isaiah: teaching us, that the more Christ's government increases in the soul,
the more peace and peaceablenesse. Isa. 9 7.
But perverseness argues a breach in the spirit, Prove. 15.4.

Study to be quiet, and do your own business. 1 Thell. 4.12.
Meddle not with the strife that belongs not to you, lost you take a dog by the
ears, Prove. 26.17. Shun contentious company, Prove. 22.34. for, like mad dogs,
they bite and make others as made as themselves. Drink not, game not, lest thou
meet with contentions, Prove. 23.29, 30. Listen not to the talebearer, Prove.
17.9.
for he separates even very friends. Enquire not into other folks faults.
Seldom is a patient man inquisitive, or an inquisitive man patient. Non vis
esse iracundus? ne si^ curiosus Sen.
Solomon would not have one lay his ear as an evesdropper, to every word is
spoken, lest he hear his servant cursing him, Eccles. 7.21. and so he should
fall to hate him, and vex himself to no purpose. Presume in thy mind, that
many things are to be suffered, while we are here: which whosoever cannot frame to
do, its but time for him to make up his pack, and be gone out of the world; for
here is no being for him. Many things also are to be dissembled and winked at,
as the lion takes no notice of the barking of curs, Non indignantur agrotu, sed
morbos sanant. Erasm.
as Physicians pass by the petulancies of their patients. Pills must be
swallowed down whole, not chewed: so injuries. Thus, by the meekness of
wisdom, prevent occasions of anger: it does require much study to live quietly.

Luke 21.19. Turpis aspectus; quid antma?
furiousness of the looks, distortion of the face, inflammation of the
nostrils. The Hebrews call anger Aph, because therein the nose rises, the
color changes, the tongue stammereth, the teeth gnash, the hands clap (as
Balaac's, Numb. 24.10.) the feet stamp, the pulse beats, the heart pants, the
whole man swells like a toad glows like a devil, tormenting himself before his
time. Plato, Seneca. Sextius. Prove. 14.9. and 11.16, and 19. E. cles.7.11. Prove
21.4. (...), 1 Pet 2 18. ab Hebrae^ (...) Stultus. (...). 1 Cor. 6 7. Invalidum
oncne natura querulum. Sen.
Whence many Heathens have advised the angry man to look his face in a glass,
and so grow ashamed of his distemper. Next, for the disgrace: The holy Ghost
has stigmatized the angry person for a fool in grain, such an one as exalts
folly, sets it up on high to be seen of all, and proclaims himself a Fool; yea
the worst of fools; for, Proud, haughty, scorner is his name that deals in
proud wrath, That Is his title. Thus God loads such a man with disgrace. And
whereas he thinks by his big looks and high terms to carry it among men (as
Lamech did) when he has gotten revenge especially. The Apostles purposely
disgraceth revenge of injury by a word that signifies disgrace, loss of
victory, or impotency of mind. And indeed it is unmanlinesse of spirit, and
little wit in the head, that causes a great deal of passion in the heart, as
we see in infants and sick people. Nibil tolerabile videtur, no^ qu^a dura, sed
quia molles pa^imur. 6.2.
Thunder, hail, tempest, neither trouble nor hurt celestial bodies: no more
does anger great minds. The tops of some mountains are said to be so high
above the middle region of the air, that not so much as the dust upon them is
moved out of the place from years end to years end: So is it here. Great
spirits, and men of understanding are like the upper region, in a perpetual
serenity: or at least, like the highest planets, that of all the rest, are
thought to be slowest in course: or like a diamond that is neither bruised nor
cut. And lastly, for the danger of anger, it consumes the body, it confounds
the soul. Fevers, colicks, palsies, Plus nocet ira quam injoria.
plurisies, apoplexies, inflammations, consumptions are caused by it, whiles it
dries up the radical moisture (that balsome of the body) boils the heart into
brine, and viper like, makes an end of the owner: who as he lived undesired, so
he dies unlamented, as Nerva, Valentinian, and other cholerike Kings and
persons of great note, who hereby have wrought their own ruth and ruin. ^ Pet.
3.7. Jam 1.19, 20, 21 Ep. 4.30, 31.
And for the poor soul, it is indisposed, by unadvised anger, for prayer or any
other duty to God or man. He is laid open, as an unwalled City, to many sins,
mischiefs and miseries ( Jam. 3.16. Prove. 3.32. and 7.13. and 29.22. Psalm
37.8.) temporal, spiritual and eternal, Prove. 17.10. Mat. 5.21. He that
lives and dies in this fury, becomes a prey to the furies of hell.



First, That those that wrong us (how malicious or mischievous soever) are the
instruments of his good providence, for our greatest good; Irasci pop. Ro^ nemo
spaie^ter potest. I^ac. Nemo me imp^me ia^essit, says the Scottish thistle. 2 Samuel 16.10, 11.
Why then should we be angry at them? Is not this to be angry at God? Now if he
could say, No wise man will be angry with the people of Rome, because of their
power, how much greater folly is it to rage at God? If he be angry with us,
there is hope of mercy, but if we be angry with him, what help is there, let
his Wrath be kindled never so little? This reyned in Job from letting sly at
the Caldeans that robbed him, and David at Shimei that reviled him. Take heed
ye be not found fighters against God, Act. 5.
And had he as well seen God in Nabal, as he did in Shimei, he had never been
so outrageous. Reverence therefore Gods providence, and be still, Psalm. 39.10.
None could have power against thee, except it were given them from above, Job.
19.11. Next, Consider Gods presence, and be careful. Set God before thy
passions, and they will be soon hushed; as unruly fellows that are quarrelling,
when once an officer comes in amongst them. When thy heart boils with wrath and
desire of revenge; say as those Disciples, Luke 9.54. Will thou that we call
for fire from heaven? Ask leave of God, ere you dare to do any thing that way,
and presume not to be thine own carver. We use to say, If the Magistrate be not
present, we may offend another to defend our selves: But if the Magistrate be
present, there is no excuse. (...). Jam. 5 ^.
behold the Judge stands before the door (says S. James) grudge not therefore,
groan not, grunt not one against another: You cannot show the least token of
impatiency, but he is an eye-witnes of it; Jer 5.22.
Now will ye not tremble at my presence, says the Lord? Job, though patient at
first, yet when once wet to the skin, falls a roaring and raving, and there was
no hoe with him: Till at length God steps forth, as it were from behind the
hangings, over-hearing him, and takes him up roundly, Chap. 38.2 Who is this,
says he, that talks thus? how now? After which, Job laid his hand upon his
mouth, and we hear no more of him. Consider, lastly, (...). Act 13.18. Psalm.
103.8, 9.
Gods infinite patience and long-sufferance in bearing men's manners, as he did
theirs in the wilderness. How slow is he to anger, and plenteous in mercy! He
will not always chide, though always provoked: neither will he keep his anger
for ever. God judges the righteous (but very gently, and in the midst of
judgment he remembers mercy) God also is angry with the Wicked (or angered by
them) every day. But what will he do in his anger? If he turn not, he will whet
his sword (before it devours flesh. He first takes hold on judgment, before
his judgment takes hold on men:) He has bent his bow and made it ready, etc.
Sic patientiam exercet suam, dum panitentid expectat tuam. Aug. Amb. in Gen 9
Psalm. 7.12.13. We read of Gods bow, says Ambrose, set in the cloud, but
nothing of his arrow. The how cannot hurt us, but the bow fore-warns us of the
arrow; and the string of the bow is to Usward, to show how unwilling God is to
punish even the wicked. He must first turn the bow, and then he bends his bow,
and then his arrow is unprepared too, verse. 14. So unready and unwilling is he
to afflict, to grieve the children of men. Lam. 3.33. Isa. 28.21. Hithhallech.
Genesis 3. (...) Sep. Ad Vesperam d^el. Ambre^.
He calls it his work, his strange Work; he goes not about it, till there be
no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. When God came to punish Adam, he came slowly, and in
the cool of the day. He ran not upon him, as David did upon Goliath, and cut off
his head, but with a softly pace and still voice, and not till the evening. And
then convents him, before sentence (which he would not do for the devil) and
promises him a Savior from the deadly sting of that old serpent. Oh look upon
this pattern of patience, as they did once upon the brazen serpent, and it will
cure our hearts when stung with impatiency. Adam was the masterpiece of Gods
handiwork, in whom he rested and rejoiced: adorned him with his own image,
advanced him to dominion over all other sublunary creatures, honored him with
the possession of Paradise, and possibility of heaven, held himself so far
honored by him, as that he is not called Lord God, till man was created. Genesis
1. Psalm. 49 12.
But men being in honor, continued not one night (as it is thought) but became
like the beasts that perish; nay worse, like the devils, with whom he should
have perished, had he not dealt with a sin-pardoning God, none ever like him,
Mic. 7.18. Isa. 57 7.
He still multiplies pardons, as we multiply provocations, and stretches out
his hand all the day long to a rebellious people, 2 Cor 5.20.
Isa. 65.2. his grace even kneels to them, beseeching them to be reconciled,
and bearing with such abominable practices, in the mean while, as the meekest
Moses that ever breathed would never bear with, if in his room, but even for an
hour. If we consider especially how infinitely great he is and mighty, armed
with power at his will. For the Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of
Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Now the higher any
person is, the less patient of wrongs, How rigidly dealt David with the
Ammonites, for the abuse done to his Ambassadors? And when the people stoned
Adoram, ^ King 12 18, 20.
that was over the tribute, Rehoboam gathered all Judah and Benjamin to fight
with them. If God should be as short spirited, what would soon become of all?
Let a man but put up an injury once or twice from another, and he has himself
highly in admiration, and in his own conceit deserves to be chronicled, nay
canonized for a Saint, as our Henry the sixth had like to have been for this
very virtue. One of his successors (King Henry the seventh) labored it, says
the Historian, and had obtained to have done it, had not the charges thereof,
that so far exceeded mediocrity, caused him to leave it undone. Of this King it
is reported, That in both estates he so demeaned himself, that he modestly
carried the one, and moderately under-went the other: Passion at no time
drowning his judgment, nor will at any time domineering over his reason: yea
such was his deportment, that the inconstancy of his estate could not alter the
constancy of his mind. He was never heard to swear oath (which David did in
his heat, I Sam. 25.22.) his greatest asseveration being for most part,
Forsooth, forsooth, or verily, verily. His patience was such, that to one that
struck him, when he was taken prisoner, he only said, Forsooth you do Wrong
your self more then me, to strike the Lords anointed. Another that had drawn
blood of him, when he was in prison, he freely pardoned (when restored) saying,
Continuation of Daniels h^st, of England by T^u^g^^, so. 198
Alas poor soul, he struck me more to win favor with others, then of any ill
will he bare me. Of that happy memory, that he never forgot any thing but
injuries. This was a fair president, and hardly matched again in a man of his
place, and living in those dark times of gross Popery, Psalm 74.20. Idco
deteriores sum^s, quia meliores esse debemus. M^l. 3.18.
For the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty, says
the Psalmist. But what is all this to Gods infinite patience in suffering wrong
and long too? not from the vessels of wrath only. Romans 9.22. but his own elect,
who should be better, spa^ing them as a man spares his son that serves him,
forgiving them seventy times seven times in a day, passing by without
grievance, a world of infirmities, yea taking advantage of their backs^^dings
to show them the more mercy, as Hos. 2.13. The deep and due consideration of
this patience in God, will greatly patient our spirits, and transform us into
the same image, as it did that Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.32. and that Earl
called Elzearus, of whom it is storied, that being much given to immoderate
anger, the means he used to cure this disordered affection, was by studying of
Christ, and of his patience. This meditation he never suffered to pass from
him, In vita ^jus a, pud Suriun.
before he found his heart transformed and conformed to the heavenly pattern.

Lastly, If to these means and meditations you add a constant endeavor to
become low in your own eyes, keeping the strict watch of the Lord over your
heart, taking your self in the manner, when impatience begins to boil in you:
and if you heartily pray down your passions, arraigning and condemning them in
Gods presence, and desiring him to do execution, you shall soon see that this
your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Apostasy.
MATTHEW. 24.12, 13. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold.

But he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved.


IT is well observed concerning those two destructions of the world, Ludolf, de
vita Christ l. 2.6.87
that as the first was by water for the heat of their lust, so the second shall
be by fire, for the coldness of their love. The deluge of iniquity shall
quench the love of many. But he that endures, etc. It is but a He in the
singular number that holds out to the end. The most are of them that draw back
to perdition, and not of them that believe to the saving of the soul, (...).
Heb. 2 12. Confitetur se esse Apostatam, sed beatum and sanctum, qui fidem
diabelo datam non servavit. Melch Ad. in vit Luth p. 145. Sleidan Comment.
Heb. 1.39. The opposition there imports that incredulity is the root of
apostasy; that (I mean) whereby a man departs from the living God. It was laid
to Luthers charge, that he was an apostate. He confesses that he was an
apostate, but a blessed and holy one: such as had not kept promise with the
devil, but fallen off from him, and his Church malignant. The like imputation
the Papists laid upon those famous Italian converts, Zanchius, Peter Martyr,
Paulus Vergerius the Popes Nuncio, who began to write a book, Adversus
Apostatas Germaniae (that was the title) against the Lutheran apostates: but by
searching into their tenets, with purpose to confute them, was converted by
them, and leaving his Bishopric, and that whole Synagogue of Satan, lived and
died a painful and powerful Preacher of Gods truth in Germany. Galeacius
Caracciolus also, an Italian Marquess, and nephew to Pope Paul the fifth,
hearing Peter Martyr read upon the 1 epist. to the Corinths, was converted by
him, and leaving all went to Geneva. Where when he was afterward tempted by a
Jesuit to revolt for money: he cried out, His life translated by Crosh.
Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the world worth
one days society with Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit. And cursed be that
Religion for ever, that seeks by money to corrupt men's minds from the
simplicity of Christ. The Papists do at this day propose rewards to such as
shall relinquish the Protestant religion, and turn to theirs: as in Ausborough,
where they say there is a known price for it of ten florens a year: in France,
Relation of West Religion sect. 16.
where the Clergy have made contributions for the maintenance of runagate
Ministers: such as were Bolsecus (whom the Papists afterward hired to write
Calvin's life, where so many lines, Religion^m ephemeram bab^re exissimabatur.
B^z. Melch Adam. do vit exler. Theolog P ^^. Ibid. p ^9. Redijt Steiserus ad
Pontificiot and mise e periisse du^^ur. Scultet. Annal. 118.
so many lies) Baldwin that notable turn-coat, that changed his religion three
or four times at least for advantage, and died at last of envy, that another
was preferred before him, as Chaplain to Henry the third of France, when he
went to take possession of the Kingdom of Polonia: Petrus Carolus, that odious
apostate, and troubler of the true Church: Staphylus, Speiserus, Brissonettus,
and others long agone: As of late, Bertius, Tilenus, Spalatensis, and many
other renegadoes, re-entred by the unclean spirit, who made their last state
worse then the first, as the Jaylour lays load of iron on him that had
escaped, Luke 11.26. These, as they sin not common sins; so, for most part (as
it is said of Korah, and his company) they die not common deaths: they seldom
escape the visible vengeance of God whom they have forsaken: witness Arrius,
Julian, Valerian, Spira, Spalatensis, Judge Hales, Guarlacus, Bomelius, Latomus
Lovaniensis, who to his end had nothing else in his mouth, but that he was
damned, and rejected of God, Act and Mon^ fol. 1999.
and that there was no hope of salvation for him, because that wittingly
against his conscience, he withstood the manifest truth of his Word. Yea, those
that never went so far as to persecute the truth, but denied or dissembled it
only, have fearfully perished. In the story of Philbert Hamlin Martyr, a
certain Priest, his host whom he had instructed in the truth, revolted. To whom
he prophesied, That nevertheless he should die before him. He had no sooner
spoke the word, but the Priest going out of the prison from Hamlin, was slain
by two Gentlemen, who had a quarrel to him. Where of when Hamlin heard, he
affirmed, He knew of no such thing, but only spoke as God guided his tongue.
Ibid. 834.
Likewise we read of William Wolsey Martyr, that when he went to execution, he
left six shillings eight pence to be delivered to one Richard Denton a Smith,
dwelling at Well in Cambridgeshire, with this commendation, That he marvelled
that he tarried so long behind him, seeing he was the man that first delivered
him the book of the Scripture into his hand, and told him that is was the
truth, desiring him to make haste after as fast as he could, Denton at the
receipt of it, answered, I confess it is true; but alas I cannot burn. But he
that could not burn in the cause of Christ, was after wards burned against his
will, Ibid. 1558.
when Christ had given peace to his Church. For anno 1564. on Tuesday, April
14. his house was set on fire: And whilst he went in to save his goods, he
lost his life, with two other in the same house. Among the Angrognians and
their neighbors in France, it is certainly known, that those that yielded to
the adversaries were more cruelly handled then the others that continued
constant to the death. Ibid. 873.
See how God hates apostates. When Caracciolus Marquess of Vicum, resolved to
leave all, and go to Geneva, The life of G^eatias Caracciolus, p. 21.
he opened his mind to some of his most familiar friends, and wrought upon
them so far, as they promised and vowed to accompany him, etc. But diverse of
them, who for a time seemed to beled with a most earnest zeal of Gods glory in
this action, when they came to the borders of Italy, and considered what they
forsook, first began to look back, afterward went back again indeed. Where
purposing to serve God in their pleasures, and in the midst of Popery, they
were, after, taken by the Spanish Inquisition. Latimer, ^orm. 7. Before King
Edward.
etc. Others have fallen under a worse torment, the terror of their own
consciences, which they were not able to stand before: As I might instance not
only in Bilney, who, after he had borne his faggot, was so terrified, that his
friends were afraid to let him be alone: If they brought him comfortable places
of Scripture, it was as though a man should run him through the heart with a
sword, as Latimer testifies. In Bainham who could not rest till he had
publicly recanted his recantation, praying every body rather to die then to
do as he had done: for he would not feel such a hell again as he did feel for
all the worlds good; In James Abbes, Act. and mon. fol. 328.
who having yielded to the Bi^hop of Norwich his persuasions, and received a
piece of money from him was pitiously vexed, till he went again to the Bishop,
and there threw him his money, Ibid. 1528.
and said, Is repented him that he ever consented to their Wicked persuasions:
In Thomas Whittle Martyr, who could never be quiet till he had gone to the
Bishops Office, Ibid. 1632.
and torn the bill of his recantation, for the which Bonner first buffeted him
soundly, and then burnt him: In Thomas Benbridge, who feeling the intolerable
heat of the fire, cried out, I recant, and subscribed to certain Popish
Articles at the stake upon a man's back, and so was led back to prison. But soon
after, he retracted what he had subscribed, and the same-day-seven night he was
burnt indeed, or rather broiled by the vile tormentours. Ibid. 1857.
The like befell Richard Sharp a Weaver of Bristow, who likewise suffered for
that truth, which he had recanted, saying, Ibid. 1861.
I am sorry that ever I denied my Lord God, etc. But besides all these that
recovered of their relapses: What shall we think of Pendleton, who resolved
that as he came not frying into the world, so he would not go out frying?
Ibid. 1504.
but roared upon his deathbed, and full fore repented (if it were not too
late) that ever he had yielded to Papistry, and been so sparing of his fat and
flesh, whereof he had vowed to Saunders he would see the uttermost drop molten,
Ibid, 1363.
and gobbet consumed to ashes, before he would forsake God and his truth. What
shall we think of Steven Gardner, who cried ou^ upon his death bed, That he
had denied his Master with Peter, but never repented with Peter, and so, both
stinkingly and unrepentantly died? Of Mt West Chaplain to Bishop Ridley, Ibid.
1904.
who refusing to die in Christ's cause with his Master, said Mass against his
conscience, and was so vexed by his conscience, that soon after he pined a way
with sorrow? What shift Shaxton and Harding made to die I know not. Ibid. 1558.
and 1570.
A couple of apostates I know they were, a These 2.
and fair warning they had; but that God had given them up to the efficacy of
error to believe a lie, because they would not receive he love of the truth,
whereof they could not but be convinced. Harding (a little before King Edward
died) was heard openly in his Sermons in London, to exhort the people with
great vehemence, That if troubles came, they should never shrink from the true
doctrine of the Gospel, that they had received: which yet he himself soon after
did. The Lady Jane (whiles she was prisoner, wrote an excellent letter to him,
wishing him to remember the horrible History of Julian of old, and the
lamentable case of Spira of late. Ibid. 1292.
Return to Christ (says she) who now stretches out his arms to receive you,
ready to fall upon your neck and kiss you, and cast off all to feast you with
the dainties and delicates of his own precious blood: which undoubtedly, if it
might stand with his determinate purpose, he would not let to shed again,
rather then you should be lost. Thus sought that sweet Lady to charm and
reclaim this adder; but he turned the deaf ear to her, and died an obstinate
Papist, a Prebend of Gaunt. Shaxton was somewhat more toughly handled, but with
no better success: for evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived. This Shaxton in King Henry the eights days, being Bishop
of Salisbury, at the coming in of the six Articles resigned up his Bishopric,
Ibid. 1578.
together with Latimer, rather then to forgo the peace of their consciences,
and so remained a great space unbishoped, till King Edwards time, who restored
them. But when Queen Mary came in, and changed religion, Latimer suffered, but
Shaxton turned not only a Papist, but a persecutour and perswader to Popery.
When William Wolsey Martyr, and some others were brought before him, Ibid. 1558.
Good brethren (said he) remember your selves, and become new men. For I my
self was in this fond opinion that your are now in: but I am now become a new
man, Ah, said Wolsey, are you become a new man? Woe be to thee thou wicked new
man, for God shall justly judge thee. And so he did I doubt not: it being his
usual course to hang up such notorious apostates in gibbets, as it were, for
example to others He that betrayed the Rhodes was well served. For his promised
wife and portion were presented: But the Turk told him, that he would not have
a Christian to be his son-in-law, but he must be a Musulman, that is, a
believing Turk both within and without: And therefore he caused his baptized
skin (as he called it) to be taken off, Speculum belli sacri. p. 157.
and him to be cast in a bed strawed with salt, that he might get a new skin,
and so he should be his son in-law. But the wicked wretch ended his life with
shame and sorrow. Theoderick an Arrian King, did exceedingly affect a certain
Deacon, although an orthodox. This Deacon thinking to ingratiate and get
preferment, became an Arrian, which when the King understood, he changed his
love into hatred, and caused the head to be struck from him, affirming, That if
he kept not his faith to God, what duty could one expect from such a person?
King John of England, being overlaid in his Barons wars, sent Ambassadors to
the Monarch of Morocco for aid, offering to hold his Kingdom of him, Heyl Geo
p. 714
and to receive the law of Mahomet. The Moor marvellously offended with this
offer, grew into such dislike of our King, that ever after he abhorred the
mention of him. Solomon the great Turk, seeing a company of many thousand
Christians fall down before him, and hold up the sore-finger (as their manner
of conversion to Turcisme is) he asked them, Voi^ge into the Levant. p 111.
What moved them to turn? They replied, It was to be eased of their heavy
taxations. He disdaining that baseness, rejected their conversion, and doubled
their taxations. The form they use when they turn Turks is this: I confess
that there is but one God only, Melch Adam. in vit Gerla^hij.
and Mahomet his servant. I confess also that I am come from the false to the
true religion, and I utterly renounce my former faith, together with all the
adherent Articles. After this, they are circumcised, and do put on a new
turbant, as a badge of a Musulman or right believer. We read of two Dutchmen
(the one a Divine, the other a Baker) that became Mahometans not many years
since, upon what discontent, or other motive, I know not. Ibid p. 816.
The Ministers name was Adam Neusserus, once a Pastor of Heidelberg, who fell
off first to Arrianisme, and then to Tureisme. He died miserably at
Constantinople, October. 12. Anno 1576 (much in the same manner, as Arminius did
at Leyden, who was grievously tormented with a cough, gout, ague, and incessant
pain in his belly, Hist. of Low Country.
with a great binding and stopping under the heart, which caused much
difficulty of breathing. He slept also very unquietly, and could not digest his
meat, etc.) But to return from whence I am digressed; This Neusser when he came
to die, was thus comforted by the Baker abovesaid, and other his friends, Be
of good cheer, brother, we shall meet again in Paradise, where we will drink
with you, and take large carouses. As for the Dutch Baker that turned Turk, his
name was John Ferber once of Backnang in the Duchy of W^rtemberg: and when the
Emperor of Germany his Ambassadors came to Constantinople with presents of
Sultan Selymus, as they entered the Turks palace, amidst many thousand Turks,
one of the multitude cried out in the Dutch tongue, Melch. Adam. ubi supra.
Of what religion are you? Which is the first question in the Dutch Catechism.
The Ambassadors wondered at the words, and found out afterward who it was:
and that by those words he j^ared and derided the Christian religion. So did
not the King of Morocco abovementioned: for talking with King John's
Ambassadors he told them, that he had lately read Paul's epistles, which he
liked so well, That were he now to choose his religion, he would, Heyl. Geo p.
714.
before another, embrace Christianity. But every one, says he, ought to die in
his own religion: and the leaving of the faith, wherein he was borne, was the
only thing that he disliked in that Apostle. This was his Heathenish conceit of
that elect vessel, who himself counted it a singular mercy, and worthy of all
thanks, that he had grace to change his religion, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.
I was a blasphemer, says he, a persecutour and injurious: but I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly: for else it had been the unpardonable sin,
as Ferbers sin might well be. Bishop Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward,
tells of one who fell away from the known truth, and after fell to mocking and
scorning it: yet in the end he was touched in conscience for it. 2 Cor. 13.8.
Beware of this sin, says he, for I have known no more but this that
repented. What evil soever we do, we can do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth, says S. Paul for himself, and all true Christians. But
apostates become altogether filthy, Psalm. 53.3. None being worse then those
that have been good, and are naught: and might be good, Ezekiel. 24 13.
and yet will be naught. In their filthiness is lewdness, their scum boils
into them: It is with them, as in that case, Levit. 13.18, 19, 20. If a man had
a bile healed, and after brake out, it proved the plague of leprosy, he was
utterly to be excluded. These judge themselves unworthy eternal life, unfit
for Gods Kingdom, Luke 9.63. they cast themselves into hell-mouth, Heb. 10.39.
where they are like to have the greater measure of torment, by how much they
are fallen from greater hopes and likelihoods of heaven: as Adam, the more
holiness and happiness he had, the greater was his sin and misery upon his
fall.

But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, though we thus speak, says the Author to the Hebrews, Heb 6 9.
Heb. 3 12. Heb. 4 12. Heb 5.4.
after he had both bidden them beware of Apostasy, and chidden them for their
non-proficiency, and to awaken them out of their lethargy, had set before them
the cursed condition of such as commit the unpardonable sin, which begins in
apostasy, goes on in persecution, and ends in blasphemy. Deuteronomy. 32 5
But this spot is not the spot of Gods children, as Moses has it. Fall they
may fearfully, but not finally, they cannot possibly fall so low, but Gods holy
hand is still lower under them, Ioh. 10. Ioh. 17.12.
to raise them up again. None can take them out of the Fathers hand: the Son
loses none of those that were given him by the Father, but the son of
perdition, who was never of his body, though he seemed to be, by reason of his
office: And the holy Ghost the Comforter abides with his for ever. He is called
an earnest, not a pawn. Joh. 16.14.
A pawn is to be returned again, but an earnest is part and pledge of the whole
bargain. The Papists teach a total and final falling from grace. The
Lutherans are forced to grant a total (though they deny a final) lest they
should be brought utterly to abjure that error that they hold in common with
the Papists concerning the efficaciousnesse of the Sacraments. Bertius* the
Arminian sets forth a book with this horrid title, De Apostasia Sanctorum, and
was therefore called by King James, bloody Bertius. They deny that the truly
regenerate are certainly of the number of Gods elect, since there is not (say
they) so vast a gulf betwixt the regenerate and reprobate, Lege D. Prideaux
Lect. p. 191.
but that they may pass over the one to the other, so that reprobates may
become regenerate, and believers unbelievers; for a time at least. An uncouth
and uncomfortable doctrine. Bellarmine says, That which is true grace,
veritate essentiae only, may be lost, not that grace which is true, veritate
firmae soliditatis. If by the former he understand common grace, by the later,
special grace, we are of the same judgment.

1. Common grace may come to nothing, whether it be such as fits a man for some
particular calling only, as in Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14. And those idle shepherds who
lost their gifts, Zech. 11.17. Or such as fits him for a common profession of
religion only; A form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. and a form of godliness 2 Timothy
3.5. wherein a man may go far, doubtless, as Judas, Demas; do much for
God, as the stony ground; suffer much, and not shrink in the wetting, as the
thorny ground; have a counterfeit of all saving graces, as the sorcerers of
Egypt had of Moses his miracles; be a ringleader of all good exercises, as
Joash was the first that complained of the negligence of his best Officers, in
not repairing the Temple, etc. 2 Chronicles. 24.4, 5, 6.
and yet be nothing in truth, and come to nothing at length, Heb. 6.6, 7. 2
Pet. 2.20.

2. Special saving graces proper to the elect: and these are either radical,
original, fundamental, serving to the being of a Christian, as faith, hope,
charity; or secondary, flowing from these, and serving to his well-being only,
as joy of faith, confidence of hope, zeal and fervor of love. These are, as it
were, the luster, shine and radiancy of the radical; the beams of the Sun,
as those the body of the Sun; the leaves of the tree, as those the sap and
substance; the back of steel that may be put on or taken off the bow, Levit.
6.11, 13. Prove. 31.18.
etc. The later we may lose, and perhaps irrecoverably, Psalm. 51.12. Not so the
former: for like the fire of the Sanctuary, and the good house-wifes candle, it
never goes out. But though the reins be consumed, yet the root of the matter
remains in Gods people, Job 19.27, 28. A partial decay there may be even in
fundamental graces, and that both inward (in the judgment, as the Galatians,
and affections, as the Ephesians, Revel. 2.4.) and also outward, the acts of
grace may be remitted, the exercise abated, as an angry man for the time
exercises not reason, Happy is he that can say in a spiritual sense, as it
was said of Moses, that after long profession of religion, his sight is not
waxed dim, nor his heat ^bated. Psalm 5 1.
nor a sleeping man motion. Yea it is a disputable question (says one) whether
any Christian (except he die soon after his conversion) do go steadfastly on
from strength to strength, without some sensible decay of the inward power of
the graces wherewith he is endued. Some good souls have so far declined, as
Solomon, Samson, Asa, others, that it might be said of them, as Jacob said of
Joseph, He is dead, some evil beast has devoured him. David fell from the
upper loft as Eutychus, and brake his bones. Jonas ran as far from God, as he
could by land, and then took sea, etc. After this, he fell to justify his
former frowardness, and yet no cast-a-way. Solomon was prodigal of his
spiritual portion, and spent well nigh all: He eat up the zeal of Gods house,
that had once eaten him up: And he that had built a Temple to the living God
for himself and Israel in Sion, built a Temple to Chemosh, in the mount of
scandal, for his mistresses of Moab, in the very face of Gods house: For this,
Bellarmine ranks and reckons him among reprobates, but very uncharitably. For,
what if the water ebb, the babe not spring in the womb, the Sun be eclipsed,
the tree withered in winter? What if Israel fly once or twice before the
enemy? Shall they never return, recover, prevail, conquer? Is there not life in
the root, A blessing in the branches, Isa. 65.8? Is not Vzzah a King still,
though a leper? And may not Nebuchadnezzar return to his Kingdom? If once we
be a royal generation, our leprosies may deform us, not dethrone us. Still we
shall have the right, and, at length, the possession of that glorious Kingdom,
wherein we were invested from eternity. Sampson fell so far, and (twenty
years after he loved the Philistim-woman, Judges 15.20. when certainly he had
repented of that sin) he returned to Gaza, and went in to a harlot, that we
should hardly take him for a godly man, did we not find his name in the list
of those Worthies, Heb. 11. But, like a tame Hawke, though he flew f^r^e, yet
he came to hand again. So will all that belong to God: recover they shall of
their relapses, though with difficulty, yet sometimes with advantage: As a bone
well knit, after breaking, as a passenger makes more haste after wandering.
Mark 16.11.
They may be as dear to Christ afterward as ever. Go tell my Disciples and
Peter: He must know with the first, that his Lord was risen, notwithstanding
his shameful denial of him. Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, etc.
says Christ to his Spouse, Cant. 6.4 with Chap 4.1, etc.
after she had backslidden and recovered: as amiable she was in his eyes in
every point, as she had been before her fall: her hair, teeth, Mal. 2.16.
^emples, as fair and well featured as ever. He hates put^ing away, having
married his Hephtsibah to him in faithfulness. He sends for us by his Spirit
in our out-straies, Cant. 5.2.
and looks us up again, as is sweetly set forth in the Parable of the lost
groat, the lost sheep, the lost son. He knows that at our worst we are not
forsakers of the Covenant, Dan. 11.30. Wicked doers, verse 32. Withdrawers to
destruction, Heb. 10. ult. They sleep but their heart waketh that belong to
God, they slumber with the wise Virgins, but yet their lamps are burning: The
spiritual life runn^s to the heart, and leaves the outward man destitute; yet,
as there are some pulses that discover life in the sickest: so is it here.
These two never fail on Gods part, his love which is unchangeable, and his
grace a fruit of his love. And two on our part, See D Sibb^ on Cant. 5.2.
the impression of that love, and the gracious work of the new creature.
Christ never dies in his people, no more then he does, or can do at the right
hand of his Father. He has both praid and procured that our faith fail not.
Mat. 24 24.
Impostours shall deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. Possible it is
respectu rei, non respectu Dei. Grace in it self is losable, 1 Pet. 1.5.
but we are kept by the (...) of God through faith unto salvation, says Saint
Peter out of his own experience. And his counsel afterward is very good. Ye
therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye, being
also led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness:
But grow in grave, etc. 2 Pet 3.17.


Preservatives from Apostasy 2 Timothy 3.13. Col. 2 4. Revel. 9 8. Romans 16.13.
Anno 1539.
By their pithanology and pretended humility, Colos. 2^.18. these locusts, with
their women's faces, insinuate and deceive the hearts of the simple. Thus.
Jacobus Sadoletus (a man of strict life and excellent learning) wrote most
eloquent and persuasive letters, Desideratissimis suis (as he calls them) To
his most affectionately desired friends, the Senators and Commoners of Geneva:
wherein he left nothing unsaid, Calv. Opusc. Pithanologiae nunquam desunt
pseudotheologi^. Bucholc. Sozom l. 2. cap 6, 7.
whereby he might allure them to return again into the bosom of that Whore of
Rome. The like art was used, whiles there was any hope, to the late famous
Queen Elizabeth. Placilla the Empress, when Theodosius senior desired to
confer with Eunonius, dissuaded her husband very earnestly: lest being
perverted by his speeches, he might fall into heresy.

(...) opponitur (...) Heb. 10.36. Gallorum Insu brium ut primus impetus major
est quam vi. roru^, ita sequens minor, quam faeminaru^. Charles the 9 came into
the field like thunder and lightning, but went out like a snuff. Guicciard.
Exodus 19 Prove. 4.18. Psalm. 19.5
when it comes to suffering especially, but will leap out of the sire, as a
Chestnut that has not been crack at the top: And as the stony ground, the seed
straightway started up, and as soon withered, because not well rooted. The good
ground is noted to bring forth fruit with patience, or tarriance for the fit
season. Leap-Christians are not much to be liked, that all on the sudden, of
notorious profane become extremely precise and scrupulous. Violent motions are
not permanent. Aguish fits breed slushings: blazing comets soonest fall, hasty
curs bite least, heady horses quickly tire, Hot at hand seldom holds out. That
trumpets sound in the mount was louder and louder; the wind (whereto true
grace is compared, Joh. 3.) rises higher and higher: The path of the just is
as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Not like
Joshuah's (...) ^t stood still, or Heaekiahs Sun that went backward, but David's
Sun that rejoices as a Giant to run his race, and turns not again till he
has finished it. The Galatians did run well but were interrupted: The
Ephesians lest their first love: The Philippians decaid in their good will to
S. Paul, though afterward their care of him flourished again, Phil. 4.10. The
Corinthians mingled themselves again with fornicatours, after they had been
washed from their filthiness. (...). 1 Cor. 5.^. (...), Rursus commisceri post
ablutionem. Significat non ^amscortationibus so polluere, quam polluti^
conversari familiarius. Par. in loc. Act. and Mon. fol. 1680. Col. 2.6.
Mr Bartlet Green Martyr, was converted by Peter Martyrs Lectures in Oxford.
Afterward, being sent to the Innes of Court, through the continual
accompanying of such worldly young Gentlemen, he became by little and little a
compartner of their fond follies and youthful vanities, as well in his
apparel, as also in banqueting and other superfluous excesses: which he
afterward, being again called by Gods merciful correction, did sore lament
and bewail; and being founded on a rock, as he had at first received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so he walked in him, and suffered for him.

Act. and Mon. fol. 1430. Ibid. 1438.
through good report and evil report, resolving (with William Flower Martyr)
That the heavens shall as soon fall, as I will for sake my profession, or budge
in the least degree? And can I say as that other Martyr John Ardely did to
Bonner, If every hair of my head were a man, I would suffer death in the
opinion and faith that I am now in? Many will profess to do much for Christ,
but nothing it is that they will suffer for him: they come forth as those
soldiers with lights and torches to seek him, yea with bills and staves, as if
they would fight for him. But when he says, Pelago se non ita commissuru^
esset, quin, qua^do liberet, pede^ refer posset. In the Palatinate scarce one
in twenty stood out, but fell to Popery, as fast as leaves fall in Autumn.
as to them, Here I am, Take up my cross and follow me, they stumble at the
cross, and fall backwards. The King of Navarre told Beza, He would launch no
further into the sea, then he might be sure to return safe to the haven: Though
he showed some countenance to religion, yet he would be sure to save himself.
Again, Many in their low estate could pray, profess, read, etc. who in
prosperity resemble the Moon, which never suffers eclipse, but at her full, and
that by earths interposition. Jonathan followed the chase, and Samson his
parents, till they met with honey. A dog follows his master, till he comes by
carrion. So many a Demas, Judas, Diotrephes, follows Christ close till taken
off by the world; the love whereof eats out the heart of grace, as adventitious
heat consumes the natural; as Pharaohs lean kine devoured the fatter. Tit 2 12.
Deny therefore all ungodliness and worldly lusts, thou that desire to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.

Stand thou by faith? And would thou stand? Romans 11.10.
Be not high-minded, but fear. Pride goes before a fall, as it did in the
apostate Angels, in that Man of sin, and in those Illuminati, Relat. of West.
Relig.
a pestilent sect in Arragon; who affecting in themselves and their followers a
certain angelical purity, fell suddenly to the very counterpoint of justifying
bestiality. Apostasy takes root most an end in spiritual pride; which, like a
drone in the hive, or moth in fine cloth, is a great waster. All graces tend to
humbling, and humility is conservatrix virtutum, says Bernard, that which
keeps all the graces together: It is also both a grace, and a vessel to
receive more grace, (...), of (...). Inn^datam ha beat.
For God gives grace to the humble. Be ye therefore clothed with humility,
says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 5.5. The word there used comes of a primitive that
signifies a Knot, because humility ties the knot of the chain of graces, that
none of them be lost; as pearls or beads are easily lost, where the bracelet is
broken. Gods gifts in a proud heart (which makes men secure, uncharitable,
idle) sigh under our abuse, and God hearing them groan, gives them the wings of
an eagle.

Zachary, Blessed be God, for I am rich, but advance forward toward the high
price, as Paul did, Phil. 3. And Nil actum credens dum quid superesset agendum,
as Caesar, who thought there was nothing yet done, till all was done.
Beginnings are not sought for of Christians, says S. Hierome, but ends of
things: And it is a rule in the civil Law, Nothing seems to be done, if there
yet remain ought to be done. For that which is but almost done, is not done at
all, says Basil. And not to go forward, is to go backward, says Bernard. It
had been good for Judas never to have been an Apostle, and for Julian never to
have been a Christian; because to begin well, and not to hold on, Genesis 37.3.
is but to clime up higher, that he may fall the farther. Let our ladder
therefore reach to heaven, as Jacobs did: let our garments reach down to our
feet, as Joseph's did: let us offer a whole burnt-offering with the very tail
also, Exodus 29.22. Let the fire from heaven never go out upon the hearth of our
hearts, as that fire of the Sanctuary, Levit. 6 12. Let us not look back with
Lots wife, nor turn again when we go forward, as those living creatures did
not, Ezekiel 1.12. 1 Samuel 6.12.
but as the Philistims kine that drew the Ark in a new Cart (though milch kine,
and had calves at home, yet) they held on their way, lowing till they came to
Bethshemesh: so let us amidst so many avocations and discouragements hold on
our way to heaven, Jer. 50 4. 2 Pet. 2.20. Rev. 3.14.
going and weeping with our faces thither-ward. The dog to his vomit, and the
sow to her mire, are Canonical Proverbs, such as should make a Christian spew
to think on them. God will spew out all that do not so, as he did the
Laodiceans, who said they were rich and wanted nothing. They had false weights
of their own, and therefore were grievously cheated with light gold. Whereas S.
Paul, who was a fair deal better then the best of them, was still striving and
straining after more, and is therefore called by S. (...).
Chrysostom, Insatiabilis Dei cultor, a greedy insatiable worshipper of God.
Forgetting what is behind, says he, and reaching forth (as runners do) unto
those things that are before, I press toward the mark, I pursue or persecute
it (the word signifies) with eagerness of affection: I follow it as one that
will not leave, till I have that which I follow; but if I fall, I will up again
and to it, and not give over: no more then when I was a persecutour I did, till
I had him, whom I persecuted. Thus S. Paul; and he subjoyneth, Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. (...). Xenop. (...).
As who should say, Seem we to our selves or others never so perfect, or be we
never so perfect in comparison of others, yet let us be thus minded, to strive
to further perfection. And a little after, Brethren, be followers together of
me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example. For our
conversation is in heaven etc. Ever after he had been caught up thither, and
heard things unspeakable, he became unsatisfiable, till he gat thither again.
So was Moses after he had been in the Mount, and received the Law. He no sooner
was come down thence, but he was at it, Exodus 33.13. Show me thy way that ^ I
may know thee. God grants him that request: Is he satisfied? No: he must have
more yet. God must go along with the people. Well, I will do this thing also
that thou have spoken, says God, verse. 16, 17. Is he content? No: for he said,
verse. 17. I beseech thee show me thy glory. God shows it him: Is he well yet?
No: God must pardon the sin of his people too, and take them and him for his
inheritance, Chap. 34.9. Add this fruit of his favor to the rest, and then
Moses has done, for present at least. The covetous is not so greedy of gain,
as the godly of grace. He always cries, Give, give, and never has enough. Si
dixisti, susficit, periisti, Aug.
If once thou say, It is enough, thou art undone, if thou cease to go
forward, thou beginnest to go backward, etc.

Arrogance.
DANIEL 4.30. The King spoke and said; Is not this great Babylon that I have
built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of may majesty?


HIc plura absurda quam verba. Here are not so many words as absurdities,
Car^w. hist. Christ.
as one well observed of Peter's speech to our Savior in the transfiguration,
Master, It is good for us to be here: Let us build, etc. Luke 9.33. So here.
The King spoke and said: He for whom God had done so much, giving him so large
an Empire, and adding to him the Kingdom of Egypt, as his pay for his pains
at Tire. He, who in the year of his triumph had this vision of his downfall,
and had heard from heaven, Hew down the tree, yet leave the stump. He had left
the poor captive Jews a stump, a kingly seed; and has therefore a stump left
him, and is reserved for a kingly state again. He that had heard, that he
should shortly be bound with a band of iron and brass, as a mad man, and
turned a grazing among beasts for seven years together, till he should know
that the heavens do rule, Ste^ inter gramina, tanquam vinctus catenis Lyra.
and not (as the Poet has it) Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus. He that
had such sweet and savoury counsel given him by Daniel, (who was a fair deal
worse troubled for him then He was for himself, verse. 19.) Break off thy sins
by righteousness. etc. Be as abrupt in thy repentance as thou have been
corrupt in thy courses, If it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. That
[If] imports not so much a doubt as a difficulty, in regard of the greatness
of his sin. Notwithstanding which, God, of his goodness, gave him time to
repent. Now that He (a full twelve month after all this) should walk in his
palace, and thus talk to himself, who can but wonder? Is not this great Babylon
that I have built? Herod. l. 1.
A great City it was indeed, and built four square (as Herodotus describes it)
but Nimrod and Ninus built it: Nebuchadnezzar only enlarged it, Videsis Joseph
Antiq Iud. l. 16 c. 11.
and built the palace entirely. Yet such is this man's arrogance, he knows no
other founder. Wherein he first robs God: for it is he that builds the house,
and without whom they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1. Next he wrongs
his Ancestors the first founders. Thirdly, he considers not, how he had wasted
and wearied the bodies and goods of his poor subjects: This made the people in
Rehoboams time cry to him, Allevajugum, Allevajugum, Ease thou the yoke put
upon us, by thy father Solomon, when he built his own house, and the house of
God. Fourthly, he proclaims his pride in opposing his City to Gods city, and
making it his heaven, as it were: saying in effect, what God can cast me out of
it? Whereas that City was afterward taken by Cyrus, Alexander, and others. As
likewise Rome (that mystical Babylon) which, Heyl. Geog.
since it became the nest of Antichrist, was never besieged by any but it was
surprised; yet, Great means breed great minds, 2 Chro. 38.31. Dio in Tiberio.
Euripides. Whatev^r God gives to any, his glory he will not give, When Satan
came once to look after divine honor, Christ puts him off with a short answer,
Avoid Satan. M. Pemble of Pers Monar. 63.
says she in her heart, I sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow, Revel. 18.7.
Lastly, As he arrogates to himself the kingdom (till he had licked of the
whip, and learned better language, verse. 37.) so now, the power and the glory
too, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty. God is not in
all his thoughts. He sacrifices to himself, as Sejanus did; and (
Polyphemus-like) sets up himself for the sole doer. Whereas God, as he is the
first author and owner of all; so, to him, as to the utmost end of all, they
ought all to return, Quasi circulo quodam confecto, and as the rivers do to
the sea whence they had their beginning, See Romans 11.36. Since of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to him alone be glory for ever. His
glory he will not give to any other, Isa. 42.8. what ever he part with, none
shall share with him in that. It is his jewel, his darling, his own eye, his
wife (with reverence to his Majesty be it spoken) And as Abner might not see
David's face unless he brought him his wife Michal, so neither may any stand
before God, that bereave him of his glory. He comes down from heaven (as it
were) and fights hand to hand with a proud person in single combat, the whole
world beholding. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Surely God resists the proud, says Peter. He sets himself in battle-array
against them (as the original has it) as he did against Pharaoh, Herod, and
this Nebuchadnezzar, (...)
whose mind was hardened in pride (that hate of heaven, and gate to hell) as
the Prophet tells his son, Dan. 5.20. therefore, besides the brutish change of
his mind; his body was much changed in seeding and living among wild beasts:
It was not only a frenzy (as Ericus King of Swethland, being expeld his
Kingdom, for grief, Willet on Dan. Turk h^st.
fell mad: or as Bajazet taken by Tamberlane, and Boniface the 8th by Charles
of Burbon, bit and tare themselves for grief and vexation) but he was banished
from the society of men, by the just judgment of God. And so lying in the wet
and cold among beasts, his garments rotted, his hair grew hard, his nails long,
etc. his man's shape remaining, his humane soul was changed to be brutish: his
body also misshapen and deformed, not transformed, as Dr Willet has it in his
Hexapha upon Daniel, Willet on Daniel. fol. 137.
where you may read of diverse like examples. Surely the Lord of hosts has
purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all
the honorable of the earth, Isa. 23.8. Isa. 2.11, 1^. Eras. Apopht^. Herod
affecting to be a lousie god, was eaten up of worms. Pemble. Don Mendoza,
printed a lying poem in France of a triumph before the victory. Camd Elizab.
fol. ^71. The Spaniards in the pride of their Monarchy are grown also now to
swear by the life of their King. Sands Relat. 18 Breerw. Enqui. p 50. Heyl Geog
p. 30 Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. The lofty
looks of man shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
So says Isaiah: nay, so says Esop; who being asked, what God did in heaven?
He pulls down the proud, said he, and lifts up the lowly: this is his work
and business. He bears an aching tooth, a special spleen (as I may say so) to
this sin of Arrogance. His heart hates it, Prove. 6.16, 17. His mouth curses
it, Psalm. 119.21. and his hand plagueth it, as he did Herod among others. The
people had fly-blown him with their flatteries. This swells him; and, for his
pride, God turns those worms upon him to devour him: as he did the lice, upon
that proud King of Spain, that set forth the invincible Armado (as they vainly
called it) against England. The Spaniards are generally noted for an insolent
people; and their ambition has been, to settle their Catholic Monarchy over
all Christendom; but God has hitherto crossed it, and, we trust, will do.
Their language they call Romance (as if it were pure latin) and themselves the
right Hidalgoes, as if they were the only Gentlemen. So the Turks will needs be
thought the only Musulmans or true believers, as Papists the only Catholics
(the Donatists affected the same title) Gnostics the only knowing men,
Anabaptists the only spiritual persons, Jesuits the only scholars, Imperium
literarum est penes Iesuitas, Casau. ex Apologista. Relat. of West. Relig.
Politicians and Orators of the world. They vaunt that the Church, is the soul
of the world, the Clergy of the Church and they of the Clergy: that a Jesuit
cannot possibly be an heretic; but that as the devil set up Luther (that
Arch-heretike) so God sent forth them to oppose him. The Chinese would
persuade us, That they only see with two eyes, and all other Nations but with
one. These proud Jesuits would have us believe the like of them. Heyl Geog 662
And as it is reported of the great Cham of Tartary, that he reputes himself
the Monarch of the whole world, and that therefore every day, as soon as he
has dined, he causes his trumpets to be sounded, by that sign giving leave to
other Princes of the earth to go to dinner: So would these Jesuits be held the
only Worthies, their main endeavor being to subject all to the Pope, and the
Pope to themselves. Code of the Church, p. 114.
Their faction (says one) is a most agile sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed
at pleasure, in the bowels of every Commonwealth, but the handle reaches to
Rome and Spain. So that the very life, death and fortunes of all Kings and
Commonwealths hang upon the horoscopes of the Jesuits pleasure. If the
Jesuits be as lucky stars in the ascendent and culminant, they may live,
continue and flourish: if malevolent, they perish, but that Deus dominabitur
astris. Now may it not well be said to these croaking frogs and encroaching
locusts of Rome, Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi? They teach, That
the state ecclesiastical is so far more excellent then the civil, as the Sun
then the Moon, even in temporal pomp and power: and that therefore the chief
of their Clergy is as far above the mightiest Emperor, as the Sun above the
Moon. And as the Sun borrows her light of the Moon, so does the Emperor, his
State and power from the Pope. Is not this that Man of sin, (...).
that exalts himself above all that is called Augustus, or above all Kings and
Emperors? trampling upon their necks, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
forcing them to hold his stirrup, to dance attendance at his gate, etc.
kicking off their crowns, and crowning them again with his feet, Act. and Mon.
as Pandulphus the Popes Legate did King John of England? As for King Henry the
second of this land, he was forced by the Pope to kneel and pray to Beckets
shrine, whom he had disgraced in his person, and having had him above his will
(says the Chronicler) whiles he lived, has him now over his faith, being
dead. Going to Canterbury to visit the sepulcher of his own Martyr, Dan hist.
fol. 99, 10^.
he went three miles on his bare feet, which with hard stones were forced to
yield bloody tokens of his devotion on the way. And which was most shameful of
all, though he protested to the very last, That he neither commanded nor
willed, nor by any slight sought the death of Becket, yet by the Legate he was
compelled to undergo the discipline of rods upon his bare flesh, and to receive
of every Priest there present (and there were not a few) three or four lashes
upon the bare: one of the Ambassadors saying the while, Domine noli minari.
Sir, you may spare your threats, Revius de vitis Pontif. Rom p 140. Gabriel
Powell of the unlawfulness of Toleration p 92.
for we fear them not; as being of such a Court, as is wont to bear rule over
Kings and Emperors. In like sort the Pope, within the memory of many yet
alive, lashed Henry the fourth of France (in the person of his Ambassador at
Rome) after the singing of every verse of Miserere the 51. Psalm, until the
whole Psalm was sung out. Clemens the fifth would not absolve the Venetians of
their Excommunication, till Francis Dandalus their Ambassador had lain, Revius
p. 198.
like a dog at his feet under his table, with a chain of iron about his neck.
Neither would Pope Martin the fourth absolve the Sicilians, till they came and
prostrated themselves before him, with these words of the Letany, Ibid. 187.
O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, Grant us thy peace. The
Pope answers, My peace I give you, my peace I leave unto you. Prodigious
blasphemy! Sed exorto Evangelij jubare, sagaciores (ut spero) principes, ad
nutum vestri Orbilij non solvent subligacula, says a reverend Divine of our
Church. They tell us, D. Pri leaux contra Eudaem. Ioh. p. 75.
That not their Popes only, but their whole Clergy is a state so distinct and
absolute, as not any way subject to the temporal Magistrate, though their
crimes be never so many or monstrous. These be the Locusts that have no King,
Prove. 30.27. they will have none, but that Angel of the bottomless pit,
Abaddon the Pope, Revel. 9.11. Pareus in Apoc 13.3. In concillo Lateranen^i
ultimo 15^6. uno anno antequam Lutherus e^ersit plenaria potestas in totam
Ecclesiam Papae concessa est, que in nullo prius concilio fuit confirmata. Par,
hist. eccles p. ^81.
who styles himself A servant of servants, yet stamps on his coin, That Nation
and country that will not serve thee shall be rooted out. The Lateran Council
blasphemously ascribed that to the Pope, All power is given to thee both in
heaven and in earth: thou art all, and over all. And now was the Pope in the
height of his pride, and ruff of his jollity, when suddenly (the same or the
next year after) God, who resists the proud, raised up Luther to cut his
comb, and to call him Antichrist. Ever since which, there has been a sensible
decay of the Papacy thorowout the Christian world, as Bellarmine with grief
acknowledges. Ab eo tempore quo per vos Papa Antichristus esse coepit, non
modo, non crevit ejus imperium, sed magis ac magis decrevit, l. 3. de Papa, cap
21. ^ Thessalonians. ^, Iac. R. v p ^9.
It was but time God should take him down, that exalted himself not only above
Angels, whom (says John the 23. in extravag.) he has power to excommunicate,
but also above all that is called God. Our Lord God the Pope, says one of his
Parasites. Tu merito in terris diceris esse Deus, says another. Nicolas the
first said, That he was not to be called to an account by any one, because
Constantine had called the Pope by the name of God. For the which gross
fiction, the very Gloss there derideth him. And who can hold laughing at that
ridiculous gloss of a Popish Postiller upon that text, Exodus 30.31? Where,
because it is said of the holy oil, Upon man's flesh it shall not be poured,
Risum teneatis amici? Horat.
Thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons, etc. therehence He infers in an
hyperbolicall sense, That Priests are Angels, not having humane flesh. It is
not for nothing (I trow) that they send, for the most part, all their Clergy
immediately to heaven without let. Romans 2.20 (...). C^tero^ homines pro
insantibus ^a^ebat B^^on Anna ^o^ ^. (...) oppellare (...) tus e^b. Epist. 10.
and ep. 1.
Whereas all the temporalty (except Martyrs) must pass by purgatory. These
they look aloof on; as the proud Pharisee did on the Publican, as Caiaphas did
on the Council, Ye know nothing at all, says he, Joh. 11.49. Ye are all but
babies to me, etc. or as those Bragadochio's in Isaiah looked on their betters,
with Stand by thy self, for I am holier then thou. Odi fastum illius ecclesiae,
I hate the pride of that Church of Rome (says Basil) that Western brow (as he
was wont to call it, and) whereof he makes great complain to his friend
Evagrius. The other four Patriaches (and with them the whole Eastern Church)
separated themselves from the Bishop of Rome for his intolerable insolency:
and, at their parting, used these or the like words, D. Field of the Church,
Gerson, Carleton, etc.
Thy haughtiness we know, thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, thy
encroaching we can no longer abide, live to thy self, etc. This proud Bishop
had stretched himself beyond his line, prized himself above the market, set up
his counter for a thousand pound; (...) significat Aemulum seu vicarium
Christi^ Significat etiam Christo contrarium. Iac. Revius de vitis ^^ntif. p
186.
affecting not a primacy only, as successor to Peter, but a supremacy, as
Vicar to Christ: indeed an Antichrist or counter-Christ, pretending to be in
stead of Christ, but fighting against Christ, denying and opposing him in all
his offices. Pope Leo the first blasphemously boasted (and Nicolas the third
feared not to affirm the same: That Peter was taken into fellowship with the
blessed Trinity, therefore Peter's successor must be Universal Bishop. This
the Patriarch of Constantinople stomacked, and could as little bear a
superior, as the Pope an equal: And therefore the former strives to bring all
the East under him, the later, East and West too. His claw-back Canonists tell
him (and he believes it) that he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: that he
has the power of both swords thorowout the whole world, and rule over all
reasonable creatures: that he can do whatsoever Christ can do, etc. Now,
Moscon de majest. militant Eccles l. ^ c. 1. Hostiens. cap. 4. Fran. Zabar.
as every little wind raises a bubble, so does the Pope value himself so much
the more, as he sees himself higher in the rate of others opinions. Philip the
Fair (King of France) dealt plainly with him (which few others durst do) Anno
1294. For, when Pope Boniface wrote thus to him, in an imperious manner, We
would have thee to know, that thou art subject to us in temporals and
spirituals, etc. He stoutly denied it, beginning his letter, with, Sciat tua
maxima Fatuitas. Be it known to your Foolishness (in stead of Holiness) and
appealed to the Sea Apostolic, then (as he said) vacant, and to the future
Council. Volumus te scire etc. Alsted. Chronolog p. 355.
Self-love makes men unreasonable, and teaches them to turn the glass to see
themselves bigger, others lesser then they are. I am, and there is none besides
me, says Niniveh. I will ascend into heaven, and set my nest above the stars,
says Babylon. Zeph. 2.15. Isa. 14 13.


My roof receives me not, it is air I tread:
At every step I feel my advanced head
Knock out a star in heaven -- says Sejanus.
Attilas King of Hunnes, arrogantly vaunted, Neand. Chronic.
That the stars fell before him, the earth trembled at his presence, etc. Who
has not heard of the swelling titles of the great Cham, of the great Turk, of
diverse Roman Emperors? Eutrop. and alij.
As Diocletian who first commanded divine honors to be done unto him, and held
forth his feet to be kissed: Caligula, who by certain Engines thundered and
lightened, as another Jupiter, Dio in vita.
casting up stones for thunderbolts, and repeating that hemistich in Homer --
(...) Commodus would needs have the twelve months of the year called or
counted by his twelve names or titles; Amazonius, Invictus, Faelix, Pius, etc.
Idem in vita Commodi.
And the time of his reign to be held the golden age, Roderic. Santij hist
Hispan p 4. ^ 5.
and so styled in all dates and writings. And Alphonso the Wise (the fool
rather) King of Spain blasphemously said, That if he had been of the council at
the Creation, he could have made and ordered some thing better then they were.
I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and will be like the most high,
says the King of Babel, Isa. 14.14. It may seem strange that such proud
thoughts should enter into any man's heart. But by nature thre's never a better
of us. As in water face answers to face, so does the heart of a man to a man.
The natural heart is nothing else but a lump of proud flesh. That old leven of
corruption has soured and swelled the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.7. The Greek word
for pride signifies swelth. (...).
For pride is like a great swelling in the body, which unfits it for any good
service, and is apt to putrify, break and run, with loathsome and foul matter:
So does pride disable the soul from doing duty, and at last breaks into odious
words and deeds, abominable to God and men. Now if this be not thy case, bless
God for his restraining and sanctifying spirit; lift up many an humble, joyful
and thankful heart to him who made thee to differ. Greevinchovius. Sesostri^
in terris a se devictis columnis inscripsit (...), Herod. l 2.1 Tim 3. Sed
velut imm^mor qua via inde exciderit, illu^ postea redire non potuit.
Say not as that arrogant Arminian did in answer to the Apostles question, Who
made thee to differ? Ego meipsum discerno, I my self have made the difference.
Or as that proud heretic said to God, Non habeo Domine quodignoscas, I have
done nothing wherefore to crave pardon. If we had no more sins to answer for,
then this one of pride, we could not escape the damnation of hell. St Paul
advises young Students in Divinity, not to be high-minded, lest they fall into
the condemnation of the devil. It was pride that turned him out of heaven.
Pride (says Hugo) was born in heaven: but forgetting by what way she fell
thence, she could never find her way thither again. Only ever since, it looks
and aims at the highest. The first man would know as God; the Babel-builders
would dwell as God. And as our first parents in the beginning did learn that
proud lesson of the devil, M. Perkins.
Ye shall be as gods, so we, being in their loins when they sinned (says a
reverend Divine) and descending from them by ordinary generation, do, together
with our nature, receive that corruption from them, whereby we think thus
proudly of our selves, that we far excel others, and are as little gods on
earth, in respect of others. Man's heart is a palace of satanicall pride. Sic
Sesostris Aegyp^^ Rex, tempore Samsonis (...), Deus cognominatus, Phar^^^
^urru^ regum cervicibus egit L. Paul Aemyllus statuae aureae Persei Delphis
dedicatae suam i^p^^i curavit, inquiens Victoribus victos loco decedere par
esse. Plut. in Aemylio. Cusses dicter. of ages.
It is like unto that table of Adonibezek, at which he sat in a chair of
State, and made others, even Kings, to eat meat like dogs under his feet with
their thumbs cut off. Lo such an one is every man by nature: He lifts up
himself, saying, I am the man, and treads his brother under foot, as no body
to him. The Emperor Commodus would needs be styled (...) or the Surpasser, as
if there were None such. The Emperor Adrian oppressed some and slew others
that excelled in any art or faculty; that he might be held the only skillful.
Aristotle is said to have burnt and abolished the books of many ancient
Philosophers whom he excerped, that he might be the more admired. The worlds
eternity, and some other paradoxes he taught, as rather affecting singularity
(says one) then for any soundness of the matter, (...). ins. -- pu^chrum est
digit^ monstrari, and dicier, hic est. (...) Xenophon. In hunc ita quidam
lu^i^: nunc postquam mane^, defunctu^ Valla petivit: Non audet Pluto verba
latina loqui. Jupiter hunc coeli dignatus honor fuisset, Censorem linguae sed
ti^et ipse suae. ^rithem. Joh. Manl. lo^. com. p. 480.
or strength of argument. Such an itch there is in man's corrupt nature after
the applause and admiration of others. This is that Demosthenes, was a sweet
hearing. Themistocles listened to nothing so willingly as to his own
commendation. If others will not commend a man, he will commend himself. Hoc ego
primus vidi, says Zabarell, I was the first that found out this truth. Patres
sic judicant, ego vero sic, says another Singularitan. This is the Fathers
opinion of this point, but I am of another judgment. Laurentius Valla
contemned and carped at Tully, Aristotle, Virgil, and most of the best
Authors, except Quintilian only. And whereas he had found out some things in
Logic, more then the masters of those times, he said openly, Nullam esse
logicam praeter Laurentinam, That his was the only Logic. Yea he doubted not
to affirm, That he found some flaws in the fundamental points of our faith. It
will easily be judged, that this man wanted neighbors. And so, before him, did
those proud boasters, Palaemon, who gave out, Sueton.
That learning was born with him, and would die with him: Epicurus, who would
needs seem first to have found out the truth: whereas in many points he was
more blind then a beetle, Aratus and Eudoxus the Astrologers, Aug de cl^. Dei,
l. 16.
who boast that they had descried and described the whole number of the stars:
Archimedes the Mathematician, who bragged, that he could number the sand in all
the world, habitable and inhabitable: and that if he had but a place to stand
in, off the earth, he could remove the whole body of the earth. Parei hist.
eccles. page 344. (...).
Richardus de Sancto Victore (a Monk of Paris) preferred himself for skill in
divinity, above the Prophets and Apostles. This he had learned of his lord
Lucifer, who teaches his scholars, that which they call depths in divinity,
indeed depths of Satan, whereof to be ignorant is no small commendation, Revel.
2.24. The Gnostics, great students in these depths of the devil, counted and
called themselves, The only knowing men. The Manich^^s besotted with an opinion
of themselves, derived their name of Manna; because they held, That whatsover
they tanght was to be received as food from heaven. Novatus called himself
Moses, and a brother that he had, Aaron. Montanus said he was the Comforter,
and his Pepuza and Tymium (two pelting Parishes in Phrygia) he called
Jerusalem, Eusebius l. 5 ^ 17. At si ex Salvatore esset Ortundas Bez.
as if they had been the only Churches in the world. Elymas the sorcerer had
called himself Bariesus, as if he had been near of kin to Christ, Act. 13.6.
And John O-Neal, Camd. Eliz.
father to the Earl of Tyrone, inscribed himself in all places, I great John
O-Neal, Cousin to Christ, friend to the Queen of England, and foe to all the
world. But though we had known Christ after the flesh (says Paul) yet hence
forth know we him no more. 2 Cor. 5.16. Coloss 4.
Yea, though we had touched him in blood, and been flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone, yet without faith, all that were nothing. It was an honor to
Mark, that he was Barnabas his sisters son: But it is a blemish to Christ's
brethren, that neither did they believe in him, Joh. 5.40.
Joh. 7.5. Indeed how could they, when they sought their own praise only,
according to that, How can ye believe in me, when ye receive honor one of
another? Go up, say they to him, into Judea, that thy disciples also may see
thy works that thou do. For there is no man, etc. Joh. 7 3 4. Thus they
insulted over him, or sought at least to get credit by him. But he would not
gratify them so far. For he might well have said to them, 1 Samuel 17.^8.
as once Eliab did ill to his brother David, I know your pride, and the
naughtiness of your hearts, but it shall not be so. As for the best of his
kindred, He preferred Peter, that lively spark, and James and John, those sons
of thunder, before his own brother James, and before Judas, Simon, and others
of them that were his near kinsmen. For who is my mother? and who are my
brethren, etc? Surely, Mark 3.33.
he that does the will of God, he is my brother and sister and mother. Christ
calls his Church his sister, his spouse, Cant. 5.2. The nearest affinity is
Spouse, and the nearest consanguinity, Sister. And no less good terms he
gives her also after her fall, when once truly humbled, he cass her his Love,
his Dove, his undefiled one, Chap 5.9 For to him will I speak (with special
intimations of my love) even to him that is poor in spirit, and contrite in
heart, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66.2. Though the Lord be high, yet he
respects the lowly: but the proud he knows afar off: their breath is
offensive to his sharp sent, Aug de temp. Humil^a de preximo resp^cit ut
attollati; superba de l^rge cognoscit ut deprimat. Ibid. Humilis est janua
Christus Domin^^^ Qui intrat per hanc januam humiliet se oportet, ut sano
capite intrare conti^gat. Aug in Johan.
they may not come near him. Whereupon excellently St Austin, Videt^ magnum
miraculum, says he. See here a great wonder. God is on high: thou liftest up
thy self, and he flees from thee: thou humblest thy self, and he descends to
thee. Low things he looks close upon, that he may exalt them: proud things he
knows afar off, that he may depresse them. The proud Pharisee pressed as near
God as he could: the poor Publican, not daring to do so, stood aloof off. Yet
was God far from the Pharisee, near to the Publican. Hugo de Sancto Victore,
brings in God and the devil thus debating it. Jussit Dominus funiculos afferri
in partitionem, etc. God commanded the lines to be brought, and division to be
made. The fat and sweet of the earth he found in the low valleys, these he bade
be set on the one side. The deserts and dry places he found upon steep rocks
and high mountains, larger in compass less in worth. These he made be set on
the other side: and calling for the devil, bad him take his choice. The devil,
who looks aloft, and cares not for low things, chose the later, and bragged he
had got the better. But what said God? Thou art beneath, and therefore look
only after high things: I am above, and see from thence the sweetness of low
things. The violet is the lowest, but sweetest of flowers, so is humility of
graces. A broken heart that lies low, and hears all that God says, Oh it is a
sacrifice that God is much delighted in! For it sends for God (as Joab did for
David) to take the glory of all its achievements. It cries out, Act. 3.12, 16.
Non nobis Domine. And, Not we, but his name, through faith in his name, has
made this man strong, etc. why look ye so earnestly upon us? It casts down
its crown at Christ's feet, as the 24 Elders, Revel. 4. and sets the crown on
Christ's head, as Bathsheba did upon Solomon's, Cant. 2. arrogance on the other
side seeks, serves, and sets up it self only; shuts out God, and is therefore
worthily abhorred by him. It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt, says
proud Laban. Genesis 31.20. Ioh. 19.10. (...) Artianus. Herod, 12.
Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and power to loose thee?
said Pilate. Cyrus caused this to be graven upon his sepulcher, I could do all
things: not considering that it was God that held his right hand, to subdue
Nations before him, and gave him the hidden riches of secret places, Isa, 45.1,
2, 3. Apryes King of Egypt (the same is that Pharaoh Hophrah that Jeremy
prophesied against, chap. 47.) was so puffed up with pride, that he persuaded
himself, and boasted, That his Kingdom was more surely settled, then that it
could be taken from him by any, (...). Aelian, var. hist. l. 2.
whether God or man. Not long after he was taken in battle by Amasts one of his
own subjects, and hanged up. Dionysius tyrant of Sicily, thought and laid, That
his Kingdom was bound to him with chains of Adamant. But time soon confuted
him: for he was driven out, and forced to teach school at Corinth for a poor
living. Xerxes (the same is thought to be that Abashuerosh. Esth. 1.) was so
listed up, that he was angry with the mountains, winds, rivers, elements, as if
they had been men under his pay; and demanded of them reverence and obedience.
Heyl. Geog. 421
at Hellespont he caused to be wasted over two millions of men for the conquest
of Green: where when a sudden tempest had shrewdly battered his bridge of
boats, he caused the sea to be beaten with 300 stripes, and cast a pair of
setters into it, to make it know to whom it was subject. Not long after he was
forced to she back in a poor fishers boat, which, being over burdened, had sunk
all, had not the Persians by casting away themselves, saved the life of their
King. And the like befell Sigismund the young King of Hungary, Turk hist. fol.
106.
of whom it is storied, that beholding the greatness of his Army, in his great
jollity, hearing of the coming of the Truks, he should proudly say, What need
we to fear the Truks, Who need not at all to fear the falling of the heavens?
Which if they should fall, yet were we able with our spears and balberts to
hold them up for falling upon us. He, thortly after this, received a notable
overthrow, many of his Army being slain, many taken, and himself had
undoubtedly fallen into his enemies hands, had he not in a little boat got over
Danubius. It is just with God, that proud enterpises seldom prosper: whereas
those things that are fearfully and modestly undertaken commonly succeed. D.
(...) cont.
Ahab was lewd, but Benhadad insolent. If therefore Ahab shall be scourged with
the rod of Benhadads fear, Benhadad shall be smitten with the sword of Ahabs
revenge. Of all things God will not endure a presumptuous and self-confident
vaunter. The stones in the wall of Aphek shall sooner turn executioners, then
an arrogant Aramite shall escape unrevenged. How much less then an Israelite?
Who has not read that proud speech of Rehoboam? My little singer shall be
thicker then my fathers loins. This, 1 King. 14.27.
how truly he spoke, that one thing sufficiently shows, that Solomon's shields
of gold, were in Rehoboams days turned to brass. Yea, D Halls cont.
it is well observed, That God dealt more severely with his servant David, for
numbering the people, then for the matter of Vriah. He is more angry with a
spiritual and immediate affront offered to his Majesty, in our pride and
self-confidence in earthly things, then with a fleshly crime, though hainously
seconded. Yea St Austin doubts not to say, That the pride of Virginity is as
hateful a sin as impurity. Every one that is proud in heart is abomination to
the Lord, Prove. 1.5. Tamberlane told the Tamberlane told the Bassa of Natolia,
Turk, hist. 217.
whom he had taken in his first encounter, That he was sent from heaven to
punish his master Bajazets rashness; and to teach him, that the proud are
hated of God, whose promise is to pluck down the mighty, and to raise up the
lowly. And when he had taken Bajazet in battle, after he had once spoken with
him, and found him to be, amidst all his misery, intolerably proud, he carried
him about in an iron Cage to be seen and derided of all. And, to his further
disgrace, upon festival days, used him for a footstool, and at other times
scornfully fed him like a dog with crumbs fallen from his table. All which
Tamberlane did, Ibid. 120.
not so much for hatred to the man, as to manifest the just judgment of God
against the arrogant folly of the proud. It is reported that Tamberlane being
requested by one of his Noblemen (that might be bold to speak to him) to remit
some part of his severity against the person of so great a Prince, answered,
That he did not use that rigor against him as a King, but rather did punish
him as a proud ambitious tyrant. What woulst thou have done with me, said
Tamerlane to Bajazet, if it had been my fortune to have fallen into thine
hands? I would, Ibidem.
said Bajazet, have enclosed thee in a cage of iron, and so in triumph have
carried thee up and down my Kingdom. Even so said Tamberlane, shall thou be
served. He further asked him, Whether ever he had given God thanks for making
him so great an Emperor? who confessed ingenuously, He never thought of it. To
whom Tamberlane replied, That it was no wonder, so ungrateful a man should be
made a spectacle of misery. For you, says he, being blind of one eye,
Lunelavius in Annal. Turcar.
and I lame of a leg, was there any worth in us, Why God should set us over two
great Empires of Turks and Tartars, to command many more worthy then our
selves? It was therefore an excellent speech of the last French King, When I
was born, there were a thousand other souls more born, What have I done to God
more then they? In the history of his life and death p. 93. Antidotes against
arrogance
It is his mere grace and mercy, which does often bind me more unto his
justice: For the faults of great men are never small.

Who (in Gods name) made thee to differ? 1 Cor. 4.7.
or, What have thou man, that thou have not received? If then thou have
received it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? If thou
excel others in any gist or good part, thou must needly say of it, as once the
poor Prophet did of his hatchet, Alas master, it is but borrowed. To be proud
of it therefore is as great a folly, 2 King 6 5.
as for a vain Stage-plaier to be proud of his borrowed robes: or a silly groom
of his Masters horse: it is as if the mudwall should be proud of the Sunshine.
That face is hatched with impudency, that dare arrogate any good thing to it
self, that sacrifices to his own net, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
that says but in his heart, My power and the might of mine hand has gotten
me this wealth. This is to pay the rent to a wrong landlord, and so to forfeit
all, as they did, Hos. 2.9. And as that proud King of Egypt did, Ezekiel. 29 3 9.
Isa. 19.5, 6. Because Pharaoh says, The river (Nilus) is mine own, therefore
says God, I will dry up the river, and so, starve Egypt.

etc. Prove. 8.13. Joseph truly feared God, and therefore hated not only gross
evils (as that of adultery) but close evils, as this of arrogance. It is not in
me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer, Gen 41.16. As he insinuates himself by
this dutiful comprecation, so he extenuates his gifts, that he may give the
glory to God, And he lost nothing by it. For he that said, Without me God shall
answer Pharaoh, heard from Pharaoh, without thee shall no man lift up his hand
in the land of Egypt, ver. 44. So John Baptist was full of the sear of God,
and thereby of humility: for these two go coupled, Prove. 22.4. and so close,
that there is no copulative in the original: thus it runs, By humility the fear
of the Lord (the one is as it were predicated of the other) are riches, and
honor, and life. What riches John Baptist had, I know not: but for honor,
that hand of his that he thought not worthy to unloose Christ's latchet of his
shoe, Christ thought worthy to be laid upon his head in baptism. John modestly
withstood the motion at first: be forbad him, yea he earnestly forbad him, as
the Greek word signifies: (...) obnixe prob^buit. (...) in compos. intendit
signification^as.
for I have need, says he, to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? But
when he heard better reason, he soon submitted (an humble man will never be an
heretic, never be opinionate, at least obstinate.) Then be suffered him, Mat.
3.14, 15. There are that say, That for his humility here on earth, he is
dignified with that place in heaven, from which Lucifer fell. Who told them
that, I know not: but this I know, that he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

Gen 18.27. Ephar vegnaphar (...) Ioh (...) Disce hominis (...), and at (...)
disam, (...) Roll. in ^^^um. All nations are but as a drop of a bu^. (...)
before God. Quantil^^igitur es tu (...) particula? Vnde superbit home (...)
conceptio culpa, nasci poera, labor vita, necesse mort? Revel. 3.17. Pharisaeus
non vuln^ra, sed munera os^e^tat
but is dazelled. Abraham when he stood before God, and considered the infinite
distance and disproportion, confesses himself to be dust and ashes. Job
abborres himself in dust and ashes, who till then thought himself somebody:
Isaiah cries out, W^e is me, for I am undone, Isa. 6.5. Yea that proud
Nebuchadnezzar (when once tamed and taken down, and had seen but some small
portion of Gods might and majesty) acknowledges, That all the inhabitants of
the earth are nothing, etc. Dan. 4 35. See thy self next, what thou art by
nature, what by practice: See this in the clear crystal of Gods pure law, that
perfect law of liberty, as St James calls it; because it freely and fully shows
a man the blemishes of his soul, the errors of his life. The sight whereof (if
any thing) will say a man low in his own eyes, and make him as much abased and
abashed before God, as Mephibosheth would have been before David, if he had
been as fully guilty of treason, as Ziba falsely accused him. But therefore did
Laodicea so admire her self, because she knew not that she was wretched and
miserable, etc. This if she had seen, she would soon have laid down her plumes.
And so would that blind Pharisee that bragged as fast of his righteousness,
as once Zenxis the Painter did of Atalanta's picture; which when he had
finished, he wrote under it, (...)
Sooner may painters envy, then imitate this work: yea he so pleased himself
with the conceit of what he had done, that he died with laughing at it.

Nebuchadnezzar for instance; and, after him, Belshazzar; Dan 5.22. (...) Herod
Disette justitiam moniti, etc. ^irg.
because he would not to be warned: as before him Senacherib, whose statue is
yet to be seen (says Herodotus) in Vulcans Temple, with this inscription, Look
upon me, and learn to fear God. No sin so directly offends God as pride, and
his judgments are most direct against it above all sins. When a wall swells, it
is nearer breaking: when the heart is puffed up, it is nearer destruction.

Jacob is less then the least of Gods loving kindenesses: David a worm and no
man: (...) Luke 5.8.
Agur more brutish then any man: Great Paul the least of Saints, the greatest
of sinners: Peter, a man a sinner, a very mixture of dirt and sin. Bradford
in his own judgment, A very painted hypocrite. Mr Bartlet Green Martyr, was of
such a modest nature, so humbly thinking of himself, as in sew is to be found
(says Mr Fox) ever dejecting himself under that was in him, and ever seeming
to be less then he was; as well declares not only his letter to Mr Philpot,
wherein he does earnestly expostulate with him, for slandering him with praise
of his wit and learning, and other excellent virtues: but also by his own
speech and answers in his examination, etc. When he was beaten and scourged
with rods by Bonner (which scarce any man would believe, nor I neither, says
the same Mr Fox, but that I heard it of him) and he greatly rejoiced in the
same, yet his shame-fac'd modesty was such, that neither he would express any
mention thereof, lest he should seem to glory too much in himself, save that
only he opened the same to one Mr Cotton of the Temple, a friend of his, Act
and Mon. fol. 1684.
a little before his death. A gracious heart is not a blab of his tongue, but
rests and rejoices silently in the conscience of a secret goodness. Christian
modesty teaches a wise man not to expose himself to the fairest show, and to
live at the utmost pitch of his strength. Christ (beside the vail of his
humanity) sates, See you tell no man: hid himself that they might not make him
a King, rode upon an Asse-colt, washed his Disciples feet, sought not his own,
but his Fathers glory, humbled himself to the death of the cross, emptied
himself of all his excellencies, (...). Phil. 2.7.
suffered the contradiction of sinners, who took him for a demoniack and a mad
man: whereas in him were hid all the treasures of wisdom. In him they were,
but hid they were: shall we fret when we are obscured? Is it not enough that we
shall one day appear with him in glory? Moses hides his glorified face, and
says, Who am I? when God was sending him to Pharaoh. Many a man says, Who am
I not? and rather seems to be good, then seeks to be so. All his care is to be
seen with Ichu, and to dazzle men's eyes with admiration, Tantum ^^ vanam sama^^
caplet. Mercer.
not caring for unknown riches. A fool both no delight in underanding but only
for this, that his heart may discover it self, Prove. 18.2. that he may have the
name and the note of a wise man. But such an one passes commonly for a proud
fool. For, When pride comes, then comes shame: Occulti modesti, sumunissi,
qui pre vericund^a sese abdunt, quos pude^ quicquam perarrogamer facere. Abon
E^^a. luo qui vet in pub i^o appar^re verecundan. ur. Mercer.
but with the shame faced is wisdom, Prove. 11.2. The original word there
signifies such as hide themselves through modesty, who blush at men's praises
(says Aben Ezra) and are ashamed to arrogate or own any commendation, though
never so well deserved. When Charles the fifth was royally entertained by the
French King at Paris, one of the Councillors made an elegant speech to him,
rehearsing all his brave acts, he bri^sly and modestly replied, ldco sibi
gratum effe' orationem, quodeum (...), quod talis esse deberet. Ioh, Maul. loc.
com. 595. Ibid. p. 175. Our King Henry the fifth after his victory at
Agincourt, gave straight order, that no balled or song should be made or sung
more then of thanksgiving to the Lord, etc. Trussels continuation. of ^antels
history of: England fol. 101.
That be accepted of the ration, because it admonished him, not so much what be
had been, as what be ought to be. And when to Citizens of Antwerp presented him
with a rich Arras, wherein was curiously set forth his victory over the King of
France, together with the names of that King, and the other Princes that were
overthrown by him in the bat^e, he refused to receive it. But when they that
presented it, had taken out those names, he received it, and took great content
in it. The stars are not seen by day: the Sun it self is not seen by night. As
it is no small art to hide art, so no small glory to conceal glory. Not I but
the grace of God that is in me, says Paul. Not I, but thy talent has gained
other talents, says the good servant. The more direct the Sun is over us, and
in us, the less is our shadow of pride and self-love. Boughs, the more laden
with fruit, the more lowly: but in a fan, the chafe is above the corn: not
because it is better, but because it is lighter. Hebreo^um provethium est,
Stater in lagena sonitum sonitum edet K^m^^^ and R. Solomon. Prove 14.33.
Holo^^antes di^itur qui omn^ao, lendat. Corn. Nepos. Act. and Mon. fol. 1620.
Empty casks sound loudest, say we: Empty purses gingle most, say the Hebrews,
That which is in the midst of fools is soon made known, says Solomon: they are
lavish of that little wisdom they have, and will laugh on purpose (with
Egnatius) to show their white teeth. They set the best side ^utward with
Alcibiades, and have a trick, as Stephen Gardner had, with boldness and
stoutnesse to make their gifts to appear much greater; as butchers use to blow
up their flesh, to make it better liked of. But what says our Savior, Let
your light shine, not your lightness: and let your end be that the light may
be seen, not that your selves may be seen. Eo praesulgebant quod non vischan^ur
(...), Ham. it us stu^^niae. Sotades,
The wise Historian observed, that the statues of Brutus and Cassius did
therefore shine, because they were not seen, and were the more glorious and
illustrious, because they were not brought forth with other images, in a solemn
procession at the funeral of Germanicus. The engine that does all in great
works, is often inward, hidden, not taken notice of: so they that best deserve,
do least desire to be noticed or applauded. They have low conceits of
themselves, and love not the loud praises of others. Moses shone and knew not
of it. David flies from honor, and it follows him: Saul follows it, and it
flies from him. Think of this, and it will prick the bladder of pride: make it
fall slat, and shrivell to nothing, it will cure us of arrogance, which is
nothing else, says one, but the neighing of folly.

Lastly, Nebuchadnezzars, but especially Paul's, and to hide pride from thee.
The key of man's heart he keeps under his own girdle, and orders it at his
pleasure. Ply the throne of grace therefore with uncessant suites, to subdue
thy stout heart, to cripple thine it on sinews, to make and keep thee supple
and soluble, tender and tractable, pliant and obedient; that so the Nilus of
his grace may overflow the low valley of thy mind, and fill thee with all
orient and fragrant flowers of knowledge and virtue. This was the course S.
Paul took when the devil (that King of all the children of pride. as Leviathan
is called, Job 41.34) sought to puff him up with the abundance of his
revelations. In danger he was to have been carried higher in conceitednesse,
then he was before in his ecstasy. But he complained betimes, as soon as ever
the devil assaied to blow up such a blab in his soul, he ran to God, 2 Cor. 12.
and praid thrice, and prevaild that Gods grace was sufficient for him. How
easy is it for the best man to dote upon himself, and to be lifted up so high,
as to lose the sight both of the ground whence he rises, and of the hand that
advanced him? How hard was it for Vzziah, that had invented strange engines for
the battering of his enemies, to find out any means to beat down his own proud
thoughts I Prayer would have done it. Pray therefore, and God shall humble thy
heart, pray, I say, to the Lord. He has promised a heart of flesh: and to
pray, is to put in suit the promises, etc.

Arts.
DANIEL 1.17. As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in
all learning and wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all visions and
dreams.


THe perfection even of humane arts both liberal and mechanic, is to be found
in the Church: For, Isa 28.10. Exodus 313. Inventus est artisex. qui and
campanulam and indicem and libramen^a omnia in Carolls annulo digiti
collocarit. Sphinx p. 90. Isa.50.4.
his Ged does instruct him to discretion (says the Prophet of the very
plowman) and this also (that is his skill in matters of husbandry) comes
forth from the Lord of hosts, which is Wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working. He it was that filled Bezaleel and Aholiab with the spirit of wisdom
for the work of the Tabernacle; and that gave to the prophet Isaiah, the tongue
of the learned, that he should know how to time a word to him that is weary: he
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth my ear to hear as the learned, who are
ever listening after more, even to the last breath. As it is reported of David
Chytraeus, a Dutch Divine, that when he lay upon his deathbed, and heard some
that sat by him, disputing with a low voice (lest they should disturb him) he
lifted up his head, as well as he could, and desired them to speak out,
Tucundiorem sibl decessum fore si maribuadis etiam aliquid Aidicisset. Mesch.
Adam in vita. Epist. 1.9.
for he should die the more cheerfully, if he died learning somewhat. Labenter
omnibus omnes opes concesserim, ut mihi liceat, vi nulla interpellante, isto
modo in literis vivere, says Tully. I would give all the good in the world,
that I might but sit quietly at my study, and not be called off by any other
business. Quidam equis, by avibus, nonnulli ser is defectantur: egovero, inde
usque, a pueritta, (...) ^upiditate arsi, pist ad (...)
Some delight in horses, some in birds, others in beasts (says Julian the
Apostate) but I, from my youth up, have ever burned with the love of books. A
learned and witty man he was, but learnd and lend, wittily wicked, ingeniose
nequam, as Ca^us Curio. He persecuted, more by persuading, then enforcing men
to idolatry; and prevailed more by enticements then by torments: abu^ing his
eloquence to the dishonor of God that gave it him, and fighting against God
with his own gifts, as David did against Goliath with his own sword, or as John
against Jehoram with his own men. N^zianz orat. 1 cont. Julian.
He forbad all Christians the use of learned Authors: And one of his
bosomebirds, Porphyry, said, It was pity that ever so good a scholar as Paul
was cast away upon our religion. St Paul was first brought up at the feet of
Gamalial, a grave Doctor: and after that, (...), verburn Platonicum, Paulo non
ignota ejus scripta. S^^lter. Mat. 83.45.
at the University of Tarsus. That he had read Aratus, Menander, Epimenides,
etc. is clear by what he cites out of them: and Scultetus gathers out of 2 Timothy
1.6. that he was well versed in Plato's writings. He was that wise Merchant,
that besides the pearl of price, in comparison of whom be counted all but dung
and dogs-meat, sought also other goodly pearls, which in their proper place
have their use and excellency. How bravely does he play the orator, when he
lists, as at Athens, and before Agrippa, in setting forth his sufferings, 2
Cor. 11.23? and exhorting to unity, Ephesians. 44. All the rowlings of Demosthenes
are dell stuff to his elegancies? Domest benis in (...) contra. Aesch^rem,
santa est elo. quent^a quanta. in anim le bominam inchediposs^^. ^^cero. 1 Cor,
2.1, (...) significat ostentationem borum donoium ^ut supra amos (...), Par^us.
(...) Pin.
As often as I hear him Speak, says Hierom, me thinks I bear not words but
thunderclaps. His very enemies could not but acknowledge his worth. His
letters, said they, are weighty and powerful: but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10. And why contemptible, but because he
came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom (which he could have done
better then the best of them) but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power?
Humane learning (says one) is to be used in ecclesiastical exercises, non ut
esculenta fed ut condimenta, not as meat but sauce. It were a madness, because
lace sets out a garment, therefore to make a garment of lace only. Sub finem
caenae, dulcis est placenta. St Austin bewailed it as a vanity of his youth,
That he had framed-his discourses, Vt placeret magis quam ut doceret, more to
please then to profit. And when I first began to preach (says S. Chrysostom)
I was a child, and delighted in rattles, in the applause of the people: but
when I grew a man, I began to despise them. A golden-mouthed Preacher he was
(according to his name) a master of speech, as Paul was said to be, (...)
Act. 14.12. an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, as Apollos, Act.
1.24. His eloquence (whereby he so drew men in to admiration of him, that it
was grown to a common proverb, Satius esse sole^ non lucere, qua^ chrisostomum
non dorere. De (...): Graes sub (...) De dect Christ cap. 22. To use Heathen
Authouis for ostentation, of to make a calt of the treasure gotten out of
Egypt.
Better the Sun should not shine, then that Chrysostom should not teach) he is
said to have drawn out of Aristophanes his 28 Comedies, which he laid usually
under his pillow, when he went to sleep. This was (as Theodoret has it) to
gather roses off the thorns, sweet honey out of bitter flowers, wholesome
medicines out of venomous beasts and serpents. This was to spoil the Egyptians
of the jewels they unjusty detained from the Church, as Austin has it. See we
not, says he, with what a deal of gold, silver, costly garments Cyprian (that
sweet Doctor and blessed Martyr) went laden out of Egypt? With what a deal
Lactantius, Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious, besides innumerable Greek Fathers?
And this was first done by that faithful servant of God Moses, of whom it is
written, That he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and so became
mighty in word and deed. Now the learning of the Egyptians (says Pererius)
was foretold Mathematics, Physics, Ethics and Divinity, a chief part whereof
was Hieroglyphics. In all these Moses was thoroughly instructed, Acts 7 27. Com
in Exodus
says Philo; and in short space excelled not only all his fellows, but his
teachers too. So did Daniel and his three companions, all the wisemen of
Babylon, whose books they read, and whose learning they looked into, which (had
they held it unlawful) they would as little have meddled with, as with the
meats that came from the Kings table, Epist. 84. 1 Samuel 71.51.
says S. Hierome: But this was (as he elsewhere that it) to wring the sword out
of Goliahs hand, and to out off his head therewith: this was to shave the
captive woman's head, and pare her nails, and so to take her to wise. Deuteronomy.
21.12, 13
Humanity may be fitly used as a handmaid to Divinity, or as Diers color the
cloth with some inferior color first, that they may make it a perfect purple.
Prove 9.3.
wisdom sends forth the Aris as her maids, to call them into the City, 2
Pet. 3 16.
to help hem to the better understanding of the holy Scriptures: which else,
they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest unto their own destruction.
Theodoret mentions S. Basils sharp reply to one Demosthenes, who being but an
officer of the Emperors kitchen, durst encounter that Doctor of the whole
world with wrested Scriptures, (...)
It belongs to the (an unlettered person) to look to the pottage-pot. Our
Savior (I grant) chose unlearned men for his disciples; but he made them
learned before he made use of them, he gifted them before he sent them abroad.
Insomuch as Act. 4.13. the Priests and Scribes (whom for their learning S. Paul
called, The Princes of this world, Asinos elegit christus and idiotas, sed
oculavit in pru. len^^s: (...) dona d^^it, and ministeria D. Beddings Cone. ad
Cler. Oxon I han de Turre erem. 1 Cor 9.1.
2 Cor. 2.8.) wondered at their boldness and abilities; as knowing that they
were unlearned and ignorant men: they marvelled (as the Nazarens also did at
Christ) how they came by that new learning. But besides that, it is well
observed, That our Savior excluded not from his discipline learned Nathaneel
and Nicodemus a master in Israel, lest if he should have called simple ones
only, it might have been thought they had been deceived out of their
simplicity. True it is (and pity it is) that the greatest Clarks are not
always the wilest men in the things of God; because knowledge puffs up: as
it did the Athenians, where no Church was founded, they were so self-conceited:
Paul the babbler was no body with them, the resurrection they derided as
impossible in nature, and took it to have been some strange goddess, that Paul
sought to bring in amongst them. So when those three famous Bishops Cranmer,
Latimer and Ridley were prisoners at Oxford (where also they suffered) one of
them complains, That not one scholar come at them, or showed them any
countenance. Many for the tree of knowledge, Asulti propter arborem scienti^
(...) Indoct^ rap^unt extum etc Aug. (...) ^e sap^entes bujus sae^uli alta ^ap
entes, and ^^^am lingantes (...) descend^r^ in (...) Bern. (...) esse (...)
Baron An^al, a (...) 44. (...) Deortan ab ceclesia Romt rela^us esi (...)
Venota.
utterly lose the tree of life, says a Father. The unlearned carry away
heaven, when we with all our Arts and Sciences are tumbled into bell. And
suffer ye the wise of this world, says another, that search into natures
secrets, and ascend no higher, to descend with all their wisdom into bell:
where none are so filed with the wrath of God, as your knowing men and
Philosophers, that detained or imprisoned the truth in unrighteousness, Rom
1.18. and were therefore delivered up to a reprobate fense, or an injudicious
mind, ver. 28. so that they became the heretics Patriarchs, as Tertullian
st^^eth them: For it is no hard thing to show, That diverse ancient heretics
drew their erroneous opinions out of the writings of the philosophers. The
Papists also tell us, That we may find their holy water, and sprinkling of
sepulch^es, in Juvenals sixth Satyr: their lights in sepulchers in Su^touius
his Octavius; lamps lighted on Saturday in Seneca's 96. Epistle: distribution
of tapers among the people, in Macrobius his Saturnals: Purgator) in Virgils
Aeneads, etc. Bembus the Cardinal tells ns of his S. Francis, That he was
reckoned by the Romish Church in the number of the gods. He means, he was
canonized for a Saint. But the Cardinal affected to deliver himself in Heathen
language. So did Pomponius. Laetus that antiquary. Anno 1442.
His name was Petrus, but he changed it for Pomponius a Roman name: he called
himself also Dictator, and worshipped Romulus, says Ludo: Vives. Such another
alate was Castalie the Ciceronian Translatour of the Bible: And before them
all, Averroes the Arabian Physician, who so madly admires his Master Aristotle,
Alsted. Ch^on p 460.
as that he doubts not to say, that there is no error to be found in his
works, that his learning was the chief truth, and that his understanding was
the utmost bound of humane understanding: that he was the rule and pattern that
nature invented, wherein to set forth the utmost perfection of a man, etc. And
when he died, cried out, Sit anima meacum Philosophis. Let my soul be where the
Philosophers souls are, The Colonienses indeed set forth a book, D Prideaux ex
Agy^ppa and Balao.
De salute Aristotelis, of the salvation of Aristotle, and affirm, That he was
Christ's forerunner in naturals, as John Baptist was in supernaturals. And
whether Erasmus was in earnest or in jest, V^x possum me continere quin dicam,
sancte Socrates ora pro nobis Joh. M^^l. lo^. com. p. 126.
I know not; but in his Preface to Tullies Tusculan Questions, he has this
piece of Letany, I can hardly forbear saying, Saint Socrates pray for us. When
he was ready to die, he often repeated this speech, Domine, fac finem, fac
finem. Make an end. Lord, make an end: but what he meant by those words, I wot
not, says Melancthon. Sure it is, his Saint Socrates could then do him no
good. Justin Martyr tells us, That he left his Gentilisme upon reading a piece
of Plato: and holds (but groundlesly) that those that lived (...) (that is,
according to the rule of reason) before Christ came in the flesh, were to be
counted good Christians, although they had no hope, understanding, not taste of
the future restoration by Christ. This Paradox was stiffly defended in the
Council of Trent by Androdius, Soto Vega and Victoria. Venator also the
Arminian rages and says, I deny this proposition, No man can be saved that is
not knit to Christ by a true faitb. Sleldan. Com. Greg de Valen. tom^ D.
Prid^aux Lect. de salute Ethnic. Act 4. Lib 3. confess. cap 4.
But the Scripture affirms, That there is no other name under heaven whereby
to be saved, but only by the name of Jesus. And S. Austin (though he yields
that by the reading of Cicero's Hortensius, he was taken off from the hope of
vain things, and the desire of earthly cares, and persuaded to the love of
wisdom, and contemplation of the things above) yet the cannot but say, that
nothing more cooled his affection toward that book then this, that he found not
in it the name of Jesus. this to a true Christian is mel in ore, melos in aure,
jubilum in cord; honey in his mouth, music in his ear, 1 Cor 1.1. to 124
jubilee in his heart. S Paul cannot come off it, but names it nine several
times in tem verses. All the learning that he cared for was to know Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Phil. 3.10.
To know him, I say, not notionally only, and out of the book (for so every
Catechism teaches him) but experimentally: to know the power of his death,
and the virtue of his resurrection: to have a Bible stamped in his head, and the
counterpane of the Covenant graven in his heart. This, this, is the only
learning, without the which all other learning does but light men into utter
darkness, (...) Suidus (...) Suidus Nihil exc plebat de guo non prof^^ebatur.
Acad. quest 1.6. Cic. 3 de orat.
Of Monius a certain Poet it is recorded, that he was for learning every way so
absolute and accomplished, that he gave place to no man then alive.
Eratosthenes was sir-named (...), because he could dispute excellently in any
art whatsoever. Democritus was skillful in all sciences, says Suidas: there
was nothing wherein he could not publicly profess, says Cicero. Hippias
Eleus was wont to boast, That there was nothing in any art which he knew not
of, whether liberal or illiberall: for with his own hands he made the ring he
wore upon his finger, the coat upon his back, the shoes upon his feet, etc. as
Tully tells us. Aristotle was a magazine of learning, and is therefore (as
aforesaid) over-admired by Averroes, and was abundantly rewarded by Alexander
the Great, who gave him for his book, Denatura animalium, Hou male nune arts
miseras baecsaecu a tractant. Juven. Ludit qui sterile semina punit bumo Prop
l. 2. Job Man's log. com p. 572. Asino quidam narravit sabula^. at ille movebat
aures.
eight hundred talents. Gaza, who translated that work of Aristotle into
latin, and dedicated it to Pope Sixtus, met not with so good a match, For when
he had brought and presented the book very richly bound up in velvet, and
bossed with gold, the Pope (that Ass) asked him what the outside stood him
in: Gaza made answer forty crowns. The Pope allowed him so much money, and so
dismissed that learned man without any further rewards, who deserved a great
honourary for so profitable a piece of work. But to return to his Author
Aristotle, whom all worthily extol for his learning, not fo for his honesty.
In the Town of Siuckard in Germany, a certain Doctor of divinity preached,
That the Church might be ruled and taught concerning God, Ibid. 478.
and the things of God out of Aristotle's Philosophy (his Ethics especially)
though the Bible were loft out of the world. Aristor. Eibic. 1.7 cap. 3. and 4
Ramus in theo. Praesat.
Whereas he himself confesses the disability of moral knowledge to rectify
the intemperance of nature: and made it good in his practice: for he used a
common strumpet to satisfy his lust. He was also accused at Athens, and
banished into Chal^^, because he had evil opinions of the Deity, say diverse
Authors. As for his Divinity, which he calls his Metaphysics, whereof he
writes 14 books: It is, says Ramus, the most foolish and impious piece of
sophistry that ever was written. Tully was a great scholar, no doubt, and he
knew it. Two things, says he, Optimaram artium scientiam. and maximarun rerun
gloriam, etc; Lib ^. op. familiar. Quod Pompcio confisus, ejusque parts
secutus fucrim Ioh Manl loc. com 481, 496 Ciceronis lingua^ omnes sere
mirantur, pectus no^ ita l 3. c 4 co^f Nescio qnamono imb^^^ll or est medicina
quam morbus. Nullus mibi per otium dies exit partens noctium studijs vendico
non vaco somne, sed su^^umbe, etc. Sen ep^st. Epist. 15. Delectabatur exoletis,
idque Neronom sacere docuer at; etsi anted (...) fuit morun severi ^ate, ut ab
eo ^eteret, ue so oscularetur, neve una seeum caenandi causa discumberet. Dio.
in Nero.
I have to glory in, my knowledge of good arts, and my waging of great acts:
the first whereof shall never be taken from me, while alive, the second no not
when I am dead There was one that wrote an Apology for Tully (says Melancthon)
and commended him for a holy man, and a good Christian: because he says
somewhere R^prehende peceam men etc. I condemn mine own errors, for that I
trusted to Pompey, and took his part. And Lotamus Lovanionsis writes, That
there was no other faith found in Abrabam then what was found in Cicero.
Whereas Abraham saw my day, says Christ, and rejoiced: he walked with God, and
was upright: Not so Cicero. His tongue we all admire, says Augustine, not so
his practice: And how little his learning could dot for him (for lack of faith)
when he came to die, that speech of his sufficiently witnesses, I know not
how, but so it is, the medicine is weaker then the disease. It is nothing but
true faith, that can fortify the heart against the fear of death. Seneca and
such like have set, forth what a mercy mortality is, what a happiness that we
can lose our lives when we last, how contented a man should be with life, how
courageous in death, etc. A great Philosopher he was, and a close student, as
himself testifies. A mighty man he was surely, says Lipsins, and a mighty
spirit works in them that read him. But yet (by your leave) he that shall read
Dio Cassius his testimony of him, will scarce take him for an honest man. He
salutes his friend Lucilius thus, Si Philosopharis benee est, ego quidem
Philosophor But his practice was most unphilosophicall. He enveighed against
Court-parasites, yet was ever himself at Court: he detested flatterers, when
none flattered more then he: He taught chastity, but was too in ward with
Agrippina the mother of Nero, and taught him by his practice that abhorred
trade of unnatural filthiness. He reproved rich men, but gat a vast estate;
and condemned luxury, when himself had five hundred stools of Cedar, with feet
of ivory, and every thing else answerable. Thus Abanah and Pharphar may serve
to scour and rinse, but Jordan only can cure the leper. Learning and Philosophy
may barb and curb corruption: but it is the Scripture only that gives more
grace, as St James has it, Iam 9.6
and does a perfect cure upon the conscience. And that is only too, when it is
seconded and set on by the spirit: who moves upon the face of these waters,
stirs them, (...) 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb 4.2. Tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere
possit: Litero, nam nota est (...) nullo ^ibi. S Tho Moore, -- quis nesset
Erasmun Culls as aelernum si latuisset opus? Minoris arbitror Hieronymo suos
constable it esse libres conduos quam nobis restitutes Erasm. Annol in To. 1. Plus
sanctimotie conipici in ipso libello, qua^ in libelli authere. Job. a Woovers
in Polymatbia. D. Pridea lect. Nihil unquam eum ignorasse. Neand. Chron. p 91.
Ita in singulis doctus ^^afit, ut carum uniod tantum tote vilae suae decursu
operam dedisse videretur. Bonosius in vita Tostari. Casaub. exere. in Baron.
and makes them medicinable, Wholesome words such as have a healing property in
them, as the word signifies. For else the word profits not, unless it be
mixed with faith: yea the Bare letter kills (I say not, learning kills, as
that Ignoramus once mistook the matter) but the spirit gives life. Erasmus was
as well seen in the text as another, and did a great deal of good by his latin
translation, gave much light to it by his annotations and Paraphrases. Besides
his other worthy works, he took insinite pains in furbishing the Fathers. This
one thing (says he) I dare boldly affirm, That S. Hieroms books never cost him
so much pains in making them, as they have cost me in restoring them, And yet
for all this we cannot tell what to make of him, for matter of religion.
Erasmus in religione suit (...), says Bucholcerus. He was as soon with
Protestants, and as soon with Papists, and so was well thought of on neither
side, lost his good esteem with all. Beza thinks he was not sound in the
doctrine of the Trinity. And it was a witty truth put upon him by one of his
friends (as he himself relates it) concerning his Enchiridion of a Christian
soldier, That there was more holiness to be found in his book, then in the
Author of his book, Raram facit virtus cum scientia mixturam, says one.
Learning and grace meet not but in a few. Galen the chief Physician derided the
Bible. Paracelsus was an Atheist, and (if Eractus belie him not) a Magician.
Vlpian the chief Lawyer was a bloody persecutour. Baldus an Arch-patron of the
Popes supremacy; and yet they were wont to say of him, That he knew all that
was knowable. Tostatus (otherwise called Abulensis) was omnium scientiarum,
doctrinarumque arca and emporium, A magazine or mart of all sciences: so
skillful in each, that one would have thought he had studied noting else but
that, all his life long. Besides, of he had had all his works, he is thought to
have written as many sheers, as he lived days: and yet carried down the stream
of the times with the error of the wicked, as S. Peter has it, 2 Pet. 3.17.
And as Calderinus his contemporary was wont to say, when he went to Mass,
Eamus ad communem errorem, he stickled ^iti^ly for Antichrist. Laudo acumen
viri si in meliora incidisset te^^^ora long maximi, says Casaubon. It was his
unhappiness that he fall upon such bad times, else he might, likely, have been
better. I was an obstinate Papist (says Latimer of himself) as any was in
England; Insomuch that when I should be made Bachelour in Divinity, my whole
argument went. against Philip Melancthon and his opinions. Bilney heard me at
that time, Act. and Mon. fol 910.
and perceived that I was zealous without knowledge, and came to me afterward
in my study, and desired me, for gods fake to hear his confession. I did so*
and, to say the truth, by his confession I learned more then before in many
years. So from that time forward I began to smell the Word of God, and forsake
the school-Doctours, and such like fooleries. Horrible barbarism had
overspread the eye of whole Christendom. To be a Grecian was grown suspicious,
Ioh. Manl lo. com p. 972.
but to be an hebrician, little less then heretical. Rodulphus Agricola, and
Joannes Capuio lived together at Heydelberg. Rodulphus interpreted Greek
Authors to the young students: Capuio read them an Hebrew lecture, but
privately, and to a few only, for fear of the Monks, who were mad at that
general resurrection of all good learning and language, a little before the
receiving of the Gospel. For as in the first plantation there of in Europe, God
shipped the arts before into Greece, that they might be as harbingers unto it,
Siccanes linguntusceri La zare.
as Tertullian speaks: So in these later ages, the Lord intending a
reformation of religion, set up the Turk to overrun Greece, and by that means
sent over into these Western parts diverse learned exiles, Paul Iovius in
clogijs vircrum literis illustriu^. L^ll Girald. Dialog Volater. Anthropolog l.
21. Parei medulla hist e^ol p. 311.
as Chrysoloras, Trapezuntius, Gaza (who translated Tully de senectute into
Greek) Argyrophylus, Chalcondylas, Cydonius (who translated like wise Thomas
Aquinas his works) Marcus Musurus (with whom Erasmus lived familiarly)
Hermotimus Spartiata, whom Capuio heard in France, as he had done Argyropylus
in Italy. These were Gods first instruments to restore humane learning, that
was almost lost out of the world. At which time also he vouchsafed to mankind
the knowledge of the Art of Printing, which is said to have been first invented
at Strasborow in Germany, by John Guttenberg a Monk, where like wise John
Mentelius printed the first book, and that was Tullies Offices: the copy
whereof is kept in the public library at Frankford to this day for a monument.
After this, the Press was transtated first to Mentz, and then to Rome by
Joannes Gallinaccus. And shortly after, there were printed at Paris, Antwerp,
Venice, and diverse other places, the works of sundry learned men, stirred up by
God to fetch the Arts back out of ^^anishment. Such as were in Italy, Bembus,
Sadoletus, Victorius; in Germany, Erasmus, Melancthon, Camerarius, Sturmius: In
France, Budaeus, Silvius, Turnebus, Lambinus: here in England, Ludovicus Vives,
Sr Thomas Moor, Lilly, Linaker (my near kinsman by the mothers side) and many
others. Buchanan indeed the Scot complains, that he was born, nec coelo, nec
solo, nec saeculo erudite, Life of Edw. 6 by Sir John Hayw p. 3. Sic Archelaw,
magis ex Euripidu, quam Euripides ex Archelai familiaritate innotuit. Eras Adag.
in neither, learned air, foil, nor age. But as the Historian says of Dr Cox,
(...) M. John Cheek (Tutours to K Edw 6) that though they were men of mean
birth, yet were they so well esteemed for virtue and learning, that they might
well be said to be born of themselves. So may it be said of that Prince of
Poets Buchanan, He was an honor to his country, better known by him, perhaps
abroad, then he by it, as little Hippo was by great S. Austin.

But to proceed: After that humane learning began thus to reflourish and lift
up the head, Divinity also, that had been shamefully obscured and flurried with
needless and endless doubts and disputes, was vindicated and illustrated by
the knowledge of latin, Greek and Hebrew (the dignity and study whereof the
holy Ghost seems to intimate that he would have ever kept afoot in theChurch by
the inscription of our Saviors title on the cross in those three tongues) and
all frivolous and fruitless school-quirks taken out of the way, young students
were put upon the reading of the Scriptures, in stead whereof, till then,
little was heard in the Church, but the dotages of Monks, and legendary fables,
Then grew up that foelix proventus, that golden age of glorious Divines famous
and matchless for depth of learning and height of holiness. Imperium literarum
est penes Iesuitas. Eudae, Joh.
I speak not here of Jesuits, who brag that the Empire of learning is within
their dominion, and that we have not a scholar on our side. The Cardinal (such
is his candor) in his book of ecclesiastical writers, Trussels contin. of
Daniels hist. of England, fol. 2.2. Erud^tis stuiti videntur que stultis
eruditi videre veline. Quint. in Iusti. Leguleiorum foeces december. dracb.
mariae: qui inter opiliones se jactitant Iurisperites, ne opiltonam qutdem
aestamatione babentur. Rex Platomcus. p. 135.
does not vouchsafe to name any one of ours: under whose table (nevertheless)
it is evident that he scraped together most of the crumbs, that he makes use
of, Great scholars, we grant, they are many of them. And yet we doubt not to
say of them, as the Chronicler does of D. Shaw and friar Pinket) that were
Richard the 3. factours to obtrude bastardy on K. Edw. 4. and so to disable his
children for succession) That they were of greater learning then honesty, and
yet of more repute then learning: being such, that more regarded by the
ignorans to be accounted learned, then by the learned to be judged ignorant.
Inter indoctos etiam Corydus sonat. To learned men those seem fools, that to
fools seem learned, faith Quintilian. Atturneys (says another) among swains
are taken for lawyers, among lawyers they hardly have the esteem of swains.
Jesuits have a notable faculty of setting the best side outward (as is noted
before of Stephen Gardner) and of boasting themselves for some great thing, as
Simon Magus. The Jebusites boasted and insulted over David, 2 Samuel 5 6. Brisst
Mot. 48.
that he should not enter their tower of Sion, though there were but some few
blind and lame to defend it. The Jesuits crack as fast of their power and
prowess, could they but get us (...) our paper-castle of Scripture-testimonies
into the open field of Fathers and Councels (as Bristow phraseth it) what they
would do to us, what babies they would make of us. But how well they have done
it, let all the world see in their concertations and controversies with our
Whitakers and Rainolds (to go no further) many of whose works remain yet
unanswered, indeed because they are unanswerable. D Hall episs. decad. 1. ep.
5. and ep^st. 7.
for D. Whitakers: one that knew him well, and knew as well what he said of
him, gives him this testimony, That never man saw him without reverence, nor
beard him without wonder. And for D. Rainolds, He was (says the same Author)
a well furnished library, full of all faculties, of all studies, of all
learning: whose reading, whose memory was near to a miracle. He was (says
another foreign writer) a living library a third University. Gentil^s (who yet
loved him not) could not but confess, That he knew the civil law as well as
himself, Johnston; de Naturae Constan^^a 66.
who yet was the Kings professor for the laws in the University of Oxford.
These came not to the Divinity schools (...), half-dipped, as Lucian phraseth
it, but thoroughly died, Diog Laert.
and well provided of humane learning. Spensippus was wont to say to such as
came to his philosophy-school without music and Geometry, Get you hence: for
you want the handles and handmaids to Philosophy. Plato in his Commonwealth,
calls those bastard Philosophers, who think they can attain to other arts
without the help of Logic. Vt catuli pannicalos.
Unskillful Logicians, says he, tear truths in pieces as curs do clouts. Out
Lord Christ (the Arch-prophet and great Doctor of his Church) though he be not
tied to schools or means, but can make an Ass confute his master, and does often
choose the simple to confound the learned (when it was scornfully demanded, 1 Samuel 10.11, 12.
Is Saul also among the Prophets? one of the same place answered, But who is
their father? As who should say, Prophecy comes not so much by man's teaching as
Gods; therefore wonder not that Saul prophesies, though not bred a scholar)
yet himself honored schools, when be fate among the Doctors, both bearing
them (for learning fake,) and asking them questions: when he pitched upon Paul,
scholar to Gamalie^, for an elect vessel to bear his name to the Gentiles, and
to be able at Athens to dispute philosophically with those Philosopher: when he
commanded Timothy to give attendance to reading: when he gave Solomon wisdom
to set in order so many Proverbs, and to discourse of so many particulars, from
the Cedar to the shrub: when he gave his people a Kiriath-sophe^, Josh. 15.15.
(...) quasi, medeta publica sive popusi Becman. de Or ginib. Bu^ho Chron, Neand
Chron.
a City of letters or books (such as our Universities are) to be unto them, as
the library of Alexandria is said to be, physic for the soul. Diverse of the
Patriarchs are held to have been skillful in physic, and therefore fo welcome
to Kings, as Abraham and Isaac to Pharaoh and Abimelech. From the mouth of
Adam, says one, as from a fountain issued all the profitable doctrine,
discipline, Wisdom and knowledge that is in the world. The longevity of the
Fathers before the sloud was a work of Gods providence, for the perfecting of
the sciences, says another. Iaphet dispersed abroad his Europe the doctrine of
the premised seed, says a third, which was afterward collected and conserved
by the Sibylls, when it began to be forgotten. Hence the ancient Sages fetched
whatsoever found thing they held concerning God, the immortality of the soul,
Eusebius de prepar^cap ult lose (...) Antiq, 41. c 1. Delrius in disq. Mag l, 1. c
5. q. 1 sect 1. Alchymia est ars fine art, ^ujus scire est pars cum parts
medium est strenue mentiri, Finis est mendicatum ire Rythmum hunc a plebe
decanta^ll recitat Libanius Lib. ae myster. Aegyp. Ioanem illam and
usarpatorla^ Philosophiae do^^inam veritatis ratieni post habuit, and ea
descripsit, etc. 6. Hexam: c. 2.
the duration of Empires, etc. Abraham's philosophy is thus described by Philo
the Jew, who might have it by tradition. He reduced all the eff^cts of the
second causes to the first cause immediate. He did not attribute to the Sun the
light of the day, nor to the clouds rain, nor to the eyes sight, nor to the
ears hearing, nor to the other next instruments of sense the cause of their
faculty, but referred all to the Sovereign head, the Creator of substances, the
give of forms, the cause of canses, etc. Josephus and Eusebius tell us, That
Abraham taught the Mathematiks in Egypt. Neither want there those that show a
book that was made, as they say, by Moses and his sister Miriam, concerning
Alchymy; which is an Art without art, says one, A multiplying of something by
nothing, says another. An omne, aliquid, nihil, that Moses, I believe never
dreamt of: nor was it any part of the wisdom of Egypt, wherein he was so well
instructed and excelled, Act 7 22. And although he were mighty in word and
deed, yet he has left us nothing in writing of his Egyptian learning, nothing
of the true rational philosophy, which he both learned and taught long before
Mercurius Trismegistus was born (whom yet Iamblicus makes the first author of
Egyptian Arts) S. Ambrose gives the reason: because he received Gods Spirit, as
the servant of God, faithful in all his house, he preferred the heavenly truth
before that vain earthly philosophy; and set down such things only, as he
judged fit for the furtherance of our faith. Arts are a rich blessing of the
Lord, and it was then, and is ever to be wished, that all Gods faithful
messengers were endued with such excellent parts of humane learning, Masohil of
David Prove. 501.
as Moses was. But, what is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord, to those
that preached men's devices, and fought out vain things in stead of Gods word,
Ier. 23.28. striving to please the people, and to set up themselves, by
ostentation of their own gifts and learning. The 32. Psalm is entitled, David's
learning; and was penned to teach the unlearned how to get true happiness. And
Solomon calls this knowledge Wisdoms or Knowledges. And Isa calls that a
learned tongue, that studieth out cases of conscience, and speaks a word in
due season: Job calls him an Interpreter, one of a thousand, Isa. 50.4. Job
33.23.
that declares unto man his righteousness, etc. How vain then are those that
count nothing worthy to be known, but these earthly learnings, and spend all
their time and studies in them? as the Heathen did, till they become almost as
heathenish. Their spare-hours indeed, and as it were for recreation sake, many
of the ancient Fathers spent, and not unprofitably, in Heathen Authors: partly
for the bettering of their style, as Chrysostom: and partly for confutation of
heathenish opinions and superstitions, as Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. which made
Julian the apostate cry out, Proprys pennis configimur, we are beaten with our
own weapons. Thus S. Paul beat the Athenians: thus Arnobius in a lofty and
lively style beats the Gentiles, Act. 17.
after that himself had written some things against the Christians, before he
was converted from Gentilisme. He, for this style, Vtinam tom no^^a potu^ss^
confirmare quia^ facile aliena destruxit. Ora. pro^ Plac. (...) Plato in Tim,
Issum quasi paren^em hujus Vniversitatis inven^re d^ssicile est; and cum jam
inveneris, and care in vul gus^^n^fas Cic.
was called the Christian Caesar, as Lactanitius (his scholar) was called the
Christian Cicero. S. Hierom passes this censure upon his writings: Lactantius
was, as it were, a certain flood of Tullian eloquence: I would he had been as
happy at confirming of our religion, as he was at the confuting of the contrary
superstition. Sed, non omnia possumus omnes. Tully wished, Would he could as
easily find out the true God, as descry the false, And had he consulted the
Jews, whom for their calamities he so much slighted, he might happily have heard
of him. Something he had read of him, and thereby groped after him in the dark,
Act. 17.27. in Plato; who speaks thus, and is translated word for word by
Tully: To find out the maker and Father of all, is a hard task: to tell what
he is, when thou have found him out, is impossible. Hence the Athenians had
their alter dedicated to the unknown god, that is, to the true and only God: Of
whom they had learned (out of the ancient philosophers and Sibylles oracles)
that he was but one invisible, ineffable essence, whose name cannot be uttered,
as the Jews held, from whom the best of the philosophers drew their best
Divinity. Hence Lucan a Heathen Poet, calls the Jews God, an uncertain God:
Iuvenal jeareth, That they worship nothing but the clouds, -- dedita sacris
incerti ludea Dei, In pharsal. 1.2. Nil praeter nubas and aeli numen adorant.
^^ct 17. (...)
and an unknown God within them. And Aristophanes brings in Socrates
worshipping the clouds, because he worshipped not the same Gods, as the vulgar
did, but fought to bring in new ones, as Laertius relates it. For which cause
also, he was condemned to death in the same court of Areopagus, whither S. Paul
was hurried, but by a special providence of God escaped: not being so much as
called to his answer, which would have been to the hazard of his life. Athens
is called by Euripides, the Greece of Greece: by Demosthenes, the eye, soul and
Sun of Greece: by Thucydides, the common school of mankind. There were the
finest and most mercuriall wits of the world: and they had the bravest preacher
in the world, who took his text often one of their alters, and expounded it out
of their own Authors. But with what success? Some doubted, some derided, a
very few only were converted and no Church planted. For the natural man (though
never so learned) perceives not the things of God, as little as Nicodemus
(though a Doctor) did the doctrine of regeneration.

What then? shall learning be the less valued, because by some abused,
perverted, and made a hinderance from heaven? The Anabaptists indeed condemned
the arts, and other ornaments of grace and nature, for the unworthiness of the
persons or subjects, wherein they were found. Luther retorted upon them, Then,
belike, matrimony, authority, liberty, etc. are to be despised and avoided. Are
not the works of God good, because the men, who use them are, Gel. l. 15.0.11.
some of them wicked? The Romans, I know not upon what dislike, banished one
time, all Philosophers out of their City; but that was not the wisest act that
ever they did. Licinius the Emperor was such an enemy to learning, that he
called it the plague and poison of the Common. wealth. But that was the braying
of an ass rather then the speech of a man. Hamanitatis studioso^ uno nomine
hereti^us appellaret Ioh. M^nl loc, com p 246.
Pope Paul the second pronounced all scholars heretics; and seriously
exhorted the Romans not to breed up their children at school; it was enough if
they could write and read. It is cautionated by the Duke of Russia, That there
be no schools, lest there should be any scholars but himself. The people say
in a difficult question, God and our great Duke know all this. The Turks
Janissaries upbraided their Emperor with his learning. Heyl Geog. 343.
for when Bajazet the second had cast Achmetes Bassa into prison, those martial
men, amongst many other opprobrious words wherewith they shamefully loaded him,
Turk hist fol. 414. Plats.
as drunkard, beast, rascal, etc. they called him oftentimes by the name of
Bengi, Bengi, that is, Scholar. scholar, which amongst them is accounted in a
Prince to be no small disgrace. But what said a far wiser man? Happy is that
Commonwealth where either Philosophers bear rule, or the Ruler study
philosophy. The Doctors and Judges amongst us (to intimate some such thing
surely) have one and the same habit (square caps and scarlet gowns) prescribed
them. Nebuchadnezzar seems to have been a scholar, Dan. 1.19. for he was able
to pose the young students, and to pronounce after he had communed with them,
which were the best learned. Yea, it is said, v. 20. That in all matters of
wisdom and understanding, that the King enquired of Daniel and his fellows, be
found them ten times better then all the Magicians (so they called their
Philosophers and interpreters of divine and humane laws) and wise men (the
learned of all Nations were called so, (...) contemplative persons.
Mat. 23.34. till Pythagoras first in modesty named himself Philosopher, or a
wel-willer to wisdom) that were in all his realm. Ahashuerosh also, when he
could not sleep, called for a book; fo did Tamberlane the night before the
mortal battle between him and Bajazet, he called for a book (care would not
suffer him to sleep) wherein was contained the lives of his fathers and
Ancestors, and other valiant worthies: the which he used ordinarily to read,
as he then did, not as therewith vainly to deceive the time, but to make use
there of by the imitation of that which was by them worthily done, and
declining of such dangers, as they by there rashness or over-fight fell into.
Alphonsus King of Sicily called his books his best Councillors: for they wound
tell him truth, Turk. Hist 218. Et hoc ipso laudem veram merait quod falsam
contempsit, Lipsius Gabriel Simeo^ in Symbolis.
when none else durst. Julius Caesar wrote his own acts, and modestly called
them, not Histories, but Commentaries. He would be carved standing upon a globe
of the world, and having in his left hand a book, in his right hand a sword,
with this title or motto, Ex utroque, Caesar. Q. Elizabeth, who was wont to
qual^fie the tediousness of her serious affairs with the sweet recreation of
letters, either read or wrote some what every day, Camd Elisab. 412, 500.
says M. Camden: who alto testifies, that she translated Boethius his books,
De consolatione. handsomely into the English tongue; that the took very all
that Anagram, Veritas a^mata, according to the queen of Scots name Maria
Stuarta: that being perplexed whether or no to put the Queen of Scots to death,
the sat many ^mes melancholy, and often sighing muttered to her self, Aut for
aut seri, and Ne feriare feri, etc. She answered several Ambassadors in their
several languages: being herein like Cleopatra, who gave answers by her self
to the Ethiopians, Arabians, Hebrews, Syrians, Medes and Parthians, (...)
Plutarch.
and could tune her tongue like an instrument of many strings (says Plutarch)
to whatsoever dialect she listed. But besides the vulgar tongues (wherein she
was ready) Queen Elizabeth understood the learned tongues: as did also, not
long before her, the Lady Jane Gray, and that famous Olympia Fulva Morata, of
Ferrara in Italy; who publicly and with great commendation professed the Greek
and Latin tongue at Heidelberg, anno dom. 1554. I conclude with K. James,
whose golden pen (says a reverend Divine, M Boltons Genesis direct. for wall. with
God, p. 15.
in whose words I relate if) has given such a blow to that beast of Rome, that
be will never be able to stand upon his four legs again: He has shot out of
his royal bow such keen arrows taken out of the quiver of Gods book, which will
bang in the sides of that scarlet whore, and make her lams as long as she
lives, etc, This learned King after he had moderated as Doctor of the Chair at
Oxford in all faculties, when, in the public library there, he beheld the
little chains where with the leverall books are fastened to their places,
Eruidem fi unauan m^bt in fvis fit, ut capav^s ducar, hoc ca^erem cancere com
(...), etc. Rex Platon. per D Isaa^ Wake. p. 113 Bonarum arti^ expers and igna,
(...) cet vere caque ad viru^ doctum tertmthilde;t, intelligere ac sacere
videretur D^ F^runt cum non, cru^u^sse, cum esse^ ^ perator, ^ec puduisse
unquam ad do^torem prosicis^ D^^ in vite Bu^chius in, a^^
I could wish, said he ( is ever it be my lot to be carried captive) to be shut
up in this prison, to be bound with these chains, and to spend my life with
these fellow captives that stand here chained. Few Princes have the happiness
that Trojan had, who though he were no scholar, yet he truly understood, and
accordingly did those things that pertain to a scholar. But he highly esteemed
learning in Pliny, and others whom he prized and preferred, no less then did
Antoninus the Philosopher; who was not ashamed after that he was Emperor, to
resort dally to his Doctor. And after he came to Athens, and was admitted to
be of that University, he granted them large privileges, did them great
honors, and founded many Lectures with a liberal allowance of maintenance.
Aeneas Sylvius (afterward pope) was wo^t to say of learning, That popular men
should esteem is as silver, Noblemen as gold, princes as pearls. His
^u^e^ff^ou^ N^c^las the fifth, when it was told him, that there were such and
such in Rome that made good verses Nay not good verses, said he, for if they
can do so, why come they not, and make themselves known to me, Qui Poetis etiam
malis pateo, who am a favourer and rewarder of any Poets be they never so bad?
Diverse learned men flourished in the times of our Henry 1. (surnamed Beauclark)
because he had in his youth some taste of learning, Dan hist fol. 68.
which put many of his subjects into the fashion of the book: like as all the
Court of Sicily was set upon the study of Philosophy, when Dionysius looked
that way, and had got the company of Aristippus and Plato: the former of whom,
Iohnston de natur^e constantia, p 69 Neand Chron.
said he, is ever craving money of me, the later defires nothing but books. And
indeed how much Plato preferred books before money well appeared, when he gave
(as he is reported to do) for three books thirty thousand florens. As of
Renchlin it is storied, that he gave the Jew a crown an hour that read Hebrew
to him at Rome. Of S. Hierome, That he went by night and by stealth to the Jew
that taught him Hebrew: for if it had been known, the Jews would have been the
death of them both. This he did, when he was now an old man: as Cato, though
old, set himself to learn Greek, and Sigismund the Emperor Latin. The
Emperor much bewailed the matter at the Council of Constance, That neither he,
nor any of his great Courtiers and Councillors were able to answer a foreign
Ambassador in the Latin tongue. He began therefore to learn, though it were
late first. And when some of his Nobles that had no learning, and therefore
hated it, An^ Dom 1437. Bucholc. Chron
took it in great disdain and dudgin, that he preferred before them some that
were of mean degree, merely for their learning, he answered, That be had good
reason to honor scholars above all, as those that were singularly graced and
gifted by God. Knights and Lords, said he, I can make in a day as many as I
list; but scholars God only can make, from whom comes every good gift and
perfect giving: which in the original Greek is an Hexameter verse, Iam. 17.
(...) 2 Pet 2.22. (...)
as that of S. Peter is an Iambick, Et poeticum quid spirat. The sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire, etc.

Atheism.
PSALM. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God.


THe fool has said it: and surely none but a fool would say it. (...)
One in whom common reason is faded and dried up, as the sap is in a leaf in
Autumn, so the word signifies. The Philosopher goes further, Avicenna.
and says, He that denies the one God, and his providence in all things, is
not only void of reason, but of sense. And yet th s witless, saplesse,
selflesse creature, this wide asse-colt, is every mothers child of us by
nature: witness S. Paul, Romans 3. where going about to prove all natural men
to be sinners, he fetches proof out of this Psalm, and the tenth, Psalm. 19.41
where the same thing is avowed. It is (I confess) an inviolable principle,
and indelebly stamped upon man's nature, That there is a God. The barbarous
people of Brasil, that are said to be, Sine Fide, sine Rege, sine Lege, that
have neither Religion, Rule nor Raiment, Plin. l. 2. Not. hist.
yet they have some knowledge of God, some spice of religion, such as it is:
Rather then want a god, they worship the very devil; not inwardly only (for so
the most among us do, being acted and agitated by the devil, who is therefore
called the god of this World; by whom he is as readily obeved, as God was in
the Creation, Ephesians. 2.3.
when he said, Let there be light, etc) but alto with an ^^^ward worship. The
devil himself, though he be no Atheist, nor can be (for he feels the wrath of
God, and so believes and trembles) yet he does all he can to make men Atheists:
because when there is no fear of God before their eyes, they will sin all
manner of sins the devil would have them sin, Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3. And Romans
3.18. After a bedrole of sundry other sins, this is subjoyned, as the root of
all the rest, There is no fear of God before their eyes: That is, they are flat
Atheists if not in opinion, yet in practice.

Atheists in opinion are, 1. Such as conclude there is no God. 2. De dijs utrum
sins non a^sim affirmare, d^^it ^^Protagoras. (...)
Such as suspect as much.
Of the former fort was Pharaoh, who knew no other God but himself, and
therefore asked, Who is the Lord? He should rather have asked, Who is Pharaoh?
a miserable mortal creature, a worm and no man, a mixture and compound of
dirt and sin. Cods attributes show both what he is and who he is. To the
Question of Moses, What be is? God gave a short answer, I am. To the second by
Pharaoh, Who be is; he made a large reply, till Pharaoh was forced to answer
him, The Lord is righteous. Eliphaz alto accuses Job, that he should say, How
does God know? Can be judge through the thick cloud? Darkclouds are a covering
to him, that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven, Job 2.13,
14. As if he had had nothing to do, or took no care at least of his earthly
kingdom. And does not Job himself, when once wet to the skin with the tempest
of Gods wrath soaking into his soul, seem to say so much, Job 37.23, 24.
Di^^arthus and Protagoras de Deo a: sit n^^ ^e, madoo ser ^^eat ossa,
inquirendum non (...) tant, Cic.
But God steps forth (as it were from behind the hangings) over-hearing and
controuling him out of the whirlwinde, Chap 38.2. Who is this, says he, that
talks thus? How now? peace, and be still. Histories tell us of some professed
Atheists that utterly denied a Deity, and that, either out of sensuality as
Epicurus and Lucretius: or out of stomach, as Diagoras, who having written a
book of verses, and made it ready to be set forth, was by stealth deprived of
it. And when he had called him that had stolen it before the Senate of Athens,
he swear that he did it not, and so was quit, and after wards set out the book
in his own name. Which when Diagoras saw, and that he was not presently
stricken with a thunderbolt, he became an Atheist. So did Porphyry and Lucian,
who were Christians at first, but receiving injury by the Church, the one by
words, the other by blows, in spite became Atheists, Porphyry wrote against the
Bible, and sought to disprove it. So did Galen the great Physician. He jears at
Moses for saying, That God made all things of nothing. Egregie dicis, Domine
Moses, sed quomodo probas? is said to have been the speech of Aristotle, when
he read Genesis. For, ex nibilo nibil fit, says Philosophy. And Plato never
calls God (...) or (...), a Creator, but (...), as if he had made the world of
a praeexisting matter, coaeternall with God himself. But what says the
Apostle? Credo, non probo. Through faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the bare word of God, Heb. 11.3. And by the same mighty word are
upheld, Heb. 1.3. which else would soon shatter and fall asunder, but that he
hoops them, as it were, and holds them together. This the Athenians knew not,
as S. Paul boldly tells them, Act. 17.23, 24. Whom there fire ye ignorantly
worship, him declare I unto you, God that made the world, and all things
therein, seeing that be is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples
made with bands. thus says the Lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is
my foot 2lool: Where is the house that ye build unto me? Isa. 66.1. The Turks
build their Mosch^es or Churches without any roo^, because they hold even as we
do, Turk hist. 342.
That God is incomprehensible, a circle, whose center is every where, whole
circumference is no where, as Empedocles described him, Aristotle would confine
him to heaven, as if his presence and providence extended not to things done on
the earth. Lucian also, that Atherst, tells us of certain crannies and chinks in
heaven, through the which Jupiter, at some set times, looks down upon men. And
if then they be praying they may be heard, otherwise not. Christ an nominat
(...)
With the same impudency also does he deride all other his Heathenish gods: and
yet with the same blasphemous mouth rail^th upon Christ as a crucified Cosener
(I abhor to relate it) and upon Christians as mad men, because so for ward to
suffer Martyrdom. Thus he lates about him on every side, and makes that good
of himself, that some have affirmed of Constantinus Copronymus, That he was
neither Jew, Pagan, nor Christian, Sed coliuvies quaedam impictatis, but an
arrant Atheist. So before him are said to have been Theodore of Cyrene,
Evemerus, Hippo, Nicanor, In protrep^ico Sacton u^refert cum au^^tum sic
commina^tem ^ovi (...) ^^iad 3.
and others mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus. Such an one was that monster
Caligula, that braved his god Jupiter, and threatened him. And yet not
withstanding at every clap of thunder or slash of lightning, he ran under his
bed, or fought somewhere to hide himself, as frighted worm wriggles into his
hole. Mentiuntur qui dicunt senon sentire esse Deum, says Seneca. They lie
that say they think there is no God. for though they say so to thee by day, yet
they doubt thereof within themselves by night. Then fear comes upon them and
trembling, which makes all their bones to shake, as it did his, Job 4 14. And
as it is reported of Tullius Hostilius (the third King of Romans), that turned
the peoples minds to the study of warlike discipline, Plutarcht
despising Numa his predecessors sacrifices, and saying that religion did but
effeminate men's minds, and make them unfit for noble imploiments.
Nevertheless Lactantius witnesses, that this King fained to himself and
worshipped two new Gods, Pavorem and Pallorem, Fear and Palenesse: Gods that he
carried about with him in his own bosom, Lactantius.
and could not shake off. For as any man is more desperately wicked and
irreligious, so he is more vexed with the terrors of his own conscience, which
is gods spy and man's overseer, and stings him, Rom 2.15.
betwixt whiles, with unquestionable conviction and horror. It was an
Atheistical speech of Statius the Poet.

Primus in or be Deos secit Timor. Statius.


That Fear first made gods in the world: and that all opinion of a Deity was
frivolous, devised by wise men to keep the people in awe and order. For if
these were no other argument to prove, that there is a God, these very fears
and terrors of conscience, stricken into men's minds after sin, were
sufficient. For these must needs come from a Judge that detesteth dishonesty,
and exercises judgment upon the soul. Richard the third of England felt this.
Trussels contin, of ^aniels hist. of England fol. 349. Somnum nost^rmi horrores
pleru^^, interru^ (...) and ^ursus a ^^ibiti sy^phoniaci conciliabant. Thuan l
57.
And so did Charles the ninth of France. The former, after the murder of his two
innocent Nephews, had fearful dreams: Insomuch that he did often leap out of
his bed in the dark, and catching his sword (which always naked stuck by his
side) he would go distractedly about the chamber, every where seeking to find
out the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. The later, after the bloody
massacre of Paris, could seldom take any sound sleep; being as terrible to
himslef, as he formerly had been to others: and could never endure to be
awakened out of sleep without music, or some like diversion. Now could these
men possibly either conclude or suspect there was no God?

Some I confess there are that lay violent hands upon all the principles in
their heads, and do what they can to tear them our, that they may sin the
more freely. They are loath to confess a God, for fear to stand in awe of him,
and yet (will they, nill they) the fear of the least things makes them to
confess him. Nay, Isa. 7.2. 2 Chronicles 33.1.
because they fear not him that made all things, therefore they stand in awe of
all things: as Ahaz that trembled as a shaken leaf, and his grandson Manassch,
that hid his head among the thorns, Tanta ad^o cum res trepidae, reverentia
divsim Nas^itur ^^ Silius 1.7.
and from thence was pulled, and bound with setters, He that had faced the
heavens, and neither feared God nor cared for man, is now at his wits ends for
the fear of his heart Wherewith he did fear, and for the fight of his eyes
which he did see, Deuteronomy. 28.67. What would such Atheists then do, did they but
see hell? Bellarmine is of opinion that one glimpse of hell were enough to make
a man not only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monk, to live after
the strictest rule that may be. And yet he tells us of a certain Advocate of the
Court of Rome, that being at point of death, Bellar. de arte^s moriendi 1.2.
cap 10. E^oenim propero ad inferet; ne^ est at aliquid pro me agas.
stirred up by the standers by to repents, and call upon God; with a constant
countenance, and without sign of sear, he turned his speech to God, and said:
Lord, I have a desire to speak unto thee, not for my self, but for my wife and
children. For I am bastening to bell, neither is there any thing that thou
should do for me. And this be spoke, says Bellarmine (who was there present
and heard it) as if he had spoke of a journey to some village or town, and was
no more affrighted, Surely had this man had a right apprehension of
hell torments endless, easelesse, remediless, such as he should never be able
to abide or avoid, he could not have made so light account of them. But a
discourse of hell is but as painted fire which burns not: or as the painting of
the toad, which men can look on and handle without affrightment. Jac. Rev hist.
Pontif^^om, 199.
Of Pope Clement the fifth it is reported, That when a Nephew of his (whom he
had loved sensually and sinfully) died, he sent his Chaplain to a Necromancer,
to learn how it fared with him in the other world. The Conjurer showed him to
the Chaplain lying in a fiery bed in hell: which when it was told the Pope, he
never joyed more after it, but within a short while died also. But to most men
it may be justly said, Gredo quae ese infer is dicuntur fa^sa esse existimas.
Heu vivunt bemines, tanquans mors nussa sequatur: Aut veluit insernus sabula
vana soret.
as Cato id once to Caesar, I believe that thou think all that is said of
bell to be false and fabulous.

Men live (alas) as if they should never die:
Or as if hell were a mere foppery.
And this is that (2) Atheism in practice, so rife in all places: for of such
dust-heaps (that confess god with their lips: but deny him in their lives) ye
may find in every corner. All places is full of them, and so is hell too.

1. some think basely of God, as if he were altogether such an one as
themselves, (...) Act, 13.
because he keeps silence and bears with their evil manners, Psalm. 50.21.
Averroes the Philosopher hence draws an argument against Gods presence and
providence here on earth, thinks he meddleth with nothing below the Moon,
because of his slownesse to anger.

2. There are again that grant a God, but made all of mercy: and thereupon lay
the reins in the neck, to do wickedly with both hands earnestly, as presuming
of an easy and speedy pardon. Nahum tells us, Nahum 1.2, 10
That God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord revengeth, and is
furious, etc. And that such as these are but as stubble laid but in the Sun a
drying, that it may barn the better: and like grapes let to hang in the
sunshine till they be ripe for the wine press of Gods wrath, Rev. 1.16.

3. Judas in betraying Christ wa^^ occasion of his death, as man, in
desp^iring, he (...) what in him lay to take away (...) life, as God D. Stlbs.
Eccles 10.12. -- Serviut to ceant, jumenta toquentur.
Others look upon God as a just Judge, and sharp revenger of sin and
disobedience, and hereupon could wish (for their own case) that there were no
God. This is Deicidium, God-slaughter. The good soul wishes with David, Vivat
Deus, let God live, and blessed be the God of my salvation. But the wicked is a
hater of God, Romans 1 30. and to a murderer of him, according to that 1 Job
3.15. He that hates any is a murderer. This is a high and hateful degree of
Atheism. If a man curse the King in his heart, and wish him out of the world,
the sin is so heinous, that the souls of heaven shall disclose it: How
horrible then is this same sin against the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

4. Some again have bald conceits of God, as if he were an old man sitting in
heaven, with a crown on his head, a scepter in his hand, and had the parts and
proportions of a man, as the Papists picture him. God made man after his image,
and men (to requite him) will needs make God after their image, cast him anew
in their base mould, and make an idol of him. In they year of Christ 403 this
foolish and atheistical question, An Deus corporeus sit? Func in Com. Chron.
Quia nibil any mal anima'i superius c^gitare potest,
Whether the divine essence be a true body, having hands, feet, etc. as men
have, stirred up great strife among the Monks of Egypt: For the ruder and more
ignorant sort of them, held that it was so. Xenophanes was wont to say, That if
beasts were able to paint, they would pourtray God like to themselves; because
they could not naturally conceive any ^urther. So do these natural bruit
beasts (as Peter calls them) made to be taken and destroyed, speak and think
evil of God whom they know not, and so utterly perish in their own destruction,
a Pet. 2 12.

5. Other practical Atheists there are not a few, that deny not God indeed,
but dethrone him, which is as bad: whiles they are lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God: make their belly their God, their gold their god, yea the
god of this world their god, coming to them especially with offers of honors
and promotions, Ierem. Dike, Mal. 3.8.
All this will I give thee. In too many families (says one) Venus has her
altars in the chambers, and Bacchus his sacrifices in the butteries: which two
having made their divident, and shared their devotoes, alas what a poor third,
will be left for God? (...) Dij stercorarij, (...) q. ^up^ter stercorari^. Romans
12.1.
Thus he. Will a man rob his God? The blind Heathens would not deal so ill by
their dunghill Deities. Yet ye have robbed me, says the Lord of hosts. Not in
tithes and offerings only, but in offering up your selves, your souls and
bodies to be a holy, lively and acceptable sacrifice unto me, yea in loving the
Lord your God with all your soul, mind and might, and your neighbor as your
selves, which is better then all burnt sacrifices, as that Scribe
understandingly answered. Not but that there may be, (...)
and ^^e sacrificing Sodomites, as Isa, 1.10. Archatheists, arrant hypocrites,
that bring thousands or rams, and rivers of oil, that offer largely, and would
give any good for a dispensation, even the sons of their body, for the sins of
their souls. Mic. 6.6, 71
But they do worse then lose their labor, they commit sin, For, Prove: 21.27.
The sacrisice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord: how much more when he
brings it with an evil heart, says Solomon: as thinking to cozen God with a
carcass (as Prometheus would have done his Jupiter) with an outside, a form of
godliness, a shadow of religion. Surely God may say to these Atheists, as once
Isaac did to his father, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb?
Or as Jacob did to his sons that brought him Joseph's bloody coat, Luth in decal.
Here Is the coat, but where is the child? Cainis^aa suat, says Luther,
offerentes non personam, sed opus personae. These are of Cains kindred, that
offer to God the work done, but themselves they do not offer: they draw night
to God with their li^s, but their hearts are far from him. God also will be
as far from them, when they have most need of him, as he was from Saul, 1 Samuel 28, 15.
that hypocritical Atheist. God has for saken me, says he, and the
Phllistims are upon me. so, sickness, death, hell is upon me, and God has
forsaken me: neither is it my Lord, Lord, that can bring him back to my help
and deliverance. The Swan in the law was white in feathers, yet reputed
unclean, and unmeet for sacrifice, because the skin under them was black.
Wash therefore your hands, ye sinners: but withal, cleanse your hearts, ye
double-minded, Jam. 4 8. God is not mocked, Gal. 6. not an hypocricicall
service accepted: dissembled sanctity is double iniquity.

To end this Discourse (and so this first Decad) David gives us these sure
signs of an Atheist, Psalm. 14. M^rks of an A ^^ist.


First, A disordered life, No sooner does the fool conceit there is no God, but
presently follows, Corrupt are they and do abominable, verse. 1. Yea they
prevaricate, till they stink again, v. 3, as the old world did, that was grown
sofoul, that God was fain to wa^h it with a flood. All sin is both, 1. from
Atheism: for did men believe a God that saw all, and would punish all, they
durst not but be innocent: And 2. to atheism. The best that can come of sin
is repentance; which if men have no mind to, they will be willing to turn
Atheists, and it is the best of their play, to wipe out all notions of a D^ity
as much as may be for their own quiet, left they fall into a hell above-ground,
and be tormented before their time. M. Capell of tempt p 265.
Hence flow all exorbitancies in men's lives. Hence there is no hoe in sinning.
For what (says one) should, or can keep the wit and will of man in, when once
we conceit, D Preston his sensible demonstration of the Deity.
there is no such thing as God? And from the weakness of this spring (says
another) slow all enormities. Men say in their hearts, It may be there is an
almighty God, it may be not: and thence they will have some care in the duties
of religion, but a full care they have not: whereas, if they did believe it
fully, they would serve him with a full and perfect heart. Thus he. David
walked before God with an upright heart in all things, save only in the matter
of Vriah: In that one particular he despised both god and his Commandment, 2 Samuel 12.11. and that out of the venom of original lust, the master-vein
wherein is Atheism. Thus in general. Then

Secondly (for particulars.) The Atheist is a great oppressor of others, II.
a very caitiff-Canniball, verse 4. H'e cats up Gods people, as he eats bread.
Mica. 3.2, 3.
He tears the very flesh off the poor, and sels them (that which he he leaves
of them) for old shoes, as the Prophet has it: David in another Psalm compares
these Atheistical men-eaters to a lion couchant and rampant. God is not in all
his thoughts, says he, Psalm. 1.4 What follows? He lies in wait secretly as a
lion: he lies in wait to catch the poor: he does catch the poor when he
draws him into his net, that is, into his bonds, debts, morgages, etc. As the
Jews in Nehemiah had done their poor brethren, whom therefore he taxes of
Atheism and irreligion, ^ch 5.9, 10.
Ought ye not to have feared God, says he, and not to have dealt thus hardly
with your brethren, I pray you let us leave off this usury. So Job to his
friends, those uncharitable censurers. To him that is in misery pity should be
showed from his friend, but be for saketh the fear of the Almighty, Job 6.14.
Or, as David expresses in the place above cited, He says in his heart, God
has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it. Psalm. 10.8 -- 11.
Hence it is that he sits in the lurking places of the villages, in the
secret places does he murder the innocent, his eyes are privily set against
the poor. He not only robs the poor, but ravisheth him: he not only robs the
poor, but ravisheth him: he not only murders him, but eats him up as bread: he
makes no more conscience to undo a poor man, then to eat a meals meat when he
is hungry. A poor man's substance is his life. The poor widow cast into the
treasury all that she had, even all her living, says the text, (...)
Mark 12.44. It is in the original, All her life. So she with the bloody issue
is said to have spent all her life, that is, her livelihood upon Physicians,
Luke 8.43. For a poor man in his house, is like a snail in his shell: crush
that, and ye kill him: which the Atheist cares not to do, as who fears not
God, and so regards not man, Luk 18.2.

Thirdly, The Atheist calls not upon God, says David there, III. As beggars
have learned to cant, so Atheists to pray.
either in Church or chamber; unless it be for fashion sake, and that he may
not be held a rank Atheist. The gross hypocrite (whom I have proved an
Atheist) may make a goodly prayer for matter, and set a gloss, a grace upon it
in the utterance, but it is but lip labor, and so lost labor, the effect of
art and parts, not of the heart and spirit of grace and supplication, Zach,
12.10. Some short-winded wishes he may have, Ps. 4 6. not pour out his soul
with groans unutterable.

Lastly, Reproaching religion, and casting contempt upon those that profess
and practile it, is a note David gives of an Atheist, IIII.
verse. 6. You have shamed the counsel of the poor, because God is his resuge.
See it in Ishmael and Michol, Tobiah and Sanballet, in Herod and Pilate. What Is
truth? says he to our Savior, Job. 1.38. in a scornful profane manner. Herod
also having been long desirous to see Christ, and hoping to see tome miracle
done by him (as by some base jugler) when he could obtain nothing of him, set
him at naught, and mocked him, Luke 2.11. So did Julian and Lucian the
primitive Christians: contemptuously calling them Galileans; Vlpian, deceivers;
Demetrian, and other Heathen. Atheists, procurers of all public calamities:
crying out therefore, Christianos ad leones, To the lions with these
Christians. Tertul Ap^lic^, 40.
Tantum maliquia Christians, as Pliny said of them. No otherwise evil then for
that they were Christians. So far did ignorance and ma^^ce prevail in the world
among those, I mean, that were (...) without God in the world, that it was
counted a capital crime to call himself a Christian. A sect every where spoke
against of old, Act. 28.22. and so is still. Every fool, that says in his
heart, there is no God, has out of the same quiver a bolt to shoot at
goodness. Barren Michol has too many sons, Qui scoptice and scabiose de bonis
loquuntur, as one says, who speak scornfully and scurvily of men much better
then themselves, reproaching religion for hypoc^^sie, S. E^^^. Sands.
sincerity for singularity, strictness for silliness. In Italy (says one,
and I wish it were not so in England) they hold integrity for little better
then silliness, and abjectnesse. And it is notoriously known (says another)
that the most honorable name of Christian, D Fulk ^n the Rhem P^st (...),
Annot, in Act. seet 4. Sir Ha^p Lynl.
is, in Italy, and at Rome, a name of reproach, and usually abused to signify
a Fool or a Dolt, They boast themselves rather in the name of Catholic. So did
the Rogatian and Arrian heretics before them; calling the true Christians
Ambrosians, Athanasians, Homousians, etc. As these their successors did,
Wiclevists, Waldenses, Hussites, and now of late Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Calvinists, Puritans, and what not? The Atheists in Nehemiah's time thought to
have jeared the good Jews out of their for wardnesse to re-build the City. And
so did the Papists (herein Atheists) hope by like arts to have weakened the
hands of the renowned Reformers. Bu^bole ^^pera p^st. Dratribe ad^ servum
arbit^^ M Luther.
Erasmus also (that mongrell in religion) that was, Mente and dente potens, as
one says of him, how bitter is he against Luther in h^s Hyperaspistis,
declaring thereby what spirit he was of? And what a dry wipe was that he gave
Wolphangus Capito, Qualem a se Capito decimum sore sperat? He could not deny
(sarth Mr Calvin) but that Capito Was a holy man, Cal^ in praesat. ad ^saiam.
and one that took very good pains to purge the Church, But whereas he held it
as bootlesse a business, and impossible for Christ's Ministers to leek to
correct the worlds wickedness, as to make a rive sun backward, under the
person of that one man, he condemned us all of inconsiderate zeal. Howbeit
wisdom is justified of her children. (...) Iud^catur vel se ^tentia
^ron^nciatur. Camerarius. Scu'tetus.
Mat. 11.19. Or (as some learned men read that text) wisdom (...) judged of
her children: That is, Those that pretend to be her children (as Erasmus with
his fellow-Pharisees did) they perversely and preposterously pass sentence upon
their Mother, whom they ought, as dutiful children, to hearkem and submit to.
But many learned men are arrant Atheists: as were not only the Sadduces, but
these Pharisees also, that out of the venom of their spirits, could not but
mock at the precious and heart-piercing Sermons of the Son of God, Luke
16.14. Religion was not more with them a matter of form, then of scorn, a
manifest mark of the worst kind of wicked, Psalm. 1.1. a right note of a rank
Atheist, Isa. 21.11. and 22.13. 2 Pet. 3.3. (...) Casp^nare sub. san^abant.


FINIS.

