POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, Being the Result of Idle HOURS: To please the
Desire of some FRIENDS.

Written by J. T. Esquire

A Jove Principium.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCC.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ROBERT SOVTHWELL.
The AUTHOR wishes all Present and Future Happyness.
SIR,
THE manifold undeserved Favors I have received from your Hands, being
altogether a Stranger to you, have laid an eternal Obligation on me: And I
being incapable of making any return of Gratitude at so great a Distance,
besides the acknowledgement of Your Courtesies, I have made bold to present you
with the Perusul of a few Essays, of a dull Fancy, and my idle Hours. The
Subjects treated on, though not handled with that Judgment and Fancy that an
abler Pen would have done; however, some of them may serve to intimate, that
true Office of a Friend, which is to mind the eternal good of his Friend. Which
unquestionably, Sir, is the utmost bent of Your Thoughts. However I do hope
(Sir,) you will set a good Construction on this presumption of Mine; and axcept
of these as a faint Acknowledgment of Your unmerited Favors, from him who will
ever remain,

SIR, Your Real and Faithful Friend and Servant, I. T.

This Book of Poems lent to J. W and returned with these following Lines.
GO Learned Muse, go back to him again,
Whose Verse is Witty, Grave, Jacose and plain.
If I could Feast thee, with becoming Cheer,
Thou should be welcome, and stay longer here.
But tell thy Master, though I cannot send
The like to him, yet I can his commend.
Thou art an Eden, graced with many a Bower,
A Be, extracting Honey from each Flower:
Armed with a Sting, yet careful to offend
None, but the Atheist, who is no Man's Friend;
Whom yet thou do not take delight to Wound,
But only search his Sore to make him Sound.
Brisk as a Rural Nymph, and all as Fair,
In desent Garbs, thy Trops and Figures are.
In thee the Graces naked I espy;
But naught offensive to a Virgins Eye.
Naught like the Geer our mincing Females show,
In the Belcony of their staring Brow.
But (what all Love and Covet, Tooth and Nail,)
Like a fair Beauty, covered with a Veil.
Obscenity, (if I the Truth can hit)
Is but the Flyblow of a rotten Wit.
The Foreskin of a Fancy, rude and base,
To its own Shame, cast in the Readers Face.
The Inwards of a Pockyfied Thought,
Up through the Mouth by Salivation brought,
Civility inverted, and the A -- se
Of Poesy turned up in leprous Verse;
To such vile Stuff, their Muse who prostitute,
Are Runagado's to their own repute.
But thy, Euterpe takes care to hush,
What e're might tempt a modest Face to blush:
Dear Sir, keep on, as nobly you begin
To hate low Vice, and lash unmanly Sin;
How precious is good Husbandry of Time,
When Virtue is the Poets Anti-Rhyme?
When he delights to sow a gallant Strife,
Between his Pen, and emulating Life.
I Will be your Pupil, Sir, and strive to Choose
Each blessed Virtue praised by your Muse.
If she commend the Meek and Gall-less Dove,
I Will fly to meet her on the Wings of Love.
If pure Affections in a body Chaste,
To clasp her Beauty I will run as fast.
If Justice, Mercy, Temperance; my Soul
With hers Cemented shall compose one Whole.
How blessed is that Music, when two Parts
Strike Concord in an Unison of Hearts.
It Is Heaven below to do like those above,
And Hell on Earth, in foretast not to Love.
Truth Sung in Anthems is the Angels Food,
And to forget ill turns, a God-like Good.
But why does my dry Muse thus toil in vain,
This Subject better suites your richer Strain.
Yet when we meet within those blessed abodes,
Which Poets style, the Palace of their Gods.
When the great Judge shall come to punish that
Which guilty Felix hearing trembled at.
'Twill add one Gem the more to your bright Crown
If any Grace you teach be made my own.
To me no less Addition will accrue,
If 1, in ought that is brave, can pleasure you.
When each to others Soul, is a Divine,
Both like the Stars in Heaven clear will Shine.
POEMS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS, etc.
The Character of a Theist.
OF Mankinds several Inquisitions,
Divines, Statists, or Politicians,
Lawyers, Astronomers, Physicians.
He Is the Philosopher, that truly can,
Find the Original and End of Man;
When he does Causes most truly Consult,
And searches into Mistery's most occult,
Shall find that this is the truest result.
That some first Cause of all Things there must be,
And who but the great God alone is he?
Primary supernatural Being,
Who did make All-Hearing, and All-Seeing,
And gave to All their created Being.
With Intellects suitable to his own,
That they his Omnipotence all should own,
And dread his Power, by whom the Angels fell,
From their exalted State, as low as Hell.
And by their Example learn to Control,
The inordinate Appetites of the Soul.
And strive to practice that pure Law Divine,
Which blessed God on Mount Sinai made shine.
With that most pure and perfect Law of Love,
Which that spotless, Gall-less glorious Dove,
Revealed on Earth, as it is in Hea'vn above.
He scorns for this World's Profit or Pleasure
To quit so Inestimable a Treasure.
For being truly written in his Heart,
From it he never will swerve or depart.
Till he comes to that happy blessed Place,
Where ravishing Glory shall swallow up Grace.
Thus the Character of the Theist ends,
The happiest of Mortals, best of Friends.
The Character of an Atheist.
OF all Dissemblers, Villains and of Rogues,
That ever wore Goloshoos, Boots or Brogues.
The Endellion Devil bears the mark alone,
The greatest Villain made of Flesh and Bone,
Malice and Envy, and all Sin beside
Most of all, Lust, Covetousness and Pride,
Do still perplex and agitate his Soul,
Which empty is of what should it control;
Honesty, Friendship, and Marriage Ties,
Are looked on by him, but as Fooleries,
Fit only to hinder all Native Liberties;
Who is always Plotting, Deceit and Guile,
When he intends to kill begins to Smile,
The truest Emblem of the Crocodile.
This cunning Serpent so like the Devil,
Designing naught but Mischief and Evil;
When fairest shoes he makes and most pretense,
It Is but on purpose to delude the Sense.
Which when he'th seduced and caused to believe,
He designs more Mischief than Satan did to Eve.
O mighty Atheist, with thee there is no dispute,
Deceit's thy Essence, Cunning thy Attribute.
Interest is thy God, if thou have any,
But I do fear that is but one of many.
For Heathens use to Worship more than one, they say,
But thou have not learned to any how to pray.
To Decypher thee rightly, if that I could,
A White Witch full of Evil, yet thought good;
For when thou'st a mind to do any Evil,
Thou appearest an Angel as did the Devil;
Whose deluding Subtilties, Frauds and Deceits,
Thou imitatests so well, with all his Cheats,
Thou lackest nothing, but, his Badge the Teats.
But thy Description, all Verse does exceed,
As far as thy Faith, the Christian Creed.
Therefore thy Character, at present, ends.
Thou double faced Janus, the worst of Friends.
A Satyr on an Atheistical Friend.
HEy da! What Is this? It Is a Friend you see.
Presto! be gone! He is now an open Enemy.
Interest appears. The God that he adores,
For which he will pawn his Body, Soul and Whores.
Soul, did I say? That fancy of the Priests,
Unto their Mill, to bring more gainful Griests.
With Conscience, that Phantasm of the Soul,
With which was troubled that old dotard Paul;
A thing that does proceed from melancholy Fleagm
A very Chimera, a mere delusive Dream;
Let blind Religion, or a vain pretense
Delude the Reason, and the grosser Sense,
Of such as do believe its Truth: But as for me,
I Scorn to be vainly decoyed by such a lie,
Which hinders the free range of Nature's Liberty.
Nature, which allows Fraud and Circumvention,
With a well dissembled cunning Intention.
By which a Man may deceive his very Brother,
Nay, if they were alive, his Father and Mother.
If cunning cannot Reasons Twilight delude,
The stall decoy of Conscience, he will intrude;
In Word and Show, to promote Design or End,
Though it be to deceive his best and dearest Friend.
If advantage be to be had in Law,
Or if in a Deed there be ever a Flaw;
Boggles not at Equity, Conscience, or Reason,
No more than he would at Blasphemy or Treason.
Let illiterate Rabble Souls plain-dealing use,
Whom, misty Morals and the Bible do abuse;
But to a seared Atheists Conscience,
Hardened, as his own Face with Impudence,
Who shakes of all religious Rules, Bonds and Ties,
And scorns to be guided by such triffling Fooleries.
My blunt pointed Satyr, and little pocket Gu^n,
That cannot reach beyond a Quibble or Punn.
Can do no good on him, h'deserves a Cannon Shot,
Whom sure some Fiend on Iucubus begot;
Nothing in Nature can against him prevail,
Until his due Damnation does him Assail;
Although the Character deserves excuse,
Yet hold! my too fertile and pregnant Muse.
Who knows but God may so with him dispense,
That he may not be damned for repute of Sense.
But may consent to allowed fundamental Truths,
Which is the old Man's duty as well as the Youths.
So hoping he will find out the Milky-way;
The ugliness of Sin, I shall next display.
On Sin.
A Deluding Devil in Misquerade,
A Jilt, a Whore, a very Jade.
That leads Men to their sure Perdition,
Far worse than Spanish Inquisition,
Thou Mountebank, and not Physician.
That give us thy gilt, but deadly Pill,
Full of all real, and all certain Ill;
Worse then the Mischiefs of Pandora's Box
Filled with the Plague, Pestilence and Pox;
Which will as certain, and as surely kill, --
Yet fond and foolish Man thou do bewitch
With thy tantalizing, tickling Itch
Of Pleasure, Perferment, and worldly Wealth,
Thou robbest him of his Eternal Health;
For which thou can make no Recompense,
By all the Pleasures of Man's depraved Sense.
Unless thou could give what is beyond thy reach,
That which alone Divinity does Teach.
On the World.
THou Fools Home, but thou Wise Man's Inn,
Thou Misers Tomb, thou Shop of Sin;
Thou painted Proud, and rotten Whore,
Whom Fools and Madmen do Adore.
Whose painted Joys, but real Grief,
Lead us to Ruin, past relief.
Who promis'st Bread, but giv'st a Stone,
But real Comfort can give none:
For all thy large and fair pretense,
Thou lead'st Man only by the Sense;
Where by that dark and glim'ring Light,
Thou lead'st him to eternal Night;
Where when those Scales fall off his Eyes,
He Is then surrounded with surprise.
To see he is of his Joys bereaven,
To loose his Earth, and miss his Heaven.
On Religion.
REligion ought be plain, not Superstitious,
And very real, not at all Fictitious;
Amongst all Judgments, they being put to the Test,
The Church of England deserves that Name the best.
Which serves God according to his written Word,
In Unity of Spirit, and with one accord.
And gives all Glory as due unto his Name,
For not doing of which, some Sects are much to blame;
Who fancy themselves brimful of the Spirit,
And think to save themselves by their own Merit
When as the most Holy Scripture most plainly says,
Works are but the Servants and Instruments of Faith.
By the which alone, it says, we are justified,
Which can by no rational be denied.
For God's Grace and Bounty are absolutely free;
As in the Creation we most plainly may see.
And when fond Man by his Folly and Sin did fall
From his first State of Happiness, which was not all
He lost by his wild Rebellion, when he fell
Doomed he was to dire Eternal Death and Hell.
But by Gods free bounty and most exceeding Grace,
In State of greater Happyness he did him Place;
By promising to him, and blind seduced Eve,
Eternal Happiness, upon their bare belief.
On our Lord Jesus Christ his true and only Son,
Who was before this created World begun,
Which being fulfilled, to us their Posterity
We ought to worship God with all sincerity.
Not with blind Zeal, or Romish Superstition,
Not with Tautology and repetition.
But as says St. Paul, with a sound form of Words,
And vindicate our Faith with Reason, not Swords
So will our Church daily much brighter Shine,
And prosper for ever by Providence Divine.
On Physic, and his Friend a Physician.
Physic of all Humane, the most noble Science,
Which with Divinity has near Alliance;
For even as the Humane Body is inclined,
Even so does follow oftentimes the Mind.
Therefore the Wise best Physician Christ Jesus,
From distempers of Body sometimes did ease us:
Knowing that when the Body is sick and diseased,
Few People are good humored or well pleased.
He spent much of his time in that noble Science;
Therefore it may to all other bid defiance.
If practiced by honest and ingenious Men,
That know how, where, and likewise the time when
Their Doses to prescribe and to administer.
When to Phlebotemize, to Vomet and Glister.
Among which rank I do most deservedly Place
One, who to the Profession did sometimes Grace.
Not with the splendour of fine Cloths, or plush Coat
On which some Country Coxcombs do to often dote
As not considering the Inward real worth,
And what God by a weak Instrument may bring forth;
Nor like every saucy and pragmatical Jack,
Or every vaunting Stage-playing bragging Quack
Who Gouts, Consumptions, Palsies, pretend to Cure,
With all other Diseases that Mortals endure;
But his true, universal and solid Knowledge
Learnt from the Discipline of a governed College.
He never varyed from the true Rules of Art,
But his Skill for Public Good would freely impart;
Not for Avarice of Gold, but still doing good,
By purging malignant Boil, Choler, Phlegm, and Blood;
And where Nature it self did not begin to fail,
His sure Physic was an approved Coat of Mail.
But Nature by order of Providence Divine,
Will have its Period, to which it does incline
From Birth, till inevitable Death summons to the Grave.
Where equally do lie, 'the Simple, Fool, and Brave. (...) those for his
Funeral Text.

On Mr. Grenvil's Book.
ALthough the Author Creature wanted sight,
Yet God in the Creature has shown great Light;
And made him see quite through the liquid Skies,
With clearer Prospect then blind Mortals Eyes,
The Great, Bright, Glorious, Eternal, Wise,
God-man. Mercy revealed in the Creature
In every Stature, and in every Feature,
In every Sex, and in every Condition,
The eternal, ever Wise Physician.
Has shown his Love, Care, and Protection,
His wonderful and great Affection;
By curing all their Mortal Maladies,
Gotten by being sadly purblind Wise.
Again he gave them their full Prospect, Sight,
Feet for the Lame to walk, and Hands to Fight.
The Dumb he made to sing his grateful Praise,
The Dead to healthful Life again did raise:
He Cured the Woman's great Flux of Blood,
To whom Physicians could do no good.
He opened wide the dead barren Womb,
And preserved Infants till time to come.
His Providence and universal Care
Is always present, also every where;
Even to a Sparrow, and a small Hair,
And to the Men which in a Garden are.
Advice to a Painter.
DRaw the World before God, the Word, and Light,
Brought it from the fathomless Abyss of Night.
Draw it right Chaos, a confused Matter,
A crinkle crankle Cipher, but no Letter,
Draw Atoms of various Figures and Forms,
Blown hither and thither by various Storms,
Some short, some long, some angular and round,
Some little, some middle, and some prosound.
Composing Chaos in Order and Frame,
In the which we Mortals now see the same,
Men, Beasts, Fish, Birds, Trees, Herbs and also Plants,
Sun, Moon and Stars, with creeping Pismires and Ants.
Draw this All, with skill, and so to the Life,
That they no Pictures show, or a Lot's Wife.
Which may otherwise cause Dispute with Swords,
Concerning how Atoms composed Words:
All this kind Painter, if you cannot do,
Learn to distinguish real Paint, from true Divinity.
On Ireland.
IRELAND, whence they have their Name, various said,
And as hard it is to tell, as who is a Maid;
But the Natives Disposition and Temper,
Idem per idem facit idem semper.
From Noah though they do derive their Pedigree,
It Is of later Date, as the Wise may plainly see,
From Scota hard-hearted King Pharaoh's Daughter,
Or from a viler Wretch which followed after;
Judas I mean, whom they very much resemble,
And who can as cunningly as he dissemble;
If a Child be known by being like the Mother,
They do very much resemble one the other.
For as he his Master betrayed with a Kiss,
So they in no respect at all come short of this;
For when the greatest Protestations they make,
They soonest will you kill, betray, deceive, forsake.
They say the Land no venomous Thing produces,
The Natives having all in their Blood and Juices.
Worship they own with show and Superstition,
As Mountebanks imitate the Phisician;
Although St. Patrick from Heathens did them convert,
He never could change their Natures, Manners, nor Heart.
On Friendship.
FRiendship, thou empty Name, but naught beside,
Which changest with the Wind, or with the Tide,
Of Man's Affection, Interest, Passion,
Caemelion like to any Fashion;
Thou cheating, cousening, subtle Chimmick Gold,
Which art so slippery, no Man can thee hold;
Thou glittering Varnish, and painted Glass,
Thou tinkling Cymbal, and thou sounding Brass,
Thou promisest Mountains, but at the Birth
Bring'st forth a Mouse, as did the pregnant Earth.
In all our Troubles, Discontents and Grief,
Thou pretendest to give us ease and relief.
Yet can not Cure the Bodies subtle Pains,
Such as the Stone, which much afflicts the Reins;
Nor yet the Afflictions of the Mind,
Thou for that Cure no good Receipt can find.
Afflictions which are caused by Sin,
Which do disturb the hidden Man within:
Therefore give over and cease thou empty Name,
Any more henceforth the World for to shame.
On Friendship.
THou precious Elixer of our Lives,
Beyond the endearment of our kind Wives,
Thou Good, thou Great, thou universal Cure,
Against all the ill poor Mortals do endure.
Thou comfort of our Lives, sum of our Joys,
To whom all Things below are gaudes and toys;
Thou Soul, thou All in every Part,
As well in Head and Foot as in the Heart;
Thou Center of our happiness, in thee
Is comprehended, the great number Three.
Whose Love and Friendship never can have end,
Who giv'st us the great blessing of a Friend.
A gift, which God to Man has freely given
To be the sweetest Antepast of Heaven.
On Drunkenuess.
THou foolish, apish, hocus pocus Sin,
Thou outest Wit, yet perswad'st its in,
Who to Damnation play'st the Platonic,
And seek Health in a Disease that is Cronick.
Thou Pisky which foolest us with firm ground,
When with dirt and puddle we are drowned,
And fancy our Head's steady, when it goes round.
Which makes us think we can guide the Globe,
When the watr'y latax has drowned each lobe.
And Spirits like Fairies dancing round the Brain,
Having dethroned Reason, begin to Reign;
Who by wilful and Arbitrary Sway,
Phaeton like would guide the Day.
But by that ambitious blind desire,
Set the little Microcosme Man on fire.
Fear God and keep all his blessed Commands,
And fear not the force of Weapons or Hands;
For he can in less Times space than an Hour
Confound all this Humane Force and Power;
And thereby assert his Power to Rule,
Turning Humane Wisdom to Ridicule.
On the P. Infallibility.
THe Holy Psalmist does plainly assir,
That all Mankind are Liars and Infirm,
How came the Holy P. then free from Error,
Cause he never viewed himself in that Mirror;
For certainly it is humane to err,
But it is most beastlike to persevere,
Then sure the P. disowns Humane Nature,
And may be judged some other Creature.
On the Quakers.
THe Scripture says, none does good, no not one,
How come these People then to be alone?
When our Savior himself was tempted,
How came these Quakers to be exempted?
Or do they think they have the same Spirit,
Which he from his Father did Inherit?
Which made him still temptation Proof,
And caused his Adversary to stand aloof;
No certain, they have need to be redeemed,
However by themselves they are esteemed.
Their righteousness is but as filthy Rags,
For all their Euthusiastical brags.
Their dark Glowworm ignus fatuus Light,
Will doubtless lead them to eternal Night.
On Love.
LOve the highest and greatest blessing,
Beyond our thinking or weak expressing,
And yet within our own possessing.
The Cement of the whole Creation,
Which keeps each Man within his Station.
When we missthee but one half Hour,
All our sweets are turned to sow'r.
Thou make all conditions pleasant,
And changest our coursest Fare to Pheasant.
But what mortal Man is there so wise,
Thy praises fully to Characterise?
He must have thy Idea in his Heart,
That would show then but of thy self a part,
But if thou will appear in a Figure,
Than all our Gifts and Graces bigger.
What made the whole Creations Frame?
Eternal Love produced the same.
On Time misspent.
TOO long have I my Time employed,
In Pleasures which have only cloyed,
Which, Constitution have destroyed.
Too long have I employed the same
To seek Applause, though but a Name,
And got thereby most real blame.
Too long indeed, my Time has been
Employed in Vanity and Sin,
Which to redeem, its time begin,
Assist me then Almighty Power,
That I to thee aloft may tower;
Assist me with thy mighty Spirit,
That I may most truly Inherit
My blessed Saviors pious Merit.
Which will Rival me with mighty Kings,
Nay to transcend all earthly Things.
'Twill make me like to the blessed Saints above,
So pure, holy, and so full of Love;
My Thoughts 'twill to their Center raise,
Make me sing thy glorious Praise,
When there shall be no longer Days.
On Life's uncertainty.
IN a dull melancholy Posture lying,
Thinking of living, thinking of dying,
And of our slippery Minutes slying.
Thinking of Courts and the Grandeur of Kings,
And of all other sublunary Things.
I found Man Lord of all the Creation,
To whom all is in subordination;
Was made and destined soon for to dye,
Considering farther the reason why,
I found he was ordained to live again,
And still his happy Being to retain,
In ravishing Pleasure or endless Pain,
Why then do we our slying time beslow,
In following those sading Things below?
Why do we not with better Husbandry
Prepare for the Circle of Eternity?
By shaking off those weighty Clogs of Sin,
With every hindrance and every Ginn,
Then shall we show our selves most truly wise,
Making Earth the Basis to mount the Skies.
On Happiness.
ALl Court Happiness, yet know not where it dwells,
Whether in fair Palaces, or homely Cells.
We grope in dark, thinking to find it here,
It being by truest search found elsewhere;
Our Senses being Judges fallible,
And therefore such not juice that is alible,
The young Man spends his short time and leisure,
To find it out in vain Sport and Pleasure;
And in the height of his simplicity,
Thinks that the chiefest felicity.
The middle aged Man courts Honor and Fame,
Although it be naught but an empty Name.
And spends his fleeting time in getting Wealth,
Although it be sometimes by fraud and stealth,
By damning Soul, Body, and loosing Health.
The aged Man in his grave melancholy,
Of all these Things having seen the folly,
Thinks it Happiness to be counted Wise,
Although he never sought beyond the Skies;
Until one of his Feet be in the Grave,
Then cries out with Peter, O Lord save.
By which we may most infallibly know,
Our happiness lies not here below.
The whole World when it would appear most kind,
Is not able to satisfy our Mind.
Which shows it in all reallity,
Of higher Extract than Mortality.
Which we must leave, and all Things else below,
Before our full Happiness we shall know;
When if our Parts have been but Acted well,
In peaceful bliss we shall forever dwell.
On the Parture of a Friend.
WHen Friends do part it is but civil though,
They take their leave before that they do go.
The Poet thinks it fit to send his Muse
To bear the Embassy of his excuse;
Whose mind is fraught with most real good will,
As it was yesterday, so it is still,
And thus it does drop from his quill.
Consider your time is still a slying,
As well as of living think on dying.
For of grim Death there is no defying,
Nor of Heaven and Hell, no denying,
The former pleasures being so immease,
They infinitely exceed that of Sense.
The pains of the other so intolerable,
That to suffer them no one is able.
Let those things make us to mind our duty,
And not to prize our Humane Beauty.
Which fades like unto the fair Flower,
Nay often withers within an Hour.
But let us with our utmost Husbandry
Prepare our selves for an Eternity.
It Is enough our time has hitherto been
Employed in vanity and ugly Sin.
For which our time is little to repent,
Although the remainder were on it wholly lent.
Consider this while you have grace and time,
And think it not an empty piece of Rhyme.
Consider it with your utmost thinking,
And go not to destruction winking.
And learn to see the Wood from the Trees,
And to suck the Honey and leave the Bees.
So you will have Reason to bless your Friend,
Who wishes you well in'th World without end.
On Pleasure.
PLeasure, the tickling Itch of those that know
No greater Joys, than those that are below.
Bewitching Cyren with whose charming Song,
We are enticed to our ruin along.
Deluding Crocodile, with whose false Bears,
We are led into a thousand busy Snares.
Though most real Evil, but seeming good,
Because by few Men thou art understood.
Being like to the Be, whose honyed thigh,
Carries a painful Sting very nigh.
That thou Tarantula, do sting to death,
And causest Men to laugh away their Breath;
Thou Judas like, do kiss and then betray,
All those thou meetest in thy cos'ning way.
Yet fond and foolish Man, will not beware
Of thy deluding Gins and cursed Snare;
But will be deceived by thy Chimick Gold,
Thou fool'st him young and damnest him when old.
On Wisdom.
Wisdom, the gift of blessed Jehove,
Which keep'st us all in unity and love.
By which we learn to Steer our earthly Course,
And following thee right, find no remorse.
All other Things being compared to thee,
Like Atoms to the Universe they be.
By thee we rightly know from whence we came,
Who swerveth from thee never wants blame.
By thee we know, we shall forever live,
By thee, we know, God's read'ness to forgive
Our Sins and Trespasses, though never so great,
If we do not them too often repeat,
And weary out his good Spirit of Grace,
Which in our hearts would fain have resting Place.
It Is by this Wisdom rightly understood,
we come to learn and know our greatest good,
God's great Mercy revealed to flesh and blood.
For when all the Race of perverse Mankind
Were instead of clear Seeing, made stark Blind
By wicked Adams rebellious Fall,
By which he forfeited his Life and all
His present and future Happiness and bliss,
Which was prepared both for him and his.
It pleased the great, and eternal Wise
To visit the Earth, as well as the Skies,
The Sun of Righteousness, on all did rise.
Since God showed so great Condescension,
Exceeding our Sense or Apprehension,
Let us not frustrate his blessed Intention.
But learn and obey his blessed command,
Duty to practice, as well as understand.
Duty and Happiness being the same,
Although understood by a diverse Name.
For would we attain to eternal Bliss,
Following Duty we shall never miss.
The Atheist on the Tolleration
NOW we have certain hope, by this late Liberty,
All Churchmen and Church-Goverment for to defy;
With all their odd paraphrasing Divines,
Which so often do harrass us with their pert Lines,
And with their thundering Anathama's from Pulpit;
Oh their impertinent Divinity dull Wit!
Who do think for to fright us with the foolish prate,
Of Heaven and Hell, and of a Future State,
Not knowing that all Things are governed by Fate.
But suppose we should grant such Places there should be,
A cleansing Purgatory will set us all free;
Then what wise Man, nay but of common Sense,
Will change the Present, for the Future Tense?
The Answer.
HOld, Atheist hold, and stop your ranting Course,
Learn to be humble, and have some remorse.
Hearken unto those learned grave Divines,
And they will convince you by their pert Lines;
That there is most certain a future State,
And that Repentance does often come to late,
And that God's Providence rules over Fate.
There Is Heaven and Hell without restriction,
And Purgatory is but a Fiction.
Then what wise Man, nay but of common Sense,
Will change the future for the present Tense.
Divide and Impera.
INfernal Maxim, which sure first did come,
From him, who first dividcs to overcome,
The grand Disturber of perverse Mankind,
Who does not loiter, but always does mind.
The way that most conduces to his Ends,
By sowing Discords between chiefest Friends;
By fomenting in Families, debate,
'Tween dearest Consort and her loving Mate;
By setting Kingdoms in a burning flame
Thereby to bring us unto endless blame.
I wonder that after so long a time,
Thou have been detected in Prose and Rhyme.
Mankind should love their slavery and Sins,
And not beware of thy sad cursed Gins;
And their true Happiness to understand,
By loving Concord God's blessed command;
Concord, Love, Peace and Mistick unity,
Being the greatest Mirror of the Deity.
Which will lead us to that good land of Peace,
Where blessed Union will never cease.
The Earth God's bountifulness does declare,
The Firmament shows his handy Works,
His Goodness extends every where,
To Christians, Jews, Indians and Turks.
No finite Being can it apprehend,
How far his loving Mercy does extend.
A PSALM.
TO render thanks unto the Lord
How great a Cause have I?
Who me has heard
And not deferred,
To hear me from on high.
He breathed in me hreath of Life,
When straight I did begin,
As soon as born
(O wretch forlorn!)
To lead a Life of Sin.
And so have since continued
To vex his wrathful ire,
Though the great God
Be with his Rod,
A great consuming Fire.
To all those that do still persist
In wickedness to dwell,
The Lord will Curse
Without remorse,
And throw him into Hell.
But they that do his blessed Commands
Endeavor to fulfill,
In Heaven above,
With Peace and Love
They shall for ever dwell.
The Lord by his great Providence,
Has saved me as in Tower,
When I was sick,
He did not stick,
To help me by his Power.
His Mercyes are so very great,
They do so far exceed,
That they may move
Us all to love,
The Articles of our Creed.
On Faith.
FAITH, by which alone it is that we can,
Believe that the great God created Man.
And when lapsed Man from his bliss did fall,
In State of Grace, he did him reinstall.
By promising Light and Life in Christ his Son,
Whose Life and Light before the World begun.
If we his Light would fully apprehend,
We should love and imitate our blessed Friend;
And let our darkness by his Rays be lighted,
Then we shall never more be benighted.
By Faith we know Things formerly have been,
By Faith we still do hope for Things not seen.
On Hope.
HOPE from which our comfort does proceed,
From the saving Articles of our Creed.
Hope the Comfort both of the good and bad,
Who still do cheat us when we are most sad.
Who do restore the lingering sick to Health,
Who make the poor Beggar full of Wealth.
Who suitest every Condition,
Who art the universal Physician.
Thou Comfort of all Miseries below,
Because we hope we shall them all forgo.
And live where Love and Charity does dwell,
Thou Heaven to those that on Earth do well.
On Charity.
HAD I the Faith to see into Heaven,
That all my Sins are freely forgiven,
By Christ his blessed Merits not my own,
For which my Life and Soul both will I pawn;
Could shining Angels tongue, or that of Men,
From learned Homer down to good old Ben.
My wretched hope but in the least inspire,
To be one of their famed learned Quire;
If that pure Charity I could not gain,
Both my Faith and my Hope were still in vain.
On S. V.
HAppy's the Man that walks by Reasons light,
Who curbeth his Passions dark at Night,
His Life is assuredly in the right.
Who having seen his Vanity and Crimes,
And Alteration of Humane Times;
Does mind that Thing for which he was born,
To serve his God, the Church and State adorn;
He Is still a New and constant Almanac,
And always remains unchanged Shadrach.
On the Death of an Insant.
LIttle Primrose, soon sprung, fading Flower,
Who bloomest and dyest within an Hour,
The true Emblem of all Humane Power.
Which extended to never so long a date,
Must yet submit to all conquering Fate,
As do all sublunaries soon or late.
Thrice happy he whose fertile Mothers Womb,
Does prove to him a Sepulcher or Tomb.
If he be so unfortunate forlorn,
As in this troublesome World to be born,
The next great happiness that he can crave,
Is early to wish for, or find a Grave,
And be not this World's Darling nor its Slave.
On the Death of T. T. Esquire
SHall good Men dye and no Poetic Knell,
Out sound the tinckling of the Parish Bell?
Shall the Memory of the Good and Just,
Perish, as does the rude and common Dust?
No, no such Things our Eyes can never see,
Till all the Race of Mankind cease to be.
For he that is Truth it self has expressed,
The Memory of the Just shall be blessed.
But the wicked which are not by Faith begot,
Their Name and their Memory both shall rot.
This wise Man whom this earthy Tomb contains,
Early did dig within those richest Veins.
Where that inestimable Treasure lies,
Worth more then this fading Worlds both Indies.
He often did view that true sacred Record,
God's holy revealed and written Word.
And did transcribe that Copy in his life,
By loving blessed Concord, and hating Strife;
His Prince and Country Laws he did obey,
And no Man's Interest he would betray.
He performed an Husbands duty to's Wife,
By living in Amity free from Strife.
And when the great Almighty did them part,
She was always inshrined in his Heart.
For a true Widower free from all stain,
Constant till his Death he did remain;
His Children in God's Laws he did instruct,
And gave them drink from that true Aqueduct.
(My barren, dry and thirsty, Crabstock Muse,
Still does remain without the least excuse,
After such manure, such Fruit to produce.)
His Covenant with Servants he did fulfill,
And left them not to their disordered Will,
But taught them their Duty to their great Lord,
Whom they all worshipped with one accord;
His Duty to God he did never neglect,
His Neighbor as himself he did respect,
And true and real Friendship did affect.
But that on Earth being not so resin'd,
As was his clear Intellectual Mind;
In Virtue having outrun his ancient Race,
In Heaven he has got an everlasting Place.
On W. S. of M. Esquire
HAD I the Poets Rapture, or their Rage,
I Would sing the Praises of venerable Age.
Where Reason, Justice, Piety did dwell,
Whose End and Aim was always to do well.
Who being guided by Divine foresight,
He did always lead his own Life aright.
Free from Error or Romish Superstition,
He erected in himself an Inquisition;
And Temperance was his chief Physician.
Blind Cant and Phanaticism he did hate,
And was a chief Pillor in Church and State.
Public Imploys he had a great many,
And did discharge them all as well as any.
Judge he was of the whole Admiralty,
Likewise Vice-Warden of the Stannery,
Deputy-Lieutenant and Colonel;
Both which he discharged exceeding well.
He was true Conservator of the Peace,
From Business and Duty he never did cease.
His Religion was true and Authentic,
And as ancient as the Atlantic,
And his Family was great and Antique.
His Praises to write, what Pen is able,
Whose great Virtues were unimitable,
And all his whole Life most admirable.
But now having bidden his Friends good night,
God has given him everlasting Light.
On the B. of E.
HAIL, all renowned and blessed Patriot,
Who addest luster to them thee begot,
Whose Charity extends over the large Globe,
And gives glory to the Lords bright Robe.
Whose Virtues, like thy capatious mind,
Are free and liberal, unconfined.
Which have preferved thee when in Tower,
Against Arbitrary and lawless Power.
Thy Fame then the Cannons much louder roars,
It reaches from Native to Foreign Shoars.
It cannot be heghtned by slight Poetry,
Nor by the Title of Lord Trelawny,
Which has already reached the Sky.
Where thy great love and friendship does extend,
Like our greatest and universal Friend.
Who will Crown the Mitre at this Worlds end.
On Sir R. S.
FRiendships darling, loves delight, Virtues choice,
Of all thou have the universal Voice.
Others friendships are to their Friends confined,
Thine's capatious as thy boundless Mind,
And is extended to all humane kind.
All the four great Virtues Cardinal
In thy enlarged Soul are Centrical;
Thy Character most truly to complete,
You Are the extract of all that is Good and Great.
On the E. of R.
SAddle bold Pegasus and all his Race,
My Muse may find out Honors resting Place.
And now she has fetched her full career,
And has now travailed both far and near,
She'th found it at home in a peerless Peer.
Honor, Love, Friendship, Affability,
With the true extract of Gentility.
Whose Virtues are far more honorable,
Than Or, or Argent. Vert. Gules, or Sable.
I Am sure my Muse delights not in Fable.
Whose Religion in reality
Which will sure, when he leaves Mortality,
Cause him in Heaven above for to dwell;
My tardy Muse endeavors to bode well.
My resty Pegasus begins to bound,
And feign would cast my Muse on Cornish ground.
And having thrown of both bridle and dock,
Would very willingly lie nigh the Rock.
On N. B.
DULL slumbring Muse awake thy self upraise,
And sing the pleasures of thy youthful Days.
When at Oxford where the blessed Muses ring,
Whence Knowledge, and all Sciences do spring.
Where my lovely Dame and I have spent,
Many happy Hours to our sweet content.
Where we were both destined from our Birth,
To taste the Fruits of Paradise on Earth.
Innocently we did enjoy our Love,
Like little Children, or the gall-less Dove.
Never were I between thy pretty Legs,
Where lies concealed sweet Muskadine and Eggs;
And where would stoop the greatest Beglerbegs.
Your House in Castreet History did adorn,
We have often perused with Mrs. Horn.
Then in a Boat strewed with green Rushes,
We have gone to hear the warbling Thrushes,
Who were out done by thy melodious strains,
Who charmest the Academick and the Swains,
And all whose blood's not child in their old Veins.
'Twas at the pretty pleasures of a Wake,
That first I did of the happyness partake,
And was more lucky than Sir Francis Drake.
When he new Worlds to us did discover.
I was so very fortunate a Lover,
My genious over thee will hover,
Till we shoot the Gulf to Heaven or Hell,
I never shall forget kind Madam Nell;
And bless my Stars, and Exeter College,
That gave me of thee the happy Knowledge.
On Madam B. welcome into the Country.
THe brave Cornish Muses,
Deserve no excuses,
For not bidding you welcome hither,
For inspired from above,
With Poetry and Love,
They should do it all together
For your Mind so serene.
Like to the Queen of Spain,
Is free from all turbulent Passion,
With Verse a whole Fleet,
They ought you to greet.
Even as I do in some Fashion.
Your Religion is plain,
And runs in the old Vein,
And is not at all Superstitious,
Your Life is most devout,
Like to a Martyr stout,
And is not at all Fictitious.
Your Example will teach,
What in vain others Preach,
To persuade us to abstain from Sin,
So without any loss,
You Will refine our thick Dross,
And give us your fined Gold for our Tin.
Could my slow Muse fly,
And Soar to the Sky,
And see the beautiful Nymphs of Fame,
Astrea nor Celia,
Nor lovely Cosmelia,
Have not so Celestial a Name.
As Eliza; Second best
Amongst the wondrous rest
Of fair and conquering Woman kind,
That Man that does not see
Divinity through thee,
Is not only dark but blind.
May we still you enjoy,
Without e're being coy,
Till you part from Sister and Brother,
And for better for worse
Without any remorse,
You follow the steps of your Mother.
You're Welcome to our Parts,
With all our whole Hearts,
And may nothing our Friendship sever,
Till in Heaven above,
With blessed Peace and true Love,
We all meet where we shall part never.
On the Dasie, quasi Days Eye.
It opens and shuts with the Sun.
Although we lie open all the long Day,
And in the pleasant Sunshine bask and play;
The darksome Night will come in which we must
Close our pale Heads and turn to Earth and Dust.
On a Dasie.
THE Dasie, the bright Queen of all the Feilds,
Which so much Pleasure and contentment yieds.
When that she does every where bespread,
Her Eye pleasing beauteous Coverled:
Upon the which each loving longing Swain,
Of Cloris and Phillis does still complain.
Unkind and fickle Souls, who always prove
Deaf to the Men that do them mostly love.
But to the Men, sond and lovingly blind.
That unto them are most severe, unkind.
Like Men in Fevers, that do burn and rave,
And what does injure them do mostly crave.
Upon such beauteous and flowery Banks,
There are played many gay youthful pranks.
Where some Lovers prove more tender hearted,
Who from their Swains are not soon parted.
Until in the height of Loves fiercest rage,
They do get of themselves the true Image,
Which does survive them in the next Age.
Then falling into sleep they forget quite;
The approaches of the following Night.
But in folded Arms together do lie,
Being over spread by starry Canopy.
Till fair bright Days-eye does again appear
In this clear pleasant Spring time of the Year;
When frisking Lambs do dance, and Birds do sing,
Praises to God, their great heavenly King.
On the Marygold.
THE pleasant Marygold that shines most bright,
Shuts quite close at the approach of Night.
The love of all those that Marry for Gold,
May be compared to the Marygold;
When Night comes on, and the Gold is done,
The Marygold's shut, and the love is gone.
On his Friend, J. V.
WHen Ancientest Reason us had taught.
How to distinguish between good and naught
What Demon taught our Happiness to place
In her that ruined us and all our Race?
And think our Happiness in them does dwell,
That are the public Mart and Road to Hell;
Surely he was Post or Pisky ridden,
To taste of such putrid Fruit forbidden;
Whose rotten inside, though her outside fair
Has led him to so great and deadly Snare;
Who nath brought on him so great a Slander,
But they must needs be Flour'd, come near the Launder.
On Mrs. Thell.
FRiendship before was naught but Name and show,
Which I Would by some Poet or Painter drew,
Till you of all the fairest Sex the Fame
Have made it to appear more than a Name;
Whose bright Soul, like unto the Gods above,
Does all Things in the way of Heroic Love.
But here, give me leave, Fortune to accuse,
For giving place unto my slender Muse;
When shows but the Emblem of my Mind,
And can but promise I should have been kind,
And grateful, for your former Courtesies,
Your real Friendships and Civilities;
Which should have been done in reality,
Setting aside all blind formality.
For if e're I forget Mr. Colling's Shop,
May I turn School-boy'gen and scourge a Top;
May I not know Maidenhair from Syrrup,
Neither my Gambado from my Styrrup.
May I be Quack, and no Physician,
Or be put in Spanish Inquisition.
May I not know Cordial from Blister,
Neither an Emetick from a Glister;
May, I ever in Oblivion dwell,
If ever I do forget dear Mrs. Thell.
The Latin Sentences in Mr. Goddard's Miscelanies Paraphrased.
Sine Deo, nec gratia nec gaudium, nec Coelum.
WIthout the Rays of the Almighty's Face,
We cannot attain the least spark of Grace.
Nor joy nor any great or goodly Thing,
Nor Heaven, without our Heavenly King
Redemptor noster pro bonis miserecorditer incarnatus est; nihil igitur hac
Margarita ad porcos and Canes.
OUR Savior in pity to the Good,
Took on him our natural Flesh and Blood.
This precious Pearl then must not be thrown,
To Piggs and surly Dogs, who will not own
His infinite Worth, and pious Merit:
All such his purchase shall never Inherit.
Sine Speritu Sancto, nec lux, pax, puritas, sanctitas nec gloria.
WIthout the Holy Ghost we have no Light,
But live in endless perpetual Night.
No Peace, nor Happiness, nor Purity,
No heavenly Mindedness, nor Sanctity,
Nor without belief of the blessed Trinity
Shall we attain to eternal Glory.
Peccatum lethale est venenum, quod delectat et necat.
SIN is a deadly Poison which does kill,
All those People that take thereof their fill;
Although it goes down with great delight
With them whose Palats it has distempered quite.
Which cannot relish Virtues bitter Pill,
Which gives Life and Antidotes all ill.
Mundus delectat, decipit, destruit.
THE World deceives us with its gaudy Toys,
And gives us but painted, not real Joys,
And all that trust it, certainly destroys.
Per obedientiam, pax, prosperitas, libertas: Per Rebellionem, infaelicitas,
paupertas, infamia desolatio damnatio.
BY our obedience we obtain Peace,
Consusions, Wars, Bloodsheds, then do cease;
Then if we have but true sincerity.
We shall enjoy eternal Prosperity.
But Rebellion is simplicity,
It brings on us all infelicity,
Poverty, Infamy, and Punishment,
It causes Wars and Desolation,
And without Repentance, Damnation.
Divitiae sine gratia, nocent, affligunt, vexant, premunt, opprimunt, irretant,
interficiunt.
RIehes ensnare and do us greatly hurt,
When we consume them in our Vice and Sport.
They afflict, and vex, and they do oppress,
And cause us our Duty for to transgress.
They stir us up to Anger, and to Strife,
And make us live a discontented Life.
Unless they are sanctified by Grace,
Like graceless Children they fly in Parents Face.
Avaritia est Aveni porta, pietatis gangrena, honestatis tinea mors anima.
COvetousness's the way and gate to Hell,
Where covetous Misers shall ever dwell,
They that do not from this base Vice abstain,
'Twill prove to their Piety a Gangrene.
This Vice is worse then idleness or sloth,
And will prove to Man's honesty, a Moth.
Nay this Vice is so mischievous and foul,
'Twill prove the Death of both Body and Soul.
Voluptas obcaecat, titillat, pascit, placet, perdit.
ALL fleshly Pleasures do bewitch the Mind,
And make the Understanding quite purblind.
It tickles us with painted Joys, it feeds
Our Fancies, but does never supply our needs;
Though it pleases with its poisonous Pills,
Instead of giving ease, it surely kills.
Salus and sal, and Sol est humanae vitae.
HEalth is both salt and Sun of Humane Life,
Exceeds Riches, or a virtuous Wife.
Per fidem in Christo, Corona in Coelo.
BY Faith in Christ we attain unto Bliss,
By infidelity that Crown we miss.
If our Faith be joined to sincere Love,
We complete our Joy in Heaven above.
Paenitere, est vere sapere, valere, vivere.
WOuld we truly and sincerely repent,
We must make our whole lives a pious Lent.
And always appear with watery Eyes,
Then shall we appear most truly Wise.
We shall be in Health and for ever live,
When God our heinous Sins shall all forgive.
Preces poscunt, obtinent, praeliant vincunt, triumphant.
PRayers do always profit and obtain,
And never return empty nor in vain.
They press and overcome, (Heaven's the Place)
And always obtain some favor or grace;
If they are true sincere without blind Cant,
They will always appear most triumphant.
Sinceritas est pietatis medulla, anima gratiae, antidotus contra desperationem.
WE all shall find, when we do come to dye,
The real worth of true sincerity,
Which is the pitch and the heart of Piety.
'Twill cause our Actions appear most fair
By antidoting ugly black despair.
It Is the true Life and very Soul of Grace,
'Twill bring us to the beatifick Face.
Afflictio illuminat, docet, purgat, curat.
AFlictions us do inlighten and teach,
And true Repentance to us all do Preach;
They do both soundly Purge and thoroughly Cure
All, that can them patiently endure.
Patientia, tacet, adjuvat, exonerat.
PAtience does from all Perturbation cease,
And is a Conservator of the Peace.
She helps us in all our ill Events,
And removes all sad cross Accidents.
She does unburden us, when sore oppressed,
And gives us ease, with sweet quiet rest.
Baptismus, Janua est vitae Christianitatis ostium, Sacramentum regenerationis.
CHristian Baptism, of Life is the Gate,
By which we ought to enter soon or late,
It is the Door of Christianity
Which none but blind Reprobates do deny.
And the sign of Regeneration,
Which gives Interest in Christ's Passion.
Caena Domini cibus est animae, gratiae alimentum, nutrix pietatis. solaminis
canalis, pignus amoris.
THE Lord's Supper is the true Feast of Souls,
Where we may cheer our selves with brim full Bowls.
Being the healthy aliment of Grace,
'Twill cheer our Hearts and smooth our mournsul Face.
'Twill nourish Piety, engage our Love.
Unto the Laws of Jesus Christ above.
'Twill make us believe what God's true word says,
It seals our Gifts and strengthens our Faith.
Evangelii predicatio aeternae vitae est promulgatio, pietatis semen, virtutis
poculum, consolationis vehiculum, cordis fulcrum, imber gratiae, animae
pharmacum; mortuis tuba, caecis lux, dux errantibus, titubantibus baculum,
esurientibus cibus, ignorantibus fons Scientiae, oceanus gaudii, parens fidei.
WOuld we live in pure love free from strife,
Hark to the preaching of eternal Life.
The Gospel is of Piety the Seed,
Which contains the Articles of our Creed.
Virtues Cup, Vehicule of Consolation,
Best searcher of Hearts, and Cordial in the Nation.
A Shower refreshing of Divine Grace,
Which fructifyeth all the faithful Race.
It Is the dispensatory of the Soul,
Which Cures the Sins and sickness of the foul.
It Is the Alarm and Trumpet of the Dead,
Which makes them speak from their cold earthy Bed.
Nothing on this side Heaven can be more kind,
It gives everlasting Light to the blind.
To the erroneous it is a sure Guide,
It steers them right against both Wind and Tide.
It is a Staff unto the Lame falling,
Which makes him to mind his high calling;
Which makes him to long for this good meat,
Which all such hungry Stomachs will repleat.
It Is a Foundation liberal College,
Which gives to the Ignorant Knowledge.
It Is an Ocean full of lively Joy,
And none that diveth in it will destroy.
It will beget in us a lively Faith,
If we will but hearken to what it says.
Sacredotes pij sunt dotes praetiosissimae.
THE best Fruit on this side of the Heaven,
That unto Man in Paradise was given.
Are those most holy and most wholesome Figgs,
That grow on the Gospels precious twigs.
Qui pugnat sine mandato, paenam accipit non mercedem, qui praedicat fine
vocatione, peccat, non prodest.
HE that fights without lawful command,
Is like an Highway-man that bids Men stand.
Who for his reward deserves Punishment,
And of his forwardness ought to repent.
He that preaches without a lawful Calling,
Is like a decayed Building always falling.
He sins, he does not teach nor profit.
Therefore no real good can come of it.
Conscientia est Index, vindex, bona, Caeli est porta and primitiae, mala,
damnationis prodromus, and Gehennae Miseriarum principium.
COnscience is the Index of our Life,
To which we are linked like Man and Wife.
A Judge which our most secret Thoughts will spell,
A Justifier of us, if we do well.
It Is the gate and beginning of our bliss,
And by it Heaven we can never miss;
An evil Conscience forestalls Damnation,
And is ever hopeless of Salvation.
It does begin the Miseries of Hell,
Where those that wrong their Conscience shall dwell,
The pains whereof no mortal tongue can tell.
Vita vere religiosa optimum est medicamen contra timorem terrorem, and
stimulum mortis; bonus semper vivit, abit enim non obit, absconditur non
abscinditur: Dormit, non perit; mutatur non moritur.
ALife that is by religious Rules,
Although the busy World may count such Fools,
It Is the best Medicines against fear,
Or against the terrors of black Despair.
In the whole World there is no such Thing
Against Death's fatal and venomous Sting.
A good Man does not dye, but always live
For God eternal Life to him does give.
He is stepped aside for some little while,
Like to a Man that is gone but a Mile,
He is hidden a while, he is not slain,
And quickly shall he return again.
He sleeps, does not decay nor perish,
But he shall everlastingly flourish.
He is but changed, he does never dye,
He leaves Earth to soar unto the Sky.
Diu vixit qui pie moritur, fructus est laboris, and finis operis, pacere
melioribus.
HE has doubtless well run this short Life's race,
Who has not to Answer for abuse of Grace,
He must doubtless make a most pious end,
And find the great eternal God his Friend,
Where he shall have the reward of his pain,
In endless Joys with everlasting gain.
The end of all his Labors there shall cease,
And the gracious God, shall always please,
And fully enjoy everlasting Peace.
Soli Deo Gloria.
THE Glories of Lords, Dukes, Emperors, Kings,
All temporary fading created Things,
Derive their Being, from the greatest blessed Jehove,
The unexhausted Fountain of all Love.
As we are taught at large in sacred Story,
Therefore to him let us give all the Glory.
Idem.
WHo made this World in harmony to chime?
Who made the eternal Spring of all time?
Who made the pacing Numbers of all Rhyme?
Who made all Things that are? or e're shall be,
Who but the great Almighty God is he?
Therefore we do deserve eternal blame,
If we give not all glory to his Name.
The Cardinal Virtues turned into Verse.
On Prudence.
AGlass of Crystal in a Field of green;
Of all People to be most fairly seen,
The Lords fear, is the beginning of Prudence,
If to Solomon, we give but credence.
She searches all Things and tries forth Truth,
And is the fittest guide for Age or Youth.
She weighs all Things both the good and bad.
And takes the best Counsel may be had.
She judges Things present with Things are past,
Deliberately, not with too much have;
Thereby preventing all Dangers to come,
Pent in swift Times unfathomable Womb.
Prudence discerns all Things, Good from Evil,
Virtue from Vice, and God from the Devil.
On Justice.
A Balance of Silver in a Field of blue,
Giving to every one their right and due.
She upholdeth the property of all Estates,
And causes Foes to be most loving Mates;
Not leaving them to ungovernable Fates.
telling what to do, what to leave undone,
Guiding us with true Light, clear as the Sun.
Preserving all People in Commonwealth,
Keeping the Body Politic in health.
Giving reward to those that do deserve,
Letting Transgressors in penury to starve.
Sustaining the poor, indigent, and weak,
Giving them Feet to walk, and Mouths to speak.
Justice measures by an exact Line,
Setting a perfect Path between thine and mine.
On Fortitude.
A Pillar of Porphire in a golden Field,
Who can endure the touch, and scorns to yield.
Who has a true and invincible Spirit
Grounded on belief of his true Merit.
He cares not to spend his Goods, Life, Blood,
To serve his God, or do his Country good.
Doing Things laudable with courage sure,
Bent the most adverse Fortune to endure.
Holds his intent without alteration,
Not to be biased by a whole Nation.
All just Quarrels to allow and maintain,
As long as any blood is left in a vein.
He seeks for Succor of none but God alone,
Who slew a thousand Men with an Asses bone.
On Temperance.
AJug and Cup of a bright Ruby Rock,
In a Field of Silver, nothing can shock.
She rules herself with discretion,
Being never taken in transgression.
Staying our courage in unlawful things,
A Virtue fit for Noblemen and Kings.
Guiding all things in Order and Degree,
Qualifying the heats of thee and me.
Keeps always the mean both in word and deed,
And has no cause to Vomit, Purge, or Bleed.
Temperance abstaineth from things unlawful,
And always is Obedient and awful;
Despises this World, desires Heaven,
Which to the Temperate Man is given.
On the Free School at Fowey.
COme all you learned Athenian Ghosts,
Of whom the Ancients did make their boasts,
Me with your Pythagorean Souls inspire,
That I may not be untuneful in your Quoire,
Teach me to Consecrate this happy place,
To every Muse, and to every Grace,
That of your Sons may be perpetual race.
Let me the beauty of this Fabric tell,
May true learning in it for ever dwell,
And may it all other Schools far excel.
Yet none of her Sisters will I dispraise,
But she should wear the Laurel and the Bays.
And now I should forget my A, B, C,
Should I forget to speak in praise of thee,
Most Famous, and truly learned Mr. Weeks,
Who might pass for one of the Native Greeks.
Who has brought School-learning to perfection,
By mending her Beauty and Complexion.
And has made her lovers enjoy her more,
In three Months time, than a whole year before.
Abreviating those pedantick Rules,
That make Schoolboys but understanding Mules,
A method yet unknown to other Schools.
Thy patience all follies does wink at,
Nil tam dificile est, quod non Solertia vincat.
Thou can correct without the severe rod,
Having of learning's rules the true method,
This if any doubts, let him be advised,
By the Grammars thou have epitomis'd.
And now all you Neighbors that dwell around,
That are not in Gulf of Ignorance drowned,
Would you have your Children instructed well,
Would you have them with honest folks to dwell
Foy School does carry the largest bell.
On J. M. of T. Esquire,
TO Sing the praises of virtuous Men,
I want the skill of Shadwell, or of Ben.
But with that slender Poetry I have,
I Will mind his Memory, and pay his Grave.
His Youthful years were spent at Court,
Where the accomplished Nobles do resort;
Where he his swift time did not idly spend,
But was always most useful to his friend.
He did the King and his great Court adorn,
And V^^e and Flattery did hate and scorn.
Likewise that Hellish crime, Rebellion,
And was an honor to Endellion.
For when vile Rebels struck off England's head,
All Peace and Happiness from England sled,
And each his Sword in's Brothers bowels shed.
He then did espouse the Loyal party.
And was in that Cause Zealous and hearty;
Fighting for's King, true Liberty and Laws,
Nay, for God and his good righteous Cause.
And before most famous Plimouth's great Town,
He purchased much Honor and Renown.
But when God's omnipotence destroyed that Boar
That his Vineyard had so much spoiled and tore,
And brought our Good King to his home in Peace
All fearful Wars and Bloodsheds then did cease.
Our friend returned to his Country-Seat,
No way aspiring to be vainly great,
He spent his after time in tranquillity,
Living decent, not beyond ability;
He loved true Friendship and reality,
With good Housekeeping and Hospitality;
He loved his Children and his dear Wife,
He lived in true Concord, free from strife,
And enjoyed a long and prosperous Life.
But who can avoid common destiny?
It being ordained for all once to die.
So we will leave our Friend in rest to lie,
Desiring Relations would cease to cry.
On J. V. of T. Esquire.
COme all you chiming Poets, here lament,
My slow Muse will not 'bate you one per Cent.
But does implore and does invoake you all,
To Celebrate this mournful Funeral.
And with your sounding Voice and Music try
To stop the Current of this mighty cry.
And sing out aloud, (for yours the trust is)
How equally he held the Balance, Justice.
And what Fortitude he showed in God's Cause,
By maintaining true Religious Laws;
What temperance he used in his life,
The elements of's body were never in strise;
All actions he weighed, and then did them choose,
And prudence in them all, he still did use.
To keep ill company was very loath,
And it did grate his Ears to hear an Oath;
Virtue was not his task, but his free choice,
For which he has the universal voice.
Should I relate his Alms, and house keeping,
I should set the Neighborhood all a weeping.
His Religion soared to the highest pitch
That our Gospel precepts do us teach;
For he not only loved his Friend, but Foe,
Yet never gave any reason to be so,
And no Man's Charity can higher flow.
Should I tell all can be said of our Friend,
My Verse, like to Writing, would never end,
Therefore next I Will give account of his Wives
Omitting the Character of their Lives.
Of the first he might have reason to vaunt,
Being the present Bishop Trelawney's Aunt.
The Second was the Family of Glauvill,
A Woman full of Virtue, free from ill;
Which would tempt the digression of my quill.
But all that I now of her shall relate,
She left many love Pledges to her Mate.
The last Woman he for his Consort chose,
Was Speccot, Nichol's Widow of Penvose.
Surviving her since that he did remain,
A mournful Widower free from all stain.
Setting forth God's glory for which he was born,
Being fully ripe, like a shock of Corn,
God has gathered him, his Garner t'adorn.
Sent to him while living.
SIR,
I Hope you will take no Fancy, or Conceit,
At this, unpresidented, uncompleat;
For I know you are so well Learned and well Bred,
To know you will live among the Immortal Dead.
Yet I hope you will stand it like a first Rate,
And anticipate your Destiny and Fate,
(He that dies daily never dies soon nor 'late)
Which I wish extended to the longest date.
In the mean time accept this poor slender Verse,
Which will want room upon your large mournful Hearse.
On the Election at F.
LOng have we in Peace and Happiness dwelt,
And never the dismal Effects of discord felt;
When all our Interests were linked in one,
And none of us were single or alone;
When each our Minds revealed to other,
As confident as Brother to Brother.
Then was no difference in Elections,
Our Neighbors then had our Affections:
But now Discord has made separation,
Foreign we are as Nation to Nation.
I wish we would be better advised,
And all of us become Naturalized.
Laying aside all Circumvention,
Let the Public Good be our pretention,
For which let us have a real Intention.
And set an healing Plaster to this Sore,
That it may not fester so any more,
Wherefore let us his mighty aid implore,
Who of an ireful Foe can make a Friend,
And to all present Discords set an end.
In return to an Ode of Horace sent by J. H.
SIR,
YOur Dame does English it so well,
Although by birth a Roman
That plainly the Truth for to tell
She can be outdone by no Man.
I Have often invoked the Nine in vain,
For they will not mend my Verse or strain.
Yet Sir, to you that have the skill
Of learned Tongues for to commend
A modern Wit deserves your Quill,
Which unto you I recommend.
A Woman of the British Race,
Whose Glories time will never deface.
She does all our vain Sex exceed,
In the luster of her Soul and Face,
And in her matchless Pen indeed,
Our manly Fancies must give place,
Man may strive to be head in vain
Orinda sure has all the Brain.
Vice and Flattery she did scorn,
Which we all ought for to despise,
Love and Honor did her Mind adorn,
In which she was most truly wise.
Friendship's congenial to her Soul,
And was in every part the whole.
But why do I my Candle light
In presence of the sparkling Sun?
So many Men have done her right
Mine had better been left undone.
Her own Works praise her in the gate,
Mine comes unseasonable and late.
Her Memory time cannot deface,
Although her Corpse be turned to Dust
She being adorned with every Grace;
Dwells now amongst the Good and Just.
Let Angel's Anthems be her Praise,
And here let Laureats crown her Bays.
On the Lady P.
COme all you Sacred Nine, assist my Pen,
Or rather all pious and virtuous Men:
Here see a Woman outstrip humane Race
In Virtue, Piety and each good Grace,
Who being wrapped with Thonghts of Eternity,
Studied not how to live, but how to dye.
Her Charity and Mercy did excel,
It would seem Hiperbole the truth to tell.
Her Life was led according to God's Word,
(He that gives to the poor lends to the Lord.)
She having given unto the Poor most of her wealth,
Heaven's endless Treasures, everlasting Health,
Are her great Portion, and just reward
With the fruition of our blessed Lord.
Love Verses.
All over Love.
LOve walks the pleasant Arbor of her Hair,
From thence he creeps unto her listening Ear;
Then basking on her white and rosy Cheeks,
A thousand charming pleasures there he seeks
Then gazing on the Planet of her Eye,
Where the dancing baby he does spy,
Which must the Fate of her sad Lovers try.
Then on her Nose, the joyful lovers Bliss,
Because it intercepts no coming Kiss;
Love on her balmy lips would ever sit,
But that he creeps between to see her wit,
Where could hang on the Music of her Song,
And never think the charming hours too long
But dancing as though Tarantula stong,
He skips from thence unto her Snowy breast,
Where he would fain, but cannot, be at rest,
Till he centers in the place he likes best,
In which sweet Grove, he could for ever stay,
Melting in the sweets of Amorous play,
And never think on Night, nor wish it day.
On Absence.
IT seems Ten Winters, since thy Face I saw,
By the righteous Gospel and the Law,
I wake all Night, and dream all Day,
My hairs are almost all turned Gray;
Then come, dear Barber, thy kind Art approve,
And Trim me quickly of my o're-grown Love.
Incureable.
I Tried Cowleys Receipt, to cure my Love,
But all did useless and insipid prove.
Books, Business, Prayers, Sermons, Wine and Mirth,
With all the gayeties of the dull Earth;
My Love forgive me, I tried new desire,
But that still added fuel to the fire,
And like ill Conscience, did vex me more,
That I should any thing but thee adore.
Thy Image is so fixed within my heart
It admits the cure of no other art;
What then remains, most beautiful and fair,
But that I lie grovelling in black despair?
Only the Center of happiness can cure,
The pains that Lovers, and the damned endure.
Resolved to Love.
THE greatest Pleasure underneath the Sun,
Is for to love, until short Life be done.
The bounteous Garden, or spacious Field,
Does not half the pleasing Contentment yield;
As does the Fair and most beauteous She,
Which is all the whole charming World to me.
Let Pomp, Ambition, or an empty Name
Inslave Mankind, and set the World on Flame;
My Love is much more pleasing to me far,
Than Fame, or sounding Titles got by War,
Or than the Riches of the jangling Bar.
Then Love I will, my only charming Dear,
Not for a Day, a Week, or for a Year.
But still for ever unto the last end,
Like a true Lover, and a constant Friend.
That Love which ended, never did begin,
It Is like the taint of Original Sin,
Which still Eternal Love does wash away,
Although still renewed every Day;
Then imitate I will, the Prince of Peace,
Whose flowing Love to Man will never cease.
On the Sickness and Recovery of Cosmelia.
CRuel Disease! To seek thy thirst to assuage
With conquering Beauty and with blooming Age;
And with thy reeking Malice her perplex,
The mirror and the wonder of her Sex!
Methinks some Beldame whom Age had frozen,
For a sit Victim thou should have chosen.
Where more successful thou might have proved,
And not have grieved her, by all Men loved.
But thy envenomed and malign intent,
An higher Power did timely prevent;
And has Reprieved her for to dispense
On her All-universal Influence,
Of Love and true Friendship great Natures ties,
Which linketh Heaven with the Earth and Skies.
Go on blessed Soul, in Friendship and Love,
And always imitate the gall-less Dove,
Till ravished with happiness of God above.
An Epithalamium, Mad. Amy. H.
MAtchless Estate, by God himself contrived,
Had not fond Man his happiness survived,
Seeking to live, he became short lived.
Happy'st condition of Haman Race,
If our Nature be improved by Grace;
Which do exact, and lively represent,
Christ's Love and Friendship, and his blessed intent
Unto his dear Spouse the Church, which he will
For ever love and bless, if she fulfill,
His righteous Commands, which are most pure,
From Age, to Age, she always shall endure.
Go on blessed Pair, and imitate the love
Of Christ, the spotless and the gall-less Dove,
Until exalted with the blessed above.
To sing Alelujah's your Masters praise,
Never measuring Time by Night or Days.
But be enlight'ned, by his glorious Rays,
May both be crowned with immortal Bays.
That the Poet may fitly complete ye,
Be always mindful of the word, Amete,
And the God of Love and Mercy, Salvete,
On Cosmelia.
PArtial Nature, who did dispense
On one so large and great an Insluence;
As to attract all Eyes and longing Hearts,
In spite of all the most powerful Arts.
Thou did all thy fair Cosmeticks use,
Poor Mankind to ensnare and to amuse;
To make a Work of fuller perfection
Exceeding all Beauty and Complexion.
To remain the censuring Worlds wonder,
Whose Fame is louder then roaring Thunder.
For never was there Woman since the fall
That does so charm, attract, and conquer all.
Thy famed Beauty exceeds the power of Verse
And never will have a funeral Hearse,
But be as deathless as the Universe.
Idem.
NAture's chief workmanship of Mold so bright,
That still do please with wonder and delight,
Celestial Beauty! Where I would rest,
With the Object of my happiness, blessed.
Business, the bane of love designed
To ruin a sad poor Lovers mind;
Which should be fraught with naught but love,
As Saints are in the Heay'n above.
On Cofmelia.
WHen fair Cosmelia's Face I saw,
Such sweetness there did dwell,
That only Saints in Vision,
The like could never tell.
Her Lips, then Roses, are more sweet,
Or then the Honeycomb,
Then all the Odors upon Earth,
Or then my native home.
Her Eyes then sparkling Diamonds,
More richly they do shine,
Which shows the most lovely Image
Of her bright Soul Divine.
Her beautiful Complexion,
The Rubies does outdo
The fair and beauteous Sharons Rose
Has not so bright an hew.
Her Sister breasts like hills of Snow
So beautiful do show,
They Will make an Hermit leave his Cell
And make a Saint to woe.
Her secret Parts, who can describe?
Where Pleasures are in store,
That only they in Paradise
Can ever enjoy more.
From which odorif'rous Fountain
May many dews distill,
That may the Race of Nature still,
With young Cosmelia's fill.
Her Hair like Sunbeams dasling Light,
Where love does dance in Mazes,
Which like to all her other Parts,
Most wonderfully pleases.
Her Thighs like Ivory Pillars
Whiter then driving Snow,
But what does lie between them
Happy's the Man shall know.
Her pretty little Feet and Legs
Supporteth all the rest,
Which leads to that milky way,
Where I would be at rest.
If she were laid but in her Bed,
And I were in her Arms,
I would defy the snaring World,
With all its other Charms.
Her Soul is of a M^uld so bright,
So Affable and Noble,
It adds more Luster to the Name
Of sweet Bar. S.
On Mad. M.
MOst Beautiful, Wise, Great, Just and Good,
The fairest Creature made of flesh and blood!
Whose Features are so exquisitely bright,
That they do far Outshine the Summer's Light.
If all alike did see (but some are blind)
Thou would captivate all Humane Kind:
Thy Sun-like Rays thou do on all disperse,
Thy Fame, and his, does reach the Universe.
On Death and Cupid.
GRim Death and Cupid conquers all,
The pompous great Ones, and the small,
The Infant and the Giant tall.
The only difference is this,
Death a nobler Conqueror is,
And suffers none in pain to live,
Nor can be bribed for a Reprieve,
Although the whole World they could give.
But Cupid wounds the Heart in vain,
To make it dwell in constant pain.
Then strike pale Death and cure the Heart
That wounded lies with Cupid's Dart.
On a Horse.
SOme Men write of Hawks, and some write of Hounds,
But they all do make inferior Sounds.
To the Horse, whose Strength and comely Features,
Exceeds most all his fellow Creatures.
Which is fit in Peace, and also in War,
For Christian, Turk, Tartar, Ruz, or Zar:
For Draught, or Burden, or for the Highway,
No Creature's more serviceable Night or Day,
Be he Black, or Brown, Sorrel, White or Gray.
But of all Horses fit for your Pleasure,
There Is none can compare with Ebenezer.
For he will travel true at any rate,
And it fit to run for Wager or Plate;
For on the whole Earth he has not his Mate.
On Mad. R.
LOvely Dorinda, whose chaste Maiden Life,
Procured thee to be a virtuous Wife.
Whose Virtues have gotten so loud a Name,
That most other Wives and Matrons you shame,
Purchasing t'your self everlasting Fame.
The great Blessings of God, brave Children dear
Are born to you almost every Year;
And Prudence the Mother of Virtues Race,
In you has found her wished resting place.
By which you can blind Fate it self command
And put even Destiny to a stand.
By which you can command the shining Globe,
The sparkling Scepter the Gown and long Robe,
Your Character if could end in a Word,
Your Virtues relate you to Hungerford.
On Madam Bhens History of Oroonoko.
WHo can fully praise famed Madam Bhen,
She exceeding most of our Modern Men.
Neither Doctor Burnet, nor Doctor Sprat
Could write his Story more pertinent and pat.
For she has got such a curious knack,
To wash and polish and make White this Black.
And on this Subject does so well Indite,
She makes him look fairer then a White.
And very much to exceed in Honor.
Oneal, Obryan, or famed Oconnor.
Another Black looks but like a Cuckoo,
Compared to our Eagle Oroonoko.
Who if he had been a Christian born,
All Learned Pens his Memory would adorn.
Next she has set such a curious Gilt
On that famous, infamous damned Town Jilt;
With her bewitching tricks of Lechery,
And direful effects of Hellish Treach'ry;
The innocence of that noble Friar,
Which preserved him from cruel Fire:
For he being inlight'ned from above,
Could burn with nothing but Charity and Love.
On the happy Peace of Christendom, concluded at Reswick.
O Happy Albion! let discord cease,
Since thou art blessed again with lasting Peace.
Be all thy Churches now as well as Paul's
Illuminated with Praises of all Souls.
Let all Schools and Colleges, Halls and Cells,
With Learned Anthems out-tune our Bells.
Let all our Learned Doctors and Cannons roar,
And sing their Makers praifes over and over.
That has preserved our Faith's Defender,
Who made proud France her Conquests surrender.
May perpetual Laurels crown his Brow,
Great and triumphant always be as now,
That England may still pray God speed the Plow.
No more shall we complain loss of Treasure,
But wallow in unbounded Wealth and Pleasure.
No more shall Parents Mourn for Childrens loss,
But all true Happyness themselves ingross.
Let mournful Widows now dry up their Tears,
Marry again, and get young lusty Heirs.
Let every one sit under his own Vine,
And cheer his Heart again with sparkling Wine,
And each to other's happyness combine.
Let our Peacemakers be for ever blessed,
Enjoying glorious everlasting rest.
Let all the Elements as well as Fire
In Unity each of them conspire.
With every Voice and every Wind
To extol his Name among Humane Kind.
That has given the conquering Sword a Law,
Triumphant William the great Nassaw.
On his Tutor G. V.
ALL Men conclude, that Learning has no end,
But that Maxim's confuted by our Friend.
Who does the utmost bound of Learning know,
And with it others does Cultivate and Sow.
Who has so many Virtues laid in store,
That loud Fame it self cannot speak more.
Who did not hoard them up to be admired.
But being with Christian Zeal inspired,
He taught to others, what he had acquired.
He checked the Pupils gently for their Crimes,
And prepared them to encounter future Times.
His modesty the boldest prate would hush,
And put the chastest Female to a blush.
Truth and Reason do his great Mind adorn,
And left no room for Flattery or Scorn.
All Virtues are included in his Knowledge,
Taught in Universities or College.
The greatest Preferments he does Merit,
Having profound humility of Spirit,
An immortal Crown he will shortly Inherit.
For Nature and parts improved so by Grace,
heaven will be his reward, and resting place.
What can we then more say (dear Friend) of thee,
Whose pious Life is thy best Elegy.
I Tore my Book, and with my Muse did rage,
For not being more kinder to my Age.
Since she will not befriend me with better lines,
Henceforth I Will mind my Plough and Harrow-tines
My Kitchen-Garden, and my flowery Fields,
Which more of pleasure and contentment yields.
With that my dull Muse to me replied,
Ay and justly too, I have thee denied;
If thou had minded me in youthful Days,
I would have gotten thee both Fame and Praise;
But thou took'st pleasure in each dirty Face,
Which brought on thee, instead of Fame, disgrace,
And never thought on any of my Race.
Cease therefore, thou do rage with me in vain,
Be contented, thou can be young again.
The Conclusion.
ANd now, dear Sir, your pardon I do crave,
Since I cannot entertain you with what is brave,
Yet Id'e rather be counted Fool then Knave,
Yea rather then ungrateful, be your Slave;
Therefore accept me in the dress I have.
But I must beg the famed Poets pardons
For planting Daysies amongst their Gardens
Of Cowslips, Roses, Lillies of the Valleys,
With curious Prospects, Walks and Allies.
With their most stately and shady Bowers,
And with variety of pleasant Flowers;
Such brave Ornaments and graceful Places
Will entertain the Muses and the Graces.
But with a poor Hermit in his close Cell,
The Muses will never vouchsafe to dwell.
Which is the truest reason Sir, that I
Am left so truly barren and so dry.
That my Muse will nothing prolisick yield,
But what is common unto every Field.
But though I have no famed Enclosure,
Yet being all of my own Composure,
I desire you would accept it in good part,
Together with the Poet's Service and Heart.
FINIS.

