A RE-ASSERTION OF GRACE. OR, VINDICIAE EVANGELII. A Vindication of the
Gospell-truths, from the unjust censure and undue aspersions of Antinomians. In
a modest Reply to Mr. Anth: Burgesses Vindiciae Legis, Mr. Rutherfords Trial
and Triumph of Faith, from which also Mr. Geerie and M. Bedford may receive a
satisfactory answer.

By ROBERT TOWN.

AMBR: Quia Conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sordidentur.

JOHN 16.2. They will put you out of their Synagogues: yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.

JOHN 4.4. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them; because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Angel in Cornhill,
1654.

The PREFACE.
THe written Papers of this Book, originally under the Authors own hand, did
accidentally fall under my view, by means of a faithful friend and brother,
who first gave me intelligence that there was such a work in hand but not as
yet perfected; and afterward obtaining a sight of it in its primary
engrossings, he borrowed the same for a time, in which he might peruse and
read them over, and so in the interim, before they were returned to the owner,
they came to me, the which when I had considered, I found therein a composure
of very excellent matter, the Doctrine of the Law of God truly published in its
lightening luster, and native purity, drawn forth from under the vailing
glosses with which it lay covered (the mere Inventions of Satan transformed
into an Angel of light) and restored to its former integrity, and proper use;
Psalm. 12.
as Silver, tried in a furnace of earth purified seven times: So that Sinah's
Thunderclapps, or the bolts of Horeb do here appear Shot out, the clouds and
Pharisaicall expositions (darkening the counsel of God by words without
knowledge) being dissolved and broken through. Job 38.


And moreover, that the fainting sinner might not utterly be excluded, I found
comprised therein, the bringing to light of life and immortality through the
Gospel, the opening of the kingdom of heaven the doors being largely
expanded in Christ's own way, 2 Timothy 1.
and method of preaching; which reason, and the seed of the Serpent sown
therein (the enemy to the simple truth of God) has endeavored by all subtle
workings, and secret insinuations, either wholly to shut, or else to open, and
but to the half, by the key of such qualifications, that there is no
possibility for any heart sensibly discovered, by the door so opened, to enter
in: Only the hypocrite, who lives in a fools paradise, (fraighted with a
vain imagination of his own conditional goodness) does conceitedly seem to
himself to enter into the kingdom of heaven, Josh 6.
by that way which Satan has prepared and cast up, but the issues thereof are
the issues of death, leading to Jericho. the accursed City; so that this he
shall have in the end, He shall lie down in sorrow; Isa. 50. John 9.
and because he thinks that he sees, therefore his sin remains: For the end
cannot be enjoyed but only in God own way, appointed by himself, which way
thou shall find most clearly held out, John 14.
and convincingly proved in these ensuing treatises, to be Christ himself by
whom the believing heart has access to God, and comes with boldness to the
throne of grace, no man coming to the Father but by him; John 10.
And also, that he is the door, ready to entertain and receive into peaceable
habitations and sure dwellings, all such as are wounded with the invenomed
arrows of their hidden abominations, and stand trembling under the hand of
God, fearful of his fiery wrath, and justly deserved indignation; which none
may abide, nor otherwise can avoid. John 3.
And that he is the truth of the brazen Serpent which is lifted up upon the
pole in the wilderness, not for the whole, but for the mortally wounded to
look unto. And the water of life to cool and refresh the withered heart, Psalm.
23.
parched with the heat of sin; at the which, as still waters, the weak sheep
may drink, which otherwise were not able to stand in, or withstand the
boisterous streams, and hold its footing in the clashing waves; so that out of
his belly flows the Rivers of Living Water. John 10.
And the good Shepherd who fully manageth that relation for the good of his
tender ones, he feeds his Flock, Isa. 40.
like a Shepherd he gathers the Lambs with his arm, John 15.
and carries them in his Bosom, and gently leads those that are with young.
The Vine, in which the Branches live, and in whom his people enjoy their life
by faith, Gal. 2.
being dead in themselves through the Law, John 1. Colos. 1. Isaiah 6.1. Rev.
1. Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 1. Acts 15. Romans 8.
so that what they have or enjoy does proceed and issue from that Root so full
of moisture; of which fullness they receive, and grace for grace: They live,
but it is in him who is their life: They are righteous, and that completely,
but its through his Robes: They are cleansed and washed, but it is by his
Blood: They are accepted, but it is in the Beloved: They are adopted, but it is
in the first begotten among many Brethren: Their Hearts are purified, but it is
by the faith of the Son of God: They are free from Condemnation, but it is
because they are in Christ Jesus; for to such there is no condemnation. Nay,
reckon up all their participations, and we shall find that they are in, and
proceed from him who is the head; Coloss. 1.
that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. So that, What have they,
but they have received it? And a believing man may say most truly, In Christ I
have and am all things, but out of him I am merely nothing, nay less than
nothing and vanity.

And why should this Doctrine be so impugned? (but that the strong man armed
and keeping his house, will not be quiet, for fear he should be dispossessed;
but by all means possible, both as Fox and Lion bestirres himself, that he may
keep and retain his ancient hold) when as it ought rather to be highly extolled
and magnified, in Heart, Press, and Pulpit, Mic. 4.
seeing it lifts up and establishes the mountain of the house of the Lord in
the top of the mountains, and exalts it above the hills, and does but fulfill
that saying of Isaiah, where the Prophet speaks in the person of God himself,
Isa. 52.
Behold my Servant (meaning Christ) shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted,
extolled, and shall be very high, though many should be astonished at him,
because his visage (not appearing comely to the eye of fl sh and blood) was so
marred more than any man, and his form more than the Sons of men. But what God
in Himself, or his Word, has most highly exalted, that Satan (always an
enemy to the truth of God, and the seed of the Woman) does endeavor to
depresse and stifle under foot: But Maugre, all his enmity, the truth will
break out from amongst all the thick clouds of slanders, and neither by his
power nor policy shall be suppressed for he can but touch its heel: Isa 11.
the Ensign must be lift up for the distressed of the Nations to repair unto
and his rest shall be glorious; and he cannot let it, for its the work of God
in which he will be glorified, so that although the enemy come in like a
floude, yet the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him or put
him to flight. But because he is the accuser of the brethren day and night,
therefore he will never be quiet, but will return afresh with a new encounter,
so that it can never be expected, that a truce shall be stricken, and a real
peace concluded between the seed of the Woman and of the Serpent, or that the
child of the flesh will be at rest and sit still whilst he is in the recovery
and view of the promised seed, or the child that is borne after the spirit. But
what matter? for he that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, and these
do but crack the shell (if so much) but cannot reach to the kernel. And the
greatest enemies are those within, of a man's own houshhold which solace
themselves with the outward, but are a bane to the inner man, which daily
accompany us, and are our bosom companions, nourished up together in and with
us, and yet little do we perceive them.

I having lighted upon this work, and perceiving the maine escape thereof to
tend to a vindication, and clearing of the bare and naked truth of God from
aspersions of obloquie cast thereon, and such glosses under which it lay
obscured, and a plain patheticall and free publishing of the Gospel, as the
vein of good tidings, through which the blood of Christ runs freely to
sinners, did set pen to paper, and copy it out; and having so done, I returned
the original draught to the owner, but expecting a good while its coming forth
in another garment to public view under the Authors own papers, and not
hearing any thing of it, and the Author living at a distance from me, I was
afraid lest the child, through these national cumbers and troubles of late,
should have been smothered in the womb, and not have been produced to light
in a current hue to the Judgment of all, that men might try all things, but
hold fast that which is good. And thereupon, I endeavored that thou might
have a sight thereof in this habit, in which it is now presented to thee, by
making use of my own papers. From the which if thou shall (through Gods giving
of the increase) receive the least profit, though but as a grain of
mustard-seede, or satisfaction by the clear light of the truth it self, in
any one of the controversies agitated in the ensuing discourse, I know that the
Author will therein exceedingly rejoice; delighting if in any thing he may be
beneficial to the Church, or the least in the Church of God. And I shall also
receive the full recompense of my labor, if in the least manner I or rather
God by me (as a weak instrument) should be pleased to do any good, who am
less than the least of all his mercies.

Thine in the Lord, SETH BUSHEL.

AN ADMONITION To the READER.
Gentle Reader,
I Could not but give mine attest concerning this Author, and Book, he being a
person known unto me for many years, and I can justly witness that he has
been, and is, a godly, faithful, and painful Minister, one whom I believe
has for many years tasted of, and enjoyed the truth, as it is in Jesus, and
walked blamelesly in the simplicity and power thereof. Having been made,
through the grace of God, a constant, and zealous instrument to bear forth his
testimony against all unrighteousness of men, fleshly wisdom, carnal forms,
and legal worship (though through much persecution, scandal, and suffering)
wherein I judge him a faithful steward of the talent committed to his charge,
being upholden through faith by the mighty power of God: And I cannot but much
rejoice that God has at this season drawn forth his spirit to oppose that
Antichristian darkness, and fleshly wisdom that reigns in the children of
disobediences, and I hope and pray that the Lord will bless it to the same
end, unto which purpose he commends it to all that know and love the Lord in
truth and sincerity: Who remains

The lowest and least of Saints, Jo: WEBSTER.
December. 26. 1653.
The Preface.
Christian and courteous Reader,
THere is a little book called The Assertion of Grace, printed without my
privity by some welwishers to the truth as it is in Jesus, (if yet thou have
seen it:) That, with Dr. Crisp's Sermons, and the Honey comb, being thronged
with pikes of despite ever since their publication, have occasioned this
Re-assertion, to rescue and vindicate (if it be possible) the credit and truth
of each, wherein they have too long suffered.

The times are so frowning, and the fiery spirit of Indignation so overswaying,
that I cannot promise, but rather do fear the not-printing of it. The Author is
(as that faithful Martyr, Englands Apostle, as Mr. Fox calls him, said of
himself) ill-favored to the world-ward, more despised then the hateful Bat;
yet he casts it upon the venture, (as was Moses on the water.) Providence may
so overruled and order, that something of God appearing in it, with which being
enamored, one or other may befriend it with a Printed-publication. But if it
have not free passage, let it shame the Adversaries, being a witness of my
confidence, but of their fear.

This is the grand Controversy in our Land this day. The bloody sword has
passed through it. The Prerogative Royal, our Subject-liberties, estates, lives,
are laid at the stake: But Free Grace is the richest and chief-Diamond
belonging to the Crown of our King Jesus; and what are all these that we hazard
or can lose, to our spiritual freedom, peace of conscience, everlasting life,
and that exceeding glorious condition in Gods Kingdom! The loss of one soul,
the damnation of it in hell, is more considerable then all these; yea, if thou
add the whole worlds worth, it cannot by them all be ransomed.
Church Government is a fair flower, in its native and original purity, if so it
could be happily planted, and made to grow: but this is the Prime-rose of the
Church-garland. What is Discipline to Doctrine? the moral and temporary
education, to the spiritual regeneration, and endless blessedness? Indeed, I am
in the lowest Classis, the weakest and unfittest of all to undertake and manage
this quarrel: I could wish it were done with far more dexterity, by one
furnished with better gifts and leisure. But I see a Providence herein: no man
shows himself willing: I am engaged: and it is ordinary with the Lord to
perfect his power in humane weakness. The instrument can want no virtue or
efficacy, which he will use, to effect what he is pleased. Besides, there is a
prevalent, yea omnipotent power in Truth it self, when it shows forth its
native luster. All his adversaries could not resist the wisdom in Stephen.
These men came forth Goliah-like, full of stomach, and with resolution to lay
all level with the earth; Down with them, down with these Antinomians, and sons
of Belial, even to the ground. But like some Meteors, that give a fiery flash
of light a short time, and for want of matter are forthwith spent and
extinguished: so these Champions spirits are now much cooled, and their courage
abated. Look now on them, whom being at a distance defied the invincible
Verity, how presently upon the first Onset their eyes be sore dazzled, and their
minds dazed, with the glory and presence of it! Like them, Psalm. 48.4, 5, 6.
they seem half vanquished already: What may a few more rays and beams effect? I
hope ere long to see my desire, viz. the Truth cleared, and received in love by
both sides, and our selves happily fought to be friends. O our God! this is
easy with thee. In the interim, do they not decline the battle, and yield in
great part what was contended for? For, 1. Now they assert not that the Law is
without a condemning power, but that it does not actually condemn a believer.
2. The Covenant (though opposed at first) is now not properly conditional,
says Mr. Rutherf. the whole of it lies on God, and is given and wrought of
mere free grace. 3. The Law was said to be the instrument of Regeneration and
Conversion: but Mr. Burgess is brought to this, That it is a practical and
operative mean appointed to work, at least in some degree, that which is
commanded. Mr. Rutherford gives it a tender touch, as if he were afraid or
unwilling to meddle much with it.

And they are pleased to mistake the controverted points, and so to quarrel for
what we never asserted, nor questioned: as, 1. They contend for the inherencie
of sin after justification. Who denied it? 2. That Christ was not intrinsecally
and actively a sinner. But who ever affirmed so horrid a blasphemy? 3. That
believers are subject to the Cross. 4. Believers are to hate sin, as sin,
though freed from the peril of condemnation, etc. Now who fight they against?
they may seek their adversaries. 5. We decry duties, say they; are against
Repentance; teach that the Law is of no use; would cast it out of the Church.
But where do they read or find these? The Accuser of the brethren can help
them to enough of the like stamp.

Also, in many other of the main things they strangely shuffle and shift in the
business: for though they make a fair flourish in the eyes of the simpler sort,
who are not able to look thoroughly into them; yet a judicious spirit sees their
arguments without nerves, or their grounds to be sandy and failing. And Mr.
Burgess (above all) has devised unheard of distinctions, and much quaint
Divinity, all to support their rotten and tottering tenets. And it is no sin
with them to belly, disguise us, and with open mouth to declaim against us, as
Antinomians, sons of Belial, Seducers, Libertines, disobedient, unholy,
profane, etc. which are our genuine epithets, Doctor Tailor.
and right characters, says their prime Doctor. Such lies, indignities, and
falsehoods, either are no breaches of their law, or it wants power to condemn
them: they are privileged for impunity. But this is to beget and breed
misconceits, and undeserved hatred of our persons in the minds of people, that
so the truth of doctrine may be suspected and despised. But whosoever is wise will
see with his own eyes, and not receive all by tradition. When shall thou learn
the pure and genuine Protestant doctrine, of a faithless Papist?

Lastly, The manor of their proceeding against us does convincingly argue their
great diffidence in their Cause. For,

1. Motions for a loving and brotherly meeting and conference, or to write pro
and con, or to set down the chief tenets of both sides, that so they might be
seen and examined, have still been refused; whenas for number they were ten to
one. Either we must go in their way without question or scruple of any thing,
or Out with us. These are their own words.

2. Being writ unto, they would not answer. Yet certain of their noted
disciples have with oily words come and urged me, as the Jews did Christ, to
speak many things, still saying they intended me no harm; I must not have such
a thought of them: and at our parting gave me the hand never to open their
mouth more against me. And yet the next news was, (can you credit me?) that out
of our Conference, misconstruing and perverting what was said, they had
compiled and exhibited to the Bishop eighteen Propositions or Articles. By this
kind of Ministers and Professors (who can set a fair gloss on all their
doings, pretending much of God, and for his Law) I have been brought into
diverse Courts, and into the High-Commission-Court, where I was twice
imprisoned, my Ministry restrained, and I compelled to attend the Court two
years together: and all that while, nothing was proved, no adversary would show
his face. At last, I was dismissed, nothing worthy the least punishment being
found in me. Afterward, a Minister in Lancashire excepted against my Sermon,
termed it A dish of poison; and being much pressed, through the importunity of
one year, a Gentleman prevailed so far, that I should know my error before four
Divines of his own choosing, so that they might be Judges. Motion was made, that
I might name one; but it would not be granted. And the error was, that I said
the Covenant of Grace was absolute and free in respect of man. The Divines were
to his mind; he knew that beforehand: And they said I was in the error. I
desired to know the Condition. The gravest and prime of them (now scarce ulli
secundus in the Assembly, uti fertur) answered, that Good works was the
condition of it. Then I demanded, What was the condition of the covenant of
Works; or wherein they differed? So in some passion and discontent they arose,
and we parted. This was in the Prelates time. So not long after, I was cited
again to Chester, where I found an odious black Bill exhibited by Sir John
Lucifuga. Since that, I was summoned before the Ministers at Manchester, where
they charged me with old things. I told them, 1. I was falsely accused. 2. I had
given satisfaction to the Court. But that should not serve to acquit me, said
they. And a Minister, unknown to me, informed them, that he heard me deliver
many Antinomian errors in Stopworth. Where prove that ever I preached, I would
lose my head. But I desired to know some one error, and could not. They voted
me out of my place and Ministry, and by virtue of a pretended Ordinance of
Parliament, commanded me to leave Lancashire, and would not let me stay out my
Quarter: yet I did; and then a Writ was procured from the Colonels to apprehend
and imprison me. My offer was, To let me have justice, and I would justify
what I taught and held, and let them see their errors, (an easy thing to do:)
but they refused. Then I went to London, with intention to Petition the
Parliament: but friends who had better intelligence and experience, dissuaded
and deterred me. So finding little hope of relief, I returned, and removed my
family into Yorkshire; so giving place to their fiery zeal.

Gentle Reader, I have presumed on thy patience, in setting down these
passages: by which it is clear, that they seek themselves, and not Christ and
his Truth; and choose rather to use Club-law, as did Cain, the false Prophets,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites in all times of persecution, to extinguish or
suppress the light of heaven, then that it should discover their nakedness and
shame.

If thou ask, Why are they bent and enraged more against you Antinomians, then
any other Sect?

Answ. They can tell thee great things; and would have thee believe we are
unworthy to live in any Commonwealth. But the truth is, and many of them cannot
be ignorant of it, we teach only what is Orthodox, and the old-received truths
of God: And do desire no more favor, then what Justice can deny to none, viz.
leave to speak for our selves, before we be condemned. Only they see the
inconsistencie of diverse of our Tenets with theirs: and Dagon or the Ark must
fall: And how questionable and unjustifiable their assertions are to any
indifferent capacity, viewing and considering them in the true light, and
therefore would put out our Candie. It would make a Christian face to blush, or
his heart rather to bleed, to hear what stuff they can put off and vent in
their Sermons. I resorted to their Exercises diverse years, yet never heard one
doctrine of Free Grace, of Christ, Faith, or Justification: Legal Reformation
is taken for Regeneration and Evangelical Sanctification. I have spoken with
old and zealous prosessors, who knew not what it was to be justified by faith,
except this was the meaning of it, That God would accept of them for their good
works and duties. If any one (which yet Nature is principled for) be framed and
brought somewhat into a Legal way, and to performances, he is judged a true
Convert, and may set up his rest. If they do well, they tell you they can
believe sufficiently: upon their kind of works they build their faith. The Law
is not preached as the ministry of death, to cast down and to kill, that Christ
may be the life and spiritual resurrection: but the life that most speak of, is
to live and walk in the Law: yet Paul says, I by the Law am dead to the Law,
that I may live to God, Gal. 2.19. I am resolved of this that if people had
experience of a sensible death working in them by the Law, and that nothing but
the curse and wrath could be had in their works and ways; and had felt as
sensibly a reviving and quickening in the faith and apprehension of Christ,
there would be little ground of difference remaining: but till that be, or at
least, that the Law be preached for death, and not for life and peace, as too
many do, how can the controversy be ended?

But flesh and blood may object, What good success can I promise to this my
enterprise? I go against the full tide and violent current of humane policy
and learning of such a religious multitude, all being combined and conspiring
against me. Are not my adversaries in number infinite, rarely qualified,
admired for sanctity and zeal, backed and invested with worldly Authority,
countenanced by the times, and the sole-esteemed pillars of the Church? What am
I? how dare I oppose them? Who is my Patron?

My answer is, 1. I do not come forth in mine own name or strength, nor measure
my self with them; for then hope of prevailing is gone. But when God is set
against them, and his invincible Verity, so opposed by them, how vain and light
then are all these powers and excellencies? 2. I have been carried against the
stream almost these twenty years, yet they could not prevail, by reason of the
Lords strength and presence. 3. However the voyage fall out, I have not much
left to lose, only my outward liberty in part, and a few days, it may be, of
my natural life can be in jeopardy. And has the sacred Truth of God, and the
desired good of his Church been so prevalent, that for their sakes I have
sustained such loss, suffered so many things already; and shall I now shrink,
or be unwilling to sacrifice the loan of what is remaining? The Lord leave me
not to that temptation. 4. In all their opposition, I see nothing to convince,
but am rather thereby confirmed. They would see a mote in Dr. Crisp's eye, but
will not see a beam in their own. If to my self I were guilty of any their
unworthy imputations, or of doing or yet offering a hundredth part of that
wrong I received from them; or if my conscience did not witness with me, that I
had sought to give unto them all possible satisfaction, more then was desired,
or would be accepted of; then I should not have that inward peace and
contentment which now I enjoy. And 5. lastly, why should I desire a Patron, and
so become injurious to any in engaging them, or rendering them to be suspected?
I know the Truth is able to protect it self, and the servant of it: and further
then I am found in the way of Verity, I seek no shelter. The Name of the Lord
is a strong tower: the righteous runs into it, and is safe. Prove. 18.10.
Thou Lord have seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it
with thy hand. The poor commits himself unto thee: thou art the helper of
the fatherless. Psalm. 10.14.

R. Town.

Vindiciae Evangelii: OR, The Vindication of the Gospel from the unjust
Censure, and all Aspertions of A(...)ntinomy. Or, A Reply to Mr ANTH:
BURGESSE'S Vindiciae Legis, etc.
SIR,
YOur other Advantages are many; but God and his Truth are with us, therefore
we may be confident in our just Cause and Quarrel and the Victory is certainly
ours. Your whole College and Assembly approve of and commend your Book; that
is, I confess, cause of sadness and grief to my spirits, but not one jot of
terror? Truth is of more weight and authority with me, then the Consent and
Judgment of all the Learning and Principalities in the world; and as Luther
writ to K. H. 8. I prefer one Paul before a thousand Thom. Scotus, etc.

You anticipate our expectation of your future Reply, in your Preface to the
Reader; I hope you will not: for I perceive by this, that the light of Truth
has almost overcome you; a little more glory of it may happily both convince
and convert also. But your Ground or Reason of not Replying, So in the Closure
of your said Preface.
is a too overweening conceit and high esteem of this your elaborate and
profound Treatise, which is become as a Sun, newly risen in our Church; the
which, if it let us not see what is Truth, what is Error, a thousand Suns
cannot. It had been well, if you had brought one of the least beams of the true
Sun. In Job we read of one who darkened knowledge; and I am sure the true Sun of
Righteousness does not shine forth to the world any more clearly by these
Lectures. To say no more.

I could reduce all your Exceptions, and the Points in controversy, to a few
Heads, which I find dispread, and infinitely repeated; but then perhaps you
would think your self somewhat wronged, or else the Reader would not be so
fully satisfied: Therefore, as you do, so I am enforced to set before him the
same dish of sodden Colworts, usque ad nauseam; and yet leisure will not serve
(it would prove also too tedious) to speak to all your Book: My intent then is
only to examine what you writ against your special eyesore, the Antinomian,
how heartily you deal with him, and how solidly you confute his Positions or
Tenets.

LECTURE I.
Mr. B. Text, 1 Timothy 1.8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.


Answer. In Page 3, and 4. you say, the Law is good in three several Respects;
in the prosecution of all which, I could except against diverse things, but that
I shall have often occasion, and a more proper place to speak them all
afterward.

Mr. B. page 4. It [the Law] is good in respect of the Sanction of it; for it is
accompanied with Promises, etc. and therefore the Law does include Christ
secondarily and occasionally, though not primarily.

Ans. I stand musing at this your Novel-assertion, That the Moral Law (for of
this you will have us to understand you, not of the Ceremonal) does include
Christ; whereas the Apostle says, Romans 3.21. That the righteousness of Faith
is revealed without the Law: And Gal. 3.11. The Law is not of Faith. Now if the
Doctrine of Christian Righteousness and Faith be not contained in the Law, I
see not how Christ should be there included. And yet you presently add, It Is
true, the righteousness of the Law and that of the Gospel differ toto coelo: We
must place one in suprema part coeli, and the other in ima part terrae. as
Luther. Now I thus argue: 1. Christ and his Righteousness are inseparable: If
Christ's Righteousness (which is the only Righteousness of the Gospel) be as far
above, and out of the bounds of the Law, as the highest part of Heaven is
distant from the lowest part of the Earth, then it is impossible that Christ
should any way be included in the Law. Or, 2. You will make the Law more
capacious, and of far larger extent, then is the righteousness of it; so that
the righteousness of the Law must be kept below, but the Law it self fills
Heaven and Earth, or is above as well as below, even where Christ is. This is
your New Divinity, a late Upstart. It is strange to see what shifts you are
often put unto and how to strain your wits (if not conscience also;) for as you
want no good will to maintain and uphold the tot ring Ministry and Doctrine of
your Party, so perceiving Dr. Tailor and others in a way scarce justifiable,
and to use Arguments and distinctions not solid, and ineffectual to convince
the Adversary or to confirm your Opinions, you are thus resolved to go in an
unbeaten and newfound path, in hope to effect your desire. But to proceed. And
know also that your said Author, Dr. Luther, says, That Christ is no more in
the Law, nor yet the Christian, then Christ is now in the grave, or Peter in
the Prison. Again, says he, A believer is out of the limits of the Law, in
another Kingdom, etc. How far your secondarily and occasionally shall be made
to extend, or how you will expound them, I know not: you promise more
hereafter; that is a supersede as now.

M. B. It Is the hardest task in Divinity, to give them [Law and Gospel] their
bounds.

Ans. Yet you have undertaken that task, and presume to have done it, magnis
excidis ausis.

M. B. It Is true, if we take Law and Gospel in this strict difference, as some
Divines do that all the Precepts wherever they are, must be under the Law and
all the Promises be reduced to the Gospel, whether in the Old or new Testament;
in which sense Divines then say, Lex jubat, and Gratia juvat; and Lex imperat,
and fides impetrat: then the Law can have no Sanction by the Promise: But where
can this be showed in Scripture?

Ans. What struggling is here to evade? Your reading exceeds mine; I remember
none who so reduced and marshalled Precepts and Promises: If I credit you in
this, it is not material. I am sure, that all Orthodox Divines I read, Promiss.
aliae conditionales viz. logales, Evangel. gratuitae. Mela.
and the Scripture, do witness, That there be legal Promises which be
conditional: As, He that does these things, shall live in them, Gal. 3.12. And
to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality; is promised eternal life, Romans 2.7. And that the Gospel-Promises
are absolute and free, being only founded in Christ, in whom they have their
sanction and establishment; 2 Cor. 1.20. All the Promises of God in him are
Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. Secondly, August. Luther,
Calvin, Zanchy, Melancthon, with others, in whom we read those expressions, and
the like, viz. That what is only propounded and commanded in the Law, is
obtained, wrought and established by the grace and faith of the Gospel;
according to that in Romans 3.31. We through faith establish the Law. These
Authors, I say, do yet make a clear difference between Evangelical and legal
Promises, and therefore cannot be understood in this your sense. But lastly, If
the Spirit do convert, quicken, and give power by the Precepts, and in and by
commanding, God do convey his grace of Regeneration, (which is your Opinion)
then this question is to no purpose, Whether all the Promises be reduced to the
Gospel, or not: Neither can it be truly affirmed then, That the Law is
established by the grace and faith of the Gospel, which yet is both according
to the verity of Scripture, and the Testimonies of all Authors, as is already
showed. Now let the Reader judge, or your self, whether the Law can have
Sanction by promise, or no.

M. B. I wonder much at an Antinomian Author, saying, It cannot be a Law,
unless it also be a cursing Law, Assert. of Gr. p. 31. For besides that, the
same Author does acknowledge the Moral Law to be a Rule to a Believer; and
regula has vim praecepti, as well as doctrinae.

Ans. The Author you mention does grant the Law to be a perpetual and
inviolable Rule of Righteousness; but that it is a Rule to a Believer, quatenus
talis, he will not grant. 2. It is true, it has vim praecepti as well as
doctrinae, and so it has vim damnandi, a power to curse, as he there
affirms, and you neither have nor can refute.

M. B. What will he say to the Law given to Adam, who yet was righteous and
innocent, and therefore could not be cursing or condemning of him?

Ans. You mean not, that the Law had no power to curse and condemn, because
Adam was innocent; for you grant it had that potentially, though not actually:
If then it did not actually curse, it was not because the Law wanted that
power, but in that state of innocence there was no place nor reason actually to
curse. Henceforth wonder not at the Author for saying the Law has power to
curse (which is denied by Dr Tailor and your self,) but wonder at your own
oversight, who while you would oppose and confute your Adversary, do grant and
affirm all he requires: And yet in your Lect. 6. you deny this power to curse
to be any essential part of the Law. When Adam had sinned, whether did the Law
actually condemn or no? If yes, I demand then, whether it were by that
authority and power it had before, or some new and further power was given it
upon the fall. Did not the Law say to him, yet in innocence, What day thou
eatest of that tree thou shall dye? Genesis 2. How was it, that it threatened
death, and forbad the eating under such a fearful penalty, if it had yet no
power to execute and inflict the same? You must now yield and cease, or fight
on with your own shadow.

M. B. In respect of the Use of the Law to Believers: It has this Use, 1. To
excite and quicken them against all sin and corruption, etc. because none of
the godly are perfectly righteous, and there is none but may complain of his
dull love, and his faint delight in holy things; therefore the Law of God by
commanding does quicken him, etc. Have not Believers Crookedness, Hypocrisy,
Luke-warmness?

Ans. The love of God in Christ revealed and shed abroad in the heart, does
quicken; but the simple Command of the Moral Law, can never effect what you
say: He that loves the Lord, hates sin; but we love the Lord, not by reason
of the Law requiring it, but because he has loved us first, 1 Ioh. 4.19. and
that we be born of God, and know God in his Son. It Is strange Divinity, that
the flesh and wickedness of our nature should be cured or weakened by the Law:
It may discover the malady or disease, but not remedy it: Put the Law to the
old man, it will revive and quicken it indeed, but not to goodness, if we may
believe either Scripture, or our own experience. The strength of sin is the
Law: 1 Cor. 15.56. And Romans 7.9. When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I
dyed. Such is the poysonful enmity in us by the first Adam, that it makes head
against the plaster of the Law, being applied unto it: The old man or flesh is
enmity to God, and all goodness, Romans 8.7. and the more it is stirred and
quickened by the Law, the more it is enraged: But contrarily, the Head of the
Body (that is, the Church) is Christ, from whom it has nourishment ministered,
and so increases with the increase of God; and by this means the body of sin
is weakened and abolished, Colos. 2.19. Our Sanctification is not begun nor
perfected by legal precepts and pressings, but by our true and effectual union
with Christ; Ioh. 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. Verse 5. He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me
ye can do nothing.

M. B. In the third Use of the Law, page 9. How absurd then are they, that say
the preaching of the Law is to make men trust in themselves, and to adhere to
their own righteousness?

Ans. It may be truly said, that too many so preach the Law, that they
establish man's righteousness: for this is in the mouth of diverse; The Minister
says, Do well, and have well; and we are taught, That the way to come to glory
in Heaven, is to glorify God on Earth by good works: Christ saves none but
holy ones, etc. If the Law were used to discover sin, not to cover it; to
weaken and destroy, not to strengthen and build up; to bind and cast out, not
to loose, release and admit: if the Vail were taken off Moses face, and the
glory of God in his fiery and terrible Law did break forth, so that all found
it to be a Ministration of death and condemnation; this would be a mean to kill
and overthrow all self-confidence and boasting: But who does make that use of
it? Not one of twenty: and your self cannot receive the Law and digest it under
such a terrifying and damning notion.

M. B. page 11. The Antinomian, before he speaks any thing against or about the
Law, must show in what sense the Apostle uses it.

Ans. Your Antinomian is as good a friend to the Law as your self: neither do
you, nor yet can you make it appear, that he speaks one word against the Law.
You are too bold in saying that the Apostle argues against the Law in any
sense: but if you so charge him, your Conscience may give way to slander us.

M. B. 5 Caution, page 13. To distinguish between a Believer and his personal
acts; Believers sins are condemned, they are guilty of Gods wrath, though not
their persons.

Ans. This your nice and groundless distinction was Dr Tailors shift, as it is
yours: You might have seen the vanity of it in the Assertion of Grace; or at
least have considered how to satisfy the Objections against it, before you
present the world with it afresh. 1. The Scripture makes the guilt and curse
to redound upon the person, as Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every man that continues
not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. 2. In
your daily repentance, or confession you make in your prayers, do you not judge
and condemn your self for your sins, whereof Conscience does accuse you? What a
strange expression is it, that sins are guilty of Gods wrath? 3. If no guilt
redound upon the person, there is no more need of Christ's blood to cleanse,
acquit and justify, and to be a continual propitiation for sin: The Promise is
vain, and Faith of no effect, unless you will say, that you believe daily to
secure, not your person, but your sins from wrath. 4. And the true reason why
the sin, guilt and curse redound upon any person, is, because he is put and
placed under the Law, which reveals wrath; and why all is kept off the
Believer, it is not because the Law has lost its power to accuse and condema,
as you would bear us in hand, but because he is not under the Law, but under
Grace, Romans 6.14. Gal. 4.4. Christ has satisfied for him, taking all his sins,
guilt and curse unto and upon himself, and God has justified and set him free;
so he lives in peace and at rest by Faith in Christ, who loved him, and gave
himself to redeem him. Also the grace and benefit of his Justification does in
some sort redound upon the actions of a Believer: For was it not by his Faith
that Abels sacrifice pleased God? Heb. 11.4. There is no such purity,
perfection or dignity in the best thing you can do, which of it self, simply
considered, can procure or find acceptance with God. The Scripture and all
Orthodox Divinity do hold forth Christ only as the ground and reason of all
acceptance of man, his works and ways: 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye are an holy Priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. You say Dr
Crisp is wide, and see not your self out of the way of Truth and Charity. A man
under grace is no more under the Law; he is dead to the Law, that he may live
to God: Gal. 2.19.

M. B. 6 Caution. Law is not to be decryed, because we have no power to keep
the Law.

Ans. Who cries down, or speaks against the Law? You cannot show or name
any. And who are so much against the Law as your selves, who are become vain
and needless Advocates for it? The blind Pharisees pretended most zeal for God
and his Law, who were yet in the state of enmity; and by reason of their inward
malice and envy against Christ, opposition and hatred of the truth of his
Doctrine, false accusations, and seeking to entangle and bring him into danger,
they lived in the continual breach of the Law. Well, it is too evident, that
you, with thousand others of your Fraternity, cease not to quarrel with, except
against, and to condemn us for Antinomians, and yet no demonstrative proof is
extant of any such Error or guilt. It is easy to lay on load of accusation
upon Innocence it self (hence such aspersions and indignities cast upon David,
Paul, and that immaculate Lamb Christ himself) if the corrupt heart within give
way, and be bent thereunto: How weak is thy heart, seeing thou have done all
these things! Ezekiel. 16. The weakest and worst sort have been the most zealous
and confident accusers. We know, say the Jews, that this man Christ, is a
sinner, Joh. 9.24. yet they knew no such thing by him. What accusation (says
Pilate) bring you against this man? They answered. If he were not a Malefactor,
we would not have delivered him unto thee, Ioh. 18.29.30. If so many of that
Religion say it, it is unquestionably true, though there be no reality nor jot
of verity in the accusation; yet know it, that it is an Antinomian part to
slander and miscal, and to make no crime to appear. Thus may the greatest
delinquency and guilt of Antinomianism be laid at yours and your fellows doors.
There is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom you trust; Joh. 5.45.

M. B. Ibid. It is an expression that an Antinomian Dr. Crisp.
uses: The Law, says he speaks to thee, if troubled for sin, Do this, and
live. Now this is as if a Judge should bid a Malefactor, If thou will not be
hanged, take all England, and carry it upon your shoulders into the West
Indies: What comfort were this? Now does not the Gospel, when it bids a man
believe, speak as impossible a thing to a man's power?

Answ. Does the Doctor in this saying decry the Law? Your own words, and
judgment too, do import the like impossibility. What a sinister mind is this?
But all, if void of prejudice and partiality, may clearly see by this his
expression, that Doctor Crisps main desire, design and scope was to instruct,
erect and comfort a poor distressed and troubled Soul, and that therefore he so
applied and ministered Gospel-Cordials. Observe the ground and reason of his
words, [if thou be troubled for sin,] and then you have no cause so to reprove
and censure him as you do. 2. His counsel and direction differ much from theirs
of your way, who in such a case bid the dejected man to desire promise, and
endeavor his utmost to do and walk according to the Law, and so put him in hope
of mercy, in that (as it is taught) the Law is mitigated, Evangelized, God
accepts the will for the deed, etc. The Doctor wisely tells him of the
impossibility of making his peace that way (knowing also how apt every one is
to take that course) that so he may utterly despair of himself, self-doings,
and active righteousness, and more readily hearken to the voice and tidings of
the Gospel only. And 3. though to believe be as impossible to man's natural
power, yet it follows not, but that he is rightly put upon the believing the
Gospel; as Paul did bid the Jailer, Act. 16. to believe in the Lord Jesus, that
he might be saved. The believing way is the only way of life, peace, and
Salvation; and the Gospel is to be preached for the obedience of Faith, Romans
1.5. You seek a knot in a rush.

M. B. 7 Caution. I much wonder at one speaking thus: The Law does not only
deprive us of comfort, but it will let no body else speak a word of comfort,
because it is a rigid keeper: and he consirmeth it by that place. Gal. 3.23.
But how short this is, appears, 1. Because what the Apostle calls the Law
here, he called the Scripture in general before. 2. He speaks it generally of
all under that form of Moses his Regiment, so that the fathers should have no
comfort by that means.

Answ. Your Margin might have directed us to the Author or Book, if not to the
page and place where: that had been candid; for the circumstances there would
have given much light. Many sentences of your own, if singled and separated
from what precedeth, would speak strangely, and make a harsh sound. I think
that the expression which occasioneth so much admiration in you, is either D
Crisps, or some other reputed Antinomians, and his words are Allegorical:
Though Paul's friends had free access, and might minister unto him, Acts 24.23.
yet many a Martyr in Queen Mary's time had not that favor: So the Law, being a
spiritual Jailer to the Conscience, suffers none in a Legal way to comfort
it; no work, no duty, performance, or reformation; nor man, nor Angel. The Law
came by Moses, but Grace, Pardon, Peace, Favor, Life, Consolation, by Jesus
Christ. 2. That place, Gal. 3.23. does sufficiently confirm it, and has been
used for that purpose by such Divines as you have no exception against. 3. Your
Reasons are invalid: For first, That Scripture in general is the Law, or
nothing in the Scripture but the Law, which concludes all under sin, Verse 22.
Secondly, Grant that it is meant of all, even the fathers also under that
regiment, according to the History, and it is true that they had no comfort
that way, but by that hope to be brought in afterward, Heb. 7.19. Therefore the
phrase is, They waited for the Consolation, Luke 2.25. and looked for
Redemption, Verse 38. Yet besides that, there is a mystical and spiritual
meaning of that place, as is granted by most; and therefore it was alleged.

M. B. 1 Use of Instruction: Law is good, if used lawfully, etc.

Answ. And is this a lawful use of it, to nickname and miscal your Brother,
slander, falsely accuses him, saying, He is against the Law, destroys it,
makes it contrary Christ and his Gospel? etc. Look on your inward disposition,
frame of spirit, and such outward expressions as these, wherewith you have so
presented men's eyes and ears, by Pulpit and Press, in this crystal glass; and
shame may cover your face, and you be brought to such silence, that you dare
never open your mouth in this way.

LECTURE II.
1 Timothy 1.8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, etc.


Mr. B. In his first way of abusing the Law: He preaches the Law unprofitably,
not only that darkeneth it with obscure questions, but that does not teach
Christ by it: and I see not but that Ministers may be bumbled, that they have
pressed religious duties, but not so as to set up Christ: and hereby people
have been content with Duties and Sacraments, though no Christ in them.

Ans. 1. I dare appeal to any of your constant Hearers, or to the diligent
Reader of this your Book, whether any (though you pretend the contrary) did
more darken the Law with obscure questions, and vain-jangling about it. 2. You
are singular, that will have a Minister teach Christ by the Law: We may all
come to your School to learn this new way. I muse what a Christ the Law sets
forth; it is most like, you mean the setting up of Christ by pressing religious
duties, as your own, and next expression is; which is a most strange, yea and
impossible way to any that knows, or ever received Christ truly. 3. I would
take you in the best sense, if I could yet make any good and sound sense of
your words. Have you perceived indeed any such failing in Ministers, that they
may be humbled for pressing duties, so as they have not set up Christ? Your
Charge is heavy, on whomever it lights: but you are so wise as to beware of
putting your hand into that Hornet's nest, for fear they fly not also about
your ears: save your skin, and meddle not too much with that Noli me tangere;
If I preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense
of the Cross ceased, Gal. 5.11. But you would have religious duties pressed so
as a Christ may be in them; what, and not a Christ without them, a naked
Christ, But Christ invested and clothed with works, as Mr. Fox his complaint
was to Queen Elizabeth? yea first a Christ, and then duties. Let the poor,
sinful, miserable and lost soul first be united and married to him, in whom
dwells the fullness of the Godhead, and in whom she is then complete, wanting
nothing, Col. 2.9, 10. then tell of duties: The true Christ will be all, or
none; he will be alone, without the joining or mixture of duty; as Christ has
satisfied the Father, so that in him he is well pleased: so are we to preach
him and the unsearchable treasures in him, that he alone may satisfy the
Conscience, give true rest to the soul, be the way to favor, peace and life,
and be the reason and ground of all respect and acceptance: thus a dejected and
distressed soul may know and receive him aright, and find sure and everlasting
consolation; and then may your duties and performances have their due place,
ends and praise, with no danger. But if you can make all your duties of pure
and mere Christ, you are a strange Alchymist; this is such Chemical Divinity,
that I cannot skill of, nor well understand. Lastly, You say, people have been
contented with Duties and Sacraments, though no Christ in them, still laying
the blame of this upon the Ministers. What I except against here, is, that your
words import, the people should have Christ in duties, as he is in Sacraments:
which is dangerous, or at least doubtful in the meaning. As duties do differ
much from Sacraments (duties being our work; what is wrought in and by the
Sacraments, is properly Gods Act) so Christ is so present in the Sacraments,
that there he is represented, and exhibited: which I hope you will not affirm
of your duties. You have many such dark and difficult phrases, which the simple
by mistaking may be mislead.

Mr. B. 5. When they do oppose it to Christ, etc. and to compound Christ and
the Law together, is to make opposition: there can no more be two Suns in the
Firmament, then two things to justify; there the reconciliation of the Law and
Christ cannot be in matter of justification, by way of mixture.

Answ. As the Jews error was to oppose the Law to Christ in justification, so
it is your Error to oppose them in sanctification: which you contend to be by
the Law: Christ of God is made unto us, as Righteousness, so Sanctification. 1
Cor. 1.30. 2. If their composition of Christ and Law was opposition; can your
compounding of them be any other? yea you include Christ in the Law, which they
never did. 3. As two things cannot justify, so Christ and Law both cannot
sanctify; therefore the reconciliation of Christ and the Law, cannot be
neither in matter of Sanctification by way of mixture.

M. B. In 8 way thus. And certainly for this twofold end, I may think God
suffers this Antinomian Error to grow: 1. That Ministers may humble themselves,
that they have not set forth Christ and grace, in all the glory of it -- How
much more may we say, that in many Sermons, in many man's Ministry, the drift
and end of all his preaching is not, that Christ may be advanced?

Answ. The Error is yours, who call light darkness. We belong to Christ's
Barn-sloore; Aliquis suit usus in illo.
your loose tongue is not the Fan to separate, nor can all this boisterous
wind blow us away. The Doctrine is of God, (you had need take heed how you
fight against it) he has planted it, and will defend and water it: therefore
it shall take root, flourish and prosper; what you imagine or practice against
it, is a vain thing, Psalm. 2.12. There is an Election of Grace, who shall
receive it, though others be blinded, and hardened; and for their sakes God
will have it preached, and dispread, maugre all malice and spite of man. And
therefore Ministers may be humbled, that they have so much doted upon the Law
of works, that Christ, and the riches of his grace, has been, like the chief
Cornerstone, despised by the builders. It seems, you know many a man's
Ministry guilty herein; and about twenty years ago, there were forty for one
now: So has God been pleased to cause the Sun of righteousness to come from
under the clouds. But be bold, and let them hear it again; they take you to be
one of them, a fellow-worker, a friend: your reproof will be well taken, and
digested, much rather now then heretofore.

Mr. B. 2. Another end may be to have these truths beaten out more -- the grace
of justification, because not only of Papists, but Antinomians.

Ans. And why because of the Antinomians? For their sakes doubtless it is, that
the most acceptable Doctrine of free grace does so gloriously shine forth: and
also, if the world have any more insight into that mystical Article of
Justification, by these labors of yours, or of others of this kind, thanks may
be given to the Antinomians, as you still call them. Some preach Christ, even
of envy and strife, and some also of good will: the one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds: but the
other of love, Philip. 1.15, 16.

Mr. B. Luther speaks in his Commentary on Genesis, much against Antinomists.

Answ. But how unlike are your Antinomians to those? even as you are to Luther.

Mr. B. But yet, because people are fallen into a formality of truths, it is
good to set up Christ.

Answ. Then if other truths were in power, you see no need nor would have any
care to set up Christ. And what avail all other truths besides Christ, who is
all in all? The great Apostle Paul desired to know among the Corinthians, not
any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. All other learning
will spoil us, if it be not after Christ, Colos. 2.8. Is there any foundation
but Christ? does not all light, life, power, peace, consolation, goodness,
felicity, flow from Christ? What a god, or Idol rather, do you, or your people
worship, draw nigh unto, know, put confidence in, out of Christ? All religion
and performances be as a dead and stinking carcass, without faith in him. Paul
counted all other things but loss and dung, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus, Philip. 3.8.

But give ear, you fellow-Ministers, and professors all, to what your Champion
here says. If Christ had been truly set up, such falling into formality would
have been prevented; and now no remedy against this grievous malady, but the
advancing of him. Law, and preaching of works never so zealously, cannot effect
the cure. And yet observe how in the closure, and first Use of this Lecture he
says, How uncharitably and falsely many men charge it generally upon on our
godly Ministers, that they are nothing but justiciaries and leagal-preachers!
for do not all sound and godly Ministers hold forth this Christ, this
righteousness, this way of justification? etc. may not these things be heard in
our Sermons daily? Now, Sir, compare that with this your own charge in this
place; also, how then is it you so complain of formality, for which cause you
would have Christ set up? how it is with you now, I know not; but let me add
this, That where I have been, (and there was no want of outward profession and
zeal) your choice professors (etiam Theologi) were so ignorant of
justification, the righteousness of faith and Christ, that they said they never
heard that Doctrine before. And being examined further, they replied that their
duties and serving of God was their faith and way of peace, etc. These were men
of greatest note, and long standing; and seeing their error laid open, their
foundation sandy, and their Babel like to fall, many of them began to oppose
and persecute; some are yet alive: And I continuing, through the good hand of
God, in Lancashire, where I frequented their monthly Exercises at two places;
yet did I never hear one Sermon of Christ or his righteousness; nor no other
way to peace and life, but to Reform and Conform, attending to the rule and
precepts of the Law; and this was for about the space of eight years.

In the same twentieth page, you misinterpret that place, Augmentum gratiae est
in illa eminen^ scientia Fili^ Dei, etc.
2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;
expounding grace to be the effect of grace, or inherent holiness; whereas the
Apostle would have them to grow up and increase in that excellent knowledge of
Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the world; and of that grace and favor
of God, that is revealed and manifested in him.

LECTURE III.
1 Timothy 1.8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.


Mr. B. While our Protestant Authors were diligent in diging out that precious
gold of justification by free grace, out of the mine of the Scripture; see what
Canons the Council of Trent made against them, as Antinomian -- You may gather
by these their Canons, that we hold such opinions, as indeed, the Antinomian
does.

Answ. The like is our case now. For 1. As Luther seemed to have prophesied
truly of our times, when he said, that after his days, the Doctrine of
free-justification would be lost again, (as we know it so came to pass) and of
late years, through the preaching and writing of some few, it has been happily
revived, and brought out of obscurity to open and clear light again; yet what
Cannons have been both made, and shot off against those men? and thousands
cease not still to consult how to extinguish, and suppress the same. And 2. of
what other spirit can you judge your selves to be, then that Council was led by,
while you account the same Doctrine Antinomian, as they did, and also practice
to your utmost against it? And yet, whereas you grant that you hold such
opinions-indeed, which they condemned, you confess your self an Antinomian
indeed, and cannot so clear your self as your Adversaries do.

M. B. But our writers answer, Here they grossly mistake us.

Answ. And if you do not, yet the world may plainly see how you mistake and
scandalize us. And so ignorant are the most of free grace, and so legally
principled, that where the Papists stumble, there they are offended also.

M. B. In 2 S. Now if all this were spoken to take men off from that general
secret sin, of putting confidence in the good works we do, it were more
tolerable.

Answ. You love not the truth for it self simply, but for some end that you
like, it may be tolerable. 2. Yet if you hold and teach good works to be
necessary to salvation, yea in regard of presence, and that the promise of
life is made unto them, as you tell us, I see no how that sin of confidence in
them can be avoided. For as my soul thinks any thing needful to save me, so
far I will trust, and lean to it. But the truth is, that Christ has saved us:
the work is finished and done, 2 Timothy 1.9. And God sends his Messengers, or
Ministers forth to call men in, that they may see the salvation of their God:
know, all things are made ready; fit down, and rest securely, comfortably, and
contentedly in the apprehension and enjoyment of it. Neither touching this
matter, can you find more high expressions in Luther, as you term them, then
in the New Testament: see Matthew. 22.4. All things are prepared. Luke 2.30, 31.
Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of
all people. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. He has saved us: By grace ye are saved not by works,
lest any man should boast. It is you, that are too low of Stature, who cannot
reach to salvation by simple believing, and receiving it, unless you be
heightened, and the hands of your faith be lengthened by good works; and there
is no fault in the highness of the expression: I would learn of you how good
works can be present, when a lost sinner lays hold on salvation, or on Christ
that he may be saved? or what the presence of them can avail him? or what good
work was required of the Jailer or found in him when trembling (as truly
wretched, and undone) and crying what he might do to be saved; Paul bade him to
believe in the Lord Jesus, and he should be saved, Act. 16.31? but of this more
hereafter, as occasion will be given.

M. B. S 3. If this were their ground of many unsavory assertions among them,
etc.

Answ. If you were not too dainty nice, and quick in mis-apprehension our
assertions would not effend you; but be as savoury and acceptable as they be to
others, of as good judgment as your self.

M. B. That there may be injudiciousness in them, as a cause in part of some
their erroneous passages, will appear, in that they frequently speak
contradictions.

Answ. If you have greater perfection in judgment and other parts, shame not,
nor disdain them that want; neither be arrogant in your self: you have nothing
but what you received. 2. In the undertaking and managing of this quarrel, you
bewray great weakness of judgment, as all may perceive. 3. If speaking of
contradictions do argue injudiciousness, this is more then evident in you; I
could give instance in many passages, which I observed. You condemn that
assertion, It Is no Law, if it have no power, as to command, so to curse; and
yet with the same breath do say, that a Law is always condemning potentially,
though not actually: If it be condemning potentially always, then it has always
power; do you not see your contradiction? If it do not actually, it is not
because lex non est damnaus, but for want of occasion. And the like may be seen
in your expressions about the Law, and salvation by grace, and by works, etc.

Mr. B. ibid. This is a passage often, but very dangerous: That let a man be a
wicked man, even as high as enmity it self can make a man, yet while he is thus
wicked, and while he is no better, his sins are pardoned, and he justified: Yet
in other passages, Though a man be never so wicked, yet if he come to Christ,
if he will take Christ his sins are pardoned. Now what a contradiction is here?
To be wicked and while he is wicked, and while he is no better, and yet to take
Christ; unless they hold, that to take Christ, or to come to him, be no good
thing at all.

Answ. 1. If you wanted not charity toward your Adversary, you might have
tolerated, and accounted of suchlike passages, as you do of those high
expressions in Luther; and you pass by great mountains in Dr. Tailor, as if no
error were in him, and are thus strict to find out a mole-hil or mote in Dr.
Crisp; and yet can show none. This is out of no love to truth, or hatred of
error. 2. Many things, we say, are tolerated in Luther, for many special
reasons: and it is clear to me, that the same grounds of toleration were in
this Author you so except against. 3. The injudiciousness seems here to be in
you, who see not to put a difference between a wicked man's disposition, and his
condition while he is thus wicked, and no better; to wit, in his state and
condition. If he will come to Christ, take Christ, that argues a change in
disposition and will, a mind to be delivered and freed from that so cursed and
dangerous condition he is in. 4. To come to Christ, to take Christ, be good for
the wicked man; for he has no way else left for salvation; but first he may
thank him, from whom that motion and persuasion came, who gave him that heart
and ability to come. None can come to me, unless the Father draw him, Ioh.
6.45. And 2. If this be all the good you so plead for to come to Christ, then
he is wicked, and no better, nor otherwise till he come, or begin, and have a
heart to come; and so much his words import; which might have prevented this
wrangling, if you pleased. 5. Will you teach a man, that this act of coming or
taking Christ, is a good thing in him, to be looked at by him? or that it is
any whit satisfactory to the justice of the Law, or available to the recovery
of his lost soul and estate? that he may put this act in, and reckon it toward
his discharge, or justification? or you will teach and tell him that Christ is
all this, unto whom he therefore comes forthat purpose. If a notorious
Malefactor, condemned to dye, have a pardon put into his hands, or have it for
going to the King; can he plead his going? or does any account him less wicked,
or guilty for that?

Also, In the same page 30. and Sect. you are offended with the Authors
Rhetorical expressions, as is also Mr. Geree.

Ans. But what does not offend a weak and crazie stomach? where the mind is
prejudicate, and sinister, nothing can please: else, where or when may he
better use it then in Christ's cause, or work? and it is to as much (if not
better) purpose, then a great deal of reading you show in this Book, making
little or no use of your alleged Authors, but only for a flourish, like him
that lights a candle, and presently puffs it out. If he had his weakness,
so have we. The High Priest of old, being compassed himself with infirmity, was
thereby to be moved to have compassion on the ignorant, and them that were out
of the way, Heb. 5.2.

And you impute it [ibid] to his injudiciousness, that your adversary does
mind only the promissory part of the Scripture, and stand little upon the
mandatory.

Answ. Be it so; I hold it judiciousness and wisdom in him: For 1. There be
ten for one yea a hundred for one, who are wholly for the Mandatory. 2 Besides,
every man's conscience naturally preaches the Law of works within him, Romans
2.15. but is unprincipled in grace and the free promise. 3. If you did
consider, what little pure Gospel Light is in the general Ministry, and how
Jerusalem, the valley of vision, zealous in a religious way, yet did not know
the things of her peace, Luke 19.41. but erred in her heart, not knowing God,
way of peace and life, Psalm. 95.3. In what a dangerous and deep temptation many
a poor distressed soul lies plunged sore, for want of this doctrine and
consolation of free grace. 4. And that the relieving, enlarging, and saving of
such a soul, is much to be preferred before conversation of life. And 5.
Lastly, As Luther says, That, there is no danger in preaching faith,
free grace without works; for good works will follow, where that is truly
received: but in preaching works, and the Law so as it may be done and obeyed,
is much danger, lest free grace be obscured, destroyed, unknown; men rest in
the way of the Law, and the gate of eternal life never be opened, etc. If, I
say you had considered these, and the like, you would never have condemned the
innocent.

There be also diverse things exceptable in your supposed disputable questions,
and some that reflect on your self, as being inconsistent with what you hold at
other times, and confirming what you oppose: but we may not dwell on what is
Cursory.

Mr. B. page 31. Let us see what prejudicial inferences they gather from this
doctrine of justification -- denying them [good works] to be a way to heaven.
Thus Doctor Crisp in page 6, etc.

Answ. Methinks that expression of the Doctor is so clear, and fully
satisfactory, that you should not quarrel with it; and to me, your language is
so confused, that I cannot skill of it, but do fear it will lead the Reader out
of the right way. Let Christ be the way, and good works our employment or
business in the way, as he says, and then I see no error nor danger. If you do
truly good works, you do them in Christ, abiding in him, Ioh. 15.4. in whom you
are alive, and walk continually by faith: does the soul go out of Christ, or
leave him, when or while it works? As ye have received Christ Jesus, so walk
in him, Colos. 2.6. Now the soul cannot walk in Christ, nor have union with
him, save by faith: the believer also walks in the way of the Law of works,
but this is his way on earth amongst men, and Christ is his way to God and
heaven. Let me add: Christ is set forth so to be our way, that he is our
salvation also; so that in him the soul is at her journies end, and need not
work to go further for attaining life, as if it were a far off, and good works
were a way to carry and bring us unto it. Eternal life is in the Son; He that
has the Son, has eternal life also, Joh. 3.36. 1 John 5.11, 12. Also the
words of Bernard are, Viaregni, not ad regnum: of which difference, see more in
the Assertion of Grace.

M. B. Thus, Matthew. 7.17. Strait is the way that leads to life. What is this
way, but the work of grace and godliness?

Answ. I might here put you in mind of a threefold work of grace, as you will
have it. First, Angusta est via oportet te fieri tenuem, si vis per eam venire.
Caeterum qui operibus onerati sunt, sicut co^nchylibus onustos videmus Jacobi
peregrinos, ii non toterant penetrare. Si veneris cum magnis saceis operum
plenis, depenere oportebit, etc. Ger.
which God has wrought in and by Christ for man. 2. That which he works in
man. 3. And that which man works by virtue of his grace. Now I need not ask
you which of these you mean, for it is seen by your words you take to the third
and last; which, as I conceive, cannot be the meaning of the place: and I could
give reasons for it. But I incline to Musculus, with others, (which Authors I
have been forced to part with) who expound it so, That the Doctrine of Christ
and faith, is the straight way, which few indeed do find: and the broad way is
false Doctrine, and error of all sorts, which leaves the simplicity that is in
Christ, 2 Cor. 13.3. There is a broad way common to the religious Jews,
Papists, and deceived Protestants, which leads to destruction. As for the way
of downright wickedness, all know that is the way to hell. And as many in a
blind zeal are carried to damnation, as by profaneness and actual outward
sinning. And this is a strong inducement to me, thus to understand it, as, that
to believe, is the straightest way of all others, and fewest find and walk in
that way with an upright foot; so because Christ is there speaking of Teachers
and their Doctrine, and not of man's life and manners: so that it is doctrine he
means to be the straight way, for it is doctrine, true or false, that guides
and carries the soul one way or other, to heaven or hell: and that is either
the righteousness of faith, or the righteousness of works. He that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved: he that believes not, shall be damned: and no
good work can help to save him.

Mr. B. 2. Denying the presence of them [good works] in the person justified --
for thus says the Author expressly, speaking of that of Paul, therefore we
conclude that a man is justified without the works of the Law: Here, says he,
the Apostle does not only exclude works from having any power operative, to
concur in the laying iniquities upon Christ, but excludes all manner of works
man can do, to be present and existent in persons, when God does justify them.
And he instanceth of a general pardon for thieves. Now one man may take the
pardon, as well as another.

Answ. Your charge is heavy, but I find no evidence or proof. What, does he
deny the presence of good works in the person justified, or after his
justification? did he not grant, and say, that they are our business and
employment in the way? your words may be taken as if he denied that ever a
justified person should do good works. Bona opera non precedunt justificandum,
etc. Solis ortum sequitur aeris calafactio. Melancth. Cum peccata remitti
constet, etiamsi adhuc plena sit natura peccatis. Melancth. Deus nos in ca
persectione, in qua Christus resurrexit, imactur.
If with Austine he hold, good works do not go before a man to be justified, I
hope it is no error. The air becomes warm, not before, but after the rising of
the Sun. Perhaps your meaning would be, while justification is in fieri, in
doing; not in facto, after it is done: yet your words are otherwise. And this
is to you so dangerous, that to your charity it is inexcusable; yet your great
reading might tell you of diverse Orthodox, who speak and write as much, and the
Scripture will warant the same, when you come professedly to handle the point
hereafter. Besides, you cannot but know, that the Doctor speaks of the sinners
justification in Christ, when God did lay on him the iniquities of all the
Elect, and in raising him from death, did acquit and justify both him and all
them, in and through him, of and from all those sins for ever; and ever since,
does behold and accept them in that perfection and clear estate, wherein Christ
was raised. And Master Pemble had that discretion and charity, that by
distinguishing between justification in foro Coeli, and in foro Conscientiae,
he did admit of Polanus in the former acception. Now when sins were so
transacted, and Christ rose again wholly discharged of them for our
justification, Romans 4.25. how could any of good works be then present, or
existent?

Mr. B. He [Doctor Crisp] concluded, that therefore though a man rebel actually
from time to time, and do practice this rebellion, yet the hatefulness thereof
is laid upon Christ. Is not this such a doctrine, that must needs please an
ungodly man?

Answ. The Doctor speaks of the Elect, who before calling to the faith of
Christ, did not cease to practice rebellion; and says that God satisfied his
justice, even for those wickednesses he is in committing, at that time in which
Christ did suffer. And this will be the only refuge, plea, and staff of
support and comfort, when that soul is in trouble and distress; which is the
very end he propounded to himself, in these so free and absolute expressions of
the grace of God: as neither you, nor any other, laying aside all prejudice,
can otherwise conceive: for these be his words, page 141. I say, all the
weight, and all the burden, and all the (...) sin it self, is long agone laid
upon Christ; and that laying it upon him, is a full discharge, and a general
release and acquittance to thee, that there is not any one sin now to be
charged upon thee. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the
world, Ioh. 1.29. The laying of thy iniquities upon Christ, is an absolute and
full discharge to thee, that there neither is, nor can be any iniquity, that
for the present, or for hereafter, can be laid to thy charge. If the Lord give
to any to believe this truth, that it is his iniquity the Lord has laid on
Christ, Est scopus hujus gravissimae consolationis, munire pertene. factos, qui
agnoscant immunditiam, and imbecillitatem suam, ut certo statuant se Deo
placere propter Christum, etc.
God himself cannot charge any one sin upon that person, page 137. You may
remember your own rule, that all things are to be taken in the Authors sense,
and as he intends it; and that of Hilary: Ex causis dicendi, dictorum
intelligentiae sumatur. And so it is true, that this doctrine must be pleasant,
and most acceptable to an ungodly heart, which travelleth and is weary, under
the sense and burden of his sins. Comfort ye the hearts of my people, etc.
Isai. 40.1.

M. B. 3. In denying of gaining any thing by them, even any peace of heart, or
losing it by them. Now this goes contrary to Scripture.

Ans. While you believe, that you are justified and accepted in Christ, you can
want no peace of heart: Christ is our Righteousness, and our peace, Ephesians.
2.14. Heb. 7.2. If you cease to believe so, and fall from faith, to purisie
Conscience by works, you gain nothing; but by catching at the shadow, lose all
true and effectual consolation. But you say, it is contrary to Scripture; and
when you show your Scripture, look for a more full and satisfying answer.

M. B. Thus, Doctor Crisp, page 139. The business we are to do, is this, that
though there be sins committed, yet there is no peace broken.

Answ. I find no such words in that page: but I credit you so far, that those
are his words; you tell us of error, but show none. The peace (says the
Doctor) is not broken, to wit, between God and the believer, because the breach
of peace is satisfied in Christ. What more Orthodox or plain? He is our
Peacemaker. If any Conscience lose her peace, and be troubled, it is because
he believes not, and gives way to sense and the Law: but then receive, abide
in, and enjoy Christ as he ought. In your Answer you bring in nothing directly
against him, only you pretend a confutation. You bid us especially consider
Heb. 12. two last verses, -- Our God is a consuming fire. Answ. This helps you
not, because God is so terrible out of Christ in the Law revealing wrath;
therefore receiving a Kingdom that cannot be removed, let us have grace,
whereby we way serve God acceptably, etc. Here is an Argument to persuade the
wavering Jews to close with God in the Covenant of free grace in Christ Jesus,
otherwise his presence and dealing would prove most terrible: and not that men
should serve God themselves, and by that means to make placable and loving, and
so to avoid the danger, which is to deny and overthrow faith in the
reconciliation by Christ, and the whole grace of the Gospel. You infer, If the
Scripture threaten thus to men living in sin, if they do not, they may find
comfort. Answ. 1. You should have said, To men that abide in the unbelief of
the Gospel dallying with it, or not having that grace unto which the Apostle
there exhorts: which in effect is this, that all those are so threatened, who
believe not Christ to be the Messiah, and the Mediator who has made and
brought in a full and everlasting Atonement: whereupon follows the serving of
God acceptably, etc. The despising or neglecting of this grace, does most
displease God, and is the main condemnation under the Gospel, Ioh. 3.19. And so
long as the heart doubts whether God be pacified, and become propitious in
Christ, it can never please God, Heb. 11.6. For no prayer nor worship, with
this unbelief or doubting in the inward parts, can be heard and accepted. How
can they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14. 2. You say,
If they sin not, they may find comfort. Answ. In what? or, Displicet Deo
^ubitatio, qua^^e neque coli, ^eque in vocari ^cum dubitatione p^^est.
where is he that sins not, and can say my heart is clean? So all our comfort
lies in our discharge by Christ: Blessed is the man whose iniquities are
forgiven, Psalm. 32.1.

M. B. Secondly, Our holy duties they have a promise of pardon and eternal life
though not because of their worth, yet to their presence, and therefore may the
godly rejoice, when they find them.

Answ. This is strange teaching among Protestants. It is an Assertion gross
enough to have fallen from the pen of a Jesuit, who now deny any dignity in
good works, as well as you, deserving eternal life, only eo vi promissionis, by
virtue of Gods promise made to good works, they expect it. I will not write all
my thoughts, while I consider how such doctrine is countenanced and commended
by the President and Fellows of Sion-Colledge. But this I am bold to say, that
this is not that Law or Doctrine which came first out of Gods Sion, Isa. 2. If
you teach thus, then no man can dare to believe or receive remission of sins
through Christ's blood, till he be sure he find first the presence of good
works: and when will that be, that a man can find good works before he
believe? or what are the good works he must so necessarily find, and unto
which the pardon is promised? you might have done wisely, and it had been a
special work of charity, to have given instance in some; and then to have
showed both how those good works may be done in the state of unbelief, and also
how they may be certainly known to be good before faith. O poor, sinful and
trembling soul! into what an inextricable labyrinth will this bring thee! and
when thou shall be deeply plunged into temptation, how to prevent thy fearful
desperation, by this doctrine, is utterly impossible. 2. By this you will make
people look more to good works, then to Christ present and formed in the heart
the only hope of glory, Col. 1.27. And he that has Christ has life, and he
that has not the Son has not life, whatever works he may pretend to have, 1 John 5.12. 3. Yea a legal Ministry exhorting to duties, performances, and
conformity to the Law of works, will be held sufficient, and men need not be
bid to examine themselves, whether they be in the faith, and Christ dwell in
them, or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. but whether they have store of good works, and so
they may be sure of pardon, and salvation. But, Sir, If you will have your
Doctrine to have a free passage, why do you not prove, clear, and confirm it?
your word will not bear and warrant a Tenet of this weighty importance, and
consequence. Where find you God speaking to the work, or not rather to the
worker? and if the promise be made also to him of pardon or life, it is for his
faith, or rather for Christ's sake, in whom all the promises are yea and Amon,
unto the glory of God, 2 Cor. 1.20. Gal. 3.16. On that ever such a Doctrine
should see the Sun, be heard out of any our Pulpits, and be suffered to pass
the Press, and with such applause to be published. That good works must
necessarily be present when we be justified: and God should so respect and love
them that he promises pardon and eternal life to them or to their presence!
you mean sure to the man for their presence sake; for if they be so good and
holy, Etiam bona opera egent remissione.
they need no pardon: or if they were not first pardoned, by what art become
they good? If you say, yet you will have Christ present too he need but stand
as a cipher; the promise is not to his presence, but to the presence of holy
duties.

Mr. B. Lastly, Their ground is still upon that false bottom, because our sins
are laid upon Christ.

Answ. You need wish to have your words well taken: if you dare not build upon
it as an infallible verity, that your sins are laid on Christ; yet others dare:
and the bottom is firm, even a sure Rock when you have done all. You add, May
they not be laid upon us in other respects, to heal us, and to know how bitter
a thing it is to sin against God? Answ. 1. If the laying of sin on us will heal
us, what did make us sick or sore? the wound is by sin. 2. Then our health is
not by laying them on Christ, and discharging of us: or by faith in him, by the
means of whose stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. 2. That phrase of Gods laying
of sin upon the justified in any respect, is no Scripture Phrase, but it is
full of danger, and most agreeable to the principles of reason, a natural
conscience, and the Law. 3. How bitter sin is, may best be seen, when we see
and consider it upon Christ who under the heavy weight of it sweating water and
blood, cried so out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I grant the
afflicted conscience knows some little of it: and if ever God lay sin upon
you, and let you not see it laid on Christ for your full and final discharge,
it will then be intolerable.

Mr. B. 4. In denying them to be signs or testimonies of grace, or Christ
dwelling in us. And here one would wonder to see how laborious an Author is to
prove that no inherent grace can be signs, etc.

Answ. 1. They can be made no further evidences, then it is evident and plain
that they arise from true faith; and then I must first know that I have faith,
and be assured I am justified, else all such signs will leave me uncertain, and
may prove to be counterfeits. For, as this Argument holds not, Here is light,
therefore the Sun is up: for all light is not from the Sun; the Moon, and the
Candle have proper lights also: so all that we call graces, and holy duties,
come not from faith, nor are not only found to be in him, who is in a justified
estate, and therefore cannot convincingly argue such an estate. What can you
instance in being materially good, that was not in Paul while he was a
Pharisee; who was blameless, as touching the Law? I fear me, that it contenteth
us, that we know, teach and profess a Christ crucified, and come not to find
Christ truly formed and dwelling in the heart; whose presence is the only
light, peace, consolation, and rest to the Soul: and that is the reason of our
eying and requiring of works and graces, for testimonies and assurances of a
good estate.

M. B. In answering the Author, We may show briefly how many weak props this
discourse leans upon. 1. In confounding the instrumental evidencing with the
efficient: Not holy works, say they, but the Spirit. How he does oppose
subordinates!

Answ. The Spirit and works are not subordinate: for, as is showed, works may
be, where the Spirit of adoption and faith is not. 2. Neither can they be
subordinate, except the Spirit do infallibly reveal and confirm a good estate
by them: which you cannot make good.

Again, you say, Every man is in darkness, and like Hagar sees not a fountain,
till his eyes be opened.

Answ. That is true: but where do you read that our duties, or works, do open
the eyes, and clear this unto us? The opening of the eyes is a good work
indeed: but it is Gods work and not ours, Ephesians. 1.17.

M. B. We say, that a Christian in time of darkness and temptation, is not to
go by signs, etc.

Answ. And out of darkness and temptation, what need is there to put them to
that use? will you light a candle at noonday, when there is light enough? 2.
when there is no temptation occasioning the questioning of faith, or the
estate, what need is there to prove either?

M. B. 3. His arguments go upon false grounds. 1. That a man cannot distinguish
himself from hypocrites. 2. That there can be no assurance, but upon a full and
complete work of godliness.

Answ. 1. No; A man cannot distinguist, himself certainly, without faith's
evidence: how would you have discovered Paul, having a zealous respect to all
Gods Commandments? 2. No one, nor all your works can bring assurance
sufficient: I dare say, that soul, which seeks establishment, and to overcome
doubting that way, is far from it in the secret bottom of it: Imperfections in
all, whereunto the conscience is privy, will more weaken, then confirm: Semper
operum respect nest trepidandi materia.

M. B. 4. All those Arguments will hold as strongly against faith: for, are
there not many believers for a season or may not a man then know as soon the
nature of his heart, as the truth of his faith?

Answ. 1. Though true faith fail never, yet that is not simply from the nature
of faith, for there is no gift of grace, but of it self it is perishable:
Constancy and immutability natural be only proper to God, therefore Christ
prayed that Peter's faith might not fail. 2. Faith does not ascertain, in that
it indureth, but in that by it the soul has an effectual entrance into that
grace wherein it stands irremoveably, Romans 5.2. 3. There is not that light of
evidence in sincerity, which is in faith, Heb. 11.1. faith gives light to
those things which otherwise cannot lightly be discerned.

M. B. Now let us consider their grounds for this strange assertion.

Answ. I cannot say what assertion you mean: but it is not much material.

M. B. Because, Romans 4. It is said, God justifies the ungodly. Now this has a
twofold Answer.

1. That which our Divines do commonly give, that those works are not to be
understood in sensu composito, etc. therefore they compare these passages with
those of making the blind to see, etc. not that they did see while they were
blind, but those who were blind do now see: and this is true and good.

Answ. If you grant, that a man is as merely ungodly till he be justified, as a
man is blind till his eyes be opened, with those divines, the Doctor and you
might agree; but this answer likes you not, though you say it is good and true,
so well as another, viz.

Mr. B. 2. But I shall secondly answer it, etc. Ungodly there, is meant of such
who are so, in their nature considered, having not an absolute righteousness,
yet at the same time believers, even as Abraham was. -- So then the subject of
justification is a sinner, yet a believer. Now it is impossible. that a man
should be a believer, and his heart not purified Act 15.

Answ. So that in few and plain words, your opinion is, as we see by this and
other passages, where you call Abraham the ungodly man, That a man must be a
believer have his heart purified by faith be qualified as Abraham was at least
then, when it was said, his faith was imputed for righteousness, before he can
be capable of justification; here is poor and cold comfort to a distressed
conscience, who feels himself nothing but a mere compound of sin and misery. Do
you put men to believe, and to know they believe, and to be sure faith has
purified the heart (but you mean not faith neither but the Law) and sanctified
them, before they come to God who justifies the ungodly? A profound Rabbi: O
strange Divinity! much good do it you. You fear infection, and so get as far
from Doctor Crisp. and from Paul's Doctrine as may be; yet truth is with you,
Your Comes individuus: to part at and you is impossible. You might have named
some of those learned men, for I know them not. But to deal punctually, 1. You
know, that Doctor Crisp speaks of justification, as it is Gods only free act,
absolving and discharging all the Elect of all their sins at once, even then
when he laid them on Christ. Now as God said to Job, Where wast thou when I
cast the mountains? so where was this Faith, purity of heart, and
sanctification then? this is no evasion you know; but by this all you have said
is annihilated; he makes faith not to be necessary to justification, but the
evidence of it in due time for the relieving staying and comforting of the
conscience troubled and affected by sin and the Law. 2. To draw nearer to you,
who have thus set your self at this great distance, that your longest weapon
cannot teach your Adversary to harm him; I will grant you, that the Scripture
sets forth God as a justifier of them that are of the faith of Jesus, Romans
3.26. but let me then ask whether it be his faith, or Gods act in justifying,
that does alter him and his condition? Israel looked upon the Brazen Serpent,
but the blessing of health came from God which did effect the cure. 2. You say
faith purified the heart, Act. 15. what before justification, or after? Calvin
and Luther understand that purifying to be by justification. Luthers words are,
Totus purus es, ratione hospitis tui: because of Christ received by faith, the
heart becomes pure. And when you tell us, Abraham is that ungodly man, if you
mean he was ungodly when he was justified, there is no difference; But if you
consider him otherwise, he was then a worker, and so the text is fully against
you. To him that works not, etc. But when Paul says, He believed in God who
justifies the ungodly, it is a description of the object of faith, or of God
on whom faith believes, even that God whose nature, property, office and
promise is to justify an ungodly man; and not a declaration how the subject,
or man is to be qualified. So that the true God of the Gospel finds men
ungodly when he justifies them; but leaves them not so. Or, if you will
understand the place of Abraham, (yet there is no circumstance requiring it)
how ever he was so qualified by faith, his heart purified, he reported and
found to have exellent things in him, at that time when it was said, his faith
was imputed for righeousness, Genesis 15.5. yet God in whom he believed, is said
to justify them that are without such qualifications, even the ungodly.

M. B. Another place they much stand upon, is Romans 5. Christ died for us while
we were enemies, while we were sinners. But, why then do they say, that if a
man be as great an enemy as enmity it self can make him, if he be willing to
take Christ, etc. be shall be pardoned? (which we say is a Contradiction, for
how can an enemy with Christ, close with Christ?) So that would seem more then
in some places they seem to allow.

Answ. You do not surely deny the truth of that Scripture, but argue the
inconsistency of it with that assertion, viz. That such great enemies and
sinners closing with Christ, can be pardoned: this is a Contradiction, say you.
I answer, 1. If Christ died not for such, how could such come unto him or
believe on him? So that there is a sweet harmony; yea who else could be saved?
for what difference is there originally, and inwardly? (though not in outward
expressions and out-breakings to the eye of the world) the strictest Pharisee
is as wicked and unclean as the loosest Libertine: God looks upon the heart.
But 2. you ask how can an enemy to Christ, close with Christ? I answer, Is it
not possible for enemies to be reconciled? or for a Rebel convinced of his
danger to submit and receive a gracious pardon being offered? and when he is
receiving it, he may rightly and worthily be called a Rebel, though afterward
he become a true professed Subject. 3. Neither the Text alleged, nor the
Doctor, say enemies to Christ, but when we were enemies, viz. to God, his
justice and holiness, in reference to his law. For as God absolutely considered
cannot be the object of man's hatred, so God in Christ as Mediator comes under
another Notion, as being the only means to slay enmity, and reconcile both in
himself. You say it is more then in some places they allow. Ans. When you show
some place, we may speak to it. But how frequently read you in Doctor Crisp,
these and like expressions? If God give thee an heart to come, if thou can
believe, if now thou have a mind to close with Christ, etc. which ought to have
prevented all these exceptions, as annulling the grounds and reasons of them: I
marvel that any understanding and experienced man should except against his
Ministry it tending specially to encourage the poor and troubled soul to come
freely and with confidence unto Christ: assuring it, there is no such force and
let as the conscience of sin and his own unworthiness will suggest. Oh how hard
a thing is it in the feeling and horror of sin to look up to free grace, and
to receive Christ the gift of God, without all disputings and reasonings about
works, or qualification? It is an evil rooted deeply in nature, even that
opinion, which your doctrine maintains, nourishes and strengthens; enough
to overthrow the soul in the hour of tentation; witness all experience. And so
the thought and consideration of some conceited goodness does breed
presumption, and an unwarrantable persuasion of being the rather accepted. If
the Doctor had said that Christ is theirs, and become their salvation, whenas
yet they had no heart to receive, or desire him, you had some ground of
excepting against him.

M. B. Christ dyed not only to justify, but to save us.

Answ. 1. Christ has saved all that are to be saved, Tit. 3.5. 2. But it
follows not therefore, that any can lay hold on salvation without
justification or the righteousness of faith (although he may so do without the
righteousness of works, Tit. 3.5.) for justification is to life, the Antecedent
of it, Romans 5.18.

M. B. Indeed the grand principle, that Christ has purchased and obtained
antecedently to us in their sense, will as necessarily infer that a drunkard
abiding a drunkard, shall be saved as well as justified.

Answ. That Christ has purchased and obtained all graces (as you call them) is
so clear and fully convincing in the light of the Scripture, that you cannot
deny the truth of it, only our sense of it is corrupt and erroneous, as you
say; but why do you not tell what our sense is? It is out of no love, that you
conceal it: but rather it argues a mind in you to make the world think worse
of us then you can make us to appear. What you make, or how you pervert our
sense, would be seen; but that grand principle will necessarily infer the
contrary to the conclusion you make: for what Christ purchased for us, must
necessarily be dispensed and given; therefore cannot that grace of Regeneration
be withheld from them that are Christ's: but it comes to them not in the
preceptive way of the Law, but through the word of promise, which you cannot
skill of. If any should teach that some graces, favor, and part of eternal
life were left to be purchased and obtained by our obedience and service, that
doctrine might find more free passage, and better entertainment. But I wonder
you are so peremptory and unadvised in making such an inference, as if
justification did leave a man as it found him, and there were no virtue,
efficacy, nor health in it, nor that precious faith apprehending it: or as if
we did teach so (as by you we are slandered) the contrary still lying under
your eyes. You need, and must be forced to acknowledge, that Tot us processus,
etc. the only and whole passage from sin to righteousness, from death to life,
from bondage under wrath, and the curse, unto liberty, and the receiving into
favor, and felicity, is attributed by Scripture, and all sound Divines to that
article of free justification: so that in true and strict sense, salvation is
inseparable from it. Yet that the world may see, how the simple intent and
sense of Dr. Crisp is misrepresented by you, these are his words, page 66.
Christ the only way; If a man, says he, have a little holiness and
righteousness, he thinks now that in regard of that he may without presumption
close with Christ. Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners; but it
seems a man must be righteous before he have to do with the calling of Christ.
See now whether this be with, or against the Gospel-free-grace; therefore even
to sinners is it no licentious doctrine, nor does it a jot maintain the
continuance in sin. I say therefore, that Christ does belong to a person that
closes with him, though he be in his sinfulness; Christ indeed does wash,
cleanse and adorn a person, when he is closed with, but there is none clean
till Christ himself do enter, who makes clean where he does enter. Do not then
so misconstrue the Doctor, as if his doctrine were inconsistent with the truth.
All that you can gather and directly conclude from him, is, that sinners, under
that very notion and name, are called upon in the Gospel, to come unto Christ,
that he is tendered unto them while they are such. If God give a heart to a
wicked man at this instant willingly to close with Christ, he gives him an
absolute, and complete, and perfect interest in Christ: And these his
expressions imply as much, as you in truth can require. For can there be a
heart given to come, a real willingness to close with Christ, where there is no
sight and sense of sin and danger? why does the soul desire Christ, believe in
him? is it not that it may be saved from sin, wrath and damnation, and obtain
righteousness, life, favor and salvation? does not the hastening unto the City
of refuge, sufficiently prove the man to be a manslayer? so here, it argues a
true inward conviction of, and a real confession of a guilty estate: yea, a
persuasion that in Christ a distressed and pursued soul may be safe and in
peace, but nowhere else.

M. B. Now these speak of Christ's death, as an universal meritorious cause,
without any application of Christ's death unto this or that soul. Therefore you
must still carry this along with you, that to that grand mercy of justification
something is requisite as the efficient, viz. the grace of God; something
meritorious, viz. Christ's sufferings; something instrumental, viz. faith: and
one is as necessary as the other.

Answ. The full bent, and chief drift of the Doctors ministry is the
application of Christ, and the benefits of his death unto the soul, who so see
any thing cannot but so judge. I marvel then at this your so palpable
accusation. 2. Dr. Crisp speaks of justification, as it is Gods alone
gracious act in Christ, discharging and acquitting all the Elect in him at the
time of his passion and resurrection fully and for ever: This was done in fore
caeli, or as others, coram judicio Dei. As for the instrumentals whether the
word to reveal and publish it, or faith to apprehend and rest on it, they were
neither necessary to that Act of God: but only afterward to give evidence and
assurance to the several consciences of all those Elect, of what was done for
them freely by God in Christ upon the cross; For there God was in Christ,
reconciling them to himself, 2 Cor. 5.18.

M. B. I will but mention one place more, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have received gifts
even for the rebellious also etc. adding. Is not all this strange? Though the
Author press sanctification never much in other places, yet certainly such
principles as these over grow it.

Answ. 1. Why is it that you think this strange, viz. That the loathsomness and
hatefulness of this rebellion, is transacted from the person upon the back of
Christ? he bears the sin as well as the shame, etc. So that God acquitted his
Elect and satiffied his justice in Christ their Sure y; and by this means it
comes to pass that God can dwell withthose persons. Is this any more, then
what Paul says in short and plain words, viz. Christ was made sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5.21. and Ephesians. 2.14. Christ by his Cross has slain enmity, and made peace.
Is not Christ the Communis terminus, the bond and mean of union and atonement
with God by his only sacrifice? while we were sinners, enemies in our selves we
were reconciled in Christ, Romans 5.10.

The ground and reason of your opposing is, in that you are of opinion that God
comes unto us by or with, or because of some inherent graces or
qualifications in us, which be as a Lodestone to draw and unite his affection;
and that Christ is but the meritorious cause of this; a Papistical conceit. God
is in Christ and where Christ is, there is God present; I am in the Father, and
the Father in me, Ioh. 14.10. he that has the Son, has the Father also; and
he that has not the Son, has not the Father. He that receives me, receives
him that sent me, Ioh. 13.20. God then loves, uniteth himself, and comes to
the soul only in and through Christ, In whom he makes us accepted Ephesians. 1.6.
and that only of his grace. If the presence of good works you so contend for in
justification, were granted you, yet God has no respect to them, but beholds
us as sinful wretches plunged into all confusion; and being moved to pity us he
considers our persons, and receives us alone in our Lord Jesus Christ: yea
and he only beholds as our selves so all our good works in that perfection of
his Son, else they could not be accepted, nor liked, says Mr. Calvin. And
these are the only true, and most powerful and operative principles of all
right sanctification: though your legally-forced sanctity or reformation may
grow and arise out of another natural principle and dead root.

Lastly, as for that conversion and change of the most rebellious, by the
Ministry, it is the product or effect of this doctrine. I muse that a man of
your parts and Religion, should so stumble in so clear a light.

LECTURE IIII.
1 Timothy 1.8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.


M. B. Having confuted some dangerous inferences that the Antinomian makes from
that precious Doctrine of justification.

Answ. Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla refers tu. Review now your
elaborate work, and you will not find one syllable of real confutation; you
may learn palmodiam canere.

I only intend to defend and vindicate the assertions and cause of your later
Antinomians (as you are pleased to call them;) as for Islebius Agricola, he is
none of my acquaintance; I never read him: If you wrong him, God is his Judge
and avenger: yea and this also I would have the Reader know, tha^t I am minded
to pass by whatever I shall henceforth meet withal, whether positive or
controversal, if it do not directly touch or reflect upon his three named
Antinomians, lest all the rest in this book be taken for orthodox, or I be
accounted an approver of it; for many things in it besides are to me unsavory
and unsound.

M. B. sect. 2. They tell us not only of a righteousness or justification by
imputation, but also Saintship and holiness by this obedience of Christ: And
hence it is that God sees no sin in believers.

Answ. If they tell you of such perfection, that God sees no sin, they withal
in the same place tell you (if you had the same ears to hear it) that this
justification or Saintship is by imputation and not by inherent sanctification:
If Christ be held forth unto you by God himself, as one that has washed you
and cleansed you from all sin, and withal it be given you so to apprehend and
receive it; what think you now of your self and condition, while you abide in
this light? In the Creed you say, I believe a holy Church, yet the Church it
self is no exterior or visible thing, that the world can discern, though the
persons be visible; and her holiness is invisible: only faith, ( which is of
things not seen. Heb. 11.11.) can behold this purity of the Church, not in the
Law, nor any work or inherent thing; but as she is washed and made clean in the
blood and righteousness of her Redeemer. The Church is all fair, says August.
for her filthiness is taken away by Christ and he has made her fair. Look upon
the Christians life, and there thou may find many things that thou blamest.
If he look within himself, the work of renovation there wrought, it is also
imperfect, and not pure; but as he is beheld in Christ who has sanctified him,
he is altogether pure and holy: but faith only sees this. Mark but this one
saying of Calvin, To the intent that God may no more be an enemy, and take part
against us who are sinners, he must be fain to look upon us in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his righteousness; you like to set the Law as a medium between God
and you, which presents you with sin and wrath, etc.

And why do, if not your self yet many others in their prayers, say, Lord
behold us not in our selves, but in our Lord Jesus, etc. If there be no such
pure and secure estate, why pray we to attain to it? and if we be persuaded of
the truth of it, why wrangle we against it? you might inform your self, and
others, 1. what it is to continue of your selves separated or remote from
Christ: and 2. of the meaning of the phrase, God sees no sin; you reserve this
till afterward: so do I: and withal, for more full satisfaction, I refer the
hony-combe of free justification, and the Assertion of grace.

M. B. ser. 3. You shall carefully distinguish between these two propositions;
good works are necessary to beleivers to justified persons, or to those that
shall be saved: and this, good work's are necessary to justification and
salvation.

Answ. It Is too evident that your self do not heedfully observe this
distinction: Besides, your sense in the terms you use, is doubtful when you
say good works are necessary to justified persons. Is it your meaning, after
justification, according to that of Augustine, Nulla sunt bona opera, nisi quae
sequuntur, precedente fide. In Psalm. 67.
no works are good, except they follow faith, going before? or that they are
necessarily required in order to go before, so that their presence must be had
necessarily when God justifies; as your pleading has been heitherto? I know
the terms or words themselves are plain and distinct, but you confound them in
your afterprosecution.

2. There be many kinds of necessary: And if you understand them to be
necessary after justification in a right sense you have no adversary. But if
good works be necessary to those that shall be saved. I would ask you what you
mean: for do you not hold salvation to be the proper, next, and immediate
effect or consequence of justification? can a man be said, or supposed to be
justified, and not to be saved? if he be justified, he has Christ: he that
has Christ has eternal life, Ioh. 3. ult. the essence of eternal life or
salvation is but one, and indivisible. You cannot make the full revelation or
seasible fruition of it, to be any part of it: your error is, that you will
have good works, necessary to come in between justification and salvation at
least, as a cause, sine qua non or conditions of it: or so requisite, that the
promise of eternal life is made to them: and only by virtue of that their
promise, eternal life becomes his that does the works. But eternal life is the
free gift of God, Romans 6.23. And salvation is in Christ alone, Act. 4.12. Ioh.
5.12. He that has Christ, has life; and if he have not Christ, he can have no
life, whatsoever works he have. So that as a man may have Christ without works
by faith, so may he have salvation in order before good works; unless you will
say, either that without Christ a man can do good works, or that Christ may be
and as separate and a part from life and salvation: Christ and salvation
standing at a distance and so after he be come unto Christ, and have him he
must do good works that by them he may come unto it: but both these are
impossible. Works done in this sense, with such a mind, and for such an end as
to help us to salvation, as if Christ did not sufficiently content us, these
works, says Luther, cannot be good: but, whatever they be for the matter of
them are and ought to be numbered among the worst of evil works; fornication,
stealing, lying etc. are not so hanious says he, neither is the danger and
fearful effects and fruits of these evils comparable to the evil of such
pretended good works. While I do good to help me to salvation, I in heart deny
Christ to be my full and sufficient Savior: I make faith void, and the promise
to be of no effect; I overthrow the whole Gospel of salvation, I appropriate
the promise of life, not to Christ, nor says, but to my works. And if it be
said, it is only the presence of good works that is accounted necessary to
those that shall be saved;

I answer, Gratia Dei remissio per justitia and vita eterna in solo Christo,
mediatore proponuntur, illum vero, non appreh^ndimus bonis operibus, sed sola
fide. Gratia Dei in christo ( 1 Cor. 1) data est, quia hoc const^u um est a
Deo, u qui credit in chris^um saluus sil sine opere, sola fide. Vnum illud
asseve^averem, quod sola fides per se salvum fecit Chrysostom. Evangelium proponit
justiti. and salutem crede^^ibus in Christum gratis sine condition bonorum
operum Ger. Si bona opera sint nessaia, tum promissiones Evangeli^ae non erunt
gratuitae sed^onditionales. Insid^luas solad, mna^, hoc est, repell^t Christum,
and una cum Christo vitam eternam, quae non misi in Christo offertur. Aug.
1. How can they be present, when I must have Christ, and with him eternal
life, before I can do any good work? 2. Is not the presence of Christ and his
righteousness sufficient? Why then did Paul desire to be found in Christ, not
having his own righteousness of works, but only that which is through the faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith? Phil. 3.9.3. What
comfort or pleasure can they afford or gain, when as Calvin says, If God do
respect or look upon them we be to us: and there cannot be so little a fault,
or so small a blemish in our works, but the same is enough to make them foul
and leathsom unto God. Thus all Abraham's virtues, says he, if they had been
examined, could have brought him naught but damnation; Abraham bad no other
help, nor comfort, therefore but his faith in Christ, in whom God did singly
consider and accept him, Rom 4.1, 2.4. If, as you affirm, the promise of life
be made to them and their presence, then cannot the soul receive or lay bold of
any promise of life till they come into sight. And what promise then is made to
the righteousness of faith, or of Christ? Paul was most diligent and faithful
in his ministry abounding in the works of the Lord, fought a good fight, kept
the says, finished his course; but the crown which was laid up for him and
which he certainly expected, was the crown of the righteousness of faith, 2 Timothy 4.8. See Dr. Foulk on that place against the Rhemists; If the crown be not
due to that righteousness, to what purpose is it? and if it belong and be
annexed to it will God make promise of it to our good works? It is true, It
shall be said at the last day, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: For I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat, etc. Matthew. 25.34, 35. but the promise of inheriting is to
them, in that they were elected to it from eternity, and prepared for it by the
righteousness of faith, were found in Christ, and heirs annexed with him; and
these works in ministering to the necessities of the Saints, did flow from
their hearts and fervent love unto Christ, and declare the truth of their
faith, and of their Adoption and Election. It is for the weak and simple sort
that I have been thus large.

M. B. When we deal with adversaries, especially Papists, in disputation, then
we ought to speak exactly.

Answ. You now deal with a friend, however you slander and account of us, but
with whomever you deal, or in what case soever, you nor I cannot be too exact
and careful in our words and expressions; nor may we use more liberty at one
time, then other. Yet it is true, learned men are found in their disputes more
distinct and clear; for as the Fan cleanses the barn-floor, so opposition
inforceth them unto it: and so I think you clearer in these controversal
Lectures, then ordinary; but if we be not distinct clear, and so^i^ in every
Sermon, that so our hearers may be rightly instructed, thoroughly established,
and well able to answer the objections of the tempter, and of his own thoughts,
(which are not so easily satisfied, as an adversary of flesh and blood without
us) a little failing herein may occasion much danger in the time of inward
dispute, and conflict of conscience: One thought of the necessity of a work, or
of the presence of any thing but Christ, may prove the sinking, and the casting
away of the soul for ever. Let me add two more considerations, and I have done.

First, That many who have not the true faith, and be not of the slock of
Christ, yet may and do flourish in good works, are full of pity and compassion,
honest and sober in life, true and just in their dealings, careful in
performing duties, and zealous in their religious way; now if you teach thus,
as you do in this book, 1. That good works are necessary to salvation, in
regard of their presence. 2. Good works are the way to heaven and salvation. 3.
Our holy duties have a promise of pardon and eternal life. 4. There is some
kind of Analogical relation between good works and heaven, comparatively with
evil works. 5. Our goodness is a motive, moving God to favor and bless us, as a
King is moved to prefer one that daily saluteth him. 6. To every good action
thou do, there is a promise of eternal life. 7. Good works be conditions,
without which a man cannot be saved. 8. They are necessary by way of comfort to
our selves, and the like;

Will not such Doctrine hearten and encourage them in their way make them
bless, and speak peace falsely unto themselves; and conclude, that their case
and estate is safe and good? to say nothing of a hundred more fearful
consequences, and dangerous effects of it. And

Secondly, consider how this kind of teaching does suit and agree well with
the principles of nature, and answers the dictates and requirings of every
natural conscience, therefore ponder that of Luther; Omnibus propria est, qui
salutis n^go io kumanam ra^ione in consilium adhibent.
It is, says he the property of all those who consult with reason in the
matter of salvation, to be offended at the doctrine of the mercy and grace of
God: for although God himself did preach this doctrine, concerning the free
promise of his mercy unto our first Parents in Paradise, and in ages after, did
illustrate and confirm it, etc. yet this cleaves and sticks firmly within
us, that we confess God indeed to be merciful, yet reason thus judges, that
they alone do obtain mercy, who give themselves to righteousness, or in whom
something may be found worthy of some kind of respect, Humana sapi^ntia
oss^nditur, eo si grat^ae predicatione, etc.
more then is in others; and afterward, The wisdom of man, says he, is
offended, as if by the preaching of grace, the justice of God is abolished, and
that they were afraid least carnal security, and sinful licentiousness would
be bred among men -- So ignorant are we by nature, of the true nature and
efficacy of the doctrine of heavenly grace and salvation.

M. B. Good works are necessary upon these grounds. 1 They are the fruit and
end of Christ's death, Tit. 2.14. -- Tthere are two things in our sins, 1. the
guilt, and that Christ does redeem us from. 2. the filth, and that he does
purify us from.

Answ. It is the filthiness and loathsomness of sin, that makes us odious and
guilty: if God abhor us, it is because of the vile and evil nature of sin,
which Christ's blood does cleanse and purify us from, that so a way may be made
in divine justice for our reconciliation and acceptance. Guilt is an effect of
justice in the Law, not holding the sinner innocent, but binding it over to the
curse and death till it be purged and washed. Rev. 1.5. He has loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his blood.

M. B. 2. There is some kind of analogical relation between them and heaven,
comparatively with evil works; so in those places where it is said, If we
confess our sins, he is faithful, and also just to forgive us our iniquities, 1
Ioh. 1. So 2 Timothy 4.8. A crown of righteousness, which the righteous. Judge,
etc.

Answ. You tell of an ordinability of works, and say that evil works cannot be
ordained to eternal life, but good may: a very dark expression: who ever read
of ordination of works to heaven or hell, but of the worker? and secondly,
there can be no ordinability in good works, nor by them to life, unless you can
make it to appear, that God has any respect unto them, either in ordaining or
accepting us unto eternal life: but in this case, good works and grace are made
directly opposite, and contrary one to the other; If by grace, etc. not by
works. Romans 11.6. the soul is become ordinable by free grace, but not disposed
by works.

2. In your first Scripture, 1 Ioh. 1.9. There is mention made of no work, but
only of confession of sin: And is that such a good work? Judas confessed that
he had sinned. If there be any ordinability in it, it is not because of any
goodness in the act of confession simply, but because God has purposed and
promised, in that way, or after that order to dispense and give his pardon; and
so this place makes directly against you, for it is by the knowledge and
confession of sin, and not by any good thing the soul finds or acknowledges
in it self, that its ordinability is effected. And whereas you observe, that
God is not only faithful, but just also to forgive; they are arguments to
porswade a man to take that course without fear, or doubt; for man naturally
has that opinion of God, that where he shows favor unto any, it is for some
goodness; and therefore he dare not come as a naked and mere sinner into Gods
sight and presence, as is plain in Adam, Genesis 3. But if he can bring nothing
else, he will make promise of amendment, in some hope of mercy to be the rather
showed him: hence to correct, and satisfy our thoughts, and to encourage us to
take this course, to come as we are in our sins, making our selves, nor our
case or matter better then it is, he requires a free and simple confession of
sins; adding, that God is faithful in his promise, in which he has declared a
gracious mind to pardon such in his Son: and also, that his justice, the
thought whereof in that case, chiefly terrifieth, is so fully satisfied, that
now, non obstante imo salva justitiae, God may in order of his justice forgive
and save.

To that other place, 2 Timothy 4.8. I have before showed how you misinterpret it:
for that righteousness unto which the crown belongs, is the righteousness of
God, and not ours, Romans 1.17. Romans 10.3. of faith, and not of works that we
have done, Tit. 3.5. Romans 3.22.

M. B. Hence some Divines say, that, though godliness be not meritorious, nor
causal of salvation, yet it may be a motive: as they instance; if a King should
give great preferment to one that should salute him in a morning, this
salutation were neither meritorious nor causal of that preferment, but a mere
motion arising from the good pleasure of the King; and so much they think that
particle, for I was an hungry, does imply.

Answ. O how welcome and pleasing is this teaching to man's nature! It tends
to withdraw our eyes and considerations from off Christ unto our selves, and
from free grace unto our works; whereunto all are most prone by nature. If our
goodness be a motive moving God, 1. Then God sees something, out of himself
exciting and moving him to do good: and if you hold this foresight of goodness
which thus moved him, was from eternity, you are not far from Arminianisme or
Popery; and if he was moved at the time of doing good (which many of them also
hold) as the King you instance in, then this new and present motion in God to
do good, is a child of time, begot in his mind or occasioned of late: and God
shows more kindness then from the beginning he intended. Lastly, a motive
must needs have some influence, if not into the act of salvation, yet into the
mind of God: for the salutation works upon the kind nature and heart of the
King, stirring him up to be so bountiful; and the man may thank his salutation
in great part for his preferment. O happy man I, and happy was that time that I
met and so saluted the King! but the Gospel calls from all such fleshly
rejoicing in our selves, that he that rejoices may only so do in the Lord
Christ, in whom, and for whose sake only, God shows all favor, exalts and
blesses with all spiritual blessings. And why do you bring in and propound
this to your hearers, and the whole world as now, but both because you like and
approve of it, and would put all upon the like course and practice in hope so
to speed? But before they had done good or evil, it was said, Jacob have I
loved, etc. The true God loves, accepts, and saves freely in Christ,
without any thing considered in the party.

M. B. So that God having appointed holiness the way, and salvation the end;
hence there arises a relation between one and the other.

Answ. Keep the Law and Works, as you told us Luther said, here below on the
earth; and by faith mount up, live, and converse above in heaven; then the way
in which the soul walks to salvation, is Christ and his righteousness; a way
sanctified by his blood, Heb. 10.19, 20. Believe and be saved: and so the
relation will be between salvation and Christ's righteousness, and not our
righteousness of works: distinguish between believing Abraham, and working
Abraham, as Luther wisely, etc.

Secondly, For that place, I was an hungry, it makes nothing for your purpose:
For. 1. The kindome was prepared from the foundation of the world, therefore
God was not moved by works, Mat. 25.34. 2. It is an argument from the effect of
true faith working by love; by which faith they being accepted to life eternal,
did declare and witness the truth of it, by such seasonable, proper, and
kindly fruits as is there mentioned, all relating to Christ, and being
expressions of ardent love to him: and this is, that God may appear to be just,
therefore he proceeds to give sentence according to what is manifest to all;
for faith is hid in the heart, and not seen nor known.

M. B. 3. There is a promise made to them, 1. Tim. 4.8. Godliness has the
promises.

Answ. Some by Godliness in that place, understand the righteousness of faith,
by which we become Saints toward God, and indeed all true piety is vertually
included in it. 2. Actual holiness is produced by it; and if the promises were
to this active righteousness, yet not primarily, nor yet causally, but by
reason of justification, the sole root and foundation of it. There is a secret
faith in all that we do, says Luther; and unto this, God, in his promises of
any good, has respect; and for it, or more truly to Christ apprehended by
faith, is the promise made: so that in having Christ, we have all the promises,
else we have none. Yet it is more plain and direct to take Godliness in that
sense it is in 1 Timothy 3.16. Great is the mystery of godliness; that is, of
Christian religion in general: but all tends to one, though this seems to
me to be the meaning of it.

Secondly, You say, That the promises lie scattered up and down in the word of
God, so that to every godly action thou do, there is a promise of eternal
life.

Answ. If every Godly action have a promise of eternal life, then either so
many actions, so many eternal lives be due; as where promise is of twelve pence
a day to a labourer, and so many days work, so many twelve pences become due:
or at least, there be so many rights and interests in it as be holy actions.
But eternal life can but be due to all holy actions jointly, and to no one
singly, if it should be due to works. 2. It is true, that promises be so made
in the Law, wherein there is a concatenation, or linking of all in one; yet
they are upon such hard conditions, that it is poor comfort, and small or no
hope of having any performed, it being impossible. The Law is weak through the
flesh, Romans 8.3. but the New Testament is upon better promises, which are sure
to faith, because they are made to Christ. He says not, The promises be made
to seeds, as of, many, but to his seed, as of one; that is, Christ, Gal. 3.16.
therefore the collection of the scattered promises is in Christ only, and by
union with him, we come to have in terest and right to them all; and not by our
works.

M. B. Though God be not a debtor to thee, yet he is to himself, to his own
faithfulness.

Answ. God is a debtor to whom he made the promise, which is not to himself,
but to Christ, whom he has ordained and given for a covenant to his people,
Isa. 49.8.

M. B. You add, O Lord, It was free for thee before thou had promised,
whether thou would give me heaven or no; but now the word is out of thy mouth.

Answ. 1. If God were free and at liberty, not to give you heaven, until he
saw some of your good works to promise it unto, Then, 1. there is no firm
decree in the mind of God, or purpose to save you from eternity. Or, 2. It is
not founded upon grace, but works foreseen; but now he has written your name
in the book of life, and it is now become his will to give you the Kingdom;
for you have so pleased him with your holy duties, that you have moved him to
make you a promise of it. This is your way: I would beloath to wrong you;
neither is it a pleasure to me to let any see your nakedness; but only you
have forced me to let you see how you publish your own errors or failings,
while you seek the shame of others. Further, was it not as free for God whether
he would have made a promise to Adam for the recovery of life and felicity, and
whether it should be of mere grace, or of works? 2. The Papists now do disclaim
proper merit, and claim all as belonging to works ex vi promissionis. 3. If you
look for a promise of life to your works, then is not Christ, the Gospel,
Faith, Doctrina Evangelii apud Paulum to spectat, ut Chirographum deleat and
illam naturalem opinionem ac sententiam legis exanimo tollat and inseribat
aliam de Deo opinionem. etc.
and free grace denied or excluded? and the way is not with you. Believe, and
thou shall live, or be saved, as Act. 16.31. nor yet, believe, and then work (I
believed, therefore I spoke) but be holy and do good first; and upon that
ground well laid, make claim to the promise, and build thy faith and hope of
Salvation: but Christ is become our righteousness, our only foundation and
hope of glory, 1. Cor. 3.11. Col. 1.27. Your divinity and way be to your self.
Alas Sir! What other fruits can this teaching bring forth in your hearers, but
to confirm and maintain that legal and natural opinion men have of God, and to
make them despise true Faith, Grace, Christ and his Gospel?

M. B. God is faithful; therefore says David, I will make mention of thy
righteousness, that is, faithfulness only: and then mark what the Apostle
says of this speech; This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
etc.

Answ. It is true, God is faithful, and so all that walk in in the steps of
Abraham's faith, do judge him to be, Romans 4.20. Heb. 11.11. but that covenant of
sure mercies and peace is founded on the rock Christ, and not on the sandy
ground of works. 2. To that of David, Bernard understands it of imputed and
passive righteousness, which he says also is ours by the gracious act of free
donation, when we were yet sinners, as it is said, Romans 5.15. the gift of
righteousness. 3. That faithful saying of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13. is, that Christ
came to save sinners; directly against you, who teach that our good works have
the promise: then must we be good our selves first, before we can do good, and
so not sinners, and that salvation is not for sinners, but the godly. Lastly,
the faithful labor, and suffer shame, because they know and are assured
aforehand by their faith in Christ entitling them unto it, that they have in
heaven an enduring substance; that glory and kingdom laid up and reserved in
Christ, will more then countervail all their labor and loss for his names and
truths sake; 1 Cor. 15. ult. Heb. 10.33. With a bleeding heart pitying you, and
the people under your Minister. I write this.

M. B. Object. Is then the Gospel a covenant of works? I shall answer that
afterward.

Answ. Indeed you overthrow the Gospel, and do strangely shuffle and confound
grace and works: how weak your answer is, and ineffectual to free and clear you
from these thoughts you are so sensible of, will be seen in its place.

M. B. They are testimonies whereby our election is made sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Answ. Calvin says upon that place, If it should be so, that our vocation and
election, for the stability of them should be founded and rely on good works,
it would follow, it did depend upon us, against all Scripture, which teaches
first that our Election is grounded upon the eternal purpose of God; then, that
of Gods free pleasure and goodness our vocation is both begun and perfected. --
If it be understood of certainty to others, there is no absurditity in it; but
if we should refer that assurance unto conscience, it so ought not, says he,
in my judgment, as if the faithful thereby should before God acknowledge
themselves to be elected and called; but simply I take the meaning to be, that
by their holy life their calling may firmly appear, and so they be discerned
from Reprobates. Now this is but to taste and know the inward and hidden
goodness of the tree by the fruits, and so to judge and determine of it: but he
that has no surer and cleerer testimony within himself, will still be
uncertain and wavering; for how can works certify me of my estate, further
then I know and see assuredly that they a rise and come from true Faith? then
we must first know that we have Faith, which has a clear evidence in it self,
Heb. 11.1. and yet is Faith more out of question, when we feel it work by love,
Gal. 5.6. and 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constraining us feelingly and
effectually to all good, for his Names sake.

M. B. They are a condition without which we cannot be saved.

A. It was taught and received among the learned and Orthodox, An^ea
justificati, reconsiliati salvi, libere operamur.
before you were born, that being first justified, reconciled, saved, we then
work, and that freely, which before we cannot: Christ is no sooner our
righteousness, then he is our salvation also. I muse what your Faith is, or
what treasure or pleasure at all it brings into your soul: you may as well
and truly say, Our works are conditions of our righteousness or justification,
as of our salvation; if salvation be by Grace, works are excluded, as Ephesians. 2.8.
Romans 11.6 and if grace be free, it is without condition, the free gift of God
is eternal life, Romans 6.23. All the Orthodox deny the promise of the Gospel to
be conditional: for if good works be conditions of life in the Covenant of
Grace, what then are the conditions of the Covenant of works? Or wherein do
they differ? As this is to confound Law and Gospel, Nata est in scholis Pseudo
Apostolorum.
thus to distinguish between justification and salvation; so it is remarkable
that this distinction and question did first come out of the school of the
false Prophets, who thereby occasioned great disturbance in the Church, as Act.
15.1, 5. So Gerard, etc.

M. B. Now by the Antinomian Argument, as a man may be justified while he is
wicked, and does abide so; so also he may be glorified and saved: for this is
their principle, that Christ has purchased justification, glory, and
salvation, for us, even, though sinners and enemies.

Answ. Methinks your face should blush for shame at the framing of this so
appareatly unjust charge and accusation: does any say that Justification
leaves a man wicked? Nay, do not all and every write otherwise? let others
judge: I say no more, But that their principle is undenyably true: yet your
Logic can find no ground in it, for this corrupt and absurd inference. If
Christ ever purchased glory, justification, and salvation for us, it was when
and while we were sinners and enemies, or not at all, for he purchased nothing
since ye became holy, and a friend to God or him; neither needed to purchase
righteousness and life for any, but sinners. How are you permitted to err and
mislead!

M. B. 6. They are in their own nature a defense against sin and corruption, if
we consider the nature of these graces, Ephesians. 6.14, 16. there you have some
graces a shield, some a breast plate, etc.

Answ. 1. Graces, as you call them, or gifts of Grace, are improperly put in
and reckoned among good works. 2. The defense and power they have against sin,
is especially in regard of their object, Christ his righteousness and promises.
For thence it is that all they are so good and useful armor. If you have Faith
and hope, and ever was in any great conflict, you have found that all your
defense, help, stay and victory, was only from and by Christ the object: he is
the only refuge, plea, and sure Rock, when all works will fail.

M. B. 8. They are necessary by debt and obligation.

Answ. The works of the Law are debts required to be paid first, that we may
have life and favor: but the love and works of the Gospel are for life, peace,
and favor first had and obtained.

M. B. 9. And the Law of God still remains as a rule and directory.

Answ. As it rules, so it reigns, reproves and condemns; and when you
have walked most precisely according to it, it will subdue you and your
obedience under the Curse, Gal. 3.10. for all you can do is too light, when it
is put into this balance. You say, The Antinomian teaches the abolition of all
the Commandments. He is an Antinomian indeed, that does so: but I must you
still thus wrong and slander us.

M.B. 10. They are necessary by way of comfort to our selves. And this opposes
many Antinomian passages, who forbid us to take any peace by our holiness.

Answ. There be diverse kinds of comfort, arising from different grounds and
considerations. The Doctor speaks of that peace and comfort which arises from
the true and certain knowledge of remission of sins, and reconciliation with
God: the true, proper, and pure fountain whereof, is Christ crucified: as for
your works, they are like puddle-water, a blundered and polluted stream, or a
deceitful brook yea as a broken Cistern that holds little or none. You say in
temptation they fail, and are not to be regarded or looked at. See this
answered also, in the third prejudicial inference, Lect. 3.

M. B. These good works, though imperfect, may be a great comfort to us, as the
testimony of Gods eternal love toward us. Thus did Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. he
is there a thankful acknowledger of what was in him, etc.

Answ. The best and most satisfactory testimony and assurance of Gods love, is
his giving of that dear Son of his love to die, that we might live through him,
Joh. 3.16, 1 John 4.9, 10. In this he commends, sets forth, and confirms his
love, Romans 5.8. to put it out of all doubt. 2 The next testimony is the giving
of his Spirit, for to reveal the things of Christ, the unsearchable riches in
him, Joh. 16.14. Ephesians. 3.8. To shed abroad that love in our hearts, that so the
soul may know it, feel the consolation of it, etc. 3 A third is the delivering
and freeing of our hearts and natures from that bondage and pollution of sin,
by sanctifying us in body, soul, and spirit: yet these are no causes, but
effects and expressions of his free and eternal love: because he loved his own,
he does all for them. Our works are no causes or motives to him. nor yet sure
testimonies of Gods eternal love, for many a Papist, heathen, and reprobate,
for the matter and show of works, exceed diverse of them who believe. Therefore,
if you will have them such testimonies, and so have comfort from them, you must
look on them in all their causes, especially in 1 The Efficient, and the
impulsive and moving cause, which be neither the light judgment, or dictamen
of reason and natures principles, nor the command, coaction, and commination of
the Law, by its rule and authority, extorting them from us as being unwilling:
but they come from a free and voluntary spirit, so made by the spirit of
regeneration and Adoption, moving to do good in love and delight, Romans 8.14.
therefore be they called the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. (...). Naz.
Secondly, in the subject, that the person be reconciled, accepted, and in
favor through Faith in Christ Jesus, Heb. 11.6. Lastly (to say nothing of the
form or object) the end they are to be referred unto, is not self-praise, or
profit, to procure nor preserve by them our own peace, favor, or salvation
with God (which be the effects of Faith in Christ) but simply, Gods honor, his
Churches, and our neighbors good: even as our love is due also, Mat. 22.37.39.
And if these circumstances, required necessarily to every good work, Displicet
deo dubitatio quare neque cols, neque invocari cum dubitatione, ^otest. Melanct.
be considered, the soul will find little need of works, as testimonies and
arguments of Gods love. For that must be out of doubt first; for a doubtful
Conscience cannot please God by any work or obedience.

And your example of Hezekiah comes nothing near to make good your Assertion.
For as Gods works for us are testimonies of his love, so our works at the most
are but witnesses of our love unto him, and therefore cannot be testimonies, as
you affirm, of Gods eternal love to us: and why should you, or any other, think
that Hezekiah, so approved and commended a long time for a truly-Religious
King, should now call his spiritual estate into question or doubt, no
circumstance in the Text arguing any such thing? and if it had been so he had
gone far about to fetch his comfort and assurance from his works and life; and
it would have been very uncertain and weak, when he had done. And so this makes
nothing at all against Doctor Crispe, who would have all to derive their
comfort and peace from the pure fountain, even Faith in the satisfaction,
discharge, and atonement made by Christ, as the most direct, near, and
infallible way: and not from works, which must be first carried to our Faith or
assurance that our state is good, there to be proved to be good; and so at best
can but secondarily and weakly seal that comfort formerly had by believing. I
think Hezekiah might be reproved and condemned, Linguae impiorum est quotidiena
sornax. Aug.
as by Rabshakeh, so others nearer unto him, for his zeal in demolishing
Idolatry; whereupon, he going to God, makes him the witness of the
righteousness of the things done, and of the integrity of his heart in doing
them. Notitia nostri certior intue.
As David many times did, being wrongfully charged by Saul and others: and as
it is our case, who are falsely slandered as Antinomians, and yet can and dare
boldly go and appeal to God, before whom all things are naked, saying, Thou
know, O Lord, we are no Antinomians, no Libertines. Non est pl^x ponderis in
alieno convitio, quam in nostro testimoiro.
Teachers of licentious Doctrine, etc. and so the testimony of Hezekiahs,
David's, and our Consciences being clear of such things in the presence of God,
is a great support, a sure defense, and an effectual comfort against all those
calumnies, censures, and false aspersions: This is my rejoicing, says Paul
(being misreported to be what he was not) the testimony of our Conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. But now all this
is touching things controverted between man and man, where our innocence, such
as it is, is and ever will be the best Buckler, plea, and comfort; and it is
not pertinent to what Doctor Crispe entreats of: or, if this satisfy not, I
could add, that as the Churches estate was then servile, Gal. 4.1, 2. and as
servants, not having the promised Spirit of Adoption, they did all things
rather ex timore, then amore, out of fear, more then love; so Hezekiah having
discharged the office of a godly chief Magistrate, and now being called upon by
death to lay it aside, presenting himself before the Lord, has his own
thoughts to witness his integrity touching the generality of the course of his
life: and so they excusing and comforting him, in that case, do give him some
boldness, even as it is with a servant who has answered the requirings, and
done the commands of his Master, in the day of his accounts.

Thus, it is one thing to be comforted from the inward testimony of my
Conscience, reflecting with an impartial eye upon my conversation in this
world, and finding it to be unblamable, and in all integrity of heart,
especially when adversaries do accuse and speak evil of me; Terret me tota vita
mea, nam apparet mibi aut petcataem, aut tota florilitas, Aus.
and another thing to fetch my peace and comfort thence concerning my spiritual
estate and atonement with God: he that is exercised with inward consticts and
temptations, will easily perceive how dangerous a thing it is to have the eye
and consideration of the soul, taken off Christ and his righteousness, and to
be set upon any work or qualification of our own: then nothing but Christ, all
is accounted as dung and loss else; our own righteousness as unclean and filthy
rags, Phil. 3.8, 9. Isa. 64.6. But without spiritual buffetings of Satan, the
Doctrine of Faith of Christ, our righteousness, our reconciliation and peace
cannot be prized, learned, nor purely taught.

M. B. 11. They are necessary in respect of God, etc. a Leah, though
blear-eyed, yet when she was fruitful in children, said. Now my husband will
love me: so may Faith say. Now God will love me, when it abounds in the fruits
of righteousness.

Answ. God is not as man; his love to man is not begotten or caused by any
thing he sees in us; he loves before and without works, even while we were
enemies, our minds being in wicked works, Romans 5.8. Colos. 1.21. thus the Word
testifies, and Faith receives it: what good he works in us, or frames, and
inableth us to work, are they effects and fruits of his love, not causes of it.

M. B. 12. In regard of others, etc. 1 Pet. 3.1. It is an exhortation to wives,
so to walk, that their husbands may be won to the Lord -- So that thy life may
convert him. By the Word, the Apostle means the public preaching.

Answ. You rather make more obscure, then clear the sense and drift of the
Apostle; while you are minded to plead for good works, you attribute too much
to them. Faith in Christ, and conversion to God, is by hearing of the Word,
Romans 10.17. If the husband were an Idolatrous Ethnic, or profane; yet by the
sweet, humble, and dutiful carriage, and virtuous life of the wife, Maritos
preparent ad amplexandam Christi fidem. Calv.
he might happily be gained to approve and like well of her Religion, which had
wrought such a sensible alteration, and brought forth so plentiful and pleasant
fruits in her; and so be moved to give ear and attention to the Doctrine of the
Christian Faith: thus his mind becomes prepared, and more ready to embrace
that which did not so well please, or perhaps was an offense before. This is
all that can be meant or intended in those words.

M. B. Obj. If good works be still necessarily requisite, why then is not the
Covenant of Grace still a Covenant of Works? etc. A. Although good works be
requisite in the man justified or saved, yet its not a Covenant of Works, but
of Faith, because Faith only is the instrument to receive Justification and
eternal life.

Answ. I see no difference in effect between the Arminian Doctrine and yours in
this: you hold good works to be imperfect, so they; and you make all the
promises of eternal life to belong and to be made unto them; and what do they
more? 2 You Answer, Although they be requisite in the Justified or saved
(before, you said, in a man to be Justified and saved) yet it is a Covenant of
Faith. Answ. Where do you find it to be called a Covenant of Faith? it is a
Covenant of Grace, and so it is entire without our Faith.

M.B. Good Works are to qualify the subject believing. -- Faith only is the
condition or instrument that does receive the Covenant; but yet, that a man
believe, is required the change of the whole man.

Answ. They qualify the subject believing, in some sense is true; but do they
qualify before he believe, in believing, or after Faith? this you should have
told us: it may be concluded from your words, that they must qualify the
subject before he believe, and this is your reason, because, that a man
believe, is required the change of the whole man, as if good works did change
the man, and so were pre-required to believe. I answer, 1. That the heart must
be first changed, I grant; for the natural heart is evil and unbelieving. And
secondly. It is a good work to renew and change it; yet that is no work of
ours, but Gods. Thirdly, Do our good works qualify toward God, ( Coram
judicio Dei, as Melanct.) or toward others? Or to our own sight and sense? Is
not Christ in us, put upon us, formed and dwelling in us, qualification
sufficient for acceptance to salvation?

M. B. Use.

Answ. You are still ministering your vain Antidotes. Take you heed of that
spiritual Antichrist within man, which strongly makes head against the true
Christ. What you preach and profess, may be a deceitful flourish: you bid,
reconcile Law and Gospel, Justification and holiness, etc. I know none making
such jars between one and the other, as does your self. Is the Law then against
the Promise? Gal. 3.21. That is a blind conceit. Christ was ordained to be the
Righteousness of the sinful and lost soul of man, and to be received by it in
the feeling of the failing and want of all goodness in it self. He dwells in
the poor, meek, low, and broken heart, to receive, heal, and satisfy it. We
may think and talk of him out of us, as held forth in the letter and outward
Ministry: and all this to small and no effectual consolation or purpose.

LECT. V.
1 Timothy 1.9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man.


M. B. COncerning the righteous man here, we must not interpret it of one
absolutely righteous, but one that is so, quo ad conatum and desiderium.

Answ. Why may we not understand it as well of one who has attained to
righteousness by Faith, which is absolute and perfect, as of inherent
sanctification, which is inchoat and imperfect? or why is it that you do
altogether exclude this passive and imputed righteousness? You do not with the
Papists hold it only to be a putative and not real righteousness? And you err
if you take that which is sensible, inchoat, and so defective, to be yet more
worthy to give the denomination.

M. B. page 49. The Antinomian and Papist do both concur in this error, though
upon different grounds, that our righteousness and works be perfect. etc. and
that not only in Justification, but in Sanctification also.

Answ. Though the righteousness of Faith in Christ, and sanctification by his
Spirit, (which are inseparable in regard of the subject) be two distinct
things, yet they argue not the party to be in a twofold estate toward God for
acceptance to favor and life; but his estate is peaceable and safe, only by
the free grace of Justification. You grant your sanctification is imperfect and
defective; Now since the sinfulness remaining in us, does dispread it self
throughout all the powers of the soul, all parts, actions, and passages of the
whole man, When you then have gathered and summed up all in one, do you not
bring all your works in the end to yur Justification, by your confession of
weaknesses, wants, pollutions etc. and so seek forgiveness of the sins of your
Prayers, Etiam bona opera egent remissione peccati.
your failings in your Sermons, errors of heart and life? And this is in
effect to have all healed and justified by free justification, or the blood of
Christ: knowing that otherwise all is damnable, and in law and justice to be
rejected: know it, and cause also your hearers to learn it, that though
Justification be one individual act, yet the virtue and efficacy of it is
necessarily to be extended throughout all the life and ways of man. It
purifieth the man, and makes all pure also and acceptable, Tit. 1.15. To the
pure all things are pure.

Thus may you see that it is a truth, that all are become perfect; and the
manner also how: and lastly, that all is in Justification, and not in
Sanctification; and so know your mistake. If you receive not this, how shall
what is imperfect be accepted, except either by some mitigation of Gods
Justice, contrary to that place, so much, and that without cause urged against
us, Matt. 5.17, 18 or that you will so far be beholding to the new Covenant,
with the Arminian, as to seek for the Grace of it? which may pardon or pass by
our defects, or in effect to deny the extent and continuance of the force and
virtue of Justification and Christ's blood unto the last end?

What you charge upon your old Antinomian Islebius, I pass by, as an Author I
never read.

M. B. As for the latter Antinomian, he speaks very uncertainly and
inconsistently. Sometimes he grants the Law is a rule, but very hardly and
seldom; then presently kicketh all down again; for, says he, it cannot be
conceived that it should rule, but that it also should reign: and therefore
thinks it impossible that one act of the Law should be without the other; the
damnatory power of the Law is inseparable from it. Can you put your Conscience
under the Mandatory power, and keep it from the damnatory? Assert of Gr. p. 33.

Answ. None can speak more uncertainly and inconsistently, then you, in these
Lectures; you make neither to appear in your adversary, but he proves you
guilty of both. For when you use these expressions, Good works are necessary in
the justified, and then presently, They are necessary in him that is to be
justified; Again, only Faith in Christ is necessary to salvation: the promises
of life are made to the believer, and good works have the promises of life;
every good work thou can do, has a promise made to it of eternal life, etc.
you both leave your reader uncertain what your opinion is; and these will in no
wise consist together, besides many other like passages. Also, here you say he
grants it a rule; and yet do charge him with the total abolition of it, page
43. Is not this inconsistency? You say he grants it hardly; nay does it
freely without constraint. B. And seldom. Ans. If need require, he will do it
toties quoties.

This is not to kick all down again, to say the Law, if it rule, it does also
reign; the latter does not overthrow the former, but only it crosses and
overthrows your vain and ayry conceit of a Law ruling and not reigning. You
say, he thinks it impossible that one act of the Law should be without the
other. Answ. Here you wrong your adversary; he speaks of a power, and you of an
act. The Law may actually condemn, where and when it cannot actually justify
(as it condemns every transgressor, but can justify only the innocent) and
yet the power for to do both is equally in it as a Law. Why do you not answer
the ensuing Question, viz. Can you put your Conscience under the Mandatory
power, and yet keep it from under the damnatory? The Law bids you love your
neighbor, though your enemy: and presuppose you are obedient thereunto, yet do
you do it so perfectly, that the Law has no power to reprove and condemn you
in that particular? If the Law condemn you not, away with humiliation,
Confession, Repentance, Justification, and all living by Faith in Christ. For
now you can so walk according to the rule of the Law, that it cannot subject
you to the curse and death: you are not reproved and judged in your self for
any thing: your peace and safety is by your just life, the Law being curbed and
restrained, or rather, exauthorized, or dis-invested of all power to condemn:
and your life and comfort is not by your Faith in the Son of God, who loved you
and gave himself for you, as Gal. 2.21. There is no condemnation unto you, (not
because you are in Christ, as Romans 8.1. but) the reason is, in that the Law
though a rule, yet wants power to reign to death. We often meet with this
groundless and false assertion: and now see what is the chief stone that you
stumble at. Let this now suffice.

M. B. The same Author again, page 5. He dare not trust a believer to walk
without his keeper, etc. they are only kept within compass by the Law, but are
no keepers of it.

Answ. The word they, relates not to believers, if you look the place, as here
you do intimate. You only repeat what we write, but confute nothing.

M. B. The same Author at another time, calls it a slander to say they deny the
Law: who can reconcile such contradictions?

Answ. I see no contradiction, nor show of any: you might tell your Reader
wherein it lies; for all are not so quick-sighted as your self. But is not
this a contradiction in you, who say, that we grant the Law to be a rule, and
that a believer is a free keeper of it; and yet that we hold and teach the
abolition of it? Here the task to reconcile is now yours. Also, that we deny
the Law, abides still a slander, for which the Law is against you. See the the
ninth Commandment. The Lord lays it not unto your charge.

M. B. p. 52. The second interpretation is of the damnatory and cursing power
of the Law: the Law is not made to a believer so as he should abide under the
cursing and condemning power of it.

Answ. You might remember, that right now you said, The Law a believer is
under, has no power to condemn and curse; what need he, or how can he then be
freed from the cursing power? See your own instance. If the fire had no power
to burn, what need was there that God should hinder the act? You would saign
such a fire, as is without all power to burn, and tell us of such a Law as
wants power to condemn? who will now fear either? or rather, who can credit
such vain words? Your sword cuts the throat of the owner; for from the removal
or restraint of the act or operation, the Argument does not hold for the
removal of the thing, or the power to condemn, but rather on the contrary, it
strongly and necessarily infers and concludes, that there is such a
condemning power in the Law, in that it is restrained and hindered from the
actual doing of it. But secondly, here is no such miracle wrought upon the Law,
as was there upon the fire, which kept it from burning the three worthies, Dan.
3.23, 25. though more abundant mercy be showed: for Christ was made under the
Law, to redeem us from under it, Gal. 4.4. Not to take the curse from the Law,
but to redeem us. In what sense, and to what end Christ was under as our
surety, in the same sense are we freed: but he was under both the rule and
reign of it. Yet it will not follow that believers are in no state of
subjection and obedience: or being enlarged, and set at liberty, do not run the
way of Gods Commandments. For they do it, though by another efficient, from a
new principle, and for a different end then that of the Law, Do and live. They
are under Christ, and moved and led by his Spirit, who is the head and husband
of his Church. But of this more afterward.

M. B. Consider some parallel places of Scripture: Gal. 5.23. speaking of the
fruits of the Spirit; Against such there is no Law; the Law was not made to
these, to condemn them.

Answ. And if you refer it to the fruits of the Spirit, the Spirit produces
his fruits of himself, and of his own accord: no outward Law commanding and
directing.

M. B. And if because the godly have an ingenuous free Spirit to do what is
good, he need not the Law directing or regulating; it would follow as well, he
need not the whole Scripture.

Answ. You would still bear men in hand that we are against the use of the Law,
which yet we do stand for, if lawfully used, as your Text requires; and that
in all the Authority and Offices of it; and this we can and are ready to make
good upon occasion: yet since this is so often inculcated by you, I wish you
would give satisfaction in these few things. First, If the Spirit make the will
and affections free to what is good, does it alter and enlighten the
understanding also, to know what is truth and good, and effectually incline,
move, guide, and lead aright, without the direction and regulating of the Law?
does the Spirit, which is light, and gives all light and directive power to
the Law, need the Law in his work?

2. You are to prove and clear better then yet you have done, that the Law is
instrumental to the Spirit in the works and ways of sanctification. 3. Where do
you find, that the moral Law does give help or power unto any? jubet, non
juvat. 4. Whereas you say we are flesh, and not all spirit, etc. It may be
replied, that by Scripture and all experience, sin, the wickedness of our
nature, is rather irritated and strengthened by the Law, then weakened and
mortified. It is such a desperate disease, that it makes head more strongly
against any legal plaster and application, Romans 7.5, etc.

M. B. You say it will follow as well, that he needed not the Gospel to call
upon him to believe.

Answ. Your reason is much unlike: for first, the Doctrine of the Gospel is not
only the object of Faith, but the outward instrument and ordinary means the
Spirit uses both to implant faith and to increase it: to regenerate to Faith,
Romans 10.
and to confirm and build up in that way; which you nor any can truly affirm of
the Law. Now this your Rock is passed by without danger.

M. B. The Swinckfeildeans, upon like ground, deny the whole Scripture to be
needful to a man that has the Spirit: and that which the Antinomian does limit
to the Law, that it is a killing letter, they apply to the whole Scripture: and
I cannot see how they can escape this Argument.

Answ. I see, with a little help, the light may so shine forth, that there is
hope you will prove ours: however, we are not here nonplussed. See the error
of the Swinckfeild, and your own weakness: first if we were perfectly holy and
happy, as in Heaven and Glory, we should not need the Scripture, no more then
the Angels do. 2 But we are so only imperfectly and inchoatly, so that the
Scriptures are still requisite and needful, that we may increase with the
increasings of God. Ephesians. 4.12. for the perfecting of the Saints -- Till we
come to the unity of the Faith, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. 3 Again, your friend the Antinomian does not
call the Law a killing letter, as it is without the Spirit, but as it is that
instrument, or the ministration the Spirit uses to kill and condemn, as
touching Conscience, 2 Cor. 3.9.

I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived,
and I died, Romans 7.9.

But this may serve now, viz. The Law can but direct in the things of the Law:
where you can find no Christian estate, nature, name, way, life, faith, nor
hope of his Calling nor, to speak properly, any thing of Christianity. How now
shall your Law direct in these things?

M. B. The Law must needs have a directive, regulating, and informing power
over a godly man, as will appear by these two Reasons. First, we cannot discern
the true worship of God from superstition and idolatry, but by the first and
second Commandment.

Answ. Here is a large field, Inopem copia facit.
this requires a full Treatise it self, as for the explicating it in such
manner as may satisfy men's minds, being concerning this full of darkness and
doubts; so for the general necessity of some clear and special light to be held
forth for the informing and directing aright; a world of people going far wide,
through want of this true knowledge. In brief, thus for the present: First, God
was not only a God unto his people, but had made known also himself unto them,
before the solemn giving of the Law: and he gave not the Law, that by the
observation and works of it he might be their God, and they his people; nor yet
that thereby they might know and conceive of him in their hearts according to
that Law of works. And therefore is it observable, that he begins with these
words, Hear, O Israel, I am thy God, etc. Now as he became their God only by
Christ the promised seed, in the face of whom the knowledge of his glory is
manifested, 2 Cor. 4.6. so his redeemed and peculiar were only to take notice
of him as God in Christ reconciling them to himself, blessing all in the alone
Messiah, giving out all peace and life through him, and vouchsafing all favor
and respect only in reference unto him. To this dispensation, manner, and
kind of revealing himself to mankind (according to that first promise, Them,
nisi in Christo suo, coli aut cognosci nolit. Calv.
Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head; and, in him
shall all the Nations be blessed) are all to attend; for God will not be known
nor worshipped out of his Christ. Now man's heart naturally is a shop of
idolatry; infinite are the forms, conceptions, and images which we frame and
have of God within us. And, as our inward Notions are, under which God comes
to our understanding, so we think of him, worship him, seek to please him, and
lay a foundation for expecting and receiving some good from him. And what
inscription the Athenians had on their Altar, Act. 17.23. the same may be found
on a world of our devotions, all being to an unknown God. For as Christ said to
the woman of Samaria, Serviunt Deo qui tantum opinionabiliter, non natura est
deus.
for the most part we worship we know not what, Joh. 4. for he is only a God
in our opinion and conceit, and not in truth and his own nature, who accepts,
respects, loves, or blesses any, for any work, worth, or goodness of
theirs; but the true reason and ground of all favor is Christ. Ephesians. 1.6. Nam
verus and naturalis Deus sic loquitur: Nulla religio sapientia, justi^ia, etc.
nisi illa unica, qua pater glorificatur per filium, etc.
Thus he that in his thoughts falls from that true knowledge of Christ, and
that in him he is well pleased with him, pacified toward him, receives,
loves him, without and before any actual holiness and work, or performance of
his, he necessarily falls forthwith into Idolatry: because he cannot now but
imagine such a God, and frame him in his own mind, which is nowhere to be
found. A God out of Christ without a Mediator, not satisfied, reconciled, at
peace with us, propitious to us, Omnis lomo qui relabitus a cognitione Christi
necessario ruit in Idololatriam, etc.
etc. but requiring and respecting some duty or holiness in us, to move him to
grant us access, audience, and all blessings needful: an absolute God, clothed
with glorious attributes, terrible to sinners (and not justifying the ungodly
through Faith in Christ, nor loving us when we were enemies, and so by his own
hand and work reconciling us to himself, without any of ours, Romans 4.5. Romans
5.8, 9.) such a God do many set up in their hearts, and they frame their
devotions, works, and ways suitable with this their image: seeking in their own
righteousness and holiness to draw nigh, and that some goodness or
qualification of theirs should commend and ingratiate them unto him. A Friars
Coul, a Monks hood, holy order, pilgrimages, a strict and Religious life, must
speak for one sort: Alii ^e^unant orant, etc. his se deum placere putant
student quaerut. Luth.
others Fast, Pray, Vow, Reform, etc. thinking, studying, seeking by those to
pacify God, and procure his favor.

Now, as we may plainly see, that the Preface of the Decologue relates to the
Covenant of Grace, of Promise of peace and life in the Messiah, in which God
did commend and make known himself what a God he would be unto them, in what
way he would deal with them, and give them all their peace: so God, to keep
this light in them, to suppress or prevent all Idolatry, or spiritual and false
conceivings and imaginations of him (contrary to that his promise, whereunto
man's nature is exceedingly prone) therefore says, I am thy God (as I have made
my self formerly known unto thee) and thou shall have no other: as not worship
stocks and stones, so not form and conceive otherwise of me in thy heart and
mind.

And verily, as the heavenly light of this true knowledge of God which did
appear in the word and work of atonement by Jesus Christ, began to be eclipsed
and darkened in the Church, so idolatry and superstition crept in and
prevailed, till at last it became palpably gross, by Images Pictures, using of
Saints for Advocates, and the like. And the bright and glorious arising and
shining forth of the Sun of Righteousness, who has health under his wings,
Mal. 4.4. will prove the alone effectual means to disperse, dispel, demolish,
and abolish all that trash and superstitions vanities, and to instruct and
guide men's souls aright into the knowledge of the true God.

M. B. The practical use is, -- to pray and labor for such a free and heavenly
heart, that the Law of God may not be a terror to you.

Answ. You have taken a course for that aforehand; for how can the Law be a
terror, while you teach that it cannot curse nor condemn? but thus a man's
heart may flatter him with a false peace in the way of legal conformity, having
not attained to the righteousness of Faith or of Christ. Again, that Spirit
which makes the heart so free and heavenly, that the precepts of the Law are
sweetness and delight, comes not by the Ministry of the Law, but of the
Gospel: this is not the Spirit of bondage to fear, but of Adoption, Grace, and
love. Therefore let us pray and labor that the Gospel may have a free
passage, and be glorified.

LECT. VI.
Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles which knew not the Law, etc.


M. B. Pa. 58. OBservation. There is law of nature written in men's hearts -- How
can the Antinomian think, that the moral law, in respect of the mandatory power
of it, cease?

Ans. Your Antinomian thinks (as you also know) that the moral law is
perpetual and inviolable, in respect of the mandatory and damnatory power also,
within its own territories and dominion; there is nothing taken from it: thus
you mistake him, forget your self, and abuse your reader and hearers.

M. B. Page 59. This is good to take notice of, against a fundamental error of
the Antinomians, about the Law in general, for they conceive it impossible but
that the damning act of the Law must be where the commanding act of a Law is.

Answ. If this error be fundamental, I muse you bring no stronger Artillery to
batter and quite raze it. 2. Your adversary speaks of the power, and you
dispute of the Act: there may be power where it is not always acting. 3. I say
still, The law has power from the Author of it, indifferently to command and
to condemn; If the Law of our Land should never condemn or punish actually
for murder, because no manslayer is to be found, yet it has power to do it
nvertheless when occasion shall serve.

M. B. There are only two things go to the essence of a law, etc. 1. Direction.
2. Obligation.

Answ. These are but your words, without warrant or weight, which can never
carry it: your part is to refell the contrary. 2. If there be such a law which
can only direct and oblige to it, the Apostles Argument may seem to be
invalid, Gal. 3.10. saying, They that are of the works of the Law are cursed,
etc. for a man may be of the works of the Law, as it is of power to oblige to
direct and oblige only, say you, and yet be exempt and free from the curse. I
much marvel that you or any can suppose a law obliging to it for obedience, and
yet not obliging or binding to answer for disobedience. Whatever the Law says,
it says to them that are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world become guilty before God. Romans 3.19. Herein say you, lies the
essence of sin that it breaks the Law; which supposes the obligatory force
of it. Answ. Sin is a swerving from the rule of direction, 1 John 3.4. But can
there be sin, and not guilt? or can you suppose a man to be formally a sinner,
and yet out of condemnation by the law, by preventing that consequence, as you
call it? Lastly, a man is properly odious and hateful to God, in that he is a
sinner; and not as he is guilty and subject to the curse, which be the effects
of justice, occasioned only by sin.

M. B. God, by reason of the dominion he had over man, might have commanded
obedience, and yet never a promise of eternal life.

Answ. To what purpose do you here tell us what God might have done, where the
question is of what God has done, what a law he has made and put man under,
which, as it commands obedience, so it condemns disobedience, Romans 2.8, 9.
Who (God) will render unto every one according to his deeds, to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
eternal life: But to them who are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Is not here the express and full
mind of God in his law? and will you curtaile or conceal any part of it?
Besides, how can it stand with divine justice, to constitute a Law, without
power to punish transgressors? when he gives his law in charge, he says, That
he sets before them life and death, blessing and cursing, Deuteronomy. 30.19. You
may long tell any sober understanding man, that he may safely put his hand into
the fire, it cannot burn him, for there may be a fire without power to burn,
before you can persuade him unto it. And yet God has sufficient power to do
this also.

M. B. As for the other consequent act of the law, to curse and punish; that is
but an accidental act, and not necessary to a law, for it comes in upon
supposition of a transgression; and therefore as we may say of a Magistrate. He
was a just and complete Magistrate for his time, though he put forth no
punitive justice, if there be no malefactors offending; so is it about a law.

Answ. The Apostle in Gal. 3.19. does strongly and convincingly conclude
against you viz. that the moral law came in with power, not only to direct, but
to reveal wrath, curse, and condemn: for, says he, It was added because of
transgression; that is, to accuse and convince of it, and to condemn for it,
that so it might be subservient to the promise, in preparing the heart for
Christ the blessed Seed. This is plain to be Gods intent, in giving and
bringing in his law at the first by Moses. except you can, since then, let us
see how it is altered, or where and when the law was only given to direct and
oblige, the other authority and power being denied it, or rather taken away
from it.

2. As for your instance in the Magistrate, I answer, If the Magistrate have no
power to punish, he is no complete Magistrate. See Romans 13.4. He is a minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: this is one maine
part of his effice, and as effential to it, as it is to countenance and defend
the innocent and good. Also 1 Pet. 2.14. Governors be sent (of purpose) for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 2. Your
other instance of confirmed Angels, is as ineffectual. They were under a law,
say you. Answer, Well, it is true; and those that fell, are condemned by that
law they were under. And now suppose any of them that do stand, should yet sin
as did the other, would they not fall into the same condemnation? It may be
disputable: yet it is current with most, that the Elect Angels are confirmed by
Christ; now I would learn, Whether the benefit they have by Christ, is, in that
the condemning power is taken from the Law they live under, so that though they
fall, it cannot hurt them; or is it in that they are upheld, and established in
their integrity that they cannot fall as did the evil angels, and yet the
condemnation remains in the law still? Who then do now need most rectifying?
I fear you wittingly do oppose the truth: And your manner of replying does
confirm this my opinion. If what is said be true and evident, let it leave you
satisfied, and not go on against the clear light.

M. B. Every believer, though justified by Christ, is under the moral Law of
Moses, as also the Law of Nature.

Answ. You are too bold and peremptory in your assertion: For 1. If believers
be under those laws, then he is under their curse: S^ judice nemo no^^ns
absol^itur. Ascendet quisque mentis su^e ^^^bunale, etc.
for both of them do curse and condemn all that any way disobey them; but
every one under them do many ways disobey them. Where is there any one, if any
stirring be in him, but he may observe within his own thoughts, and feel a
sentence given out against him daily for one thing or other, that he is found
to be guilty of! But is it not written, that Christ was made under the law to
redeem us from under it. Gal. 4.4 and again, Romans 6.14. you are not under the
law, but under grace: whether now shall we believe Paul thus saying by the
infallible Spirit of God; or shall we credit you speaking contrary, of your own
head, by a private spirit? 2. You say, though justified by Christ. Now I here
would ask, whether by justification his condition or estate be not changed? he
was under the Law before, and is he so still? what avails then his
justification? or where is his liberty wherewith Christ has made him free?
Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access unto this grace wherein we stand.
This grace of justification is like the City of Resuge, for the peace and
safety of the soul, unto which it betaketh it self by faith, that so it may
find rest and security, by escaping the coademnation and danger of the Law,
when it is pursued by sin and the tempter, Heb. 6.18. so that a Christian by
his faith seeks to be delivered from the law in the purest obedience and best
works, whereof the conscience cannot be secure, nor dare not rest: vae etiam
laudabili vitae si remota sit misericordia. Indeed faith works also by love,
in another sphere and consideration; and here in love he is under the law,
serving his neighbor in the freedom and willingness of his mind, Gal. 5.13.
according to that exhortation, Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in love, as Christ has loved us,
and given himself for us etc. but this appertains only to our conversation
and the things of this life; and is so perfect in none, but that law he serves
under, will find matter and cause of condemnation; so that still the soul,
elevated and kept above in says, by which it lives, Gal. 2.20. would be found
in Christ, having his righteousness, which is perfect and everlasting; and not
having its own righteousness, which is of the law, Phil. 3.9. If there be no
curse nor danger in the works of our own righteousness, or of the law, (it
having lost its condemning power, as you affirm) why should Paul be afraid to
be found there? But in temptation, and the time of inward conflict, the truth,
benefit, and necessity of this will better appear, and so be discerned and
readily received; and without temptation Christianus nullus est. It seems
your spirits live and abide under the law, as under a quiet and peaceable
government, without sense or fear of condemnation, and without inward
molestation or chock of conscience, in that you tell us of being under both the
natural and moral law, and yet free from condemnation of either. And you would
patronize D.T. Regula vitae, and yet dare not, nor cannot do plane and plene. I
find you in doctrine agreeing with Doctor Laud, who in a Sermon on
Ashwednesday before the King, his text being Jer. 6.16. said, that the old
paths wherein we might rest, were the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten
Commandments: and added, that the law was like unto a serpent at the hedge
bottom, which had lost its sting. I believed him not, though you do. And so he
told the King and the rest, what a pestilential sect the Antinomians were; and
thus he did labor, as you do, to make the world believe that there are some
abolishers of the law, and that these against whom you write, and all others
who go in the same way, are such, and so not to be tolerated in the kingdom.
And about the same time D. Gifford, after many invectives against that sect and
sort (for it is spoken against everywhere, Act. 28.22.) in the closure he gave
this wise admonition to his hearers, viz. To repent, to believe, and to do as
they should do, and so he would warrant them to be saved. Here was repentance,
faith, and inchoate obedience, as in your friend D. Tailer; but in which will
you place salvation? In all, you and these your accomplices do say and teach; and
then in none at all, does the truth of God say; for, If ye be circumcised,
Christ profits nothing, Gal. 5.2. You cannot but see, as D. Tailor in that
his book, so others of great note amongst you, to preach and print many
erroneous things; and why do you not blaze, or reprove those their assertions,
as being far more palpable, and of more dangerous consequences, then is the
worst or weakest expression you can find in your Antinomian authors: Is it out
of a pure zeal for God? I doubt it, or you come forth thus Goliah-like to show
your valor, and to defy the family of faith. And so to gratify others, you
are resolved to venture against the pikes of old tried and pure truth,
innocence, and a good conscience. Well, henceforth be better advised: like one
bemisted, you have mistaken your way, misrepresented your adversaries, and run
your credit, cause, and conscience into a great hazard; and you may expect
worse in all these, without wise and timely retreat. The counsel is good, if it
can be seasonably taken; and it comes from a friend, and well-wisher.

M. B. page 63. This law of nature can never be abrogated. And herein we may
demand of the Antinomian, Whether the law of nature do bind a believer or no?
whether he be bound to obey the dictates of his natural conscience?

Answ. If a man were not first bound, he could not be said properly to be
loosed or set free. It is granted, yet with much limitation, and in some things
only, that every one is bound to obey the dictates of his natural conscience:
and it is as true, to be granted by you also, that in case he hearken not at
some times, or in some things, or in case of defect and failing, or
imperfection, this natural law will give out sentence of condemnation for the
same, as Romans 2.15. from which it is the peculiar and continual office of faith
to set free, and secure the conscience. So that you do very improperly demand
whether the law of nature do bind a believer, quatenus so; whereas a man
believes, that he may be set at liberty in Christ: In whom he in his spiritual
estate toward God, in the things of his peace and life, is free, as Christ is
free; with whom, by a true and real union, he is become one spirit, 1 Cor.
6.17. And so is passed from judgment of condemnation, and from death to life,
Fidei nil proponi debet praeter meramgratiam, a^que haec est ejus objectum.
Calv.
John 5.24. And here faith does not stand bound to give ear to the voice of
either implanted, or moral law, for the procuring or preservation of peace and
comfort; but turning from both, and not regarding them, does direct and confine
ear, eye the thoughts and meditations of the soul to that alone simple object
Christ, and to what he speaks in the word of grace and salvation, whose blood
sprinkled and shed for remission of sins, cries for better things then the
blood of Abel. This is the proper office, obedience, and exercise of faith. So
in God will I praise his word, Psalm. 56. here will I settle my thoughts, and
fortify them against the dictates and accusations of a natural conscience,
sense of sin, reason, law, Satan, or whatever assaileth. If faith give not an
acquiescence and rest to the foul in that free and full atonement by Christ,
and the goodness and favor of God in him, it is in danger to be lost for ever.

And as you have given me this fair occasion, so for the more simple and weak
Christians sake, who is little versed herein, and principled otherwise, let me
further add, That although nature do acknowledge a God, and that he is to be
worshipped, and served; Nil magis adversatur fidei quam lex and ratio. Luth.
yet this opinion, which is also seconded and much strengthened by the moral
law, is not without danger, and is repugnant to the doctrine and knowledge of
faith; for nothing is more cross to faith, then the law and natural reason; the
maine battle and dispute in a believer, is between the dictates of his natural
conscience confirmed by the moral law, and the principles of his faith; and as
the law of faith does enter and prevail, so it captivateth, razeth, and
expels the natural and legal knowledge and thoughts of God, and imprinteth a
diverse from them, only suiting to the Gospel or covenant of Grace: for now,
since the death of the Testator, the covenant is so ratified and confirmed with
God, that he remembereth the sins of his people no more, but abides fully, In
illa gratuita reconciliatione per obsignationem spiritus acquiescit. It a
gloria datur Deo, and non considerat fides quicqu^d in nobis vel aliis
creaturis ei adversari videatur. Olev.
and for ever pleased with them in his Son; and through faith herein, the
conscience also is made to yield to it, to receive and embrace it, and so is
led and brought into this confidence of the quietness and peace of God toward
us, and hereby effects our assured rest in God reconciled for ever, which is
the true Christian Sabbath. Thus every high thing exalting it self against the
knowledge of God according to the Gospel, is to be cast down, and every thought
to be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And by
this is glory given unto God, while one thing is felt or suggested within, and
another is believed. Let this be well marked of great and continual use in
every Christian, that the law implanted by nature, is ever contradicting and
reclaiming against the testimony of God in the word of his grace; whence
arises the difficulty and impossibility of believing save by the power and
operation of God, Col. 2.12. therefore in the weighty things of faith to
hearken to the natural conscience, or moral law, will quite overthrow whole
Christianity, and turn aside the soul to destruction. The seeds of morality and
remanents of the covenant of works may be found in nature: but there is no
spark nor intimation of any pure Gospel. In innocence Adam was not principled
to find and receive his righteousness, peace, and life in another out of
himself.

M. B. Think not, that because he (Christ) dyed to free you from the curse of
the law, that therefore you are freed from the obedience.

Answ. And do not you think nor teach that Christ came to take away the curse
and condemning power from the law, contrary to his own express words, Mat.
5.17, 18. where he says, that every jot of the Law is imperishable? and in his
opening, and applying it afterward, he does as command, so reprove, threaten
and condemn. 2. You will not deny but what Christ has performed for me as my
surety, that I am so freed from, that it may not be required of me to that end
as before. 3. Christ does free us, that we by his Spirit may serve freely and
cheerfully, and without all fear, in holiness and righteousness before God all
the days of our life, Luke 1.76. Therefore are we taken into a New covenant
that gives power and fitness so to serve, wherein he promises the law in our
hearts, to put his Spirit into us, to give a new heart, and a new way, etc.
which the covenant of works could not do, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36.27, etc.

M. B. Use of instruction against the Antinomians, who must needs overthrow the
directive and obligative force of the law of nature, as well as of Moses.

Ans. This is but the old slander, the same false charge so often repeated: It
is by this evident enough that those things whereof we are accused, are not so:
we overthrow no force at all in your sense; thus we have it in confesso, that
you do deny the condeming power: the stones then that you cast may fall upon
your own head.

M. B. 2. Some Swenckfeildians held that a man was never truly mortified till
he had put out all sense of conscience for sin.

Answ. Let the understanding reader judge, whether this your doctrine of taking
away the damnatory power of the law, does not directly tend to that end, and
can produce no other effect or fruits, but senselesseness, and wretched
security: for if I apprehend no danger in the law, it revealing no wrath, nor
threatening, nor condemning, nor terrifying; I can then rest quiet and secure
under the law, and in sin, and so never seek nor desire to come and dwell under
the protection of Christ in his Gospel.

LECT. VII. and VIII.
IN these two Lectures, I find many things not current with me, and more which
are dubious and questionable; but as he medleth not with his Antinomian. so I
willingly let all pass, as having no mind to raise or occasion new disputes:
the Church being too much disquieted already.

LECT. IX.
Romans 2.14. For the Gentiles do by nature, etc.


M. B. Sect. 1. ANtinomians seem to deny all the preparatory works upon the
heart of man.

Answ. Can there be a heart desiring Christ, and willing to receive him for
righteousness, reconcilation and life, and yet be no preparatory work? these a
man with but half an eye may see and read in Doctor Crisp, against whom this
exception is made. And what other preparation is needful, or you do (...) may
be known hereafter.

M. B. Holding that Christ immedi^^^ (...) himself to gr^ss sinners, abiding
(...).

Answ. Your terms are ambiguous; by that word immediately, may be thought as if
your adversary denied all use of means, as an Euthusiast; or else, that Christ
communicates himself before the sinner can or do prepare to meet him or
receive him, according, to that of the prophet, I am found of them that ask not
after me, Isa. 65.1. as he called Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom,
Mat. 9.9. and Peter, Andrew, James and John, Mat. 4.18, 21. And so he prevented
Paul, Act. 9.4, 5. for will ever the stray sheep seek first to the sheperd? or
is it not the shepherds office to seek the scattered and lost? Luke 19.10. you
are no patron of free will, why then do you wrangle in a matter so clear? After
that I was turned, I repented Jer. 31.19.

2. You say to gross sinners. Do you make a difference before Christ and Faith
come? Paul says, There is no difference between the profane Gentile, and legal
Jew Romans 3.9. the Jew is in no wise better then the other; although the blind
Pharisee thought and judged otherwise, Luke 18.11. or is not Christ as free for
one sinner as another; for a gross and great offender, an idolater, a
Necromancer, as Manasses, a blasphemer, and persecuter, as Paul; for Publicans
and harlors, as for a refined and reformed legalist? Alas, Sir, what then shall
become of all gross sinners, if Christ may not communicate himself unto them?
you would have them amended first; that may like you but it pleases not
Christ, who is most glorified in the chief of sinners, like that skilful
physician whose art and faithfulness does best appear in the healing and
recovery of a patient desperately sick. But by what power or means shall a
gross sinner reform and amend, before Christ come to him, who said truly,
Without me yo can do nothing? you seem by this book to be just of the elder
brothers, that is, the Pharisees mind Luke 15.12. who was offended, and
murmured because the loose and sinful prodigal was so freely received, and
kindly welcomed and entertained. What your fears or other reasons may be, Ephesians.
1.6.
I cannot well tell; but Christ took more pleasure in conversing with gross
sinners: the mercy and grace of God is become most free, and rich to the praise
of the glory of it, when such are freely justified and received into favor; and
never did nor shall any love so much, and be so serviceable and full of
expressions of love, as such unto whom most are forgiven, Luke 7.47.

3. But you add abiding so. 1. Answ. What, after Christ has communicated
himself? Impossible. 2. You know your adversary can intend no such thing, nor
has any such words; but his expressions are otherwise, as appears in his
book to any reader. 3. And if you mean, abiding so till Christ come to him; I
say, then you must work some strange cure on such an one, in making him a
Proselyte: but I forbear.

M. B. And though they hold us passive at the first receiving of Christ, which
all Orthodox do, yet they express it in an unsound sense, comparing God unto a
physician that does violently open a sick man's throat, and pour down his
physic whether he will or no.

Answ. 1. If you think that a man must or may prepare himself, you are not so
Orthodox, as to hold us passive at the first receiving of Christ. 2. You
stumble at the similitude used; but have not other approved Divines compared
Gods dealing with man at first, to a riders rough handling of a wild colt, who
is forced to cast him ere he can shoe him, and by a strong hand, and sharp
usage, to subdue, break and tame him? Neither of these do imply any more then
is warranted, Jer. 31.18. and other places. Are you of opinion that God in the
conversion of a sinner does nothing against the will of man? look then on
Manasses, Paul, Adigondo peccatum in conscientiam.
the Jailor; was there not violence done, whilst God uses afflictions without,
and the terrors of the law within, driving sin into the conscience, and so
compels the man to come in? Luke 14.23. no bitter potion, or aloes, is so
unpleasant and loathsome unto the body, as the due working of the law is
ungrateful to the conscience: besides, the patient knowing that his physic is
given not to kill, but of purpose and with a mind to prevent death, and to
cure the diseased body, will more willingly receive and digest what is so
untoothsome: but the soul, when the law reveals sin and wrath, and the spirit
of bondage begins to work, knows nothing of Gods purpose herein, unless it
be that his mind is to destroy; and therefore it does struggle, and refist, as
much as in it lies. It may be truly said in a good sense, that God, who
works the Will and the Deed, Phil. 2.12. does save a man against his will:
for man of himself is both unwilling to suffer and abide the work of God in him
and upon him, and also to have salvation in Gods way; therefore said Christ,
You will not come unto me, that ye may have life, Joh. 5.40. and none will
come, unless the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. And how often would God humble us,
and yet we will not be humbled! man stands out till he be made to yield. A
frantic man will not be bound or cured; besides, he is held captive, and
let by Satan, though voluntarily: the strong man must first therefore be
cast out by one stronger, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. Yet being overcome, converted,
and made willing by the Spirit of God, his will believes, converteth and
inclines according to the way and voice of the Gospel; so not at first, but
afterward, man being changed, is become willing and active.

M. B. page 86. Yet fifthly, We may hold truly some antecedaneous works upon
the heart before these graces be bestowed on us: this take to antidote against
the Antinomians, who speak constantly of the souls taking Christ, while it is a
grievous polluted soul.

Answ. There is no such fear of hurt by your Antinomian doctrine, as you still
pretend; but is far more danger in your so many antidotes; and the poison, as
is now apparent, lies and lurketh elsewhere. But that the world may yet more
fully and clearly see how in this also you wrong your adversaries, 1. It is
evident, that both the honey-combe, and the Assertion do grant and teach as
much concerning the antecedaneous work upon the soul (as it is Gods, and not
man's) as you can rightly call for. And whereas D. Crispe does compare God to a
physician so violently working upon, and enforcing his patient, etc. Is not
that a sufficient preparative? yet further, God gives, says he, an heart to
desire and receive Christ, etc. Now who can be supposed to have an heart
desirous of Christ, but he that is a sensible sinner, apprehensive of his
fearful estate without Christ, and convinced withal, that Christ, and Christ
alone, can reconcile and save? The alone tender of our Savior to any, does
imply a lost condition without him; and may not God even then let the soul see
it has no Christ, and so is in sin and death? and thus awakening it, at that
present stir up the desire and longing after him for salvation; and so that
free and gracious tender of a Savior to such, becomes very seasonable and
acceptable. I must you will so vainly quarrel with your friends, and the truth
too. Oh, but this will not be received, that the soul should take Christ while
it is a grievous polluted soul; we have this often set before us and I think it
is sufficiently answered; at least, I grow almost weary in replying unto it.
Will you have this so polluted soul to be half, or in part washed and cleansed
before Christ do it? 2. Do you think that the tears of repentance, humiliation,
confession. etc. have power to wash the soul from sin, as you know Doctor T.
did teach? or will such acts or exercises diminish the evil of sin? when a man
is made to know and feel into what woe and misery his sin has plunged him he
cannot by that think better of himself, but only grieveth, complains and
fears the more. Thus I write, because (which is the best I can make of it) I
take your meaning to be, that Christ should be tendered to none, but to such as
feelingly do acknowledge their sin. Now the sense of sickness and pain does no
whit extenuate the same: or the confession of a great debt, is no abatement of
it. Further, when the woman with the bloody issue desired, and sought to many
for cure and health in vain, was she by that diseased the less in body? yea, or
when through the same or report of Christ, she was strongly persuaded, that if
she could but touch the hem of his garment, she should recover; did even this
persuasion remedy her disease, till that virtue went from Christ to effect the
cure? Two blind men cried, Lord, that we might see; and were they less blind
therefore, before Christ opened their eyes, then other blind folk who did not
so complain, nor seek to Christ? Indeed, these two were not contented with that
comfortless condition: but that did aggravate misery, and afflict more, rather
then mitigate and ease it; only the uncertain hope of some help, did somewhat
sustain and relieve their spirits. And so to conclude, the soul is not less
polluted, when it knows and confesses with tears its great pollutions: and
whatever work or exercise else you will put the soul unto, it will not thereby
cease to be polluted as much as before, for its no act or work of man's, but
Gods only, that cleanses and heals sin.

LECT. X.
Romans 2.14. If the Gentiles do by nature, etc.


M. B. Page 95. THe law, if it was not in it self a covenant of grace, yet it
was given Evangelically, and to Evangelical purposes -- and therefore the
Antinomian does wholly mistake in setting up the law as some horrid Gorgon.

Answ. Your if, imports that you question the matter, and do rather incline
to hold the law in it self a covenant of grace: and if it be a covenant of
grace, then it is not a covenant of works, for grace and works be as two things
most contrary, which cannot agree, Romans 11.6. 2. If the law in it self was a
covenant of grace, then there were two of grace. 3. You would confound Law and
Gospel, which you told us out of Luther, are to be kept at a like distance as
heaven and earth. 4. Yet it was given Evangelically, say you. Answ. Who can
credit you in this? for the law came in a terrible manner, as in thunders and
lightenings: and the Lord descended upon mount Sinai in fire, and the whole
mount quaked greatly, so that all the people trembled, Exodus 19.16, 18. But the
Gospel came in a joyful manner. The Angels said unto the shepherds, Fear not,
for behold. I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people,
Luke 2.10. Neither was the law in a proper and strict sense given for
Evangelical purposes, for God purposed by his Gospel to give pardon, freedom,
peace, joy, refreshing, health, and rest to the souls and consciences of his
people; but by the law he intended to reveal sin and wrath, to terrify, wound,
and condemn, etc. These two ministrations are to produce two contrary effects;
for humbling, bruising, and beating down of the soul, being convinced of sin,
guilty of death, and worthy of Gods everlasting wrath, is the true and proper
effect of the law, and that for which it was especially given, as Gal. 3.19.
Wherefore then serves the law? it was added because of transgressions; that
is, to discover them, to cause fear and horror in the conscience, and so to
conclude or shut up the soul under a fearful and inevitable bondage and
malediction, verse 22. And thus did Paul set up the law in a most horrid and
terrible manner, as if there were no Christ, neither grace or redemption to be
expected from God, as Luther says: so that the mistake is wholly yours. And if
no such indignation, and terror be by the law, what need a Mediator for
reconciliation and peace? or Christ to be a Sanctuary or hiding place? or any
to fly to him for refuge and salvation? It seems you would have the law to
be preached more mildly then some Antinomians do, and with much mitigation of
justice: and yet you blame others for too little law: you are not good to
please: and few men's Ministry like you, so as does your own. But this I dare
say, he that was never killed, was never made alive; where the law works not
to condemnation, there the Gospel never brought justification to life. And by
this means the law is subordinate and subservient, in making sensible of sin,
guilt, and damnation, in suppressing and destroying that pestilent opinion, and
conceit, which every one has of himself, his own strength and righteousness.
And lastly, when a man lies in that deplorable and desperate case, sighing,
and lamenting under that burden of fin and wrath, in making to desire and seek
after help and remedy. And in a remote and general sense, or accidentally, it
may be said to have Evangelical purposes, in that all hope of righteousness,
acceptance, and life, being quite lost, and gone by the Law, the mind and
intent of God hereby, is, to drive man to believe in JESUS CHRIST. But of this
you will tell us your mind more fully afterward, as you say.

LECT. XI.
Genesis 2.17. But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
cat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye.


M. B. pa. 105. THe Antinomian cannot by his principles avoid that Christ
intentionally dyed, and so offers his grace to all.

Answ. That is, Christ intended by his death, fullness, perfection, or
sufficiency of salvation for all, and that so it should be tendered to all,
though the elect only can conceive it through faith; and that it will prove the
judgment and condemnation of others who were invited to be guests, but refused
to come in, as Mat. 22. and had it propounded and offered to them, Romans 10.
ult. this is a truth, as received by the Orthodox, Ancient, and Modern, so
consonant also to the Scripture: and hence Christ is called the Savior of the
world. And there is neither error nor danger in it.

You say in another place, that God justly requires faith to the Gospel of all
to whom it is preached, in that we all had power to believe given in Adam; and
is not then the object of faith, or the grace of the Gospel to be propounded to
all, with command that they believe, even for the obedience of Faith? Romans 1.5.
This is the commandment of God, that men believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ etc. how should they receive and apply Christ, unto whom he is not
preached or offered? or how can any be reproved for rejecting of him, whom they
might not receive? or blamed for not coming unto him to have life, whenas yet
they had no way nor leave given, as Joh. 5.40. You will not come unto me, that
you might have life.

LECT. XIII.
Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest, etc.


M. B. IN page 124. and 125. For did not God deal thus with Adam? If he would
obey, he should live; but if not, then be must dye: will you say with the
Antinomian, That this was an unlawful thing, and this was to make Adam legal,
and one that was not affected with the goodness of God to him?

Answ. If you deal heartily, you should name your Antinomian, and not charge
any crime upon the guiltless: you think he cannot be wronged too much. 2. But
if the continuance of Adams felicity was upon condition of his obedience, it
follows not that it is so with the Elect in the second ADAM Christ, for here
they have a far more free and safe estate then was that in time of innocence.

LECT. XIV.
Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest, etc.


M. B. p. 132. ANother maine question is, whether the estate of reparation be
more excellent then that in innocence. New here we cannot say, one is
absolutely better then another as the first estate of Adam did far exceed this
in the rectitude it had etc.

Answ. Our slate of reparation without all controversy does far excel that of
Adams innocence, even as an infinite Good exceeds a finite; yea and in
respect of rectitude, immortality, and felicity, your three instances; but then
we must believe more then we see or feel, yea, and things centrary to what
these our senses are set upon. In Christ Jesus there is a new creation: old
things are past, and all things are become new; he that by faith puts on
Christ, bears the image of the heavenly, whereas the image of Adam was the
image of an earthly man: As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and
as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly. But our life is hid with
Christ in God; and when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. Again, the state of reparation is more excellent
then that of innocence, in regard of immortality: for the life that Christ has
purchased and brought to light, can never be extinguished; it is an everlasting
life, without fear, danger, or possibility of perishing; here is no subjection
nor propensity to death or mortality; but Adams state was not so absolute and
happy: and though the body dye, and outward man perish, yet the state is
imperishable and unchangeable. And, says Christ, He that believes in me,
shall never see death, Joh. 8.51. Lastly, unto faith there is no infelicity:
for all the creatures stand reconciled in Christ unto the believer; a firm and
inviolable covenant is made for him with the beasts of the field, the fowls of
heaven and the creeping things of the ground, Hos. 2.18. Job 5.23. Also
crosses, afflictions, tabulations, and death it self, not only cannot separate
from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8. ult. but all are yours, says Paul, for
your furtherance and hope; the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, 1 Cor. 3.22. And all work together for good to them that love
God Romans 8.28. But this state is not discerned, save by the eye of says; yet
this is the truth of the Christian condition by the means of the blood of
sprinkling, which has slain and abolished all enmity, and sanctified all
things unto us: and as it stands and is confirmed in the mind of God, and by
him is revealed, and held forth in the word of atonement; he that is truly and
effectually called by God, is stated in that grace and blessed condition, where
he is without fear or danger of evil. The defects or imperfections which you
speak of, are not in the state, but in our sight and apprehension: not in the
thing or object, but in our little says. The word and ordinances are left us
to use, for the increasing of our knowledge, faith, assurance, consolation, and
full contentment of our happy condition; but the state it self simply
considered, is always one and the same, neither subject to diminution, or to be
augmented; as the Sun is as glorious in it self when it rises, as at midday,
though not so to our sight and senses.

M.B. The next question is Whether we may be now by Christ said to be more
righteous then Adam, for so an Antinomian in his Treatise of Justification,
quoteth places out of some Authors etc.

Answ. 1. The Author of that Treatise both in that book, and in his life,
appeared to be as much, if not more, for the law, then any his accusers. 2. You
cannot deny, but that the quoted places do speak fully home to what he affirmed
and held; their expressions have so puzzled you, that your Answer is silly and
frivolous. For, 1. You grant the truth of all, but you must find, and appoint
the ground they are to stand upon, whenas they had a more clear and firm
ground before; but we will deal with you upon your own ground also. The
Orthodox express so much, say you, upon this ground, Because the righteousness
of Christ as it was his, was of infinite value and consequence, and so as we
are in a Mediator, we are in a better and surer condition then the Angels or
Adam. Answ. 1. If it be of infinite price and consequence as it was his, then
it is so as it is imputed; for it is not impaired or diminished a whit by
imputation; neither read you anywhere that God impute th but only some piece or
part of it; and also Christ cease not still to be the Author and subject of
it, though imputed to us, even as we are the Authors of sin, and the subjects
in whom sin is seated, however it be imputed by him. He is the Lord our
righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and Isa. 45.24. Surely, shall one say, in the Lord
have I righteousness. In Christ are all the treasures of his Church, and in him
she is complete, Col. 2.3, 10. By her union with him she has communion in all
his unsearchable riches, Totus Christus quantus and qualis est. Luth.
as has the wife all by marriage with her husbusband; uxor fulget mariti
radiis, she is beautiful by his beauty. Whole Christ is the believers, and not
some portion of him. or of his treasures. Of him (says Paul) are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. In that Christ is ours, all his be ours, even
his purity, holiness, and perfections. Again, this does necessarily infer,
that imputed righteousness is more excellent then that of Adams or Angels, in
that theirs was finite, they being creatures, but Christ's as imputed is
infinite; Because, 1. As Mediator he is God-man, and therefore his person,
obedience, and all things of him and from him be infinite, by reason of his
Godhead. 2. What did fully satisfy the justice of God, which is infinite, that
must needs be infinite: but that obedience and righteousness which God
imputes, was it that gave satisfaction to his infinite justice, for the
almost-infinite fins of a world of men; therefore that imputed righteousness
must needs be infinite. As for your reasons you bring after, they are so poor
and weak, that they may well shame the owner. For, say you, It is only imputed
to us for that righteousness which we ought to have; it is not made ours in
that latitude as it was in Christ but as we needed it. Now God never required
of us greater righteousness then Adam had; and therefore it is a senseless
thing to imagine, that that should be made ours, which we never needed, nor
were bound to have. Answ. 1. I hope I have made it plain, that it is ours in
the same largeness it was in Christ. 2. Whereas you see no necessity of it, I
affirm, that a greater righteousness then Adam had, is needful and requisite
for the repairing and advancing of our condition, and that upon these grounds:
1. Suppose Adam, after he had eaten of the fruit forbidden, had yet either the
righteousness implanted by creation preserved in him without violation, or that
God had restored it again unto him presently upon his fall; could this his
righteousness have done any more then answer and satisfy the righteousness of
the moral law for the time to come? and then it could not make amends for the
disobedience or fact against the positive law, and so redeem him and his
posterity from death, hell, and the devil; therefore a greater was needful. 2.
There seems to me to be more poison in fin, then that the goodness of any or
all created righteousness should be able to equipoize or countervaile the evil
of it; for in the transgressing of the law, there is also laesio majestatis:
sin reflects upon the law. giver also contemning his authority, rebelling
against him; etc. and so in regard of God vilified in the breaking of his law,
the sin by this object becomes infinitely heinous and hateful, though the fact
and person be finite. 3. Thus for to preserve and to have kept Adam in that
life and felicity wherein he was first placed he had sufficient strength and
righteousness; but that could not recover and raise him up again, nor nothing
that was less then infinite. 4. What God required of us to keep us in favor
and happiness, was one thing, and Adam had sufficiency to have given: but now
the question is, what God requires of Christ for the making up of the breach,
the appeasing of his wrath, and the full satisfying of his mind and justice
according to that Law of Mediatorship laid upon him, the righteousness whereof
he has fulfilled per omnia. The first Adam, in all his perfections and
abilities, could never have done the will of God as it is contained and
required herein, Psalm 40.78. 4. Lastly, A better righteousness was needful
now, In that God intended to restore, and raise his Elect unto a far more
blessed state then an earthly Paradise, even unto an havenly crown and
kingdom, where they shall shine like the Sun in the firmament, and their
bodies shall be, not natural, as was Adams, but spiritual, made like unto
Christ's glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.44. Phil. 3.21. therefore has the Lord laid
the infinite satisfaction and righteousness of his Son for a foundation of so
superexcellent and glorious a structure or edifice, John 17.22. The glory which
thon gave me, I have given them: and verse. 24. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they behold my glory which
thou have given me. You, to find out what righteousness is needful, only
consult with the moral Law, and imagine a condition attainable by Christ,
which, you say, is only in respect of certainty of perseverance made happier
then Adams. You are peremptory, and Dictator-like in your assertions; and when
you have put your self-liking sense upon the words of any Author, never
intended by him, then you canonize him for Orthodox.

M. B. But they never used such expressions in the Antinomian sense, as if
hereby, we were made not only perfectly righteous, but also holy, and without
sin.

Answ. When the Authors have the same expressions, and use the same words; yet,
if you may be the Glossary, your sinister mind can make their sense to vary and
differ. 2. They who say we are persectly righteous, do affirm us to be holy
also and without sin in the same sense and manner, but not inherently: for if
the law require holiness and righteousness, how can we be justified in Christ,
from what the Law has against us, and yet not be as well holy as righteous in
him. and so without sin? what can be spoken by the Spirit of God more plainly
then this, Christ has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood? Rev.
15. See also Col. 1.22. And read Luther on Psalm. 130. verse. 3. who there says.
They that put not their trust herein alone, that by the death of Christ their
sins are taken away, and Gods eyes closed, that he cannot see their sins, must
needs perish; for this only do the Scriptures set forth, that our life rests
wholly and alonely in the remission of sins, and in that the Lord will not see
our sins, but in mercy cover them, etc. In the reading of which words, the said
Author of the Honeycomb was much convinced, and sore terrified and troubled,
as he confessed. But your carnal reason can put a lower and strange sense upon
all such places, and so present them in your own shape, that nothing may offend
any: beyond a carnal sense, no truth can be admitted; what God speaks
plainly, will be received no further, then wit conceives, and lets us see
how it may be true, and then we will say, we belive it; but that is not to give
credit unto God, in what in his word he propounds, but to assent unto reason,
as it comprehends.

LECT. XV.
Exodus 20.1. And God spoke, etc.


M. B. HAppily the Law will be more extolled in its digninity then ever, by
those opinions which would overthrow it.

Answ. It is impossible for any to extol the Law above the dignity due and
proper to it; but what you attempt for that purpose, does neither gain glory
to the Law, nor commendation to your self.

2. You tell us of opinions overthrowing it, yet can let your reader see none
more subverting and injurious then your own: Indeed you bear the world in hand,
that the adversaries which you have made, or feigned to your self, do speak
against the use of the Law and preaching of it, cry down the Law utterly
abolish it, etc. all which, with more suchlike interwoven stuff, is fasly
suggested by you, to render them erroneous and odious: but you can make no such
things appear.

M. B. page 139. For we may either take the word Law for the whole dispensation
of the commandments, moral, judicial, and ceremonial, or else more strictly for
that part we call the moral law, yet with the preface and promises added to it.
And in both these respects the law was given as a covenant of grace (which is
to be proved in due time) or else most strictly for that which is mere
mandative and preceptive, without any promise at all.

Answ. It is granted the word Law is capable of the two former significations;
but that in both those respects it was given as a covenant of grace, especially
in the later more strict sense for the moral law, Is a new-coyned and bold
assertion, lately come out of the mint, having as yet no image or
superscription upon it save only ipse dixit, to make it current. If your
spirits be grown so wanton and confident, by reason of some supposed parts or
abilities more eminent in your self, that you will not keep tract of the
Orthodox, but slight and reject all humane authority, as falling too short of
that height you aim at in your aspiring thoughts, yet reason requires it of
you to show your reader some clear text of Scripture, upon which you ground
your distinction, and positions. If the moral law strictly and properly so
called, was given as a covenant of grace, Why is it called a law of works,
requiring man's righteousness? And then Paul argued nothing solidly, when he
said, If it be of works, it is no more of grace: and if of grace, it is no more
of works; else grace is no more grace. To admit the one, is to exclude and deny
the other: so inconsistent they be in this point, Romans 11.6. But you take time
to prove it, and you have your asking: and we wait your leisure. In the
interim, you present us with as uncouth and unwarrantable an assertion, viz.
that the word Law is taken for that which is mere mandative, without any
promise at all, etc. It will prove as difficult, as bold an enterprise, to
undertake the proof and defense of this. The Scriptures define the law in these
words, Do, and live; and so implies the contrary, viz. He that does not shall
dye: so that the mandative is not without the promise, nor threatening. When
Paul says, They that are of the works of the law, are cursed, Gal. 3.10. does
he not argue convincingly, that the works of the law, which we do in obedience
to its command, cannot be secured and set free from the curse? And that the law
is ever invested with divine authority to promise and threaten, to curse and
bless, to kill and give life? I should be afraid so to limit the Lords
Sovereignty, and to divest him of so much power in his just and holy law, as to
make him some petite and under-ruler or commander, allowing him in his law
only a jurisdiction to make and impose a law, without a full and due reigning
power; having no more light to clear it, then as yet you hold forth unto us.
And now with this wittily-devised key, you can pick out, and give us the right
sense of all those assertions which the learned have concerning the difference
between the Law and the Gospel; and putting your sense into their words, can
make them speak as you please. But though you can show us no text to ascertaine
the verity of any thing, yet you give us a reason, as weak and unsound as is
your affirmation viz.

M. B. For if you take (as for the most part they do) all the precepts and
threatenings scattered up and down in the Scripture, to be properly the law; and
then all the gracious promises, wherever they are, to be the Gospel; then it
is no marvel if the law have many hard expressions cast upon it.

Answ. This reason seems to occasion your forged distinction. And 1. You
would father this upon the learned, but tell us of no Author, book, nor
testimony. It would have been to your credit, and the justification of your
weak and questioned cause, to have produced one sentence or syllable sounding
that way. 2. You may seem to disparage the learned too much, as if, confining
or ascribing all the promises to the Gospel, or accounting them to be Gospel,
they should deny any promise to appertain to the law. Whereas, I think, you
cannot allege one learned Author, who does not grant the law to have its
promises also, yea, and to make this difference also between legal and
Evangelical promises, that the Evangelical are free and absolute; the legal,
conditional; Promiss. alia conditionales, aliae gratuita.
yet never read I of any hard or undue expressions cast upon the law, as you
insinuate. If the curse be not sometime expressly set down, yet it is
implicit and necessarily included, wher-ever the law is mentioned, taking it
for law moral: but you reserve this to a future time; and so it is referred.

M. B. pa. 141. In the moral law is required justifying faith and repentance
etc. the second commandment requires the particular worship of God; insomuch
that all the ceremonial law, yea our Sacraments, are commanded in the second
commandment.

Answ. 1. You may as well say also, that the judicial law is included in the
first commandment, and the second table, and so jumble and confound all in one
law, which in their delivery, nature, use, and end, are so distinct. 2.
Justifying faith is so called only from the object of it, unto which it has
respect; Non aliunde nos salutem quam ex evangelio consequi quoniam non alibi
suam nobis justitiam Deus patefacil, quae sola nos ab interitu leberat. Calv.
but this object is not propounded in the moral law, for the soul to have
respect unto: therefore it is an error to teach that justifying faith, properly
so called, is required in the moral law, and a confounding of law and Gospel.
The righteousness of God is the object of justifying faith (therefore it is
called the righteousness of faith also Romans 10.6. and that in opposition to the
righteousness of the law. v. 5.) and it is only revealed in the Gospel; whence
Paul infers it to be the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16, 17. and the
Gospel is preached for the obedience of this faith, Romans 1.5. that is, to call
and bring men unto this justifying faith: but if the law do it, it is not the
proper office and end of the Gospel. 3. What requires repentance, must
necessarily propound a promise of pardon and acceptance unto the penitent; but
the moral law knows, nor offers no such mercy to any sinner. 4. God cannot
be rightly worshipped, nor known, but in Christ the Mediator, by whom alone we
have access with boldness, and confidence, Deus nisi in Christo suo coli nec
cognosci.
Ephesians. 3.12. but the law teaches not Christ. 5. And if our Sacraments be
commanded in the second commandment, then they were commanded the Jews; for
whatever the law requires, it is of them that live under it, as did the Jews,
Romans 3.19. but I hope our Sacraments were not commanded them to use; yea, and
we by that are to be circumcised, who now have the second comman dment? 2. If
all the ceremonial law be commanded there, then the ceremonial does not differ
in nature and kind from the moral, but as a part from the whole; Where is the
specifical dissirence then?
so that you have vainly distinguished the law into moral ceremonial, and
judicial: many other arguments might be used to let you see your great mistake;
but I forbear in a case so clear.

M. B. The moral law has more particulars, then can be in the law of nature;
hence the Apostle says, he had not known lust to be sin, had not the law said
so, etc.

Ans. As the moral law is not so comprehensive as to contain justifying faith
and repentance, so neither do you evince it to be more extensive or large then
the law of nature, having more particulars then be in that; these be your
private crotchets. How will it stand with the justice of God, to require more
then was given to our nature at first? And the invalidity of your reason is
evident; for though the Apostle had not known lust by it, yet you know that
much of that law lies dead and obscure in us; there be many seeds and
remanents of it, which to us be imperceivable, till the Ministry of the moral
law do fetch those sparks from under the ashes, revive, and bring them to
light. And lust lurketh in our corrupt nature, as fire is in the slint, not
known, nor taken notice of, till the law, as the steel, beat it out, and cause
it to sparkle abroad; but it follows not that the moral law contains more,
because it reveals more. 2. You take the natural law as it is obliterated,
and imperfect in our corrupt nature, and the moral law in its perfection; an
unequal comparison. 3. The sin of lust was there before the law came; now if
there were not a law of nature, or in nature, against which it was, how came it
to be sin? by what law had it a being? for the knowledge of it, you say, was
only by the moral law.

As you pass along, you are ever and anon, like a rash and passionate
Schoolmaster, lashing your adversaries without cause, accusing them as guilty
of crying down the law, preaching against it. reviling it etc. and the like
aspersions you cast upon them; which argue and bewray too much gall and
distemper in you; but such passages I pass over, being minded not to reply to
every extravagant expression, but only to give satisfaction in what is material.

LECT. XVI.
Exodus 20.1. And God spoke, etc.


LAstly, observe in general, that God did not give them his law, till he had
humbled them.

Answ. The principal end of giving the law, is, that by it, as an instrument,
God may humble us, beating down that pride and presumption in our spirits,
conceiting and boasting of what we neither have, nor are.

M. B. p. 151. -- To signify that the law could not be a way of justification.

Ans. And yet you said but lately, that the law requires justifying faith; to
what end is it, if it show no way to justification; nor cannot justify, as you
say afterward? or how can it then be a covenant of grace?

M. B. God does use the law as he does his whole word, to beget and increase
the life of grace in us -- and in this effect of the law, to increase life,
David does often commend it.

Ans. 1. There be two principal and essential parts of the Covenant of Grace.
1. To hold out the way of justification, peace, and life. 2. To promise and
give the Spirit of regeneration and renovation. So Jer. 31.33, 34. and Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. And the law does neither of these: therefore it is no covenant of
grace.

2. There is nothing more against Scripture, and the maine current of all true
divinity, then to teach that the life of grace is begot by the law. Here are
two great mistakes: First concerning the nature of the life of grace, which is
not in works, nor the expressions of inherent holiness or sanctification; for
to move and walk in the law of works, or of our own active righteousness, is a
legal life; but that is the life of grace which reviveth, quickens, and
comfort the mortified, Vita anima est sentire gratiam Dei: mors animae est
sentire iram Dei. Scult.
dejected, and distressed conscience, which lay in extreme woe, and in the
shadow of death, being apprehensive of the sentence of condemnation passed upon
him by the law and the spirit of bondage. If you know not yet what this life
is, and wherein it consists, ask the condemned prisoner, whose life is gone by
the law, and he will say, his pardon would be his life, which must come from
the mere grace and mercy of his Prince. Your great reading may tell you that
when divinity was more pure and distinct then it is now, repentance was said to
have two parts. Justificat. vitae hoc est unde nascitur vita. Pisc.
1. Mortification. 2. Vivisication; and the object of both these is the man,
who is spiritually slain by the law, as Romans 7. and again quickened through the
faith of the operation of God, and so made partaker of the first resurrection,
Revel. 20.6. hence its said, Col. 2.13. -- You has he quickened together with
him, forgiving you all your trespasses; and the efficient or worker of both
these is God, who kills and makes alive; and man is the patient: the soul
receiving the pardon of sins, has entrance into the presence and favor also
of God; and in his favor is life: and his loving kindness is better then life.
In his presence is fullness of joy, says the Psalmist. Hence we read, that
justification is to life, Romans 5.18. and Christ is the bread of life, whoever
eats of him, shall live for ever, John 6. and whosoever hears his voice,
shall live, John 5.25. Thus life comes by believing; but law is not of faith,
Gal. 3.21. If there had been a law that gives life, surely righteousness
(which is our justification) should have been by the law, Gal. 3.21. for
righteousness and life come both one way; but you confess our righteousness
comes not in that way of the law; and so I hope, hereafter, you will say life
comes another way.

Here let me commend a sentence or two unto your self and the rest of the
brethren; yet for your sakes I will not English them. Vos falsa imaginatione
decipitis miseros homines quasi ex lege vivere debent eoque praetextu in lege
ipsos detinetis, Evangelio interea facitis invidiam, quasi in nihilum justitiam
redigat, quam ex lege habemus, atqui lex ipsa est quae nos sibi mori cogit --
Romans 7. pulchre describit Paulus, neminem legi vivere, nisi cui lex est mortua;
hoc est, otiosa and fine effectu, nam fimul atque lex in nobis vivere caepit,
jem nobis infligere lethale vulnus, quo perimus, etc. ergo qui legi vivunt,
nunquam senserunt vigoram legis, ac ne gustarunt quidam quid lex sibi vellet.
Calv.

Paulus est hic haereticus omnium hareticissimus; estque haereses ejus
inandita, quia dicit mortuum legi, vivere De^o. Pseudo-apostoli docebant nisi
vixens legi, mortuus es deo, hoc est, nisi vixeris secundum legem coram deo es
mortuus. Panlus plane contrarium dicit, Nisi fueris mortuus legi, non poteris
vivere Deo, etc. hanc doctrinam ratio and sapientia humana non capit, ideo
perpetuo contrarium dicit, scilicet, si vis vivere deo, oportet te legem
servare, etc. Est que hoc principium. and una maxima omnium Theologorum, vivens
secundum legem, vivit Deo. Luth.

Est omnino impossible aliquem simul legi and Deo vivere -- nunc cessante lege
peccato and morte adsit justitia Christi salus, and vita aterna. -- Quicquid
est in me gratiae, justitiae vitae, pacis ac salutis, id omne est Christi,
haecn. ipse mihi donat: aboles legem damnat peccatum and mortem mortificat ut
ego vivam, and habeam in ipso aeternam pacem, justitiam, consolationem and
vitam.

-- Sed Christum intueor and amplector, qui crucifixus, a me apprehensus, mihi
dat vitam, sic viverit in me Christus. Corn.

He that has any Christian experience, knows, that when the soul lies in
death and darkness, the apprehension and presence of Christ (who is received
and comes into the heart by faith) is the only true light, life, peace, and
consolation of it. What that law is, David so commended to get life by, is to
be known hereafter, together with your second mistake here, viz. that the law
is the instrument to beget life, and to sanctify; for it is too irksome and
vain a thing to speak to these every time you east them in our way.

M. B. p. 153. This is remarakble, that though the former tables were broken,
yet now God enters into a covenant of grace with them, as appears by
proclaiming him self long-suffering, gracious: but yet God causes the
commandments to he written again for them: implying, that these may very well
stand with the covenant of grace which opposes the Antinomian.

Answ. God entered into a covenant of grace with them, not now, but long before;
see Genesis 17.4, 7. As for me, behold my covenant is with thee, and thou shall be
a father of many nations, verse. 7. And I will establish my covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 2. Though God in great wisdom gave the
ten commandments to Abraham's posterity for special ends and purposes (as now
also it is continued in the Church) yet it is not joined to the covenant of
grace, as if it should perfect; or alter it, or add any thing to it. It being
entire of it self, and distinct from the law; their natures, offices, ends, and
effects so much differing one from the other. Read Gal. 3.15, 16, 17. A place
full of light and satisfaction: Brethren, I speak after the manner of men,
though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth
or adds thereto: verse. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made, etc. verse. 17. And this I say, that the covenant, that was confirmed
before of God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and thirty years after
cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect. And note by
the way, 1. How the covenant (or Testament, (...)) and promise are both one
with the Apostle, which you stumbled at elsewhere. 2. That there is not one word
of truth, in what you say to oppose your adversary: but the text is directly
against your self. 3. Where you say the law may stand with a covenant of grace,
your own words imply, that it is not then a covenant of grace, as you formerly
asserted.

M. B. page 155. How necessary it is to have this law promulged, if it were
possible, as terribly in our congregations, as it was on mount Sinai! this
would make the very Antinomians find the power of the law, and to be afraid to
reject it.

Answ. 1. If it were so necessary that the outward promulgation or preaching of
the law should be so terrible as your wisdom requires, surely God would have
it so: for he has power to do it: but the special power and terror is inward
and spiritual; God by his convincing spirit making the heart shake, and tremble
in the conscience of sin, and a cursed perishing condition: of this terror and
consternation, your Antinomian may scon have much experience as you, yea more,
for he finds death in that ministration, by the reviving of sin, Romans 7.9 10.
and therefore is dead to it, as Gal. 2.19. but you say life comes by the law,
and so live by doing and working; an assured argument that you were never
truly slain by the law. 2. Would you now have the law become so terrible in
your congregations? why then did you reprove them that made it like a horrid
Gorgon, etc. you mean surely this terror only for the Antinomians, not for
others; you thunder against your adversaries, but deal gently with friends.
Also you dash sin out of countenance, which is well; but do not throw down man's
righteousness, but establish it rather.

A little after you say, The Antinomian counts sin nothing, because of
justification. But in what sense does he so vilify it? I dare affirm that
none hates sin more, is so weary of it, complains so of its remaining and
dwelling in the flesh, and the sorrow it sometime breeds him, etc. And yet if
he make light of it, how can he prize justification from it? he that accounts
nothing of sin, cannot rightly esteem of a Savior to save from it; therefore
contrarily our counting all things loss and dung, even our best works legal
zeal, reformation, and worship, because mingled and defiled with the leprosy
of sin, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus, our desire ever to be
found in him, not having our own righteousness, to know nothing but Christ
crucified etc. do argue sin to be our greatest and most fearful evil to our
apprehensions; but it is not so with you, and your disciples, who seldom or
never preach or desire to hear of a Savior, of free justification; and do so
wrangle with the doctrine of grace and faith. And lastly, it is confessed that
by faith in the blood of Jesus, and the grace of justification reigning in the
conscience, sin, Satan, and hell, be conquered, defied, and triumphed over. Who
can lay any thing to their charge? Thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. he that envyeth this in others, is to be pitied, because of his
poor condition. What account do you make of a debt you know is discharged? It
troubles you little in reference to danger by suite or law.

Lastly, That phrase of Gods not seeing sin in a believer is still an eyesore
to you and many other. And to add this to the former. It argues that you make
nothing of sin. For, 1. If you hated it, you would seek to get your soul
cleansed from it. 2. If you loved God, you would not come and appear in his
sight until you were washed from it, seeing it is unto him so hateful and
abominable, that he cannot endure the sight of it; and therefore calls upon
his people to wash and make them clean, and then to come. Or yet, 3. If you
feared God, and stood in true aw of him, knowing how terrible he and his
presence, is where he sees and marketh iniquity (for who may abide it? Psalm.
130.3. or who then can stand?) you durst not abide in his fight without that
faith and assurance that the blood of his Son Jesus has washed and cleansed
you from all your sins. If, as that Martyr said, the veil were taken off
Moses face, such a glory and dreadful Majesty would break forth, as would
confound your spirits, and be intolerable, your sins being set in the light of
his countenance; then you would not deal with God without faith in the blood of
Christ; Extrae Christum horrendum est, imo de Deo cogitare. Calv.
nor durst entertain a thought of him out of Christ, in whom iniquity is done
away, never to be remembered any more. Then you cry out, Oh blessed man, whose
iniquities are for given, and whose sin is covered, and so use your own words;
say all that ever you preached or writ against this is false, you knew not what
you said. Thus a day of temptation and trouble may come, in which you all who
have disparaged and despised this, may be brought to acknowledge and embrace
it, as an useful and most acceptable truth of God, full of soul-consolation;
which in your wretched security is now loathed and rejected; the law is so
mitigated and modified in your opinion and Ministry, that Sinai is your Sion:
you are not afraid to stand there.

LECT. XVII.
Exodus 20.1. And God spoke, etc.


M. B. THe Antinomian pleads for the universal abrogation of the law.

Answ. He is an Antinomian that does so; but you cannot find the adversaries
you deal with guilty of such a crime; yet you are no fit advocate to patronize
or defend the law, for it is abrogated by your self, if that be true, as it is
most certain, that lex non damnans; non est lex, a law without power to
condemn is no law: for the law you would establish has no condemning power, as
you say; therefore the law is by you abrogated. How fully satisfactory is
Luther to any reasonable man! Non quod lex pereat, imo manet vivit and regnat
in impiis: sed pius est legi mortuus sicut and peccato, diabolo, Inferno
mortuus est, quae tamen manent, and mundus ac impii ea habebunt. Ideo cum
Sophistae intelligunt legem abrogari -- tu intellige paulum and quemlibet
Christianum universae legi abrogari, and mori, and tamen legem manner.
Sophisters do understand and take the law to be abrogated; but the truth is,
the Christian is abrogated and dead to it; and yet the law remains entire.
Henceforth correct your self, and cease to slander, or mistake your poor
brethren, and without cause so to embitter your words with gall and servour of
spirit: and the Lord forgive you.

What further is spoken in this Sermon against the Antinomians, is either
chargeable upon Islebius, or some other not known to me: or, 2. Is grounded
upon a mere mistake of our tenets, or is answered elsewhere; so that, to avoid
prolixity, I meddle with no more.

LECT. XVIII.
Mat. 5.21, 22. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou
shall not kill; and, Whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the counsel: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hellfire.


I Wonder at an Antinomian, who is so apt to oppose the doing of things in
love. M. B. p. 173.
and doing them by the law together: for does not the law command every duty to
be in love?

Answ. Did not Christ tax and reprove the Pharisees for their alms, prayers,
sacrifices, etc. which were things commanded in the law, because they wanted
pureness of love, and did them in hypocrisy, for praise and self ends? 2. It
is the chief point of wisdom in the teacher, to discover want of truth, of
affection and love to things done according to the outward precept of the law.
3. Whosoever does a thing simply, being moved thereunto by the authority of the
law, does it not in love. 4. Though the law require love in every duty, yet it
both finds us in enmity, and yet it cannot breed nor work love in the heart,
though it be often pressed to be done, where no such affection is found, nor
once spoken of: thus most are suffered to bless themselves in that kind of
doing.

M. B. Yea, we are to love God by the law, because he has given Christ for us:
for the law commands to love God for whatever benefit he bestows upon us.

Answ. If God command love by the law, because he has given Christ, then you
must presuppose that Christ was given before promise to give him in future, it
had been more probable: for the promise of the Messiah was before the giving of
the Law. 2. But neither you, nor I (if we understand what love in truth is) can
love God because the law requires it, though that be a reason alleged and
used for it; for it is his love shed abroad into the heart that causes love in
us: We love him, because he loved us first. Natural enmity (whatever we profess
otherwise) cannot be destroyed and abolished, but by faith, which purifieth the
heart, and works by love.

M. B. God does work grace in us by this (the law) as well as by the Gospel --
God does use the law instrumentally, for to quicken up grace, and increase it
in us, as Psalm. 1 19. shows.

Answ. Paul rendereth that as the only reason why righteousness cannot come by
the law, because it cannot vivifie, quicken, or give life, Gal. 3.21, the
quickening spirit is not adjoined to it. The proper office and end of the law
is to convince us of sin and death, that we may seek righteousness and life in
Christ by faith; the branch lives and grows in the vine, and so fructifieth,
John 15.

But this controversy you do professedly, and with all your forces of
Scripture and Arguments, enter upon and largely handle in your 20 Lecture:
therefore let us pass on unto it, for the whole 19 nothing concerns us.

LECT. XX.
Mat. 5.21, 22. Ye have heard it has been said by them of old, etc.


THE Antinomian does directly derogate from the profitable effect and benefit
of the law. M. B. Pa. 187.


Answ. Your accusation and charge will prove too directly peremptory, bold, and
unjust: he that acknowledges all the effects and benefits of the Law, that the
Orthodox or God himself in his word do mention, cannot derogate any jot from it.

M.B. This therefore is the assertion which an Antinomian Author maintains,
viz. that the law is not an instrument of true sanctification; and that the
promise of the Gospel is the seed or doctrine of the new birth; and it may not
be denied, but that many speeches might fall from some men, which might seem to
comply with that opinion.

Answ. Here is strange insolency and loftiness of spirit. All men's eyes must be
put out, but yours, or theirs who see as you see: you pretend learning and
reading; but how is the judgment of the learned slighted and contemned by you?
you stand up as a zealous advocate pleading for the Law; but what illegality
and injustice is this? with what scorn and lordliness do you insult over your
Adversary? and would bear, and beat down him, the truth, and his innocence,
under the foot of pride and disdain. Your single opinion must be preferred
before all, and received by all: in your conceit it carries in it the light of
the Sun: here is the Popes spirit, all err but he: all is Gospel that comes
from him: his word is a law; only his Chair is wanting. But what mean the
Presisident and Fellows of Sion-Colledge to do in the end, who so approve and
applaud this man, and his Book? Intend they hereby to bring in and establish a
piece of new and strange divinity, and to reject and overthrow what is old and
true?

1. It may not be denied say you.

Answ. But if it might, then perhaps it would be denied; but there is that
convincing power in the light of simple truth, that will force even the most
impudent somewhat to yield.

2. Yet see what mincing he uses, and how loath he is to grant the whole truth,
and that the world should know that his Adversary has any of the learned
Orthodox truly and really for him, or that he himself opposes any in this but
a vilified and despised Antinomian. Many speeches might fall, says he, from
some men; as if they were half a sleep, or not so considerate as he is, when
they let such speeches fall: or at least intended no such thing, or not in our
sense, as he often says; for it is in him to put what sense or gloss he
pleases upon their words, that so they may not be for us, whenas the same
truth, yea totidem, and ipsissimis verbis, is asserted by both.

3. From some men. And are they not men of least worth and account too in the
Church? I dare say you do think no better of them for it. They are but some
then: perhaps you mean few; and yet I think you can hardly name one learned and
sound Author, from whose pen the same assertion has not fallen.

4. Might seem to comply with that opinion. Multa videntur, quae non sunt. What
do they seemingly accord with us, but in truth and reality are all for you, or
as you will have them? who have learned to make quidlibet ex quolibet: yet why
do you not produce one for you? because you scarce can do it.

Reader, If thou have the Assertion of grace, and would turn to page 166. and
170. thou may find there Augustine, Luther, Calvin, Bullinger, Cornerus
Perkins, Cudworth, Brentius, Piscator, Fox, Tindal, and Rollock: unto which it
is easy to add as many more Orthodox all punctual and full to the point
affirming what I say; and their words are direct, full, and exclusive, denying
this power and work to the law: wherefore I am not the first deviser or
broacher thereof, nor alone in this opinion, as walking in an unbeaten path.
But unto me it is most strange, that M. B. should be so self-confident, and
bold of spirit, as to presume to carry it with violence against all others. Let
me commend unto thee the words of Perkins, because he is worthily approved of,
and best known unto the simple sort, upon Gal. 3.2. Here, says he, we see the
difference between the Law and the Gospel: the law does not minister the Spirit
unto us, for it only shows our disease. and gives us no remedy; the Gospel
ministereth the Spirit. And upon Gal. 2.19. Evangelical sorrow is sorrow for
sin, because it is sin, this indeed is the grace of God; but it is not wrought
by the law, but by the preaching of mercy and reconciliation etc. the Law then
being the cause of no good thing in us. And Cudworth on Gal. 6.2. in the last
difference between Law and Gospel, has these words, The law is no instrumental
cause of faith, repentance or any saving grace. Is this now but seemingly to
comply with our opinion, when they say the law is no instrumental cause of
faith, repentance, nor of any saving grace, nor yet of any good thing in us?
and still these Authors were no Antinomians, but we must be so, because our
Adversaries, like those of Stephen, Act. 7. do rule, and will have it so. I
tremble to consider the woeful consequences, if the Ecclesiastical power should
be once in their hands: but I trust God will not suffer the wise and honorable
Parliament so to entrust them. But let us listen what his conceit is.

M. B. I shall now labor to maintain the positive part, that the law preached
may be blessed by God instrumentally to work the conversion of men.

An. The question is not of Gods power whether he may or can do it, but whether
he has done it: let it appear in all the New Testament, that any one was
converted, but by the Gospel: Nay Paul, and Priests, with others, who had been
zealous in the way of the law, were then only converted when they received the
Gospel, and become obedient to the faith, Act. 6.7. or did God ever reveal it,
that his will is to convert by the law? God can or may make heavy mountains to
ascend as high as the Sun, and there abide; and the waters in the Sea to burn
like straw or other combustible matter: but he never did so as yet. If you show
it to be his will, we shall question it no further.

M. B. And it is necessary to make this good.

Answ. Because you have undertaken it, and are resolved to oppose the apparent
and generally received truth: to be contrary to all the Orthodox: to gratify
Sion. College: to get a name to your self, of being a knowing man, seeing more
then all other learned Divines: or at least, to maintain your own credit, now
it is necessary for you.

M. B. For were the contrary true, it would be a Ministers duty in great part
to lay aside the preaching of the Moral Law, as not instrumental and
subservient to that maine end of the ministry, which is the conversion of souls.

Answ. If I take your words in their true sense, they argue, 1. (I am sorry to
speak it) that M. B. knows not what conversion of the soul is: but this may
be tried by and by. 2. That he intends, when he preaches, to convert people
by the Law, and looks that the Spirit should make it effectual for that
purpose: and however he puts in, or subservient to that main end, yet he
means not only preparatorily, for that he says he cannot yield unto (which
yet is the clear judgment, and constant and sound doctrine of all true
Divines) but he will be singular. But see his ground, and how sandy,
uncertain, and weak it is, to lay and erect an edifice of so great consequence
upon it.

M. B. I suppose that Jesus Christ has obtained of God by his death, that such
efficacy and virtue should go forth in the Ministry, that whether it be by Law
or Gospel he preaches, the souls of men may be healed and converted thereupon.

Answ. And must your mere supposition satisfy us in a controversy (so newly,
needlessly, and yet dangerously started up, to the great offense and disturbance
of the Church) of this nature, and high concernment? you may suppose, Christ
has redeemed all, men and Devils. A Papist supposes that Christ by his death
has obtained that his Alms-deeds, Penance, and good works should have a
meritorious virtue and efficacy in them for pardon and salvation: and upon that
deceitful foundation or supposition, the silly deluded wretch builds and
hazardeth his everlasting salvation. Oh that any should be so simple and
unwise, to content himself with an I supposed it is so. 2. You say, whether it
be by law or Gospel; so, as if God and Christ are indifferent, and it is left
to man's choice to use either, as he likes, for conversion: that is more
liberty then is allowed you.

3. That the souls may be healed and converted. The right order is, first to be
converted, then healed, Mat. 13.15. But let this pass; yet it is requisite that
we agree about the terms (for some doubts or differences may arise from the
ambiguity of the words) yet not as if I would yield that regeneration,
conversion, or healing (of which I see you make no difference) in whatever
Scripture-acceptation, are wrought instrumentally by the law; but to help the
weak reader, and to clear the truth every way.

And first: Regeneration is the begetting again of the soul to God, which God
does freely of his own accord by the word of truth, Jam. 1.18. but because
this will not be current, that this is meant of the Gospel only (as is
objected, and as is to be discussed more fully in the next Lecture) in that the
law is also called the word of truth; Let me therefore add two pregnant Texts,
to put this out of all doubt, that it is to be understood of the Gospel
exclusively. The first is Ephesians. 1.13. In whom you also, after you heard the word
of truth, the Gospel of your salvation: by which Paul tells, how the
Ephesians came to their faith and hope in Christ, namely by the preaching of
the Gospel. So says Calvin, He adorneth the Gospel with two Epithets, in that
he calls it the word of truth, and in that it is the instrument of salvation;
which two adjuncts, says he, are diligently to be observed. -- And the Gospel
is not only a certain truth, which cannot deceive (for so is the Law) but
(...) he calls the word of truth, as if properly no truth were without it: and
the virtue and efficacy of it is such, that it brings salvation unto us, as
it is also Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation etc. and
therefore Paul was not ashamed, nor afraid to preach it at Rome also. If the
Law would have served, and Paul had known also this your liberty, and chose to
use either law or Gospel, he needed not to shun, nor shrink in the preaching
of it, for every man's heart is principled to approve and receive that doctrine
having the seeds and effect of the law naturally in his bosom; but the Gospel
is supernatural, and the soul is indisposed to receive it of it self, yea and
strongly by assed and inclined against that way of peace and life revealed by
it; for it makes void, rejects, and casts down all the excellencies of
man, his freewill, strength, righteousness, wisdom, goodness, as being vanity,
folly weakness, sin, and vile with God; so to prepare and make way in the soul
to bring in and commend Gods grace to be all-sufficient and that Christ alone
may be exalted and rejoiced in. Hence the mystery of the Gospel was to the
Gentiles foolishness, and to the Jew a stumbling block. 1 Cor. 1.23.

Also it is more then evident, that this word of the Gospel was the instrument
of converting all those Churches to whom Paul writ, as his Epistles do
testify; as besides these mentioned places to the Romans Corinthians, and
Ephesians you may also see in Gal. 1.6.8.9. Col. 1.5. Phil. 1.5. who were
called into the fellowship of the Gospel. But what need the lighting of a
Candle at noonday, unless it be still dark Saturday with us. The second
remarkable place is 1 Pet. 1.23, 25. Being born again, not of corruptible seed,
but incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever: and
verse. 25. he expounds himself, saying. And this is the word which by the Gospel
is preached unto you. If need were, a cloud of expositors might be here
produced to evince and confirm it, that this instrumental word of regeneration
is not the Law, but the Gospel.

It is true, some tell us of a twofold regeneration, or rather a twofold sense
of the word; by the one, the soul comes to a second new being: and by the
other, it has the image of God reinstamped on it; And of a regeneration of
Faith, and another of holiness of nature and life; but I would trouble none
with these distinctions: yet this I add, that Melancthon upon John, observes,
that Christ calls our justification, regeneration; and indeed it is a new
creation, and the putting of the soul into a new and happy condition, for
thereby it has reconciliation and peace with God, Romans 5.

2. And there is a twofold healing. 1. Of our spiritual estates: and thus we
are said to be healed by the stripes of Christ, Isa. 53.5. who is the repairer
of this breach: and as for that wound of conscience (in that day when sin does
bite and sting, and the law accuse and terrify) none other plaster can cure
it, but the blood of Christ, who by his eternal spirit offered himself to purge
and purify the conscience, Heb. 9.14. and this is done by the application of
faith; for health or salvation is only in Christ, and in nothing else you can
name: And as Moses lifted up the Serpent, so must the Son of man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have everlasting life
John 3.14 15. 2. There is an inchoate and partial healing of our natures,
hearts and lives, which is effected by the Spirit of Christ, renewing and
changing all and every member of his mystical body, whereof he is the head: but
as the Moral Law is not the instrument to reveal and hold forth Christ
crucified; so Faith, by which the soul comes to be sensibly healed, and having
communion with Christ to receive virtue from him, this Faith is only
instrumentally by the Gospel, which is preached to all for the obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.25, 26. And if our inheritance come by the law (in part or in
whole) then Faith is made void, and the promise made of no effect, Romans 4.14.

3. And lastly, Conversion may be taken, 1. for the change of the condition, as
when who was in bondage is enlarged, set free, delivered out of the hands of
his enemies: and of far off, is made near, as John 8.36. Ephesians. 2.13. Col.
1.21. or 2. for the turning of the heart to God, Act. 26.18. To turn them from
Satan to God. If thou will return, return unto me.

3. For the change and alteration in the soul, when God sanctifies a man
throughout, etc.

4. A man may change his religion, as did the Jewish-Proselytes: and his
outward way and manner of life, being refined and reformed according to the
letter of the law, as the Pharisee, Luke 18.

Now to apply all. Hence I infer, and say, that it is never read in the
Scripture, that the soul was made spiritually free, and estated in grace and
favor, by the preaching of the Moral Law: but the office of it is to arrest,
convince, shut up the soul under sin, the curse, and condemnation, Gal. 3.22.
the law and the Gospel are the two keys that Christ gave, that by the one,
sinners might be shut and bound; and by the other, set free, and brought forth,
Mat. 18.18.

2. Neither did the Law instrumentally convert and turn the heart to God: for
Christ is the way to the Father; his blood and cross slays the enmity that is
between divine justice and the sinner, and removes all lets whatever did
hinder or separate, and so opens a free way for access, Heb. 10.19, 20. and
his righteousness is the melius terminus, bond or mean of union between God and
the soul, bringing them into a sure and everlasting covenant of peace: he is
first King of righteousness, and after that King of Salem, that is, of peace
Heb. 7.2. Now Christ, his death and resurrection, with the fruits and benefits
thereof, are the subject and peculiar treasures of the Gospel, whereof Paul was
made a Minister, that he might preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.7, 9. further God cannot be com'd unto, known, nor
enjoyed, nisi in Christo suo, but in Christ. And he gains and draws the
soul with cords of love: he appears gracious and merciful to poor sinners
beaten down, humbled, and brought to deaths door in the conscience of sin;
else the soul being afraid of him, would with Adam flee away, and hide it self
from him: hence passim, men are exhorted to turn to the Lord, because he is
gracious and merciful, Joel 2.13. Psalm. 86.5. Hos. 6.12. We are to hold forth
God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and not imputing their sins
unto them: and as Ambassadors for Christ, we pray men in Christ's stead to be
reconciled unto to God, 2 Cor. 5.18, 20. Now this cannot be by the ministry of
the Law, by which comes the knowledge of sin, for it works wrath, Romans 4.15.
threatens with the curse and death, Gal. 3.10. And thus the Law does by the
will and appointment of God, to force man out of himself, to destroy all
self-confidence, and trust in any goodness of his own, and to make him to seek
out, and to hearken after Christ, the true and only right door set open in the
Gospel: that by him the soul may have entrance, being found in him, not having
its own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through faith in
Christ, The righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. It is a vain,
and a strange conceit, that the soul should convert to God by the preaching of
the Law, since it can only turn and come unto him by faith, which nothing does
so much cross and hinder as the Law: and it puts the soul upon a contrary
way.

3. But if by conversion you mean (as happily you do) the change of the
disposition and frame of the soul: It is as certain also, and clear, that God
does not this by the law, but by Gospel: thus Act. 15.9. God purifieth the
heart by faith: and Acts 26.18. they sanctified by faith. This is the special
commendation that Paul gives of the Gospel, that therein we all with open face
behold the glory of the Lord, as in a glass, and are changed into the same
image from glory to glory even by the Spirit of the Lord.

Again, can man's nature be changed till he be united and ingrafted into Christ
the true vine? and does not virtue come by that insition or union? And was it
ever taught, or read, that the law should be that ministry by which this is
wrought? If the law do not set this object Christ before the soul, nor is no
mean to bring and join it to him; how can it be an instrument to give and
communicate the Spirit of Christ? Indeed, a legal spirit or power it has,
which has been effectual to work a great deal of reformation and legal
strictness, having a specious and deceitful show and luster, as we see in the
Pharisees, who therefore were admired in their age. O Sir, if you would set
before your own, and the eyes of your people, duly and daily, that exceeding
kindness of God, and sweetness of his so surpassing love in Christ in so
infinite expressions of it, and seek to affect both your own and their hearts
with it; you would find what an incredible force and virtue is in it, far
beyond any power in a legal Ministry, to melt, gain, and leaven the soul,
transforming it into its own nature and image, which is love and mercy; and so
disposing you to do all things of the law freely and willingly, which are but
the offices and duties of love. And the law was given not to beget this love,
but that by requiring it of us, either love or enmity as, it is in us, might be
bewrayed, and made manifest. In a word, no sounder, further, nor better
conversion can be wrought by the law, then was in Paul, before he received the
Faith; who in that his zeal of God was a blood-sucker and butcher of
Christians, Christ's silly and harmless sheep; for he was inwardly in the gall
of bitterness, etc. and so are too many this day, as we see, find, and feel,
who might be metamorphozed by the Gospel, and of wolves become lambs; like
Priest, like People, according to their pasture they feed in, viz. as the
nature of the doctrine is they receive, so they are: where much law is, there
hardness of heart, cruelty, self-love, etc. but want of meekness, humbleness,
and mercy. And it will ever be true, that a legal zeal is persecuting.

4. If lastly, you hold this last sort of conversion to be by the law, viz. to
make a loose and profane man strict and religious in his course of life (which
is properly no souls conversion; for both he may be in statu quo prius, no
changling in his state, and his nature was principled for this way) this may be
granted you: but alas who sees not that this is hypocritical, feigned and
unsound. Luther says, The law can but make hypocrites, if there be no further
work but what is by it.

This I ingenuously profess (what ever you may think of it) that my desire is
not to know or think of God out of Christ, but to confine all the powers and
workings of my soul unto that so pleasant and amiable object, God reconciled in
his Son. And so to set him before me gracious, propitious, loving, etc. in all
the events, occurences, and conditions of this life. And this is the true and
only office and exercise of faith. And thus I deal with God, even as he also
deals with me, (according to Luthers expression) without the Law, in his
Covenant of mere grace; the more I can do so, the greater confidence I have
toward him, the better every thing he does pleases me; the more welcome is
the Cross, and the more apt and able I am to bear and digest it, the more is my
heart and affections lively and sweetly stirred up, and enlarged to love God,
and to delight my self in him: by this mean the soul is made merry and kept
joyful in the Lord, and like an Instrument in good tune, it is ready for use
upon any occasion. And the inward appearing and manifestation of God unto the
soul in love and tender mercy, does melt it, and effectually change and
overcome the enmity and maliciousness of my naughty heart and nature. And this
light I endeavor to hold out to all, and to walk in this way of loving
kindness, long-suffering, and compassion toward every one, in doctrine and
life, holding it the wisest, most direct, effectual; and Gospel-like course and
way, thus to overcome the frowardness and evil that is in man, with lenity and
goodness, even as God in this way prevented and overcame me. The more I can
look into that gentleness, aimableness, and those fatherly affections in God
through Christ Jesus toward me, and that secreet bosom of divine love is so
laid open; the more are all fears banished, discontentments swallowed up, and I
am heartned to go on cheerfully in a Christian course, as best becomes that
holy and heavenly calling. And the more abundantly Gods thoughts of peace are
discovered unto me, the more peace and rest I thereby find bred and preserved
in my thoughts. You may account it a licentious doctrine, or otherwise asperse
it with indignities, because you have little skill of it: and may bridle your
self and disciples by another mean and kind of woeful doctrine; but when you
have done, I wish you might feel how your own pulses do beat. But I proceed.

You deny the Law to work only preparatorily in conversion. And I think he
never had experience of convesion, that is of your mind; you would make men
believe you sit down with a legal reformation (as is the case of too many)
instead of a Gospels-conversion: or that the law had never as yet its due and
perfect work upon you, for then you would sing another song: When the
commandment came sin revived and I dyed, Romans 7. Did ever any come to life, but
by death? And when a man has seen and felt nothing but sin and death in
himself, the law cannot tell him, nor let him know of a righteousness and life
ordained for him in another out of himself; and therefore here it cease to
help. He that expects conversion by the Law, may as well seek light in
darkness, life in death, conversion where confusion, terror, and desperation
is. Who can credit your bare word in this, that the law, which is found both by
Scripture and experience to be the word that reveals and works wrath and
death, should yet be the ministry also of conversion to the soul? I cannot do
it.

M. B. Only two things must be premised.

Answ. Nay not only two, but a third also, viz. that what you say is
infallibly true without exception; your new divinity must pass for current.

M. B. First, that the law could never work to regeneration, were it not for
the Gospels promise.

Answ. You mean not, that the Gospel-promise should be any ingredient to the
ministry of the law, and so by the virtue and efficacy of this (as some special
pearl used amongst other things, in themselves of little or no force) this cure
or work should be effected: but you say that virtue should go forth equally and
indifferently by law or Gospel; and this because God has promised to give a
new heart through Christ as the Medium, by and in whom he creates and changes
it anew; for so you would contradict your self: but thus you intend, that Gods
promise to give this heart is grounded on Christ, as the reason of making it;
but the performance may be by the law. But is it your part to make this to
appear for truth? By regeneration we are become children to God; but if this be
by the law, then are we but like Ishmael, children of the bondwoman. Well,
your words want weight and credit too. I wonder you should think such private
fancies would ever be received, having no warrant but your pen. What have you
no Text nor Author to produce, not one sentence or word from either, for
confirmation?

M. B. So that while a Minister preaching of any commandment, does thereby mold
and new frame the heart.

Answ. You want a probatum est, for it.

M. B. All this comes by Christ, who therefore dyed, and ascended into heaven,
etc.

Answ. Every word of God is pure: add thou not to his word, lest he prove thee,
and thou be found a liar, Prove. 30.5, 6. Where is it said that Christ dyed and
ascended to give such power and virtue unto the law?

M. B. So that there never was in the Church mere pure Law, nor mere pure
Gospel.

Answ. It is a heavy accusation and charge; never? what not in the Prophets,
Apostles nor yet Christ's time? but always a Miscellaneous, or mixed doctrine?
this seems too bold and rash. If you shuffle all together; it was not always
so: the promise in Paradise, That the seed of the woman shall bruise the head
of the Serpent; and that to Abraham, Genesis 12. That in Christ all the families
of the earth shall be blessed, was surely pure Gospel, without any Law.

M. B. But they have been subservient to each other in the great work of
conversion.

Answ. Subserviency was always granted and taught; but that may be without
mixture. Christ, or the Gospel and the Law, cannot be and dwell together: and
as the dead fly marreth the Ointment in the box, so the least thing of the law
mingled with the Gospel, corrupts it, and wholly destroys it, says Luther;
they are so repugnant and opposite; you know the nature and operations of
contraries, and the doctrine of grace and of works are contrary: Romans 11. If of
grace, it is no more of works.

You say you approve of Luther, Qui scit inter legem and Evang, discernere etc.
sciat se esse theologum: but you will not meddle with that now.

Answ. No, nor no time else, it is needless; if they were always intermingled,
how can they be otherwise now? and if either severally, or both jointly may
effect true conversion, what need we make a difference? or why it is of so
great consequence to give an exact difference between them, I understand not.
But in the closure, you seem as if you would have eat your own words, saying:
God may make the opening of the moral law instrumentally to concur thereunto:
you are providing hereby some moor rome aforehand, for fear of that strait your
former assertion brought you into.

M. B. The second thing which I premise, is this: That howsoever the law
preached may be blessed to conversion, yet the matter of it cannot be blessed to
Justification, Adoption, or consolation.

Answ. More strange still! what conversion is it which is not included in
Justification? by it the soul is reunited and reconciled to God. Totus
processus a peccate, etc.
The learned have taught and told us, that the whole passage and way from sin,
wrath, and death, unto righteousness, favor, and life, is by mean of free
justification. What is blessed to justify, is blessed to convert us to God: but
the Gospel, and not the Law you grant, is blessed to Justification, Adoption,
Consolation. When Paul did beseech the Corinthians to be reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5.19, 20
or to receive the Atonement, was not that to turn to God? no, God had the
heart: to eschew evil and do good, is not to turn unto God. My son, give me
thy heart, and then let thy eyes observe my ways. Christ is the way to God.
Again, is it possible to partake of Adoption, whereby we become children, by
one doctrine, and to receive the qualification, or divine image or likeness
reinstambed on us, by another doctrine? 3. Is not our Reconciliation, or
coversion, the ground of our hope and consolation? The promise of the Gospel
gives no ground of hope or consolation to the unconverted, 1 Pet. 1.3. We are
begotten again to a lively hope. Who can have hope in God, or consolation from
him, but he that is regenerated, or converted? or is there any ground, or
reason of either, but only in this, that we are called and converted to the
faith of the Gospel? Blessed be God, who has given us everlasting consolation,
and good hope through grace, 2 These. 2.16. You put in after, Not in any thing
he does, as if you made no difference between conversion, and man's doing, or
work; which is gross. And yet elsewhere you erect much hope and consolation of
future good and glory upon man's doing and duty, which here you deny: see page
40. where you say there is a promise made to our works, etc.

M. B. Therefore let us not confound Law and Gospel, nor yet make them so
contrary in their natures and effects, that where one is, the other cannot be.

An. If this your doctrine does not confound them, while you say they were
never pure, nor distinct in the Church, and not telling what is Law, what
Gospel, what then does it? But who will regard how promiscuously he preach,
seeing, if he desire and intend either regeneration, healing, or conversion of
the soul; or yet (as page 192.) the increase of grace and holiness, the Law, as
Gospel, may indifferently be preached by him, and blessed by God? And though in
respect of the use and end intended, the law be subservient; yet in their way
propounded, Gods and man's righteousness; and of the effects produced by either,
viz. life, and death, they are and must be contrary.

M. B. And this must needs be the opinion of all sound Divines, whatsoever may
fall from them at other times; as appears by their common answer to the
Papists question; If the Law and the commands thereof be impossible, to what
purpose then does he command them? Then we answer, That those commands are not
only informing of a duty but they are practical and operative means appointed
by God to work at least in some degree, that which is commanded.

Answ. You know, they do not plainly and professedly say, this is their
opinion; and therefore without alleging one sentence out of any directly to
second this of yours, you labor to derive and infer it as busily as you may;
such poor shifts are you put unto. 2. Neither is it the opinion of all, for
those are as sound whose answer is, That the law does therefore command things
now impossible, that we may see our great loss by the fall, with our present
disability, that so we may be humbled a viled and confounded in our selves. 3.
To incline and dispose the soul to look into the Gospel-way, in which all
comes, as to beggars, by faith and prayer: Therefore Augustine says, God
commands things impossible, not as you say, that in commanding he may give
power, but that we thereby feeling our own utter insufficiency, may be
occasioned to turn precepts into prayers, saying, Da quod jubes. God bids us
turn, not thereby to enable us, but that finding thereby both the necessity of
it, and also our inability, we may cry, Turn thou us and we shall be turned.
Thus we see whose hand works the will and deed.

2. You also still mince the matter, saying, At least in some degree: you love
to play at small games, rather then sit out: you are uncertain, not resolved as
yet what to affirm and stick unto, this being a fiction of your own, and no
Scripture or Author can be produced to confirm or countenance it.

It was never questioned, but what is wrought by the ministry of the word, is
to be attributed to the Spirit, as the principal efficient: and other passages
(of which he still gives some verbal touch) being already cleared, I now
proceed to his Arguments.

M. B. I bring these Arguments to prove the Law, and preaching of it, the means
of Conversion.

1. That which is attributed to the whole word of God, as it is Gods word,
ought not to be denied to any part of it: Now this is made the property of the
whole word of God, to be the instrument of conversion, 2 Timothy 3.16.

Answ. 1. Your proposition is unsound, and will not be granted: many things are
often attributed to the word in general, which cannot be affirmed of every part
of it, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things are written, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture might have hope; that is,
says Piscator, through patience arising from the comfort of the Scripture,
viz. that be written aforetime. Now in the second premise, page 188. you tell
us, that however the law may be blessed to conversion, yet it cannot be the
ground of our justification, adoption, and consolation: nor a man cannot have
hope, nor comfort in whatever he does, but it must be the promise only of the
Gospel. See how your self will not have righteousness, comfort, and hope from
every part of the word, no from no part of the law, but do restrain it to the
Gospel only, and yet the greatest part of what was then written was law. 2.
Your Assumption is denied also, viz. That it is the property of the whole word
to be the instrument of conversion. And your place 2 Timothy 3.16. will not
conclude it. For first, the Apostle speaks not there of conversion, but of
conversation, manners and life, to the converted.

Secondly, If all Scripture were to reprove, correct; then none is to comfort;
but one part is to reprove, and another for consolation, a third for doctrine,
etc. law is to kill, and Gospel to make alive; what part is for one effect and
purpose, has not formally any partial ability or fitness for another; let the
eye see, the tongue speak, and the feet walk, as being purposely made and
fitted for their proper offices. The whole Scripture is as a promptuary or full
Treasury, out of which may be drawn and taken what is needful for faith and
manners: but what is for manners, will be unaptly used to build up in the
faith. Also Matthew. 13. the word compared to the seed, is verse. 19. called by
Christ himself, the word of the kingdom, or note of distinction: and by it is
meant the Gospel, as all know. Lastly, for that place, Heb. 4.12. let Piscator
satisfy you if the context will not serve you: he says it is Sermo Evangelii,
the word of the Gospel, which is effectual to pierce the heart, and convince
the mind of the truth of the heavenly doctrine in it: so that none can with a
quiet conscience derogate from the credit or verity of it. And he adds, that
usitatissimum est, etc. It is a very usual thing with Paul, by the word of God
in general, to mean the word of the Gospel.

M. B. 2. Argument is taken from those places where the law is expressly named
to be instrumental in this great work; not to name that place Romans 7.14. where
the law is called spiritual in that respect, as well as in others, because it
is that which works spiritually in us: as Paul was carnal, because he wrought
carnally.

Answ. Indeed that place might well have been spared in this controversy: for
you find nothing in it for your turn. It is called spiritual, because of the
spiritual nature of it, in opposition to Paul's, which was carnal; and because
Paul was carnal, therefore he wrought carnally; but his working carnally, did
not make him carnal. Also the law is called spiritual, because of its spiritual
discovering and convincing power or efficacy; but not because of any spiritual
change it wrought upon Paul, as the whole context and every circumstance there
makes it plain: the law let him see the vitiousness of his nature, what
repugnancy and contrariety was in him to that purity, holiness, and perfection
held forth in the law; and so occasionally, by the commandment, sin became
exceeding sinful, verse. 13.

M. B. The places are clear out of Psalm 119. and Psalm. 19.7. The Law of God is
perfect, converting the soul. That which the Antinomian objecteth, is, that the
Hebrew word does signify largely any doctrine, and so may comprehend the whole
word of God.

Answ. You say, that others, as well as they Antinomian, take the law so
largely; so that you see your Adversary is not single in his opinion, as you
are, who can produce no Author: but only say, It seems good to expound that
phrase in such a manner. And otherwise it seems it would cross your design,
else I see, nor you do show no reason. But Luther, and some others upon that
place, Psalm. 19.7. do take the law for the moral law: but I dare say, you will
not stand to their exposition of it. Luther says, This is no absolute
commendation of the law, but it is to be understood, legem talem factans esse
per fidem: non talia facit lex: The law works not these it self, but they are
effected by the influence of the Sun of righteousness, inwardly quickening,
reviving, and comforting the soul through the faith of the Gospel. The law
gives, nor has no such heat or virtue of it self; but produces contrary
effects. It may indeed, says he, convert the eye, mouth, hand, ears, and omnes
vires, sed magis avertit cor odio paenarum, and indignatione prohibitae
concupiscentiae, sed cor non est rectum, and spiritus non est fidelis. In
brief, his judgment is, that after the soul is justified and converted by the
Gospel, then it loves the law, which it hated before; and now it does not
avert, or, as being afraid, she from God in his law, but with confidence and
delight draws nigh unto him, and observes the things of the law, because the
Spirit of Christ in the Gospel makes them sweeter to the soul then all the
riches and pleasures of this life. Thus its the doctrine of reconciliation by
Christ believed on, that marvelously alters the Christians heart, causing it
to convert and turn to God, as being thereby able to abide his sight and
presence, and to love his saw: Et Amans legem non potest eam satis landare,
adeo placet, quae prius adeo displicuit. You say nothing, that has any
strength in it against the truth held out and maintained by us. And by this you
may see, whence it was, that David so commended the law strictly taken, because
his heart was so altered by the faith of the operation of God. It is
remarkable, says Luther, that the way to love and keep the law, is to believe
and receive the Gospel: from this belief issues love and all true obedience,
and it is not bred and effected by the law commanding and requiring it: By
faith we establish the law, Romans 3. ult.

M. B. That opinion which would make Christ not take an instrumental way for
conversion of men in his first Sermon; wherein he was very large, that must not
be asserted: but to hold that the preaching of the law is not a Medium to
conversion, must needs be to say, Christ did not take the nearest way, etc.

Answ. You answer your self, page 169. where your words are, That our Saviors
intent was only to explicate the law better then did the Scribes and Pharisees,
that so they might be sensible of sin, and discover themselves to be fouler,
and more abominable then ever they judged themselves: unto which let me add,
And that by requiring and so letting the hearers see a necessity of a more
absolute righteousness then was held forth even in the doctrine of the Scribes
and Pharisees, he might so destroy all confidence in their own works, prevent
the establishing of man's righteousness, and prepare and dispose them to hearken
after his righteousness: for he is the end of the law for righteousness to all that believe, Romans 10.4. And by this it may appear that he used the law
preparatorily to justification and conversion; as you in part are forced to
grant it to be the opinion and doctrine of all Orthodox Divines, and yet it is
thwarted by you, who love to have a way by your self.

M. B. If the law of God have that objectively in it, that may work exceedingly
upon the heart when set home by Gods Spirit, then it may be used
instrumentally, as well as the Gospel: but it has etc.

Answ. Here is nothing but the vain reason of man. If God be otherwise pleased,
what is it, how glorious, fit, and worthy soever it may seem for this in our
eyes! The Sun in the firmament is a glorious object to look upon, when we have
eyes: but God uses it not therefore to give and restore the use of sight to
those that be blind: the seeing man finds variety of delightful objects to
look at among the creatures, but they find him not eyes therefore.

M.B. 5. If the law of God may be blessed after a man is converted, to the
increase of his grace and holiness, why not then to the first beginning of it?
That it is for the increase of of Godliness, appears by experience.

Answ. Every Christians experience teaches him, that the more he inwardly
sees and feels that divine love that pardons, reconcileth, and preserves
the soul in that everlasting covenant of sure mercies, and peace, the more it
loves again; and in love, hates evil, escheweth it, does good, is every way
cheerfully obedient. I love the Lord (says David) because he heard me, when I
called upon him in the time of trouble, and delivered my soul from death, my
eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. What bred and caused love, and
gained the heart to God at the first, that same is of continual force still to
enlive and enlarge the affections toward him. But because sins are forgiven,
it is said, she loved much, Luke 7. and if this Candle be put under a bushel,
if this Sun, the light of Gods countenance, do not shine forth upon the
Solissequium, the soul of a believer, it will be dark, dull, and indisposed to
whatever good you can propound to it; therefore is it requisite that faith be
nourished, and ever operative and lively in apprehending and feeding upon that
exceeding kindness of God in Christ, that so it may be more quick and free in
all holy expressions. Faith works by love: if faith dye, or wax cold, by which
the soul lives, the law can but little work upon, or affect the heart.
Besides, as the Christians beginning, so his building up and increasing is in
another way, and by other means then are merely legal; he lives and grows in
the Vine Christ, and thereby fructifieth.

M. B. It is hard to think that a Minister having opened any moral duty of the
law, may not pray to God to cloth that word with power to change the heart of
the hearers.

Answ. Why should man think it hard, or be offended at any thing, where he
finds it Gods will that it be so and no otherwise? 2. If God reveal not his
mind and willingness to put forth any renewing power in the law, how can you
then pray in faith to be heard? 3. True prayer is for the fulfilling of his
promise in his own way, and not in ours.

M. B. If the Ceremonial Law, the Sacraments and Sacrifices were blessed by
Gods Spirit, while they were commanded to be used for the strengthening and
increase of grace, notwithstanding the deadly nature of them now then the Moral
may be blessed, etc. seeing it stands still in force.

Answ. While those ordinances were in use, they were effectual to increase
faith, and so to quicken, confirm, and cheer the heart, against inward
temptations from sin, Satan, the fear of death, of judgment etc. for they were
instituted for that purpose, and fitted also, in that they held forth and
shadowed Christ Crucified, the body and substance, life, and thing signified.
If you can prove that the moral law was either ordained, or so fitted for that
end, you say something; else water is not so weak, as is this Argument.

M. B. Let the use of them be, etc.

Answ. The Lord let you see your error and failing, and give you a right use of
what is said. Indeed the law is holy, yet it is manifest, that makes neither
heart nor life full of holiness, though you abound in legal performances.

M.B. What is regeneration, but the working of the moral law in the heart? that
is the Image of God.

Answ. Regeneration gives a new being, birth and estate, as well as a new
Image. It makes us both Sons, and also like our heavenly Father: but the law
is the instrument for neither, but the word of truth, which is the Gospel of
salvation, Jam. 1.18. as is cleared before. You seem to have a zeal, but not
according to knowledge, and so would lead and hasten on your hearers in a wrong
way.

LECT. XXI.
Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law, etc.


M. B. Let us consider a great mistake of the Antinomian Author, in the
Assertion, page 171. where he makes the very ground why they are charged with
Antinomianisme to be, because they do not hold the law to be used by God
instrumentally, for the conversion of men: certainly this is a great mistake,
for there are many learned men, who hold the work of the law to be no more but
preparatory.

Answ. Sir, It is no mistake at all, for both Dr. Tailor, and many others upon
that ground have so concluded, and condemned us. And if your words will
sufficiently satisfy the world, that this our Opinion and Tenet is so
Orthodox, and free from Antinomianism (as you are enforced to do, lest
otherwise you should unavoidably, as you see, and say, bring many, yea all the
learned into the same condemnation with us, except your self; who yet in so
doing might put your own neck into the collar) I doubt not then, but the truth
will also clear and free us in all other out assertions. And so in despite of
all ill will, our innocence, which has so unjustly suffered, and been so
unworthily aspersed a long time by you and others, will at last come to light,
and we shall mirabile dictu, stand recti in curia. Plead thou our cause, O God
of our righteousness.

M. B. Yet for all that, they do peremptorily maintain the use and obligation
of the law in respect of believers: therefore they are not in that respect
condemned for that error.

Answ. Surely, if I understand any thing, neither they, nor yet your self will
be so peremptory as to maintain the use and obligation of it to believers,
quatenus tales. To faith, or in the state or things of faith, there is no
obligation, nor use of the law. If the law be useful to the working Abraham (as
Luthers phrase and distinction is) yet here they all (and you also must do so
at the last) unanimously confess, that the law has power actually to condemn
him in all his works, and ways; so that by his faith he ever retireth in
spirit, and returns to Christ his righteousness, that so he may enjoy and
preserve his peace, freedom, life, and comfort: your best performances need
remission of sins, much more you, for these your Lectures. Again, if the
learned be not condemned for this error in this respect, yet you account it an
error in them, (and cannot prove it so) or else how is it so intolerable in
us? are you become partial and inequal judges?

M. B. The question is not, whether by the power of the law we come to obey the
law; but whether Grace may not use the precepts, or law preached, for the
inflaming of our affections so in love with the things commanded, that we are
thereby made more holy; And thus I interpret those Authors that deny the law to
be instrumental to holiness; that is, not animated by Gods Spirit, or separated
from it.

An. Now you should address your self to encounter, and you begin to shrink, in
diffidence doubtless of your cause, which you perceive so unjustifiable, that
no advocate will be found to patronize it: for did not you in page 187. say,
that you suppose Christ Jesus has obtained by his death, that such efficacy
and virtue should go forth of the ministry, that whether it be law or Gospel,
the souls might be healed and converted? And now you seem to be no longer of
that mind, that by the power of the law we come to obey the law, which as you
mean it is all one with conversion. If we come not by the power of the law to
obey, then it is by the power of the Gospel only: and so we agree. If you
reply, You mean, by no power inherent in the law; I say, There is no inherent
or physical virtue neither in the Gospel, to effect our conversion. 2. Now the
question must be only, whether Grace may not use the law, etc. This is the
liberty you can allow your self, to alter and to state the question as best
likes you: If you misliked the form and terms wherein you found it, why became
you opponent? And now your expressions in this be so uncouth and improper, as,
that grace may use the precepts, etc. and your meaning in the residue so
obscure and doubtful, and I so unwilling to wrong you the least jot, that I had
rather forbear, then meddle any further.

I shall deliver my mind, (how pertinent to your question, or satisfactory to
your self it shall prove, I know not) thus: This word of God which reveals
the riches of grace, and exceeding kindness, in giving righteousness and
salvation to the soul, is the true and proper instrument for the inslaming of
the affections in love both to God, his law, and all the things of God: and the
law neither makes to love God, nor its own commands. And here you so mince
it, that your expression only is, to make us more holy, as if already you
granted now, that the law does not instrumentally initiate or work
sanctification at first, but increase it afterward: consider this well. Lastly,
Those Authors you mean, are not beholden unto you for your so gross and
inconsistent interpretation. They say the law is not the instrument of
sanctification: Gods Spirit sanctifies not by the law: the law is the
instrument of no good, etc. It is true, you say, and thus they mean, that is,
the law, not animated by Gods Spirit, or separated from it.

Answ. So neither do either they, or any, think Law or Gospel to be. 2. If that
be their meaning, they might deny the Gospel to be instrumental also. 3. But
you read their words in the Assertion of grace, to be, that the Spirit does not
animate, nor use the law in sanctification or conversion, save only
preparatorily. Now you must either grant us, that these Authors (unto which
might be added all others of any special account, are guilty of as much
Antinomianisme, as your adversaries are in this respect, or that your quarrel
is as weakly managed, as it was causlesly undertaken: yea and that you with
your society have erred in opinion and practice. I shut up all with that so
pertinent and pregnant saying of Calvin, on Gal. 3.19. Si quis excipiat cum lex
regula sit pie and recte vivendi, cur potius transgressionum, quam obedientia
causa positadicitur? Respondeo Vtrumque veram justitiam demonstret; tamen in
hac naturae corruptione, nihil quam augere trangressiones ejus doctrina donec
accedat Spiritus regenerationis, qui ipsam cordibus inscribat: hic autem non
datur a lege, sed fide percipitur.

M. B. I come to consider of those places, etc. I shall not take all, because
one answer may serve for many, they being built upon the same ground.

Answ. You are far indeed from taking all, but only such, by your perverse
usage and wresting whereof, you may more subtly and easily elude, and seem to
evade.

M. B. First, the state of the question is obscurely propounded by him; for
thus he says, The promise or the Gospel, and not the Law, is the seed or
doctrine of our new birth, Assert. page 163. Now here are ambiguities; as
first, the promise or Gospel: for by this he seems to decide a great
question, that whatsoever is a promise in the Scripture, this belongs to the
Gospel, but a command or threatening that belongs to a law, whereas this
needs a great discussion.

Answ. You see a mote in your Brothers eye, and consider not the beam in your
own. How changeable have you been in the assertion and question last discussed
and handled? you are so inconstant and mutable in your terms, sense, and
scope, that it is very uncertain and doubtful, as yet, what you are resolved to
stand to. But 2. where its said the Promise, or Gospel, and not the Law. etc.
do you accuse this of ambiguity? surely without cause, except for your humor,
or to take occasion to trouble the simple with a dotage, which none of mean
understanding would ever question. As for your so great question, as you call
it; All the promises in the Scripture cannot belong to the Gospel: for the law
has its promises Do and thou shall live in them; where life is promised
conditionally: of this is spoken before, and it is of the By. 3. If the word
promise, were only used; yet being placed antithetically in opposition to the
law, who can doubt what should be meant by it? Paul in Gal. 3.18. thus uses
it. If the inheritance be of the law it is no more of promise: but God gave it
to Abraham by promise. Argumentum a contrariis. Haereditas est promissione,
nempe nuda ac simplici, seu gratuita: non igitur ex lege, i. c. promissi^ne
conditionalis. Piscat. In Gal. 3.
How often does he in that Chapter, as in Romans 4. oppose law and the promise!
Also, to avoid all ambiguity, as much as was possible, it follows, Or the
Gospel; by which it is easy to conceive what is meant, by him who has not a
mind to cavil, and seek a knot in a rush. The learned tell us, That in the
Scriptures use and sense, Testamentum, foedus, promissio, pactum, Evangelium,
fere sunt Synonyma. Well, by promise then is meant the Gospel, so that
controversy is decided, and there is no place for ambiguity. And if you turn
to your named page 163. the word promise is not at all in the proposition; but
a wanton spirit may find himself sport at his pleasure.

M. B. 2. The State of the question is not about the Gospel, or the law, as
they are both a doctrine, but as the Spirit of God working by one or the other:
the not attending to this, makes the Argument so confounded.

Answ. The proposition is formally this; The Gospel, and not the Law, is the
instrument of true sanctification. What need these cautions, and vain words? as
if none can speak plain English but you. And as by your Predecessor Dr.
Tailer, so here we must be styled and taken for confused men: but you only are
distinct and seraphical.

M. B. 3. He says, It Is not the seed of the New Birth, whereas conversion or
regeneration is made the writing of the law in the heart; and Matthew. 13. The
word of God in general is compared to seed sown.

Answ. And he says nothing but he may truly affirm it still. 2. You put no
difference between regeneration, conversion, and writing the law upon the
heart, which yet in propriety of phrase, sense, and use, are distinct, as is
showed before: who now is guilty of confusion? 3. And although the work you
mean, should be the writing of the Law in the heart; yet it follows not to be
by the law: for how then should the law in sanctification be established by
faith? Lastly, It is not the word in general, but with restriction, the word of
the Kingdom, that is, the Gospel, that is compared to the seed sown: see Mat.
13.19.

M. B. The first instance is John 17.17. Sanctify them, etc. I answer. 1. The
word Sanctify, when applied to men, does not signify only justification or
renovation, but setting apart to some peculiar office, or charge.

Answ. The words in the Assertion, are, To Sanctify, in the sense of the
Hebrews from whence it is taken, is to separate any thing from a profane and
common use, and so to consecrate it to God: or to convert it to a sacred and
divine use. So that, if you have learned men (for your great and full Library,
may well exceed my poor and diminished Study) who so take it, that Christ
prayed here for the fitting of the Apostles for their great charge; yet that is
of fishers to make them fishers of men, and so to separate them from their
former profane and worldly calling and trade, unto a sacred; which thing my
words do include and import also.

2. But then to sanctify them, must be more then to ordain them for that
function, even to endue them with a great measure of holiness and gifts
requisite for so high a calling.

Yet, 3. All that I read, do take the word as I say. And since Christ does
include others also (even all that the Father gave him) in that prayer, I still
incline to their judgment.

4. You say the word does not only signify, etc. whereas the word only is
not there, but now is foisted in by you.

5. And your mere reason why to sanctify cannot comprehend justification or
renovation is, because these cannot be applied to Christ; who says, For their
sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified through thy truth.

Answ. This is much against you, as I conceive. For 1. did not Christ sanctify
himself, viz. his humane nature, that he might be the root, cause, and means of
communicating righteousness and holiness, both to justify, renew and change
them? 2. Neither will it follow, on the other hand, that a word of so extensive
a sense, may not, as it is aplyed to Christ, be taken more strictly, or in one
sense only: and to his Elect, more largely, as it agreed to their condition.

M. B. If sanctification do here include justification; how by the Antinomian
principle can our Savior pray for the justification of them that were already
justified?

Answ. Answer your self: how do you ask forgiveness of sins in the Lords
Prayer, and yet believe they are forgiven in your Creed? 2. His prayer is
extended also to all that afterward should come to believe through their word
and ministry.

M. B. But in the next place, grant sanctification for renovation, how does
this prove, that the law is not used instrumentally? for our Saviors argument
is universal, They word is truth: and may not this be affirmed of the Law, as
well as of Gospel?

Answ. Our Saviors words be indefinite. But why pass you over these words in
that very place, page 164. which be so material, so pertinent, and satisfactory
to this your query? viz: But if we note well what this word of truth is, it
will be more evident: for this end, compare with this that place, Ephesians. 1.13.
and Col. 1. where the word of truth is said to be the Gospel of salvation, and
the Antithesis used in John 1.17. shows that it is a special and peculiar
prerogative of the Gospel to be called by that name by way of excellency, as
also Calvin, Piscator, etc. affirm. Thus far in the Assertion, unto all which
you stand not only mute without a word of reply, but here you ask a question,
which they answered before you formed it, and so would have prevented. Its
granted, the Law strictly taken, is truth: but, as it is observed by all the
learned, the Gospel in many like places is so called (...).

M. B. The next instance is Tit. 2.11, 12. For the grace of God brings
salvation, teaching it is, etc. Answ. All this may be granted, and nothing makes
against this opinion: for none deny the Gospel to be instrumental.

Answ. But the place does import it to be peculiar to the Gospel: for that word
of grace, or the grace of God appearing in that word, that brings salvation,
teaches to deny ungodliness, etc. And I put not in that word effectually
ambiguously, as you charge me, but to avoid and prevent all ambiguity: for I
grant, the Law teaches these same things materially, but not with efficacy and
success as does the Gospel the Spirit being pleased to utter such divine force
and virtue in that Ministry unto the Elect.

M. B. But is not here a contradiction? The Author before made the Gospel and
promise all one; whereas here it does command holiness and godliness. Is not
this with the Papists, to make a new Law? let him reconcile himself.

Answ. You are better skilled in tying knots, then in unloosing any. If the
Gospel and promise be all one, that is not of my making: I found them so Gal.
3.18. as is showed before: and see that you both take and leave them so,
according to the true intent of Scripture. 2. You say, It commands, but there
is no such word in the text; but teaching to deny, that is, instrumentally. The
holy Ghost is that spiritual unction that teaches believers, and does it
effectually by the Gospel, Unctio docet vos. Spiritus S. efficax est per
praedicat. Evangelii.
says Piscator on 1 John 2.27. And this they receive, says he, as the members
from the head, the branches for the vine. But this is not wrought by nor
effected only by a literal and outward command. The Spirit moves and teaches
a spirit, and comes from the union with Christ. I wish your Tenets did not
more interfere with Papists. But I forbear. Now you may see how your thoughts
need reconciling, not my opinions: the light by this has happily done it.
Lastly, do you deny that grace moves or teaches effectually, because that all
are not thereby effectually turned unto holiness? then God works nothing
effectually in any, because he does not in every one: not in Peter, because not
in Judas; else to what purpose do you make this flourish?

M. B. Beside, the Argument may be retorted upon him. What word teaches to
deny ungodliness, etc. that sanctifies, etc. but the law does so, Psalm. 119. A
young man whose lusts are strongest etc. may be cleansed by attending thereunto.

Answ. But as it is retorted, it has no force in it, for every word that
teaceth does not sanctify; therefore although the Law do teach, it is no
consequence: your proposition is not universally true, so you conclude nothing.
What say you of Philosophical precepts and instructions? and of the dictating,
and teaching of every natural conscience; do these sanctify? only this word
of grace that brings salvation do^^ so indeed if you mean Pharisaical washing
of the outside only, as of hands, cares, eyes, etc. these laws have washed
their disciples and hearers, witness Paul before his conversion to the faith, a
man touching the Law blameless: the whole generation of the Pharisees.
Aristides, Socrates etc. but what soul insides had they? full of pride, malice,
envy, infidelity, etc. And many that I know of your legal stamp; which, like
him that was born of the bondwoman, condemn and persecute the children of the
promise, Gal. 4.29. That place in Psa. 119. proves no more, but that a young
man may be cleansed by attending to the word: and who is against that? or what
makes it for your opinion? But that of Peter Martyr is most for our assertion:
for if the Law attain such effects only when it is written in the hearts or
bowels (which comes by the new Covenant, Jer. 31.) then it is not by the
outward commandments, or ministry of it. And surely he could not conceive, as
you say, that the Spirit does use the Law to write it self in the heart: but,
as both he and others affirm, this is effected by the Gospel, so Lex sola fide
suffulta est. The Law is established by the preaching of Faith, which is the
thing we contend for, and you have brought nothing to weaken, much less to
overthrow it.

M. B. A third and last instance out of Scripture, in answering of which, all
is answered, from Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or
by the hearing of Faith? that of the Gospel, or doctrine of Faith. In the
opening of this Text, we must take heed of three errors.

Answ. A Caveat against all error is necessary; but it is well, that you accuse
your Antinomian of none of those three. And it had been wisdom in you to have
taken heed of affectation of singularity; for in rejecting all other of the
Orthodox, you substitute a most doubtful opinion of your own; as may appear by
and by.

M. B. First, I may demand, whether any under the old Testament were made
partakers of Gods Spirit or no. If they were, how came they by it? there can be
no other way found, but that God did give his Spirit in all those public
Ordinances unto the believing Israelites: so that although they did in some
measure obey the Law yet they did it not by the power of the Law, but by the
power of Grace.

Answ. You might beware of co-incidency with the first error you named, of
having Faith before the Spirit: for ever we come not to Faith by our reason and
will; yet you grant a giving of the Spirit to believers, as if they first
believed, then received the Spirit; but the gifts and operations of the Spirit
are diverse: Its by the Spirit that the soul comes to union with Christ; and
after the woman touched the hem of his garment, she received a healing virtue:
but let this pass. 2. By your next expression, you might seem to be an
Antinomian: for, They obeyed the Law, say you, but not by the power of the Law,
but by the power of Grace; what difference now? but I like not to force the
joining of hands, where the parties hearts be not first linked; yet the Reader
may take it, as if you contradicted your self; for why are your words so
exclusive? but if it be not by the power of the Law originally, as by the first
and principal efficient, yet you mean still it is a subordinate and secondary
cause or mean of conveyance. Egregie sane.

M.B. Again, in the next place (which has always much prevailed with me) did
not the people of God receive the grace offered in the Sacraments, in the
Circumcision, Paschal Lamb? They were partakers of Christ as well as we; and
yet the Apostle does as much exclude Circumcision, and these Jewish Ordinances
from grace, as any thing else; wherefore that there may be no contradiction in
Scripture, some other way is to be thought upon about the exposition of these
words.

Answ. When a man willingly of himself is going down a steep place, every thing
will further him. If you had not first conceived this silly and weak opinion of
your self, out of a humor of contradiction, and desire to be accounted the
vindicator of the Law, you needed not to be so puzzled and put to such shifts,
nor to seek out such sandy grounds, and tottering Pillars, to support what you
see cannot be upholden. I may so far credit you, that this has prevailed with
you, as you tell us: but I cannot think it always did so: for you have not always
thought of this, nor always been of this private opinion, that the Law is the
doctrine of regeneration.

2. Grant, that this prevailed to keep and continue you in that mind; yet
would I learn, if I might be so bold, what brought you into it at first: sure
it came by some immediate inspiration; for I see neither clear Scripture, nor
Author for it.

3. As it has so prevailed with you, so I am sensible of no force at all in
it, whether to incline or carry the judgment unto it at first, or to keep the
mind the same still. Consider better of it: It is granted, the people of God
did receive the grace offered in their Sacraments, etc. and were partakers of
Christ, as well, that is, as truly and as really, as we; now what is this to
your purpose? I ingenuously profess, I see not wherein it makes one jot for
you, or to confirm your tenet: what would you infer hence? you say the Apostle
did as much exclude these ordinances from grace as any things else and as well
and as much as the Law; that must be your meaning.

Answ. Your self have seemed still to exclude the Law from Grace: and to make a
direct opposition between them.

2. As for Circumcision and these Ordinances, being in their prime institution
types, yea signs exhibitive of Christ, and, if not essential parts, yet
appendances of their Covenant of Grace (which cannot be said of the Law, it
being a doctrine of another nature and use) therefore neither the Apostles nor
Prophets in that case and sense did exclude them from Grace: but only as the
hypocrites, Ceremonia Legis in sua natura consideralae, non autem quatenus suo
tempore Sacramenta erant gratiae. Pisc. Gal. 3.
and unbelievers did use them, as resting in the things done, or using them
being antiquated and our of date; or joining them with Christ and Faith, as
necessary observances to salvation, etc. Now as this assertion will be too
bold, as unjustifiable, That the Apostle does as much exclude the Jewish
Sacraments in their prime, pure, and right use, from Grace, as he does the Law;
so that Argument is too childish, viz. If the believing Jews were partakers of
Christ, and did receive grace by these Ordinances; so did they receive grace by
the Moral Law also. If you look again; there is neither contradiction in
Scripture, nor occasion given to seek out such an uncouth and unwarrantable
exposition of the words.

M. B. Some there are that understand by the Spirit, etc.

Answ. Here, you first present your Reader with Beza's interpretation; but that
is misliked, as not to your purpose. Again say you, thus it may be explained.
As by faith is meant the doctrine of faith, so by the works of the Law is to be
understood the doctrine of the works of the law (thus far I approve) which the
false Apostles taught, viz. That Chrict was not enough to justification, unless
the works of the law were put in as a cause also.

Answ. If you look into Act. 15. and compare verse. 1. and 5. it seems that
they taught Christ for justification, for it is said verse. 5. they believed;
(and what should they believe in Christ for, but for righteousness?) and yet
they required Circumcision and the keeping of the Law of Moses as necessary to
salvation, verse. 1, 5. when we are justified, we must work to get heaven. So
many now hold and teach, that good works, and observing of the Law are not
needful to justification, but they are to salvation: of which sort you will
prove one, if I mistake not; Contrary to Act. 15.10.11. Now why tempt ye God,
to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks? etc. that is, as though he could not save
by faith: and salvation now not to be sought by grace only in Jesus Christ,
says the Margent. But we believe, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
to be saved, even as they (Fathers) do. Learned Zanchy stateth the question
between Paul and the false teachers to be, An praeter Christum, etc. whether
besides Christ, good works also be necessary to salvation.

Mr. B. And if this should be the sense of the Text, then it was clear, that
the Galatians were not made partakers of Gods spirit by the corrupt doctrine
that was taught them of late by their Seducers, but before, while they did
receive the pure doctrine of Christ: and therefore it was their folly, having
begun in the spirit, to end in the flesh: this may be a probable interpretation.

Answ. Yet these exceptions may be against the latter part. 1. The question
made by the Apostle is divisive, whether they received the Spirit by the
doctrine of faith or by the other? for by one they must needs have it: And not
whether they received the spirit by both doctrines conjoined and confounded: so
that you mistake the form of the question. 2. They begun in the spirit, while
they abode in the doctrine of Christ for righteousness and salvation only; and
their folly in ending in the flesh was, in that besides the righteousness of
faith, they would have also works of the law for salvation, for this is to end
in the flesh, that is, in themselves, having begun in Christ by the spirit: or,
as says Piscator, this is called an ending in the flesh, because it is a way
both heavy and impossible.

Mr. B. That which I shall stand upon is this, The Jews and false Apostles --
when they went furthest, joined Christ and the observance of the moral Law
equally together for justification and salvation: whereas the Law separated
from Christ did nothing but curse and condemn, not being able to help the soul
at all.

Answ. It is as probable, if not more, as I said, that they held Christ
sufficient to justify, but not to save, without works. 2. They joined Christ
and the Law for justification and salvation say you: And you join them for
sanctification and salvation; so no such great difference. 3. If the Law
separated from Christ did nothing but accuse and condemn then it seems, if it
be joined with Christ, it will acquit and justify: or you think it has left
that power to condemn being joined to Christ. Came Christ to take that power
from the Law, or to mitigate and meeken it by uniting it, to himself; or to
redeem his elect from under the Law, to live and abide where no Law is to
accuse? Romans 8. Who can lay any thing to their charge? Is not Christ also our
sanctification and redemption, as well as our justification, without the Law, 1
Cor. 1.30? This doctrine is of God, says Paul there, but yours is but of man.
Also you disclaim that the Law of it self is able to stir up the least Godly
affection in us, but Christ and Law together can; and not Christ without it: If
the soul be married to Chist her husband, he cannot make her to bring forth
fruits to God, but Moses the former dead husband must be raised up again: and
so the beleiver has two husbands to make him fruitful, and both at one time:
a thing utterly against the Law, and the Ordinance of Marriage, civil or
spiritual: for as in the civil, two are thereby become one flesh; so they
that are joined to Christ are one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

Mr. B. More places of Scripture are brought against this: but they will come
in more fitly under the notion of the Law as a Covenant.

Answ. It Is true, there are many more, page 165. of the Assert. unto which as
many might be added, but you have enough of these, the rest you reserve to a
more fit occasion. And I had thought to have enlarged this point, but that it
is lost labor: and I may ill spare any.

Mr. B. Thus therefore I shall conclude this point, acknowledging that many
learned and orthodox men speak otherwise, and that there is a difficulty in
clearing every particular about this question, but as yet, that which I have
delivered carries the more probability with me.

Answ. I thank you for your ingenuous and free acknowledgement. I am not alone
in this my opinion, as yet I think you are in yours, for any thing, I mean,
that can be read in the Orthodox; for otherwise the whole College would not
have given you such hearty thanks, and your book so superlative commendation,
if they inclined not your way.

2. Whereas you find difficulty, that is because you have taken the staff by
the wrong and worst end, contending against the clear truth: I will not say
against the light and checks of conscience. But the more difficult, the more
fit for one of your quality and parts to encounter with, that so your victory
might happily have been more glorious. Yet you have brought it no further even
in your own thoughts, but to be question probabilis: and you found it in as
perfect condition and state when you entered upon it: nay, I say more, I never
read that it was controverted by any Protestant till now: but your words imply
that you may be of another mind to morrow. The Lord instruct, and establish us.

Mr. B. And I will give one Text more which I have not yet mentioned, that is
Act. 7.38. where the moral Law is called (...), the lively cracles, that is not
verba vitae, but verba viva and vivificantia, so (...) is as much as (...),
giving life; not that we could have life by virtue of obedience to them, but
when we by grace are enabled to obey them, God of his mercy bestows eternal
life.

Answ. Before you were only defensive, sheilding your self as busily as you
could against those Scriptures that fought against you; but now you are
disposed to give your adversary one stroke: and yet the arm, or weapon rather,
will not serve to fasten one blow either to hurt or fright: this is but a
childish skirmish or flourish. It is granted, the moral Law may be called
(...), lively oracles or words: and so it is in its own nature: yea and in the
Ministry of it, life is propounded, as Deuteronomy. 30.19. I have set before you life
and death: and Levit. 18.5. Ye shall keep my statutes and my judgments: which
if a man keep, he shall live in them: but this life it promises to give, is
upon such terms and impossible conditions, that as yet none was quickened by
it, but contrarily it brought death upon all, by reason of that poysonfull
enmity and maliciousness of our common nature: whereupon Paul is bold and
peremptory to affirm, that all that are of the works of the Law are cursed,
Gal. 3. this inbred enmity is discovered but not cured by the Law, Romans 3.20.
Romans 7.7. Also you are much deceived, when you say that (...) is as much as
(...). See 1 Cor. 15.45. The first Adam was made (...), a living soul, nor as
if he could quicken himself or others; for that is peculiar to God himself, no
man as yet quickened his own soul. And the opposition in that place shows the
great difference between those two words; for it follows, The last Adam was
made (...) a quickening spirit, in that he both quickened himself being dead, and
quickneth all his members. Lastly, see that place Gal. 3.2. If there had been a
Law which could have given life (...) righteousness should have been by the
Law. In which words Paul intimates that there was never Law given that could
vivifie, or which had any quickening virtue to impart or communicate unto any.
I will not trouble you with commentaries directly contradicting, and
overthrowing your exposition of that place, because I perceive you so abound in
your own sense, that their judgment is not esteemed by you: and you have
greater store of them to satisfy you when you please, then I have. And lest
you should be mistaken, you add, Not that we could have life by virtue of any
obedience, but when we by grace are enabled to obey them etc. Now I thought
that you rather should have thus said, (as more pertinent to the question in
hand) But that they do instrumentally vivifie, convert and give us life to obey
them. But in this saying of yours you grant as much as we contend for: for if
grace that comes by the Gospel do enable us to obey the Law, then it is not
the Law that instrumentally does convert and give life and strength to walk in
it. And your last clause is dangerously ambiguous, seeming to import, that
Christ is not our salvation of himself, without our works or obedience to the
Law: you will speak out more plainly and fully in some other place.

And you give us a poor reason why you inclined to this your opinion, viz.
because Socinians deny grace and justification under the Law or old Testament:
as if there were no middle way to take which could like you, but either you
must run on the rocks on one side or other. Incidit in Scyllam, etc.

Mr. B. And thus I come to another question, which is the proper and immediate
ground of strife between the Antinomians and us, and from whence they have
their name: And that is, the abrogation of the moral Law.

Answ. Toto Coelo erras. This is not the controversy, except you mean, that
you do assert the Abrogation of it, for it may sooner and more easily be
concluded from your tenets then any of ours, who hold the Law to be inviolable:
but this may appear afterward. 2. If their name be from hence, then if you
prove them not guilty of the Abrogation of the Law, you and others have falsely
accused and standered them for Antinomians, and now you for ever quit them from
that aspersion. I will be bold before the encounter: if he that shall prove
guilty of the abrogation of it in whole, or in part, shall be the Antinomian,
then mutato nomine, de te narratur fabula: look to your self.

Mr. B. Paul makes an objection, and he does it for this end, to take away the
calumny and reproach cast upon him by his Adversaries, as one that would
destroy the Law: Do we make void the Law?

Answ. If you and your partners in your ministry did go with a right foot in
the foot in the Gospel, or tread in his steps, the same would be charged upon
you, and you might be glad to pretend or wipe off such aspersions. Hoc nomine
pessime audiebat inter Judaeos, non mode Paulus sed Dominus queque ipse acsi
tota sua praedicatione legis abrogationem moliretur.-
Nunquam tanta cautio, etc. Christ himself, says Calvin, who is the wisdom of
God, could not so preach the doctrine of Free Grace, but some took occasion
from his words (as you from ours) to say or think he destroyed the Law: hence
was that prohibition Do not think I came to destroy the Law, Matthew. 5.17. Do
you think your self more wise or wary in your Preaching, then Christ, or Paul
was? if not, suspect your self, in that you bear not the like reproach. When
innocence is thus traduced, Presertim ver^ facile obtinet falsa hac imaginatio
inter vos qui prepostera legis intelligentia, etc. Calv.
and condemned, quis stabit? The Disciple is not above his Master: if Christ
and Paul were counted Antinomians, Abrogaters of the Law, who will not take up
the same Cross? And it is remarkable, by whom they were so opposed and
aspersed, even by the preposterous Zelots of Moses Law: a generation which ever
have and will hinder the free passage of the Gospel, and disturb the peace of
the Church, like Cain, Ishmael, etc.

I thought here to have ended, Sic ergo nes and meminerimus Evangelium
dispensare ut nostro decendi modo lex stabiliatur: sed nulla alia firmitaetu
quam fide Christi suffulta. Id.
but that in the closure I observe that you approve of Austins intepretation,
viz. The Law is established, because by the Gospel we obtain grace in some
measure to fulfill the law, (we obtain it not then by the Law) and do obtain by
faith in Christ (still not by the Law then) obedience in some degree to it.
Your eyes are strangely holden, if you see not how this interpretation makes
fully for us, and wholly against your self. You add, Which obedience though it
be not the Covenant of grace, yet is the way to salvation. Now there is nothing
out of the covenant of grace can be proved to be in a strict and prosense the
way to salvation. Ubi ad Christum ventum est, primum i^ eo invenitur exacta
legi^ justitia quae por imputationem; etiam nostra sit deinde sanctificatio,
qua sermantur cordae nostra ad legis observantiam, etc. Calv.
To believe in Christ is the only way to it, Act. 16.31. Mark 16. Christ
dwells in the heart by faith, and he that believes on the Son has
everlasting life, Joh. 3.36.

By attributing too much to the Law, and our works, you obscure the glory of
Christ and of free grace, mingle Law and Gospel, entangle and deject the hearts
of the faithful, carry them from Christ and that union in spirit with him,
hinder the right exercise of faith and prayer, etc. for you teach that by the
Law we receive grace, conversion, sanctification, so that the Law enliveth,
fills, builds, satisfies: It does not make us poor, feeble, humble, empty,
nothing in our selves, that so we may seek out for all, receive, and live by
faith in Christ our head, grow up in him, and so be built up in this way of
faith to the everlasting Kingdom. You thus swerve from the truth, and the old
and good way.

LECT. XXII.
ROMANS 3.31. Do we then make void the Law?


Here you tell us, It is hard to set up Christ and grace, and not thereby to be
thought to destroy the Law. But it is easy with who was never suspected. 2.
You say, Your Antinomians still are mistaken in this point, and plunged into a
dangerous error. You should make your words good, and discover the error, if
not help them out: we expect this from you. 3. But now like blind Sampson, unto
whose fact you allude, you have raised a doctrine which will lead you to lay
your hands on the chief pillars of the Antinomian edifice.

Mr. B. The question then at this time to be discussed, is, whether the Law be
abrogated, or no, by Christ, to the believers under the Gospel?

Answ. Who would question it? for Christ came not to destroy the Law, but
taught that every Apex or lota of it is imperishable, Matthew. 5.17, 18. Indeed
your doctrine is, the Law is deprived of all power to justify, accuse, or
accurse; but who can receive it? If these be no tittle or part of the Lawd
understand nothing. And yet you tell us often of promises of great rewards for
your legal obedience and good works; cherefore, there is a power to justify,
command, and bless established by you; or else, which I rather think, your
tenets be inconsistent, and mutually overthrow each other.

Mr. B. If we would speak exactly and properly, we cannot say in any good
sense, that the Moral Law is abrogated at all.

Answ. If you would keep there, denying according to the truth of the
Scripture, any mitigation at all, either total or partial, we might soon
agree, shake hands, and lay down our weapons.

Mr. B. We may say it is mitigated.

Answ. It is then because your Tongues are your own: or that you will speak
before God say so, and so without your Warrant. Such teaching, of mitigating
and Evangelizing the Law, of Gods accepting the will for deed, etc. has
occasioned such dangerous confusion of Law and Gospel, these sad controverfies
in the Church, much instabilitie, and many mistakes, in the peoples minds, etc.

Mr. B. But you must still distinguish, when we speak of the Law, some parts of
it from the whole. Some parts of it may be abolished, and yet not the whole
nature of it for there are in the Law these parts: 1. Commands. 2. Promises of
life to him that does them. 3. The threatenings of eternal death to him that
fails. Now the Moral Law, although it be abrogated in respect of the two
later to a believer, yet in respect of the former it does still abide, yea and
will continue in Heaven it self, as we have already proved, that one part of
the Law may abide, when the other does not.

Answ. Like Foundation, like Building. This makes all your opposition, dispute,
and discourse so weak and soon annihilated, in that your ground is so faulty
and failing. 1. Why are you so inconsiderate thus to distinguish where God does
not? and so audacious, as to mutilate his good Law, which he delivered, and
would have still to be preserved entire and perfect? 2. All this tends to
nothing, but to make the Kingdom and way of the Law so easy and tolerable,
that the soul may here find a requiem where to settle her abode, and never
enjoy nor come to Christ, and dwell under his shadow and Kingdom, where Grace
through his righteousness reigns to eternal life, Romans 5.21. 3. What is the
reason your discourse is so loose, and improper? did you not even now tell us,
that to speak properly and exactly, we cannot say in any good sense the Moral
Law is abrogated? and have you so soon forgotten what you said? or are you
regardless of any good sense, or propriety of words? You make three parts: I
would know what parts they may be called; Homogeneal, all of them truly law,
as a drop of the Ocean is as verily water as the whole Sea? or Heterogeneal, as
Timber and Stones be parts of a House but not of the same kind and nature in
themselves? and the Soul and Body be two essential parts constituting the man;
yet the one as flesh, the other as spirit: and not of one of these alone, but
the compositum of both is the man. So here I demand, when you tell us we must
distinguish some parts of the Law from the whole, Whether these parts be
essential and requisite to the making or constituting of the whole Law? If
these three be all parts, then to take away two, will mutilate, if not destroy
the whole Law, the whole consisting but of three, cannot be entire and perfect,
having lost two. And the rather I ask this, because page 139. you say, (but
prove not, for it is not your manner: your Disciples, and so all other, must be
jurati in verba Magistri) that the Law most strictly taken is mere Mandative,
without any promises at all: Now if the mere Mandative be a Law, why do you
call the other two, (there excluded as not needful) parts of it? and not
rather, with Dr. Tailer, appendices to it? 4. To distinguish between part and
part, may be granted, and useful; but as to distinguish between soul and body,
between Christ and his Church, or between the sign and grace in the Sacrament;
but to separate and sunder one part from the the other, you know here its
intoleable, and destructive: and you so distinguish, that you plainly separate
and cut off two parts from the third as abolished. And yet the whole nature of
the Law remains, if we can believe you, not abrogated to the believer: you
have often put your Adversary to reconcile his tenets, when there was no such
cause as you see here is to agree yours. The Law in regard of the threats and
promises (say you) is abrogated: a very bold assertion, which never can be made
good. When you promise eternal life unto every good work a believer does, (as
page 40.) is it not a legal and conditional promise, so as no good work, no
eternal life? and how then can you here say, that the promises of the Law be
abrogated to a believer? And when a believer, with Noah, David, Lot, etc. does
fall into open and scandalous offenses, do you not threaten and terrify him,
that he may be moved and stirred up, if he be secure, to seek for healing by
faith in the blood of Christ? And does not this also convincingly argue that
the reproofs and threats of the Law are of force, and not abrogated? -- Lastly,
if the preceptive part continue in Heaven, you cannot say that justice there
shall be without power for the two other also: what though it does not actually
condemn any? Is God without power to make another World, because he makes it
not? And whereas you say, That you have already proved two parts to be
abrogated, and one still abiding; you either forget your self, or your ipse
dixit must suffice: you said so much indeed, page 139. but proved not one
syllable there nor here. Much more might be added to discover the vanity and
error of your opinions and exceptions against us: but this shall be all at
this present.

Mr. B. Those that say the Law is abolished, as it is foedus, but not as it is
regula, say true. The Law may be considered as it is a Covenant, or as it is an
absolute Rule requiring conformity unto it. Now it may be granted, that the Law
is abolished in the former notion, though not in the later.

Answ. Those that say the Law as it is foedus, is also regula, and where it
does regulate, there it is foedus a Covenant; and that the Law is neither
abolished as foedus nor regula, say most truly and properly according to the
Scripture. If you look upon the Law and consider it, as God propounded it, you
never find an absolute rule, where it is not a Covenant: we want your scriptum
est. Though God deal with his people in a Covenant of mere mercy, it follows
not, that his justice in his Law is abrogated, or any whit diminished: beside,
Christ having once answered and fully satisfied that, has also made a clear
way for this manner of Gods dealing: but this is only the object of the faith
of the Elect. 2. You are ready to grant what likes you, to any one, save the
truth to the favorers of it. In your last page, Law was not abrogated at all
in any good sense, say you; but now it may truly be granted: thus you play
fast and loose as you please. In whom now is inconstancy? You promise to show
(but take time for it, and till then we will wait) that the Law given by Moses
was a Covenant of Grace. If you understand it of the Moral Law, it will be
denied: therefore look well what you affirm.

Mr. B. Whosoever expects life and justification by the Law, he sets up the
Covenant of works again: nor is it any advantage to say, These works are the
works of grace, and wrought by the spirit.

Answ. 1. By the Law you must needs understand the Law of nature, or as it was
given to Adam, for your opinion is, that the Law given by Moses was a Covenant
of grace: by which then, till it was antiquated, it seems the Church might
expect life and justification: so that when God said by Moses, Whosoever does
these things shall live in them, herein they were to seek righteousness and
life, and not by faith. I know not how you can evade, but leave it to your
second thoughts. 2. You set up the Covenant of works again, when you teach that
salvation is due to good works by virtue of Gods promise, though not of merit:
this does none other but set up man's righteousness and the Law as foedus: yet
in words you would seem sometime to deny it. And remember also your own words,
viz. It is no advantage to these works, or works of grace, for still it is by
doing. 3. And by this now we may learn what you mean, when you say the Law
instrumentally regenerateth and converteth, for it did so in David's time, and
in the old Testament: that Law by your opinion was not the Law of works but the
Covenant of grace, But seeing you say withal, that that Covenant of grace is
now abrogated, then it is not now to be used to quicken and convert. It was of
use and force in David's time, but not now, say: you therefore the Argument is
inconsequent. Or may we take you thus? Christ has obtained that the Law given
to Adam may be isntrumental for the Spirit; but how is it then that you bring
no other Scripture but Psalm. 19. and 119. which you grant to be meant of the
Law comprehensively, that is, as here, for the Covenant of grace? you see, this
will not prove the Law of works to be a converting word. Thus you are found
further from the truth, and at great variance with your self, here is much need
of reconciling and salving.

Mr. B. The Law is a rule to walk by, though not a Covenant be justified by.

Answ. The just both lives and walks by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. then not by the
Law. 2. If the Law by Moses be a Covenant of grace, then it was to be justified
by. If you object, you mean the Law largely taken for the whole dispensation of
Commandments, Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial; I reply, you cannot make all
these of one nature, so not all to make a Covenant of grace. 2. To say the
denomination is given to the better part; I answer, as no text warranteth this,
so the natures of the Laws is not thereby changed. If you say of the whole heap
in the floor, Its as Corn; that makes nor proves not chafe to be Wheat.
Also, so the judicial, which was for the government of the Jewish
Commonwealth, is as much the Covenant of grace, as the Moral Law. But this is
to decline the question, and to confound what you should keep distinct.

Mr. B. The Antinomian distinction, of the Law abolished, as a Law, but still
abiding in respect of the matter, is a contradiction. -- The Law, says the
Antinomian, in the matter of it was not denied to be a rule according to which
a believer walks and lives.

Answ. You much wrong your Adversary, and more endanger your self, if there be
any evil in a false accusation, as the ninth command: for he says not the Law
is abolished, as a Law, but that it is inviolable and for ever. Neither can,
nor yet would any man so conclude from his words but you: his words are, as you
say, The Law in the matter of it, is not denied, etc. but what ground is here
to infer an abolition? And where he says, A believer walks according to
the rule of the Law; yet it is not by virtue from the Law regulating him, but
from another power within, renewing and disposing the heart thereunto. He is
like the honest Traveller, who keeps the high way freely of his own accord,
and takes pleasure in so doing. And yet the work here is so imperfect, and he
comes so far short of what is in that Law, that he finds and acknowledges a
power therein threatening and condemning for it: so that his free justification
by grace is his continual Rock and refuge, and his faith therein the sole
preserver of his peace and safety. But by your doctrine, there should be no
more need of justification, Christ, or faith, after conversion: for the Law
has only a Mandative power, say you, but none to condemn or curse. I muse,
that your own experience does not convince you of your error. Thus we reach
and say: The Law, or more properly and plainly (that there may be no evasion)
God in his Law obliges and binds unto that rule of perfect righteousness,
and also to the curse inevitably for every failing and disobedience. You tell
of a contradiction: but it is in your own tenets, which cross and overthrow one
another. And you deny God to have any Sovereign or Reigning power in his Law,
but only a Ruling, and that also with much mitigation and abatement of rigor
in his justice, which yet is as indefinite as unwarrantable. In ruling and
commanding by his Law, he may promise no peace, life, nor good, say you, unto
the obedient; nor threaten and condemn the disobedient. Thus you exauthorize
God in the Kingdom of his Law, and put him down from two parts of his justice
and power regal.

Mr. B. The Law is no more abrogated to a believer under the old Testament,
then to one under the new.

Answ. You mean, it is as much abrogated; that is, nothing at all.

Mr. B. They carry it, as if it were abrogated only to believers under the
Gospel. Now how can this ever be made good? for either they must deny, that
there were any believers under the old Testament, or if there were, then they
are freed from it as much as any man.

Answ. Indeed we hold and teach according to the Scriptures, that in the days
of the Gospel. God calls unto, and makes his elect partakers of a far more
free, excellent, and comfortable state and condition then was before Christ, as
Galat. 4.1, 2. Now I say that the Heir, as long as he is a Child, differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all: But is under Tutors, until
the time appointed by the Father. You say, Either we must deny that there were
any believers under the old Testament, or they were freed as much as any now.
Let any of a mean capacity but mark the Apostles words, The Heir so long as he
is a Child, differs nothing from a servant, etc. this represents the state
of believers in that Infantile age, which differs not from a servant; how
then say you, that they were freed from the Law as much as now? will you make
the condition of the Child being six or seven years old, and so kept under his
Guardian and Tutor, to be as free as when being of full age, he is at his own
disposing? You say, If the Law be taken for the whole administration, you grant
it was Pedagogicall and more servile. But was not this servility principally,
yea, and as concerning the conscience and the spiritual state of the soul,
solely caused by the Moral Law, which like a thick cloud, and dark, of sin and
wrath ( Romans 3.21. Romans 4.15.) did interrupt and hinder their light, and make
the Heavens black over their heads, so that they could not, all that while,
break perfectly through that veil which lay so on them? the sacrifices and other
ceremonies indeed were a burden and bondage in respect of the outward state,
but not as pertaining to the conscience, which is chiefly intended by Paul. And
therefore it must be understood of that servility they were in by the Moral
Law more then now; and in regard of this Moral Law especially, says Calvin,
were they said to be under a heavy yoke, as Act. 15.10. And how can the Law
Pedagogically taken, be the same to them, as to us, in respect of justification
and salvation, as you tell us, whereas you granted this Administration to be
altogether antiqnated? page 205. l. 20.

Mr. B. If then we speak of the Law in regard of the essential parts of it,
which are directing and commanding, threatening and promising life upon perfect
obedience, these are still equally in power, or else equally abrogated to all
believers under the old or new Testament.

Answ. If these all and every of them be now confessed to be essential parts
of the Law, then none of these be appendices or mere accessaries, as D. Tailer
accounts them: and you in page 59. do make direction and obligation the only
essential parts of a Law, and threatenings and premises to be but consequences
required ad been esse: so inconsistent and mutable are you in your positions.
And if these also be essential why did you oppose it in the Assertion of
grace? Again, then to abrogate any of these, is more then to diminish one Apex
or Iota of the Law; and so who now is become least in the Kingdom of God? But
lastly, the Law in regard of these, is not equally in power to the faithful
under both Testaments: for it is more then evident that the believing Jews were
put under the teaching and government of it, as a Child in nonage is made
subject to his Schoolmaster or Tutor, and that by the will and appointment of
God, Gala. 4, 13. Gala. 3.23. Before faith came, we were kept under the Law,
etc. 24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster unto Christ. 25. But after
faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. Now the time appointed
by God the Father, was till the resurrection of Christ, which he calls the
coming of faith, or tempus Evangelii, the time of preaching the Gospel to all
for the obedience of faith; and hereby he calls and brings his Church into
a more fice and happy condition; therefore now is the Church said to receive
the Adoption of the Sons, Gala. 4.5. that is, say Interpreters, The liberty
and right pertaining to Sons, which was not granted before Christ was
exhibited. And says Calvin, Truly Paul does not speak here only of the
ceremonies, nor of the Moral Law severally, but comprehends the whole
economy or Ministry of Moses, by which God then governed his people. And if
the whole, then it follows that the Law Moral is not now equally in power,
as then. Also, do not you say, that the Moral Law is only now of force to a
believer in the mandative and directive part, but not in the promissive or
threatening. So that it concerns you to consider, that those Arments for
subjection under the old Testament, are not so strong and valid against
believersnow, since the Church is in the condition of the Heir that is grown up,
and of ripe age.

Mr. B. Therefore it is wild divinity of an Antinomian, Honey C. page 6. who
makes three different estates of the Church. 1. Under the Law. 2. Under John
the Baptist. 3. Under the Gospel.

Answ. Why is it wild? In that it grows not in your Garden, or likes not
your fancy: so also there are other precious truths, like choice flowers, which
are disliked, and cast out as unsavory weeds, by your Doctrine and Ministry.
You should have showed some cause of distaste, which you do not, unless you
include it in these words -- He compares these together, and shows how we
under the Gospel exceed those of the Law, etc. but here I see, that as you
cannot receive it for truth, so you dare not plainly reject it for error. The
Author in that point has given full satisfaction to the indifferent Reader,
otherwise I should add much more.

There is great difference between the time of promise, and of exhibition, or
performance. It was revealed unto the Prophets that not unto themselves, but
unto us they did Minister the things that are now reported unto you, 1 Pet.
1.12.

Mr. B. There are two notorious falsehoods. 1. That God indeed saw sin in
believers in the old Testament, but not in these of the new.

Answ. To see sin is as an Act of Gods justice in the legal Ministration,
under which they were in the old Testament; but now (as is cleared) we are not
under that Ministration, as sometime you yield; so that it may follow, that God
might see sin in those, and not in these. You conceive and think of God,
without reference to his word, and would have sin the object of his eternal
and incomprehensible sight in a carnal sense and imagination. Can you believe
that God remembers the sins of his people no more. as his Covenant is, Heb.
8.12? And why not then be persuaded of this?

Mr. B. Was not that place, God sees not iniquity in Jacob, spoken of the
Church in the old Testament? and besides, If the Godly were in Christ, then
does it necessarily follow by his principles, That God must see no sin in them.

Answ. The Author took that place, as I remember, to be a Prophecy of a
future state.

2. Though they were in Christ, yet not being adulti, but in their time of
minority, under that legal government, God might see and impute sin temporally
unto them: so there appears no absurdity or contradiction, but that you love
to have your own words.

Mr. B. The second difference he makes is, that God seeing, did therefore
punish and afflict for it; but he does not so now. So Moses was stricken with
death, etc. Now who sees not how weak and absurd these Arguments are? for does
not the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. speaking of those under the new Testament, say,
That some were sick, some did sleep? were not Ananias and Sapphira struck dead
immediately?

Answ. Your words indeed are, that his Arguments are weak and absurd; but you
make no such thing to appear. As for that of 1 Cor. 11. his Answer to it still
may suffice: for you show not any invalidity of it, nor regard his distinctions
there given. Besides, It will not be granted that those Corinthians, nor yet
Ananias, and Sapphira, were believers: And so your reason falls short of the
point in question.

Mr. B. The Arguments of the Antinomians, for the greater part, do not only
overthrow the use of it to believers, but to unbelievers also.

Answ. Their Arguments, if rightly conceived of, and used, do not overthrow the
use of the Law to either: but then you must keep it within its own proper
limits, and use it lawfully. I grant, if you understand those words. The Law is
a Schoolmaster to Christ historically only, (for some make a mystical and
spiritual sense of them also) then the meaning is, that the same believing Jew
who before was under the Law, yet since Christ is freed from that servitude,
and so his state is changed; that Pedagogy is no longer; yea, and believer or
unbeliever in the days of the Gospel, we are not to meddle with that
administration by Moses, but only to give care to the Gospel, which is
preached to all for the obedience of faith, Romans 1.2, 5. but then it will
necessarily follow, that he that believes is actually freed from the yoke of
the Law: if from the whole occonomy, then from every part. And he lives by his
faith only under mere free grace, Romans 6.14.

Mr. B. We will grant that to a believer the Law is as it were abrogated in
these particulars. 1. In respect of justification. 2. Condemnation. 3. Rigid
obedience. 4. Its no terror, nor are the godly slavishly compelled to obey. 5.
It does not work, nor increase sin, as in the wicked. 6. It is abrogated in
many accessaries and circumstances.

Answ. You say you had rather use the word Mitigation then Abrogation: as being
proper, etc. And I mislike both as they are used in reference to the Law for
both Scripture and experience show that neither word is incident nor can
possibly befall the Law of God; for it is inviolable. If the Fire burn you not,
not Sea drown you, its not because they have lost that natural power to do it,
but in that you happily are kept out of either; such as abide under the Law
find no true abrogation or mitigation. And if the Law justify not, it is not
because the power of it to do it is lost or lessened, for then it could not
promise life to the observers, saying, Do. and live; but in that it does not
justify, and give life actually to any, that weakness is not in the Law, but
in man through the flesh, Romans 8.3. for the Law neither can, nor ever yet had
power to justify a sinner, nor one that failed the least in the observance of
it.

And the like may be said in respect of condemnation. The Law curses and
threatens upon Sinai, but comes not on Mount Sion. In Christ we are freed
from the Law, and so from its Condemnation; so the change is in the state of a
Christian, but no alteration in the Law at all. Your own expression clears
it: While the Law by reason of sin does pursue me, I run to Christ for
refuge, and seek to be found in him: this I implies that the Law has not lost
any of its threatening or cursing power, and that my security is not -- that the
Law wants power to condemn, but that I am in Christ, and under his
protection, Phil. 3.9.

As for your third respect of mitigating the rigid obedience, as you call it,
yet I see you are forced to yield what D. Tailer and others did not, that it
cannot be maintained. If we fail in the least tittle, we are presently gone by
the Law. And as Christ has not obtained at Gods hand, that the Law should not
oblige and tie us to a perfect obedience; so you might as truly say, he has
not procured, that the Law should not justify us being sinners: for this it
could not do before. But I am glad to have such words from you, that all our
obedience is accepted, not because of any mitigation in Gods justice, or for
dignity in the duty, but only in and through Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. the best
piece of Divinity I find in your Book: but then there is no mitigation of rigid
obedience in the Law.

To the fourth. To speak properly the Law is therefore no terror, because a
believer is not under it: for it is a terror to all that be under it: the
Christian being under grace, is free from terror. And if he be sometime or
something afraid, that is not because there is not fullness of security in his
condition, but through the imperfection of faith; as children, we fear, where
and when, we have no true cause: neither does it argue any less terror in the
Law. And you have some strange add unsound expressions in this Section: for
grant a regenerate and ungenerate part, yet the man is but one, and his state
but one, not two: and put the Law with its terror and compelling power to the
flesh, what avails this? Can this draw the flesh to the ways of piety, as
your words are? you imagine either that the flesh, being and remaining flesh,
can move in the ways of piety, or that the terror of the Law can change the
corrupt heart: but can clear or justify neither. It is simple and free
believing, that leads and carries the soul into the right way: and all the
forcing and terrifying of the Law can provoke only unto an external and
hypocritical obedience, such as is in the Children of the Bondwoman. If the
spirit in the godly be not always so willing, the Law cannot give aid and
quickening to it, but rather dampeth and deadeth the spirit of faith and love,
and does vivifie the corruption in nature, for so says Paul, when the
Commandment came, sin revived and I died, Romans 7.9. and again, the strength of
sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56. It Is only faith in the Gospel of Christ that
exciteth to all goodness cheerfully and joyfully, so Heb. 11. Noah, Abraham,
Moses, are said to do all by faith. Sine qua, multa faciendo nihil facimus: and
impleudo Legem, non implemus. What caused life at first, must preserve, and
quicken it being dead or dull.

5. And your fifth Assertion is false: for the Law does (as is said and proved)
increase sin even in the faithful, this being the bitter effect of it through
the vitiousness of our nature, Romans 7.5. The motions of sin which were by the
Law, do work in our members to bring forth fruit to death; and all along the
chapter, Paul says, It wrought no otherwise in him, in his regenerate estate;
but that all the power to resist, weaken, and overcome sin and the flesh, was
from Christ the head, and his spirit. Therefore thanks be to God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. This take notice of, that if infidelity be accidentally
nourished, and faith hindered and opposed by the Law, as is most true, then sin
cannot decrease, but does increase by it. Besides, is not flesh and corruption
in the regenerate of the same kind with that in the unregenerate? If the Law
then be the occasion of the reviving of sin in the one, why not in the other?
the nature of the flesh, nor the operative virtue of the Law is not altered by
grace, though they both be overmastered and subdued.

In the sixth you slander your Antinomian again for disparaging the Law, in
that it was written in stones. What good can it do, say you? Answ. It does good
many ways, else God would not have writ it there: but that cannot make man
good. God therefore has promised to write his Law in the Tables of the heart
by his spirit, whereby the Gospel also is made effectual as he pleases: but
this inward writing of the Law, is a promise and branch of the new Covenant,
Jer. 31.33.

Mr. B. But the Law continues to them as a rule, which may appear, first, from
the different phrases used concerning the ceremonial law, nowhere applied to
the moral; as which Chemuitius does reckon up, (...), etc. which are not used
of the Moral: but when he speaks of it, he says, We are dead unto it, We
are redeemed from the curse of it: which Phrases do imply the change to be wade
in us, and not in the Law.

Answ. Your supposition is still false, for we hold no abrogation, mitigation,
or mutation in the Law, as is already cleared. 2. This makes wholly for us:
for if there be no change in the Law, then it continues in all other offices
and regards, as well as to be a rule: and so has power to promise and to
condemn also. Hunc suo jugulo gladio. 3. You reason nihil ad Rhombum, viz. If
the Antinomian could bring such places, that would prove it were as unlawful
to love the Lord, because the moral Law commands it, as we could prove it
unlawful to circumcise, etc. Answ. The rule of comparison requires, that it
should be unlawful to circumcise, because the ceremonial Law commands it. And
if that Law were of force still, and not repealed, it were as lawful to
circumcise: so that the unlawfulness to do it, is not from the nature of the
thing, but in that the ceremonial requiring circumcision, is abrogated, but so
is not the moral: for then to love were not required. But though the moral Law
command love, yet your heart wanting it, it gives it no power to do it. Thus
you have gained here nothing to your purpose, but lost both labor and credit.

Mr. B. 2. From the sanctification and holiness that it requires of the
believer, which is nothing but conformity to the Law.

Answ. Though the Law require, yet it proves not it to be a rule, regulating,
disposing and framing the soul to holiness; for the Law does not sanctify: but
Christ is of God made to be sanctification, whereby comes true conformity to
the Law. The Law requires to be just, but does not justify: so it wills us
to be Saints, but sanctifies not. There is a mutual relation between Christ
and faith: as a quality, or virtue, faith purifieth not; but as it fetches and
deriveth virtue from Christ. Purity is not in us naturally, the Law requiring
it, does convince us both of the want of it, and of the necessity to have it,
but it supplieth us not with it: (for then Christ need not be our root of
holiness, nor we by faith to have it from him) but drives us to Christ, in
whom all fullness dwells. You have your Answer to the rest of the Section, in
what precedeth.

Mr. B. 3. In that Disobedience to it is still a sin to a believer.

Answ. As Disobedience is a sin against the Law, so it is condemned by the Law,
as was David's adultery, Peter's denial, etc. else what need they of faith to be
justified from them? so still by this the Law has power to condemn, as well as
to rule. As for the evasion you mention, I know it not: you have not as yet
brought us into any such strait or danger, as that we need seek evasion.

The residue of this Lecture makes nothing for your purpose, nor at all
against us.

LECT. XXIII.
Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law? yea, we establish it.


HEre you do not invalidate the Authors assertion, nor Arguments. If the Law
and Prophets lasted but till John; And as John was greater then any before him,
so the least in the kingdom of Heaven is greater then he. You will then find it
hard to put John either under the old or new Testament, or to evince your
Adversary. Inter Legem and Evangelium interpositus fuit Johannes, qui medium
obtinuit munus, and utrique affine. Calv. It Is true, the Law, or Moses and the
Prophets write of Christ, and agreed in that: and did not only typifie him in
the ceremonies then used, as you imply.

Mr. B. In what sense the Apostle argues against the Law.

Answ. Truly he argues not against it in any true sense at all, but for it, to
give and maintain all its rights.

Mr. B. The proper state of the question in those days, appears, Act. 15.
where you have a relation made of some believing Jews of the sect of the
Pharisees, who pressed the necessity of circumcision, etc.

Answ. See Act. 15.5. There arose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees,
which believed saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command
them to keep the Law of Moses. Note that expression, which believed: So that
the question was then, Whether that circumcision and the keeping of the Law
were needful to be conjoined with the faith of Christ, in the point of
salvation, and ver. 11. makes it more plain: We believe through the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, even as did they also. I confess your first
words might import as much; but you are not constant, but shrink much from
this; And tell us what opinion the Jews were generally of, who thought that the
observation of the moral Law without Christ, was enough for their peace and
comfort. In your prosecution of it, you sejoyne, what in the proposition was
rightly conjoined. Those Jews who thought, as you say, That the external
performing of the ceremonies, and a life outwardly conformable to the moral
Law, would secure them; they did oppose Christ, and perfecute his Gospel, as 1
These. 2.14, 15. But the other, mentioned Act. 15. did receive and preach the
Gospel, though not according to the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3.
but added and mingled other things to that of faith, and so overthrew the whole
Gospel, and salvation also. Hence it was the Apostle peremptorily said, that,
If they were circumcised, Christ profited them nothing; implying that they
would have Christ and circumcision too. Your words are, That the Apostle
speaks seemingly derogatorily to the Law, because they took it without
Christ. But he indeed derogated not from it, but acknowledged it to be good, if
used lawfully; but they did otherwise; not in taking it without Christ, as you
affirm; but in conjoyning it with him, as if he alone were not sufficient to
salvation as well as to righteousness, without the works of the Law. Take you
heed of this way, and kind of teaching.

Mr. B. Now where the Law seems to be abrogated, it is taken either 1
Synecdochically put for that part which actually condemns, as Gal. 5. Against
such is no Law: for he speaks, as if there were nothing in the Law but
condemnation. Whereas we may say, the Law is by way of direction and
prescription; for a thing, as well as against it by accusation.

Answ. If it be said, the Law of our Land has nothing against you or to accuse
you of in point of homicide, Is this any seeming abolition of the Law? while
your innocence is cleared and justified, the Law suffers no diminution by it:
how tryfling and childish is this your discourse? 2. If the Law be for a thing
in direction, and against it by accusation, then by Paul's doctrine still it
has lost nothing of its power. Thus the constant mistake is not ours, but
yours, who most abolish the Law indeed.

Mr. B. First, He is without the Law, that is without the understanding of it:
thus the Gentiles. Secondly, Without the sense and experience of the terrifying
power of it, as Paul, Romans 7. Now the godly, though they be denied to be under
the Law, yet are not said to be without it.

Answ. It is true, the faithful have both understanding and experience of the
Law: but now, faith Luther, It is their chief point of wisdom to be ignorant of
the Law. Is not this a Paradox or Parable? You say Paul, Romans 4.14. cannot mean
the Law of Moses, for that was long after: a poor reason. Does he not, in Gal.
3. deny the blessing and inheritance of Abraham to be by the Law, but by
promise? and yet ver. 11. he says, The Law was 430 years after. When the
blessing was promised to come in that way to Abraham, there was no question:
but now since the circumcision and the Law were after added to the promise, and
have been of so long continuance, is that question thereby occasioned.

In the fifth Interpretation of what it is to be under the Law, your words are
nothing against us, but rather confirm that exposition of Romans 6.14. which is
in the Assertion of grace against D. T. But observe withal, how here you
oppose Law and grace in sanctifying and healing, which formerly you so much
contradicted. You say, The Law is never so much alive, as in the godly, who
most obey it. But I say, It is the spirit of Christ that quickens them by the
Gospel, to love and obey the Law: and their obedience flows from this life of
faith, as an expression of it. He that lives by faith, as Gal. 2.19, 20.
keeps the Law joyfully, and freely.

LECT. XXIIII.
Deuteronomy. 4.13. And he declared to you his Covenant, etc.


Mr. B. I Have already handled the Law as a rule, and now come to consider it
as a Covenant, that so the whole Law may be fully understood.

Answ. Your undertaken be great, and your promises sat and fair, but never knew
I worse success, nor less performance. I muse that these points so weighty, and
so much controverted, should be so slightly handled, and your Affirmative part
so weakly confirmed by a man of your learning. Suppose all be clear and
unquestionable to your self: (which I cannot believe now) yet others need more
light then as yet you hold forth. And your Adversaries see nothing to convince
and satisfy them. You tell us, He that is so blind that he cannot see by the
light of one Sun, would not see any more if there were a thousand Suns. Alas,
do you think that he that reads then, shall find these your elaborate and
judicious Lectures so clear, and beyond exception, that he is like unto him
that has the nooneday to walk in; and is strangely blinded, if any thing be
rejected as erroneous, or questioned as obscure? To give you my ungrateful
opinion, I neither see light of one Sun, nor yet of one beam of it. I fear you
are too self-conceited, and self-confident. I say no more, but Aliorum esto
judicium. We are now, being made public, to be censured by others.

Now you come to consider the Law as a Covenant, etc. Answ. Then it is not
simply a rule: but it may be you will help this somewhat, by telling us of a
more large acception of the Law; yet that is not to speak precisely to the
point in controversy; also, though your considerations be diverse, yet the Law
is constantly the same. Your doctrine, that the Law was delivered in Mount
Sinai in a Covenant-way, or it was a Covenant God made with his people; I list
not to meddle with by-matters. You then show what a Covenant is: And as here
you say, You find much difference of judgment: so I say, You are unhappily
persuaded to incline to the most unlikely, unfound, and palpably erroneous
opinion of all others, if yet you have any to travel and go with you, in your
way; but you love cross and by-ways, that you may be better noted, to become
famous or infamous.

Mr. B. The Law as to this purpose may be considered more largely, as that
whole doctrine delivered on Mount Sinai, with the preface and promises
adjoined, and all things that may be reduced to it: or more strictly, as it is
an abstracted rule of righteousness, holding forth life upon no terms but
perfect obedience. Now take it in the former sense, it was a Covenant of grace:
take it in the later, it was not of grace, but of works.

Answ. This is first to be premised, and we take it as granted by you, that
however you consider the Law, yet you mean only the moral Law. Yet you will
not be contented with the simple and entire law as it is an absolute law in it
self, but do take in also unto it, the preface, promises and all things
reduceable; your extent of it is now become large indeed, and to me indefinite.
What you draw in and reduce to it, who knows? But I smell some fear and
diffidence in this great enterprise: your own thoughts being apprehensive of
the unjustifiableness of this strange and bold assertion, you would not
therefore be too narrowly kept in, but will take more scope and ground then is
allowable: but let this pass, and to come to a more particular reply.

Methinks the Pieface it self should have been sufficient to have stopped you in
this your way or opinion. Thus it is recorded, Exodus 20.2. and Deuteronomy. 5.6. I am
the Lord thy God, which brought thee out, etc. out of which I collect, and it
is plain and undeniable, That God was their God, and Israel his people, before
the giving of the Law: and that he did not in these words express his
wilingness and consent to be their God, if, or upon condition, they will keep
these his Commandments, which you call the first thing belonging to a Covenant:
therefore he says, Hear, I am thy God, that is, I am now already thy God,
namely, by free promise in the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. or as it was made to
Abraham and his posterity, Gen 12.3. Gal. 3.6. To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made. And unto this promise or Covenant of grace, (then which I know
no other in simple nature and essence, or substance) they had given and
professed their consent formerly by their faith, and externally by receiving
circumcifion the sign of the Covenant, and so avouched God to be their only
God in Christ, and themselves his people through him. And he being their God
and King, it pleased him now to deliver unto them his will in this way and form
of Government, according to which he would rule them, and they were to conform
themselves to his pleasure herein.

2. And this promise given by God, and believed on by them so long before this
promulgation and solemn delivery of the Law, was entire of it self, containing
perfection of doctrine, and holding out a free and clear way to pardon,
reconciliation, and life. And therefore it was singly made and preached at
first to Adam, and Abraham, with his posterity: so that Paul says, Gal. 3.18.
God gave the Inheritance (that is, all the blessedness belonging to a Child)
bylpromse, denying and excluding the Law in this. And hence is it, that (to
prevent all objections against the doctrine of free grace) Paul says, Romans
5.20. Moreover the Law entered, that the offense might abound. (...), id est,
(...). that is, the Law entered besides the promise of grace, which was the
prime and principal doctrine: and it entered into the Church, or among the
people of God, and yet neither to disannull, nor to add any thing unto the
former Covenant or promise, Gal. 3.15. as if, of imperfect before, it was to be
perfected thereby; Nor yet as if it were to be mingled with the promise and so
to adulterate it: but it was to be kept distinct from it, as being of another
nature, and for another end, contrary to that of the promise, The Law was to
uncover sin, terrify the conscience, exclude the soul from Gods favor and
presence: the promise to cover, to pacify and comfort, and to admit or give
entrance again with confidence through faith in Christ's blood. The Law was to
make sin abound, that upon that occasion the ampleness and efficaciousness of
the grace promised in Christ, might be more abundant.

And as for the promises of the Law, Piscator tells you, That they are to be
excluded the Covenant of grace, as being of a diverse nature or quality from
those promises of grace. The promise of grace is Nuda, simplex, and gratuita:
the legal promises are Conditionales.

But now we will consider by what Scriptures and Reasons you would confirm it.
First, you say,

Mr. B. There is nothing more ordinary with Paul in these controversies, then
to consider the Law so differently; as take this instance, Romans 10.5.6. where
he descibeth the righteousness of the Law, from these words, Do and live, etc.
We find this in effect, Deuteronomy. 30.16. and yet from this very chap. The Apostle
describes the righteousness which is by faith. And Beza does acknowledge, that
that which Moses speaks of the Law, Paul applies to the Gospel.

Answ. We might expect a more plain and clear text then this, (which is so
knotty and difficult, that it has troubled the best commentators) if yet you
could produce any: ^er verbum entelligit M. Legem quam Dominus voce sua
promulgavit. P. autom ad praedicationem Evangelii quae fuit Legis perfectio
accommodat. B.
but your poor shift and nakedness is manifest. If you stand here to Beza, his
words make directly against you. What Moses speaks of the Law, Paul applies to
the Gospel, says he: Moses said thus of the Law, and Paul of the Gospel. Thus
then by his interpretation, 1. The Law is not one with the Gospel, nor does it
comprehend it, but contains a doctrine in kind differing from the Gospel or
Covenant of grace. 2. He seems to be of that judgment, (with many others)
that Paul does but allude to that place in Moses, and does not directly and
purposely cite Moses for confirmation: and this is most probable, in that
something is added, some left out, and something altered. Calvin thinks the
knot may easily be untied, -- Sed totam in genere doctrinam, quae ^vangelium
sub se compre^endat, etc.
thus, If by the word we understand not the law, but the whole doctrine of God
in general, as it comprehends the Gospel: for says he, The word of the Law
never comes of it self to be in the heart, no not in the least syllable of it,
until it be there implanted by the faith of the Gospel. (Note you well this by
the way.) And however the learned vary somewhat about this, yet I can read no
word favoring your odd Opinion. Now come we to your Arguments.

Mr. B. The first shall be taken from the relation of the covenanters, God on
the one part, and the Israelits on the other. God did not deal as this time as
absolutely considered, but as their God and their Father: hence God says he is
their God. And when Christ quoteth the Commands, he brings the Preface, Hear O
Israel, the Lord thy God is one: and Romans 9.4. Now unless this were a Covenant
of grace, how could God be their God, who were sinners?

Answ. God dealt with them now, not absolutely indeed, but yet with relation to
his promise formerly made, by means of which he had freely chosen, and taken
them to be his peculiar people: having long before said to Abraham, I will be a
God to thee, and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. And hereupon the constant
Martyr Mr. Bradford, intending to comfort one dejected and distreffed in mind,
upon consideration of some failing or want of obedience, as I remember writes
to this effect. Let this cogitation be still in your mind, that before God ask
any thing of us, he says, he is ours: I am the Lord thy God: giving himself,
and then all he has, to be ours. And this he does in respect of himself, of
his own mercy and truth, and not in respect of us: for then were grace no
grace. In consideration whereof, says the Martyr, Whatever he commands, though
of duty we be bounden to accomplish, and be culpable and guilty if not; yet he
requires the same no further of us, then to make more in love, and more
certain of this his covenant, That he is our Lord God, which is made in
respect of his grace in Christ Jesus, and depends nothing on our obedience.
So this Covenant is most free and most sure for ever, and the only refuge and
plea of the soul in the hour of tentation. It is more then evident then, that
God as now, so from the first, stood reconciled to his people in Christ Jesus,
and in him became their God, and took them into that happy relation of being
his people, his peculiar treasure, and Children. And all your Scriptures, if
now you look on them again, do hold forth this, and can speak no other truth.
What infirmity is this? Cannot God take a people into Covenant with himself,
and become their God and Father in Christ his Son, and yet govern and put them
under the Law, but we must then infer, either that all his grace and favor
is conditional, or else the Law we are made to live under for a time, is a
Covenant of grace?

Mr. B. If we consider the good things annexed to this Covenant, it must needs
be a Covenant of grace, for there we have remission of sin, whereas in the
Covenant of works, there is no way for repentance or pardon. In the second
Commandment God is described to show mercy to thousands, etc.

Answ. If God promise and show mercy in this way of obedience, (as we Parents
also commonly do deal with our Children, looking pleasantly upon them, using
them kindly, etc. when we find them most dutiful: and tendering and receiving
them lovingly and gently, upon their submission after some failing) will you so
far forget the truth and your self, as to infer and conclude thence that the
Covenant is established on our obedience? It is one word and way by which we
are begotten and become Children to God our Father: and he may rule us, and
show us favor by another word and way, especially whilst we be in minority, as
Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. And what could keep the Children of Israel in the conscience of
their many faults and failings from despair? or what could erect their spirits,
and preserve still a confidence and cheerful hope in them? was it not, as Mr.
Bradford said, That knowledge and inward persuasion, that God was their Father,
and they his Children, by a free and faithful promise of mere grace in Christ
to come?

Mr. B. 3. If we consider the duties commanded in the Law so generally taken,
it must needs be a Covenant of grace: for what is the meaning of the first
Commandment, but to have one God in Christ, our God by faith?

Answ. What is said to the other, Deus Pater seipsum in Christo abscondidit ita
ut nusquam alibi quam in Christo quaeramus and agnoscamus, etc.
resolves this also: for this Commandment presupposes that God was their God,
(and did not now by his Law become their God) by promise in the Messiah to
come, on his part, and by faith receiving it on their side. And to keep them to
his faith in Christ, and to prevent defection or Idolatry, he propounds himself
to be known and acknowledged only in Christ the promised seed, saying, I am
thy God in my Christ: that so they might love him, trust and delight in him.

Mr. B. From the ceremonial Law. All Divines say, That this is reduced to the
Moral; so that sacrifices were commanded by virtue of the second Commandment.
Now all know that the sacrifices were Evangelical, and did hold forth remission
of sins, etc. then there must be grace included.

Answ. Now I understand what you would have reduced to the moral Law. And in
this passage of yours, I observe diverse strange things; as, 1. That the
ceremonial should be reduced to the moral, as if the one were not entire and
absolute of it self, without the other: or that they were not distinct species,
under the same genus: the whole Ministration by Moses, being divided into Law
moral, ceremonial, judicial, so that every of the three is absolute of it
self, for the matter and doctrine contained in it, and in respect of the end
and use it was given for. 2. You cannot let us see one syllable concerning the
sacrifices in the second Command. The Lord delivered by the same authority he
had over them, and as equally and immediately required the observation of each
of these, which in nature and office were so distinct. And the charging of
Israel with all and every of them is grounded still upon this, I am thy God:
therefore was it, that his people were to be instructed, governed, and ordered
as he pleased. He signified his will and mind, in the matters of faith, by the
ceremonial Law. 2. Touching morality and duty in the moral. 3. And what
concerned the polity, and republique, in the judicial Law. I see not, but that
you may as well reduce the judicial to the first Commandment, or to the second
Table, as the ceremonial to the second Commandment, and thus confound all,
making but one Law. 3. And I mark another thing, viz. That in this you have
one eye, and respect to the consent or opinion of Divines, as the best, yea
sole reason and warrant you have for this, whereas you regard not their
concurrence in other things. 4. Your inference is as strange, viz. That there
must then necessarily be grace included in the moral Law: for suppose your
reducement be true, yet the same grace was still contained and kept in the
ceremonial as before: and it could import no whit of its native virtue, or as
a physical ingredient, infuse its spirit, strength, or force, to alter and
qualify the Law of works: for then grace were no more grace, nor works no more
works. If you make the moral so capacious, as to receive into it the other, as
a greater Orb the lesser, or as your Chest does a box of ointment, or the Ark
the Pot of Manna, yet there is no necessity of any influence from one into the
other, or of any thing to be poured out of one vessel into another: but all
that grace of remission of sins, etc. was still preserved and kept in the
ceremonial Law: and so no grace in the moral.

4. If the Apostle did speak as much against the ceremonial, as moral Law,
was it not because the people had no further respect then to the act,
observance, or thing done, resting in the bare use, without faith in Christ,
the only treasure hid, and propounded in and by them? and so they made that to
be work, which was grace: and so no difference between ceremonial and moral
things. Sincere accep^^ non sunt pro^^ie opera ho^^num, sed ^^ei: nam ni^^l
agimus sed ^^ferimus nos ^^eo, ad recipi^^ndam ejus ^^vatiam. Call.
And being thus perverted, the continuance and use of circumcision and the
sacrifices did oppose Christ, and grace, though they did not so, as they were
instituted and commanded by God to be used. Sacrifices and Sacraments be Gods
Ordinances, which rightly understood and taken, and purely used, are not
properly man's works, but Gods. He propounds and commends thereby unto us
his grace, and the work of redemption by Jesus Christ, the sole object that our
faith is to look at, and to be exercised about in the use of them. If we handle
them sincerely, we bring no work, nothing for acceptance with God, but only
are receivers of what he freely gives unto us. Its an easy and too common an
error to turn all into works, even Baptism and the Lords Supper, whereby the
simple nature and verity of them is extinguished and lost. Christ profits
none, but such as despairing of Law and works, do by faith she only unto the
promise of his grace. If a man seek help or comfort in any one act, or work, he
is then bound to seek the same in all the works of the Law, and so is a debtor
to fulfill the whole Law: and is quite fallen from grace: so is it Gal. 5.2, 3,
4. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised (namely in that
persuasion, that that act will avail you any thing) Christ shall not profit you
at all, etc.

5. Lastly, This say you has been always a strong Argument to persuade you,
etc. And there appears no strength in it, but it is as weak, silly, and poor
as any: and whereas you say, always, I understand you thus, viz. since you
entertained that conceit, that the Law of works is a Covenant of grace: by a
mistake herein, you might be confirmed in that error; but what bred or
occasioned that opinion at first? And we now having the same moral Law, how is
it (if the ceremonial be included in that second Commandment) that it does not
bind us also to sacrifice, be circumcised, etc. as it did the Jews? else we
have not all in the Law.

Mr. B. This will appear from the visible seal to ratify the Covenant, which
was by sacrifices and sprinkling the people with blood: and this did signify
Christ the Mediator of this Covenant.

Answ. Interpreters vary about the meaning of that Covenant-book, or Testament
that was sprinkled with blood, Exodus 24. If you will contend it was the Law
largely taken, even for what was delivered on Mount Sinai; In which large
acceptance, that Law, blood of sprinkling, and other ceremonies then used,
were typical, and shadows of future good things, Heb. 10.1. then you exclude
the Moral Law strictly taken, as a rule of righteousness; for it was not
typical. And now what have you gained by making this a Covenat of grace, which
the Jews lived under? or where, or what grace is found in the moral Law? But
when Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the
blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you, Exodus 24.8. your
Marginall note tells you, It was to signify, that the Law being broken by
us, could alone be satisfied by the blood and death of Christ. Let Moses be
typical Mediator, yet it follows not, that it was not a covenant of works,
(if you take it for the Law moral) but contrarily, that it was no other: for a
Mediator was therefore needful, because by the Law the people were convinced
that there was dissension and variance between God and them, in that they were
proved to be transgressors of that his Law, and the enmity was to be slain and
abolished, and a reconcilement made by a middle person.

The residue of this Section, I leave as dubious and obscure: of whom you mean,
I know not.

Mr. B. If the Law was that same Covenant, with that Oath God made to Isaac,
then it must needs be a Covenant of grace: But, etc. Therefore God remembers
what he had promised to Abraham, Deuteronomy. 7.2. It shall come to pass if ye hearken
to these judgments, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee
the Covenant and mercy which he swear unto thy Fathers.

Answ. Nothing is more evident by this place, then that the Law (requiring
these judgments to be hearkened unto and done) was a distinct doctrine from
that Covenant made with them in their Fathers. For, 1. God requires of them the
doing of the one, but promises that he himself will keep the other, the
Covenant and the mercy: so that this wholly rests and relyeth on him. 2. He
calls and commends himself first to be the Lord their God, not upon condition
of their doing or obedience, but before he required it, and as the ground of
commanding it. 3. The Covenant and mercy was made long before, and confirmed by
Oath in the days of their Fathers: these stand all in that text fully against
you, and for us. Yet he dealing with them, as a Father with his Children, is
willing to manifest his faithfulness and love in keeping Covenant and promise
made long before in that way of their obedience and dutifulness: but that he
made that Covenant the same with the Law, is denied, as utterly false. If you
say to your Child, he shall find you a loving and kind Father to him, so that
he will be dutiful and obedient to you; now you are not his Father nor he your
Child upon this condition, though in this way you may manifest and express your
affections at your pleasure.

Now take a view of your six Arguments, and let us know what be your second
thoughts of them; and also your answer to those places so fully meeting and
opposing you in this your way, as the Angel did Balaam in his way, is infirm
and nothing satisfactory.

Mr. B. If that in Gal. 3.18. and Romans 4.14. be rigidly and universally true,
then the doctrine of the Socinians would plainly prevail, who from these do
urge there was no grace, nor faith, nor nothing of Christ vouchsafed unto the
Jews, whereas they had the adoption, though their state was a state of bondage.

Answ. 1. Truth is to be received in love to it, for it self, though no error
nor danger (a thing impossible) should be prevented by it. 2. If Socinians do
urge those places, to infer, that no grace, etc. come by the Law, but by the
promise only made and given long before; let us see how you would except
against this: but both you and the Socinians are wide and deceived, though not
in the same way. 3. They had the adoption indeed, but that was by faith in the
promised seed: and the putting them under that pedagogy of Moses made their
state so servile.

What you say in the rest of this Lecture, has been presented to us before:
where also the answer and satisfaction is to be found.

LECT. XXV.
Romans 3.27. Where is beasting then? etc.


I Cannot cease to muse, that you so prosecute your matter in this large
acception and sense of the Law, knowing that the question is of the moral
strictly taken. You choose rather to keep the thickets and bushes, then to
appear in the open plains: we may guess why. Yet take notice, that the doctrine
you raise does not grow from your text, no not in your own exposition: for you
expound it of the Law of works strictly taken, as it is opposed to the Law of
faith. But your doctrine you so frame and carry, as that you tell us, The Law,
as a Covenant of grace given to the Israelites, in some sense does oppose the
grace of the Gospel: which assertion, suppose true, yet is no fruit of this
tree; has not its rise from your text. 2. Being witty to coin and devise
things of your own head, without Scripture-ground, you say it is for this end,
viz. To discover the nature of the Law and Gospel; a fair pretense and promise,
without reality of performance: for you rather cover and darken, then
otherwise. 3. You bring in Calvin to little purpose, who distributes the Law
into three kinds; and he does not say that the moral Law differs only from
the Gospel in regard of clearer manifestation, but denies it to have or
contain any grace in it: and so in nature and kind to differ from the Gospel
or word of grace, and not gradually only. And the like may be said of Pareus.
4. You have often received what is thought of your so often sod Coleworts,
presented here again to the Reader: that they under the Law did enjoy grace,
etc. viz. that they had it not by the Law, etc.

Mr. B. That the doctrine of the Law, in the more preceptive nature of it may
be compared with the doctrine of the Gospel, having the grace of God axnexed to
it, and going along with it: now this in some respects is an unequal
comparison.

Answ. Why do you now more straiten the Law then did Calvin, in that his
testimony, who takes the Law for that rule of life, in which God requires of
us that which is his own, giving us no ground of hope unless in every respect
we walk according to it? And you tell us of the Gospel having the grace of God
annexed to it, etc. as if the Gospel could be separated from that grace, which
is the subject matter of it: for does the Gospel speak of, or hold forth unto
us any thing else? beside, the grace of God is so proper and peculiar to the
Gospel that not one word of it is mentioned in the Law: for the Law is of
works, and the Gospel is called the word of his grace. But perhaps you will
say. By grace, you mean the spirit of life, that renews and quickens the
soul; if you do so, yet it has been cleared that although the Spirit do not
always, and in all, produce and work this work of renovation, yet the Gospel is
the ordinary instrument that is used for this, and not the Law. That expression
of yours (If you take the doctrine or letter of the Gospel without the grace of
God) is very improper: for it is, as if you could take the writing without the
matter it specifieth and entreats of. Again, observe, that the difference
between the letter of the Gospel, and the letter of the Law (as you call them)
is, in that the Law is said then to kill, when the spirit works effectually
by it: for then sin reviveth in the conscience, and so J died, says Paul, Romans
7.9. and so the Commandment was found to be to death, ver. 10. but the Gospel
then kills and leaves in death and condemnation, when the spirit works not
in the heart to receive and mingle it by faith, Heb. 4.2. Joh. 3.19. 2 Cor.
4.4. Your counsel is good, to make the parallel equal: but this is unequal in
you, still to make Law and Gospel equally and alike the instrument of grace and
life.

Mr. B. page 2, 3, 4. I come to the Antinomian difference, and there I find
such a one, that I am confident was never heard of before. In Honey Comb, God,
says he, saw sin in believers of the old Testament, but not in the new, etc.

Answ. Our weakness makes us stumble and to be offended, where no cause is
sometime, and with too much confidence to condemn or reject such precious
truths, as are received and justified by the Children of wisdom. I have spoken
before to this phrase. In sobriety of mind, ponder this. The Scripture does not
say, that Christ did actually take and do away sin, till he came and shed his
blood for that purpose: and the object of their faith in the old Testament, was
the promise of future good things, to be done and wrought by Christ when the
fullness of time appointed came, Gal. 4.4. so that God is said to have patience
in bearing with his people till he received full satisfaction, Romans 3.25. and
this finished and plenary work of redemption, that the Gospel holds forth to
us, was the object of their hope, who only lived in a certain expectation of
it, according to the promise: yet did that faith and hope both sustain, save,
and serve them sufficiently according to that their condition, wherein it
pleased the Father to place them. Their Gospel in brief was, That Christ should
appear and take away sin: ours now is, That he is come and has done it: he
loved us and has washed us from our sins, Rev. 15. they had the promise of
this; but we the performance. This might content an indifferent mind. The Sun
of righteousness was not risen in their days, Mal. 4.2. I hear of another of
better abilities and helps, who is much engaged in this controversy, and has
promised to vindicate both the Honey Comb, and D. Crisp: I shall not prevent him.

What D. Crisp asserteth, is solid and clear; neither do you bring any thing of
any great force to overthrow it. I perceive his Scriptures and reasons to prove
them two distinct Covenants, carry such light and weight in them, that you have
little mind to meddle with them. And to the judicious, yourdealing her is
neither satisfactory nor son.

You tell of a heap of fulshoods and much error in few lines; but make not one
truly to appear. Also you cannot justify your charge afterward: for he says
not that all the legal sacrifices were only for sins of mere ignorance:
but alleging that place, Numb. 15.28. and ver. 20. The soul that sins
presumptuously shall dye: Here, says the Doctor, is a sacrifice for sins of
ignorance, but that soul that sins presumptuously shall dye, no sacrifice
for that. The Scripture is plain, and will bear him out, in all that he
infers from it. See your many errors and mistakes in this. 1. He says,
Here, Numb. 15.28. is a sacrifice for sins of ignorance; and so there is: but
your charge is, that he says, All legal Sacrifices were for sins of mere
ignorance. 2. That they were only for those sins. 3. You put in the word mere,
which he uses not: Is this candid, or as a Minister? let me ask, Was there
not diverse sins, for which no sacrifices could be admitted? and again, was
not pardon of sin sued out upon those sacrifices that God required? If you
grant those two, as the evidence of truth in them will prevail and enforce so
far, then I see no cause herein to except against the Doctor.

Mr. B. Obj. Christ the true satifice was represented in every sacrifice, and
all the virtue and benefit to come from Christ's blood: and then could not that
take away all sin, as well as some?

Answ. It Is true, Christ was represented, and sufficient virtue from his blood
to take away that sin the party then was guilty of, and was troubled with: but
the blood of Christ was not held out in every particular sacrifice, to expiate
all sins present, past, and to come, as in the time of the Gospel. Even as the
brazen serpent was erected to cure as they were wounded, and in the sense of
their fear and smart made use of it: therefore you are too rash in saying,
Unless the Antinomian Author were a Socinian, he can never expedite himself.

Mr. B. In the new Testament is there not the sin against the Holy Ghost, for
which no pardon is promised?

Answ. What is this against the Doctor, or to the point in hand? The Doctor
speaks of the sins of the Elect of God: (for who else receive forgiveness?)
and of the manner of Gods dispensing pardon to them, how differing it was from
this under the Gospel; but the sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, and
therefore the Elect are kept from falling into it.

Moreover, as I conceive, The differences which the Doctor insisteth on, are to
be understood in regard of the application of the sacrifice and blood of
Christ, and that not only on man's part through faith; but on Gods part also,
in his Ordinances and manner of administration. The Apostle in the Epistle to
the Hebrews brings all, or the main and most differences between the Churches
state, before and after Christ's death, unto the condition of the conscience,
which could not be peaceable, comfortable, and joyful under the old Testament,
because there was still on Gods part new remembrance of sin, and so also
sacrifices appointed to be offered upon the commission of fresh and new sins.
And God did not appear unto them, neither could they in conscience so receive
and apprehend him, as actually satisfied and reconciled, till after their
sacrifices: but now Christ by one sacrifice and offering of himself, has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified; so there is no remembrance of sin,
for God has said, that in his Son he is well pleased, and that for ever.

So that the opposition is not only as you say, between Christ and those
legal sacrifices, being considered and used without him, or without faith in
his blood: (for so they were effectual to take away no sin at all, whenas yet
it is said in many places of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that they did, though
not to the perfecting of the conscience, in that there was a remembrance of sin
again) but it is evident to be between the estate of the Church in the days of
Moses, and now after Christ's resurrection, which is the time of reformation:
Christ by his eternal spirit having offered himself without spot to God by his
blood, to purge the conscience from dead works to serve the living God. And
hereby all may see how insolid, impertinent, and vain all your reply is. First,
The blood of Christ in the virtue and efficacy of it, did extend and reach unto
those times also, and did cleanse from all sin; but God did so carry it, that
he was pleased to reveal and apply this his grace unto them as they needed. All
pardons by Christ were purchased which they had; but these unsearchable riches
of forgiveness, peace, favor, adoption, and inheritance were manifested and
dispensed by some and some, as Fathers do things of worth by small pittances at
once unto their Children. Secondly, It Is true, in this is no difference between
the faithful Jews then, and Christians now, that all the good God did to
either was only for his own names sake, and no good in them, and so are
prevented by him, in being made his people freely and of free grace. Yet while
God did govern his Church under the Law, most of his favors and good thing, he
(after they became his) did tender, dispense, and communicate, upon antecedent
conditions. So that although they were Children and free, yet their state and
manner of education was servile. And in the way of their obedience therefore
they received their peace, the conscience whereof gave them boldness toward
God. And yet if God veiled his Paternity, graciousness, and favor, as sometimes
Parents do not show the like pleasant countenance to their Children, when they
have not carried themselves dutifully, It will not follow then, that God
cease to love them, but is wise in the opportune manifestation of his love.
Thus it is a perpetual truth indeed, That Christ's sacrifice was as efficacious
to those before his death, as those after, viz. to procure and purchase all
things necessary to salvation: but these treasures being in the Fathers
keeping, he did dispose and dispense them as he pleased, more sparingly then,
then now.

LECT. XXVI.
Romans 3.27. Where is beasting theu? etc.


WHatever your reason or ends may be for it, yet I see not any good or
warrantable ground thus to take and handle the Law and Gospel in a large sense,
as you say: and when you have done. I would know what of the Gospel you
conceive to be legal, and how much Law you take to be Evangelicall. Also you
prefixe a Text as your foundation, but the discourse you erect does not touch
it, is not at all supported by it, but stands like a Castle built in the Air.
Neither do I find the Lutherans posing the Calvinists about the Law in this:
for both affirm the Law to be a Covenant of works, and superadded to the
promise; holding forth all favor and peace upon such hard conditions to the
Jews, that they might experimentally be convinced of their folly in seeking it
by their own righteousness. You must go over it again, else what is done will
not serve to prove Moses Law a Covenant of grace. Indeed we grant the godly
Jews did enjoy what Christ premised: but it was by such Ordinances as were of
grace, and not of works, as is the Law: they eyed or looked at Christ in the
promises, and not in precepts.

And as you began, so you proceed; laying down differences, not between the Law
and Gospel, but between Gospel and Gospel, I mean the administration of grace
before and now, of which others have writ more particularly, plainly and
profitably. Then you tell us, They Jews had a twofold consideration, 1. as
being servile; another as being Sons, but under age. Now that is it that we
say, As Sons they were free, for they were so by Christ promised; but their
condition was servile, and their immunities and privileges were in a great
part veiled and kept from them.

But note that the Mosaicall pedagogy is antiquated: what need was it to handle
law or Gospel otherwise then in their strict and proper sense? To run over
every thing, is long and tedious. What is said by you of these differences, may
be granted with these two exceptions; first, that the law strictly taken, is
not as you say, only for those who have a perfect and holy nature; Paul does
directly cross and contradict it, saying, The Law is not made for the
righteous, but for the Lawless and disobedient. 1 Timothy 1.9. And Adam was not
charged with this law in his integrity, but had a Law touching a thing in its
own nature indifferent: for the keeping of this law was then natural to him,
as is flying to a Bird, and bearing fruit to a Tree, or Herb. Also it is
clear that the law was added because of transgression, Gal. 3.19. as, if there
had been no sin, there should have been no occasion of giving the law. And
this contradicts your self elsewhere, affirming the Law to be an effectual
instrument to regenerate and sanctify. Now who needs to be regenerated and
sanctified? he that has a perfect and holy nature, or he that is a sinner and
impure? if you think otherwise, what a deceiver are you, when you would
persuade the filthy and the vile, that they may be changed and renewed by the
Law of works? And thus as your fourth difference is utterly false, so your
third is found to be defective, and not plenary: for all is of grace. It is the
Gospel or word of grace that justifies and sanctifies. God in that
ministration we live under, is a free giver; and man, a mere receiver: for God
having discovered and made bare the root and heart of man, so as he sees his
spiritual poverty and wretchedness by his Law, does then open his graciousness
and his bountiful hand by his Gospel, that the believing soul may be satisfied
with his goodness in every kind. So that now as a Beggar he must live by Alms
of Divine liberality, being thus made to walk humbly with his God. Open thy
mouth, and I will fill it, Psa. 81.

2. And in your last difference, you set up and pull down, say and unsay. At
first you tell us, The Law is conditional, but the Gospel absolute: but this
is too clear a ground for you to abide upon: therefore presently you say, I
find this question a troublesome one. Thus you trouble your self and others
without cause. Repentance and faith are no Gospel-conditions, but are said to
be the reason and end of the preaching of the Gospel: It is preached that men
may repent and believe, Romans 16.26. Luke 14.47. yea, and that they may be holy
too, Tit. 2.12. Ephesians. 4.22. Secondly, The Gospel is the seed of them all, as
is to be cleared afterward: they all grow and arise out of the doctrine of
grace: how then can they be conditions of it? for what is a condition, but that
which is necessarily required that a thing may be so? so that it will follow:
It is no Gospel, where there is no faith or repentance, or at least none
preached to me. What am I called upon to believe then? The Gospel is the object
of faith, and in believing are we said to receive and obey it, 2 These. 1.8. The
Gospel offers pardon, favor and eteruall life to sinners, that they may
come, receive, and partake of all freely; yea, beseeches men to be reconciled;
And does not bid them go and get repentance, and faith, and holiness elsewhere,
as they can: and then upon condition they bring these, they shall be forgiven
all their sins, be reconciled and saved by the Gospel. Indeed where God makes
the Gospel to be effectual, there it brings forth these fruits, there is
repentance and says to believe: and it gives no peace nor consolation to any,
but the believing soul: so as faith is after the hearing of the Gospel, so
comfort is after faith, Romans 15.13. The God of all hope fill you full of peace
and joy in believing. In order one precedes another. Gospel is preached before
Faith, that men may believe: and then comes peace and consolation upon
believing. But who would argue hence, that Faith is a condition of the Gospel,
or Peace a condition of Faith? They denote a certain Order, that God is
pleased to set and observe in his works and dispensations.

As for Mortification and Sanctification you speak of, they are the effects of
the Gospel: for the soul thereby called and implanted into Christ, begins to
dye unto all things, and to live only unto Christ and God in him; so increasing
with the increasings of God, Col. 2.19.

And Repentance admits of diverse considerations, in regard of some whereof
it is Legal, and of others Evangelical: but of this next Lecture.

LECT. XXVII.
Romans 3.27. Where is boasting? It is excluded, etc.


IF this Question, Whether the Gospel preach Repentance or no, be as you
affirm the foundation of Antinomanisme, It then much concerns you in this to
play the man, that the foundation being razed, all may fall to confusion: and
this the rather also, in that you say, that this made the great commotion at
first, between the Orthodox and the Antinomians.

Before I entermeddle with this dispute, let me deliver my opion. Which is,
That Repentance cannot be said properly to be the doctrine of the Law: and yet
the Law is not by this wholly excluded, as you say it is by the old
Antinomians: whom you mean, or what their Tenets were, I know not, neither
think it much material. I shall love the truth in any, and maintain them no
further. Now my inducement hereunto is, because the Law never mentions
Repentance, nor has any word to exhort and call thereunto. It works indeed
preparatorily in the soul, by revealing sin and misery, so as a man finds
himself undone, without help or hope, in great distress: but this is not
Repentance: for here Man is a Patient, being convinced subdued and brought in
his spirit under the work of the Law. And this may well be called the former
Mortification, which is not of sin in Man, but in the Man for sin, as Romans
7.11. But to repent is an act, a thing to be done, put upon man being plunged
into this great depth of woe and horror, as a hopeful and initial mean to
obtain mercy, pardon and salvation: this is clear to me, from Act. 2.37, 38.
Where those Jews being beaten down, and exceedingly terrified in the conscience
of that horrid fact, the killing of the Lord of Life, and crying out as sinking
in despair for advice and council, presently Peter said unto them, Repent,
etc. whence I collect with Ambrose, that all that former sight and sense of sin
and legal terror was no part of Repentance: It was yet to begin: yea, and
secondly, It was prescribed as the first course to be taken, with hope of
recovery. Not that Repentance was in their or any man's power; for it is God
that gives it, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.3. None are bid to Repent, without a promise of
mercy annexed withal to move him to it; which promise holding forth the grace
of the Gospel, is doubtless first hearkened unto, received and credited: and so
the burdened conscience conceiving now a good hope through Faith in this
promise, begins to repent and seek unto the Lord. Hence Isaiah says, chap.
55.7. Let the wicked man return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him:
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. and Joel 2.13. Rent your hearts,
and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, etc. So that to me it is clear, that in order of nature the doctrine
that holds forth the graciousness of the Name and nature of God in Christ,
(in whom he is propitious) ought first to be published; both because our
conceits naturally are, that God will not favor and receive sinners, but the
just and good are they only, unto whom the promises of acceptance and blessing
do belong: And also in that God, in that Ministry of the Law, has already
appeared unto the dejected soul in another form, and under a contrary notion,
revealing wrath, threatening a casting off, and shutting up all mercies in
displeasure against it because of sin; for how else possibly can these natural
and inbred conceits and imaginations of God be raised out of the mind, and the
soul be persuaded, that notwithstanding and beyond all that it apprehends of
God in his Law, and is become sensible of, yet there is hope of mercy,
forgiveness and redemption with the Lord? So that the effectual and immediate
incentive and introduction to repentance, and turning to God, is the promise of
Grace by Jesus Christ. When Benhadad King of Syria and his servants being in
great strait and danger of losing their lives considered what they had heard of
the Kings of Israel, how that they were merciful; see their humble resolution.
Let us put (ackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the
King of Israel, 1 King. 20.31. But on the other side, Adam not so conceiving of
God, out of the inward privity of his disobedience, and being then altogether
ignorant of any mercy to be showed by God in that way, that afterward God
acquainted him with; he in stead of repenting and falling down in a sorrowful
confession of what he had done, and crying peccavi, In his inward horror and
fear ran away, hid himself, and then would fain have excused the matter. Now
if the way be thus freely set open for all, he that comes not in is
inexcusable: and he that desires may come: but this is not, that any soul
should rest contented with hearing that it may be freely welcome; but that it
come indeed, and so it find an effectual entrance into that state and kingdom
of Grace: for too many do hover, and dally with these weighty things: and the
inward terrors ceasing to pursue the soul to the utmost, the bare knowledge,
and having of the letter of this word of Grace suffices them, being never
truly converted, healed, and comforted. And this is the main reason of their
hankering after the legal way, for a supply of what they want, or of turning
this Grace into wantonness.

So that I cannot but marvel, that you, or any experienced Christian should so
oppose D. Crisp, (whom the Lord raised up, and used as a choice instrument to
open this free way to poor sinners, that if God had given them a heart to come,
whatever their sins were, they might come and welcome, and nor be rejected nor
denied what they defired) as if his doctrine were against repentance; whereas
it tends to breed and bring forth true Repentance, not to be repented of. I
had thought to have writ a Treatise only upon this Subject, seeing how
opposite men's minds are to that so acceptable truth of God. Who will seek unto
him that smites him, humbling, and casting down himself at the foot of the
Lord willingly, if he do not first hear and know, that God pardons iniquity,
and delights in showing mercy? God draws the froward heart of man with the
Cords of his love, and overcomes his evil and rebellious nature, by showing
and commending his kindness, even as afterward he frames their heart, and
puts his own into the same way, to follow him in laboring to overcome evil
with good, Romans 12.21. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

And lastly, who will not be contented to be numbered amongst transgressors,
yea and willingly sit down with the greatest and chief of sinners, when he
hears that God is merciful to sinners, justifies the ungodly, and where
sin abounds, makes his Grace to abound the more? thereby taking occasion
to manifest and magnify his graciousness in the eyes of all the World, as Romans
5.20. Ephesians. 2.7. Ephesians. 1.6. By this you may see still, that the Law excludes
and keeps out the sinful soul: and that it may convert and turn unto God, the
word of his Grace only is to be preached. Now I come to consider what you
write.

Mr. B. The word [repentance] is taken sometime largely, and sometime strictly.

Answ. By what is said, It is apparent that repentance may be taken, as it is
often, for the whole turning to God, because after the soul apprehending its
danger, and seeing no hope of safety any way else, yet hearing what is reported
of Gods Grace in Christ, to poor, wretched and lost sinners; It is moved, drawn
and persuaded (through the hand and mean of Faith taking hold hereon) to
repent, and cry unto God for mercy and pardon: so that sorrow and tears arising
from the sight of his forlorn condition, is but the pining away in their
iniquities, does hasten death, and to tend utter despair.

2. Your second position, as it may be construed, shall pass now; somewhat being
before to like effect, and the subserviency of the Law as preparatory being now
granted by you.

3. Your third conceit is ambiguously and confusedly set down; but enough has
been said about it, viz. That neither repentance, nor the Faith of the Elect
can be said to be wrought by the Law. As for that legal Faith you mention, it
may be in a Reprobate, and of it self it is the mother and breeder of despair.
If you or others will have a legal repentance, meaning thereby that conviction,
fear, or trouble wrought by the Law when it reviveth sin, or at most such as is
ascribed to Judas, from whom by inward force and violence was squeezed out that
confession, I have sinned, etc. by a heavy hand upon his conscience, as to
clear the innocence of Christ, so partly may be in hope by that venting, to
find some ease and mitigation of anguish within: (which yet is not that in
question) I shall not much contend about words: so we accord in the thing: but
then you are to know, this is (...), not (...).

Also besides that Faith or persuasion of mercy in God according to his
promise, there is also another special Faith after the soul is come in to God,
which is an effectual that the parties sins are done away, God reconciled, and
he accepted: and so this being the end of his coming, his desire is satisfied;
and now follows, as it is called, another Repentance upon this, for now the
love of God enters, and is shed out into the soul by the Holy Ghost, which
does marvellously refresh and stablish the heart, and renew and inflame it with
love reciprocal unto God, who has appeared in such mercy and kindness: and
thus is the soul in love gained and given up to be the Lords, and to serve him
in holiness and righteousness without fear all the days of his life: thus Luke
7. she loved much in affection and expression, who had received forgiveness of
many sins: and this renovation and change of mind, does far exceed your
legal reformation, which you so much press and stand for.

Mr. B. 4. Unbelief is a sin against the Law, as well as against the Gospel.
The Gospel declares the object of justifying Faith, but law condemns for not
believing in him, etc.

Answ. I question whether the Law condemn for positive infidelity, or for not
believing in Christ. Under favor, I am of that mind, that the Law only
condemns for the not believing or obeying of those things which the Law
propounds. Now the Law propounds not Christ to be believed on: besides, your
doctrine is, that Christ is to be propounded to none, but the broken in spirit,
the penitent, and I know not how otherwise qualified. And I see not then but
the Law should condemn for not being broken and penitent first, and for not
believing after. I confess the same God requires Faith to whatsoever he shall
speak by Law or Gospel; but by the Law I can be bound only to believe those
things the Law declares unto me. Legal doctrine requires a Legal, but not
an Evangelicall Faith. Whatever the Law says, it says it to them that are
under the Law: But you present us with much strange divinity; so this is most
uncouth to me, and untrue, That the Law should be enlightened by the Gospel, and
so fasten a new Command upon us: how differs this opinion from that of
theirs, who say, Christ added to the Law? which you say yet is infected with
Socinian poison, page 243.

LECT. XXVIII.
Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law, etc.


Mr. B. TAke notice of a foul error of an Antinomian, who denying assurance
and comfort by signs of grace labors to prove that an unregenerate man may
have universal obedience, and sincere obedience; bringing in this instance of
the Jews, Romans 10.3. Your answer is, that the Jews zeal was not Hypocritical,
because they did not go against conscience: but it was not sincere, in that it
was not a true gracious zeal.

Answ. The Author you mean would have you leave the streams and those waters
which are questionable and impure, and to seek to the first rise and
Springhead, where the water flows out freely, purely, and in an undoubted
truth. What foul error is this, if prejudice be not? 2. He speaks of Legal
obedience, such as was this their zeal in seeking to establish their own
righteousness: and you tell of sincerity taken for the truth of grace, whereby
the soul is freely subjected to the Gospel, and submits to the righteousness
thereof (for so I would fain understand you) which is passive, and not active:
thus far then you are wide.

Mr. B. page 257. I shall explain that place, 2 Cor. 3.7. because it may be
wrested by the Antinomian, as if the law were to be abrogated.

Answ. I wish the Scriptures were not more perverted by your self: you
pretending to fear others, are too confident in your self: you may see, if ye
will, the men you fear are better establishers of the Law, then who opposes
them: How is it that still you so mistake both them, and your self?

2. You give an undue exposition, but explain not, but rather do involve the
place in greater obscurity: for, say you, --

Mr. B. The intent of the Apostle is to show the excellency of the Ministry of
the Gospel, above that of the Law, and that in three respects, 1. In regard one
is the Ministry of death and condemnation, the other of life and
righteousness, therefore one called Letter, the other Spirit: which you must
understand warily, taking the Law nakedly, without the Spirit of God, and the
Gospel with the Spirit: for as Beza observes, Gospel without Gods Spirit, is
also the Ministration of death, etc. and what good is wrought by the Law, it
comes from the Spirit of Christ. 2. In regard of continuance. The Ministry of
Moses, understanding it of the Jewish pedagogy, was to be abolished: not the
Moral part, which still obliges Christians: but Gospel abides for ever. 3.
In regard of glory, God caused some material glory to shine upon Moses, etc.
but what comes by the Gospel, is spiritual.

Answ. Both Beza, Piscator, and Augustine, Collatio^st cb ipsa substantia
Ministerii sumpla.
and the express words in the text, do make it more then manifest, that the
Apostles comparison is taken from the very substance of Moses Ministry, to
wit, the Moral Law, and not that part only which is Ceremonial, as you would
have it: for verse 7. it is called that Ministry that is written and engraven
in stones. Whence it is easy to gather that Paul speaks not of the
Ceremonial, Impressum and insculptum; ex hoc locoisacile colligitur Paulum,
non agere de Ceremoniis, sed de ipse Decalego. B.
but Moral part: for it was the Decalogue that was so written and delivered in
Tables of Stone.

2 Your words imply, that there is no difference in truth and strict sense,
between Law and Gospel, so that the Spirit be taken with them both; which
directly contradicts the Apostle, who calls one the Ministry of death and
condemnation, and the other of life and righteousness: for the Spirit working
by the Law, does kill and condemn, and therefore is also called a Spirit of
boudage, Romans 8.15. but the Spirit by the Gospel quickneth and gives life,
being a Spirit of Adoption and liberty. The Spirit is one and the same, but the
Ministrations be different: and so are the effects produced by either. You say
the difference is, because Christ the Author of the Gospel is the fountain of
Life, But is not Christ the Author of the Law also? He is called the lawgiver.
And though Christ be the Author of Life, yet you cannot show where the Law is
called the Ministry of Life, as if Christ did use it to convey and give Life.
Also to say that the Spirit quickens by the Law, is to enforce a sense flatly
against the Apostle. Moreover your expressions do make the place more obscure
and dark, in telling us that the Gospel also without Gods Spirit, is the
Ministration of death, because it is as impossible to believe, as to obey the
Law. Whereas Paul therefore calls the Gospel the Ministration of
righteousness and life, in that the Spirit thereby begets faith in the
hearts of the Elect, whereby they come to righteousness and life. So Piscator.
The Law then having the Spirit working by it, kills, as we see in Paul. Romans
7. But the Gospel makes alive, justifying all the Elect of God.

2. You fail much in your second respect also, for 1. as is proved and cleared,
that the opposition is chiefly between the Moral Law, and the Gospel. 2
However in a proper and true sense the Law is done away in the kingdom of
Christ, yet where infidelity is, the Law remains: but where the word of
righteousness and life is, there can the Ministry of sin and death have no
place, even no more then the darkness of midnight has at noonday: but
spiritual things are spiritually discerned.

3. Paul intends that glory to be of the Law, whereas you interpret it to be
that accidental glory which did shine upon Moses. A word of these things shall
suffice.

LECT. XXIX.
Matthew. 5.17. Whosoever shall break one of these least, etc.


SEe and consider the words of the Prophet, Psalm. 7.14 15, 16. This Lecture,
above all yet, shows much gall to be in your ink. Now your task is near an
end: The residue is but to make a grave or ditch for your Antinomian, and to
describe and delineate the man, that all mistake being prevented, he may
forthwith be sentenced and sent to his appointed place: but stay: Where, or who
is he? You are in a golden dream.

Mr. B. When there shall be a reformation, and truth break forth, etc. then
those corrupt Teachers, who would poison men, should be discovered, and be of
least, that is, of no account.

Answ. Seeing this will be when the truth breaks forth, Now Lord send forth
thy light and thy truth, that all false teachers and doctrines of lies and
vanities may be put to shame and confusion. And if your dream be true, look to
your self. You fear not, perhaps presuming upon your own supposed innocence,
external sanctity, the present state of our times, the reputation you are in,
the authority and multitude of your combined fraternity, etc. as being now set
upon a mountain that will never be moved. But the Church, the Truth, and
quarrel is Gods. He is strong that is Judge, to put down the mighty from their
seats, to scatter the imaginations of the proud, and to return all the
intended evil upon the head of the authors and devisers. In him the fatherless
find mercy, he preserves the simple and meek that trust in him.

Read Isa. 66.5. Hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble at his word: Your
Brethren that have cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy and they shall be ashamed: and Joh.
16.2.3. Some look for no better from your hands, if left unto your will: and
have already sound the like dealing: for the Scripture must be verified.

Mr. B. They overthrow the law, when they hold such principles that will
necessarily by way of consequence infer the abrogation of the Law. And thus
though some Antinomians do expressly and boldly assert the abolishing of it, at
least to believers. Yet others, etc. disclaiming it, held such assertions as
necessarily infer the abrogation of it.

Answ. You cannot prove and make it appear, that any do assert the abolishing
of it; so it may be taken for a slander and false accusation. 2. In way of
correction, as having overshot your self, and would eat some of your Words, You
say, At least to believers. Now first, What need believers a Law? so far as
believers, they live by Faith, and walk by Faith, yea and war by Faith. 2.
The Law affords nothing to nourish or supply any defect in the Christians
Faith. 3. Yet you nor none can directly and duly infer hence, that they do
abrogate the Law: so much now to vindicate them. But to return your words upon
your self. I think that you do hold such principles that necessarily by way of
consequence, at least, do abrogate the Law, yea, and make void repentance in
great part after Faith is come, and bring in carnal security and a false peace
into the soul; for one principle of yours is. That direction and obligation to
obedience be the sole essential constitutes of the law. So that that which
condemns, justifies, promises and threatens, is not properly the Law: but
it has been not only asserted, but proved already, that these are as
assential to a Law as the former. Again, What will you call that which does
condemn, and promise favor and peace to the good, if it be not Law? I am sure
it is no Gospel: have you a third name for it? 2. Whence have these power to
condemn, etc. if no Law be in them? The Scripture faith, The Law does curse,
reveal wrath, etc. I argue thus: Whosoever denies the Law a power to condemn
and justify, he destroys the Law: But Mr. Burg. denies this to the Law:
Therefore Mr. B. destroys and abrogateth the Law, and so is the true
Antinomian, and least in the kingdom of God. This is so plain, that I leave it
to your consideration, with what has been said formerly. In the next place you
say, The Law has power over a believer, to direct, command, and oblige to
duty, but not to condemn. Now I reply, Suppose a believer has no will nor
disposition to obey in some things, or at sometimes; has the Law no further
power to threaten and condemn? then the Law will soon become an Aesops block,
vilified and brought into contempt. Also grant a believer having the spirit, is
freely disposed and willing to obey, yet his obedience will be but partial and
defective: and if then the Law have no power to accuse and threaten in that way
of new obedience, he may trust henceforth in his own works, have his peace in
that way of duty, (and not by his Faith in Christ) and thus grow self-consident
and secure: but Paul who consented to the Law, delighted in it, etc. yet in
that he attained not to that perfect righteousness of it, cried out, Oh
wretched man that I am, Rom 7.24. And if the curse be now gone to a believer,
from the Law, what further use or need has he of his justification, and of the
preserving and maintaining his continual peace only thereby? Lastly,
Confession of sin, self-humiliation, self-judging and condemning the accounting
of our own righteousness as dung, the fear of it, and the constant desire to be
still found in Christ, not having our own righteousness, etc. these will have
no more place in us. What need Noah to keep in the Ark, if there be no drowning
waters without? what need Christ a refuge or protection, where no power of the
Law is to pursue, nor no danger to be feared?

These and many such like be the consequences and fruit of your doctrine or
assertions. And note, that either to curse, etc. is not so much as an Iota or
tittle of the Law, (a hard thing to affirm, much more to prove) or you offer
too much violence to the good and inviolable law of God, in daring to part and
separate these from the Law every whit of it being imperishable: and incur that
danger your self, as Mal. 5.17, 18. Yet you have such an evil eye and spite
against us, that you say, page 269.

Mr. B. The Antinomians do more fall against this text then any, who teach the
disobligation, not only of the least Command, but of the whole Law.

Answ. The contrary is apparently true, let the judicious Christian Reader,
looking through all our discourse hitherto, judge how untrue and unreasonable
your charge is. The law binds continually to duty and to the curse for the
least failing: And faith uncessantly acquitteth and loses, sets free the
soul, like those two keys which Christ left to his Church to continue with it
until the end. In the law I am bound, in faith set free.

M. B. It argues impudency of those who would make Luther on their side
because of his 6. disputations against the Antinomians.

Answ. But if his disputations be against the Antinomians, then they may be
against your self, and in no wise against us: we establish and maintain the law
in the utmost extension. 2. You show nothing asserted by any you quarrel
withal, which in effect may not be found in Luther; so that he is for them. 3.
Yet it is not his opinion, but the truth we contend for. And whose those
scattered Propositions were, that you have so collected, I know not: but with a
good construction, diverse of them may be received and justified. And are held
affirmatively by such as are not suspected guilty of Antinomianisme.

You spare not still to take and scrape together what you can to make us
odious, that we may be utterly cashiered; saying, Luther calls those Hosts
legis organa Satanae, quid furores Antinomorum: their doctrine is more to be
taken heed of, then Papists. And also present the world afresh with those
unfavoury and false records of D.T. M.B. which two have writ more then you lift
to defend, Psalm. 52.2.
or they could justify: yet you love to have a hand in their sin: and had
rather side with them, whose Tenants are so erroneous and unsound, then give a
favorable construction to one more Orthodox then your self. But I see great
mercy from the Lord shining through this thick and dark cloud of your malice.
You are witnesses to your selves, says Christ, That ye are the children of
them who killed the Prophets -- Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers,
Mat. 23.31, 33.

M. B. In their Books every Error is more warily dressed, then in secret.

Answ. And still no Error can come to light. 2. The Proverb is true, You muse,
as you use. I think your ordinary, or Pulpit-divinity, is more gross, or not
so pure, as we find you here: and yet upon you review, this may be
reproveable. If your you can see in secret, you may judge what is done in
secret, as God does; else, De secret is now judicat Ecelesia.

M. B. It cannot be denied but in some parts of their books be some good
passages: as in a wood full of brambles be some violets and primroses.

Answ. What wise man, so clear sighted as your self, would not gather the
fragrant and useful flowers, and forbear rather wholly to meddle with the
bushes, then so to trouble, prick, and endanger himself, as you have here done?

M. B. The Author of the Assert. of grace disclaims the opinion against the
law, yet there affirms such principles, from whence this conclusion will
necessarily follow.

Answ. It is but your conceit of such a conclusion: to make it indeed, you must
be forced to add of your own unto the premises: but proceed to justify your
Accusation.

M. B. For first, he makes no real difference either in Scripture, or use of
words, between the law reigning and ruling; so that if the Law rule a man it
rules over him: now then they deny the law to reign over a believer, therefore
they must needs hold it cannot be a rule.

Answ. If your Adversary say there is no real difference between reigning and
ruling. It is your part, who oppose him, to make the difference appear by
Scripture, or some way else: but this you do in no place, so often as you
repeat it; which makes me think verily you cannot. And you are not of that
credit with me, that your bare word can carry it. Yet since you thus slightly
pass over that which you make the main ground of your oppsition, and this
failing all you say falls to nothing; I yet shall add a little, to occasion
and provoke more diligence and better inquisition hereafter. 1. I argue thus.
To grant or leave unto God only a power to rule in his law, and to deny him
the reigning power, is to make God in his law like an inferior Magistrate, who
has no Sovereignty by right ascribed to him. 2. That God makes, and imposes
his law with such a command to be obeyed in it, does argue his Sovereignty in
his law, and man's subjection to him in it, as his Sovereign. But. 3. In the
Scripture Language and use, I find no difference between them. Psalm. 103.19.
It is said, The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom
rules over all. Is not this all one with Reigns? Psalm. 110.2. God says to
Christ, Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. As did he not rule and reign
as Lord and King? see Luke 19.14. We will not have this man reign over us: and
verse 27. Those mine enemies, that would not have me reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me; which is meant of Christ, whom the Father
appointed to be ruler over all; to that in ruling, he reigns: and they be
indifferently used still. Ezekiel. 20:33. As I live, says the Lord surely with a
mighty hand with a stretched-out arm, and with fury poured out will I rule over
you. Here is the word Rule, and yet dominion and sovereignty in ruling unto the
utmost extent. Also Rev. 2.27. and 19. 15. He shall rule them with a rod of
iron: does God rule, where he reigns not? Its a strange conceit, and a bold
assertion of you and Doctor T. let it vanish as the smoke. The law has a
kingdom, and so has Grace another: if we can discern, and distinguish the one
from the other, we need not to lessen the power of either. Lastly, And in what
sense it is said the law does not reign over a believer, in the same, and no
other may it be said, the law does not rule him: but this is not because either
reigning or ruling power be taken from the law; but that in a true and proper
sense, the Scripture affirms the believer not to be under the law, but under
Grace, Romans 6.14. He that knows not this mystery, cannot stand fast in that
liberty, wherewith Christ has made him free, nor endure in temptation.

You only and vainly repeat what you read, but consute nothing; there is
reason why: As you do not like, so you cannot oppose the clear truth: your
spirits fail you; yet add to that you bring in out of D. T. That a Christian by
Christ is freed from the law, and also freed to it, to love it live and walk in
it. In regard of that righteousness and salvation he stands in with God which
is the object of his faith, he is freed from it: but in regard of his holy and
unblamable conversation and life here below, Christ by his Spirit does set free
and enlarge the heart actively to run the way of Gods commandments, so that yet
in walking according to this rule, he is not ruled by the law, but by the
Spirit within proceeding from Christ, unto whom he stands in subjection, as
unto his Sovereign Lord and King.

I hope you will now be satisfied, and the world too, at least so far as to
account of us no more for Antinomians. If any thing yet be dark, we must
consider the Gospel is a great mystery.

You might well have kept in those reviling and hateful words, or have been
better advised ere you had shot so reproachful speeches: though they be Arrows
taken from the quivers of other men, yet is it, that you might vent some spite
by them: and when they return, you will find the point of them toward your
self.

Then you give Antidotes, where there is no danger of infection. If any need
them, he may use them in stead of better.

M. B. He sets up free grace and Christ, not who names it often his book, or in
pulpit, but whose heart is inwardly and deeply affected with it.

Answ. A private Christian, not gifted to preach or print, may be more affected
with it, then the Minister; and yet not so set it up in the hearts of others,
for want of those means of communication. 2. Out of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaks. If you were inwardly more affected with this doctrine, you
would preach and commend it more, then any other, as Paul, who desired to know
nothing but Christ Crucisied: 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 1.20.
and sought that he might be magnified, whether by his life or death: the main
subject of his ministry was the unsearchable riches in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.
Consider these words of Luther, in his preface to the Galations. In my heart
this one Article reigns, even the faith of Christ, from whom, by whom, and
unto whom, all my divine studies day and night have recourse to and fro
continually. And I perceive that I could not reach any thing near etc. But it
is a sure Argument of small reigning or power it has in that soul, whose mouth
and pen is so busied to cavil, and write against it.

Also, may not another as truly say, That he sets up the law, not who names it
often, but whose heart is most sensibly and deeply affected with the power and
inward work of it? some would be Doctors of the law, not knowing what they say,
nor whereof they affirm 1 Timothy 1.8.

And now also, who will most heartily and experimentally, set up and endear
Christ, and free grace? he who teaches the law to be only a rule of life, yet
to have no reigning power, but disableth it from cursing and condemning, so
that a man may bless himself, and find peace and rest in the righteousness of
his own works? or he that teaches that the law is ever revealing wrath,
threatening, and pursuing with the dreadful curse and vengeance all that are of
the works of the law, in that when they have done their utmost. they are come
short of what it requires: and therefore it will suffer them to have no rest
nor confidence, save in the righteousness of God by faith?

Certainly this man's doctrine will much more make Christ and Free Grace desired
and prized by all that have any discerning spirit, and a broken and believing
heart.

FINIS.
SIRS,

AS I have in part vindicated and cleared the lovely Truth, so unworthily
aspersed, and used by your hands; so in recompense of my great pains occasioned
by you, I desire that in patience you would suffer both your selves, and others
to see your own face and pourtracturei in your nature, lineaments and color,
without the least painting or mixture at all. Truth rejoices in the light. I
have only contracted, and placed together some few of your assertions that
were dispersed, (...) doubting but time may produce a fuller and more per^^^^
^^^ps^s, and Inventory.

A Model of new Divinity: or, certain Miscellaneous, Anti-evangelical,
inconsistent, or ambiguous Positions and Tenants, which the Adversaries (having
Decryed, depressed and defaced the doctrine of Free Grace) do assert,
substitute, and publish in Pulpit and Press.
Mr. Burgess.
1. THe Law includes Christ secondarily,and occasionally. 2. The Law given to
Adam, was not cursing and condemning. 3. The Law has no power to curse and
condemn, yet it has power to rule, command, and direct. 4. The Law with the
preface and promise added to it was given as a Covenant of Grace. 5. The Law is
taken most strictly, for that is mere mandatory, without any promise at all. 6.
God does use his Law, as he does his whole word, to beget and to increase the
life of Grace. 7. While a Minister is preaching any commandment, he does
thereby mould, and new-frame the heart. 8. I suppose, that Christ has obtained
of God by his death that such efficacy and virtue should go forth in the
Ministry, that whether it be Law or Gospel, the souls of men may be healed,
and converted thereupon. 9. I cannot yield to that, that the Law works only
preparatorily. 10. There was never in the Church of God mere pure Law, or mere
pure Gospel. 11. Only two things go to the essence of a Law. 1. Direction. 2.
Obligation. 12. In the Moral Law is required justifying Faith, Repentance: and
our Sacraments be commanded in the second Commandment. 13. The Moral Law
contains more then the Law of Nature. 14. Good works are necessary to
Salvation, in regard of the presence of them. 15. Our holy duties have a
promise of pardon and eternal life, not because of their worth, but yet of
their presence. 16. To every godly action thou do, there is a promise of
eternal life. 17. Goods works be conditions without which a man cannot be
saved. 18. Good works are in their own nature a defense against sin and
corruption. 19. Our good works be a motive moving God, as a King that
prefers one that saluteth him. 20. The State of reparation cannot be
absolutely said to be better then that in innocence. 21. We are not by Christ
more righteous then Adam was: or imputed righteousness, though infinite in
Christ, is only imputed to us for, that we lost and ought to have: and we need
no more. 22. The Gospel makes known Christ, and then the Law: thus as it were
illightned by the Gospel, does fasten a command upon us to believe in Christ.
Mr. Rutherf.
23. Gods decree of grace, in the execution of it, may be broken in a link by
some great sin, but Christ cannot but soder the chain, and raise the fallen
sinner. 24. The Law has power to convert by the Spirit. 25. Sinners remaining
in that damnable state, are not to believe: but as thus qualified, that is
humbled, wearied, self-condemned only. 26. Yet, though thou were upon the
borders of hell, the Gospel excepts thee not from the duty of believing, and
coming to Christ. They that sin against the holy Ghost are condemned for
unbelief. 27. Saving humiliation is conjoined with Christ.
Dr. Tayeler.
A man may get from under his dangerous state by the attaining and exercise of
three saving Graces; Faith, Repentance, and inchoate obedience. Repentance
wipes off old scores, repealeth all the actions of the Law, gets all sins
cast into the bottom of the Sea. Inchoate obedience has promise of acceptance,
and is accounted as full and complete obedience to the Law. The way to escape
the yoke and coaction of the Law, is to become a cheerful and free observer of
it. That these are not of the substance of the Law, but circumstances,
appendce, and consequences, viz. 1. That the Law yoaketh every man to a
personal performance of it. 2. To exact personal and perfect obedience upon
pain of eternal death. 3. To urge and force it self upon the conscience with
fear and terror. 4. That no life or salvation must be expected by the Law, but
by keeping it wholly and exactly. 5. That the Law arraignes and condemns the
sinner, and is the Ministry of death. Without the law no man can know what God
is, nor his worship, nor how to perform duties. Good works be conditions of
blessedness.
Mr. Bedford.
Christ has freed us, provided that men by faith lay hold on Christ keep close
to him and walk according to those rules of holiness that he has prescribed:
for in so doing, we obtain what the Law promised, life and salvation. Believers
are not under that condition of full and perfect obedience, but under a
condition of sincerity of obedience. The Law as circumstantial, viz. as it is a
covenant of life and death, is abolishod.
Mr. Bl. in sermon.
Christ came to save none but holy ones. Setting up of Familiy-duties, like the
sprinkling of the blood of the Paschal lamb, will keep out the destroying
Angel.
Mr. All. sem.
As Christ was glorified because he first glorified his Father; so we must
first glorify God by our obedience, and serve him, if we will be saved. There
is a general equity, that if God save any, he save them that serve him. To be
glorified of God, is to be received into communion, have acceptance peace of
conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, Adoption, and the inheritance: these we
shall have by honoring and serving of God here: so that by honoring God, we
do good to our selves.
Mr. No.
The law is the word of Grace that brings salvation. Grace comes by the Law
as well as by Gospel. And so expounded those Texts, Tit. 2.11. 2 Cor. 6.1. Act
20.32.
Mr. H.
God made man for happiness, and the Law must be his rule and guide unto it.
The Covenant of Grace is not absolute and free but upon condition of our good
works: or, works are considerations, or Causa sine qua non; as when a great
treasure is promised for going a hundred miles. The Covenant of works requires
perfect obedience: and the condition of the covenant of Grace is at least a
purpose and endeavor to keep the Commandments.
The Lord give us a good understanding in all things, and make us rightly to
discern between things that differ. To God belongs glory for ever. Amen.
FINIS.
Monomachia: OR, A Single REPLY To Mr. RUTHERFORD'S Book CALLED Christ's dying
and drawing of Sinners.

Vindicating and clearing only such Positions and Passages in The Assertion of
Grace, as are palpably mistaken and perverted, and so mis-called ANTINOMIAN.

Wherein also it appears, that the Adversaries dealing is neither just nor
candid.

By Robert Town.

Luke 6.22, 23. Blessed are ye when men hate you, and when they separate you,
and revile you, and cast out your name as evil for the Son of man's sake.

Rejoice ye in that day, etc. -- for after this manner their fathers did to the
Prophets.

Joh. 9 39. And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they
which see not might see, and they which see might be made blind.

James 3.14, 15. If ye have bitter envying, and strife in your hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the Truth.

This wisdom descends not from above, etc.

Qui aliorum verba calumniantur, illi art alium fingunt, ac formant sermonem,
quam ab co, quem calumniantur, est dictus Moll.

Jac. 3.14. Aemulationem dixit amaram, quia non regnat nisi dum veneno
malignitatis infecti sunt, ut omnia in amarulentiam convertant. Calv.

London, Printed by J. C. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1654.

Christian Reader,
AFter about fifteen years expectation, and the frequent threatenings of my many
Adversaries, Mr. Rutherf. Mr. Burgess.
a reply unto and a pretended confutation of my Answer to D. Tailors REGULA
VITAE, is come forth; and that from men of such eminency for learning, and
gifts, that if these cannot effect what they intended and aimed at, others, not
comparable for art, and qualifications, are not much to be feared. And yet to
say the truth, (whatever contrary thoughts may be in others, through a
different seeming light, or partiality of affection) I see nothing they write
having any power and evidence to prevail, or to convince me as guilty of the
least Antinomy, or error; but where they make any appearance of such in me, it
is there where they pervert, and palpably mistake my words, and meaning.

There is a great interval, or space of time between our comings into public
view, their printing and mine: but the reasons are, 1. It was long ere I knew,
or heard of their books. 2. I dwell in an obscure and remote place, amongst such
who little meddle with any thing controversal. 3. My bodily infirmities, and
little leisure, do much retard me. 4. And lastly my own thoughts will not
easily, nor hastily give way: but there have been diverse months. ere I could
obtain, and get free and full leave of them, to do any thing in this way of
contention; although the bent of my mind, and weapons be only defensive, and
in no wise to render my Adversaries weaker or worse, then they have manifested
themselves, without one syllable of mine. Otherwise I find it as easy to
refute, as it is to read their Objections.

In this my latter rejoydner, or reply, to M. Rutherf. Book, called, Christ
Dying, and Drawing of sinners, I have singled out, and spoken only unto such
places or passages, as he excepted against in my Assertion of Grace, not
intermedling with any thing written against M. Salmarsh, M. Den or others:
because, 1. I have not their Books, and so cannot know how heartily be deals
with them. 2. That may be clear truth to them in their own Notions, and
conceptions, which I may misapprehend or darken. 3. They are better able to
vindicate, and clear themselves, if they see occasion: and may have done so,
for any thing I know.

If my Adversary think himself wronged, or discredited hereby; I answer, I
should be sorry to stand guilty of doing that wrong to him, as he has done
against me, and the truth it self. 2. As for discredit, he knows, that the
truth when it comes forth will shame all that oppose, or contend against it:
his chief wisdom had been, not to have meddled. Otherwise I have been cautelous
in aspersing him (only sometime returning his own words, I ask, Who now is
the Antinomian, Libertine? etc.) but have tendered his credit as my own. Their
own doings have procured all unto them.

It had been much better (I am sure more easily effected, and more love had
been in it, and the peace of the Church had not been so disturbed) if they had
cast the mantle of a favorable construction upon what seeming errors, or
failings appeared in D. Crisp, and others: and given some cantion to the
people, not to mistake and abuse such words of Free Grace, and precious
consolations.

And if they will still proceed in this way, after such conviction and
evidence, they may. The Philistine, having found their Dagon fallen before the
Ark of God, yet would set it up again (a base Competitor) till it lost both
hands, and head, and nothing but a filthy stump was left. Let them presume of
parts, place, and repute in the Church (as a Knight of the Parliament said once
to me, in the same case; It makes no matter what such a man's doctrine, or
opinion be, his worth and esteem will win him the field) yet let them consider
withal, that the righteous God dwells with the humble; and sees every one
that is proud in heart, to abase him: And none, exalting himself against him
can prosper.

Indeed, as the Pharisaical, and Antichristian spirit will live and breath in
some unto the end; so the more any are found to walk in the pure steps of
Christ's, Stephens, or Paul's Ministry or Doctrine, the more will that Spirit be
disposed and ready to cavil, and except against them as Antinomians,
Libertines, Seducers, Heretics, etc. Oh how reproachful, odious, and bitter
are their words! how do they defame and declaim against us, and breath out
threatenings still, if ever the sword come into their hands! And alas, what have
we done! what error or fault do they make to appear in us! Thou may see, good
Reader, what cause and color they have.

Yet some Object, If we be not Antinomians, why do we not make it appear so?
and why do we not speak against them that are, as do others? My answer is; 1. I
hope now it is most apparent, we are not Antinomians: and that charge to be
most undue, and unjust. 2. I have preached over the whole Decalogue, and the
Lords-Prayer; And yet, they say, I cast out the law, prayor, and all duties out
of the Church: how can their mouths be stopped? 3. And in truth I know not one
Antinomian: And to rail or to speak so bitterly, and constantly against such,
and the overspreading of that sect, as do many, is to confirm that false
opinion in the hearers minds: which I wish much rather might dye, and perish.

I hear of Sects in our Land, and Kingdom, incredible for number, and nature.
And I bless God, that I am acquainted with none, that adhere to any, as I know:
for I have determined to know nothing among my people, but Christ, and him
Crucified: And I both wish and strive, that they, and I may live only by the
faith of him; for therein is all spiritual peace, rest, and consolation: and
thence freely and continually flows humility, meekness, patience, confidence,
self-denial, obedience, love, goodness. Many endeavor in vain to hammer, and
beat out an unwilling service, and ungrateful performances by a legal
Ministry: and do sometime change and reform the outward life; but the heart is
still the same, unmortified, not purified, nor pacified: God does draw his with
cords of love unto him. And the word of the Kingdom (which is the Gospel of
salvation) is like leaven hid in the Meal, which effectually alters, and
turns all into its own nature. Thus, the wisdom from above is pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits:
without partiality, whithout hypocrisy, Jam. 3.17. hence also, They shall not
hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord, Isa. 11.9. But, alas
for we, the fruit of doctrine, now a days is, That the Wolf shall not dwell
with the Lamb, etc. It is time for the Lord to put to his hand.

Reader, Thou art now to judge, and determine whose be the errors and
mistakes. Be thou wise, and impartial, and if any can in love clear them to be
mine, he may call for my retractation, and have it. The Lord keep us in that
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

Farewell.
MONOMACHIA, or, A single Reply to Mr. Rutherfords book, called, Christ's dying
and drawing of Sinners: vindicating and clearing only such positions and
passages, in the book entitled, The Assertion of Grace, as are by him palpably
mistaken and perverted: and so miscalled Antinomian.
THe first Exception that I find, is against this passage in Assert. page 37.
Holy walking and good works can no more be means, or the way to the kingdom (
as Mr. Town and other Antinomians say,) then motion within the City can be a
way to the City, in regard the man is in the City before he walk in it.

Reply. If all must be Antinomians, who so have held and said in our sense,
then you will condemn, with us all the Orthodox. But 2. If you can put a good
construction upon their words, why will not charity do the like for us? will
you be partial? 3. Where is your confutation, or conviction of error? 4. The
kingdom of grace and glory is but one in nature and kind, as all do assert: the
difference is in regard of degrees. And the entrance into it, is by
regeneration, Joh. 3.5. which is before all works; therefore we do rightly
teach, that a man must first be in the New-Jerusalem the City of God, before he
can walk in it. 5. If you will take the kingdom strictly for the future state
of glory and felicity, (which you know your Antinomians do not in this their
position) yet even then it is the free gift of God without condition of our
works, as Romans 6.23. The free gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Neque enim obedientia nostra ant causa est aut conditio, propter quam
accepti coram Dco.
As the mean through which it can be received, is Christ; so faith is the
instrument by which; as a gift is received, and taken by the hand from the
giver. Lastly, There is one in your bosom will tell you, that we are not
against good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in amongst men;
only as you grant them to be improperly conditions of life, so we according to
the Scriptures and the Orthodox, do affirm that opinion to be false and
dangerous, from which it is most hard to withdraw men's minds and thoughts, it is
so natural unto them; and in the best construction, it does obscure the free
grace of God in Christ Jesus. Importing, that Christ saves not without works:
or faith cannot receive Christ in the promise for both righteousness and life:
but he is held forth for salvation upon condition and after our good works: so
that faith also must be kept in suspense and Gods promise too, until the end
of our holy walking.

Mr. Rutherf. Neither do these places make justification and regeneration all
one, as Mr. T. with other Antinomians do: for we are not regenerated by faith,
but that we may believe: but we are justified by faith. 2. Regeneration puts
in us a new birth, the image of the second Adam: justification formally is for
the imputed righteousness of Christ, which is in Christ, not in us.

Reply. 1. You may see there (page 78.) that it is brought in as the saying of
Melancthon, whose words upon Joh. 3. are these, Christus justificationem dicit
esse regenerationem, etc. Christ says that justification is regeneration: this
is indeed to mortify the flesh, and to be renewed in Spirit. True
mortification is the sense or feeling of death, whereby the flesh is confounded
and judged: vivification is, in that death, a sense of life, peace, joy of
heart, etc.

As also of Mr. Fox, who says thus: Regeneration is not a being altered into a
new bodily substance from what we were, but a being turned by reconciliation
into a new state of grace: so as such, who were before dead to God, and
damnable creatures and children of wrath, are now accepted, purged, justified
from the malediction of original and actual sin: they who were separated from
God, are restored again into favor and grace. I could add others of as good
judgment and experience, as is any adversary.

Your reasons are invalid: for 1. If regeneration be to faith, and so be before
it, then it follows, that either we come not to Christ, and become one with
him by faith: (which elsewhere you affirm, as do others) or else regeneration
does precede our union; which is against the noon-light of Scriptures. We are
in Christ before we become new creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. Joh. 15.1, 2.

2. Then regeneration is not the begetting of man again to God, as Jam 1.18.
but a begetting of new qualities, or a renewing of Gods Image in him, who as
yet is a sinner in the state of nature, a Child of wrath, etc. And so the
accident will be before and without its proper subject: there being found the
likeness of a Son, without the Sonship itself. Or at least by your opinion
one may be regenerated, and so the Child of God, who is not as yet justified
nor in favor and acceptance with God. This is clear, if regeneration be to
faith. And then we are to believe, that we may be justified, reconciled, etc.

3. Then also, either the word is not the seed of our new birth, as 1 Pet.
1.23. or else the word is effectual to regenation without and before faith. But
the word profits not without faith, Heb. 4.2. And faith is first required to
make us Sons of God, as Joh. 1.12. The power to become the Sons of God is
given to them that receive Christ, or believe in him: so Gal. 3.26. Ye are all
the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. If by faith, then not before it.

Our second thoughts may be more satisfactory.

Mr. Rutherf. page 257. Mortification and new obedience, as Mr. T. and others
say, is but faith in Christ: and not abstinence from wordly lusts, that war
against the soul.

Reply. 1. Abstinence from worldly lusts, cannot be mortification formally and
properly so called, for it is to kill and crucify lust, Gal. 5.24. that is
more then to abstain from it. 2. Your accusation is false; for I say not so:
see the place again.

Mr. Rutherf. page 272: To repent, to mortify sin, is not to condemn all our
works, ( as Mr. T. says, Assert. page 15, 16.) righteousness, and judgment,
and our best things in us, and then by faith to flee to grace: nor is it to
distrust our own righteousness, and to embrace Christ in the promise. Because
1. this is faith, and we are justified by faith, not by repentance and
mortification: neither receive we Christ by repentance.

Reply. Your wrong is manifold: for I confound not faith and repentance: but
say, that they are inseparable in the subject, and yet to be distinguished, as
Mark 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel.

2. I do not make repentance and to mortify sin all one, as I there speak of
repentance.

3. Neither say I, that to repent and to mortify sin, is by faith to fly to
grace, embrace Christ, etc. The Law is against you as a false witness in all
these. And you cannot but perceive that I speak of that legal repentance and
mortification, which you with others so much stand for, as requisite before
faith. Which is when a man is so laid open to himself, so effectually
convinced, and wrought upon by the Law, that he sees, acknowledges, and
renounceth all things in him and done by him, as sin and abomination before
the Lord, whatever esteem he has had of them formerly, or whatever show they
may make. Yea, and as sin, the sting of death, appears and reviveth in all,
which is the very mortification, the wounding and killing of the soul, Romans
7.10. so all these seeming excellencies and good things become mortified within
him, and his heart that lived and rejoiced in them, now dies unto them:
finding nothing but vanity, sin, and death in all things out of Christ. Thus he
repents and changes his mind with shame and sorrow, that ever he so exalted
and established his own righteousness of works, as did Paul and those zealous
Jews being converted to the faith.

And because we are necessitated to carry this body of death to the grave, and
therefore sin and death will ever and unavoidably be in us and all our works;
and we can by faith in Christ alone, find true righteousness, life, peace,
confidence, joy and salvation: hence Christ is our only treasure who has our
hearts delight, and all else are renounced, and accounted as dung and dross,
Phil. 3.9. You neither may nor can rightly understand my words as spoken of
that Evangelical repentance, or mortifying of sin in life and conversation by
the Spirit, of which we read, Romans 8.13. Colos. 3.5.

Also you know, that both in the Scriptures and Authors, repentance is sometimes
taken largely, as comprehending faith also, with the effects and fruits of it:
and so it is divided into mortification and vivification. But fince all fullness
is in Christ, who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, that all our rejoicing should be in him, he that lives by faith in
him is the only mortified man, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth desired besides him.

Mr. Rutherf. page 273. There be two things in the Law. 1. The authority and
power to command. 2. To punish. page 275. Its most false that Mr. T. says, To
justify and condemn, are as proper and essential to the Law as to command. 3.
Its false that we are freed from active obedience to the moral Law, because
Christ came under the active obedience: for law requires obedience out of love.

Reply. These two authorities of the Law are repeated and inculcated by you and
Mr. Burg. usque ad nanseam. Dictator-like, you still say, It Is false, it is most
false, etc. but where is there any truth or weight in what you say against me?
I can contemn your vain and reproachful words, and do account your self-coined
distinctions as windy, without warrant and weight. You have a satisfactory
answer in my former Reply. I may challenge you to produce one syllable for a
Law commanding, without its condemning power. Remember Matthew. 5.17, 18.

2. That the Law requires obedience out of love, its true; but we work from
self-love, and for self ends, viz. that we may live thereby, and not dye. The
first Adam by his obedience might have preserved himself, in that life and
state of holiness and happiness he had by creation: but now in Christ our life
and and felicity is attained and kept by faith: we believe that we may live.
And we love and obey freely, for no such ends, as not standing and falling by
our obedience or disobedience moral. Also if our love be changed from legal
into evangelical, void of selfness, Yet that alters not the cords of the law,
nor the chains we were in; but Christ has happily freed us from them. The
change is in the true Christian, and in his estate, but you can show no change
in the Law. Neither do we destroy the Law, as you slander us again, but do
establish it by faith, Romans 3.31. Where I see that Paul preached the same way
that we do, in that he was so put to clear and vindicate his Ministry, as you
do us.

This also will serve for that exception in page 275. where you set the same
Coleworts before your Reader. It is your constant doctrine, that works have
reward here, and eternal life hereafter: and that they be conditions, and the
way to life and glory: how this will consist with faith and Christ, let all
judge.

Mr. Rutherf. page 332. Town in Assertion, page 56, 58. A believer is as well
saved already, as justified by Christ and in him. Divines say, Our life and
salvation is inchoate: but they speak of life as it is in us subject^e: Quantum
ad nos spectat, or in respect of our sense and apprehension: here in grace, our
faith, knowledge and sanctification is imperfect: but in regard of imputation
and douation our righteousness is perfect, and he that believes has life,
not, he shall have it or has it in hope only. Answ. If we have glory really
actually, perfectly, but want it only in sense, we have the resurrection from
the dead also actually: -- we want nothing of the reality of heavrn but sense:
but we are not yet before the throne. Therefore holy walking can be no way nor
condition nor means of salvation, etc. therefore no wonder they reject all
sanctification as not necessary: and teach men to loose the reins to all
fleshly walking.

Reply. Justification puts the soul into a present state of salvation. The
Scriptures are plain. He has saved us, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8. and
These things have I written unto you that believe, etc. that ye may know that
ye have eternal life, 1 John 5.13. This is the record, that God has given to
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son ver. 11. and Ephesians. 2.5. God has
quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I muse you stumble in so clear
light. Hence, says Musculus, Before God we are all that which he willed, and
also has caused us to be. Christ is not alone in his eyes, but we also are
conjoined to him. The Assertion does present you with testimonies sufficient.
you believe so far as you see and feel. If you deny our perfection in Christ
our head ( In whom we are complete Col. 2.10) deny also our union with him,
that we have received him, have him, are now the Sons of God, 1 John 3.2. Yea,
then deny that God has given us as yet Christ, and life in and with him: but
all is still kept in suspense, and reserved till future. So where the Spirit of
truth says, God has given unto us Christ and eternal life in him, your Ghost
says, nay, but he will, his promise is de futuro: give us them upon condition
of our good works, and by them as a way we must come to Christ and salvation.
God has conveyed and given nothing by promise. There is no Christ nor life in
reality and substance communicated by the word and Sacrament: these are empty
shells. The just lives by faith, what feeds he on to nourish and increase
life? what on the Wind? well, you teach that we must live in hope to have all
in the end, upon condition of our obedience and service. And for this reason
you call upon men to work and please God. But the truth says, Christ has
received all for us: and we enjoy all in him.

You say, that because we hold works are no conditions of salvation, therefore
we loose men's reins to carnal walking. Its a Popish cavil or slander, And
argues a spirit in the Author too servile and mercenary, which will do no good
but for lucre, and to gain by it, and such a spirit must needs accompany your
doctrine.

Mr. Rutherf. page 463. Mr. T. says, In sanctification as well as in
justification, we are mere patients and can do nothing at all: and page 464.
The blessedness of man is only passive, not active in his holy walking.

Reply. As this is objected in your other book, so you have your answer to it.
But my words are in Assert. page 68. What can you do to the sanctifying or
changing of your self, more then in your justification? Its Gods act to
sanctify throughout, you cannot make one hair white or black: Who would think
that Mr. Rutherf. would quarrel with this? You alter my words, to make them
capable of your gloss and sense. But all men may see that I speak of the act of
sanctification, and not of the expression and fruits of it. If you can
sanctify your self in whole or part, glory in your freewil and power: but that
is the greatest arrogance of Antichrist, says one. So I leave you, with your
absurdity unto the worlds censure: you show neither text or reason against me.

2. And that blessedness is passive and not active in holy walking, you must
grant: or when you say any thing against it, deserving or requiring it, you may
then expect your answer. Blessedness in holy walking is declarative showing how
God has renewed, and enlarged the heart: but that phrase is yours, not mine.

Mr. Rutherf. Town the Antinomian said, Page 501.
David confessed his sins, not according to truth and the confession of faith,
but from want and weakness of faith, etc.

Reply. My words are David prayed that his sins might be pardoned; which you
grant were pardoned. Now then did he thus pray according to truth and the
confession of faith; or from want or weakness of faith, and of the effectual
apprehension of forgiveness? Is not Mr. Rutherford now the Antinomian, who
against Law so palpably mistakes his Adversary? There is great difference
between confessing of sin, and praying for pardon. If God, my own conscience,
men, yea Satan require that I confess my self a sinner, I shall readily do it:
for this is to justify God in his Law, saying, There is none righteous, etc.
And this may well stand with my faith, and effectual apprehension of pardon:
for I confess what I am in my self: I believe what I am in Christ, through that
grace that justifies the ungodly. Thus while your mistakes only make me
erroneous (whom otherwise you find not so) who is now the Antinomian? Is not
the Author of the error? so all will return to your own discredit and
disadvantage: And what a gross slander is that which follows, viz. Town and
all Antinomians teach, that it is unbelief, a work of the flesh, of old Adam,
etc. that justified persons confess or feel sin, sorrow, or complain of the
body of sin, as Paul, Romans 7? This is as if the continual dwelling of sin in
us, did not trouble us, or could not consist with faith in justification by
Christ: or that now the spiritual estate of the soul, being clear and safe,
made up in Christ, sin in no other regard were sorrow or trouble to us. But you
cannot in this neither make good your charge: You care little how falsely you
accuse us, so that you make your Bill foul and black enough to make us still
more odious and vile.

M. Rutherf. page 505. M. T. contendeth for a complete perfection, not only of
persons justified, but also of performances: so that, says he, page 75. I
believe, there is no sin, malediction, or death in the Church of God -- he will
have a perfection not of parts, but also of degrees; this he proves from
Luthers words perverted.

Reply. What perfection I contend for, you must yield me, or else, with your
heart you believe not, that there is a holy Church; which is indeed, as Luther
says, nothing else: but I believe that there is no sin no malediction, no
death in the Church of God; but this is in Christ, not in our selves: by
justification, not by inherent sanctification, for this is imperfect. You say I
pervert Luther; take his words again. So mightily, says he, works faith,
that he that believes that Christ has taken away sin from him, he like Christ
is void of sin. Again Christ will have us to believe, that like as in his own
person there is now no sin, nor death, even so there is none in ours; there is
no defect in the thing it self, but in our incredulity. Let us see what
construction, or sense you can make of these words. But you pervert my words,
or meaning, as if I meant it, that sin dwells not still in us: a fiction. But
Luther adds, as you read in the Assertion, That to reason its a hard matter
to believe these inestimable good things, and unspeakable riches. Moreover,
Satan with his fiery darts, and his Ministers with their wicked and false
doctrine, go about to wrest it from us, and utterly to deface this doctrine:
and specially, for this Article, we sustain the cruel hatred and persecution
of Satan and the world; for Satan feels the power and fruit of this Article.
Consider what you Read.

M. Rutherf. page 510. When D. Tailer objects, as a limb of their fleshly
divinity, No action of a believer after justification is sin; M. T. Answers,
Nothing, but of the way: no action is sin: the disorder or ataxie of the action
is sin. But D. T. means that there is no disorder in the action of a
justified man by their way, etc. can this be any but the divinity of the flesh?

Reply. If the Dr. say it, you will swear it: But my answer is direct to his
words; yet since you now, help me to know his meaning, I say, there is disorder
in their actions: else perfection should be in us, and no need of justification
if we sin not. What gain you by this? you say, by justification there is no
removal of sin, but of the guilt, or obligation to eternal wrath, etc. But the
Scripture speaks not of guilt nor obligation to punishment, but of sin, and
the debt it self; whereof we being discharged, the obligation to the curse
cease upon that: yet we may be discharged in our accounts with God of sin,
and it be still dwelling in us; and we confess it too. Now what flashly
divinity is this? nay, is not your doctrine truly fleshly? for it is
self-liking, and from a carnal principle, That our good works are conditions of
life and salvation: And that Christ saves from eternal wrath, but we must
suffer temporary punishment here; we may sin, and the law not curse us, etc.
hence is your doctrine so current, and acceptable to all carnal minds.

M. Rutherf. page 572. Town ( by the word Law Romans 6.) I understand, says he,
Moral law, with all its Authority. Answ. If we be freed from all authority of
the law, then has the sixth command no authority from God to teach that murder
is a sin: that Idolatry is agaainst the second commandment.

Reply. By like consequence it may be said, If there be no curse, nor
condemnation in the law we live under, as you teach us, then the sixth
Commandment cannot curse, or condemn for murder, etc. Your Argument holds
not: what the law says, it is to them that are under it. The law may have
power, though you in a true sense be not under it. So the Law teaches what sin
is, and what curse is annexed to sin, though you agree with the profane, and
secure in heart, who in their imaginations deceitfully separate sin and the
curse, as they would sin without peril.

M. Rutherf. Then the Believer, when he lies, whores, etc. is not obliged to
know, and see, from the light of the law, that these be sins.

Reply. In like manner by your doctrine he is to see no condemnation, nor
danger by the Law for these sins, but may live and continue secretly in
sinning; for the Law, to him, has no condemning power: deliver your self, and
acquit me.

M. Rutherf. Mark, says T. Three grounds of mistake. 1. That justification and
sanctification are separable. 2. To ease men by faith of the yoke of the law,
is to suffer them to run after the course of the world. 3. That all strict
conformity to the law is right sanctification.

Answ. 1. Not any of these is owned by Protestant Divines, they are all in Mr.
T. forged calumnies.

Reply. I hate forging, and wish you used it no more then I: you find not me
charging Protestant Divines with these: but whether Mr. Burgess with the
President and fellows of Sion. College (who unanimously justify and commend
to the whole Kingdom his Sermons and Doctrine) and Dr. Tailor (whom your self
so much defend) be Protestant Divines, I leave that to your thoughts. For, 1.
Mr. Burgess says expressly, That the Law is used as an effectual instrument of
Sanctification, Regeneration, and Conversion. And D. Tailor says. If a man be
freed from the Law, he may whore, steal etc. as if there were no power in the
word of Grace, and spirit to renew, guide, and keep us in the good ways of
God. And to the third, I say, If hundreds teach not so then I am mistaken. Who
is now the forger of Calumnies? whether they own them, or no. I avow them as I
say. Yet you say, we never make the Law the efficient instrument of
sanctification: and you know it is otherwise. They, for whom you so plead, and
against whom, for that cause, we except, have taught and published, as I say.

Mr. Rutherf. I cannot see, that sanctification is any thing by Antinomian
Doctrine, but mere justification.

Reply. You want eye salve, or will not see; how often may you read them
distinguished in the Assertion?

Mr. Rutherf. Mr. T. passes by all guidance of the Saints by Commandment of Law
or Gospel, and tells us of a leading by a free Spirit only. So that by the
Antinomian doctrine, we are no more under the Gospel, as a directing and
Commanding rule then under law. What hinders then, but Antinomian
justification bids, live as we list? 2. A dead letter forbids no sin, commands
no duty: but the Gospel, without the Spirit is a dead letter, as well as Law.

Reply. 1. Is Mr. Rutherf. guilty of denying all truths he never mentions?
but 2. The Assertion tells you of a sanctifying virtue and power of the
Spirit by the Gospel, to subdue sin, change the heart, and freely dispose it to
walk according to the rule of the Law: this you read. And under this dominion
and guidance of this Evangelical spirit of Christ, are all the Sons of God,
Romans 8.18. What an indirect and undue inference then do you make, saying, We
teach men to live as they lift? First, there is a change in their list and will
from what they were: The Spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5. And 2. I
tell you, If this Spirit have not sovereignty over you, and power to renew and
guide you, you will neither follow the rule of Law nor Gospel. The unction
leads into all truth.

You call the Gospel a dead Letter; Its no Scripture Phrase: which says, its
the ministration of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. yet it makes not against me at all.

Mr. Rutherf. If by conformity to the law in the letter, Mr. T. means external
obedience without faith in Christ, He knows Protestant Divines acknowledge no
sound sanctification, but that which is the natural issue and fruit of
justification, and flows from faith. And such strict conformity to the law, we
hold to be true sanctification, though all enemies to holy walking cry out
against it, such as are all mockers of all religion, the Prelatical and
Antinomian party, who mock strait walking.

Reply. Bona verba quaeso. But 1. I know Protestant Divines hold sanctification
to issue out of justifying faith; and you cannot but know many who deny it, and
that some will have sanctification to be coetaneous unto, yea to precede
justification. 2. If it be the issue and fruit of faith, by which the heart
believes first to justification and salvation; how is it that you teach strict
conformity to be a necessary condition, mean or way of salvation, which by
faith is attained in order before holy walking? He that believes is saved.
Abraham did believe and work both; but he did only by faith come to
blessedness: and so all his children, Gal. 3.9.

2. You are ill-transported, when in your distemper you conjoyn us with the
Prelatical party (though I doubt not, but amongst them were diverse as sound for
doctrine, and life, as in your party) and make us both mockers, and enemies to
holy walking. Sir, does the Law now regulate you, when you are so far from
charity and truth?

The Lord forgive, and grant you repentance. Amen.

Mr. Rutherf. page 575. There is a twofold keeping in of sinners; one merely
legal -- they care not for Mr. T. Jail.

Reply. The law is not my Jail, but Gods; and both they and you may be made to
mind it more then either yet does: you speak too contemptibly.

Mr. Rutherf. Mr. T. will have the believer so free, so perfect, as the law
needs not to teach, nor direct him in one stop: he does all without a keeper,
by the free compulsion of a Spirit separated from Scriptures: which is right
down, A believer is neither under law, nor Gospel, but a Spirit separated from
both, guides him.

Reply. When I say the Spirit of the Lord is his keeper, do I teach then, he
has no keeper? 2. He receives the Spirit that leads him, by the Gospel; how
false then is your charge? who speak or dream of a spirit separated from
Gospel, and not I. And yet the Spirit breaths, and blows in the heart, and
the voice or sound of it is there heard, when there is no syllable of outward
Law or Gospel: but you have sufficient answer before. As for your instances of
Joseph, and David; I ask of you, whether it was the Spirit within, that kept
them from offending, or the law?

T. page 5, 6. I muse you omit to show what it is to be under Grace.

Mr. Rutherf. Dr. Tailor did not omit to show what it is, if you did not omit
to read his words, he is clear to any.

Reply. Before you complained you could not see what was plain before you: but
now you can see what is not extant; this is the fruit of partiality.

Mr. Rutherf. But let your exposition stand, you are not under the law as
teaching, directing, regulating believers in the way of righteousness: but the
Gospel gives power to subdue sin, without any teaching, or regulating power of
the law. But what is the power of subduing sin to the Antinomians? not
sanctification, but justification; that is, a power to believe that Christ has
obeyed law for me -- we are obliged to no personal sanctification, etc. then to
be inherently holy is unlawful to Antinomians.

Reply. The exposition is not mine verbatim: yet even in your own expression
the light of truth is so clear, and convincing on our part, that you turn your
back on it, as afraid to meddle. And being disposed to take occasion to
wrangle, you demand what it is to subdue sin? whereas it is set before you:
even the weakening of the power of sin within us, that it domineer not over us.
Indeed the Prophet, Micah 7.19. uses the phrase of subduing by justification,
and that is a true subduing it in the conscience, that it there reign not to
death and condemnation. And yet by your confession, this must precede, and is
the proper cause of subduing it in conversation: and then that will necessarily
follow, issuing out of this faith: So that in fine, this is but a Papistical
cavil, That to teach justification is the overthrow of holiness and good works.
Lastly, whereas you tell of obliging to sanctification, I answer, we are to
believe, that God will sanctify us, and that throughout, and put his Spirit
into us, to lead us in his ways; and so in that faith desiring and hungering
after it, to seek to him (as a sick man longing for health, unto his Physician)
and to wait in the use of his ordinances, that he may so perform. The new
Covenant properly requires nothing of man; but God, knowing his spiritual
poverty, and utter disability, calls upon him to seek to him, who works
both the will and the deed of his own pleasure. Open thy mouth, and I will
fill it, Psalm. 81. Your slanderous conclusion is both against the rule of Gods
law, and of all humane arts. But such extravagancy becomes, or still pleases
Mr. Rutherford.

T. Assert. page 6. I deny not the law to be an eternal, and inviolable rule of
righteousness; yet the Grace of the Gospel does truly and effectually conform
us unto it.

Mr. Rutherf. page 578. I ask to whom the law is a rule? if to Believers, then
they must be under it. 2. That rule the grace conformeth unto, we must be
under. 3. An inviolable rule of justice cannot be violated without sin. Then
the Believer cannot violate the law, and murder, but they must sin, and violate
the rule, etc.

Reply. Its true, the law is an inviolable rule, but not to him as a Believer,
or in the things of his Faith; but here he departs from it, for he does not the
Law to be saved: but believes, after the rule of the Gospel.

2. If you consider him morally, I see not, but he may be conformed to the rule
of the law, and yet not under it, but under grace, and the rule of the spirit,
which conformeth him.

3. In this your moral or civil conception of him, you take him quite out of
Christ's kingdom, where grace reigns. And now, grant he does murder and sin,
It is death and condemnation by the same rule and law: so that he must be
totally removed out of the limits of the law, before he can be freed and
secured from either sin or death. You leave faith, and fall from grace in all
your arguments. And they are as forcible to maintain the condemning power of
the law to believers, as the regulating; for where the law regulates, it may
condemn; and so it does the best Saint here, if you bring him, and his life
under it.

T. Assert. page 7. Through faith is bred assured confidence, lively hope, etc.

M. Rutherf. page 579. This is a close perverting of the word of truth: the
Antinomians faith may here be smelt: then whoever once wavereth or doubts,
are yet under the law of works. A doctrine of despair to broken reeds, who cry,
I believe, help my unbelief.

Reply. I must commend to you Jam. 1.6, 7. But observe, good Reader, what is
here excepted against, viz. Through Faith in Christ is bred assured confidence,
lively hope, pure love toward God, invocation of his name without wavering,
fear, or doubting, not questioning his good will, audience, acceptance; which
would never be effected by all the zeal and conscience toward God according to
the law of works. And now judge impartially, what truth can be current with Mr.
Rutherf. I ask, 1. can assured confidence, lively hope, etc. come, or be
effected any way else then by faith in Christ? If there want light at Noonday,
Read Heb. 3.9. where your Bible-Note says, That he calls that excellent
effect of faith (whereby we cry Abba, Father) confidence, and to confidence he
joyneth hope, which is termed a lively hope that God begets unto, 1 Pet. 1.3.
see also, Heb. 10.22, 23. Romans 15.13. and 10.14. How shall they call on him, on
whom they have not believed? But it is like this moves M. Rutherf. that it is
said, that these cannot be attained by all the zeal according to the law of
works; yet Paul clears it, Ephesians. 2.18. That through Christ we have entrance unto
the Father: and Ephesians. 3.12. By him we have boldness, and entrance with
confidence by faith in him. If Mr. Rutherf. object, But these are not in full
and absolute perfection, where yet true faith may be? Who says so, or who but
Mr. Rutherf. would so closely pervert the truth? that I may retort his own
words. Being justified by faith, we have peace, etc. In whom believing ye
rejoice, etc. God has begotten us again to a lively hope, etc. Romans 5.1. 1
Pet. 1.3, 8. Nay, says Mr. Rutherf. This is a close perverting of the truth;
for he doubts not, but that there are many weak believers, of a trembling,
timorous, and troubled spirit, whose faith is not yet able to over-master their
fears, which cause torment, and disquietness: but I cease.

And Mr. Rutherf. hereby smells our faith.

Reply. Naribus utilis; yet no unsavory error. And know it, that it is the
effect of the law of works upon the natural conscience, and the unbelief of the
Gospel, that keep the soul in bondage through that slavish fear.

Mr. Rutherf. ibid. The covenant of grace commands faith, and also good works
as witnesses of faith: but Mr. T. will have good works in any Notion of an
Evangelick command to stand at defiance with the covenant of grace.

Repl. What contend you for? if you grant grace to be the fountain-cause of all
holy walking, then not the law. 2. If it be a lively and free fountain, then
does holiness issue out of it, as a pleasant stream: and how now do good works
stand at defiance with the covenant of grace? Besides it is said
Catachresti^^s, abusively, and not properly, that the covenant of grace
commands faith, and good works; for it promises to give both, to them who have
power to neither. Lastly, these works are not done as conditions to obtain
eternal life: for that is said passim, to be by faith without works: faith for
salvation, good works for conversation.

Mr. Rutherf. ibid. The man under the law cannot give himself to be ruled by
the law after the mind and will of God, as Mr. T. says, except Antinomians be
Pelagians.

Reply. Its a palpable wrong: I have no such words, as that a man under the law
can give himself to be ruled by it after the mind and will of God; you have a
strange conscience, that no better bridleth you, though your affections be void
of love to your Adversary. I might more truly reply, by your doctrine, That a
man under the law can do it: for you free none from under it: or else you are
not ruled by it after the mind and will of God. And that is most propable: who
now is the Pelagian?

But to deal plainly, what say you of Paul and many zealous Jews, who in
earnest applied themselves to do the things of the Law? so that Paul says,
touching it he was blameless, and that before his conversion to the faith. To
do it after the mind and will of God, is your addition.

Mr. Rutherf. Paul speaks of a man under the Law in the flesh and in opposition
to that under Grace, married to Christ; he that is dead to the Law, married to
Christ, and serves God spiritually. And it is clear, the Apostle counts it a
part of deliverance from the Law, and a fruit of our marriage to Christ, that
we bring forth fruit to God, walk holily, and serve in newness of spirit.

Reply. Jam convenimus. What contend you for? all is granted, that I desire or
said: for 1. then Christ, and not the Law, as a husband makes fruitful. 2.
Then there was a serving of God under the Law in the oldness of the letter. 3.
Where, or how then find you me to be against holy walking, and according to the
rule of righteousness? Is not this your false slander?

Assert. How can Christ redeem us from the Law, except in the same sense and
extent, that Christ was under it?

Mr. Rutherf. 1. Christ was under the Law of Ceremonies: I hope Gentiles were
not under that.

Reply. The question is of the moral, and you talk vainly of ceremonial.

Mr. Rutherf. If Christ was under the Law as a rule, to free us from it, why
commands he to imitate him?

Reply. Christ was under the Law for life, even to obtain favor and salvation
for us; so he is in the end of the Law for righteousness to all that believe.
2. It is by his spirit and power any imitate him, walking as he did, and so do
keep the Law, as he did, freely in love; not for self-life or self ends, for so
did Christ, who sought not himself.

Assert. page Mr. T. has a strange evasion. The spirit is free, why will you
control and rule it by the Law? whereas the nature of it is freely to conform
heart and life to the outward rule of the law, without the help of the law: as
a crooked thing is made straight, etc.

Mr. Rutherf. To do the will of God, merely as commanded, from the power of an
outward commandment, is legal, says Saltmatsh; and Mr. T. says it is to
control the free spirit. Three means, says T. are passive; to hear, read,
receive Sacraments, are so many restraints laid on the free spirit.

Reply. I say again, If the spirit rule you according to the Law, then neither
Law nor you do rule it; but the Law is only the rule or pattern, according to
which the Spirit forms you. What can be more plain to him that will see and
grant any truth? And this makes no contrariety, but a sweet harmony between the
word and the spirit: yea, and establishes the Law by the faith and Spirit of
the Gospel. And here you would range us among the old Anabaptists, Enthusiasts,
etc. and love to expatiate, having burst the banks and bounds of charity and
truth. I am not more strange to you, then this is to me, That you are of such a
spirit:

2. Where say I, that means are passive? The Spirit is pleased to blow sweetly
by all Evangelical means, as Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments, etc. and we
rightly using them, do carry our selves passively, that the Spirit may thereby
breath and give life to our Spirits, and that we may have it more abundantly.

Mr. Rutherf. What T. means in saying, The spirit freely conformeth the heart
to it.

Reply. The sense is easy and plain, if your mind were not finister.

Mr. Rutherf. If the meaning be, that the Law of it self cannot convert a man
to God, Antinomians father most falsely such dreams on us -- but if the Spirit
conform us to the outward rule of the Law, then must the Law be yet a rule to
our obedience.

Reply. When you please, you can spell out my meaning. But, 1. Whether it be
your dream or no, I leave it. Yet you know that your Brethren so hold and
teach, and may be forced to own this brat, or novell-assertion of theirs.

2. As if Mr. Rutherf. were in a dream, he in his other book would seem to
affirm and maintain it, and with a small touch he there passes it over: And
here he says, The Law it self converts not. No more does the Gospel it self,
as he often says, without the spirit. This is as if, with Mr. Burgess he
means, that either Law of Gospel is the Spirits instrument for conversion: and
that we may preach either for that end. Mr. Rutherford is unwilling to speak
out. Loquere, ut videam.

3. If the Spirit by the Gospel, conform us to the rule of the Law, Its then
true, that the Law is a passive rule, but not active, as actuating to
effectuate this: thus you grant what I asserted, and oppose without cause. But
at last you tell us, the Apostle never speaks of our freedom from the Law, as
it does regulate, direct, and lead us.

Reply. Now this overthrows what you said even now, viz. That the Spirit by
the Gospel does direct and lead us in the way of the Law: for then the Law does
not actively lead us.

Mr. T. page 9. What freeth a believer from the curse? but because he is a new
Creature.

Mr. Rutherf. That new creation is sanctification, 2 Cor. 5.17. not
justification. If any be in Christ, that is, if he be justified, he is a new
creature, that is, sanctified: or else by the Antinomian gloss, the meaning
must be, If a man be justified in Christ, he is justified in Christ. Paul
speaks not so nonsense.

Reply. This new creature is the man changed in himself and his state.
Sanctification is not a new creation, but a new qualifying of a man. It begets
him not, nor recreates him not to God, nor yet delivers him from under the
curse; makes him not the child of God; restores him not into favor, nor does
make him Heir, Coheir with Christ, etc. See your error. 2. To be justified
and to be in Christ, is not all one, as your gloss is; they differ as the cause
and the effect, or as the antecedent and consequent. To be in Christ, imports
union, which is before justification. Or it is insition, that work of the
Father, Joh. 15.1. that being ingrafted into him, he may partake of his
righteousness and holiness, both imputatively and inherently, if I may use the
Aristotelian word. More sound or probable is their judgment, who teach that
regeneration includes both justification and sanctification.

Mr. Rutherf. How shall it follow, that Christ has loosed us from all debt of
active obedience, because he has loosed us from a necessity of perfect active
obedience? but the Law is spiritualized and lustred with the Gospel, Law, and
free grace: and drawn down to a Covenant of free grace, requires not, nor
exacts upon perfect obedience, under pain of losing salvation. It requires
obedience as the poor man is able to give it, by the grace of God: that the man
may enter in the possession of eternal life.

Reply. I Reply, You can show no text nor reason why Christ loses not from
imperfect, as well as perfect obedience; and that from active as well as
passive. Nay, if from prefect, much more may we argue from imperfect. 2. If our
state and case be well considered, we are spiritually so poor, that we are as
unable to pay pence as pounds. It is all one to a dead man, whether life be
tendered unto him upon condition of moving his least finger, or the removing of
a great Mountain: and this is our case. Again, you can produce no Law, 1 That
requires not perfect obedience. 2 That calls not for obedience, as a proper
condition of life, Do and live. 3 That threatens not death upon the least
failing in any Iota.

But you let all see your new divinity. 1 I must obey, but not perfectly. 2 The
Law is spiritualized, etc. drawn down to a Covenant of free grace. 3 No more is
required of the poor man, then he can give, etc. Vltra posse viri, non vult
Deus ulla requirt. Thus grace is abrogated, promise made void, and faith is of
no effect.

Mr. Rutherf. Paul shows what Law we are freed from, of sin and death: and
says, Christ died for this end, Romans 8 4. That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. Whence I argue, Those that ought to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law, by walking after the Spirit, and mortifying the deeds
of the flesh, are not freed from the Law as a rule of righteousness.

Reply. The strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56. 2 Christ dyed that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, imputatively: or grant,
inherently: yet if this be the end and fruit of Christ's death, as you say, then
the Law is no active cause of it, but the power of Christ's death effects it.
And though this righteousness be for matter one with the Law, yet still the Law
is but a rule passively, according to which the believer is conformed and
regulated, it not actively regulating. Also active walking in the Law, is but
the expression and effect of sanctification, and not properly sanctification it
self. Adam made holy, lived accordingly from that inward form: his holy life
made him not holy. Neither is our holy life to procure or preserve peace,
favor, life, as the Law propounds and requires it: for these consist in
faith alone: which finds and enjoys Christ to be such a true fullness and
All Sufficiency to the soul, that self by him and with him is satisfied, and so
needs no ends of its own in working and obeying, Joh. 6.35. He that comes to
me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst.

Mr. Rutherf. We are freed from the Law being once justified, (so the
Antinomians) whatever we do is not against a Law or rule, -- the law gives a
dispensation to do those things being justified, which the unjustified cannot
do, but in doing it they sin: because the unjustified are under the law as a
rule of justice, which we are not under. We have an Antidated dispensation to
sin.

Reply. You strain your wit, if not conscience, to make quidlibet ex quolibet:
But I say, Take justification in the full latitude, and extent of it; or
consider a Christian still as justified, and so he is freed from under the Law:
but if you speak of, or consider him in his active righteousness of works, so
as you bring him under the Law, so he sins; yea and is judged and condemned
by the Law; and you must raise him and bring him up to his justified state, ere
he can be free and secure from the curse. Justification extends to all sins at
all times throughout the whole life. But its false, that I give an Antidated
dipensation; that is your indirect inference. If you put the believer under the
Law, as he sins, like the unjustified, so the Law threatens and curses
both equally. Though you tell us unwarrantably (of your bare word) that the Law
has power to rule, where it has no power to condemn: then we may live
securely in sin or the works of the law: and need no more make use of
justification, nor have Christ for our shadow and protection.

Mr. Rutherf. p. 591. That the Saints are mere patients and blocks in all their
holy walking is gross libertinisme.

Reply. But how unjustly do you charge this upon your Adversary! who says
only in the act of sanctification: in which the Spirit only acts. Is not
this to pervert what is spoken?

M. Rutherf. No way cries to the conscience of the traveller, This is the way,
as the law does in its directing and ruling power, etc.

Reply. The law materially is resembled to the highway: and its true, the
highway calls not to the passenger to keep his way; yet the authority of the
King does so call and require: so then it is not the law as we consider it, and
speak of it; but God the Author of the law, who commands to walk in it. And
if God in so doing, convince you of unrighteousness for your going astray, Is
not his grace in the Gospel your daily needful refuge, and plea? or you still
are in no danger, nor fear, because law cannot condemn? for God say you is
pleased with what the poor man can do, or give. Thus you live under a law
securely, which is as weak as your self: and will be content with with any
thing, as you list, or can obey. Whereas, I on the other side, say, that the
law has lost no power nor part of its perfection, Matthew. 5.17, 18. And
therefore it convinces all of sin, and condemns such as are found under it,
because in many things we sin all. In our best works we are found faulty and
judged, that we may find no rest, nor safety, but in the righteousness of
Christ by faith. Let the Reader judge, who is in the error.

But it is no marvel you so mis-call, mistake, and pervert your Adversary, and
falsely accuse him (as you do passion) and yet have no check of conscience for
it, seeing you are so principled that you may transgress, and do any thing,
impure that is, Scot-free, by your law, and are not led by a
right-Gospel-Spirit.

Town. page 10. The law wrappeth every man in sin for the least transgression.

Mr. Rutherf. page 593. Still Antinomians bewray their engine. If me say (being
justified) we have no sin, we lie, 1 John 1.10. then there cannot be a man nyon
the earth, but he is under the curse of God -- Antinomians say, the justified
are freed from the curse; then they have no sin; nay, they cannot sin, by
their Argument; for they will have the curse essentially and inseparably to
follow sin; which is most false.

Reply. 1. If we be justified from the curse, then from the sin which yet we
have remaining in us, (Coram judieio Dei) for the cause is taken away before
the effect.

2. Else by the contrary, Christ is not our righteousness in justification,
(which is opposed to sin) but only our blessedness, in stead of the curse that
was upon us: how then is it said, he brought in everlasting righteousness? Dan.
9.24. And that we are made the righteousness of God in him? 2 Cor. 5.21. So
there is no man indeed, but he is under the curse, if the blood of Christ have
not washed him from his sin, as Rev. 1.5. He has loved us, and washed us
from our sin.

3. In order justification is after sin, and it being extensive to all sins
past, present, and to come, it must presuppose future sins also as done,
before it abolish either sin, or curse due for sin.

4. You say, Its most false that sin and the curse be inseparable; but you
neither prove nor can show any thing to the contrary. Indeed a carnally secure
heart, is apt to separate them, and is thereby hardened, presuming to sin
without danger or fear, Deuteronomy, 29.19. If you allow of his engine, as better
suiting with your own, you may well mislike ours.

5. Here you tell us of an unscripture-like, and ungrounded distinction of a
twofold misery and guilt, and so of deliverance, etc. But I confess I
understand not your meaning, and would be loath to mistake or pervert you, as
you do me. Your Simile gives me most light, viz. That as the rising of the
Sun, is the way to the full noonday, etc. I answer, but so it is no act of
ours, but of the Spirit sanctifying us throughout, till we be perfected in our
selves; and so it is not simply our repentance and new-obedience, which are
consequences effects and expressions of that renovation or sanctification. And
I demand also, Is not that blot it self so taken away, ut non imputetur, as not
reckoned to us, by the death of Christ? though it abide physically, or
inherently, yet in our accounts it is abolished, and blotted out.

Lastly, I must that you will except against that expression in Assert. page
15. The Law of works is so inwrapt and entwined together, that if a man lay
hold on any, even the least link, he inevitably pulls the whole chain upon
himself; And yet what you say is of no force. Your repentance and love of
brethren, if you understand your self, do pull the whole Law upon you, as they
be your acts. You cannot oblige your self in part and in some degrees only as
you please. Woe to that life most commendably passed over, if the grace of the
Gospel be not to pardon all imperfections. All our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, Isa, 64.6. Therefore durst not Paul be found in his own
righteousness, Phil. 3.9.

Mr. Rutherf. page 595. Our obedience is not full and perfect only it is so
counted and accepted in Christ.

Reply. If this were all your meaning, that our obedience or works as
proceeding from us, or as we perform them, are imperfect. yet are accepted as
perfect in Christ; I could receive it. But you explain your self otherwise. 1.
You say, It is not so, and yet it is accounted perfec; does not God account it
rightly as it is? 2. You are against all sound Protestant Divines, if you hold
of acceptance with God of any work because of any proper, formal, inherent
dignity in it; or if you do not make Christ the alone ground, reason, and cause
of all acceptance whether of persons or performances. 3. It is true God
accounts not us non-sinners in our selves, and free from all indwelling sin;
for that were an untruth; but he both justifies us by faith in Christ, and
makes us pure and free from all spot of sin, before his Judgment seat, Col.
1.22. 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus cleanses us from all sin.

Now you are pleased to expatiate, and to amplify your self needlessly and
wilfully, to wrest our words; as if ^ we did not hold the good works of the
regenerate to be faulty in themselves. 2 As if we meant by the removal (as you
call it) or abolition of finne, such an annihilation of sin in its essence
root and branch, that it should not dwell in us here; whereas you know and read
the contrary.

Yet, that both Tree and the Fruit, the believer and his work, are acceptable
in Christ, is no new divinity; but according to Scripture and all the Orthodox,
Tit. 1.15. To the pure all things are pure.

Your Scriptures 1 John 1.8. Jam. 3.2. do speak of works as proceeding from us,
not as presented in Christ, who justifies, and freeth us from all the evil and
filth cleaving to them.

I retort, If God can accept of us, or our performances out of Christ, what
need we then continually to deal with God in Christ? 1 Pet. 1.6. Heb. 13.15. By
him let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually: Whatsoever you do
in word or deed, Do all things in the name of our Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God, even the Father by him. Colos. 3.17.

But this is open wrong which you do us in saying, that we hold works perfect
simply in themselves, or to be accepted for any worth or inherent dignity in
them; which is your doctrine rather: we teach, That Abels sacrifice was
accepted by faith, that is by Christ believed on; and not for any merit in it,
Heb. 11.4. The Scriptures and Testimonies of the Orthodox (which you read in
the Assertion) might have prevented all this labor, if you had been so advised.

Consider that of Calvin in that l. 3. cap. 17. sect. 8.9. Qua jam sequuntur
bona opera, Sepulto etiam imperfectionis vitio, quod bona opera fedare folet,
quae fiunt a fidelinus. b. opera justa confentur, etc.
etc. Those good works which follow after justification, are esteemed and
valued otherwise, then by their own desert or dignity: for whatever
imperfection is in them, it is covered with Christ's perfection: whatever
blemish or filthiness in them it is cleansed by his purity, lest it should be
questioned or examined before Gods judgment seat. Therefore says he the fault
of all our transgressions being blotted out, whereby men are hindered from
bringing forth any thing acceptable to God; and the imperfection and defect,
which is wont to defile all good works, being buried, all the good works of the
faithful are acknowledged to be just. etc.

Thus may all see how palpably you have mistaken me in this, as in the other
passages; And how indirectly and falsely you do infer, That we may be
justified by works, or we make them meritorious, etc. whereas we say plainly,
that the person is first justified, without and before all works: and that then
they become accepted and pleasing by the same way and reason; that the person
came into favor: For as God stands and appears propitious to us in Christ, and
so his works and dealings with us, and disposals of us be pleasing and welcome
to us; even so we being received and accepted in Christ, what we do through him
is pleasant to God: but not because of any formal and intrinsecal dignity in
the work. So that we study to deal with God only in Christ, and are now
encouraged unto all good works: for who can have a heart to do any good work,
till he by faith know, that he pleases God by Jesus Christ? So Christ alone is
exalted and magnified.

Salus semel donatur, ut oporibus acquirenda non sit. To seek Heaven by works
and deservings, is to wrong, yea to shame Christ's blood: and unto such it is
shed in vain. When the Gospel is preached unto us, we believe the mercy of God,
and in believing receive the Spirit, the earnest of eternal life, and be in
eternal life already: and feel in our hearts already the sweetness thereof, and
are overcome with the kindness of God and of Christ: and therefore love the
will of God, and of love are ready to work freely; and not to obtain that
which is given already, and whereof we be heirs by Grace freely. Tindall Martyr.

A brief REPLY to the Exceptions taken by Mr. Rutherford in his Trial and
Triumph of Faith, against the supposed Antinomian Errors.
1 Exception.
THe first Exception is against the Assert of Grace. page 112, 113. Where it is
said, That Christ only did bear our sins, and the punishment of them, so
that the justified are not punished for sin; Mr. Rutherf. answers with a
twofold distinction. 1. Of justice legal and sin revenging. 2. Of a mixed
justice, which is in a Father; and so says, That the sins of the Saints are
not only against the legal, but also a wrong done against his mixed justice.
Where God does punish their sins, though not satisfactorily to his Law.

Reply. 1. To assert a mixed justice, is to temper and mingle Law and Gospel
without warrant: and to hold forth God in a Covenant made up both of free grace
and works, which yet be inconsistent, -- Romans 11.6. 2. Our Divines distinguish
indeed between punishment and chastisement: and so call these corrections of
Children, and not punishment properly: for that every punishment is in some
sort satisfactory. And so will that be inferred, which by them is objected
against the Papists, viz. If the Saints be punished for their sins
temporally, then Christ satisfied for pounds, and left us to satisfy for
pence. 3. The true and intrinsecal nature and property of all justice offended
requires satisfaction: so that our punishments must be satisfactory also, so
far as the sin deserves: else who, or what satisfies? does this mixed
justice take its pennyworth and full due out of the flesh and bones of Gods
Children, so as God neither can cease beating till he has given all the
stripes the fault deserves: and when correction is past, then the Fathers
justice is quieted? 4. And if you put them under the Government of justice
tempered with mildness and mercy, (which is Law Evangelized: a new crotchet and
dream) then the Law of strict justice, which is the decalogue, is no longer a
rule: our sins must be no longer examined and measured by it, but judged as
they are offenses of this mixed and fatherly justice. So now Christ may be set
aside, we shall no more need him for Advocate, neither is there use of faith
when we sin: but our sufferings must in this condition pacify, not Christ's
passion, (that only was of use and efficacy to bring us into this state, and
under this Government.) Who now are become the total abrogators of the Moral
and pure Law, yea and as it is a rule to live and walk by? Can you tell us how
much of justice, and what a measure of mercy is in this new rule and
Government? But the result is, That our sins after justification have a double
relation: (and had but one before) one to the strict Law, and that Christ
contented: the other is to a milder justice, against which our stripes must be
opposed, that by them we may be healed.

Its granted, during the Mosaical-pedagogie, there was some show, yea ground
for somewhat, but not for all that here you assert: for God did in that
dispensation veil his Paternity, which now in Christ is done away. And your
Scriptures are only of force for that, and during Christ time.

2 Exception.
2 Against what is said to 1 Cor. 11. Mr. Rutherf. says, Faith does no more
hinder a justified person to receive unworthily the Lords Supper, then it does
hinder him to commit Adultery.

Reply. It Is true, faith is not always effectual in all to hinder the doing of
both these. But what then? Is it not for want of the exercise of faith in
vigor, life, and perfection, that these or any other sins are not prevented?
So if faith do not hinder, what then can hinder? what purifieth the heart, and
rightly principleth and disposes the soul to all good actions, but faith? but
not faith as a dead quality, or habit lying still and idle within: but as it is
lively and operative, according to its nature and property. 2. What else does
the Soul in eating and drinking the Lords Supper employ, or set on work, but
faith? Nay, is the act of eating and drinking formally, any other thing but to
believe? So that if faith be not to be put forth and exercised, (and then where
is justification?) there may be a bodily action in using the visible Elements,
which is unworthy indeed, and not befitting a Christian, but no spiritual
eating, as the Ordinance requires. You make your self sport, saying, Mr. T's.
sense seems to carry, That a justified person cannot sin, nor eat and drink
unworthily, because faith makes him worthy: and if so the way is a wanton merry
way. Reply. My words speak no such thing, if you lift to spell them aright: but
if your ill will suffer you not, The Lord forgive, and amend it. Faith
includes all. It presupposes hunger and thirst before eating, 2. a true and
spiritual receiving, 3. inward refreshing and satisfaction thereby, whence 4.
follows love, rejoicing; with thanksgiving: so that he who eats and
drinks in faith, cannot eat and drink unworthily.

The ground out of which all your seven Arguments grow and receive their
supposed strength, is, that mixt-justice, or that Mosaical-Government, which we
do not now live under. And therefore that failing, they will all totter and
fall. It needs then your second hand and labor to uphold and confirm it.

Moreover, to the seventh and last, requiring some more particular answer, I
say, 1. That all afflictions are subservient to the Law, and signs of wrath,
is no error or position of ours: neither is our assertion founded upon it. 2.
Yet as afflictions come from justice offended and provoked, to inflict them for
sin, so they are appendices of the Law: and you cannot disprove it. 3. You
add, (as a thing that we hold) That as believers are freed from the ruling
power of the Law, so are they also from the Rod. Whereas 1. your doctrine by a
direct and necessary consequence does free the believer from the ruling power
of the Law, while you place him under a mixt-Government of justice and mercy:
for the Law is pure justice without mixture, and a strict and exact rule
without mitigation. 2. It is false that we free believers from the Rod, as your
own eyes may witness while you read our positions: for we do not cry down all
Crosses, and secure the justified from all affliction. In this our way, we have
had, and still expect many a scratch and prick from you and others; and yet not
for any desert or error that all your diligence can find and prove. Your
other pretended error, is cleared before.

Lastly, though Christ paid for sins before: yet the Law acquits them not, nor
conscience apperehends it not before actual justification.

3 Exception is against the Covenant.
Mr. Rutherf. Some teach this Covenant has no condition: so Dr. Crisp and
other Libertines.

Reply. We must have your lash and unworthy brand also. You may sin, and we are
made to suffer: but unless you bring in Freewill, this Covenant of Grace will
prove absolute, no part of it lying on us: for that presupposes some power and
goodness where is none: for this Covenant is with man being fallen, and so
having lost all: therefore it behooves that it should be suitable to his broken
state, requiring, neither promising no good conditionally, where nothing could
be first given by him.

2. It is granted by all, that all was transacted between God the Father and
the Son from eternity, and that the Covenant as it comes and is commended to
us, is as the breaking up of that great seal, the opening and manifestation of
those secrets concluded upon; so far as they concern the raising of the Elect
of God, out of their sinful dust, unto everlasting blessedness: so that what is
in the decree of heaven concerning them the same is contained in the Covenant:
then as God purposed to give repentance, faith, holiness, so he has included
and promised all in the Covenant: and these are truly parts and branches of
it, and not properly conditions. Now we see, that as there were thoughts of
peace in God for us, when we were in our lowest and worst condition; and in
what way, and after what manner his mind is to recover our souls from their
lost Estates, and restore and give life, favor and glory unto them: so by this
Covenant also, he has laid and cleared to us a firm ground, upon which we may
with comfort and considence expect and wait for faith, and all things to be
given freely unto us. This agrees to the expressions of Zanchie, Calvin,
Parous, etc. Indeed God observes his due and set order, in giving and working
one thing before, and another after: (so as a prius and a posterius is granted)
but the first, suppose repentance or faith, is not a condition of what
follows, except with us, and according to these Authors, you will call it a
condition of state: that is, Conditio statu^.
God brings the soul unto such a state or case, as he humbles it, and then
gives Grace, etc. Thus many promises are with an if; If ye repent, if ye
believe, then thus it shall be unto you: and denote only order and
consequence, as Calvin says, not condition. As a Husbandman sows not his
land, till it be plowed and fitted: if he be asked why he does not commit his
seed to it, he will answer, it must be prepared first: but one part of his
work is not the condition of the other, when the whole lies on him. Again, if
the promise to give faith and repentance be not in the Covenant, where is it to
be found? Is there any thing to be looked for, not mentioned in the Covenant?

3. You call it a Covenant of Grace; now if it be of Grace, then works are
excluded: yea repentance and faith, as our acts; and if it be free, that
necessarily fights against all conditions; it cannot be free and conditional.
The more freely the riches of Gods Grace is held forth, the more glorious and
admirable is it in our eyes. Besides, it is your expression, That Christ is a
party contracting, or a Covenanter undertaking for all his: so that I see not
how you can make his Elect, singly and simply to be any partys in undertaking
and promising any thing.

You say, Dr. Cr. gives this reason why it is not on condition of our
believing, because man may fail in believing; and so the condition failing,
Covenant fails.

Reply. His reason is good and sound, for of it self faith is failing, else
Christ needed not to have prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, Luke 22.32.
But all the whole Covenant being grounded on Christ as the foundation, it is
established on a firm Rock, and so is everlasting.

Mr. Rutherf. They object, that God promises all, as to give faith, to put Law
in the inward parts, to cause to walk in his ways, as Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36.26,
27. To circumcise our hearts, Deuteronomy. 30.6. which the Arminians deny, yet is the
clear daylight of Scripture, so that all lies on God.

Reply. But you return not one syllable of a direct and satisfactory answer
unto it: you cannot deny, but what God promises, he is faithful to perform and
do it. You infer some indirect and undue consequences, as if you would rather
wrangle against the truth, which you cannot resist, or were offended that it
shines forth so gloriously and convincingly in your face. What if Dogs abuse
it, and Pharisaical Spirits (otherwise principled) spurn against it, or
mis-construe it, as occasioning Libertinisme? the sin be theirs; yet this is
the only right ground and reason of prayer, and using all Gods Ordinances, in
which the soul carrying it self passively, waits, that God may communicate
and pour out his blessings according to his word. Because God had promised
first, and that freely, the building of David's house, and the King saw thereby,
that God had a gracious mind and purpose to do it, and that it should be his
act, therefore David prayed that the Lord would bless his house, that it might
continue for ever before God, For thou O Lord have spoken it. 2 Samuel 7.27, 28,
29. If all fullness be in the fountain, and free access may be had, it standing
open to all; It is an effectual invitation to come.

As for those opinions bred and breathed in New England, I know nothing of
them; neither am I so credulous, or uncharitable toward any, as to receive
whatever an Adversary reports: for if the liquor be never so precious and
pure, yet if it come out of a fusty and tainted vessel, it will taste of the
Caske. I see none of you so candid, but in some things you wrong the Author in
perverting his words or meaning, even when it is printed, and obvious to every
eye.

But here you let all see that you cannot outwrangle the truth: for at last you
chide your self to agree, and yield to it: for 1 you say, I grant God works
the condition. Then how is it man's condition? or how can it be said to lie on
him? 2 Truth is, say you, It Is an unproper condition, for the whole bargain is
pure Grace. Thus you are brought to grant all, and no thank to you, for you
would fain have it a condition still. An unproper one must serve rather then
none. God indeed works orderly one thing after another: the former, as is
said, we may call a State-condition, but not otherwise properly and without
danger.

But ere you cease, you tell us again of Libertinisme, etc. Reply. Well,
receive the love of the truth, and here shake hands, and cast your stones
against abusers of Free Grace, if your side be not guilty of the like, or
worse. You have a watchful eye to look into our ways; if in love to us, we
thank you. It might occasion us at least (if we had any unfeigned desire, that
the good and fair way of the Lord might not be evil spoken of) to walk more
circumspectly: but if the word of Grace leaven not the heart, it will abide
graceless. And I rest persuaded, that if it had not been either the licentious
or loose life of some, who are noted; or because such as had been formerly
wicked and profane, did flock after Dr. Crisp, and attend to his Ministry, as
they did, in Luke 15.1, 2. and that it was more glorious and effectual then
others; else that you and your fellows would never have used tongue or pen
against this way. My reason is, because it is so clear and undeniable, that
having searched and sifted it with all diligence, there is found no solid and
material cause of exception against it: but all is resolved into envy and
prejudice.

As for that question of justification before faith or after, I have spoken to
it in answer to Mr. Burgess. It Is true, God in his Gospels-dispensation only
pronounces the sentence of absolution to the believer: for he deals in it
with men of actual understanding; and the main end is to quiet and comfort the
conscience; for which purpose faith is mainly useful, as to give glory unto
God. But you grant, that the Covenant is with Christ, and all his Heirs and
kindred in him: he being a public person in whom all were acquitted; and that
is sufficient.

4 Exception in page 102.
Mr. Rutherf. Can we, says Mr. Town, separate the directing or commanding
power of the Law from the condemning power? Is it a Law, and has no power to
condemn? Answ. Actual condemnation may be separated; as a Lion is a Lion,
though chained, that he cannot actually devour: it could not condemn Adam,
before sin, etc. Christ has removed the curse.

Reply. The question is, whether the Lion be a devouring beast? and you answer,
He cannot actually devour, because he is chained: but does chaining change his
devouring nature? and so has not the Law a condemning power still, though it
condemn not actually always? you see power to do it, is not taken from it. That
it did not condemn Adam in innocence, has no more sinew of Argument in it,
then that the Law of the Land has no power to condemn murder, because there
is no actual murderer. It has power to do it, but it is to exercise and put
forth its power in a way of justice, that is, when the sin is actually
committed. You say, (but they are vain words, without light or weight) that to
condemn is accidental to a Law. I reply, as truly and in the like sense, That
to command and direct be as accidental: (so the whole of the Law, in all its
parts and offices, shall be accidental) for the Law does not actually rule and
govern Lawless rebels: may not I then as solidly infer, It has no authority
nor power to do it? yea, in Hell among the damned, as in our prisons, there is
Law only actually condemning and tormenting: but not ruling and directing in
its way of holiness. Lastly, You should prove that Christ has removed the
curse from the Law: he has redeemed his from under it, but left the Law with
all the power it had. But you speak what Mr. Burgess objected also. If need be,
see more in Answer to his book. I muse, that men of wisdom and parts, will so
fight and contend against so mnnifest truths. You grant the believer sins
daily, and that every sin, yea least omission, is Hell by the Law; and thus
he is daily brought under reverence of Divine justice: now how can that be, and
yet no condemnation or curse left in the Law? Hell is but a fiction or a
painted fire: the man need not fear it, though he sin: nor he need no Faith,
nor Christ to preserve and secure him. Thus one of your Tenets cutteth the
nerves of another.

5 Exception same page
Mr. Rutherf. They object, That holiness and good works be not the way to
salvation. Answ. There be three things, 1. the will of God to save. 2. Jus, or
Law-right to salvation. 3. Actual salvation, Now touching this last, holiness
is the way to it.

Reply. 1. The way by which we can only go and enter into Heaven, is that New
living way dedicated by blood, Heb. 10.20, 21. In which way the soul can only
walk and continue by believing. Hence it is said, That through faith they
inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. He that walks in Christ is holy, and
walks holily: but he walks not in Christ by his holy life. As ye have
received Christ, so walk in him, Colos. 2.6. In walking or living holily, we as
it were move in another sphere: by faith we live and walk in Christ, and in the
way of peace and life, which is by his righteousness: by love we walk the legal
way of our own active righteousness, says Luther. Does not the Scripture call
us to come to Christ, to be found in him to abide, walk, and continue in him?
All which can only be effected by faith. In this way the soul meets with the
most and strongest temptations and oppositions, which it resists and
overcomes by faith alone, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. 1 John 5.4. You tell us what the
faith of Libertines is: It may be you know it, and what your own is to you; but
if you censure and asperse them for Libertines who are not so, whose
condemnation is that? be not so rash in judgeing: they stand and fall to
Christ, not to you, Rom 14.4. And if your faith, which should elevate and carry
up the soul unto Christ, and the way of free justification by his grace, for
continual peace, favor, acceptance, and everlasting salvation, do yet let you
seek, and labor to receive all in the way of your own works and obedience; it
may well then be questioned, Gal. 2.19, 20, 21. Further, your expression is not
home, but falls short, when you say, that Christ only gives a right to
salvation. Christ and salvation cannot be parted: you would place Christ in the
beginning, salvation in the end, and your good works makes the way, and
leads and guides from Christ to salvation: this is your divinity. But
eternal life is in Christ, He that has Christ, has life, 1 John 5.11, 12. You
may as well say, A believer has not Christ, but only has a right to him, now
Christ dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3. And his Kingdom is in you, which
is in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. I am sure if
you find and walk in a holy and clean way, it is by faith, or rather the blood
of sprinkling cleanses and makes your way undefiled before God, and no
perfect obedience of yours. But spiritual things are spiritually discerned.

Mr. Rutherf. In answer to the fifth object. The principle of Love and Law are
not contrary.

Reply. To work from a Law-principle, is to work as a servant for hire, Do and
live, but love is free, and seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13.5.

You add, that the Law directing is not abolished by Grace, or by Love. Rep.
True, no more is the Law condemning, for any thing you have yet, or can show.
We must still bear your indignities cast on us in your way, but know full well
that all your logic cannot number us amonst your old Libertines. You delight
your self in your witty expressions; if you understand them, it is well.

6 Exception. Of the Law converting the soul.
Reply. In this you are one with Mr. Burgess also. Read your answer there, and
study a second reply with him. A legal reformation is no Gospel-conversion, nor
Christian sanctification.

Unto your answer of 6 Object. I say, I leave it to the Author, because he is
living, and able also to satisfy you.

7 Exception, against Dr. Crisp.
Mr. Rutherf. Dr. Crisp objects, Christ puts forth a general proclamation to
all. Answ. It Is true, the Gospel excepteth no man from pardon -- but the
promise of the Gospel is not simply universal, as if God intended all and every
should be actually redeemed and saved. 2. It Is most untrue that Christ
belongs to sinners, as sinners: for then Christ should belong to all
unbelievers, how obstinate soever. Nay, Christ belongs only to sinners elected
to glory -- and to believing sinners, as believing, in regard of actual union.
3. It Is false that sinners, as sinners, receive Christ; so should Judas receive
him. Only believers receive him. 4. It Is false that sinners, as sinners,
believe in Christ. This way of Libertines, is a broad way for Sorcerers,
Thieves. etc. remaining in that damnable state, to believe: where as sinners as
thus qualified are to believe, that is, humbled, wearied self-condemned only.

Reply. You know that Dr. Cr. speaks only of the proclamation and
Gospel-tender, which is to every creature, Mark. 16.15. and not of Gods
intention, which he grants is only to gather and save the elect. Also you
said a little before, That the obligation of believing lies on all, yea though
they be damned: so then the Gospel is to be preached indiscriminatim unto all,
for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26.

2. You here again pervert and restrain his meaning: for he speaks of the free
tender of Christ unto all, and you say he is intended only to sinners elected
to glory. This argues a mind disposed to cavil, and to let nothing pass
without a Carp, how pure soever. Christ in the dispensation is to be preached
and made known to unbelievers, that they may become believers. Gospel finds
not men believers; it is well if it leave them so. Faith comes by hearing, and
after faith comes actual union.

To your 3. If sinners as sinners do believe, then as sinners they receive
Christ. For what is it to believe, but to receive Christ? Joh. 1.12. Your
expression is, Christ belongs to believing sinners. To receive, is to take a
thing offered or given, as Joseph took unto himself Mary, Matthew. 1.30. So Romans
5.11.

To your 4. If sinners be wearied and self-condemned, are they not sinners
still? Because they are sensbly so, are they less so? or not formally sinners?
Prove that further. And though all be not so prepared or qualified, yet it is
plain by your own confession before, that they are bound to believe: the
obligation lies on them. 2. In tendering Christ to thieves, etc. whosoever upon
that ground or tender receives him, in so doing does confess himself a thief:
and if he were not self-convicted and condemned, he would never believe, or
receive Christ: for the end of the action is it, that puts him upon the
action: he believes in Christ, or receives him, that he may be saved:
therefore he sees he is lost, and cannot otherwise be saved. This is clear.
But that expression is most strange, when you say, that sinners remaining in
that damnable state do believe. For, 1. Can they possibly be out of that
damnable state before they believe; or any other way, but by faith in Christ?
2. Again, if they believe in Christ, can you imagine that they shall remain in
statu quo prius? What a false mist is this, or vile dust that you cast before
the eyes of people! but you are in the net, and your end is perceived. But what
preparations would you desire more, then that God should give a heart to such
sinners to come to Christ? a heart sensible of sin, apprehensive of danger,
desirous to be in a secure condition, and that is resolved that peace and
safety is only in Christ, and by Christ? else the soul comes not to Christ:
and if it come not to him, it has no encouragement by Dr. Crisp's Ministry.
Do not condemn the innocent. You often speak of a lazy dead faith. If yours
were truly operative, we should find you more in the way of truth and
charity. Faith works by love. Gal. 5.6.

I end, commending to your second thoughts your own words, page 128. Though
thou were upon the borders of hell, yet the Gospel, though it except thee from
all actual mercy, yet not from the duty of believing, and coming to Christ. --
Those that sin against the holy Ghost, are condemned for unbelief. Be
reconciled first to your self, and so to the Doctor.

8 Exception against Mr. Town.
Mr. Rutherf. Mr. Town says, All our obedience, as it is the work of the
Spirit, is passive.

Reply. Here I observe a twofold failing. 1. In that the occasion of these
words, and unto which they relate, is concealed. Dr. Tailer said, God looks
not on their obedience as theirs, but as it is his own work in them. Now then I
grant it in a sort to be his own work; but so it is passive to us: and so it
must be, unless you put no difference between what the Spirit works in and
upon us, and what we work by the same Spirit: for here we act. And your dealing
is not fair, in that you leave out the words in them; for so Mr. T. says, What
the Spirit works is passive to them. But 2. see how you pervert this, and so
infer as you please, That now it is sacrilege for us to be holy, and to add
any of our active holiness to Christ's active obedience. Repl. The former Clause
arises not from my premises, as you cannot but see: unless this be the
meaning, to make our selves holy; which is Gods work alone, not ours at all.
And if you will add our active holiness to Christ's, it is no other then
sacrilege, (though Mr. T. has no such words) for you steal and take from
Christ, what you put to your own obedience.

M. Rutherf. page 121. Use. Antinomians cry down duties. -- This is not the way
of grace.

Repl. You take it to be your duty and part unjustly to charge your brethren.
2. Duties are to be cried and chased out of the way of Free Grace, if you
rightly conceive and take it, as Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5. Romans 11.6. But they are
not to be denied in practice and conversation.

Mr. Rutherf. p. 126. Often that which troubles is subtle and invisible pride:
he will not believe for want of self-worthiness: as, I dare not rest on Christ,
nor apply promises because of my sinful unworthiness. -- I am not good enough
for Christ. Then you add, Right and saving humiliation conjoined with faith,
etc.

Repl. First you principle your hearers by your doctrine for such temptations
and thoughts, telling them that sinners as sinners have nothing to do with
Christ; they must be better qualified, bring saving humiliation, repentance,
and faith; and now you chide and reprove them for such conceits of their wants
and unworthiness, as to be thereby let and deterred for coming to Christ.
This is your inconstancy. And if now you apprehend this to be the ordinary and
usual temptation of a troubled and dejected sinner, desirous of Christ, and
would clear it, that self-unworthiness is no bar; why are you so invective
against Dr. Crisp? Oh consider, and be better advised. But it is improper, and
unscripture-like, to call humiliation saving, as also inconsistent with
self-unworthiness.

9 Exception.
Dr. Crisp. We cannot gather assurance of a spiritual state from holy walking.

Mr. Rutherf. Holy walking is performed by that efficacious grace promised in
the Covenant as an argument on which we may build our peace, as a grace
threeded upon the free promise.

Repl. He that believes is only in a safe and sure state. Joh. 3.36. 2. The
question will be, Whether the holy walking be performed by that efficacious
grace of the Covenant. You must know it as an effect of such a cause: for all
walking in a Legal way, will not argue it; as we see in Paul while a Pharisee,
Phil. 3.8. First the soul must be in the covenant of Grace, and be certain of
that, else it cannot say, This is the performance of the promise; nor, That
holiness of mine is threeded upon the promise. A servant may be obedient, as
well as a child: but that will neither make nor prove him free in Christ by
adoption. It was not Abel's sacrifice that did witness his faith, (for Cain
sacrificed also) but his faith proved his offering to be good and acceptable.
Heb. 11.4. But I must that any experienced man should say, that there is no
more light of evidencing a good estate, nor more certain ground of peace and
comfort in a true justifying faith, then is in holy walking and sincerity: or
should oppose Dr. Crisp, seeing his doctrine is not only true, but so very
necessary: especially considering how Some of you grant, that many do seek and
gather all their peace and comfort in a mere Legal way, and by their
reformation and performances; in whom the Law never wrought to death and
condemnation, that all their life and hope might be the faith of Christ their
righteousness. He that was sensibly dead, knows how he was quickened and
restored to life, and he that knows in himself what death and life is. If
then he need, and can do it, he may use his after-holiness and obedience as
Adminicula fidei: but so, ut alibi statuat solidura firmamentum. Calv. See more
in answer to Mr. Burgess, if need require.

10 Exception.
Mr. Rutherf. Mr. Eaton brings diverse Reasons to prove that we are not both
righteous in the sight of God, and yet sinners in our selves.

Repl. What an open wrong is this by you, who pretend and plead for Law! Do you
not care to offend? Mr. Eaton's words are, That Proposition, that we are both
righteous and sinners also in the sight of God falls flat to the ground. But he
denies us not to be sinners in our selves, or that sin remains and dwells
still in us, and that to our sense and feeling. How often does he repeat that?
And your own words immediately going before, do sufficiently clear and acquit
him. But (says Mr. Eaton) those imperfections of our sanctification are left
in us to our sense and feeling, that they may be healed in our justification.
Is not this then a palpable and unjust charge? And hence follows your
damnable joining hands between Antinomians and the Council of Trent in this.
And thus having condemned the innocent, in your next Sermon you needlessly
undertake to prove, that Justification is not an abolition of sin in its
physical indwelling; as if that were any opinion of your adversaries. In chap.
5. p. 96. of Honeycomb, you may read to your conviction and shame, Thus it is
plain, that although God knows the sin that dwells in his sanctified children,
yet he sees them abolished out of his own sight. Is not here a clear
confession of the indwelling of sin? But I prosecute no further; though you,
having by this violence got out of the way, do hasten and go far.

11 Exception.
Mr. Rutherf. Dr. Crisp teaches, that not only the guilt of sin but sin it
self really and inherently was laid upon Christ. Again, p. 179. I judge it
blasphemy (says Mr. Rutherf) to say that Christ became, when our sins were
laid on him, as really and truly the person that did all those sins, as those
persons that did commit them really. And p. 142. It must be a lie, etc. to make
Christ intrinsecally the sinner, the murderer, etc.

Repl. This accusation is as false and unjust as the former. I muse you blush
not nor conscience did not make the hand to tremble when you used it in this
horrid charge. There are no such words as, That sin was inherently laid on
Christ; or, that Christ was the person that really and truly did all these
sins, or was intrinsecally the sinner. The most, and which comes nearest to
these blasphemies, is where he says, That Christ was really and truly the
person that had all these sins, when they were laid on him; but not that he was
the person that did them, as you say: The Lord charge you not with it. And as
he urges rightly, Where does Scripture say, that the guilt of sin, and not sin
it self, was laid on him? You grant as much (if you understand your self) as he
asserteth, viz. That as Surety, he was really and truly the debtor, or sinner;
not the formal subject of sin, in whom the blot of it was intrinsecally or
really inherent: you can gather or infer no such thing. You add, It was by
imputation. True: but that speaks to the manneer how he was a sinner, and not
to the reality and truth of it: he was truly the sinner, or debtor, in regard
of his office or condition, or Law-place, as you call it. 2. So then he was to
answer justice. And 3. hereupon became he obnoxious to make satisfaction by
suffering. So that the Doctor reasons firmly. If he had not been first found
to be the sinner in law, or debtor, not actively, that ever he committed any
evil, (such blasphemy he denies and abhorred) but passively, he being made the
debtor who must pay; God having laid the iniquities of his people upon him: and
those first laid on him, otherwise he had not suffered and satisfied for them.
You cannot find any blasphemy, save what you made your self, by exchanging and
putting in your own words: and who then stands guilty of it? If any
understanding and indifferent mind, free from malice and prejudice, had heard
or read him, he would never have so perverted and mis-interpreted, as you have
done. But D. Luther's words, if you yet do think him Orthodox, may be fully
satisfactory, on Gal. 2.13. Serio loquitur Propheta, etc. The Prophet speaks
earnestly, that Christ this Lamb of God should bear the sins of us all. But
what is it to bear sin? The Sophisters answer, To be punished. Well: but why is
Christ punished? Is it not because he has sin, and bears it? Now that Christ
has sin, the holy Ghost witnesses, in Psalm. 40. My sins have taken such hold
on me, that I am not able to look up: they are more in number then the hairs of
my head. In this Psalm he speaks in the person of Christ, and Psalm. 41. This
testimony is not the voice of an innocent, but of a suffering Christ, who took
upon him to bear the person of all sinners. Wherefore Christ was not only
crucified and died, but sin also, through the Divine love, was laid upon him:
when sin was laid upon him then comes the Law, and says, Every sinner must
die, etc. -- God sent his Son into the world, and laid on him the sins of all
men, saying, Be thou Peter the denyer, Paul the persecutor, blasphemer, and
cruel oppressor; David that adulterer; that sinner who ate the apple in
Paradise, that thief who hanged on the Cross; and briefly, be thou the person
which has committed the sins of all men: see therefore that thou pay and
satisfy for them. Here, now comes the Law, and says, I find him a sinner,
and that such a one as has taken on him the sins of all men, etc. therefore
let him die upon the Cross: and so sets upon him, and kills him. -- Now
sin being vanquished, and death abolished by this one man, God would see
nothing else in the whole world, if it did believe, but a mere cleansing and
righteousness. And a little before upon the same 13 verse. And this (no doubt)
all the Prophets did foresee in spirit, that Christ should become the greatest
transgressor, murderer, adulterer, thief, rebel, and blasphemer, that ever was
or could be in all the world. Again: If it be not absurd to confess and believe
that Christ was crucified between two thieves, then it is not absurd to say
also, that he was accursed, and of all sinners the greatest. You may read much
more to like purpose: but this may let you see your partiality and error. If
you can understand and construe the one Doctor aright, why not the other also?
except your mind be sinister, or otherwise let. And now, if you have any
conscience toward God, or love to the Truth and your Brethren, so much injured
by you, you will clear them publicly, and accuse your self. By this I could
easily untwist and annul what you have said against us.

12 Exception.
M. Rutherf. In all this you shall find grace turned into wantonness. -- In
all his Sermons -- is much to depress and cry down holiness, and walking with
God.

Repl. He was raised up, and fitted especially to be a son of consolation in
these sad times. Yet I knew him not. But I perceive this to be your fundamental
error: for from the want of knowledge of the true nature and efficacy of this
doctrine of Free Grace, have you raised all slanders. Christian liberty is
carnal licentiousness, to a Legal eye, a loveless apprehension, and a faithless
heart. Such spirits as are not principled for it, cannot skill of it; and
misconceit breeds misreports; and too much credulity is an easy inlet for the
worst you can say, into such a mind as receives not the love of the truth.
Grace is by him turned into wantonness etc. Thus you belly him; and they that
are not of the light, believe you: and hence is the overflowing of your gall,
which has so filled the veins and passages of your book with bitter invectives
and falsehoods. If you had produced one clause rightly interpreted, crying down
true holiness in its due place, and for its proper ends, you might have had
credit. Yet true Evangelical sanctification will discover the vanity and
unsoundness of Legal reformation. It is not all one, To serve in the oldness of
the Letter, and in the newness of the Spirit. Also, Christ our righteousness is
the bond of union with God, by faith in whom we abide in God, and walk with
him. We cannot deal immediately with God in our own holiness.

Lastly, you think we are out of love with sin only for fear of an ill turn,
and do not hate it as sin: as if the love of God and the love of sin could
lodge in one soul; or the Spirit received by the hearing of faith, did not work
and cause an antipathy and contrariety against sinfulness: or that the chain of
the Covenant of grace could be broken and one link or branch sundered from
another. If you so mistake your Patients, we will not have your for our
Physician.

FINIS.
Reader, these books following are printed for Nath. Brook, and are to be sold
at his shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
1. TImes Treasury, or Academy for Gentry: excellent grounds both divine and
humane, for their accomplishment in arguments of discourse, habit, fashion:
with a Ladies Love-lecture, and Truths triumph: summing up all in a Character
of Honor. By Ri. Brathwait Esquire

2. Morton on the Sacrament. In folio.

3. That excellent Piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopie, the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the body; the subject of Dreams: to
which is added the Art of Memory. By Ri. Sanders Student. Fol.

4. Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum; containing several Poetical Pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermetique Mysteries in
their ancient Language. By Elias Ashmole Esquire

5. Chiromancie: or, the Art of Divining by the lines engraven in the hand of
man by Dame Nature; Theologically, Practically, in 19 Genitures: with a learned
discourse of the soul of the World, and universal spirit thereof. By Geo.
Wharton Esquire

6. Catholic History, collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councels and
ancient Fathers, modern Writers both Ecclesiastical and Civil: in answer to Dr.
Vane's Lost Sheep returned home. By Edw. Chisenhale Esquire

7. The whole Art of Survey of Land; showing the use of all Instruments, but
especially the Plain Table. Whereunto is added an Appendix to measure regular
Solids, as Timber, Stone: useful for all that intend either to sell or purchase.

8. An Arithmetic in Number and Species, in two Books: 1. Teaching by precept
and example the operation in Numbers, whole and broken by Decimals, and use of
the Logarithms, Napyers bones. 2. The great Rule of Algebra in Species,
resolving all Arithmeticall questions by supposition: with a Canon of the
powers of numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moore late of
Durham. 8.

9. Tactometrica: or, the Geometry of Regulars, after a new, exact, and
expeditious manner, in Solids; with sundry useful Experiments. Practical
Geometry of Regular-like Solids, and of a Cylinder body, for liquid
vessel-measure; with sundry new Experiments never before extant, for Gauging. A
Work very useful for all that are employed in the Art Metrical. By Joh. Wyberd,
Dr. in Physic.

10. An Astrological discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the
powerful and harmonical influence of the Planets and Fixed stars upon
Elementary bodies; in justification of the validity of Astrology. By Sir Chr.
Heydon Knight.

11. Magic and Astrology vindicated; in which is contained the true
definitions of the said Arts, and the justification of their practice, proved
by the authority of Scripture, and the experience of ancient and modern
Authors, by H. Warren.

12. An Astrologicall judgment of Diseases from the Decumbiture of the sick:
also the way of finding out the cause, change and end of a disease: also
whether the sick be likely to live or die. By N. Culpeper.

13. Catastrophe Magnatum, or the downfall of Monarchy, by N. Culpeper.

14. Ephemerides for the year 1652. being a year of wonders, by N. Culpeper.

15. Lux Veritatis, or Christian Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Daemonology
confuted; in answer to N. Homes D.D. By W. Ramsey, Gent.

16. The History of the Golden Ass.

17. The Painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consummating of
that noble Art; and how those ancient Artificers attained to their still so
much admired excellency.

Isreal's redemption, or the prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth. By Robert Matton.

18. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the Soul at a Dispute held in the School at Cambridge at the
Commencement, March 3. 1646. By Charles Hotham Fellow of Peter-house. 12.

19. Teratologia: or, a discovery of Gods wonders manifested in former and
modern times by bloody rain and waters. By I.S.

20. Fons Lachrymarum: or, a fountain of Tears, from whence does flow Englands
complaint, Jeremiah's lamentations. With an Elegy upon that son of Valor Sir
Chapter Lucas. By J. Quarles. 8.

21. Oedipus: or, a Resolver; being a clue that leads to the chief Secrets in
Nature, and true resolution of Amorous, Natural, Moral, and Political Problems.
By C. M.

22. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting Darkness to the height of eternal Light. By Tho. Fettisplace.

23. Nocturnal Lucubrations, or Meditations Divine and Moral; with Epigrams and
Epitaphs. By Robert Chamberlain.

24. The unfortunate Mother. A Tragedy. By Tho. Nabs.

25. The Rebellion. A Comedy. By T.R.

26. The Tragedy of Messalina. By Not. Richards. 8.

27. The remedy of Coffeehouse: or, a Treatise of Contentation in whatsoever
condition. Fit for these sad and troublesome times. By Jos. Hall, late B. of
Exon and Norwich. 12.

28. The grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table. By the late Reverend, Daniel Featly D.D. 4.

29. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, Atheism and Profaneness:
or, a most hopeful way to Grace and Salvation. By R. Young. 8.

30. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the
Wavering to stay the Wandering, to strengthen the Fainting. By Joh. Brinsley
Minister of Gods Word at Yarmouth.

31. Comforts against the fear of Death; wherein are several evidences of the
work of Grace. By John Collins of Norwich.

32. Jacob's seed: or, the excellency of seeking God by prayer. By Jer.
Buroughs, Minister of the Gospel to the two greatest Congregations about
London, Stepney and Cripplegat^^

33. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon, by Tho. Threscot.

34. Britannia Rediviva, or a Soverain Remedy to cure a sick Commonwealth,
preached in the Minster at York before the Judges, August 9. 1649. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull.

35. The Princess Royal, preached in the Minster in York before the Judges,
March 24. 1650. by Joh. Shaw Minister of Hull.

36. Anatomy of Mortality, divided into eight Heads. 1. The certainty of Death.
2. Meditations of Death. 3. Preparations for Death. 4. The right behavior in
Death. 5. The Comfort in our own Death. 6. The comfort against the Death of
Friends. 7. The Cases wherein it is lawful or unlawful to desire Death. 8. The
glorious Estate of Gods Children after Death. By George Strende.

37. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, August 1651.

38. Mirror of Complements fitted for Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and
Strangers, with forms of speaking, and writing of Letters most in fashion, with
witty Poems: and a Table expounding hard English words.

39. Cabinet of Jewels, discovering the nature, virtue, value of precious
Stones: with infallible Rules to escape the deceit of all such as are
adulterate or counterfeit, by Tho. Nichols.

40. Quakers Cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

41. Divinity no Enemy to Astrology: a Sermon intended for the Society of
Astrologers for the year 1653. By Dr. Tho. Swadlin.

42. Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England
in the year 1628. to the year 1653 and all the material passages happening
there. Exactly performed.

43. Select Thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a pious spirit. A Century of Divine
breathings for a ravished soul, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus. By
I. Hall. B. of Nor. A new piece.

44. The holy Order or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To which is added, Songs
in the night: or, Cheerfulness under Affliction. By Ios. Hall, Bp. of Norwich.
A new Piece.

45. The Art of Memory: or, a cure for a weak Memory. Wherein the natural
defects of that noble faculty are artificially repaired, by the regular
application of Images and Idea's easy to be apprehended by the meanest
capacity; and useful to all persons, from the Gown to the Clown. A new Piece.

46. History of Balaam, and Jonah, and John the Baptist, in Verse; with other
Poems. By Io. Harvy Esquire A new Piece.

47. Re-assertion of grace. Vindiciae Evangelii: or, the vindication of the
gospel. Or, a Reply to M. Anth. Burgess Vindiciae Legis, and to M. Rutherford.
By Robert Town. A new Piece.

48. Anabaptist anatomized and silenced: or, a Dispute with M. Tombs. By Mr.
Joh. Cragge. A new Piece.

49. Practical Divinity: or, the grounds of Religion in a Catechistical ^y. By
M. Christopher Love. A new Piece.


